Contributors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . vii
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xi
SECTION I
DIAGNOSIS OF RESPIRATORY DISORDERS
1 Approach to the Patient with Disease
of the Respiratory System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
David A. Lipson, Steven E.Weinberger
2 Dyspnea and Pulmonary Edema . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Richard M. Schwartzstein
3 Cough and Hemoptysis. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
Steven E.Weinberger, David A. Lipson
4 Hypoxia and Cyanosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
Eugene Braunwald
5 Disturbances of Respiratory Function . . . . . . . . 25
Steven E.Weinberger, Ilene M. Rosen
6 Diagnostic Procedures in Respiratory Disease. . . 36
Scott Manaker, Steven E.Weinbeger
7 Atlas of Chest Imaging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
Patricia A. Kritek, John J. Reilly, Jr.
SECTION II
DISEASES OF THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM
8 Asthma. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
Peter J. Barnes
9 Hypersensitivity Pneumonitis and Pulmonary
Inﬁltrates with Eosinophilia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
Joel N. Kline, Gary W. Hunninghake
10 Environmental Lung Disease . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 86
Frank E. Speizer, John R. Balmes
11 Pneumonia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 99
Lionel A. Mandell, Richard Wunderink
12 Tuberculosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 115
Mario C. Raviglione, Richard J. O’Brien
13 Inﬂuenza. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 139
Raphael Dolin
14 Common Viral Respiratory Infections and
Severe Acute Respiratory
Syndrome (SARS). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 149
Raphael Dolin
15 Pneumocystis Infection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 161
A. George Smulian, Peter D.Walzer
16 Bronchiectasis and Lung Abscess. . . . . . . . . . . . 166
Gregory Tino, Steven E.Weinberger
17 Cystic Fibrosis. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 172
Richard C. Boucher, Jr.
18 Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease. . . . . . 178
John J. Reilly, Jr., Edwin K. Silverman,
Steven D. Shapiro
19 Interstitial Lung Diseases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 190
Talmadge E. King, Jr.
20 Deep Venous Thrombosis and Pulmonary
Thromboembolism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 204
Samuel Z. Goldhaber
21 Disorders of the Pleura and Mediastinum . . . . . 215
Richard W. Light
22 Disorders of  Ventilation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 221
Eliot A. Phillipson
23 Sleep Apnea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 228
Neil J. Douglas
24 Lung Transplantation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 233
Elbert P.Trulock
25 Infections in Lung Transplant Recipients. . . . . . 239
Robert Finberg, Joyce Fingeroth
SECTION III
GENERAL APPROACH TO THE
CRITICALLY ILL PATIENT
26 Principles of Critical Care Medicine. . . . . . . . . 246
John P. Kress, Jesse B. Hall
27 Mechanical Ventilatory Support . . . . . . . . . . . . 258
Edward P. Ingenito
28 Approach to the Patient with Shock. . . . . . . . . 266
Ronald V. Maier
CONTENTS
SECTION IV
COMMON CRITICAL ILLNESSES
AND SYNDROMES
29 Severe Sepsis and Septic Shock. . . . . . . . . . . . . 278
Robert S. Munford
30 Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome. . . . . . . . 290
Bruce D. Levy, Steven D. Shapiro
31 Cardiogenic Shock and Pulmonary Edema . . . . 297
Judith S. Hochman, David H. Ingbar
32 Cardiovascular Collapse, Cardiac Arrest, and
Sudden Cardiac Death. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 306
Robert J. Myerburg, Agustin Castellanos
33 Unstable Angina and Non–ST-Elevation
Myocardial Infarction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 316
Christopher P. Cannon, Eugene Braunwald
34 ST-Segment Elevation Myocardial Infarction . . 324
Elliott M.Antman, Eugene Braunwald
35 Coma . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 343
Allan H. Ropper
36 Neurologic Critical Care, Including Hypoxic-
Ischemic Encephalopathy and Subarachnoid 
Hemorrhage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 353
J. Claude Hemphill, III,Wade S. Smith
SECTION V
DISORDERS COMPLICATING CRITICAL
ILLNESSES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT
37 Acute Renal Failure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 370
Kathleen D. Liu, Glenn M. Chertow
38 Dialysis in the Treatment of Renal Failure. . . . . 386
Kathleen D. Liu, Glenn M. Chertow
39 Fluid and Electrolyte Disturbances . . . . . . . . . . 393
Gary G. Singer, Barry M. Brenner
40 Acidosis and Alkalosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 410
Thomas D. DuBose, Jr.
41 Coagulation Disorders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 424
Valder Arruda, Katherine A. High
42 Treatment and Prophylaxis
of Bacterial Infections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 434
Gordon L.Archer, Ronald E. Polk
43 Antiviral Chemotherapy, Excluding
Antiretroviral Drugs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 456
Lindsey R. Baden, Raphael Dolin
44 Diagnosis and Treatment of
Fungal Infections. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 470
John E. Edwards, Jr.
45 Oncologic Emergencies. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 475
Rasim Gucalp, Janice P. Dutcher
Appendix
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance . . . . . 491
Alexander Kratz, Michael A. Pesce, Daniel J. Fink
Review and Self-Assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 513
Charles Wiener, Gerald Bloomﬁeld,
Cynthia D. Brown, Joshua Schiffer,Adam Spivak
Index. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 555
vi
Contents
vii
GORDON L. ARCHER, MD
Professor of Medicine and Microbiology/Immunology;Associate
Dean for Research, School of Medicine,Virginia Commonwealth
University, Richmond [42]
VALDER ARRUDA, MD, PhD
Associate Professor of Pediatrics, University of Pennsylvania School
of Medicine, Division of Hematology,The Children’s Hospital of
Philadelphia, Philadelphia [41]
LINDSEY R. BADEN, MD
Assistant Professor of Medicine, Harvard Medical School,
Boston [43]
JOHN R. BALMES, MD
Professor of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco;
Chief, Division of Occupational and Environmental Medicine,
San Francisco General Hospital; Professor of Environmental Health
Sciences, School of Public Health, University of California,
Berkeley [10]
PETER J. BARNES, MA, DM, DSc
Professor and Head of Thoracic Medicine, National Heart & Lung
Institute; Head of Respiratory Medicine, Imperial College London;
Honorary Consultant Physician, Royal Brompton Hospital,
London [8]
GERALD BLOOMFIELD, MD, MPH
Department of Internal Medicine,The Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore [Review and Self-Assessment]
RICHARD C. BOUCHER, JR., MD
William Rand Kenan Professor of Medicine, University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill; Director, University of Carolina Cystic
Fibrosis Center, Chapel Hill [17]
EUGENE BRAUNWALD, MD, MA (Hon), ScD (Hon)
Distinguished Hersey Professor of Medicine, Harvard Medical
School; Chairman,TIMI Study Group, Brigham and Women’s
Hospital, Boston [4, 33, 34]
BARRY M. BRENNER, MD, AM, DSc (Hon), DMSc (Hon),
Dipl (Hon)
Samuel A. Levine Professor of Medicine, Harvard Medical School;
Director Emeritus, Renal Division, Brigham and Women’s Hospital,
Boston [39]
CYNTHIA D. BROWN, MD
Department of Internal Medicine,The Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore [Review and Self-Assessment]
CHRISTOPHER P. CANNON, MD
Associate Professor of Medicine, Harvard Medical School;Associate
Physician, Cardiovascular Division, Senior Investigator,TIMI Study
Group, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston [33, 34]
AGUSTIN CASTELLANOS, MD
Professor of Medicine; Director, Clinical Electrophysiology,
University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami [32]
GLENN M. CHERTOW, MD
Professor of Medicine, Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of
California, San Francisco School of Medicine; Director, Clinical
Services, Division of Nephrology, University of California,
San Francisco Medical Center, San Francisco [37, 38]
RAPHAEL DOLIN, MD
Maxwell Finland Professor of Medicine (Microbiology and
Molecular Genetics); Dean for Academic and Clinical Programs,
Harvard Medical School, Boston [13, 14, 43]
NEIL J. DOUGLAS, MD
Professor of Respiratory and Sleep Medicine, University of
Edinburgh; Honorary Consultant Physician, Royal Inﬁrmary of
Edinburgh, United Kingdom [23]
THOMAS D. DuBOSE, JR., MD
Tinsley R. Harrison Professor and Chair of Internal Medicine;
Professor of Physiology and Pharmacology,Wake Forest University
School of Medicine,Winston-Salem [40]
JANICE P. DUTCHER, MD
Professor, New York Medical College;Associate Director,
Our Lady of Mercy Cancer Center, Bronx [45]
JOHN E. EDWARDS, JR., MD
Chief, Division of Infectious Diseases, Harbor/University of
California, Los Angeles Medical Center; Professor of Medicine,
David Geffen School of Medicine at the University of California,
Los Angeles,Torrance [44]
ROBERT FINBERG, MD
Professor and Chair, Department of Medicine, University
of Massachusetts Medical School,Worcester [25]
JOYCE FINGEROTH, MD
Associate Professor of Medicine, Harvard Medical School,
Boston [25]
DANIEL J. FINK,† MD, MPH
Associate Professor of Clinical Pathology, College of Physicians and
Surgeons, Columbia University, New York [Appendix]
SAMUEL Z. GOLDHABER, MD
Professor of Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Director,Venous
Thromboembolism Research Group, Director,Anticoagulation
Service, and Senior Staff Cardiologist, Department of Medicine,
Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston [20]
RASIM GUCALP, MD
Professor of Clinical Medicine,Albert Einstein College of Medicine,
Monteﬁore Medical Center, Bronx [45]
Numbers in brackets refer to the chapter(s) written or co-written by the contributor.
CONTRIBUTORS
†Deceased.
JESSE B. HALL, MD
Professor of Medicine,Anesthesia & Critical Care; Section Chief,
Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, University of Chicago,
Chicago [26]
J. CLAUDE HEMPHILL, III, MD, MAS
Associate Professor of Clinical Neurology and Neurological Surgery,
University of California, San Francisco; Director, Neurocritical Care
Program, San Francisco General Hospital, San Francisco [36]
KATHERINE A. HIGH, MD
William H. Bennett Professor of Pediatrics, University of
Pennsylvania School of Medicine; Investigator, Howard Hughes
Medical Institute,The Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia,
Philadelphia [41]
JUDITH S. HOCHMAN, MD
Harold Synder Family Professor of Cardiology; Clinical Chief, the
Leon H. Charney Division of Cardiology; New York University
School of Medicine; Director, Cardiovascular Clinical Research,
New York [31]
GARY W. HUNNINGHAKE, MD
Sterba Professor of Medicine; Director, Division of Pulmonary,
Critical Care and Occupational Medicine; Director, Institute for
Clinical and Translational Science; Director, Graduate Program in
Translational Biomedicine; Senior Associate Dean for Clinical and
Translational Science, Iowa City [9]
DAVID H. INGBAR, MD
Professor of Medicine, Physiology & Pediatrics; Director, Pulmonary,
Allergy, Critical Care & Sleep Division; Executive Director, Center
for Lung Science & Health, University of Minnesota School of
Medicine; Co-Director, Medical ICU & Respiratory Care,
University of Minnesota Medical Center, Fairview [31]
EDWARD P. INGENITO, MD, PhD
Assistant Professor, Harvard Medical School, Boston [27]
TALMADGE E. KING, JR., MD
Constance B.Wofsy Distinguished Professor and Interim Chair,
Department of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco,
San Francisco [19]
JOEL N. KLINE, MD, MSC
Professor, Internal Medicine and Occupational & Environmental
Health; Director, University of Iowa Asthma Center, Iowa City [9]
ALEXANDER KRATZ, MD, PhD, MPH
Assistant Professor of Clinical Pathology, Columbia University
College of Physicians and Surgeons;Associate Director, Core
Laboratory, Columbia University Medical Center, New York-
Presbyterian Hospital; Director,Allen Pavilion Laboratory, New York
[Appendix]
JOHN P. KRESS, MD
Associate Professor of Medicine, Section of Pulmonary and Critical
Care, University of Chicago, Chicago [26]
PATRICIA A. KRITEK, MD, EdM
Instructor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Co-Director,
Harvard Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine Fellowship,
Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston [7]
BRUCE D. LEVY, MD
Associate Professor of Medicine, Harvard Medical School;
Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Brigham and Women’s
Hospital, Boston [30]
RICHARD W. LIGHT, MD
Professor of Medicine,Vanderbilt University, Nashville [21]
DAVID A. LIPSON, MD
Assistant Professor of Medicine, Pulmonary,Allergy & Critical Care
Division, University of Pennsylvania Medical Center,
King of Prussia [1, 3]
KATHLEEN D. LIU, MD, PhD, MCR
Assistant Professor, Division of Nephrology, San Francisco [37, 38]
RONALD V. MAIER, MD
Jane and Donald D.Trunkey Professor and Vice Chair, Surgery,
University of Washington; Surgeon-in-Chief, Harborview Medical
Center, Seattle [28]
SCOTT MANAKER, MD, PhD
Associate Professor of Medicine and Pharmacology, Pulmonary and
Critical Care Division, Department of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia [6]
LIONEL A. MANDELL, MD
Professor of Medicine, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario [11]
ROBERT S. MUNFORD, MD
Jan and Henri Bromberg Chair in Internal Medicine, University
of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas [29]
ROBERT J. MYERBURG, MD
Professor of Medicine and Physiology;AHA Chair in Cardiovascular
Research, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine,
Miami [32]
RICHARD J. O’BRIEN, MD
Head of Scientiﬁc Evaluation, Foundation for Innovative
New Diagnostics, Geneva, Switzerland [12]
MICHAEL A. PESCE, PhD
Clinical Professor of Pathology, Columbia University College of
Physicians and Surgeons; Director of Specialty Laboratory, New York
Presbyterian Hospital, Columbia University Medical Center,
New York [Appendix]
ELIOT A. PHILLIPSON, MD
Professor, Department of Medicine, University of Toronto,
Toronto [22]
RONALD E. POLK, PharmD
Chair, Department of Pharmacy, Professor of Pharmacy and
Medicine, School of Pharmacy,Virginia Commonwealth University,
Richmond [42]
MARIO C. RAVIGLIONE, MD
Director, StopTB Department,World Health Organization,
Geneva [12]
JOHN J. REILLY, JR., MD
Associate Professor of Medicine, Harvard Medical School;
Vice Chairman, Integrative Services, Department of Medicine,
Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston [7, 18]
viii
Contributors
ALLAN H. ROPPER, MD
Executive Vice-Chair, Department of Neurology, Brigham and
Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston [35]
ILENE M. ROSEN, MD, MSC
Associate Director, Internal Medical Residency Program;Assistant
Professor of Clinical Medicine, University of Pennsylvania School of
Medicine, Philadelphia [5]
JOSHUA SCHIFFER, MD
Department of Internal Medicine,The Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore [Review and Self-Assessment]
RICHARD M. SCHWARTZSTEIN, MD
Professor of Medicine, Harvard Medical School;
Associate Chair, Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine;
Vice-President for Education, Beth Israel Deaconess 
Medical Center, Boston [2]
STEVEN D. SHAPIRO, MD
Jack D. Myers Professor and Chair, University of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh [18, 30]
EDWIN K. SILVERMAN, MD, PhD
Associate Professor of Medicine, Harvard Medical School,
Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston [18]
GARY G. SINGER, MD
Assistant Professor of Clinical Medicine,Washington University
School of Medicine, St. Louis [39]
WADE S. SMITH, MD, PhD
Professor of Neurology, Daryl R. Gress Endowed Chair
of Neurocritical Care and Stroke; Director, University of
California, San Francisco Neurovascular Service,
San Francisco [36]
A. GEORGE SMULIAN, MB, BCh
Associate Professor, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine;
Chief, Infectious Disease Section, Cincinnati VA Medical Center,
Cincinnati [15]
FRANK E. SPEIZER, MD
Edward H. Kass Professor of Medicine, Harvard Medical School,
Channing Laboratory, Department of Medicine, Brigham and
Women’s Hospital, Boston [10]
ADAM SPIVAK, MD
Department of Internal Medicine,The Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore [Review and Self-Assessment]
GREGORY TINO, MD
Associate Professor of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania School
of Medicine; Chief, Pulmonary Clinical Service Hospital of the
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia [16]
ELBERT P.TRULOCK, MD
Professor of Medicine, Rosemary and I. Jerome Flance Professor of
Pulmonary Medicine,Washington University School of Medicine,
St. Louis [24]
PETER D.WALZER, MD, MSC
Associate Chief of Staff for Research, Cincinnati VA Medical Center;
Professor of Medicine, University of Cincinnati College of
Medicine, Cincinnati [15]
STEVEN E.WEINBERGER, MD
Senior Vice President for Medical Education Division,American
College of Physicians; Senior Lecturer on Medicine, Harvard
Medical School;Adjunct Professor of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia [1, 3, 5, 6, 16]
CHARLES WIENER, MD
Professor of Medicine and Physiology;Vice Chair, Department of
Medicine; Director, Osler Medical Training Program,The Johns
Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore [Review and
Self-Assessment]
RICHARD WUNDERINK, MD
Professor, Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care, Department of
Medicine, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine;
Director, Medical Intensive Care Unit, Northwestern Memorial
Hospital, Chicago [11]
Contributors
ix
This page intentionally left blank 
Pulmonary diseases are major contributors to morbidity
and mortality in the general population.Although advances
in the diagnosis and treatment of many common pul-
monary disorders have improved the lives of patients,
these complex illnesses continue to affect a large segment
of the global population.The impact of cigarette smoking
cannot be underestimated in this regard, especially given
the growing prevalence of tobacco use in the developing
world. Pulmonary medicine is, therefore, of critical global
importance to the ﬁeld of internal medicine.
Pulmonary medicine is a growing subspecialty and in-
cludes a number of areas of disease focus, including reactive
airways diseases, chronic obstructive lung disease, environ-
mental lung diseases, and interstitial lung diseases. Further-
more, pulmonary medicine is linked to the ﬁeld of critical
care medicine, both cognitively and as a standard arm of
the pulmonary fellowship training programs at most insti-
tutions.The breadth of knowledge in critical care medicine
extends well beyond the respiratory system, of course, and
includes selected areas of cardiology, infectious diseases,
nephrology,and hematology.Given the complexity of these
disciplines and the crucial role of the internist in guiding
the management of patients with chronic lung diseases and
in helping to guide the management of patients in the in-
tensive care setting, knowledge of the discipline is essential
for competency in the ﬁeld of internal medicine.
The scientiﬁc basis of many pulmonary disorders and
intensive care medicine is rapidly expanding. Novel diag-
nostic and therapeutic approaches, as well as prognostic
assessment strategies, populate the published literature
with great frequency. Maintaining updated knowledge of
these evolving areas is, therefore, essential for the optimal
care of patients with lung diseases and critical illness.
In view of the importance of pulmonary and critical
care medicine to the ﬁeld of internal medicine and the
speed with which the scientiﬁc basis of the discipline is
evolving, this Sectional was developed. The purpose of
this book is to provide the readers with an overview of
the ﬁeld of pulmonary and critical care medicine. To
achieve this end, this Sectional comprises the key pul-
monary and critical care medicine chapters in Harrison’s
Principles of Internal Medicine, 17th edition, contributed
by leading experts in the ﬁelds.This Sectional is designed
not only for physicians-in-training, but also for medical
students, practicing clinicians, and other health care pro-
fessionals who seek to maintain adequately updated
knowledge of this rapidly advancing ﬁeld. The editors
believe that this book will improve the reader’s knowl-
edge of the discipline, as well as highlight its importance
to the ﬁeld of internal medicine.
Joseph Loscalzo, MD, PhD
PREFACE
xi
NOTICE
Medicine is an ever-changing science. As new research and clinical experi-
ence broaden our knowledge, changes in treatment and drug therapy are
required. The authors and the publisher of this work have checked with
sources believed to be reliable in their efforts to provide information that is
complete and generally in accord with the standards accepted at the time of
publication. However, in view of the possibility of human error or changes
in medical sciences, neither the authors nor the publisher nor any other
party who has been involved in the preparation or publication of this work
warrants that the information contained herein is in every respect accurate
or complete, and they disclaim all responsibility for any errors or omissions
or for the results obtained from use of the information contained in this
work. Readers are encouraged to conﬁrm the information contained herein
with other sources. For example, and in particular, readers are advised to
check the product information sheet included in the package of each drug
they plan to administer to be certain that the information contained in this
work is accurate and that changes have not been made in the recommended
dose or in the contraindications for administration.This recommendation is
of particular importance in connection with new or infrequently used drugs.
The global icons call greater attention to key epidemiologic and clinical differences in the practice of medicine
throughout the world.
The genetic icons identify a clinical issue with an explicit genetic relationship.
Review and self-assessment questions and answers were taken from Wiener C,
Fauci AS, Braunwald E, Kasper DL, Hauser SL, Longo DL, Jameson JL, Loscalzo J
(editors) Bloomﬁeld G, Brown CD, Schiffer J, Spivak A (contributing editors).
Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine Self-Assessment and Board Review, 17th ed.
New York, McGraw-Hill, 2008, ISBN 978-0-07-149619-3.
DIAGNOSIS OF
RESPIRATORY
DISORDERS
SECTION I
David A. Lipson
I
Steven E. Weinberger
Patients with disease of the respiratory system generally
present because of symptoms, an abnormality on a chest
radiograph, or both.These ﬁndings often lead to a set of
diagnostic possibilities; the differential diagnosis is then
reﬁned on the basis of additional information gleaned
from the history and physical examination, pulmonary
function testing, additional imaging studies, and bron-
choscopic examination. This chapter considers the
approach to the patient based on the major patterns of
presentation, focusing on the history, physical examina-
tion, and chest radiography. For further discussion of
pulmonary function testing, see Chap. 5, and of other
diagnostic studies, see Chap. 6.
CLINICAL PRESENTATION
History
Dyspnea (shortness of breath) and cough are nonspeciﬁc
but common presenting symptoms for patients with res-
piratory system disease. Less common symptoms include
hemoptysis (the coughing up of blood) and chest pain
that often is pleuritic in nature.
Dyspnea
(See also Chap. 2.) When evaluating a patient with
shortness of breath, one should ﬁrst determine the time
course over which the symptom has become manifest.
Patients who were well previously and developed acute
shortness of breath (over a period of minutes to days)
may have acute disease affecting either the upper or the
APPROACH TO THE PATIENT WITH DISEASE
OF THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM
intrathoracic airways (e.g., laryngeal edema or acute
asthma, respectively), the pulmonary parenchyma (acute
cardiogenic or noncardiogenic pulmonary edema or an
acute infectious process such as bacterial pneumonia),
the pleural space (a pneumothorax), or the pulmonary
vasculature (a pulmonary embolus).
A subacute presentation (over days to weeks) may sug-
gest an exacerbation of preexisting airways disease
(asthma or chronic bronchitis), an indolent parenchymal
infection (Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia in a patient
with AIDS, mycobacterial or fungal pneumonia), a non-
infectious inﬂammatory process that proceeds at a rela-
tively slow pace (Wegener’s granulomatosis, eosinophilic
pneumonia, cryptogenic organizing pneumonia, and
many others), neuromuscular disease (Guillain-Barré syn-
drome, myasthenia gravis), pleural disease (pleural effu-
sion from a variety of possible causes), or chronic cardiac
disease (congestive heart failure).
A chronic presentation (over months to years) often
indicates chronic obstructive lung disease, chronic inter-
stitial lung disease, or chronic cardiac disease. Chronic
diseases of airways (not only chronic obstructive lung
disease but also asthma) are characterized by exacerba-
tions and remissions. Patients often have periods when
they are severely limited by shortness of breath, but
these may be interspersed with periods in which their
symptoms are minimal or absent. In contrast, many of
the diseases of the pulmonary parenchyma are character-
ized by slow but inexorable progression. Chronic respi-
ratory symptoms may also be multifactorial in nature
CHAPTER 1
CHAPTER 1
Clinical Presentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .2
Integration of the Presenting Clinical Pattern and . . . . . . . . . . . 5
Diagnostic Studies
I Further Readings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
2
because patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease may also have concomitant heart disease.
Other Respiratory Symptoms
Cough (Chap. 3) may indicate the presence of lung disease,
but cough per se is not useful for the differential diagnosis.
The presence of sputum accompanying the cough often
suggests airway disease and may be seen in patients with
asthma,chronic bronchitis,or bronchiectasis.
Hemoptysis (Chap. 3) can originate from disease of the
airways, the pulmonary parenchyma, or the vasculature.
Diseases of the airways can be inﬂammatory (acute or
chronic bronchitis, bronchiectasis, or cystic ﬁbrosis) or
neoplastic (bronchogenic carcinoma or bronchial carci-
noid tumors). Parenchymal diseases causing hemoptysis
may be either localized (pneumonia, lung abscess, tuber-
culosis, or infection with Aspergillus spp.) or diffuse
(Goodpasture’s syndrome, idiopathic pulmonary hemo-
siderosis). Vascular diseases potentially associated with
hemoptysis include pulmonary thromboembolic disease
and pulmonary arteriovenous malformations.
Chest pain caused by diseases of the respiratory system
usually originates from involvement of the parietal pleura.
As a result, the pain is accentuated by respiratory motion
and is often referred to as pleuritic. Common examples
include primary pleural disorders, such as neoplasm or
inﬂammatory disorders involving the pleura, or pul-
monary parenchymal disorders that extend to the pleural
surface, such as pneumonia or pulmonary infarction.
Additional Historic Information
Information about risk factors for lung disease should be
explicitly explored to ensure a complete basis of historic
data.A history of current and past smoking, especially of
cigarettes, should be sought from all patients.The smok-
ing history should include the number of years of smok-
ing; the intensity (i.e., number of packs per day); and if
the patient no longer smokes, the interval since smoking
cessation.The risk of lung cancer decreases progressively
in the decade after discontinuation of smoking, and loss
of lung function above the expected age-related decline
ceases with the discontinuation of smoking. Even
though chronic obstructive lung disease and neoplasia
are the two most important respiratory complications of
smoking, other respiratory disorders (e.g., spontaneous
pneumothorax, respiratory bronchiolitis-interstitial lung
disease, pulmonary Langerhans cell histiocytosis, and
pulmonary hemorrhage with Goodpasture’s syndrome)
are also associated with smoking.A history of signiﬁcant
secondhand (passive) exposure to smoke, whether in the
home or at the workplace, should also be sought
because it may be a risk factor for neoplasia or an exac-
erbating factor for airways disease.
A patient may have been exposed to other inhaled
agents associated with lung disease, which act either via
direct toxicity or through immune mechanisms (Chaps. 9
and 10). Such exposures can be either occupational or
avocational, indicating the importance of detailed occu-
pational and personal histories, the latter stressing expo-
sures related to hobbies or the home environment.
Important agents include the inorganic dusts associated
with pneumoconiosis (especially asbestos and silica
dusts) and organic antigens associated with hypersensi-
tivity pneumonitis (especially antigens from molds and
animal proteins). Asthma, which is more common in
women than men, is often exacerbated by exposure to
environmental allergens (dust mites, pet dander, or cock-
roach allergens in the home or allergens in the outdoor
environment such as pollen and ragweed) or may be
caused by occupational exposures (diisocyanates). Expo-
sure to particular infectious agents can be suggested by
contacts with individuals with known respiratory infec-
tions (especially tuberculosis) or by residence in an area
with endemic pathogens (histoplasmosis, coccidioidomy-
cosis, blastomycosis).
A history of coexisting nonrespiratory disease or of
risk factors for or previous treatment of such diseases
should be sought because they may predispose a patient
to both infectious and noninfectious respiratory system
complications. Common examples include systemic
rheumatic diseases that are associated with pleural or
parenchymal lung disease, metastatic neoplastic disease
in the lung, or impaired host defense mechanisms and
secondary infection, which occur in the case of
immunoglobulin deﬁciency or with hematologic and
lymph node malignancies. Risk factors for AIDS should
be sought because the lungs are not only the most com-
mon site of AIDS-deﬁning infection but may also be
involved by noninfectious complications of AIDS.Treat-
ment of patients with nonrespiratory disease may be
associated with respiratory complications, either because
of effects on host defense mechanisms (immunosuppres-
sive agents, cancer chemotherapy) with resulting infec-
tion or because of direct effects on the pulmonary
parenchyma (cancer chemotherapy; radiation therapy; or
treatment with other agents, such as amiodarone) or on
the airways (beta-blocking agents causing airﬂow
obstruction, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors
causing cough) (Chap. 9).
Family history is important for evaluating diseases
that have a genetic component.These include disorders
such as cystic ﬁbrosis, α1-antitrypsin deﬁciency, pul-
monary hypertension, pulmonary ﬁbrosis, and asthma.
Physical Examination
The general principles of inspection, palpation, percussion,
and auscultation apply to the examination of the respira-
tory system. However, the physical examination should be
directed not only toward ascertaining abnormalities of the
lungs and thorax but also toward recognizing other ﬁnd-
ings that may reﬂect underlying lung disease.
Approach to the Patient with Disease of the Respiratory System
3
CHAPTER 1
On inspection, the rate and pattern of breathing as well
as the depth and symmetry of lung expansion are
observed. Breathing that is unusually rapid, labored, or
associated with the use of accessory muscles of respira-
tion generally indicates either augmented respiratory
demands or an increased work of breathing.Asymmetric
expansion of the chest is usually caused by an asymmet-
ric process affecting the lungs, such as endobronchial
obstruction of a large airway, unilateral parenchymal or
pleural disease, or unilateral phrenic nerve paralysis.Visi-
ble abnormalities of the thoracic cage include kyphosco-
liosis and ankylosing spondylitis, either of which may
alter compliance of the thorax, increase the work of
breathing, and cause dyspnea.
On palpation, the symmetry of lung expansion can be
assessed, generally conﬁrming the ﬁndings observed by
inspection. Vibration produced by spoken sounds is
transmitted to the chest wall and is assessed by the presence
or absence and symmetry of tactile fremitus. Transmis-
sion of vibration is decreased or absent if pleural liquid
is interposed between the lung and the chest wall or if
an endobronchial obstruction alters sound transmission.
In contrast, transmitted vibration may increase over an
area of underlying pulmonary consolidation. Palpation
may also reveal focal tenderness, as seen with costochon-
dritis or rib fracture.
The relative resonance or dullness of the tissue
underlying the chest wall is assessed by percussion. The
normal sound of the underlying air-containing lung is
resonant. In contrast, consolidated lung or a pleural effu-
sion sounds dull, and emphysema or air in the pleural
space results in a hyperresonant percussion note.
On auscultation of the lungs, the examiner listens for
both the quality and intensity of the breath sounds and
for the presence of extra, or adventitious, sounds. Nor-
mal breath sounds heard through the stethoscope at the
periphery of the lung are described as vesicular breath
sounds, in which inspiration is louder and longer than
expiration. If sound transmission is impaired by endo-
bronchial obstruction or by air or liquid in the pleural
space, breath sounds are diminished in intensity or
absent. When sound transmission is improved through
consolidated lung, the resulting bronchial breath sounds
have a more tubular quality and a more pronounced
expiratory phase. Sound transmission can also be
assessed by listening to spoken or whispered sounds;
when these are transmitted through consolidated lung,
bronchophony and whispered pectoriloquy, respectively, are
present.The sound of a spoken E becomes more like an
A, although with a nasal or bleating quality, a ﬁnding
that is termed egophony.
The primary adventitious (abnormal) sounds that can
be heard include crackles (rales), wheezes, and rhonchi.
Crackles are the discontinuous, typically inspiratory
sound created when alveoli and small airways open and
close with respiration. They are often associated with
interstitial lung disease, microatelectasis, or ﬁlling of
alveoli by liquid. Wheezes, which are generally more
prominent during expiration than inspiration, reﬂect the
oscillation of airway walls that occurs when there is air-
ﬂow limitation, as may be produced by bronchospasm,
airway edema or collapse, or intraluminal obstruction by
neoplasm or secretions. Rhonchi is the term applied to
the sounds created when free liquid or mucus is present
in the airway lumen; the viscous interaction between the
free liquid and the moving air creates a low-pitched
vibratory sound. Other adventitious sounds include
pleural friction rubs and stridor. The gritty sound of a
pleural friction rub indicates inﬂamed pleural surfaces rub-
bing against each other, often during both inspiratory
and expiratory phases of the respiratory cycle. Stridor,
which occurs primarily during inspiration, represents
ﬂow through a narrowed upper airway, as occurs in an
infant with croup.
A summary of the patterns of physical ﬁndings on
pulmonary examination in common types of respiratory
system disease is shown in Table 1-1.
A meticulous general physical examination is mandatory
in patients with disorders of the respiratory system.
Enlarged lymph nodes in the cervical and supraclavicu-
lar regions should be sought. Disturbances of mentation
or even coma may occur in patients with acute carbon
dioxide retention and hypoxemia. Telltale stains on the
ﬁngers point to heavy cigarette smoking; infected teeth
and gums may occur in patients with aspiration pneu-
monitis and lung abscess.
Clubbing of the digits may be found in patients with
lung cancer; interstitial lung disease; and chronic infec-
tions in the thorax, such as bronchiectasis, lung abscess,
and empyema. Clubbing may also be seen with congen-
ital heart disease associated with right-to-left shunting
and with a variety of chronic inﬂammatory or infectious
diseases, such as inﬂammatory bowel disease and endo-
carditis. A number of systemic diseases, such as systemic
lupus erythematosus, scleroderma, and rheumatoid
arthritis, may be associated with pulmonary complica-
tions, even though their primary clinical manifestations
and physical ﬁndings are not primarily related to the
lungs. Conversely, patients with other diseases that most
commonly affect the respiratory system, such as sar-
coidosis, may have ﬁndings on physical examination not
related to the respiratory system, including ocular ﬁnd-
ings (uveitis, conjunctival granulomas) and skin ﬁndings
(erythema nodosum, cutaneous granulomas).
Chest Radiography
Chest radiography is often the initial diagnostic study
performed to evaluate patients with respiratory symp-
toms, but it may also provide the initial evidence of dis-
ease in patients who are free of symptoms. Perhaps the
most common example of the latter situation is the
Diagnosis of Respiratory Disorders
4
SECTION I
ﬁnding of one or more nodules or masses when radiog-
raphy is performed for a reason other than evaluation of
respiratory symptoms.
A number of diagnostic possibilities are often suggested
by the radiographic pattern (Chap. 7). A localized region
of opaciﬁcation involving the pulmonary parenchyma may
be described as a nodule (usually <3 cm in diameter), a
mass (usually ≥3 cm in diameter), or an inﬁltrate. Diffuse
disease with increased opaciﬁcation is usually characterized
as having an alveolar, interstitial, or nodular pattern. In
contrast, increased radiolucency may be localized, as seen
with a cyst or bulla, or generalized, as occurs with emphy-
sema. Chest radiography is also particularly useful for the
detection of pleural disease, especially if manifested by the
presence of air or liquid in the pleural space.An abnormal
appearance of the hila or the mediastinum may suggest a
mass or enlargement of lymph nodes.
A summary of representative diagnoses suggested by
these common radiographic patterns is presented in
Table 1-2, and an atlas of chest radiography and other
chest images can be found in Chap. 7.
Additional Diagnostic Evaluation
Further information for clariﬁcation of radiographic
abnormalities is frequently obtained with CT scanning
of the chest (see Figs. 6-1, 6-2, 19-1, 19-2, 30-3). This
technique is more sensitive than plain radiography in
detecting subtle abnormalities and can suggest speciﬁc
diagnoses based on the pattern of abnormality.
For further discussion of the use of other imaging
studies, including MRI, scintigraphic studies, ultrasonog-
raphy, and angiography, see Chap. 6.
Alteration in the function of the lungs as a result of
respiratory system disease is assessed objectively by pul-
monary function tests, and effects on gas exchange are
evaluated by measurement of arterial blood gases or by
oximetry (Chap. 5). As part of pulmonary function test-
ing, quantitation of forced expiratory ﬂow assesses the
presence of obstructive physiology, which is consistent
with diseases affecting the structure or function of the air-
ways, such as asthma and chronic obstructive lung disease.
Measurement of lung volumes assesses the presence of
restrictive disorders seen with diseases of the pulmonary
parenchyma or respiratory pump and with space-occupying
processes within the pleura. Bronchoscopy is useful in
some settings for visualizing abnormalities of the airways
and for obtaining a variety of samples from either the air-
way or the pulmonary parenchyma (Chap. 6).
INTEGRATION OF THE PRESENTING
CLINICAL PATTERN AND
DIAGNOSTIC STUDIES
Patients with respiratory symptoms but a normal chest
radiograph often have diseases affecting the airways, such
as asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
However, the latter diagnosis is also commonly associated
with radiographic abnormalities, such as diaphragmatic
ﬂattening, an increase in the retrosternal air space, and
attenuation of vascular markings. Other disorders of the
respiratory system for which the chest radiograph is nor-
mal include disorders of the respiratory pump (either the
chest wall or the neuromuscular apparatus controlling the
chest wall) or pulmonary circulation and occasionally
interstitial lung disease. Chest examination and pulmonary
Approach to the Patient with Disease of the Respiratory System
5
CHAPTER 1
TABLE 1-1
TYPICAL CHEST EXAMINATION FINDINGS IN SELECTED CLINICAL CONDITIONS
CONDITION
PERCUSSION
FREMITUS
BREATH SOUNDS
VOICE TRANSMISSION
ADVENTITIOUS SOUNDS
Normal
Resonant
Normal
Vesicular 
Normal
Absent
(at lung bases)
Consolidation or
Dull
Increased
Bronchial
Bronchophony, 
Crackles
atelectasis (with
whispered
patent airway)
pectoriloquy,
egophony
Consolidation or
Dull
Decreased
Decreased
Decreased
Absent
atelectasis (with
blocked airway)
Asthma
Resonant
Normal
Vesicular
Normal
Wheezing
Interstitial lung 
Resonant
Normal
Vesicular
Normal
Crackles
disease
Emphysema
Hyperresonant
Decreased
Decreased
Decreased
Absent or wheezing
Pneumothorax
Hyperresonant
Decreased
Decreased
Decreased
Absent
Pleural effusion
Dull
Decreased
Decreaseda
Decreaseda
Absent or pleural
friction rub
aMay be altered by collapse of underlying lung, which increases transmission of sound.
Source: Adapted from Weinberger, with permission.
function tests are generally helpful in sorting out these
diagnostic possibilities. Obstructive diseases associated
with a normal or relatively normal chest radiograph are
often characterized by ﬁndings on physical examination
and pulmonary function testing that are typical for these
conditions. Similarly, diseases of the respiratory pump or
interstitial diseases may also be suggested by ﬁndings on
physical examination or by particular patterns of restric-
tive disease seen on pulmonary function testing.
When respiratory symptoms are accompanied by radi-
ographic abnormalities,
diseases of the pulmonary
parenchyma or the pleura are usually present. Either dif-
fuse or localized parenchymal lung disease is generally
visualized well on the radiograph, and both air and liquid
in the pleural space (pneumothorax and pleural effusion,
respectively) are usually readily detected by radiography.
Radiographic ﬁndings in the absence of respiratory
symptoms often indicate localized disease affecting the
airways or the pulmonary parenchyma. One or more
nodules or masses may suggest intrathoracic malignancy,
but they may also be the manifestation of a current or
previous infectious process. Multiple nodules affecting
only one lobe suggest an infectious cause rather than
malignancy because metastatic disease would not have a
predilection for only one discrete area of the lung.
Patients with diffuse parenchymal lung disease on radi-
ographic examination may be free of symptoms, as is
sometimes the case in those with pulmonary sarcoidosis.
FURTHER READINGS
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF CHEST PHYSICIANS: Diagnosis and manage-
ment of cough: ACCP evidence-based clinical practice guide-
lines. Chest 129(suppl):1S, 2006
GOODMAN L: Felson’s Principles of Chest Roentgenology. A Programmed
Text, 2d ed. Philadelphia, Saunders, 1999
LEBLOND RF et al: DeGowin & DeGowin’s Diagnostic Examination,
8th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2004
WEINBERGER SE: Principles of Pulmonary Medicine, 4th ed. Philadel-
phia, Saunders, 2004
Diagnosis of Respiratory Disorders
6
SECTION I
TABLE 1-2
MAJOR RESPIRATORY DIAGNOSES WITH COMMON
CHEST RADIOGRAPHIC PATTERNS
Solitary circumscribed density—nodule (<3 cm)
or mass (≥3 cm)
Primary or metastatic neoplasm
Localized infection (bacterial abscess, mycobacterial
or fungal infection)
Wegener’s granulomatosis (one or several nodules)
Rheumatoid nodule (one or several nodules)
Vascular malformation
Bronchogenic cyst
Localized opaciﬁcation (inﬁltrate)
Pneumonia (bacterial, atypical, mycobacterial,
or fungal infection)
Neoplasm
Radiation pneumonitis
Bronchiolitis obliterans with organizing pneumonia
Bronchocentric granulomatosis
Pulmonary infarction
Diffuse interstitial disease
Idiopathic pulmonary ﬁbrosis
Pulmonary ﬁbrosis with systemic rheumatic disease
Sarcoidosis
Drug-induced lung disease
Pneumoconiosis
Hypersensitivity pneumonitis
Infection (pneumocystis, viral pneumonia)
Langerhans cell histiocytosis
Diffuse alveolar disease
Cardiogenic pulmonary edema
Acute respiratory distress syndrome
Diffuse alveolar hemorrhage
Infection (pneumocystis, viral or bacterial
pneumonia)
Sarcoidosis
Diffuse nodular disease
Metastatic neoplasm
Hematogenous spread of infection (bacterial,
mycobacterial, fungal)
Pneumoconiosis
Langerhans cell histiocytosis
Richard M. Schwartzstein
DYSPNEA
The American Thoracic Society deﬁnes dyspnea as a “sub-
jective experience of breathing discomfort that consists of
qualitatively distinct sensations that vary in intensity.The
experience derives from interactions among multiple
physiological, psychological, social, and environmental
factors, and may induce secondary physiological and
behavioral responses.” Dyspnea, a symptom, must be dis-
tinguished from the signs of increased work of breathing.
MECHANISMS OF DYSPNEA
Respiratory sensations are the consequence of interac-
tions between the efferent, or outgoing, motor output
from the brain to the ventilatory muscles (feed-forward)
and the afferent, or incoming, sensory input from recep-
tors throughout the body (feedback), as well as the inte-
grative processing of this information that we infer must
be occurring in the brain (Fig. 2-1). A given disease
state may lead to dyspnea by one or more mechanisms,
some of which may operate under some circumstances
but not others.
Motor Efferents
Disorders of the ventilatory pump are associated with
increased work of breathing or a sense of an increased
effort to breathe.When the muscles are weak or fatigued,
greater effort is required even though the mechanics of
DYSPNEA AND PULMONARY EDEMA
the system are normal.The increased neural output from
the motor cortex is thought to be sensed because of a
corollary discharge that is sent to the sensory cortex at the
same time that signals are sent to the ventilatory muscles.
Sensory Afferents
Chemoreceptors in the carotid bodies and medulla are
activated by hypoxemia, acute hypercapnia, and acidemia.
Stimulation of these receptors, as well as others that lead
to an increase in ventilation, produce a sensation of air
hunger. Mechanoreceptors in the lungs, when stimu-
lated by bronchospasm, lead to a sensation of chest
tightness. J-receptors, which are sensitive to interstitial
edema, and pulmonary vascular receptors, which are
activated by acute changes in pulmonary artery pressure,
appear to contribute to air hunger. Hyperinﬂation is
associated with the sensation of an inability to get a
deep breath or of an unsatisfying breath. It is unclear if
this sensation arises from receptors in the lungs or chest
wall or if it is a variant of the sensation of air hunger.
Metaboreceptors, located in skeletal muscle, are believed
to be activated by changes in the local biochemical
milieu of the tissue active during exercise and, when
stimulated, contribute to the breathing discomfort.
Integration: Efferent-Reafferent Mismatch
A discrepancy or mismatch between the feed-forward
message to the ventilatory muscles and the feedback from
receptors that monitor the response of the ventilatory
CHAPTER 2
CHAPTER 2
I Dyspnea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Mechanisms of Dyspnea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Assessing Dyspnea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
Differential Diagnosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
I Pulmonary Edema . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Mechanisms of Fluid Accumulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
I Further Readings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
7
Diagnosis of Respiratory Disorders
8
SECTION I
pump increases the intensity of dyspnea. This is particu-
larly important when there is a mechanical derangement
of the ventilatory pump, such as in asthma or chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
Anxiety
Acute anxiety may increase the severity of dyspnea either
by altering the interpretation of sensory data or by leading
to patterns of breathing that heighten physiologic abnor-
malities in the respiratory system. In patients with expira-
tory ﬂow limitation, for example, the increased respiratory
rate that accompanies acute anxiety leads to hyperinﬂa-
tion, increased work of breathing, a sense of an increased
effort to breathe,and a sense of an unsatisfying breath.
ASSESSING DYSPNEA
Quality of Sensation
As with pain, dyspnea assessment begins with a determi-
nation of the quality of the discomfort (Table 2-1).
Dyspnea questionnaires, or lists of phrases commonly
used by patients, assist those who have difﬁculty describ-
ing their breathing sensations.
Sensory Intensity
A modiﬁed Borg scale or visual analogue scale can be used
to measure dyspnea at rest, immediately after exercise, or
on recall of a reproducible physical task (e.g., climbing
the stairs at home).An alternative approach is to inquire
about the activities a patient can do (i.e., to gain a sense
of the patient’s disability). The Baseline Dyspnea Index
and the Chronic Respiratory Disease Questionnaire are
commonly used tools for this purpose.
Affective Dimension
For a sensation to be reported as a symptom, it must be
perceived as unpleasant and interpreted as abnormal. We
are still in the early stages of learning the best ways to
assess the affective dimension of dyspnea. Some therapies
for dyspnea, such as pulmonary rehabilitation, may reduce
breathing discomfort, partly by altering this dimension.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Dyspnea is the consequence of deviations from normal
function in the cardiopulmonary systems. Alterations in
the respiratory system can be considered in the context
of the controller (stimulation of breathing), the ventila-
tory pump (the bones and muscles that form the chest
wall, the airways, and the pleura), and the gas exchanger
(the alveoli, pulmonary vasculature, and surrounding
lung parenchyma). Similarly, alterations in the cardiovas-
cular system can be grouped into three categories: con-
ditions associated with high, normal, and low cardiac
output (Fig. 2-2).
ALGORITHM FOR THE INPUTS IN DYSPNEA PRODUCTION
Respiratory centers 
(Respiratory drive)
Sensory cortex
Feedback
Feedforward
Error signal
Corollary
discharge
Motor
cortex
Ventilatory
muscles
Chemoreceptors
Mechanoreceptors
Metaboreceptors
Dyspnea intensity 
and quality
FIGURE 2-1
Hypothetical model for integration of sensory inputs in
the production of dyspnea. Afferent information from the
receptors throughout the respiratory system projects directly
to the sensory cortex to contribute to primary qualitative sen-
sory experiences and provide feedback on the action of the
ventilatory pump. Afferents also project to the areas of the
brain responsible for control of ventilation. The motor cortex,
responding to input from the control centers, sends neural
messages to the ventilatory muscles and a corollary dis-
charge to the sensory cortex (feed-forward with respect to
the instructions sent to the muscles). If the feed-forward and
feedback messages do not match, an error signal is gener-
ated, and the intensity of dyspnea increases. (Adapted from
Gillette and Schwartzstein.)
TABLE 2-1
ASSOCIATION OF QUALITATIVE DESCRIPTORS
AND PATHOPHYSIOLOGIC MECHANISMS
OF SHORTNESS OF BREATH
DESCRIPTOR
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Chest tightness or
Bronchoconstriction, interstitial
constriction
edema (asthma, myocardial 
ischemia)
Increased work or
Airway obstruction, neuromuscular
effort of breathing
disease (COPD, moderate to
severe asthma, myopathy,
kyphoscoliosis)
Air hunger, need
Increased drive to breathe
to breathe,
(CHF, pulmonary embolism, 
urge to breathe
moderate to severe airﬂow
obstruction)
Cannot get a
Hyperinﬂation (asthma, COPD)
deep breath,
and restricted tidal volume
unsatisfying
(pulmonary ﬁbrosis, chest wall
breath
restriction)
Heavy breathing,
Deconditioning
rapid breathing,
breathing more
Note: CHF, congestive heart failure; COPD, chronic obstructive pul-
monary disease.
Source: Adapted from Schwartzstein and Feller-Kopman.
Dyspnea and Pulmonary Edema
9
CHAPTER 2
Respiratory System Dyspnea
Controller
Acute hypoxemia and hypercapnia are associated with
increased activity in the controller. Stimulation of pul-
monary receptors, as occurs in those with acute bron-
chospasm, interstitial edema, and pulmonary embolism,
also leads to hyperventilation and air hunger, as well as a
sense of chest tightness in the case of asthma. High alti-
tude, high progesterone states such as pregnancy, and drugs
such as aspirin stimulate the controller and may cause dys-
pnea even when the respiratory system is normal.
Ventilatory Pump
Disorders of the airways (e.g., asthma, emphysema,
chronic bronchitis, bronchiectasis) lead to increased air-
way resistance and work of breathing. Hyperinﬂation
further increases the work of breathing and can produce
a sense of an inability to get a deep breath. Conditions
that stiffen the chest wall, such as kyphoscoliosis, or that
weaken the ventilatory muscles, such as myasthenia
gravis or Guillain-Barré syndrome, are also associated
with an increased effort to breathe. Large pleural effu-
sions may contribute to dyspnea, both by increasing the
work of breathing and by stimulating pulmonary recep-
tors if associated atelectasis is present.
Gas Exchanger
Pneumonia, pulmonary edema, and aspiration all inter-
fere with gas exchange. Pulmonary vascular and intersti-
tial lung disease and pulmonary vascular congestion may
produce dyspnea by direct stimulation of pulmonary
receptors. In these cases, relief of hypoxemia typically
has only a small impact on the intensity of dyspnea.
Cardiovascular System Dyspnea
High Cardiac Output
Mild to moderate anemia is associated with breathing
discomfort during exercise. Left-to-right intracardiac
shunts may lead to high cardiac output and dyspnea,
although in their later stages, these conditions may be
complicated by the development of pulmonary hyper-
tension, which contributes to dyspnea.The breathlessness
associated with obesity is probably caused by multiple
mechanisms, including high cardiac output and impaired
ventilatory pump function.
Normal Cardiac Output
Cardiovascular deconditioning is characterized by early
development of anaerobic metabolism and stimulation
of chemoreceptors and metaboreceptors. Diastolic dys-
function—caused by hypertension, aortic stenosis, or
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy—is an increasingly frequent
recognized cause of exercise-induced breathlessness.
Pericardial disease (e.g., constrictive pericarditis) is a rel-
atively rare cause of chronic dyspnea.
Low Cardiac Output
Diseases of the myocardium resulting from coronary
artery disease and nonischemic cardiomyopathies result
in a greater left ventricular end-diastolic volume and an
elevation of the left ventricular end-diastolic as well as
pulmonary capillary pressures. Pulmonary receptors are
stimulated by the elevated vascular pressures and resul-
tant interstitial edema, causing dyspnea.
ALGORITHM FOR DYSPNEA PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Dyspnea
Respiratory
Cardiovascular
Gas exchanger
Pulmonary embolism
Pneumonia
Interstitial lung disease
Pump
COPD
Asthma
Kyphoscoliosis
Controller
Pregnancy
Metabolic acidosis
Low output
Congestive heart failure
Myocardial ischemia
Constrictive pericarditis
Normal output
Deconditioning
Obesity
Diastolic dysfunction
High output
Anemia
Hyperthyroidism
Arteriovenous shunt
FIGURE 2-2
Pathophysiology of dyspnea. When confronted with a
patient with shortness of breath of unclear cause, it is useful
to begin the analysis with a consideration of the broad 
pathophysiologic categories that explain the vast majority of
cases. COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. (Adapted
from Schwartzstein and Feller-Kopman.)
Approach to the Patient:
DYSPNEA
In obtaining a history, the patient should be asked to
describe in his or her own words what the discomfort
feels like, as well as the effect of position, infections,
and environmental stimuli on the dyspnea (Fig. 2-3).
Orthopnea is a common indicator of congestive heart
failure, mechanical impairment of the diaphragm asso-
ciated with obesity, or asthma triggered by esophageal
reﬂux. Nocturnal dyspnea suggests congestive heart
failure or asthma.Whereas acute, intermittent episodes
of dyspnea are more likely to reﬂect episodes of
myocardial ischemia, bronchospasm, or pulmonary
embolism, chronic persistent dyspnea is typical of
COPD and interstitial lung disease. Risk factors for
occupational lung disease and for coronary artery dis-
ease should be solicited. Left atrial myxoma or
hepatopulmonary syndrome should be considered
when the patient complains of platypnea, deﬁned as
dyspnea in the upright position with relief in the
supine position.
The physical examination should begin during the
interview of the patient.A patient’s inability to speak
in full sentences before stopping to get a deep breath
suggests a condition that leads to stimulation of the
controller or an impairment of the ventilatory pump
with reduced vital capacity. Evidence for increased
work of breathing (supraclavicular retractions; use of
accessory muscles of ventilation; and the tripod posi-
tion, characterized by sitting with one’s hands braced
on the knees) is indicative of disorders of the venti-
latory pump, most commonly increased airway resis-
tance or stiff lungs and chest wall.When measuring
the vital signs, an accurate assessment of the respira-
tory rate should be obtained and examination for a
pulsus paradoxus carried out; if it is above 10 mmHg,
the presence of COPD should be considered.
During the general examination, signs of anemia
(pale conjunctivae), cyanosis, and cirrhosis (spider
angiomata, gynecomastia) should be sought. Exami-
nation of the chest should focus on symmetry of
movement, percussion (dullness indicative of pleural
effusion, hyperresonance a sign of emphysema), and
auscultation (wheezes, rales, rhonchi, prolonged
expiratory phase, diminished breath sounds, which
are clues to disorders of the airways, and interstitial
edema or ﬁbrosis). The cardiac examination should
Diagnosis of Respiratory Disorders
10
SECTION I
History
Quality of sensation, timing, positional disposition
Persistent vs. intermittent
Physical exam
General appearance: Speak in full sentences? Accessory muscles? Color?
Vital signs: Tachypnea? Pulsus paradoxus? Oximetry-evidence of desaturation?
Chest: Wheezes, rales, rhonchi, diminished breath sounds? Hyperinflated?
Cardiac exam: JVP elevated? Precordial impulse? Gallop? Murmur?
Extremities: Edema? Cyanosis?
At this point, diagnosis may be evident—if not, proceed to further evaluation
Chest radiograph
Assess cardiac size, evidence of CHF
Assess for hyperinflation
Assess for pneumonia, interstitial lung disease, pleural effusions
Suspect low cardiac output, 
myocardial ischemia, or 
pulmonary vascular disease
Suspect respiratory pump or gas 
exchange abnormality
Suspect high 
cardiac output
ECG and echocardiogram to 
assess left ventricular 
function and pulmonary artery 
pressure
Pulmonary function testing—if diffusing 
capacity reduced, consider CT 
angiogram to assess for interstitial lung 
disease and pulmonary embolism
Hematocrit, 
thyroid function 
tests
If diagnosis still uncertain, obtain cardiopulmonary exercise test
FIGURE 2-3
An algorithm for the evaluation of the patient with dysp-
nea. CHF, congestive heart failure; CT, computed tomography;
ECG, electrocardiogram; JVP, jugular venous pulse. (Adapted
from Schwartzstein and Feller-Kopman.)
focus on signs of elevated right heart pressures (jugu-
lar venous distention, edema, accentuated pulmonic
component to the second heart sound), left ventricu-
lar dysfunction (S3 and S4 gallops), and valvular dis-
ease (murmurs).When examining the abdomen with
the patient in the supine position, it should be noted
whether there is paradoxical movement of the
abdomen (inward motion during inspiration), a sign
of diaphragmatic weakness. Clubbing of the digits
may indicate interstitial pulmonary ﬁbrosis, and the
presence of joint swelling or deformation as well as
changes consistent with Raynaud’s disease may be
indicative of a collagen-vascular process that may be
associated with pulmonary disease.
Patients with exertional dyspnea should be asked to
walk under observation to reproduce the symptoms.
The patient should be examined for new ﬁndings that
were not present at rest and for oxygen saturation. A
“picture” of the patient while symptomatic may be
worth thousands of dollars in laboratory tests.
After the history and physical examination have
been performed, a chest radiograph should be obtained.
The lung volumes should be assessed (hyperinﬂation
indicates obstructive lung disease; low lung volumes
suggest interstitial edema or ﬁbrosis, diaphragmatic
dysfunction, or impaired chest wall motion).The pul-
monary parenchyma should be examined for evidence
of interstitial disease and emphysema. Prominent pul-
monary vasculature in the upper zones indicates pul-
monary venous hypertension, and enlarged central
pulmonary arteries suggest pulmonary artery hyper-
tension.An enlarged cardiac silhouette suggests dilated
cardiomyopathy or valvular disease. Bilateral pleural
effusions are typical of congestive heart failure and
some forms of collagen vascular disease. Unilateral
effusions raise the specter of carcinoma and pulmonary
embolism but may also occur in patients with heart
failure. CT of the chest is generally reserved for further
evaluation of the lung parenchyma (interstitial lung
disease) and possible pulmonary embolism.
Laboratory studies should include an electrocardio-
gram (ECG) to look for evidence of ventricular
hypertrophy 
and 
prior 
myocardial 
infarction.
Echocardiography is indicated in patients in whom
systolic dysfunction, pulmonary hypertension, or
valvular heart disease is suspected.
DISTINGUISHING CARDIOVASCULAR FROM
RESPIRATORY 
SYSTEM 
DYSPNEA
If 
a
patient has evidence of both pulmonary and cardiac
disease, a cardiopulmonary exercise test should be
carried out to determine which system is responsible
for the exercise limitation. If, at peak exercise, the
patient achieves predicted maximal ventilation,
demonstrates an increase in dead space or hypoxemia
(oxygen saturation <90%), or develops bronchospasm,
the respiratory system is probably the cause of the
problem. Alternatively, if the heart rate is above 85%
of the predicted maximum, anaerobic threshold
occurs early, the blood pressure becomes excessively
high or decreases during exercise, the O2 pulse (O2
consumption/heart rate, an indicator of stroke volume)
decreases, or ischemic changes are seen on the ECG,
an abnormality of the cardiovascular system is likely
the explanation for the breathing discomfort.
Dyspnea and Pulmonary Edema
11
CHAPTER 2
Treatment: 
DYSPNEA
The ﬁrst goal is to correct the underlying problem
responsible for the symptom. If this is not possible, one
attempts to lessen the intensity of the symptom and its
effect on the patient’s quality of life. Supplemental O2
should be administered if the resting O2 saturation is
90% or below or if the patient’s saturation decreases to
these levels with activity. For patients with COPD, pul-
monary rehabilitation programs have demonstrated
positive effects on dyspnea, exercise capacity, and rates
of hospitalization. Studies of anxiolytics and antidepres-
sants have not demonstrated consistent beneﬁt. Experi-
mental interventions (e.g., cold air on the face, chest wall
vibration, and inhaled furosemide) to modulate the
afferent information from receptors throughout the res-
piratory system are being studied.
PULMONARY EDEMA
MECHANISMS OF FLUID ACCUMULATION
The extent to which ﬂuid accumulates in the intersti-
tium of the lung depends on the balance of hydrostatic
and oncotic forces within the pulmonary capillaries and
in the surrounding tissue. Hydrostatic pressure favors
movement of ﬂuid from the capillary into the intersti-
tium.The oncotic pressure, which is determined by the
protein concentration in the blood, favors movement of
ﬂuid into the vessel.Albumin, the primary protein in the
plasma, may be low in patients with conditions such as
cirrhosis and nephrotic syndrome. Although hypoalbu-
minemia favors movement of ﬂuid into the tissue for
any given hydrostatic pressure in the capillary, it is usu-
ally not sufﬁcient by itself to cause interstitial edema. In
a healthy individual, the tight junctions of the capillary
endothelium are impermeable to proteins, and the lym-
phatics in the tissue carry away the small amounts of
protein that may leak out; together these factors result in
an oncotic force that maintains ﬂuid in the capillary.
Disruption of the endothelial barrier, however, allows
protein to escape the capillary bed and enhances the
movement of ﬂuid into the tissue of the lung.
Cardiogenic Pulmonary Edema
(See also Chap. 31) Cardiac abnormalities that lead to an
increase in pulmonary venous pressure shift the balance
of forces between the capillary and the interstitium.
Hydrostatic pressure is increased and ﬂuid exits the cap-
illary at an increased rate, resulting in interstitial and, in
more severe cases, alveolar edema. The development of
pleural effusions may further compromise respiratory
system function and contribute to breathing discomfort.
Early signs of pulmonary edema include exertional
dyspnea and orthopnea. Chest radiographs show peri-
bronchial thickening, prominent vascular markings in
the upper lung zones, and Kerley B lines. As the pul-
monary edema worsens, alveoli ﬁll with ﬂuid, and the
chest radiograph shows patchy alveolar ﬁlling, typically
in a perihilar distribution, which then progresses to dif-
fuse alveolar inﬁltrates. Increasing airway edema is asso-
ciated with rhonchi and wheezes.
Noncardiogenic Pulmonary Edema
By deﬁnition, hydrostatic pressures are normal in patients
with noncardiogenic pulmonary edema. Lung water
increases because of damage of the pulmonary capillary
lining with leakage of proteins and other macromole-
cules into the tissue; ﬂuid follows the protein as oncotic
forces are shifted from the vessel to the surrounding
lung tissue.This process is associated with dysfunction of
the surfactant lining the alveoli, increased surface forces,
and a propensity for the alveoli to collapse at low lung
volumes. Physiologically, noncardiogenic pulmonary
edema is characterized by intrapulmonary shunt with
hypoxemia and decreased pulmonary compliance.
Pathologically, hyaline membranes are evident in the
alveoli, and inﬂammation leading to pulmonary ﬁbrosis
may be seen. Clinically, the picture ranges from mild
dyspnea to respiratory failure. Auscultation of the lungs
may be relatively normal despite chest radiographs that
show diffuse alveolar inﬁltrates. CT scans demonstrate
that the distribution of alveolar edema is more heteroge-
neous than was once thought.
It is useful to categorize the causes of noncardiogenic
pulmonary edema in terms of whether the injury to the
lung is likely to result from direct, indirect, or pulmonary
vascular causes (Table 2-2). Direct injuries are mediated
via the airways (e.g., aspiration) or as the consequence of
blunt chest trauma. Indirect injury is the consequence of
mediators that reach the lung via the blood stream.The
third category includes conditions that may be the con-
sequence of acute changes in pulmonary vascular pres-
sures, possibly the result of sudden autonomic discharge
in the case of neurogenic and high-altitude pulmonary
edema or sudden swings of pleural pressure, as well as
transient damage to the pulmonary capillaries in the case
of reexpansion pulmonary edema.
Distinguishing Cardiogenic from
Noncardiogenic Pulmonary Edema
The history is essential for assessing the likelihood of under-
lying cardiac disease as well as for identifying one of the
conditions associated with noncardiogenic pulmonary
edema. The physical examination in cardiogenic pulmonary
edema is notable for evidence of increased intracardiac pres-
sures (S3 gallop, elevated jugular venous pulse, peripheral
edema) and rales or wheezes on auscultation of the chest.In
contrast, the physical examination in noncardiogenic pul-
monary edema is dominated by the ﬁndings of the precipi-
tating condition; pulmonary ﬁndings may be relatively nor-
mal in the early stages. The chest radiograph in cardiogenic
pulmonary edema typically shows an enlarged cardiac sil-
houette, vascular redistribution, interstitial thickening, and
perihilar alveolar inﬁltrates;pleural effusions are common.In
noncardiogenic pulmonary edema, the heart size is normal,
alveolar inﬁltrates are distributed more uniformly through-
out the lungs, and pleural effusions are uncommon. Finally,
the hypoxemia of cardiogenic pulmonary edema is largely
attributable to ventilation-perfusion mismatch and responds
to the administration of supplemental oxygen. In contrast,
hypoxemia in noncardiogenic pulmonary edema is primar-
ily attributable to intrapulmonary shunting and typically
persists despite high concentrations of inhaled O2.
FURTHER READINGS
AARON SD et al: Overdiagnosis of asthma in obese and nonobese
adults. CMAJ 179:1121, 2008
ABIDOV A et al: Prognostic signiﬁcance of dyspnea in patients
referred for cardiac stress testing. N Engl J Med 353:1889, 2005
Diagnosis of Respiratory Disorders
12
SECTION I
TABLE 2-2
COMMON CAUSES OF NONCARDIOGENIC
PULMONARY EDEMA
Direct Injury to Lung
Chest trauma, pulmonary contusion
Aspiration
Smoke inhalation
Pneumonia
Oxygen toxicity
Pulmonary embolism, reperfusion
Hematogenous Injury to Lung
Sepsis
Pancreatitis
Nonthoracic trauma
Leukoagglutination reactions
Multiple transfusions
Intravenous drug use (e.g., heroin)
Cardiopulmonary bypass
Possible Lung Injury Plus Elevated
Hydrostatic Pressures
High-altitude pulmonary edema
Neurogenic pulmonary edema
Reexpansion pulmonary edema
BANZETT RB et al: The affective dimension of laboratory dyspnea:
Air hunger is more unpleasant than work/effort. Am J Respir
Crit Care Med 177:1384, 2008
Dyspnea mechanisms, assessment, and management: A consensus
statement.Am Rev Respir Crit Care Med 159:321, 1999
GILLETTE MA, SCHWARTZSTEIN RM: Mechanisms of dyspnea, in
Ahmedzai SH, Muer MF (eds). Supportive Care in Respiratory Dis-
ease. Oxford, UK, Oxford University Press, 2005
MAHLER DA et al. Descriptors of breathlessness in cardiorespiratory
diseases.Am J Respir Crit Care Med 154:1357, 1996
MAHLER DA, O’DONNELL DE (eds): Dyspnea: Mechanisms, Measurement,
and Management.New York,Marcel Dekker,2005
SCHWARTZSTEIN RM: The language of dyspnea, in Mahler DA,
O’Donnell DE (eds). Dyspnea: Mechanisms, Measurement, and
Management, New York, Marcel Dekker, 2005
———, FELLER-KOPMAN D: Shortness of breath, in Braunwald E,
GOLDMAN L (eds). Primary Care Cardiology, 2d ed. Philadelphia,
WB Saunders, 2003
Dyspnea and Pulmonary Edema
13
CHAPTER 2
Steven E. Weinberger
I
David A. Lipson
COUGH
Cough is an explosive expiration that provides a normal
protective mechanism for clearing the tracheobronchial
tree of secretions and foreign material. When excessive
or bothersome, it is also one of the most common
symptoms for which patients seek medical attention.
Reasons for this include discomfort from the cough
itself; interference with normal lifestyle; and concern for
the cause of the cough, especially fear of cancer.
MECHANISM
Coughing may be initiated either voluntarily or reﬂex-
ively.As a defensive reﬂex, it has both afferent and effer-
ent pathways.The afferent limb includes receptors within
the sensory distribution of the trigeminal, glossopharyn-
geal, superior laryngeal, and vagus nerves. The efferent
limb includes the recurrent laryngeal nerve and the
spinal nerves. The cough starts with a deep inspiration
followed by glottic closure, relaxation of the diaphragm,
and muscle contraction against a closed glottis. The
resulting markedly positive intrathoracic pressure causes
narrowing of the trachea. After the glottis opens, the
large pressure differential between the airways and the
atmosphere coupled with tracheal narrowing produces
rapid ﬂow rates through the trachea.The shearing forces
that develop aid in the elimination of mucus and foreign
materials.
COUGH AND HEMOPTYSIS
ETIOLOGY
Cough can be initiated by a variety of irritant triggers
either from an exogenous source (smoke, dust, fumes, for-
eign bodies) or from an endogenous origin (upper airway
secretions, gastric contents). These stimuli may affect
receptors in the upper airway (especially the pharynx and
larynx) or in the lower respiratory tract following access
to the tracheobronchial tree by inhalation or aspiration.
When cough is triggered by upper airway secretions (as
with postnasal drip) or gastric contents (as with gastroe-
sophageal reﬂux), the initiating factor may go unrecog-
nized, and the cough may persist.Additionally, prolonged
exposure to such irritants may initiate airway inﬂamma-
tion, which can itself precipitate cough and sensitize the
airway to other irritants. Cough associated with gastroe-
sophageal reﬂux is caused only partly by irritation of
upper airway receptors or by aspiration of gastric con-
tents; a vagally mediated reﬂex mechanism secondary to
acid in the distal esophagus may also contribute.
Any disorder resulting in inﬂammation, constriction,
inﬁltration, or compression of the airways may be associ-
ated with cough. Inﬂammation commonly results from
airway infections, ranging from viral or bacterial bron-
chitis to bronchiectasis. In viral bronchitis, airway inﬂam-
mation sometimes persists long after resolution of the
typical acute symptoms, thereby producing a prolonged
cough that may last for weeks. Pertussis infection is also a
possible cause of persistent cough in adults; however,
diagnosis is generally made on clinical grounds.Asthma is
CHAPTER 3
CHAPTER 3
I Cough . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
Mechanism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
Etiology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
Complications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
I Hemoptysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
Etiology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
I Further Readings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
14
a common cause of cough. Although the clinical setting
commonly suggests that when a cough is secondary to
asthma, some patients present with cough in the absence
of wheezing or dyspnea, thus making the diagnosis more
subtle (“cough variant asthma”). A neoplasm inﬁltrating
the airway wall, such as bronchogenic carcinoma or a
carcinoid tumor, is commonly associated with cough.
Airway inﬁltration with granulomas may also trigger a
cough, as seen with endobronchial sarcoidosis or tuber-
culosis. Compression of airways results from extrinsic
masses such as lymph nodes or mediastinal tumors or
rarely from an aortic aneurysm.
Examples of parenchymal lung disease potentially
producing cough include interstitial lung disease, pneu-
monia, and lung abscess. Congestive heart failure may be
associated with cough, probably as a consequence of
interstitial as well as peribronchial edema.A nonproduc-
tive cough complicates the use of angiotensin-convert-
ing enzyme (ACE) inhibitors in 5% to 20% of patients
taking these agents. Onset is usually within 1 week of
starting the drug but can be delayed up to 6 months.
Although the mechanism is not known with certainty, it
may relate to accumulation of bradykinin or substance P,
both of which are degraded by ACE. In contrast,
angiotensin II receptor antagonists do not seem to
increase cough, likely because these drugs do not signiﬁ-
cantly increase bradykinin levels.
The most common causes of cough can be categorized
according to the duration of the cough.Acute cough (<3
weeks) is most often caused by upper respiratory infection
(especially the common cold, acute bacterial sinusitis, and
pertussis), but more serious disorders, such as pneumonia,
pulmonary embolus, and congestive heart failure, may also
present in this fashion. Subacute cough (between 3 and 8
weeks) is commonly postinfectious, resulting from persis-
tent airway inﬂammation or postnasal drip after viral
infection, pertussis, or infection with Mycoplasma or
Chlamydia spp. In a patient with subacute cough that is not
clearly postinfectious, the varied causes of chronic cough
should be considered. Chronic cough (>8 weeks) in a
smoker raises the possibilities of chronic obstructive lung
disease or bronchogenic carcinoma. In a nonsmoker who
has a normal chest radiograph and is not taking an ACE
inhibitor, the most common causes of chronic cough are
postnasal drip (sometimes termed the upper airway cough
syndrome), asthma, and gastroesophageal reﬂux. Eosinophilic
bronchitis in the absence of asthma has also been recog-
nized as a potential cause of chronic cough.
1. Is the cough acute, subacute, or chronic?
2. At its onset, were there associated symptoms sug-
gestive of a respiratory infection?
3. Is it seasonal or associated with wheezing?
4. Is it associated with symptoms suggestive of post-
nasal drip (nasal discharge, frequent throat clear-
ing, a “tickle in the throat”) or gastroesophageal
reﬂux (heartburn or sensation of regurgitation)?
(However, the absence of such suggestive symp-
toms does not exclude either of these diagnoses.)
5. Is it associated with fever or sputum? If sputum is
present, what is its character?
6. Does the patient have any associated diseases or
risk factors for disease (e.g., cigarette smoking, risk
factors for infection with HIV, environmental
exposures)?
7. Is the patient taking an ACE inhibitor?
The general physical examination may point to a sys-
temic or nonpulmonary cause of cough, such as heart
failure or primary nonpulmonary neoplasm. Exami-
nation of the oropharynx may provide suggestive evi-
dence for postnasal drip, including oropharyngeal
mucus or erythema, or a “cobblestone” appearance to
the mucosa. Auscultation of the chest may demon-
strate inspiratory stridor (indicative of upper airway
disease), rhonchi or expiratory wheezing (indicative
of lower airway disease), or inspiratory crackles (sug-
gestive of a process involving the pulmonary
parenchyma, such as interstitial lung disease, pneumo-
nia, or pulmonary edema).
Chest radiography may be particularly helpful in
suggesting or conﬁrming the cause of the cough.
Important potential ﬁndings include the presence of
an intrathoracic mass lesion, localized pulmonary
parenchymal opaciﬁcation, or diffuse interstitial or
alveolar disease. An area of honeycombing or cyst
formation may suggest bronchiectasis, and symmet-
ric bilateral hilar adenopathy may suggest sarcoidosis.
Pulmonary function testing (Chap. 5) is useful for
assessing the functional abnormalities that accom-
pany certain disorders that produce cough. Measure-
ment of forced expiratory ﬂow rates may demon-
strate reversible airﬂow obstruction characteristic of
asthma.When asthma is considered but ﬂow rates are
normal, bronchoprovocation testing with metha-
choline or cold-air inhalation may demonstrate
hyperreactivity of the airways to a bronchoconstric-
tive stimulus. Measurement of lung volumes and dif-
fusing capacity is useful primarily for demonstration
of a restrictive pattern, often seen with any of the
diffuse interstitial lung diseases.
If sputum is produced, gross and microscopic
examination may provide useful information. Purulent
sputum suggests chronic bronchitis, bronchiectasis,
Cough and Hemoptysis
15
CHAPTER 3
Approach to the Patient:
COUGH
A detailed history frequently provides the most valu-
able clues for the cause of the cough. Particularly
important questions include:
Diagnosis of Respiratory Disorders
16
SECTION I
pneumonia, or lung abscess. Blood in the sputum
may be seen in the same disorders, but its presence
also raises the question of an endobronchial tumor.
Greater than 3% eosinophils seen on staining of
induced sputum in a patient without asthma suggests
the possibility of eosinophilic bronchitis. Gram and
acid-fast stains and cultures may demonstrate a par-
ticular infectious pathogen, and sputum cytology
may provide a diagnosis of a pulmonary malignancy.
More specialized studies are helpful in speciﬁc cir-
cumstances. Fiberoptic bronchoscopy is the procedure of
choice for visualizing an endobronchial tumor and
collecting cytologic and histologic specimens.
Inspection of the tracheobronchial mucosa may
demonstrate endobronchial granulomas often seen
in sarcoidosis, and endobronchial biopsy of such
lesions or transbronchial biopsy of the lung intersti-
tium may conﬁrm the diagnosis. Inspection of the
airway mucosa by bronchoscopy may also demon-
strate the characteristic appearance of endobronchial
Kaposi’s sarcoma in patients with AIDS. High-resolu-
tion computed tomography (HRCT) may conﬁrm the
presence of interstitial lung disease and frequently
suggests a diagnosis based on the speciﬁc abnormal
pattern. It is the procedure of choice for demonstrat-
ing dilated airways and conﬁrming the diagnosis of
bronchiectasis.
A diagnostic algorithm for evaluation of subacute
and chronic cough is presented in Fig. 3-1.
Other important management considerations are
treatment of speciﬁc respiratory tract infections, bron-
chodilators for potentially reversible airﬂow obstruc-
tion, inhaled glucocorticoids for eosinophilic bronchitis,
chest physiotherapy and other methods to enhance
clearance of secretions in patients with bronchiectasis,
and treatment of endobronchial tumors or interstitial
lung disease when such therapy is available and appro-
priate. In patients with chronic, unexplained cough, an
empirical approach to treatment is often used for both
diagnostic and therapeutic purposes, starting with an
antihistamine—decongestant combination, nasal glu-
cocorticoids, or nasal ipratropium spray to treat unrec-
ognized postnasal drip. If ineffective, this may be fol-
lowed sequentially by empirical treatment for asthma,
nonasthmatic eosinophilic bronchitis, and gastroe-
sophageal reﬂux.
Symptomatic or nonspeciﬁc therapy of cough should
be considered when (1) the cause of the cough is not
Cough  > 3 weeks’ duration
Hx
PE
ACEI
Smoking
Stop ACEI
Stop smoking
Cough
gone
No prior infection
CXR
Abnormal
Normal
Cough
gone
Cough
persists
Cough persists
Cough
persists
Evaluate based
on likely clinical
possibilities
(e.g., CT scan,
sputum testing,
bronchoscopy)
Empirical
treatment for 
postnasal drip 
(upper airway
cough
syndrome)
Evaluate (or 
treat empirically)
for asthma
Treat for non-
asthmatic eosino-
philic bronchitis
Consider
gastroesophageal
reflux disease
Hx suggests
postinfectious
Rx for
postnasal drip
Cough
gone
Cough
persists
Consider
pertussis
Evaluate (& Rx)
for hyperreactive
airways
MANAGEMENT OF COUGH LASTING > 3 WEEKS
Cough
persists
FIGURE 3-1
Algorithm for management of cough lasting more than 3
weeks. Cough lasting between 3 and 8 weeks is considered
subacute; cough lasting longer than 8 weeks is considered
chronic. ACEI, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor; CXR,
chest x-ray; Hx, history; PE, physical examination; Rx, treat.
COMPLICATIONS
Common complications of coughing include chest and
abdominal wall soreness, urinary incontinence, and
exhaustion. On occasion, paroxysms of coughing may
precipitate syncope (cough syncope) consequent to
markedly positive intrathoracic and alveolar pressures,
diminished venous return, and decreased cardiac output.
Although cough fractures of the ribs may occur in other-
wise normal patients, their occurrence should at least
raise the possibility of pathologic fractures, which are
seen with multiple myeloma, osteoporosis, and osteolytic
metastases.
Treatment:
COUGH
Deﬁnitive treatment of cough depends on determining
the underlying cause and then initiating speciﬁc ther-
apy. Elimination of an exogenous inciting agent (ciga-
rette smoke, ACE inhibitors) or an endogenous trigger
(postnasal drip, gastroesophageal reﬂux) is usually
effective when such a precipitant can be identiﬁed.
Cough and Hemoptysis
17
CHAPTER 3
known or speciﬁc treatment is not possible and (2) the
cough performs no useful function or causes marked
discomfort or sleep disturbance. An irritative, nonpro-
ductive cough may be suppressed by an antitussive
agent, which increases the latency or threshold of the
cough center. Such agents include codeine (15 mg qid)
or nonnarcotics such as dextromethorphan (15 mg qid).
These drugs provide symptomatic relief by interrupting
prolonged, self-perpetuating paroxysms. However, a
cough productive of signiﬁcant quantities of sputum
should usually not be suppressed because retention of
sputum in the tracheobronchial tree may interfere with
the distribution of alveolar ventilation and the ability of
the lung to resist infection.
tumors.
Blood originating from the pulmonary
parenchyma can be either from a localized source, such
as an infection (pneumonia, lung abscess, tuberculosis)
or from a process diffusely affecting the parenchyma (as
with a coagulopathy or with an autoimmune process
such as Goodpasture’s syndrome). Disorders primarily
affecting the pulmonary vasculature include pulmonary
embolic disease and conditions associated with elevated
pulmonary venous and capillary pressures, such as mitral
stenosis and left ventricular failure.
Although the relative frequency of the different
causes of hemoptysis varies from series to series, most
recent studies indicate that bronchitis and bronchogenic
carcinoma are the two most common causes in the
United States. Despite the lower frequency of tubercu-
losis and bronchiectasis seen in recent compared with
older series, these two disorders still represent the most
common causes of massive hemoptysis in several series,
especially worldwide. Even after extensive evaluation,
HEMOPTYSIS
Hemoptysis is deﬁned as the expectoration of blood from
the respiratory tract, a spectrum that varies from blood
streaking of sputum to coughing up large amounts of
pure blood. Massive hemoptysis is variably deﬁned as the
expectoration of more than 100 to 600 mL over a 24-h.
period, although the patient’s estimation of the amount
of blood is notoriously unreliable. Expectoration of even
relatively small amounts of blood is a frightening symp-
tom and may be a marker for potentially serious disease,
such as bronchogenic carcinoma. Massive hemoptysis, on
the other hand, may represent an acutely life-threatening
problem. Blood can ﬁll the airways and the alveolar
spaces, not only seriously disturbing gas exchange but
also potentially causing asphyxiation.
ETIOLOGY
Because blood originating from the nasopharynx or the
gastrointestinal tract can mimic blood coming from the
lower respiratory tract, it is important to determine ini-
tially that the blood is not coming from one of these
alternative sites. Clues that the blood is originating from
the gastrointestinal tract include a dark red appearance
and an acidic pH in contrast to the typical bright red
appearance and alkaline pH of true hemoptysis.
An etiologic classiﬁcation of hemoptysis can be based
on the site of origin within the lungs (Table 3-1).The
most common site of bleeding is the tracheobronchial
tree, which may be affected by inﬂammation (acute or
chronic bronchitis, bronchiectasis) or by neoplasm
(bronchogenic carcinoma, endobronchial metastatic car-
cinoma, or bronchial carcinoid tumor). The bronchial
arteries, which originate either from the aorta or from
intercostal arteries and are therefore part of the high-
pressure systemic circulation, are the source of bleeding
in bronchitis or bronchiectasis or with endobronchial
TABLE 3-1
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS OF HEMOPTYSIS
Source other than the lower respiratory tract
Upper airway (nasopharyngeal) bleeding
Gastrointestinal bleeding
Tracheobronchial source
Neoplasm (bronchogenic carcinoma, endobronchial
metastatic tumor, Kaposi’s sarcoma, bronchial
carcinoid)
Bronchitis (acute or chronic)
Bronchiectasis
Broncholithiasis
Airway trauma
Foreign body
Pulmonary parenchymal source
Lung abscess
Pneumonia
Tuberculosis
Mycetoma (“fungus ball”)
Goodpasture’s syndrome
Idiopathic pulmonary hemosiderosis
Wegener’s granulomatosis
Lupus pneumonitis
Lung contusion
Primary vascular source
Arteriovenous malformation
Pulmonary embolism
Elevated pulmonary venous pressure (especially
mitral stenosis)
Pulmonary artery rupture secondary to balloon-tip
pulmonary artery catheter manipulation
Miscellaneous and rare causes
Pulmonary endometriosis (catamenial hemoptysis)
Systemic coagulopathy or use of anticoagulants or
thrombolytic agents
Source: Adapted from Weinberger SE: Principles of Pulmonary
Medicine, 4th ed. Philadelphia, Saunders, 2004, with permission.
Diagnosis of Respiratory Disorders
18
SECTION I
a sizable proportion of patients (≤30% in some series)
have no identiﬁable cause for their hemoptysis. These
patients are classiﬁed as having idiopathic or cryptogenic
hemoptysis, and subtle airway or parenchymal disease is
presumably responsible for the bleeding.
for a mass lesion, ﬁndings suggestive of bronchiectasis
(Chap. 16), or focal or diffuse parenchymal disease
(representing either focal or diffuse bleeding or a focal
area of pneumonitis).Additional initial screening eval-
uation often includes a complete blood count, a coag-
ulation proﬁle, and assessment for renal disease with a
urinalysis and measurement of blood urea nitrogen
and creatinine levels.When sputum is present, exami-
nation by Gram and acid-fast stains (along with the
corresponding cultures) is indicated.
Fiberoptic bronchoscopy is particularly useful for
localizing the site of bleeding and for visualization of
endobronchial lesions. When bleeding is massive,
rigid bronchoscopy is often preferable to ﬁberoptic
bronchoscopy because of better airway control and
greater suction capability. In patients with suspected
bronchiectasis, HRCT is the diagnostic procedure of
choice.
A diagnostic algorithm for evaluation of nonmas-
sive hemoptysis is presented in Fig. 3-2.
Approach to the Patient: 
HEMOPTYSIS
The history is extremely valuable. Hemoptysis that is
described as blood streaking of mucopurulent or
purulent sputum often suggests bronchitis. Chronic
production of sputum with a recent change in quan-
tity or appearance favors an acute exacerbation of
chronic bronchitis. Fever or chills accompanying
blood-streaked purulent sputum suggests pneumonia,
and a putrid smell to the sputum raises the possibility
of lung abscess. When sputum production has been
chronic and copious, the diagnosis of bronchiectasis
should be considered. Hemoptysis after the acute
onset of pleuritic chest pain and dyspnea is suggestive
of pulmonary embolism.
A history of previous or coexisting disorders
should be sought, such as renal disease (seen with
Goodpasture’s syndrome or Wegener’s granulomato-
sis), lupus erythematosus (with associated pulmonary
hemorrhage from lupus pneumonitis), or a previous
malignancy (either recurrent lung cancer or endo-
bronchial metastasis from a nonpulmonary primary
tumor) or treatment for malignancy (with recent
chemotherapy or a bone marrow transplant). In a
patient with AIDS, endobronchial or pulmonary
parenchymal Kaposi’s sarcoma should be considered.
Risk factors for bronchogenic carcinoma, particularly
smoking and asbestos exposure, should be sought.
Patients should be questioned about previous bleed-
ing disorders, treatment with anticoagulants, or use of
drugs that may be associated with thrombocytopenia.
The physical examination may also provide helpful
clues to the diagnosis. For example, examination of
the lungs may demonstrate a pleural friction rub
(pulmonary embolism), localized or diffuse crackles
(parenchymal bleeding or an underlying parenchymal
process associated with bleeding), evidence of airﬂow
obstruction (chronic bronchitis),
or prominent
rhonchi with or without wheezing or crackles
(bronchiectasis). Cardiac examination may demon-
strate ﬁndings of pulmonary arterial hypertension,
mitral stenosis, or heart failure. Skin and mucosal
examination may reveal Kaposi’s sarcoma, arteriove-
nous malformations of Osler-Rendu-Weber disease,
or lesions suggestive of systemic lupus erythematosus.
Diagnostic evaluation of hemoptysis starts with a chest
radiograph (often followed by a CT scan) to look
Treatment:
HEMOPTYSIS
The rapidity of bleeding and its effect on gas exchange
determine the urgency of management. When the
bleeding is conﬁned to either blood streaking of spu-
tum or production of small amounts of pure blood, gas
exchange is usually preserved; establishing a diagnosis
is the ﬁrst priority. When hemoptysis is massive, main-
taining adequate gas exchange, preventing blood from
spilling into unaffected areas of lung, and avoiding
asphyxiation are the highest priorities. Keeping the
patient at rest and partially suppressing the cough may
help the bleeding to subside. If the origin of the blood is
known and is limited to one lung, the bleeding lung
should be placed in the dependent position so that
blood is not aspirated into the unaffected lung.
With massive bleeding, the need to control the air-
way and maintain adequate gas exchange may necessi-
tate endotracheal intubation and mechanical ventila-
tion. In patients in danger of ﬂooding the lung
contralateral to the side of hemorrhage despite proper
positioning, isolation of the right and left mainstem
bronchi from each other can be achieved by selectively
intubating the nonbleeding lung (often with broncho-
scopic guidance) or by using specially designed double-
lumen endotracheal tubes. Another option involves
inserting a balloon catheter through a bronchoscope by
direct visualization and inﬂating the balloon to occlude
the bronchus leading to the bleeding site. This tech-
nique not only prevents aspiration of blood into unaf-
fected areas but also may promote tamponade of the
bleeding site and cessation of bleeding.
Cough and Hemoptysis
19
CHAPTER 3
FURTHER READINGS
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF CHEST PHYSICIANS: Diagnosis and manage-
ment of cough: ACCP evidence-based clinical practice guide-
lines. Chest 129 (suppl):1S, 2006
GIBSON PG et al: Eosinophilic bronchitis: Clinical manifestations and
implications for treatment.Thorax 57:178, 2002
HAQUE RA et al: Chronic idiopathic cough. A discrete clinical
entity? Chest 127:1710, 2005
IRWIN RS, MADISON JM: The diagnosis and treatment of cough. N
Engl J Med 343:1715, 2000
IRWIN RS, MADISON JM:The persistently troublesome cough. Am J
Respir Crit Care Med 165:1469, 2002
JEAN-BAPTISTE E: Clinical assessment and management of massive
hemoptysis. Crit Care Med 28:1642, 2000
KHALIL A et al: Role of MDCT in identiﬁcation of the bleeding site
and the vessels causing hemoptysis. AJR Am J Roentgenol
188:W117, 2007
Other available techniques for control of signiﬁcant
bleeding include laser phototherapy, electrocautery,
bronchial artery embolization, and surgical resection of
the involved area of lung. With bleeding from an endo-
bronchial tumor, argon plasma coagulation or the
neodymium:yttrium-aluminum-garnet (Nd:YAG) laser can
often achieve at least temporary hemostasis by coagu-
lating the bleeding site. Electrocautery, which uses an
electric current for thermal destruction of tissue, may be
used similarly for management of bleeding from an
endobronchial tumor. Bronchial artery embolization
involves an arteriographic procedure in which a vessel
proximal to the bleeding site is cannulated and a mater-
ial such as Gelfoam is injected to occlude the bleeding
vessel. Surgical resection is a therapeutic option either
for the emergent therapy of life-threatening hemoptysis
that fails to respond to other measures or for the elec-
tive but deﬁnitive management of localized disease
subject to recurrent bleeding.
Suggestive of
lower respiratory
tract source
EVALUATION OF NONMASSIVE HEMOPTYSIS
History and physical examination
Suggestive of 
upper airway or 
gastrointestinal
source
ENT, GI evaluation
Normal
Mass
Other
parenchymal
disease
No risk factors 
for cancer, 
history not 
suggestive of 
bronchitis
History 
suggestive 
of bronchitis 
and no risk 
factors for 
cancer
Risk factors
for cancer
Suggestive
of particular
diagnosis
CT
No specific
diagnosis
suggested
Bronchoscopy
Bronchoscopy and CT
Evaluation 
focused 
toward the 
suggested
diagnosis
Consider
bronchoscopy 
and/or CT
Observe
Cessation of
bleeding
No further
evaluation
Recurrence
of hemoptysis
Chest radiograph
FIGURE 3-2
An algorithm for the evaluation of nonmas-
sive hemoptysis. CT, computed tomography;
ENT, ear, nose, and throat; GI, gastrointestinal.
Eugene Braunwald
HYPOXIA
The fundamental task of the cardiorespiratory system is
to deliver O2 (and substrates) to the cells and to remove
CO2 (and other metabolic products) from them. Proper
maintenance of this function depends on intact cardio-
vascular and respiratory systems, an adequate number of
red blood cells and hemoglobin, and a supply of inspired
gas containing adequate O2.
EFFECTS
Decreased O2 availability to cells results in an inhibition
of the respiratory chain and increased anaerobic glycoly-
sis. This switch from aerobic to anaerobic metabolism,
Pasteur’s effect, maintains some, albeit markedly reduced,
adenosine triphosphate (ATP) production. In severe
hypoxia, when ATP production is inadequate to meet
the energy requirements of ionic and osmotic equilib-
rium, cell membrane depolarization leads to uncon-
trolled Ca2+ inﬂux and activation of Ca2+-dependent
phospholipases and proteases. These events, in turn,
cause cell swelling and ultimately cell necrosis.
The adaptations to hypoxia are mediated, in part, by
the upregulation of genes encoding a variety of pro-
teins, including glycolytic enzymes such as phospho-
glycerate kinase and phosphofructokinase, as well as
the glucose transporters Glut-1 and Glut-2; and by
growth factors, such as vascular endothelial growth factor
HYPOXIA AND CYANOSIS
(VEGF) and erythropoietin, which enhance erythrocyte
production.
During hypoxia, systemic arterioles dilate, at least in
part, by opening of KATP channels in vascular smooth
muscle cells because of the hypoxia-induced reduction
in ATP concentration. By contrast, in pulmonary vascu-
lar smooth muscle cells, inhibition of K+ channels causes
depolarization, which, in turn, activates voltage-gated
Ca2+ channels, raising the cytosolic [Ca2+] and causing
smooth muscle cell contraction. Hypoxia-induced pul-
monary arterial constriction shunts blood away from
poorly ventilated toward better ventilated portions of
the lung; however, it also increases pulmonary vascular
resistance and right ventricular afterload.
Effects on the Central Nervous System
Changes in the central nervous system (CNS), particu-
larly the higher centers, are especially important conse-
quences of hypoxia. Acute hypoxia causes impaired
judgment, motor incoordination, and a clinical picture
resembling acute alcoholism. High-altitude illness is
characterized by headache secondary to cerebral vasodi-
latation and by gastrointestinal symptoms, dizziness,
insomnia, and fatigue or somnolence. Pulmonary arterial
and sometimes venous constriction cause capillary leak-
age and high-altitude pulmonary edema (HAPE) (Chap. 2),
which intensiﬁes hypoxia and can initiate a vicious circle.
Rarely, high-altitude cerebral edema (HACE) develops.
CHAPTER 4
CHAPTER 4
I Hypoxia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
Effects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
Causes of Hypoxia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
Adaptation to Hypoxia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
I Cyanosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
Differential Diagnosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
I Clubbing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
I Further Readings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
20
This is manifest by severe headache and papilledema and
can cause coma. As hypoxia becomes more severe, the
centers of the brainstem are affected, and death usually
results from respiratory failure.
CAUSES OF HYPOXIA
Respiratory Hypoxia
When hypoxia occurs consequent to respiratory failure,
PaO2 declines, and when respiratory failure is persistent,
the hemoglobin-oxygen (Hb-O2) dissociation curve is
displaced to the right, with greater quantities of O2
released at any level of tissue PO2. Arterial hypoxemia,
that is, a reduction of O2 saturation of arterial blood
(SaO2), and consequent cyanosis are likely to be more
marked when such depression of PaO2 results from pul-
monary disease than when the depression occurs as the
result of a decline in the fraction of oxygen in inspired
air (FiO2). In this latter situation, PaCO2 decreases sec-
ondary to anoxia-induced hyperventilation and the
Hb-O2 dissociation curve is displaced to the left, limit-
ing the decline in SaO2 at any level of PaO2.
The most common cause of respiratory hypoxia is
ventilation-perfusion mismatch resulting from perfusion of
poorly ventilated alveoli. Respiratory hypoxemia may
also be caused by hypoventilation, and it is then associated
with an elevation of PaCO2 (Chap. 5). These two forms
of respiratory hypoxia are usually correctable by inspir-
ing 100% O2 for several minutes.A third cause is shunt-
ing of blood across the lung from the pulmonary arterial
to the venous bed (intrapulmonary right-to-left shunting) by
perfusion of nonventilated portions of the lung, as in
pulmonary atelectasis or through pulmonary arteriove-
nous connections.The low PaO2 in this situation is cor-
rectable only in part by an FiO2 of 100%.
Hypoxia Secondary to High Altitude
As one ascends rapidly to 3000 m (~10,000 ft), the
reduction of the O2 content of inspired air (FiO2) leads to
a decrease in alveolar PO2 to about 60 mmHg and a con-
dition termed high-altitude illness develops (see earlier).At
higher altitudes, arterial saturation declines rapidly and
symptoms become more serious, and at 5000 m, unaccli-
matized individuals usually cease to be able to function
normally.
Hypoxia Secondary to Right-to-Left
Extrapulmonary Shunting
From a physiologic viewpoint, this cause of hypoxia
resembles intrapulmonary right-to-left shunting but is
caused by congenital cardiac malformations such as
tetralogy of Fallot, transposition of the great arteries, and
Eisenmenger’s syndrome. As in pulmonary right-to-left
Hypoxia and Cyanosis
21
CHAPTER 4
shunting, the PaO2 cannot be restored to normal with
inspiration of 100% O2.
Anemic Hypoxia
A reduction in hemoglobin concentration of the blood
is attended by a corresponding decline in the O2-carrying
capacity of the blood. Although the PaO2 is normal in
anemic hypoxia, the absolute quantity of O2 transported
per unit volume of blood is diminished. As the anemic
blood passes through the capillaries and the usual
quantity of O2 is removed from it, the PO2 and satura-
tion in the venous blood decline to a greater degree
than normal.
Carbon Monoxide Intoxication
Hemoglobin that is combined with CO (carboxyhemo-
globin, COHb) is unavailable for O2 transport. In
addition, the presence of COHb shifts the Hb-O2 disso-
ciation curve to the left so that O2 is unloaded only at
lower tensions, contributing further to tissue hypoxia.
Circulatory Hypoxia
As in anemic hypoxia, the PaO2 is usually normal, but
venous and tissue PO2 values are reduced as a conse-
quence of reduced tissue perfusion and greater tissue O2
extraction. This pathophysiology leads to an increased
arterial-mixed venous O2 difference or (a - -v) gradient.
Generalized circulatory hypoxia occurs in patients with
heart failure and in most forms of shock (Chap. 28).
Speciﬁc Organ Hypoxia
Localized circulatory hypoxia may occur consequent to
decreased perfusion secondary to organic arterial
obstruction, as in localized atherosclerosis in any vascular
bed, or as a consequence of vasoconstriction, as observed
in Raynaud’s phenomenon. Localized hypoxia may also
result from venous obstruction and the resultant expan-
sion of interstitial ﬂuid causing arterial compression and,
thereby, reduction of arterial inﬂow. Edema, which
increases the distance through which O2 must diffuse
before it reaches cells, can also cause localized hypoxia.
In an attempt to maintain adequate perfusion to more
vital organs in patients with reduced cardiac output sec-
ondary to heart failure or hypovolemic shock, vasocon-
striction may reduce perfusion in the limbs and skin,
causing hypoxia of these regions.
Increased O2 Requirements
If the O2 consumption of tissues is elevated without a
corresponding increase in perfusion, tissue hypoxia
ensues, and the PO2 in venous blood declines. Ordinarily,
Diagnosis of Respiratory Disorders
22
SECTION I
the clinical picture of patients with hypoxia caused by
an elevated metabolic rate, as in fever or thyrotoxicosis,
is quite different from that in other types of hypoxia; the
skin is warm and ﬂushed owing to increased cutaneous
blood ﬂow that dissipates the excessive heat produced,
and cyanosis is usually absent.
Exercise is a classic example of increased tissue O2
requirements. These increased demands are normally
met by several mechanisms operating simultaneously:
(1) increasing the cardiac output and ventilation and
thus O2 delivery to the tissues; (2) preferentially direct-
ing the blood to the exercising muscles by changing
vascular resistances in the circulatory beds of exercising
tissues directly, reﬂexly, or both; (3) increasing O2 extrac-
tion from the delivered blood and widening the arteri-
ovenous O2 difference; and (4) reducing the pH of the
tissues and capillary blood, shifting the Hb-O2 curve to
the right and unloading more O2 from hemoglobin. If
the capacity of these mechanisms is exceeded, then
hypoxia, especially of the exercising muscles, will result.
Improper Oxygen Utilization
Cyanide and several other similarly acting poisons cause
cellular hypoxia.The tissues are unable to use O2, and as a
consequence, the venous blood tends to have a high O2
tension.This condition has been termed histotoxic hypoxia.
ADAPTATION TO HYPOXIA
An important component of the respiratory response to
hypoxia originates in special chemosensitive cells in the
carotid and aortic bodies and in the respiratory center in
the brainstem.The stimulation of these cells by hypoxia
increases ventilation, with a loss of CO2, and can lead to
respiratory alkalosis. When combined with metabolic
acidosis resulting from the production of lactic acid, the
serum bicarbonate level declines (Chap. 40).
With the reduction of PaO2, cerebrovascular resistance
decreases, and cerebral blood ﬂow increases in an
attempt to maintain O2 delivery to the brain. However,
when the reduction of PaO2 is accompanied by hyper-
ventilation and a reduction of PaCO2, cerebrovascular
resistance increases, cerebral blood ﬂow decreases, and
hypoxia is intensiﬁed.
The diffuse, systemic vasodilation that occurs in gen-
eralized hypoxia increases the cardiac output. In patients
with underlying heart disease, the requirements of
peripheral tissues for an increase of cardiac output with
hypoxia may precipitate congestive heart failure. In
patients with ischemic heart disease, a reduced PaO2 may
intensify myocardial ischemia and further impair left
ventricular function.
One of the important mechanisms of compensation
for chronic hypoxia is an increase in the hemoglobin
concentration and in the number of red blood cells in
the circulating blood (i.e., the development of poly-
cythemia secondary to erythropoietin production). In
persons with chronic hypoxemia secondary to prolonged
residence at a high altitude (>13,000 ft or 4200 m), a con-
dition termed chronic mountain sickness develops. It is
characterized by a blunted respiratory drive, reduced
ventilation, erythrocytosis, cyanosis, weakness, right
ventricular enlargement secondary to pulmonary hyper-
tension, and even stupor.
CYANOSIS
Cyanosis refers to a bluish color of the skin and mucous
membranes resulting from an increased quantity of
reduced hemoglobin or of hemoglobin derivatives in the
small blood vessels of those areas. It is usually most marked
in the lips, nail beds, ears, and malar eminences. Cyanosis,
especially if developed recently, is more commonly
detected by a family member than the patient.The ﬂorid
skin characteristic of polycythemia vera must be distin-
guished from the true cyanosis discussed here. A cherry-
colored ﬂush,rather than cyanosis,is caused by COHb.
The degree of cyanosis is modiﬁed by the color of
the cutaneous pigment and the thickness of the skin, as
well as by the state of the cutaneous capillaries. The
accurate clinical detection of the presence and degree of
cyanosis is difﬁcult, as proved by oximetric studies. In
some instances, central cyanosis can be detected reliably
when the SaO2 has decreased to 85%; in others, particu-
larly in dark-skinned persons, it may not be detected
until it has declined to 75%. In the latter case, examina-
tion of the mucous membranes in the oral cavity and
the conjunctivae rather than examination of the skin is
more helpful in the detection of cyanosis.
The increase in the quantity of reduced hemoglobin
in the mucocutaneous vessels that produces cyanosis
may be brought about either by an increase in the quan-
tity of venous blood as a result of dilation of the venules
and venous ends of the capillaries or by a reduction in
the SaO2 in the capillary blood. In general, cyanosis
becomes apparent when the concentration of reduced
hemoglobin in capillary blood exceeds 40 g/L (4 g/dL).
It is the absolute, rather than the relative, quantity of
reduced hemoglobin that is important in producing
cyanosis.Thus, in a patient with severe anemia, the rela-
tive quantity of reduced hemoglobin in the venous
blood may be very large when considered in relation to
the total quantity of hemoglobin in the blood. However,
because the concentration of the latter is markedly
reduced, the absolute quantity of reduced hemoglobin
may still be small; therefore, patients with severe anemia
and even marked arterial desaturation may not display
cyanosis. Conversely, the higher the total hemoglobin
content, the greater the tendency toward cyanosis; thus,
patients with marked polycythemia tend to be cyanotic
Hypoxia and Cyanosis
23
CHAPTER 4
the size of the shunt relative to the systemic ﬂow as well
as on the Hb-O2 saturation of the venous blood. With
increased extraction of O2 from the blood by the exer-
cising muscles, the venous blood returning to the right
side of the heart is more unsaturated than at rest, and
shunting of this blood intensiﬁes the cyanosis. Sec-
ondary polycythemia occurs frequently in patients with
arterial O2 unsaturation and contributes to the cyanosis.
Cyanosis can be caused by small quantities of circu-
lating methemoglobin and by even smaller quantities of
sulfhemoglobin.Although they are uncommon causes of
cyanosis, these abnormal oxyhemoglobin derivatives
should be sought by spectroscopy when cyanosis is not
readily explained by malfunction of the circulatory or
respiratory systems. Generally, digital clubbing does not
occur with them.
Peripheral Cyanosis
Probably the most common cause of peripheral cyanosis
is the normal vasoconstriction resulting from exposure
to cold air or water. When cardiac output is reduced,
cutaneous vasoconstriction occurs as a compensatory
mechanism so that blood is diverted from the skin to
more vital areas such as the CNS and heart, and cyanosis
of the extremities may result even though the arterial
blood is normally saturated.
at higher levels of SaO2 than patients with normal hema-
tocrit values. Likewise, local passive congestion, which
causes an increase in the total quantity of reduced
hemoglobin in the vessels in a given area, may cause
cyanosis. Cyanosis is also observed when nonfunctional
hemoglobin, such as methemoglobin or sulfhemoglobin,
is present in the blood.
Cyanosis may be subdivided into central and periph-
eral types. In the central type, the SaO2 is reduced or an
abnormal hemoglobin derivative is present, and the
mucous membranes and skin are both affected. Peripheral
cyanosis is caused by a slowing of blood ﬂow and abnor-
mally great extraction of O2 from normally saturated
arterial blood. It results from vasoconstriction and
diminished peripheral blood ﬂow, such as occurs in cold
exposure, shock, congestive failure, and peripheral vascu-
lar disease. Often in these conditions, the mucous mem-
branes of the oral cavity or those beneath the tongue
may be spared. Clinical differentiation between central
and peripheral cyanosis may not always be simple, and in
conditions such as cardiogenic shock with pulmonary
edema, there may be a mixture of both types.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Central Cyanosis
(Table 4-1) Decreased SaO2 results from a marked
reduction in the PaO2. This reduction may be brought
about by a decline in the FiO2 without sufﬁcient com-
pensatory alveolar hyperventilation to maintain alveolar
PO2. Cyanosis usually becomes manifest in an ascent to
an altitude of 4000 m (13,000 ft).
Seriously impaired pulmonary function, through perfu-
sion of unventilated or poorly ventilated areas of the
lung or alveolar hypoventilation, is a common cause of
central cyanosis (Chap. 5). This condition may occur
acutely, as in extensive pneumonia or pulmonary edema,
or chronically with chronic pulmonary diseases (e.g.,
emphysema). In the latter situation, secondary poly-
cythemia is generally present, and clubbing of the ﬁn-
gers (see later) may occur. Another cause of reduced
SaO2 is shunting of systemic venous blood into the arterial cir-
cuit. Certain forms of congenital heart disease are associ-
ated with cyanosis on this basis (see earlier).
Pulmonary arteriovenous ﬁstulae may be congenital or
acquired, solitary or multiple, and microscopic or mas-
sive.The severity of cyanosis produced by these ﬁstulae
depends on their size and number. They occur with
some frequency in patients with hereditary hemorrhagic
telangiectasia. SaO2 reduction and cyanosis may also
occur in some patients with cirrhosis, presumably as a
consequence of pulmonary arteriovenous ﬁstulae or
portal vein-pulmonary vein anastomoses.
In patients with cardiac or pulmonary right-to-left
shunts, the presence and severity of cyanosis depend on
TABLE 4-1
CAUSES OF CYANOSIS
Central Cyanosis
Decreased arterial oxygen saturation
Decreased atmospheric pressure—high altitude
Impaired pulmonary function
Alveolar hypoventilation
Uneven relationships between pulmonary ventilation
and perfusion (perfusion of hypoventilated alveoli)
Impaired oxygen diffusion
Anatomic shunts
Certain types of congenital heart disease
Pulmonary arteriovenous ﬁstulas
Multiple small intrapulmonary shunts
Hemoglobin with low afﬁnity for oxygen
Hemoglobin abnormalities
Methemoglobinemia—hereditary, acquired
Sulfhemoglobinema—acquired
Carboxyhemoglobinemia (not true cyanosis)
Peripheral Cyanosis
Reduced cardiac output
Cold exposure
Redistribution of blood ﬂow from extremities
Arterial obstruction
Venous obstruction
Diagnosis of Respiratory Disorders
24
SECTION I
Arterial obstruction to an extremity, as with an
embolus, or arteriolar constriction, as in cold-induced
vasospasm (Raynaud’s phenomenon), generally results in
pallor and coldness, and there may be associated
cyanosis. Venous obstruction, as in thrombophlebitis,
dilates the subpapillary venous plexuses and thereby
intensiﬁes cyanosis.
soft tissue at the base of the nail. Clubbing may be
hereditary, idiopathic, or acquired and associated with a
variety of disorders, including cyanotic congenital heart
disease (see earlier), infective endocarditis, and a variety
of pulmonary conditions (among them primary and
metastatic lung cancer, bronchiectasis, lung abscess, cystic
ﬁbrosis, and mesothelioma), as well as with some gas-
trointestinal diseases (including inﬂammatory bowel
disease and hepatic cirrhosis). In some instances, it is
occupational (e.g., in jackhammer operators).
Clubbing in patients with primary and metastatic
lung cancer, mesothelioma, bronchiectasis, and hepatic
cirrhosis may be associated with hypertrophic osteoarthropa-
thy. In this condition, the subperiosteal formation of
new bone in the distal diaphyses of the long bones of
the extremities causes pain and symmetric arthritis-like
changes in the shoulders, knees, ankles, wrists, and
elbows. The diagnosis of hypertrophic osteoarthropathy
may be conﬁrmed with bone radiography.Although the
mechanism of clubbing is unclear, it appears to be sec-
ondary to a humoral substance that causes dilation of
the vessels of the ﬁngertip.
FURTHER READINGS
FAWCETT RS et al: Nail abnormalities: Clues to systemic disease.
Am Fam Physician 69:1417, 2004
GIORDANO FJ: Oxygen, oxidative stress, hypoxia, and heart failure.
J Clin Invest 115:500, 2005
GRIFFEY RT et al: Cyanosis. J Emerg Med 18:369, 2000
HACKETT PH, ROACH RC: Current concepts: High altitude illness.
N Engl J Med 345:107, 2001
LEVY MM: Pathophysiology of oxygen delivery in respiratory failure.
Chest 128(Suppl 2):547S, 2005
MICHIELS C: Physiological and pathological responses to hypoxia.
Am J Pathol 164:1875, 2004
SEMENZA GL: Involvement of oxygen-sensing pathways in physio-
logical and pathological erythropoiesis. Blood 114:2015, 2009
SPICKNALL KE et al: Clubbing: an update on diagnosis, differential
diagnosis, pathophysiology, and clinical relevance. J Am Acad
Dermatol 52:1020, 2005
TSAI BM et al: Hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction in cardiothoracic
surgery: Basic mechanisms to potential therapies. Ann Thorac
Surg 78:360, 2004
Approach to the Patient: 
CYANOSIS
Certain features are important in arriving at the cause
of cyanosis:
1. It is important to ascertain the time of onset of
cyanosis. Cyanosis present since birth or infancy is
usually caused by congenital heart disease.
2. Central and peripheral cyanosis must be differenti-
ated. Evidence of disorders of the respiratory or
cardiovascular systems is helpful. Massage or gentle
warming of a cyanotic extremity will increase
peripheral blood ﬂow and abolish peripheral, but
not central, cyanosis.
3. The presence or absence of clubbing of the digits
(see below) should be ascertained. The combina-
tion of cyanosis and clubbing is frequent in
patients with congenital heart disease and right-
to-left shunting and is seen occasionally in patients
with pulmonary disease such as lung abscess or
pulmonary arteriovenous ﬁstulae. In contrast,
peripheral cyanosis or acutely developing central
cyanosis is not associated with clubbed digits.
4. PaO2 and SaO2 should be determined, and in
patients with cyanosis in whom the mechanism is
obscure, spectroscopic examination of the blood
should be performed to look for abnormal types
of hemoglobin (critical in the differential diagnosis
of cyanosis).
CLUBBING
The selective bullous enlargement of the distal segments
of the ﬁngers and toes caused by proliferation of con-
nective tissue, particularly on the dorsal surface, is
termed clubbing; there is also increased sponginess of the
Steven E. Weinberger
I
Ilene M. Rosen
The respiratory system includes the lungs, the central
nervous system (CNS), the chest wall (with the
diaphragm and intercostal muscles), and the pulmonary
circulation. The CNS controls the activity of the mus-
cles of the chest wall, which constitute the pump of the
respiratory system. Because these components of the res-
piratory system act in concert to achieve gas exchange,
malfunction of an individual component or alteration of
the relationships among components can lead to distur-
bances in function. In this chapter, we consider three
major aspects of disturbed respiratory function: (1) dis-
turbances in ventilatory function, (2) disturbances in the
pulmonary circulation, and (3) disturbances in gas
exchange. For further discussion of disorders relating to
CNS control of ventilation, see Chap. 22.
DISTURBANCES IN
VENTILATORY FUNCTION
Ventilation is the process whereby the lungs replenish the
gas in the alveoli. Measurements of ventilatory function in
common diagnostic use consist of quantiﬁcation of the
gas volume contained in the lungs under certain circum-
stances and the rate at which gas can be expelled from the
lungs.The two measurements of lung volume commonly
used for respiratory diagnosis are (1) total lung capacity
(TLC), which is the volume of gas contained in the lungs
after a maximal inspiration, and (2) residual volume (RV),
DISTURBANCES OF RESPIRATORY FUNCTION
which is the volume of gas remaining in the lungs at the
end of a maximal expiration. The volume of gas that is
exhaled from the lungs in going from TLC to RV is the
vital capacity (VC) (Fig. 5-1).
Common clinical measurements of airﬂow are
obtained from maneuvers in which the subject inspires to
TLC and then forcibly exhales to RV. Three measure-
ments are commonly made from a recording of forced
exhaled volume versus time—i.e., a spirogram: (1) the vol-
ume of gas exhaled during the ﬁrst second of expiration
[forced expiratory volume (FEV) in 1 s, or FEV1], (2) the
total volume exhaled [forced vital capacity (FVC)], and
(3) the average expiratory ﬂow rate during the middle
50% of the VC [forced expiratory ﬂow (FEF) between
25 and 75% of the VC, or FEF25-75%, also called the maxi-
mal midexpiratory ﬂow rate (MMFR)] (Fig. 5-2).
PHYSIOLOGIC FEATURES
The lungs are elastic structures containing collagen and
elastic ﬁbers that resist expansion. For normal lungs to
contain air, they must be distended either by a positive
internal pressure—i.e., by a pressure in the airways and
alveolar spaces—or by a negative external pressure—i.e.,
by a pressure outside the lung.The relationship between
the volume of gas contained in the lungs and the dis-
tending pressure (the transpulmonary pressure, or PTP,
deﬁned as alveolar pressure minus pleural pressure) is
CHAPTER 5
CHAPTER 5
I Disturbances in Ventilatory Function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
Physiologic Features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
Measurement of Ventilatory Function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
Patterns of Abnormal Function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
Clinical Correlations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
I Disturbances in the Pulmonary Circulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
Physiologic Features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
Methods of Measurement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
Mechanisms of Abnormal Function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
Clinical Correlations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
I Disturbances in Gas Exchange . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
Physiologic Features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
Measurement of Gas Exchange . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
Clinical Correlations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
I Further Readings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
25
Diagnosis of Respiratory Disorders
26
SECTION I
described by the pressure-volume curve of the lungs
(Fig. 5-3A).
The chest wall is also an elastic structure, with prop-
erties similar to those of an expandable and compressible
spring. The relationship between the volume enclosed
by the chest wall and the distending pressure for the
chest wall is described by the pressure-volume curve of
the chest wall (Fig. 5-3B). For the chest wall to assume
a volume different from its resting volume, the internal
or external pressures acting on it must be altered.
At functional residual capacity (FRC), deﬁned as the
volume of gas in the lungs at the end of a normal exha-
lation, the tendency of the lungs to contract is opposed
by the equal and opposite tendency of the chest wall to
expand (Fig. 5-3C). For the lungs and the chest wall to
achieve a volume other than this resting volume (FRC),
either the pressures acting on them must be changed
passively—e.g., by a mechanical ventilator that delivers
positive pressure to the airways and alveoli—or the res-
piratory muscles must actively oppose the tendency of
the lungs and the chest wall to return to FRC. During
inhalation to volumes above FRC, the inspiratory mus-
cles actively overcome the tendency of the respiratory
system to decrease volume back to FRC. During active
exhalation to volumes below FRC, expiratory muscle
activity must overcome the tendency of the respiratory
system to increase volume back to FRC.
At TLC, the maximal force applied by the inspiratory
muscles to expand the lungs is opposed mainly by the
inward recoil of the lungs. As a consequence, the major
determinants of TLC are the stiffness of the lungs and
inspiratory muscle strength. If the lungs become stiffer—i.e.,
less compliant and with increased inward recoil—TLC
TLC
VC
ERV
IC
FRC
RV
VC
IC
ERV
RV
RV
VT
A
B
B
A
C
75% VC
FVC
FEV1
1 s
Obstructive
Slope = FEF25–75%
25% VC
Normal
Restrictive (parenchymal)
Time
FIGURE 5-1
Lung volumes, shown by block diagrams (A) and by a
spirographic tracing (B). ERV, expiratory reserve volume;
FRC, functional residual capacity; IC, inspiratory capacity; RV,
residual volume; TLC, total lung capacity; VC, vital capacity;
VT, tidal volume. (From Weinberger, with permission.)
FIGURE 5-2
Spirographic tracings of forced expiration comparing a
normal tracing (A) and tracings in obstructive (B) and
parenchymal restrictive (C) disease. Calculations of FVC,
FEV1, and FEF25–75% are shown only for the normal tracing.
Because there is no measure of absolute starting volume
with spirometry, the curves are artiﬁcially positioned to show
the relative starting lung volumes in the different conditions.
0
Lungs
Chest wall
Volume
Pressure (cmH2O)
20
40
A
B
–40
–20
0
20
Pressure (cmH2O)
Volume
Volume
Respiratory system
Chest wall
TLC
FRC
Lungs
RV
Pressure (cmH2O)
C
–10
–20
0
20
40
FIGURE 5-3
Pressure-volume curves. A. Pressure-volume curve of the
lungs. B. Pressure-volume curve of the chest wall. C. Pressure-
volume curve of the respiratory system showing the superim-
posed component curves of the lungs and the chest wall.
FRC, functional residual capacity; RV, residual volume; TLC,
total lung capacity. (From Weinberger, with permission.)
Disturbances of Respiratory Function
27
CHAPTER 5
is decreased. If the lungs become less stiff (more compli-
ant and with decreased inward recoil),TLC is increased.
If the inspiratory muscles are signiﬁcantly weakened,
they are less able to overcome the inward elastic recoil
of the lungs, and TLC is lowered.
At RV, the force exerted by the expiratory muscles to
further decrease lung volume is balanced by the outward
recoil of the chest wall, which becomes extremely stiff at
low lung volumes.Two factors inﬂuence the volume of
gas contained in the lungs at RV.The ﬁrst is the ability
of the subject to exert a prolonged expiratory effort,
which is related to muscle strength and the ability to
overcome sensory stimuli from the chest wall. The sec-
ond is the ability of the lungs to empty to a small vol-
ume. In normal lungs, as PTP is lowered, lung volume
decreases. In lungs with diseased airways, as PTP is low-
ered, ﬂow limitation or airway closure may limit the
amount of gas that can be expired. Consequently, either
weak expiratory muscles or intrinsic airways disease can
result in an elevation in measured RV.
Dynamic measurements of ventilatory function are
made by having the subject inhale to TLC and then per-
form a forced expiration to RV. If a subject performs a
series of such expiratory maneuvers using increasing
muscular intensity, expiratory ﬂow rates will increase
until a certain level of effort is reached. Beyond this
level, additional effort at any given lung volume will not
increase the forced expiratory ﬂow rate; this phenome-
non is known as the effort independence of FEF. The phys-
iologic mechanisms determining the ﬂow rates during
this effort-independent phase of FEF are the elastic
recoil of the lung, the airﬂow resistance of the airways
between the alveolar zone and the physical site of ﬂow
limitation, and the airway wall compliance up to the site
of ﬂow limitation. Physical processes that decrease elastic
recoil, increase airﬂow resistance, or increase airway wall
compliance decrease the ﬂow rate that can be achieved
at any given lung volume. Conversely, processes that
increase elastic recoil, decrease resistance, or stiffen air-
way walls increase the ﬂow rate that can be achieved at
any given lung volume.
MEASUREMENT OF
VENTILATORY FUNCTION
Ventilatory function is measured under static conditions
for determination of lung volumes and under dynamic
conditions for determination of FEF. VC, expiratory
reserve volume (ERV), and inspiratory capacity (IC)
(Fig. 5-1) are measured by having the patient breathe
into and out of a spirometer, a device capable of measur-
ing expired or inspired gas volume while plotting
volume as a function of time. Other volumes—speciﬁcally,
RV, FRC, and TLC—cannot be measured in this way
because they include the volume of gas present in the
lungs even after a maximal expiration.Two techniques are
commonly used to measure these volumes: helium dilu-
tion and body plethysmography. In the helium dilution
method, the subject repeatedly breathes in and out from
a reservoir with a known volume of gas containing a
trace amount of helium. The helium is diluted by the
gas previously present in the lungs, and very little is
absorbed into the pulmonary circulation. From knowl-
edge of the reservoir volume and the initial and ﬁnal
helium concentrations, the volume of gas present in the
lungs can be calculated. The helium dilution method
may underestimate the volume of gas in the lungs if
there are slowly communicating airspaces, such as bullae.
In this situation, lung volumes can be measured more
accurately with a body plethysmograph, a sealed box in
which the patient sits while panting against a closed
mouthpiece. Because there is no airﬂow into or out of
the plethysmograph, the pressure changes in the thorax
during panting cause compression and rarefaction of gas
in the lungs and simultaneous rarefaction and compres-
sion of gas in the plethysmograph. By measuring the
pressure changes in the plethysmograph and at the
mouthpiece, the volume of gas in the thorax can be cal-
culated using Boyle’s law.
Lung volumes and measurements made during forced
expiration are interpreted by comparing the values mea-
sured with the values expected given the age, height,
gender, and race of the patient (Appendix, Table 14).
Because there is some variability among normal individ-
uals, values between 80 and 120% of the predicted value
have traditionally been considered normal. Increasingly,
calculated percentiles are used in determining normality.
Speciﬁcally, values of individual measurements falling
below the ﬁfth percentile are considered to be below
normal.
Obstructive lung disease is determined by a decreased
FEV1/VC ratio, where VC is deﬁned as the largest of the
FVC, SVC (slow vital capacity), or IVC (inspiratory vital
capacity). Although a ratio <0.7 is typically considered
abnormal, the normal value does vary with age. Histori-
cally, the FVC was the standard denominator for this
ratio, and for most individuals, the FVC, SVC, and IVC
are very similar. However, in individuals with airways
obstruction, the SVC or IVC may be larger than the
FVC.The FEF25-75% is often considered a more sensitive
measurement of early airﬂow obstruction, particularly in
small airways. However, this measurement is less speciﬁc
and must be interpreted cautiously in patients with
abnormally small lungs (low TLC and VC). These
patients exhale less air during forced expiration, and the
FEF25-75% may appear abnormal relative to the usual pre-
dicted value even though it is normal relative to the size
of the patient’s lungs.
It is also a common practice to plot expiratory ﬂow
rates against lung volume (rather than against time); the
close linkage of ﬂow rates to lung volumes produces a
typical ﬂow-volume curve (Fig. 5-4). In addition, the
Diagnosis of Respiratory Disorders
28
SECTION I
spirometric values mentioned above can be calculated
from the ﬂow-volume curve. Commonly, ﬂow rates dur-
ing a maximal inspiratory effort performed as rapidly as
possible are plotted as well, making the ﬂow-volume
curve into a ﬂow-volume loop. At TLC, before expiratory
ﬂow starts, the ﬂow rate is zero; after forced expiration
has begun, a high peak ﬂow rate is rapidly achieved. As
expiration continues and lung volume approaches RV,
the ﬂow rate falls progressively in a nearly linear fashion
as a function of lung volume for a person with normal
lung function. During maximal inspiration from RV to
TLC, inspiratory ﬂow is most rapid at the midpoint of
inspiration, so the inspiratory portion of the loop is U
shaped or saddle shaped.The ﬂow rates achieved during
maximal expiration can be analyzed quantitatively by
comparing the ﬂow rates at speciﬁed lung volumes with
the predicted values or qualitatively by analyzing the
shape of the descending limb of the expiratory curve.
Assessing the strength of respiratory muscles is an
additional part of the overall evaluation of some patients
with respiratory dysfunction. When a patient exhales
completely to RV and then tries to inspire maximally
against an occluded airway, the pressure that can be gen-
erated is called the maximal inspiratory pressure (MIP). On
the other hand, when a patient inhales to TLC and then
tries to expire maximally against an occluded airway, the
pressure generated is called the maximal expiratory pressure
(MEP). In the proper clinical setting, these studies may
provide useful information regarding the cause of
abnormal lung volumes and the possibility that respira-
tory muscle weakness may be causally related to the
lung volume abnormalities.
PATTERNS OF ABNORMAL FUNCTION
The two major patterns of abnormal ventilatory func-
tion, as measured by static lung volumes and spirometry,
are restrictive and obstructive patterns. In the obstructive
pattern, the hallmark is a decrease in expiratory ﬂow
rates. With fully established disease, the ratio FEV1/VC
is decreased, as is the FEF25-75% (Fig. 5-2, line B). The
expiratory portion of the ﬂow-volume loop demon-
strates decreased ﬂow rates for any given lung volume.
Nonuniform emptying of airways is reﬂected by a coved
(scooped) conﬁguration of the descending part of the
expiratory curve (Fig. 5-4). With early obstructive dis-
ease, which originates in the small airways, FEV1/VC
may be normal; the only abnormalities noted on routine
testing of pulmonary function may be a depression in
FEF25-75% and an abnormal (i.e., coved) conﬁguration in
the terminal portion of the forced expiratory flow-
volume curve.
In obstructive disease, the TLC is normal or increased.
When helium equilibration tests are used to measure
lung volumes, the measured volume may be less than
the actual volume if helium was not well distributed to
all regions of the lung. RV is elevated as a result of air-
way closure during expiration, and the ratio RV/TLC is
increased.VC is frequently decreased in obstructive dis-
ease because of the striking elevations in RV with only
minor changes in TLC.
The hallmark of a restrictive pattern is a decrease in lung
volumes, primarily TLC and VC. Disorders resulting in a
restrictive pattern can be broadly divided into two sub-
groups, depending on the location of the pathology:
pulmonary parenchymal and extraparenchymal. In pul-
monary parenchymal disease, RV is also generally
decreased, and FEF rates are preserved. In fact, when
FEV1 is considered as a percentage of the FVC, the ﬂow
rates are often supranormal, i.e., disproportionately high
relative to the size of the lungs (Fig. 5-2, line C). The
ﬂow-volume curve may graphically demonstrate this dis-
proportionate relationship between ﬂow rates and lung
volumes because the expiratory portion of the curve
appears relatively tall (preserved ﬂow rates) but narrow
(decreased lung volumes), as shown in Fig. 5-4.
With extraparenchymal disease, dysfunction can be
caused by neuromuscular disease with associated respira-
tory muscle weakness or by disorders of the chest wall
or pleura (Table 5-1). In the extraparenchymal diseases,
TLC is decreased caused by inspiratory muscle weakness,
Volume
TLC
RV
increasing
Normal
R(E)
R(P)
O
Expiration
Inspiration
Flow
FIGURE 5-4
Flow-volume curves in different conditions: Forced expi-
ration is plotted in all conditions; forced inspiration is shown
only for the normal curve. By convention, lung volume
increases to the left on the abscissa. The arrow alongside the
normal curve indicates the direction of expiration from TLC
to RV. TLC, total lung capacity; O, obstructive disease; R(E),
extraparenchymal restrictive disease with limitation in inspi-
ration and expiration; R(P), parenchymal restrictive disease;
RV, residual volume.
Disturbances of Respiratory Function
29
CHAPTER 5
resistance. In consequence, the increase in mean pul-
monary arterial pressure (PAP), even with a three- to
fourfold increase in cardiac output, is small.
METHODS OF MEASUREMENT
Assessment of circulatory function in the pulmonary
vasculature depends on measuring pulmonary vascular
pressures and cardiac output. Clinically, these measure-
ments are commonly made in intensive care units capa-
ble of invasive monitoring and in cardiac catheterization
laboratories. With a ﬂow-directed pulmonary arterial
a stiff chest wall, or a space-occupying process within
the pleura. If inspiratory muscle weakness is the cause of
this pattern, then RV is often not signiﬁcantly affected,
expiratory ﬂow rates are preserved, and MIP is
decreased. Alternatively, if the restrictive pattern is
caused by a deformed chest wall that is abnormally rigid
at volumes below FRC, the ability to expire to a normal
RV is also limited. Consequently, RV is often elevated,
unlike the pattern observed in the other restrictive sub-
categories.
CLINICAL CORRELATIONS
Table 5-1 summarizes the typical patterns of altered
ventilatory function as indicated by pulmonary function
testing.This information can then be useful in diagnosis,
as outlined in Table 5-2.
DISTURBANCES IN THE
PULMONARY CIRCULATION
PHYSIOLOGIC FEATURES
The pulmonary vasculature must handle the entire out-
put of the right ventricle (i.e., ∼5 L/min in a normal
adult at rest). The comparatively thin-walled vessels of
the pulmonary arterial system provide relatively little
resistance to ﬂow and are capable of handling this large
volume of blood at perfusion pressures that are low
compared with those of the systemic circulation. The
normal mean pulmonary artery pressure is 15 mmHg
compared with ∼95 mmHg for the normal mean aortic
pressure. Regional blood ﬂow in the lung is dependent
on vascular geometry and on hydrostatic forces. In an
upright person, perfusion is least at the apex of the lung
and greatest at the base.When cardiac output increases,
as occurs during exercise, the pulmonary vasculature is
capable of recruiting previously unperfused vessels and
distending underperfused vessels, thus responding to the
increase in ﬂow with a decrease in pulmonary vascular
TABLE 5-1
ALTERATIONS IN VENTILATORY FUNCTION
TLC
RV
VC
FEV1/VC
MIP
Obstructive
N to ↑
↑
↓or N
↓
N
Restrictive
Pulmonary parenchymal
↓
↓
↓
N to ↑
N
Extraparenchymal
Neuromuscular weakness
↓
Variablea
↓
Variablea
↓
Chest wall deformity
↓
Variableb
↓
N
N
aDepends on expiratory muscle strength.
bDepends on speciﬁc chest wall disorder.
TABLE 5-2
COMMON RESPIRATORY DISEASES BY DIAGNOSTIC
CATEGORIES
Obstructive
Asthma
Chronic obstructive lung disease (chronic
bronchitis, emphysema)
Bronchiectasis
Cystic ﬁbrosis
Bronchiolitis
Restrictive—Parenchymal
Sarcoidosis
Idiopathic pulmonary ﬁbrosis
Pneumoconiosis
Drug- or radiation-induced interstitial lung disease
Restrictive—Extraparenchymal
Neuromuscular
Diaphragmatic weakness or paralysis
Myasthenia gravis
Guillain-Barré syndrome
Muscular dystrophies
Cervical spine injury
Chest wall
Kyphoscoliosis
Obesity
Ankylosing spondylitis
(Swan-Ganz) catheter, PAP and pulmonary capillary
wedge pressure can be measured directly, and cardiac
output can be obtained by the thermodilution method.
Pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR) can then be calcu-
lated according to the equation
PVR = 80(PAP −PCW)/CO
where PVR = pulmonary vascular resistance (dyn • s/cm5);
PAP = mean pulmonary arterial pressure (mmHg); PCW =
pulmonary capillary wedge pressure (mmHg); and CO =
cardiac output (L/min).
The normal value for pulmonary vascular resistance is
approximately 50 to 150 dyn • s/cm5.
MECHANISMS OF ABNORMAL FUNCTION
PVR may increase by a variety of mechanisms. Pulmonary
arterial and arteriolar vasoconstriction is a prominent
response to alveolar hypoxia. PVR also increases if intra-
luminal thrombi or proliferation of smooth muscle in
vessel walls diminishes the luminal cross-sectional area. If
small pulmonary vessels are destroyed, either by scarring
or by loss of alveolar walls (as in chronic obstructive
lung disease), the total cross-sectional area of the pul-
monary vascular bed diminishes, and PVR increases.
When PVR is elevated, either PAP increases to maintain
normal cardiac output or cardiac output decreases if
PAP does not increase.
CLINICAL CORRELATIONS
Disturbances in the function of the pulmonary vasculature
as a result of primary cardiac disease, either congenital
heart disease or conditions that elevate left atrial pres-
sure, such as mitral stenosis, are beyond the scope of this
chapter. Instead, the focus will be on the pulmonary vas-
culature as its function is affected by diseases primarily
involving the respiratory system, including the pul-
monary vessels themselves.
All diseases of the respiratory system causing hypox-
emia are potentially capable of increasing PVR because
alveolar hypoxia is a very potent stimulus for pulmonary
vasoconstriction. The more prolonged and intense the
hypoxic stimulus, the more likely it is that a signiﬁcant
increase in PVR producing pulmonary hypertension
will result. In practice, patients with hypoxemia caused
by chronic obstructive lung disease, interstitial lung disease,
chest wall disease, and the obesity hypoventilation–sleep
apnea syndrome are particularly prone to developing
pulmonary hypertension. If there are additional struc-
tural changes in the pulmonary vasculature secondary to
the underlying process, these will increase the likelihood
of developing pulmonary hypertension.
With diseases directly affecting the pulmonary vessels, a
decrease in the cross-sectional area of the pulmonary
vascular bed is primarily responsible for increased PVR,
and hypoxemia generally plays a lesser role. In the case of
recurrent pulmonary emboli, parts of the pulmonary arter-
ial system are occluded by intraluminal thrombi originating
in the systemic venous system. With primary pulmonary
hypertension or pulmonary vascular disease secondary to
scleroderma, the small pulmonary arteries and arterioles are
affected by a generalized obliterative process that narrows
and occludes these vessels. PVR increases and signiﬁcant
pulmonary hypertension often results.
DISTURBANCES IN GAS EXCHANGE
PHYSIOLOGIC FEATURES
The primary functions of the respiratory system are to
remove the appropriate amount of CO2 from blood
entering the pulmonary circulation and to provide ade-
quate O2 to blood leaving the pulmonary circulation.
For these functions to be carried out properly, there
must be adequate provision of fresh air to the alveoli for
delivery of O2 and removal of CO2 (ventilation), ade-
quate circulation of blood through the pulmonary vas-
culature (perfusion), adequate movement of gas between
alveoli and pulmonary capillaries (diffusion), and appro-
priate contact between alveolar gas and pulmonary cap-
illary blood (ventilation-perfusion matching).
A normal individual at rest inspires ∼12 to 16 times per
minute, each breath having a tidal volume of ∼500 mL.
A portion (∼30%) of the fresh air inspired with each
breath does not reach the alveoli but remains in the con-
ducting airways of the lung. This component of each
breath, which is not generally available for gas exchange,
is called the anatomic dead space component.The remain-
ing 70% reaches the alveolar zone, mixes rapidly with the
gas already there, and can participate in gas exchange. In
this example, the total ventilation each minute is ∼7 L,
composed of 2 L/min of dead space ventilation and
5 L/min of alveolar ventilation. In certain diseases, some
alveoli are ventilated but not perfused, so some ventila-
tion in addition to the anatomic dead space component
is wasted. If total dead space ventilation is increased but
total minute ventilation is unchanged, then alveolar ven-
tilation must decrease correspondingly.
Gas exchange is dependent on alveolar ventilation
rather than total minute ventilation, as outlined below.
The partial pressure of CO2 in arterial blood (PaCO2) is
directly proportional to the amount of CO2 produced
per minute ( .VCO2) and inversely proportional to alveolar
ventilation ( .VA), according to the relationship
PaCO2 = 0.863 × ˙VCO2/ ˙VA
where .VCO2 is expressed in mL/min and .VA in L/min,
and PaCO2 in mmHg. At fixed  .VCO2, when alveolar
ventilation increases, PaCO2 decreases, and when alveolar
Diagnosis of Respiratory Disorders
30
SECTION I
ventilation decreases, PaCO2 increases. Maintaining a
normal level of O2 in the alveoli (and consequently in
arterial blood) also depends on provision of adequate
alveolar ventilation to replenish alveolar O2.This principle
will become more apparent from consideration of the
alveolar gas equation below.
Diffusion of O2 and CO2
Both O2 and CO2 diffuse readily down their respective
concentration gradients through the alveolar wall and
pulmonary capillary endothelium. Under normal cir-
cumstances, this process is rapid, and equilibration of
both gases is complete within one-third of the transit
time of erythrocytes through the pulmonary capillary
bed. Even in disease states in which diffusion of gases is
impaired, the impairment is unlikely to be severe enough
to prevent equilibration of CO2 and O2. Consequently, a
diffusion abnormality rarely results in arterial hypoxemia
at rest. If erythrocyte transit time in the pulmonary cir-
culation is shortened, as occurs with exercise, and diffu-
sion is impaired, then diffusion limitation may contribute
to hypoxemia. Exercise testing can often demonstrate
such physiologically signiﬁcant abnormalities due to
impaired diffusion. Even though diffusion limitation
rarely makes a clinically signiﬁcant contribution to rest-
ing hypoxemia, clinical measurements of what is known
as diffusing capacity (see later) can be a useful measure of
the integrity of the alveolar-capillary membrane.
Ventilation-Perfusion Matching
In addition to the absolute levels of alveolar ventilation
and perfusion, gas exchange depends critically on the
proper matching of ventilation and perfusion.The spec-
trum of possible ventilation-perfusion (.V/ ˙Q) ratios in an
alveolar-capillary unit ranges from zero, in which venti-
lation is totally absent and the unit behaves as a shunt, to
inﬁnity, in which perfusion is totally absent and the unit
behaves as dead space.The PO2 and PCO2 of blood leav-
ing each alveolar-capillary unit depend on the gas ten-
sion (of blood and air) entering that unit and on the
particular  .V/ ˙Q ratio of the unit. At one extreme, when
an alveolar-capillary unit has a  .V/ ˙Q ratio of 0 and
behaves as a shunt, blood leaving the unit has the com-
position of mixed venous blood entering the pulmonary
capillaries, i.e., P-vO2 ≈ 40 mmHg and P-vCO2 ≈46 mmHg.
At the other extreme, when an alveolar-capillary unit
has a high .V/ ˙Q ratio, it behaves almost like dead space,
and the small amount of blood leaving the unit has
partial pressures of O2 and CO2 (PO2 ≈150 mmHg,
PCO2 ≈0 mmHg while breathing room air) approaching
the composition of inspired gas.
In the ideal situation, all alveolar-capillary units have
equal matching of ventilation and perfusion (i.e., a ratio
of ∼1 when each is expressed in L/min). However, even
in the normal individual, some .V/ ˙Q mismatching is
present because there is normally an increasing gradient
of blood ﬂow from the apices to the bases of the lungs.
There is a similar gradient of ventilation from the apices
to the bases, but it is less marked than the perfusion gra-
dient. As a result, ventilation-perfusion ratios are higher
at the lung apices than at the lung bases. Therefore,
blood coming from the apices has a higher PO2 and
lower PCO2 than blood coming from the bases.The net
PO2 and PCO2 of the blood mixture coming from all
areas of the lung is a ﬂow-weighted average of the indi-
vidual components, which reﬂects both the relative
amount of blood from each unit and the O2 and CO2
content of the blood coming from each unit. Because of
the sigmoid shape of the oxyhemoglobin dissociation
curve, it is important to distinguish between the partial
pressure and the content of O2 in blood. Hemoglobin is
almost fully (∼90%) saturated at a PO2 of 60 mmHg, and
little additional O2 is carried by hemoglobin even with a
substantial elevation of PO2 >60 mmHg. On the other
hand, signiﬁcant O2 desaturation of hemoglobin occurs
after PO2 to <60 mmHg and onto the steep descending
limb of the curve. As a result, blood coming from
regions of the lung with a high .V/˙Q ratio and a high
PO2 has only a small elevation in O2 content and can-
not compensate for blood coming from regions with a
low .V/˙Q ratio and a low PO2, which has a signiﬁcantly
decreased O2 content. Although  .V/˙Q mismatching can
inﬂuence PCO2, this effect is less marked and is often
overcome by an increase in overall minute ventilation.
MEASUREMENT OF GAS EXCHANGE
Arterial Blood Gases
The most commonly used measures of gas exchange are
the partial pressures of O2 and CO2 in arterial blood
(i.e., PaO2 and PaCO2, respectively).These partial pressures
do not measure directly the quantity of O2 and CO2 in
blood but rather the driving pressure for the gas in
blood. The actual quantity or content of a gas in blood
also depends on the solubility of the gas in plasma and
the ability of any component of blood to react with or
bind the gas of interest. Because hemoglobin is capable
of binding large amounts of O2, oxygenated hemoglobin
is the primary form in which O2 is transported in blood.
The actual content of O2 in blood therefore depends
both on the hemoglobin concentration and on the PaO2.
The PaO2 determines what percentage of hemoglobin is
saturated with O2, based on the position on the oxyhe-
moglobin dissociation curve. Oxygen content in normal
blood (at 37°C, pH 7.4) can be determined by adding
the amount of O2 dissolved in plasma to the amount
bound to hemoglobin, according to the equation
O2 content = 1.34 × [hemoglobin]
× saturation + 0.0031 × PO2
Disturbances of Respiratory Function
31
CHAPTER 5
because each gram of hemoglobin is capable of carrying
1.34 mL O2 when fully saturated and the amount of O2
that can be dissolved in plasma is proportional to the
PO2, with 0.0031 mL O2 dissolved per deciliter of blood
per mmHg PO2. In arterial blood, the amount of O2
transported dissolved in plasma (∼0.3 mL O2 per deciliter
of blood) is trivial compared with the amount bound to
hemoglobin (∼20 mL O2 per deciliter of blood).
Most commonly, PO2 is the measurement used to assess
the effect of respiratory disease on the oxygenation of
arterial blood. Direct measurement of O2 saturation in
arterial blood by oximetry is also important in selected
clinical conditions. For example, in patients with carbon
monoxide intoxication, carbon monoxide preferentially
displaces O2 from hemoglobin, essentially making a por-
tion of hemoglobin unavailable for binding to O2. In this
circumstance, carbon monoxide saturation is high and O2
saturation is low, even though the driving pressure for O2
to bind to hemoglobin, reﬂected by PO2, is normal. Mea-
surement of O2 saturation is also important for the deter-
mination of O2 content when mixed venous blood is
sampled from a pulmonary arterial catheter to calculate
cardiac output by the Fick technique. In mixed venous
blood, the PO2 is normally ∼40 mmHg, but small changes
in PO2 may reﬂect relatively large changes in O2 saturation.
A useful calculation in the assessment of oxygenation is
the alveolar-arterial O2 difference (PAO2 −PaO2),commonly
called the alveolar-arterial O2 gradient (or A − a gradient).
This calculation takes into account the fact that alveolar
and, hence, arterial PO2 can be expected to change
depending on the level of alveolar ventilation, reﬂected by
the arterial PCO2.When a patient hyperventilates and has a
low PCO2 in arterial blood and alveolar gas, alveolar and
arterial PO2 will increase; conversely, hypoventilation and a
high PCO2 are accompanied by a decrease in alveolar and
arterial PO2.These changes in arterial PO2 are independent
of abnormalities in O2 transfer at the alveolar-capillary
level and reﬂect only the dependence of alveolar PO2 on
the level of alveolar ventilation.
To determine the alveolar-arterial O2 difference, the
alveolar PO2 (PAO2) must ﬁrst be calculated. The equa-
tion most commonly used for this purpose, a simpliﬁed
form of the alveolar gas equation, is
PAO2 = FIO2 × (PB −PH2O) −PaCO2/R
where FIO2 = fractional concentration of inspired O2
(0.21 when breathing room air); PB = barometric pressure
(∼760 mmHg at sea level); PH2O = water vapor pressure
(47 mmHg when air is fully saturated at 37°C); and R =
respiratory quotient (the ratio of CO2 production to O2
consumption, usually assumed to be 0.8). If the preceding
values are substituted into the equation for the patient
breathing air at sea level, the equation becomes
PAO2 = 150 −1.25 × PaCO2
The alveolar-arterial O2 difference can then be calcu-
lated by subtracting measured PaO2 from calculated
PAO2. In a healthy young person breathing room air, the
PAO2 −PaO2 is normally <15 mmHg; this value increases
with age and may be as high as 30 mmHg in elderly
patients.
The adequacy of CO2 elimination is measured by the
partial pressure of CO2 in arterial blood (i.e., PaCO2). A
more complete understanding of the mechanisms and
chronicity of abnormal levels of PCO2 also requires mea-
surement of pH or bicarbonate (HCO3
−) because PCO2
and the patient’s acid–base status are so closely inter-
twined (Chap. 40).
Pulse Oximetry
Because measurement of PaO2 requires arterial puncture,
it is not ideal either for ofﬁce use or for routine or fre-
quent measurement in the inpatient setting.Additionally,
because it provides intermittent rather than continuous
data about the patient’s oxygenation, it is not ideal for
close monitoring of unstable patients. Pulse oximetry, an
alternative method for assessing oxygenation, is readily
available in many clinical settings. Using a probe usually
clipped over a patient’s ﬁnger, the pulse oximeter calcu-
lates oxygen saturation (rather than PaO2) based on mea-
surements of absorption of two wavelengths of light by
hemoglobin in pulsatile, cutaneous arterial blood.
Because of differential absorption of the two wave-
lengths of light by oxygenated and nonoxygenated
hemoglobin, the percentage of hemoglobin that is satu-
rated with oxygen (i.e., the SaO2) can be calculated and
displayed instantaneously.
Although the pulse oximeter is widely used in the
noninvasive assessment and monitoring of oxygenation,
there are several issues and potential problems concern-
ing its use. First, the clinician must be aware of the rela-
tionship between oxygen saturation and tension as shown
by the oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve. Because the
curve becomes relatively flat above an arterial PO2 of
60 mmHg (corresponding to SaO2 = 90%), the oximeter
is relatively insensitive to changes in PaO2 above this
level. In addition, the position of the curve and there-
fore the speciﬁc relationship between PaO2 and SaO2
may change depending on factors such as tempera-
ture, pH, and the erythrocyte concentration of 2,3-
diphosphoglycerate. Second, when cutaneous perfusion is
decreased (e.g., owing to low cardiac output or the use
of vasoconstrictors), the signal from the oximeter may be
less reliable or even unobtainable. Third, other forms of
hemoglobin, such as carboxyhemoglobin and methemo-
globin, are indistinguishable from oxyhemoglobin when
only two wavelengths of light are used.The SaO2 values
reported by the pulse oximeter are not reliable in the
presence of signiﬁcant amounts of either of these forms
of hemoglobin. In contrast, the device used to measure
Diagnosis of Respiratory Disorders
32
SECTION I
oxygen saturation in samples of arterial blood, called the
CO-oximeter, uses at least four wavelengths of light and
is capable of distinguishing oxyhemoglobin, deoxy-
genated hemoglobin, carboxyhemoglobin, and methe-
moglobin. Finally, the clinician must remember that the
often-used goal of SaO2 of 90% or above does not indi-
cate anything about CO2 elimination and therefore does
not ensure a clinically acceptable PCO2.
Diffusing Capacity
The ability of gas to diffuse across the alveolar-capillary
membrane is ordinarily assessed by the diffusing capacity
of the lung for carbon monoxide (DLCO). In this test, a
small concentration of carbon monoxide (0.3%) is
inhaled, usually in a single breath that is held for ∼10 s.
During the breath hold, the carbon monoxide is diluted
by the gas already present in the alveoli and is also taken
up by hemoglobin as the erythrocytes course through
the pulmonary capillary system. The concentration of
carbon monoxide is then measured in the gas exhaled
after the breath hold, and DLCO is calculated as the
quantity of carbon monoxide absorbed per minute per
mmHg pressure gradient from the alveoli to the pul-
monary capillaries. The value obtained for DLCO
depends on the alveolar-capillary surface area available
for gas exchange and on the pulmonary capillary blood
volume. In addition, the thickness of the alveolar-
capillary membrane, the degree of  .V/ ˙Q mismatching,
and the patient’s hemoglobin level will affect the mea-
surement. Because of this effect of hemoglobin levels on
DLCO, the measured DLCO is frequently corrected to
take the patient’s hemoglobin level into account. The
value for DLCO, ideally corrected for hemoglobin, can
then be compared with a predicted value based either
on age, height, and gender or on the alveolar volume
(VA) at which the value was obtained. Alternatively, the
DLCO can be divided by VA and the resulting value for
DLCO/VA compared with a predicted value.
Approach to the Patient: 
DISTURBANCE OF RESPIRATORY FUNCTION
Arterial Blood Gases Hypoxemia is a common manifes-
tation of a variety of diseases affecting the lungs or
other parts of the respiratory system.The broad clinical
problem of hypoxemia is often best characterized
according to the underlying mechanism.The four basic,
and not mutually exclusive, mechanisms of hypoxemia
are (1) a decrease in inspired PO2, (2) hypoventilation,
(3) shunting, and (4)  .V/˙Q mismatching.A ﬁfth poten-
tial mechanism of hypoxemia, due to decreased diffu-
sion, occurs only under selected clinical circumstances
and is not usually included among the general categories
Disturbances of Respiratory Function
33
CHAPTER 5
of hypoxemia. Determining the underlying mechanism
for hypoxemia depends on measurement of the PaCO2,
calculation of PAO2 −PaO2, and knowledge of the
response to supplemental O2. A ﬂowchart summariz-
ing the approach to the hypoxemic patient is given in
Fig. 5-5.(See also Chap.4.)
A decrease in the inspired PO2 and hypoventilation
both cause hypoxemia by lowering PAO2 and there-
fore PaO2. In each case, gas exchange at the alveolar-
capillary level occurs normally, and PAO2 −PaO2 is not
elevated. Hypoxemia due to decreased inspired PO2
can be diagnosed from knowledge of the clinical situ-
ation. Inspired PO2 is lowered either because the
patient is at a high altitude, where barometric pres-
sure is low, or much less commonly, because the
patient is breathing a gas mixture containing <21%
O2. The hallmark of hypoventilation as a cause of
hypoxemia is an elevation in PaCO2.This is associated
with an increase in PACO2 and a decrease in PAO2.
When hypoxemia is due purely to a low inspired PO2
or to alveolar hypoventilation, PAO2 −PaO2 is normal.
If PAO2 −PaO2 and PaCO2 are both elevated, then an
additional mechanism, such as  .V/˙Q mismatching or
shunting, is contributing to hypoxemia.
Shunting is a cause of hypoxemia when desaturated
blood effectively bypasses oxygenation at the alveolar-
capillary level. This situation occurs either because a
structural problem allows desaturated blood to bypass
the normal site of gas exchange or because perfused
alveoli are not ventilated. Shunting is associated with
an elevation in the PAO2 −PaO2 value.When shunting
is an important contributing factor to hypoxemia, the
lowered PaO2 is relatively refractory to improvement
by supplemental O2.
Finally, the largest clinical category of hypoxemia
is .V/˙Q mismatching.With .V/˙Q mismatching, regions
with low .V/˙Q ratios contribute blood with a low PO2
and a low O2 content. Corresponding regions with
high .V/˙Q ratios contribute blood with a high PO2.
However, because blood is already almost fully satu-
rated at a normal PO2, elevation of the PO2 to a high
value does not signiﬁcantly increase O2 saturation or
content and therefore cannot compensate for the
reduction of O2 saturation and content in blood
coming from regions with a low .V/˙Q ratio.When  .V/˙Q
mismatch is the primary cause of hypoxemia, PAO2 −
PaO2 is elevated, and PCO2 generally is normal. Sup-
plemental O2 corrects the hypoxemia by increasing
the PO2 in blood coming from regions with a low  .V/˙Q
ratio;this response distinguishes hypoxemia due to  .V/˙Q
mismatching from that due to true shunt.
The essential mechanism underlying all cases of
hypercapnia is alveolar ventilation that is inadequate
for the amount of CO2 produced. It is conceptually
useful to further characterize CO2 retention based on
a more detailed examination of the potential con-
tributing factors. These include (1) increased CO2
production; (2) decreased ventilatory drive (“won’t
breathe”); (3) malfunction of the respiratory pump or
increased airways resistance, which makes it more dif-
ﬁcult 
to 
sustain 
adequate 
ventilation 
(“can’t
breathe”); and (4) inefﬁciency of gas exchange
(increased dead space or  .V/ ˙Q mismatch) necessitating
a compensatory increase in overall minute ventila-
tion. In practice, more than one of these mechanisms
is commonly responsible for hypercapnia because
increased minute ventilation is capable of compensat-
ing for increased CO2 production and for inefﬁcien-
cies of gas exchange.
Diffusing Capacity
Although abnormalities in diffu-
sion are rarely responsible for hypoxemia, clinical
measurement of diffusing capacity is frequently used
to assess the functional integrity of the alveolar-
capillary membrane, which includes the pulmonary
capillary bed. Whereas diseases that affect solely the
airways generally do not lower DLCO, diseases that
affect the alveolar walls or the pulmonary capillary
bed do have an effect on DLCO. Even though DLCO is
a useful marker for assessing whether disease affecting
the alveolar-capillary bed is present, an abnormal DLCO
does not necessarily imply that diffusion limitation is
responsible for hypoxemia in a particular patient.
CLINICAL CORRELATIONS
Useful clinical correlations can be made with the mech-
anisms underlying hypoxemia (Fig. 5-5). A lowered
inspired PO2 contributes to hypoxemia if either the
patient is at high altitude or the concentration of
inspired O2 is <21%. The latter problem occurs if a
patient receiving anesthesia or ventilatory support is
inadvertently given a gas mixture to breathe containing
<21% O2 or if O2 is consumed from the ambient gas, as
can occur during smoke inhalation from a ﬁre.The pri-
mary feature of hypoventilation as a cause of hypoxemia
is an elevation in arterial PCO2.
For further discussion of the clinical correlations with
hypoventilation, see Chap. 22.
Shunting as a cause of hypoxemia can reﬂect transfer
of blood from the right to the left side of the heart
without passage through the pulmonary circulation, as
occurs with an intracardiac shunt.This problem is most
common in the setting of cyanotic congenital heart dis-
ease, when an interatrial or interventricular septal defect
is associated with pulmonary hypertension so that
shunting is in the right-to-left rather than the left-to-
right direction. Shunting of blood through the pul-
monary parenchyma is most frequently due to disease
causing absence of ventilation to perfused alveoli. This
can occur if the alveoli are atelectatic or if they are ﬁlled
with ﬂuid, as in pulmonary edema (both cardiogenic
Diagnosis of Respiratory Disorders
34
SECTION I
FIGURE 5-5
Flow diagram outlining the diagnostic approach to the
patient with hypoxemia (PaO2 <80 mmHg). PAO2 −PaO2 is
usually <15 mmHg for subjects ≤30 years old and younger and
increases by ∼3 mmHg per decade after age 30 years. COPD,
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
Hypoventilation
alone
Is PaCO2 increased?
Hypoventilation
Is PAO2 –  PaO2 increased?
Is PAO2 –  PaO2 increased?
↓Inspired PO2
Is low PO2correctable with O2?
Hypoventilation plus
another mechanism
Shunt
V/Q mismatch
1. High altitude
2. ↓FlO2
1. ↓Respiratory drive
2. Neuromuscular disease
1. Alveolar collapse
  (atelectasis)
2. Intraalveolar filling
  (pneumonia,
  pulmonary edema)
3. Intracardiac shunt
4. Vascular shunt within lungs
1. Airways disease
  (asthma, COPD)
2. Interstitial lung disease
3. Alveolar disease
4. Pulmonary vascular disease
Hypoventilation
alone
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
APPROACH TO PATIENT WITH HYPOXEMIA
and noncardiogenic), or with extensive intraalveolar
exudation of ﬂuid due to pneumonia. Less commonly,
vascular anomalies with arteriovenous shunting in the lung
can cause hypoxemia.These anomalies can be hereditary,as
found with hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia (Osler-
Rendu-Weber syndrome), or acquired, as in pulmonary
vascular malformations secondary to hepatic cirrhosis,
which are similar to the commonly recognized cutaneous
vascular malformations (“spider hemangiomas”).
Ventilation-perfusion mismatch is the most common
cause of hypoxemia clinically. Most of the processes
affecting either the airways or the pulmonary
parenchyma are distributed unevenly throughout the
lungs and do not necessarily affect ventilation and per-
fusion equally. Whereas some areas of lung may have
good perfusion and poor ventilation, others may have
poor perfusion and relatively good ventilation. Impor-
tant examples of airways diseases in which .V/˙Q mis-
match causes hypoxemia are asthma and chronic
obstructive lung disease. Parenchymal lung diseases caus-
ing .V/ ˙Q mismatch and hypoxemia include interstitial
lung disease and pneumonia.
Clinically important alterations in CO2 elimination
range from excessive ventilation and hypocapnia to
inadequate CO2 elimination and hypercapnia.
For further discussion of these clinical problems, see
Chap. 22.
Diffusing Capacity
Measurement of DLCO may be useful for assessing disease
affecting the alveolar-capillary bed or the pulmonary vas-
culature. In practice, three main categories of disease are
associated with lowered DLCO: interstitial lung disease,
emphysema, and pulmonary vascular disease.With inter-
stitial lung disease, scarring of alveolar-capillary units
diminishes the area of the alveolar-capillary bed as well as
pulmonary blood volume. With emphysema, alveolar
walls are destroyed, so the surface area of the alveolar-
capillary bed is again diminished. In patients with disease
causing a decrease in the cross-sectional area and volume
of the pulmonary vascular bed,such as recurrent pulmonary
emboli or primary pulmonary hypertension, DLCO is
commonly diminished.
Diffusing capacity may be elevated if pulmonary
blood volume is increased, as may be seen in congestive
heart failure. However, after interstitial and alveolar
edema ensues, the net DLCO depends on the opposing
inﬂuences of increased pulmonary capillary blood vol-
ume elevating DLCO and pulmonary edema decreasing
it. Finding an elevated DLCO may be useful in the diag-
nosis of alveolar hemorrhage, as in Goodpasture’s syn-
drome. Hemoglobin contained in erythrocytes in the
alveolar lumen is capable of binding carbon monoxide,
so the exhaled carbon monoxide concentration is
diminished, and the measured DLCO is increased.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We acknowledge the contribution of Dr. Jeffrey M. Drazen to
this chapter in previous editions of Harrison’s Principles of
Internal Medicine.
FURTHER READINGS
BRUSASCO V et al: ATS/ERS Task Force Standardization of lung
function testing: Standardization of measurements of lung vol-
umes. Eur Respir J  26:511, 2005
——— et al: ATS/ERS Task Force Standardization of lung func-
tion testing: Standardization of spirometry. Eur Respir J 26:319,
2005
——— et al: ATS/ERS Task Force Standardization of lung func-
tion testing: Standardization of the single-breath determination
of carbon monoxide uptake in the lung Eur Respir J 26:720,
2005
CELLI BR: The importance of spirometry in COPD and asthma:
Effect on approach to management. Chest 117(Suppl):15S, 2000
CHUPP GL (ed): Pulmonary function testing. Clin Chest Med
22:599, 2001
PELLEGRINO R et al: Interpretative strategies for lung function tests.
Eur Respir J 26:948, 2005
ROSE BD, Post T: Clinical Physiology of Acid-Base and Electrolyte Disor-
ders, 5th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2000
SCHWARTZSTEIN RM, PARKER MJ: Respiratory Physiology: A Clinical
Approach. Philadelphia, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2006
WEINBERGER SE: Principles of Pulmonary Medicine, 4th ed. Philadel-
phia, Saunders, 2004
Disturbances of Respiratory Function
35
CHAPTER 5
Scott Manaker
I
Steven E. Weinberger
The diagnostic modalities available for assessing a
patient with suspected or known respiratory system
disease include imaging studies and techniques for
acquiring biologic specimens, some of which involve
direct visualization of part of the respiratory system.
Methods to characterize the functional changes devel-
oping as a result of disease, including pulmonary func-
tion tests and measurements of gas exchange, are discussed
in Chap. 5.
IMAGING STUDIES
Routine Radiography
Routine chest radiography, generally including both
posteroanterior and lateral views, is an integral part of
the diagnostic evaluation of diseases involving the pul-
monary parenchyma; the pleura; and, to a lesser extent,
the airways and the mediastinum (Chap. 7). Whereas
lateral decubitus views are often useful for determining
whether pleural abnormalities represent freely ﬂowing
ﬂuid, apical lordotic views can often visualize disease at
the lung apices better than the standard posteroanterior
view. Portable equipment, which is often used for
acutely ill patients who either cannot be transported to
a radiology suite or cannot stand for posteroanterior
and lateral views, generally yields a single radiograph
taken in the anteroposterior direction. Common radi-
ographic patterns and their clinical correlates are
reviewed in Chap. 7.
DIAGNOSTIC PROCEDURES
IN RESPIRATORY DISEASE
Computed Tomography
CT offers several advantages over routine chest radiog-
raphy (Figs. 6-1 and 6-2; see also Figs. 19-3, 19-4, and
30-4). First, the use of cross-sectional images allows dis-
tinction between densities that would be superimposed
on plain radiographs. Second, CT is far better than rou-
tine radiographic studies at characterizing tissue density,
distinguishing subtle density differences between adja-
cent structures, and providing accurate size assessment of
lesions. As a result, CT is particularly valuable in assess-
ing hilar and mediastinal disease (which is often poorly
characterized by plain radiography), identifying and
characterizing disease adjacent to the chest wall or spine
(including pleural disease), and identifying areas of fat
density or calciﬁcation in pulmonary nodules (see Fig. 6-1).
Its utility in the assessment of mediastinal disease has
made CT an important tool in the staging of lung can-
cer because an assessment of tumor involvement of
mediastinal lymph nodes is critical to proper staging.
With the additional use of contrast material, CT also
makes it possible to distinguish vascular from nonvascu-
lar structures, which is particularly important in distin-
guishing lymph nodes and masses from vascular structures
primarily in the mediastinum.
Helical CT scanning allows the collection of contin-
uous data over a larger volume of lung during a single
breath-holding maneuver than is possible with conven-
tional CT.With CT angiography, in which IV contrast is
administered and images are acquired rapidly by helical
CHAPTER 6
CHAPTER 6
Imaging Studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
Techniques for Obtaining Biologic Specimens . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
I Further Readings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
36
scanning, pulmonary emboli can be detected in segmen-
tal and larger pulmonary arteries. With high-resolution
CT (HRCT), the thickness of individual cross-sectional
images is ~1 to 2 mm rather than the usual 7 to 10 mm,
and the images are reconstructed using high-spatial-
resolution algorithms.The visible detail on HRCT scans
allows better recognition of subtle parenchymal and
airway disease, such as bronchiectasis, emphysema, and
Diagnostic Procedures in Respiratory Disease
37
CHAPTER 6
diffuse parenchymal disease (Fig. 6-2). Certain charac-
teristic patterns have now been recognized for many of
the interstitial lung diseases, such as lymphangitic carci-
noma, idiopathic pulmonary ﬁbrosis, sarcoidosis, and
eosinophilic granuloma; however, it is not yet clear in
what settings these patterns obviate the need for obtain-
ing lung tissue.
Recent advances in computer processing of helical
scanning data have provided the opportunity to display
images in views and planes other than the traditional
cross-sectional view,
including sophisticated three-
dimensional reconstructions, to produce images (called
virtual bronchoscopy) mimicking direct visualization through
a bronchoscope.
Magnetic Resonance Imaging
The role of MRI in the evaluation of respiratory system
disease is less well deﬁned than that of CT. Because MRI
generally provides a less detailed view of the pulmonary
parenchyma as well as poorer spatial resolution, its useful-
ness in the evaluation of parenchymal lung disease is lim-
ited at present. However, MRIs can be reconstructed in
sagittal and coronal as well as transverse planes, so the
technique is well suited for imaging abnormalities near
the lung apex, spine, and thoracoabdominal junction.
MRIs depend on tissue characteristics other than density,
unlike CT scanning.Therefore, in selected circumstances,
MRIs can better suggest the nature of abnormal tissue
than can density-determined CT images. Finally, MRI is
particularly well suited to evaluating intrathoracic cardio-
vascular pathology and to distinguishing vascular from
nonvascular structures without the need for contrast.
Flowing blood does not produce a signal on MRI, so
vessels appear as hollow tubular structures. This feature
can be useful in determining whether abnormal hilar or
mediastinal densities are vascular in origin and in deﬁn-
ing aortic lesions, such as aneurysms or dissection. In
addition, gadolinium can be used as an intravascular con-
trast agent for MR angiography.
Scintigraphic Imaging
Radioactive isotopes, administered by either IV or
inhaled routes, allow the lungs to be imaged with a
gamma camera. In the past, scintigraphic imaging in the
form of ventilation-perfusion lung scanning was com-
monly performed for evaluation of pulmonary embolism.
However, with advances in CT scanning, scintigraphic
imaging has largely been replaced by CT angiography
in patients with suspected pulmonary embolism. When
injected intravenously, albumin macroaggregates labeled
with technetium 99m become lodged in pulmonary
capillaries; therefore, the distribution of the trapped
radioisotope follows the distribution of blood ﬂow.
When inhaled, radiolabeled xenon gas can be used to
FIGURE 6-1
CT scan demonstrating a mediastinal mass of heteroge-
neous density (arrow). CT is superior to plain radiography
for the detection of abnormal mediastinal densities and the
distinction of masses from adjacent vascular structures.
FIGURE 6-2
High-resolution CT scan from a patient with idiopathic
pulmonary ﬁbrosis. There are scattered reticular densities
(arrows point to examples) that are especially prominent at
the periphery of the lungs. This particular cross-section is
from the base of the lungs, where the ﬁndings in idiopathic
pulmonary ﬁbrosis tend to be most marked.
Diagnosis of Respiratory Disorders
38
SECTION I
demonstrate the distribution of ventilation. For example,
pulmonary thromboembolism usually produces one or
more regions of ventilation-perfusion mismatch( i.e.,
regions in which there is a defect in perfusion that fol-
lows the distribution of a vessel and that is not accompa-
nied by a corresponding defect in ventilation) (Chap. 20).
Another common use of such radioisotope scans is in a
patient with impaired lung function who is being con-
sidered for lung resection. The distribution of the iso-
tope(s) can be used to assess the regional distribution of
blood ﬂow and ventilation, allowing the physician to
estimate the level of postoperative lung function.
Positron Emission Tomographic Scanning
Positron emission tomographic (PET) scanning is
increasingly being used to identify malignant lesions in
the lung based on their increased uptake and metabo-
lism of glucose. The technique involves injection of a
radiolabeled glucose analogue, [18F]-ﬂuoro-2-deoxyglucose
(FDG), which is taken up by metabolically active malig-
nant cells. However, FDG is trapped within the cell after
phosphorylation, and the unstable ﬂuorine 18 decays by
emission of positrons, which can be detected by a spe-
cialized PET camera or by a gamma camera that has
been adapted for imaging of positron-emitting nuclides.
This technique has been used in the evaluation of soli-
tary pulmonary nodules and as an aid to staging lung
cancer through identiﬁcation of mediastinal lymph node
involvement by malignancy.
Pulmonary Angiography
The pulmonary arterial system can be visualized by pul-
monary angiography, in which radiopaque contrast
medium is injected through a catheter previously placed
in the pulmonary artery. When performed in cases of
pulmonary embolism, pulmonary angiography demon-
strates the consequences of an intravascular thrombus—
either a defect in the lumen of a vessel (a “ﬁlling defect”)
or an abrupt termination (“cutoff”) of the vessel. Other
less common indications for pulmonary angiography
include visualization of a suspected pulmonary arteriove-
nous malformation and assessment of pulmonary arterial
invasion by a neoplasm. However, with advances in CT
scanning, traditional pulmonary angiography has largely
been replaced by CT angiography.The latter allows rapid
acquisition of images with a less invasive procedure
because the radiocontrast material is injected intra-
venously rather than into a pulmonary artery.
Ultrasonography
Because ultrasound energy is rapidly dissipated in air,
ultrasound imaging is not useful for evaluation of the
pulmonary parenchyma. However, ultrasonography is
helpful in the detection and localization of pleural
abnormalities and is often used as a guide to placement
of a needle for sampling of pleural liquid (i.e., for thora-
centesis). Endobronchial ultrasonography, in which the
ultrasound probe is passed through a bronchoscope, is
emerging as a valuable adjunct to bronchoscopy, allow-
ing identiﬁcation and localization of pathology adjacent
to airway walls or within the mediastinum.
TECHNIQUES FOR OBTAINING
BIOLOGIC SPECIMENS
Collection of Sputum
Sputum can be collected either by spontaneous expec-
toration or after inhalation of an irritating aerosol, such
as hypertonic saline. The latter method, called sputum
induction, is commonly used to obtain sputum for diag-
nostic studies, either because sputum is not sponta-
neously being produced or because of an expected
higher yield of certain types of ﬁndings. Knowledge of
the appearance and quality of the sputum specimen
obtained is especially important when one is interested
in Gram’s staining and culture. Because sputum consists
mainly of secretions from the tracheobronchial tree
rather than the upper airway, the ﬁnding of alveolar
macrophages and other inﬂammatory cells is consistent
with a lower respiratory tract origin of the sample,
whereas the presence of squamous epithelial cells in a
“sputum” sample indicates contamination by secretions
from the upper airways.
In addition to processing for routine bacterial
pathogens by Gram’s staining and culture, sputum can be
processed for a variety of other pathogens, including
staining and culture for mycobacteria or fungi, culture
for viruses, and staining for Pneumocystis jiroveci. In the
speciﬁc case of sputum obtained for evaluation of P. jiroveci
pneumonia in a patient infected with HIV, for example,
sputum should be collected by induction rather than
spontaneous expectoration, and an immunoﬂuorescent
stain should be used to detect the organisms. Cytologic
staining of sputum for malignant cells using the tradi-
tional Papanicolaou method allows noninvasive evalua-
tion for suspected lung cancer. Traditional stains and
cultures are now also being supplemented in some cases
by immunologic techniques and by molecular biologic
methods, including the use of polymerase chain reaction
ampliﬁcation and DNA probes.
Percutaneous Needle Aspiration
A needle can be inserted through the chest wall into a
pulmonary lesion to aspirate material for analysis by
cytologic or microbiologic techniques.The procedure is
usually carried out under CT guidance to assist positioning
Diagnostic Procedures in Respiratory Disease
39
CHAPTER 6
forceps at the end of a long cable inserted through a
channel of the bronchoscope, allows recovery of cellular
material or tissue for analysis by standard cytologic and
histopathologic methods.
The bronchoscope can be used to sample material not
only from the regions that can be directly visualized (i.e.,
the airways) but also from the more distal pulmonary
parenchyma.With the bronchoscope wedged into a sub-
segmental airway, aliquots of sterile saline can be instilled
through the scope, allowing sampling of cells and organ-
isms even from alveolar spaces. This procedure, called
bronchoalveolar lavage, has been particularly useful for the
recovery of organisms such as P. jiroveci in patients with
HIV infection.
Brushing and biopsy of the distal lung parenchyma
can also be performed with the same instruments that
are used for endobronchial sampling.These instruments
can be passed through the scope into small airways,
where they penetrate the airway wall, allowing biopsy of
peribronchial alveolar tissue.This procedure, called trans-
bronchial biopsy, is used when there is either relatively dif-
fuse disease or a localized lesion of adequate size. With
the aid of ﬂuoroscopic imaging, the bronchoscopist is
able to determine not only whether and when the
instrument is in the area of abnormality but also the prox-
imity of the instrument to the pleural surface. If the for-
ceps are too close to the pleural surface, there is a risk of
violating the visceral pleura and creating a pneumotho-
rax; the other potential complication of transbronchial
biopsy is pulmonary hemorrhage.The incidence of these
complications is less than several percent.
Another procedure involves use of a hollow-bore
needle passed through the bronchoscope for sampling of
tissue adjacent to the trachea or a large bronchus. The
needle is passed through the airway wall, and cellular
material can be aspirated from mass lesions or enlarged
lymph nodes, generally in a search for malignant cells.
This procedure can facilitate the staging of lung cancer
by identifying mediastinal lymph node involvement and
in some cases obviates the need for a more invasive pro-
cedure. Other promising new techniques that are not yet
widely available include ﬂuorescence bronchoscopy (to
detect early endobronchial malignancy) and endo-
bronchial ultrasonography (to better identify and local-
ize peribronchial and mediastinal pathology).
The bronchoscope may provide the opportunity for
treatment as well as diagnosis. For example, an aspirated
foreign body may be retrieved with an instrument
passed through the scope, and bleeding may be con-
trolled with a similarly introduced balloon catheter.
Newer interventional techniques performed through a
bronchoscope include methods for achieving and main-
taining patency of airways that are partially or com-
pletely occluded, especially by tumors.These techniques
include laser therapy, cryotherapy, argon plasma coagula-
tion, electrocautery, and stent placement.
of the needle and assure localization in the lesion. The
low potential risk of this procedure (intrapulmonary
bleeding or creation of a pneumothorax with collapse of
the underlying lung) in experienced hands is usually
acceptable owing to the information obtained. However,
a limitation of the technique is sampling error due to the
small size of the tissue sample.Thus, ﬁndings other than a
speciﬁc cytologic or microbiologic diagnosis are of lim-
ited clinical value.
Thoracentesis
Sampling of pleural liquid by thoracentesis is commonly
performed for diagnostic purposes or, in the case of a
large effusion, for palliation of dyspnea. Diagnostic sam-
pling, either by blind needle aspiration or after localiza-
tion by ultrasonography, allows the collection of liquid
for microbiologic and cytologic studies. Analysis of the
ﬂuid obtained for its cellular composition and chemical
constituents, including glucose, protein, and lactate
dehydrogenase, allows the effusion to be classiﬁed as
either exudative or transudative (Chap. 21).
Bronchoscopy
Bronchoscopy is the process of direct visualization of
the tracheobronchial tree. Although bronchoscopy is
now performed almost exclusively with ﬂexible ﬁberop-
tic instruments, rigid bronchoscopy, generally performed
in an operating room on a patient under general anes-
thesia, still has a role in selected circumstances, primarily
because of a larger suction channel and the fact that the
patient can be ventilated through the bronchoscope
channel. These situations include the retrieval of a for-
eign body and the suctioning of a massive hemorrhage,
for which the small suction channel of the broncho-
scope may be insufﬁcient.
Flexible Fiberoptic Bronchoscopy
This outpatient procedure is usually performed in an
awake but sedated patient. The bronchoscope is passed
through either the mouth or the nose, between the
vocal cords, and into the trachea.The ability to ﬂex the
scope makes it possible to visualize virtually all airways
to the level of subsegmental bronchi. The broncho-
scopist is able to identify endobronchial pathology,
including tumors, granulomas, bronchitis, foreign bodies,
and sites of bleeding. Samples from airway lesions can be
taken by several methods, including washing, brushing,
and biopsy.Washing involves instillation of sterile saline
through a channel of the bronchoscope and onto the
surface of a lesion.A portion of the liquid is collected by
suctioning through the bronchoscope, and the recovered
material can be analyzed for cells (cytology) or organ-
isms (by standard stains and cultures). Brushing or biopsy
of the surface of the lesion, using a small brush or biopsy
Diagnosis of Respiratory Disorders
40
SECTION I
Video-Assisted Thoracic Surgery
Advances in video technology have allowed the devel-
opment of thoracoscopy, or video-assisted thoracic
surgery (VATS), for the diagnosis and management of
pleural as well as parenchymal lung disease.This proce-
dure involves the passage of a rigid scope with a distal
lens through a trocar inserted into the pleura. A high-
quality image is shown on a monitor screen, allowing
the operator to manipulate instruments passed into the
pleural space through separate small intercostal incisions.
With these instruments, the operator can biopsy lesions
of the pleura under direct vision. In addition, this proce-
dure is now used commonly to biopsy peripheral lung
tissue or to remove peripheral nodules for both diagnos-
tic and therapeutic purposes. This much less invasive
procedure has largely supplanted the traditional “open
lung biopsy” performed by thoracotomy.
Thoracotomy
Although frequently replaced by VATS, thoracotomy
remains an option for the diagnostic sampling of lung
tissue. It provides the largest amount of material, and it
can be used to biopsy or excise lesions that are too deep
or too close to vital structures for removal by VATS.The
choice between VATS and thoracotomy needs to be
made on a case-by-case basis.
Mediastinoscopy and Mediastinotomy
Tissue biopsy is often critical for the diagnosis of medi-
astinal masses or enlarged mediastinal lymph nodes.
Although CT and PET scanning are useful for determin-
ing the size and nature of mediastinal lymph nodes as part
of the staging of lung cancer, conﬁrmation that enlarged
lymph nodes are actually involved with a tumor generally
requires biopsy and histopathologic examination.The two
major procedures used to obtain specimens from masses
or nodes in the mediastinum are mediastinoscopy (via a
suprasternal approach) and mediastinotomy (via a
parasternal approach). Both procedures are performed
under general anesthesia by a qualiﬁed surgeon. In the
case of suprasternal mediastinoscopy, a rigid medi-
astinoscope is inserted at the suprasternal notch and
passed into the mediastinum along a pathway just anterior
to the trachea.Tissue can be obtained with biopsy forceps
passed through the scope, sampling masses or nodes that
are in a paratracheal or pretracheal position. Left paratra-
cheal and aortopulmonary lymph nodes are not accessible
by this route and thus are commonly sampled by paraster-
nal mediastinotomy (the Chamberlain procedure). This
approach involves either a right or a left parasternal inci-
sion and dissection directly down to a mass or node that
requires biopsy.
FURTHER READINGS
DETTERBECK FC et al: Seeking a home for a PET. Deﬁning the appro-
priate place for positron emission tomography imaging in the
diagnosis of pulmonary nodules or masses. Chest 125:2294, 2300,
2004
DE WEVER W et al: Multidetector CT-generated virtual bron-
choscopy: An illustrated review of the potential clinical indica-
tions. Eur Respir J 23:776, 2004
ERNST A et al: Interventional pulmonary procedures: Guidelines from
the American College of Chest Physicians. Chest 123:1693, 2003
FELLER-KOPMAN D et al: Autoﬂuorescence bronchoscopy and endo-
bronchial ultrasound:A practical review.Ann Thorac Surg 80:2395,
2005
LIN J, IANNETTONI MD: The role of thoracoscopy in the manage-
ment of lung cancer. Surgical Oncol 12:195, 2003
PATEL S, KAZEROONI EA: Helical CT for the evaluation of acute
pulmonary embolism.AJR Am J Roentgenol 185:135, 2005
WEINBERGER SE: Principles of Pulmonary Medicine, 4th ed. Philadel-
phia, Saunders, 2004
Patricia A. Kritek
I
John J. Reilly, Jr.
This atlas of chest imaging is a collection of interesting
chest radiographs and computed tomograms of the
chest.The readings of the ﬁlms are meant to be illustra-
ATLAS OF CHEST IMAGING
tive of speciﬁc, major ﬁndings.The associated text is not
intended as a comprehensive assessment of the images.
CHAPTER 7
CHAPTER 7
41
FIGURE 7-1
Normal chest radiograph—review of anatomy. 1. Trachea.
2. Carina. 3. Right atrium. 4. Right hemi-diaphragm. 5. Aortic
knob. 6. Left hilum. 7. Left ventricle. 8. Left hemi-diaphragm
(with stomach bubble). 9. Retrosternal clear space. 10. Right
ventricle. 11. Left hemi-diaphragm (with stomach bubble).
12. Left upper lobe bronchus.
Diagnosis of Respiratory Disorders
42
SECTION I
FIGURE 7-3
CT scan demonstrating left upper lobe collapse. The
patient was found to have an endobronchial lesion (not visi-
ble on the CT scan) resulting in this ﬁnding. The superior
vena cava (black arrow) is partially opaciﬁed by IV contrast.
FIGURE 7-2
Normal chest tomogram—note anatomy. 1. Superior vena
cava. 2. Trachea. 3. Aortic arch. 4. Ascending aorta. 5. Right
mainstem bronchus. 6. Descending aorta. 7. Left mainstem
bronchus. 8. Main pulmonary artery. 9. Heart. 10. Esopha-
gus. 11. Pericardium. 12. Descending aorta.
A
B
C
FIGURE 7-4
CT scan revealing chronic left lower lobe collapse. Note
dramatic volume loss with minimal aeration. There is subtle
mediastinal shift to the left.
Atlas of Chest Imaging
43
CHAPTER 7
FIGURE 7-5
Left upper lobe scarring with hilar retraction with less
prominent scarring in right upper lobe as well. These ﬁndings
are consistent with previous tuberculosis infection. The
patient was an immigrant from Ecuador.
FIGURE 7-7
Chest x-ray (CXR) demonstrating right upper lobe col-
lapse (yellow arrow). Note the volume loss as demonstrated
by the elevated right hemi-diaphragm as well as mediastinal
shift to the right. Also apparent on the ﬁlm are an endotra-
cheal tube (red arrow) and a central venous catheter (black
arrow).
FIGURE 7-6
Apical scarring, traction bronchiectasis (red arrow),
and decreased lung volume consistent with previous
tuberculosis infection. The ﬁndings are more signiﬁcant
in the left lung.
Diagnosis of Respiratory Disorders
44
SECTION I
FIGURE 7-8
Emphysema with increased lucency, ﬂattened diaphragms (black arrows), increased
anteroposterior (AP) diameter, and increased retrosternal clear space (red arrow).
FIGURE 7-9
CT scan of diffuse, bilateral emphysema.
FIGURE 7-10
CT scan of bullous emphysema.
Atlas of Chest Imaging
45
CHAPTER 7
FIGURE 7-12
Two cavities on posteroanterior (PA) and lateral CXR.
Cavities and air-ﬂuid levels are identiﬁed by red arrows. The
smaller cavity is in the right lower lobe (located below the
major ﬁssure, identiﬁed with the yellow arrow) and the larger
cavity is located in the right middle lobe, which is located
between the minor (red arrow) and major ﬁssures. An area of
consolidation associated with the cavity is seen in the right
lower lobe.
FIGURE 7-11
Multiple, thin-walled cysts consistent with lymphangioleiomyomatosis.
Diagnosis of Respiratory Disorders
46
SECTION I
FIGURE 7-13
CT scan of parenchymal cavity.
FIGURE 7-14
Mild congestive heart failure. Note the Kerley B lines (black
arrow) and perivascular cufﬁng (yellow arrow) as well as the
pulmonary vascular congestion (red arrow).
FIGURE 7-15
Pulmonary edema. Note indistinct vasculature, perihilar
opacities, and peripheral interstitial reticular opacities.
Although, this is an AP ﬁlm, making cardiac size more difﬁ-
cult to assess, the cardiac silhouette still appears enlarged.
FIGURE 7-16
CXR demonstrating reticular nodular opacities bilaterally
with small lung volumes consistent with usual interstitial
pneumonitis (UIP) on pathology. Clinically, UIP is used inter-
changeably with idiopathic pulmonary ﬁbrosis (IPF).
Atlas of Chest Imaging
47
CHAPTER 7
FIGURE 7-17
CT scan of usual interstitial pneumonitis (UIP), also known
as idiopathic pulmonary ﬁbrosis (IPF). Classic ﬁndings
include traction bronchiectasis (black arrow) and honeycombing
(red arrows). Note the subpleural, basilar predominance of the
honeycombing.
FIGURE 7-18
Sarcoid—CXR of stage I (hilar lym-
phadenopathy without parenchymal
inﬁltrates).
FIGURE 7-19
Sarcoid—CT scan of stage I demonstrating bulky
hilar and mediastinal lymphadenopathy (red arrows)
without parenchymal inﬁltrates.
Diagnosis of Respiratory Disorders
48
SECTION I
FIGURE 7-20
Sarcoid—CXR of stage II (lymphadenopathy with parenchy-
mal changes). Note the apical predominance of the disease.
The diaphragms are also ﬂattened, suggesting hyperinﬂation.
FIGURE 7-21
Sarcoid—CT scan of stage II (calciﬁed lymphadenopathy,
parenchymal inﬁltrates).
FIGURE 7-22
Sarcoid—CT scan of stage II (nodular opacities tracking
along bronchovascular bundles).
FIGURE 7-23
Sarcoid—stage III with nodular parenchymal infiltrates
(yellow arrows) and no lymphadenopathy. Also note the large
pulmonary artery (red arrow).
Atlas of Chest Imaging
49
CHAPTER 7
FIGURE 7-24
Sarcoid—stage IV (ﬁbrotic lung disease).
FIGURE 7-25
Right middle lobe opacity illustrating major (black arrow) and minor ﬁssures (red arrows) as well as the
“silhouette sign” on the right heart border.
Diagnosis of Respiratory Disorders
50
SECTION I
FIGURE 7-26
Right lower lobe pneumonia. There is subtle opacity on the PA ﬁlm (red arrow), and the
lateral ﬁlm illustrates the “spine sign” (black arrow) where the lower spine does not
become more lucent.
FIGURE 7-27
CT scan of diffuse, bilateral “ground-glass” inﬁltrates.
This ﬁnding is consistent with ﬂuid density in the alveolar
space.
FIGURE 7-28
CXR revealing diffuse, bilateral alveolar inﬁltrates without
pleural effusions consistent with acute respiratory distress
syndrome (ARDS). Note that the patient has an endotracheal
tube (red arrow) and a central venous catheter (black arrow).
Atlas of Chest Imaging
51
CHAPTER 7
FIGURE 7-29
CT scan of acute respiratory distress syndrome
(ARDS) demonstrates ground-glass inﬁltrates with
more consolidated areas in the dependent lung zones.
FIGURE 7-30
(A) to (C) Three examples of air bronchograms (red arrows) on chest CT.
A
B
C
Diagnosis of Respiratory Disorders
52
SECTION I
FIGURE 7-31
Cystic ﬁbrosis with bronchiectasis, apical disease.
FIGURE 7-32
CT scan of diffuse, cystic bronchiectasis (red arrows) in a
patient with cystic ﬁbrosis.
FIGURE 7-33
CT scan of focal right middle lobe and lingular
bronchiectasis (yellow arrows). Note that there is near total
collapse of the right middle lobe (red arrow).
Atlas of Chest Imaging
53
CHAPTER 7
FIGURE 7-34
“Tree in bud” opacities (red arrows) and bronchiectasis
(yellow arrow) consistent with atypical mycobacterial infec-
tion. “Tree in bud” refers to small nodules clustered around
the centrilobular arteries as well as increased prominence of
the centrilobular branching. These ﬁndings are consistent
with bronchiolitis.
FIGURE 7-36
Basilar pneumothorax with visible pleural reﬂection (red
arrows). Also note that the patient has subcutaneous
emphysema (yellow arrow).
FIGURE 7-35
Large right pneumothorax with near complete collapse
of the right lung. Pleural reﬂection highlighted with red
arrows.
FIGURE 7-37
CT scan of large right-sided pneumothorax. Note the sig-
niﬁcant collapse of the right lung with adhesion to the ante-
rior chest wall. Pleural reﬂection is highlighted with red
arrows. The patient has severe underlying emphysema.
Diagnosis of Respiratory Disorders
54
SECTION I
FIGURE 7-38
Small right pleural effusion (red arrows highlight blunted
right costophrenic angles) with associated pleural thickening. 
Note ﬂuid in the major ﬁssure (black arrow) visible on the lat-
eral ﬁlm as well as the meniscus of the right pleural effusion.
FIGURE 7-39
Left pleural effusion with clear
meniscus seen on both PA and lat-
eral chest radiographs.
FIGURE 7-40
Asbestosis.
Note calciﬁed pleural plaques (red
arrows), pleural thickening (black arrow), and sub-
pleural atelectasis (green arrows).
Atlas of Chest Imaging
55
CHAPTER 7
FIGURE 7-41
Left upper lobe mass, which biopsy revealed to be squamous cell carcinoma.
FIGURE 7-42
Solitary pulmonary nodule on the right (red arrow) with a
spiculated pattern concerning for lung cancer. Note also that
the patient has had a left upper lobectomy with resultant vol-
ume loss and associated effusion (black arrow).
FIGURE 7-43
Metastatic sarcoma. Note the multiple, well-circumscribed
nodules of different sizes.
Diagnosis of Respiratory Disorders
56
SECTION I
FIGURE 7-44
Left lower lobe lung mass (red arrow) abutting the pleura.
Biopsy demonstrated small cell lung cancer.
FIGURE 7-45
CT scan of soft tissue mass encircling the trachea (red
arrow) and invading the tracheal lumen. Biopsy demon-
strated adenoid cystic carcinoma (cylindroma).
FIGURE 7-46
Mycetoma. Fungal ball (red arrow) growing in a preexisting
cavity on the left. The right upper lobe has a large bulla
(black arrow).
FIGURE 7-47
Pulmonary arteriovenous malformation (AVM) demon-
strated on a reformatted CT angiogram (red arrow).
Atlas of Chest Imaging
57
CHAPTER 7
FIGURE 7-48
Large bilateral pulmonary emboli
(intravascular ﬁlling defects in the
contrast scan are identiﬁed by red
arrows).
FIGURE 7-49
CXR of a patient with severe pul-
monary hypertension. Note the
enlarged pulmonary arteries (red
arrows) visible on both the PA and
lateral ﬁlms.
FIGURE 7-50
CT scan of the same patient as in Fig. 7-49. Note the
markedly enlarged pulmonary arteries (red arrow).
This page intentionally left blank 
DISEASES OF THE
RESPIRATORY
SYSTEM
SECTION II
Peter J. Barnes
Asthma is a syndrome characterized by airﬂow obstruction
that varies markedly, both spontaneously and with
treatment. Asthmatics harbor a special type of inflam-
mation in the airways that makes them more respon-
sive than nonasthmatics to a wide range of triggers,
leading to excessive narrowing with consequent
reduced airflow and symptomatic wheezing and dysp-
nea. Narrowing of the airways is usually reversible, but
in some patients with chronic asthma, there may be an
element of irreversible airflow obstruction. The
increasing global prevalence of asthma, the large bur-
den it now imposes on patients, and the high health
care costs have led to extensive research into its mech-
anisms and treatment.
ASTHMA
PREVALENCE
Asthma is one of the most common chronic diseases
globally and currently affects ∼300 million people. The
prevalence of asthma has risen in afﬂuent countries over
the past 30 years but now appears to have stabilized,
with ∼10–12% of adults and 15% of children affected by
the disease. In developing countries where the preva-
lence of asthma had been much lower, there is a rising
incidence that appears to be associated with increased
urbanization.The prevalence of atopy and other allergic
diseases has also increased over the same time, suggesting
that the reasons for the increase are likely to be systemic
rather than conﬁned to the lungs. This epidemiologic
CHAPTER 8
CHAPTER 8
I Prevalence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
I Etiology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
Atopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
Intrinsic Asthma . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
Infections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
Genetic Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
Environmental Factors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
Other Factors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
I Pathogenesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
Pathology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
Inﬂammation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
Inﬂammatory Mediators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
Effects of Inﬂammation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
Airway Remodeling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
I Asthma Triggers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
Allergens . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
Virus Infections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
Pharmacologic Agents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
Exercise . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
Physical Factors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
Food . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
Air Pollution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
Occupational Factors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
Hormonal Factors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
Gastroesophageal Reﬂux . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
Stress . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
I Pathophysiology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
Airway Hyperresponsiveness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
I Clinical Features and Diagnosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
Diagnosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
Differential Diagnosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
I Acute Severe Asthma . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75
Clinical Features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75
I Refractory Asthma . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75
Mechanisms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 76
Differential Diagnosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 76
Corticosteroid-Resistant Asthma . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 76
Brittle Asthma . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 76
I Special Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
Aspirin-Sensitive Asthma . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
Asthma in the Elderly . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
Pregnancy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
Cigarette Smoking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
Surgery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 78
Bronchopulmonary Aspergillosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 78
I Further Readings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 78
60
observation suggests that there is a maximum number of
individuals in the community who are liable to be
affected by asthma, likely by genetic predisposition.
Most patients with asthma in afﬂuent countries are
atopic, with allergic sensitization to the house dust mite
Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus and other environmental
allergens.
Asthma is both common and frequently complicated
by the effects of smoking on the lungs; hence, it is difﬁ-
cult to be certain about the natural history of the disease
in adults.Asthma can present at any age with a peak age
of 3 years. In childhood, twice as many boys as girls are
asthmatic, but by adulthood, the gender ratio has equal-
ized.The commonly held belief that children “grow out
of their asthma” is justiﬁed to some extent. Long-term
studies that have followed children until they reach the
age of 40 years suggest that many with asthma become
asymptomatic during adolescence but that asthma
returns in some during adult life, particularly in children
with persistent symptoms and severe asthma.Adults with
asthma, including those with onset during adulthood,
rarely become permanently asymptomatic. The severity
of asthma does not vary signiﬁcantly within a given
patient; those with mild asthma rarely progress to more
severe disease, whereas those with severe asthma usually
have severe disease at the onset.
Deaths from asthma are uncommon and have been
steadily declining in many afﬂuent countries over the
past decade.An increase in asthma mortality seen in sev-
eral countries during the 1960s was associated with
increased use of short-acting β2-adrenergic agonists (as
rescue therapy), but there is now compelling evidence
that the more widespread use of inhaled corticosteroids
(ICSs) in patients with persistent asthma is responsible
for the decrease in mortality in recent years. Major risk
factors for asthma deaths are poorly controlled disease
with frequent use of bronchodilator inhalers, lack of
corticosteroid therapy, and previous admissions to the
hospital with near-fatal asthma.
It has proven difﬁcult to agree on a deﬁnition of
asthma, but there is good agreement on the description of
the clinical syndrome and disease pathology. Until the eti-
ologic mechanisms of the disease are better understood, it
will be difﬁcult to provide an accurate deﬁnition.
ETIOLOGY
Asthma is a heterogeneous disease with interplay between
genetic and environmental factors. Several risk factors
have been implicated (Table 8-1).
ATOPY
Atopy is the major risk factor for asthma, and nonatopic
individuals have a very low risk of developing asthma.
Patients with asthma commonly have other atopic dis-
eases, particularly allergic rhinitis, which may be found
in more than 80% of asthmatic patients, and atopic der-
matitis (eczema).Atopy may be found in 40–50% of the
population in afﬂuent countries, with only a proportion
of atopic individuals becoming asthmatic.This observa-
tion suggests that some other environmental or genetic
factor(s) predispose to the development of asthma in
atopic individuals.The allergens that lead to sensitization
are usually proteins that have protease activity, and the
commonest allergens are derived from house dust mites,
cat and dog fur, cockroaches, grass and tree pollens, and
rodents (in laboratory workers). Atopy is caused by the
genetically determined production of a speciﬁc IgE
antibody, with many patients showing a family history of
allergic diseases.
INTRINSIC ASTHMA
A minority of asthmatic patients (approximately 10%)
have negative skin test results to common inhalant aller-
gens and normal serum concentrations of IgE. These
patients with nonatopic or intrinsic asthma usually show
a later onset of disease (adult-onset asthma), commonly
have concomitant nasal polyps, and may be aspirin sensi-
tive. They usually have more severe, persistent asthma.
Little is understood about the mechanism, but the
immunopathology in bronchial biopsies and sputum
appears to be identical to that found in atopic asthma.
There is recent evidence for increased local production
of IgE in the airways, suggesting that there may be com-
mon IgE-mediated mechanisms.
Asthma
61
CHAPTER 8
TABLE 8-1
RISK FACTORS AND TRIGGERS INVOLVED IN ASTHMA
RISK FACTORS
Endogenous Factors
Environmental Factors
Genetic predisposition
Indoor allergens
Atopy
Outdoor allergens
Airway hyperresponsiveness
Occupational sensitizers
Gender
Passive smoking
Ethnicity?
Respiratory infections
Obesity?
Early viral infections?
TRIGGERS
Allergens
Upper respiratory tract viral infections
Exercise and hyperventilation
Cold air
Sulfur dioxide
Drugs (β-blockers, aspirin)
Stress
Irritants (household sprays, paint fumes)
INFECTIONS
Although viral infections are common as triggers of
asthma exacerbations, it is uncertain whether they play a
role in the cause.There is some association between res-
piratory syncytial virus infection in infancy and the
development of asthma, but the speciﬁc pathogenesis is
difﬁcult to elucidate because this infection is very com-
mon in children. More recently, atypical bacteria such as
Mycoplasma and Chlamydia spp. have been implicated in
the mechanism of severe asthma, but thus far, evidence
of a true association is not very convincing.
GENETIC CONSIDERATIONS
The familial association of asthma and a high
degree of concordance for asthma in identical
twins indicate a genetic predisposition to the dis-
ease; however, whether or not the genes predisposing to
asthma are similar or in addition to those predisposing
of atopy is not yet clear. It now seems likely that differ-
ent genes may also contribute to asthma speciﬁcally, and
increasing evidence suggests that the severity of asthma
is also genetically determined. Genetic screens with clas-
sical linkage analysis and single nucleotide polymor-
phisms of various candidate genes indicate that asthma is
polygenic, with each gene identiﬁed having a small
effect that is often not replicated in different popula-
tions. This observation suggests that the interaction of
many genes is important, and these may differ in differ-
ent populations.The most consistent ﬁndings have been
associations with polymorphisms of genes on chromo-
some 5q, including the T helper 2 (TH2) cells inter-
leukin (IL) 4, IL-5, IL-9, and IL-13, which are associated
with atopy. There is increasing evidence for a complex
interaction between genetic polymorphisms and envi-
ronmental factors that will require very large population
studies to unravel. Novel genes that have been associated
with asthma, including ADAM-33, DPP-10, and GPRA,
have also been identiﬁed by positional cloning, but their
function in disease pathogenesis is thus far obscure.
Genetic polymorphisms may also be important in deter-
mining the response to asthma therapy. For example, the
Arg-Gly-16 variant in the β2-receptor is associated with
reduced response to β2-agonists, and repeats of an
Sp1 recognition sequence in the promoter region of
5-lipoxygenase may affect the response to antileukotrienes.
ENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS
It is likely that environmental factors in early life deter-
mine which atopic individuals become asthmatic. The
increasing prevalence of asthma, particularly in develop-
ing countries, over the past few decades also indicates
the importance of environmental mechanisms interact-
ing with a genetic predisposition.
Hygiene Hypothesis
The observation that allergic sensitization and asthma
were less common in children with older siblings ﬁrst
suggested that lower levels of infection may be a factor
in afﬂuent societies that increase the risks of asthma.This
“hygiene hypothesis” proposes that lack of infections in
early childhood preserves the TH2 cell bias at birth, but
exposure to infections and endotoxin results in a shift
toward a predominant protective TH1 response. Children
brought up on farms who are exposed to a high level of
endotoxin are less likely to develop allergic sensitization
than children raised on dairy farms. Intestinal parasite
infection may also be associated with a reduced risk of
asthma. Although there is considerable epidemiologic
support for the hygiene hypothesis, it cannot account
for the parallel increase in TH1-driven diseases, such as
diabetes mellitus, over the same period.
Diet
The role of dietary factors is controversial. Observa-
tional studies have shown that diets low in antioxidants,
such as vitamin C and vitamin A, magnesium, selenium,
and omega-3 polyunsaturated fats (ﬁsh oil), or high in
sodium and omega-6 polyunsaturates are associated with
an increased risk of asthma. However, interventional
studies have not supported an important role for these
dietary factors. Obesity is also an independent risk factor
for asthma, particularly in women, but the mechanisms
thus far are unknown.
Air Pollution
There is no doubt that air pollutants, such as sulfur diox-
ide, ozone, and diesel particulates, may trigger asthma
symptoms, but the role of different air pollutants in the
cause of the disease is much less certain. Most evidence
argues against an important role for air pollution
because asthma is no more prevalent in cities with a
high ambient level of trafﬁc pollution than in rural areas
with low levels of pollution. Asthma had a much lower
prevalence in East Germany than West Germany despite
a much higher level of air pollution, but since reuniﬁca-
tion, these differences have decreased as eastern Germany
has become more afﬂuent. Indoor air pollution may be
more important with exposure to nitrogen oxides from
cooking stoves and exposure to passive cigarette smoke.
There is some evidence that maternal smoking is a risk
factor for asthma, but it is difﬁcult to dissociate this from
an increased risk of respiratory infections.
Allergens
Inhaled allergens are common triggers of asthma
symptoms and have also been implicated in allergic
Diseases of the Respiratory System
62
SECTION II
sensitization. Exposure to house dust mites in early
childhood is a risk factor for allergic sensitization and
asthma, but rigorous allergen avoidance has not shown
any evidence for a reduced risk of developing asthma.
The increase in house dust mites in centrally heated,
poorly ventilated homes with fitted carpets has been
implicated in the increasing prevalence of asthma in
affluent countries. Domestic pets, particularly cats, have
also been associated with allergic sensitization, but
early exposure to cats in the home may be protective
through the induction of tolerance.
Occupational Exposure
Occupational asthma is relatively common and may
affect up to 10% of young adults. More than 200 sensi-
tizing agents have been identiﬁed. Chemicals, such as
toluene diisocyanate and trimellitic anhydride, may lead
to sensitization independent of atopy. Individuals may
also be exposed to allergens in the workplace, such as
small animal allergens in laboratory workers and fungal
amylase in wheat ﬂour in bakers.
OTHER FACTORS
Several other factors have been implicated in the cause
of asthma, including lower maternal age, duration of
breastfeeding, prematurity and low birth weight, and
inactivity, but are unlikely to contribute to the recent
global increase in asthma prevalence. There is also an
association with acetaminophen (paracetamol) con-
sumption, which remains unexplained.
PATHOGENESIS
Asthma is associated with a speciﬁc chronic inﬂamma-
tion of the mucosa of the lower airways. One of the
main aims of treatment is to reduce this inﬂammation.
PATHOLOGY
The pathology of asthma has been revealed through
examining the lungs at autopsy in patients who have
died of asthma and from bronchial biopsies in patients
with usually mild asthma. The airway mucosa is inﬁl-
trated with activated eosinophils and T lymphocytes, and
there is activation of mucosal mast cells. The degree of
inﬂammation is poorly related to disease severity and
may be found in atopic patients without asthma symp-
toms. The inﬂammation is reduced by treatment with
ICSs. A characteristic ﬁnding is thickening of the base-
ment membrane caused by subepithelial collagen deposi-
tion. This feature is also found in patients with
eosinophilic bronchitis presenting as cough who do
not have asthma; it is therefore likely to be a marker of
eosinophilic inﬂammation in the airway because
eosinophils release ﬁbrogenic factors. The epithelium is
often shed or friable, with reduced attachments to the
airway wall and increased numbers of epithelial cells in
the lumen.The airway wall itself may be thickened and
edematous, particularly in fatal asthma.Another common
ﬁnding in fatal asthma is occlusion of the airway lumen
by a mucus plug, which is composed of mucus glycopro-
teins secreted from goblet cells and plasma proteins from
leaky bronchial vessels (Fig. 8-1). There is also vasodi-
latation and increased numbers of blood vessels (angio-
genesis). Direct observation by bronchoscopy indicates
that the airways may be narrowed, reddened, and ede-
matous.The pathology of asthma is remarkably uniform
in different types of asthma, including atopic, nonatopic,
occupational, aspirin-sensitive, and pediatric asthma.
These pathologic changes are found in all airways but
do not extend to the lung parenchyma; small airway
inﬂammation is found particularly in patients with
severe asthma. The involvement of airways may be
patchy, and this is consistent with bronchographic ﬁnd-
ings of uneven narrowing of the airways.
Asthma
63
CHAPTER 8
Mucus plug with
trapped
inflammatory cells
Goblet cell
metaplasia
Inflammatory cell
infiltrate
in submucosal layer
Thickened basement
membrane
Thickened airway
smooth muscle
Normal parenchymal
attachments
FIGURE 8-1
Histopathology of a small airway in fatal
asthma. The lumen is occluded with a
mucus plug, goblet cell metaplasia is pre-
sent, and the airway wall is thickened, with
an increase in basement membrane thick-
ness and airway smooth muscle. (Courtesy
of Dr. J. Hogg, University of British Colom-
bia, with permission.)
INFLAMMATION
There is inﬂammation in the respiratory mucosa from
trachea to terminal bronchioles but with a predomi-
nance in the bronchi (cartilaginous airways). Consider-
able research has identiﬁed the major cellular components
of inﬂammation, but it is still uncertain how inﬂamma-
tory cells interact and how inﬂammation translates into
the symptoms of asthma (Fig. 8-2).There is good evi-
dence that the speciﬁc pattern of airway inﬂammation
in asthma is associated with airway hyperresponsiveness
(AHR), the physiologic abnormality of asthma that is
correlated with variable airﬂow obstruction.The pattern
of inﬂammation in asthma is characteristic of allergic
diseases, with similar inﬂammatory cells seen in the nasal
mucosa in rhinitis. However, an indistinguishable pattern
of inﬂammation is found in intrinsic asthma, although
this may reﬂect local rather than systemic IgE produc-
tion. Although most attention has focused on the acute
inﬂammatory changes seen in asthma, this is a chronic
condition, with inﬂammation persisting over many years
in most patients. The mechanisms involved in persis-
tence of inﬂammation in asthma are still poorly under-
stood. Superimposed on this chronic inﬂammatory state
are acute inﬂammatory episodes, which correspond to
exacerbations of asthma. Many inﬂammatory cells are
known to be involved in asthma, with no predominant
key cell (Fig. 8-3).
Mast Cells
Mast cells are important in initiating the acute bron-
choconstrictor responses to allergens and several other
indirectly acting stimuli, such as exercise and hyperventila-
tion (via osmolality or thermal changes), as well as fog. In
biopsies from asthmatic patients, mast cells are localized to
the airway smooth muscle layer; they are not found in
normal subjects or in patients with eosinophilic cough.
Mast cells are activated by allergens through an IgE-
dependent mechanism, and binding of speciﬁc IgE to mast
cells renders them more sensitive to activation.The impor-
tance of IgE in the pathophysiology of asthma has been
highlighted by clinical studies with humanized anti-IgE
antibodies, which inhibit IgE-mediated effects, reduce
asthma symptoms, and prevent exacerbations. There are,
however, uncertainties about the role of mast cells in more
chronic allergic inﬂammatory events. Mast cells release
several bronchoconstrictor mediators, including histamine
and cysteinyl-leukotrienes, but also several cytokines,
chemokines,growth factors,and neurotrophins.
Macrophages and Dendritic Cells
Macrophages, which are derived from blood monocytes,
may trafﬁc into the airways in asthma and may be acti-
vated by allergens via low-afﬁnity IgE receptors
(FcεRII). Macrophages have the capacity to initiate a
type of inﬂammatory response via the release of a cer-
tain pattern of cytokines, but these cells also release anti-
inﬂammatory mediators, such as IL-10, and thus their
role in asthma is uncertain. Dendritic cells are special-
ized macrophage-like cells in the airway epithelium,
which are the major antigen-presenting cells. Dendritic
cells take up allergens, process them to peptides, and
migrate to local lymph nodes, where they present the
allergenic peptides to uncommitted T-lymphocytes to
program the production of allergen-speciﬁc T cells.
Immature dendritic cells in the respiratory tract pro-
mote TH2 cell differentiation and require cytokines, such
as IL-12 and tumor necrosis factor α (TNF α), to pro-
mote the normally preponderant TH1 response.
Eosinophils
Eosinophil inﬁltration is a characteristic feature of asth-
matic airways. Allergen inhalation results in a marked
increase in activated eosinophils in the airways at the time
of the late reaction. Eosinophils are linked to the develop-
ment of AHR through the release of basic proteins and
oxygen-derived free radicals. Eosinophil recruitment
involves adhesion of eosinophils to vascular endothelial
cells in the airway circulation due to interaction between
adhesion molecules, migration into the submucosa under
the direction of chemokines, and their subsequent activa-
tion and prolonged survival. Blocking antibodies to IL-5
cause a profound and prolonged reduction in circulating
and sputum eosinophils, but they are not associated with
reduced AHR or asthma symptoms, thus questioning the
pivotal role of eosinophils in asthma. Furthermore,
eosinophilic inﬂammation is also found in patients with
chronic cough who do not have any clinical features of
asthma or AHR. Increasing evidence suggests that
Diseases of the Respiratory System
64
SECTION II
Allergens
Sensitizers
Viruses
Air pollutants?
Inflammation
Chronic eosinophilic
bronchitis
Symptoms
Cough
Wheeze
Chest tightness
Dyspnea
Triggers
Allergens
Exercise
Cold air
SO2
Particulates
Airway
hyperresponsiveness
FIGURE 8-2
Inﬂammation in the airways of asthmatic patients leads to
airway hyperresponsiveness and symptoms.
eosinophils may be more important in release of growth
factors involved in airway remodeling than in AHR.
Neutrophils
Increased numbers of activated neutrophils are found in
the sputum and airways of some patients with severe
asthma and during exacerbations, although there is a
proportion of patients even with mild or moderate
asthma that have a predominance of neutrophils. The
role of neutrophils in asthma, which are resistant to the
anti-inﬂammatory effects of corticosteroids, is currently
unknown.
T Lymphocytes
T lymphocytes play a very important role in coordinat-
ing the inﬂammatory response in asthma through the
release of speciﬁc patterns of cytokines, resulting in the
recruitment and survival of eosinophils and in the main-
tenance of a mast cell population in the airways.
Whereas the naïve immune system and the immune sys-
tem of asthmatics are skewed to express the TH2 pheno-
type, in normal airways,TH1 cells predominate.Through
the release of IL-5, TH2 cells are associated with
eosinophilic inﬂammation and, through the release of
IL-4 and IL-13, are associated with increased IgE for-
mation. Recently, bronchial biopsies have demonstrated
a preponderance of natural killer CD4+ T lymphocytes,
which express high levels of IL-4. Regulatory T cells
play an important role in determining the expression of
other T cells, and there is evidence for a reduction in a
certain subset of regulatory T cells (CD4+CD25+) in
asthma, which is associated with increased TH2 cells.
Structural Cells
Structural cells of the airways, including epithelial cells,
ﬁbroblasts, and airway smooth muscle cells, are also an
important source of inﬂammatory mediators, such as
cytokines and lipid mediators, in asthma. Indeed, because
structural cells far outnumber inﬂammatory cells, they
may become the major source of mediators driving
chronic inﬂammation in asthmatic airways. In addition,
epithelial cells may have a key role in translating inhaled
environmental signals into an airway inﬂammatory
response and are probably a major target cell for ICSs.
INFLAMMATORY MEDIATORS
Many different mediators have been implicated in asthma,
and they may have a variety of effects on the airways
that could account for the pathologic features of asthma
(Fig. 8-4). Mediators such as histamine, prostaglandins,
and cysteinyl-leukotrienes contract airway smooth mus-
cle, increase microvascular leakage, increase airway
mucus secretion, and attract other inﬂammatory cells.
Because each mediator has many effects, the role of
individual mediators in the pathophysiology of asthma is
not yet clear. Although the multiplicity of mediators
Asthma
65
CHAPTER 8
Allergen
Macrophage/
dendritic cell
Mast cell
TH2 cell
Eosinophil
Mucus plug
Epithelial shedding
Nerve activation
Plasma leak
Edema
Vasodilation
New vessels
Mucus
hypersecretion
Hyperplasia
Neutrophil
Subepithelial
fibrosis
Sensory nerve
activation
Cholinergic
reflex
Bronchoconstriction
Hypertrophy/hyperplasia
FIGURE 8-3
The pathophysiology of asthma
is complex, with participation of
several 
interacting 
inﬂammatory
cells, resulting in acute and chronic
inﬂammatory effects on the airway.
makes it unlikely that preventing the synthesis or action
of a single mediator will have a major impact in clinical
asthma, recent clinical studies with antileukotrienes sug-
gest that cysteinyl-leukotrienes have a clinically impor-
tant effect.
Cytokines
Multiple cytokines regulate the chronic inﬂammation of
asthma.The TH2 cytokines IL-4, IL-5, and IL-13 medi-
ate allergic inﬂammation, whereas proinﬂammatory
cytokines, such as TNF α) and IL-1β, amplify the
inﬂammatory response and play a role in more severe
disease. Thymic stromal lymphopoietin is an upstream
cytokine released from epithelial cells of asthmatics that
orchestrates the release of chemokines, which selectively
attract TH2 cells. Some cytokines, such as IL-10 and
IL-12, are anti-inﬂammatory and may be deﬁcient in
individuals with asthma.
Chemokines
Chemokines are involved in attracting inﬂammatory cells
from the bronchial circulation into the airways.Whereas
eotaxin (CCL11) is selectively attractant to eosinophils
via CCR3 and is expressed by epithelial cells of asthmat-
ics, CCL17 (TARC) and CCL22 (MDC) from epithelial
cells attract TH2 cells via CCR4 (Fig. 8-5).
Oxidative Stress
There is increased oxidative stress in asthma as activated
inﬂammatory cells, such as macrophages and eosinophils,
produce reactive oxygen species. Evidence for increased
oxidative stress in asthma is provided by the increased con-
centrations of 8-isoprostane (a product of oxidized
arachidonic acid) in exhaled breath condensates and
increased ethane (a product of lipid peroxidation) in the
expired air of asthmatic patients. Increased oxidative stress
is related to disease severity, may amplify the inﬂammatory
response, and may reduce responsiveness to corticosteroids.
Nitric Oxide
Nitric oxide (NO) is produced by several cells in the
airway by NO synthases, particularly airway epithelial
cells and macrophages. The level of NO in the expired
air of patients with asthma is higher than normal and is
related to the eosinophilic inﬂammation. Increased NO
may contribute to the bronchial vasodilation observed
in asthma. Exhaled NO is increasingly used in the diag-
nosis and monitoring of asthmatic inﬂammation, although
it is not used routinely in clinical practice.
Transcription Factors
Proinﬂammatory transcription factors, such as nuclear
factor κB (NFκB) and activator protein 1 (AP-1), are
activated in asthmatic airways and orchestrate the expres-
sion of multiple inﬂammatory genes. More-speciﬁc
transcription factors that are involved include nuclear
factor of activated T cells and GATA-3, which regulate
the expression of TH2 cytokines in T cells.
EFFECTS OF INFLAMMATION
The chronic inﬂammatory response has several effects on
the target cells of the airways, resulting in the characteristic
Diseases of the Respiratory System
66
SECTION II
Inflammatory cells
Mast cells
Eosinophils
TH2 cells
Basophils
Neutrophils
Platelets
Structural cells
Epithelial cells
Sm muscle cells
Endothelial cells
Fibroblast
Nerves
Mediators
Histamine
Leukotrienes
Prostanoids
PAF
Kinins
Adenosine
Endothelins
Nitric oxide
Cytokines
Chemokines
Growth factors
Effects
Bronchospasm
Plasma exudation
Mucus secretion
AHR
Structural changes
FIGURE 8-4
Many cells and mediators are involved in asthma and lead
to several effects on the airways. AHR, hyperresponsiveness;
PAF, platelet-activating factor.
TH2 cell
Eosinophil
IL-5
Airway
epithelium
TNFα
TARC, MDC
Eotaxins
CCR4
CCR3
IL-4, IL-13
FIGURE 8-5
Chemokines in asthma. Tumor necrosis factor α (TNF α)
and other triggers of airway epithelial cells release thymus
and activation-regulated chemokine (TARC, CCL17) and
macrophage-derived chemokine (MDC, CCL22) from epithe-
lial cells, which attract TH2 cells via activation of their CCR4
receptors. These promote eosinophilic inﬂammation directly
through the release of interleukin 5 (IL-5) and indirectly via
the release of IL-4 and IL-13, which induce eotaxin (CCL11)
formation in airway epithelial cells.
pathophysiologic changes associated with asthma. Asthma
may be regarded as a disease with continuous inﬂammation
and repair proceeding simultaneously. Important advances
continue to be made in our understanding of these
changes, but despite these new insights, the relationship
between chronic inﬂammatory processes and asthma symp-
toms is often not clear.
Airway Epithelium
Airway epithelial shedding may be important in con-
tributing to AHR and may explain how several mecha-
nisms, such as ozone exposure, virus infections, chemical
sensitizers, and allergen exposure, can lead to its devel-
opment because all of these stimuli may lead to epithe-
lial disruption. Epithelial damage may contribute to
AHR in a number of ways, including loss of its barrier
function to allow penetration of allergens; loss of
enzymes (e.g., neutral endopeptidase) that normally
degrade inﬂammatory mediators; loss of a relaxant factor
(so called epithelial-derived relaxant factor); and expo-
sure of sensory nerves, which may lead to reﬂex neural
effects on the airway.
Fibrosis
In all asthmatic patients, the basement membrane is
apparently thickened due to subepithelial ﬁbrosis with
deposition of types III and V collagen below the true
basement membrane, and it is associated with eosinophil
inﬁltration, presumably through the release of proﬁ-
brotic mediators, such as transforming growth factor β.
Mechanical manipulations can alter the phenotype of
airway epithelial cells in a proﬁbrotic fashion. In patients
with more severe asthma, there is also ﬁbrosis within the
airway wall, which may contribute to irreversible nar-
rowing of the airways.
Airway Smooth Muscle
There is still debate about the role of abnormalities in air-
way smooth muscle is asthmatic airways. In vitro airway
smooth muscle from asthmatic patients usually shows no
increased responsiveness to constrictors. Reduced respon-
siveness to β-agonists has also been reported in post-
mortem or surgically removed bronchi from asthmatics,
although the number of β-receptors is not reduced, sug-
gesting that β-receptors have been uncoupled. These
abnormalities of airway smooth muscle may be secondary
to the chronic inﬂammatory process. Inﬂammatory medi-
ators may modulate the ion channels that serve to regu-
late the resting membrane potential of airway smooth
muscle cells, thus altering the level of excitability of these
cells. In asthmatic airways, there is also a characteristic
hypertrophy and hyperplasia of airway smooth muscle,
which is presumably the result of stimulation of airway
smooth muscle cells by various growth factors, such as
platelet-derived growth factor or endothelin 1, released
from inﬂammatory or epithelial cells.
Vascular Responses
There is increased airway mucosal blood ﬂow in asthma.
The bronchial circulation may play an important role in
regulating airway caliber because an increase in the vas-
cular volume may contribute to airway narrowing.
Increased airway blood ﬂow may be important in
removing inﬂammatory mediators from the airway and
may play a role in the development of exercise-induced
asthma (EIA). There is an increase in the number of
blood vessels in asthmatic airways as a result of angio-
genesis in response to growth factors, particularly vascular-
endothelial growth factor. Microvascular leakage from
postcapillary venules in response to inﬂammatory medi-
ators is observed in asthma, resulting in airway edema
and plasma exudation into the airway lumen.
Mucus Hypersecretion
Increased mucus secretion contributes to the viscid
mucus plugs that occlude asthmatic airways, particularly
in fatal asthma.There is evidence for hyperplasia of sub-
mucosal glands that are conﬁned to large airways and of
increased numbers of epithelial goblet cells. IL-4 and
IL-13 induce mucus hypersecretion in experimental
models of asthma.
Neural Effects
Various defects in autonomic neural control may con-
tribute to AHR in asthma, but these are likely to be sec-
ondary to the disease rather than primary defects.
Cholinergic pathways, through the release of acetyl-
choline acting on muscarinic receptors, cause bron-
choconstriction and may be activated reﬂexly in asthma.
Inﬂammatory mediators may activate sensory nerves,
resulting in reﬂex cholinergic bronchoconstriction or
release of inﬂammatory neuropeptides. Inﬂammatory
products may also sensitize sensory nerve endings in the
airway epithelium, such that the nerves become hyperal-
gesic. Neurotrophins, which may be released from vari-
ous cell types in peripheral tissues, may cause proliferation
and sensitization of airway sensory nerves.Airway nerves
may also release neurotransmitters, such as substance P,
which have inﬂammatory effects.
AIRWAY REMODELING
Several changes in the structure of the airway are char-
acteristically found in asthma, and these may lead to
irreversible narrowing of the airways. Population studies
have shown a greater decline in lung function over time
Asthma
67
CHAPTER 8
than in normal subjects; however, most patients with
asthma preserve normal or near-normal lung function
throughout life if appropriately treated.This observation
suggests that the accelerated decline in lung function
occurs in a smaller proportion of people with asthma,
and these are usually patients with more severe disease.
There is debate about whether the early use of ICSs
may reduce the decline in lung function.The character-
istic structural changes are increased airway smooth
muscle, ﬁbrosis, angiogenesis, and mucus hyperplasia.
ASTHMA TRIGGERS
Several stimuli trigger airway narrowing, wheezing, and
dyspnea in asthmatic patients. Although the previous
view held that these should be avoided, it is now seen as
evidence for poor control and an indicator of the need
to increase controller therapy.
ALLERGENS
Inhaled allergens are able to activate mast cells with
bound IgE directly leading to the immediate release of
bronchoconstrictor mediators, resulting in the early
response reversed by bronchodilators. Often, experimen-
tal allergen challenge is followed by a late response
when there is airway edema and an acute inﬂammatory
response with increased eosinophils and neutrophils that
is not very reversible with bronchodilators. The most
common allergen to trigger asthma is Dermatophagoides
spp., and environmental exposure leads to low-grade
chronic symptoms that are perennial. Perennial allergens
are derived from cats and other domestic pets, as well as
cockroaches. Other allergens, including grass pollen, rag-
weed, tree pollen, and fungal spores, are seasonal. Pollens
usually cause allergic rhinitis rather than asthma, but in
thunderstorms, the pollen grains are disrupted, and the
particles that may be released can trigger severe asthma
exacerbations (thunderstorm asthma).
VIRUS INFECTIONS
Upper respiratory tract virus infections, such as rhi-
novirus, respiratory syncytial virus, and coronavirus, are
the commonest triggers of acute severe exacerbations.
The mechanism whereby these viruses cause exacerba-
tions is poorly understood, but there is an increase in air-
way inﬂammation with increased numbers of eosinophils
and neutrophils.There is evidence for reduced production
of type I interferons by epithelial cells from asthmatic
patients, resulting in increased susceptibility to these viral
infections and a greater inﬂammatory response.
PHARMACOLOGIC AGENTS
Several drugs may trigger asthma. β-Adrenergic blockers
commonly worsen asthma, and their use may be fatal.
The mechanisms are not clear but are mediated through
increased cholinergic bronchoconstriction. All β-blockers
need to be avoided in patients with asthma, and even
selective β2 blocker or topical application (e.g., timolol
eye drops) may be dangerous. Angiotensin-converting
enzyme inhibitors are theoretically detrimental because
they inhibit breakdown of kinins, which are bron-
choconstrictors; however, they rarely worsen asthma, and
the characteristic cough is no more frequent in asthmat-
ics than nonasthmatics. Aspirin may worsen asthma in
some patients (aspirin-sensitive asthma is discussed
below under “Special Considerations”).
EXERCISE
Exercise is a common trigger of asthma, particularly in
children. The mechanism is linked to hyperventilation,
which results in increased osmolality in airway lining ﬂu-
ids and triggers mast cell mediator release, resulting in
bronchoconstriction. EIA typically begins after exercise
has ended and recovers spontaneously within about 30 min.
EIA is worse in cold, dry climates than in hot, humid
conditions. It is therefore more common in sports such as
cross-country running in cold weather, overland skiing,
and ice hockey than in swimming. It may be prevented
by prior administration of β2-agonists and antileukotrienes
but is best prevented by regular treatment with inhaled
glucocorticoids, which reduce the population of surface
mast cells required for this response.
PHYSICAL FACTORS
Cold air and hyperventilation may trigger asthma through
the same mechanisms as exercise. Laughter may also be a
trigger. Many patients report worsening of asthma in hot
weather and when the weather changes. Some asthmatics
become worse when exposed to strong smells or per-
fumes, but the mechanism of this response is uncertain.
FOOD
There is little evidence that allergic reactions to food
lead to increased asthma symptoms despite the belief of
many patients that their symptoms are triggered by par-
ticular food constituents. Exclusion diets are usually
unsuccessful at reducing the frequency of episodes.
Some foods, such as shellﬁsh and nuts, may induce ana-
phylactic reactions that may include wheezing. Patients
with aspirin-induced asthma may beneﬁt from a salicy-
late-free diet, but these diets are difﬁcult to maintain.
Certain food additives may trigger asthma. Metabisulﬁte,
which is used as a food preservative, may trigger asthma
through the release of sulfur dioxide gas in the stomach.
Tartrazine, a food yellow-coloring agent, was believed to
be a trigger for asthma, but there is little convincing evi-
dence for this.
Diseases of the Respiratory System
68
SECTION II
AIR POLLUTION
Increased ambient levels of sulfur dioxide, ozone, and
nitrogen oxides are associated with increased asthma
symptoms.
OCCUPATIONAL FACTORS
Several substances found in the workplace may act as
sensitizing agents, as discussed above, but may also act as
triggers of asthma symptoms. Occupational asthma is
characteristically associated with symptoms at work with
relief on weekends and holidays. If removed from expo-
sure within the ﬁrst 6 months of symptoms, there is usu-
ally complete recovery. More persistent symptoms lead
to irreversible airway changes, so early detection and
avoidance are important.
HORMONAL FACTORS
Some women show premenstrual worsening of asthma,
which can occasionally be very severe.The mechanisms
are not completely understood but are related to a
decrease in progesterone and in severe cases may be
improved by treatment with high doses of progesterone
or gonadotropin-releasing factors. Thyrotoxicosis and
hypothyroidism can both worsen asthma, although the
mechanisms are uncertain.
GASTROESOPHAGEAL REFLUX
Gastroesophageal reﬂux is common in asthmatic patients
because it is increased by bronchodilators.Although acid
reﬂux might trigger reﬂex bronchoconstriction, it rarely
causes asthma symptoms, and anti-reﬂux therapy fails to
reduce asthma symptoms in most patients.
STRESS
Many people with asthma report worsening of symp-
toms with stress. There is no doubt that psychological
factors can induce bronchoconstriction through cholin-
ergic reﬂex pathways. Paradoxically, very severe stress,
such as bereavement, usually does not worsen, and may
even improve, asthma symptoms.
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Limitation of airﬂow is  mainly caused by bronchocon-
striction, but airway edema, vascular congestion, and
luminal occlusion with exudate may also contribute.This
results in a reduction in forced expiratory volume in 1 s
(FEV1), FEV1/forced vital capacity (FVC) ratio, and peak
expiratory ﬂow (PEF), as well as an increase in airway
resistance. Early closure of peripheral airway results in
lung hyperinﬂation (air trapping) and increased residual
volume, particularly during acute exacerbations. In more
severe asthma, reduced ventilation and increased pul-
monary blood ﬂow result in mismatching of ventilation
and perfusion and in bronchial hyperemia.Ventilatory fail-
ure is very uncommon, even in patients with severe
asthma, and arterial PaCO2 tends to be low because of
increased ventilation.
AIRWAY HYPERRESPONSIVENESS
AHR is the characteristic physiologic abnormality of
asthma and describes the excessive bronchoconstrictor
response to multiple inhaled triggers that would have
no effect on normal airways. The increase in AHR is
linked to the frequency of asthma symptoms; thus, an
important aim of therapy is to reduce AHR. Increased
bronchoconstrictor responsiveness is seen with direct
bronchoconstrictors, such as histamine and metha-
choline, which contract airway smooth muscle, but it is
characteristically also seen with many indirect stimuli,
which release bronchoconstrictors from mast cells or
activate sensory neural reflexes. Most of the triggers
for asthma symptoms appear to act indirectly, including
allergens, exercise, hyperventilation, fog (via mast cell
activation), irritant dusts, and sulfur dioxide (via cholin-
ergic reﬂex).
CLINICAL FEATURES AND DIAGNOSIS
The characteristic symptoms of asthma are wheezing,
dyspnea, and coughing, which are variable, both sponta-
neously and with therapy. Symptoms may be worse at
night, and patients typically awake in the early morning
hours. Patients may report difﬁculty in ﬁlling their lungs
with air. There is increased mucus production in some
patients, with typically tenacious mucus that is difﬁcult
to expectorate. There may be increased ventilation and
use of accessory muscles of ventilation. Prodromal
symptoms may precede an attack, with itching under
the chin, discomfort between the scapulae, or inexplica-
ble fear (impending doom).
Typical physical signs are inspiratory, and to a great
extent expiratory, rhonchi throughout the chest, and
there may be hyperinflation. Some patients, particu-
larly children, may present with a predominant non-
productive cough (cough-variant asthma). There may
be no abnormal physical findings when asthma is
under control.
DIAGNOSIS
The diagnosis of asthma is usually apparent from the
symptoms of variable and intermittent airways obstruc-
tion but is usually conﬁrmed by objective measurements
of lung function.
Asthma
69
CHAPTER 8
Lung Function Tests
Simple spirometry conﬁrms airﬂow limitation with a
reduced FEV1, FEV1/FVC ratio, and PEF. Reversibility
is demonstrated by a >12% and 200-mL increase in
FEV1 15 min after an inhaled short-acting β2-agonist or,
in some patients, by a 2- to 4-week trial of oral gluco-
corticoids (prednisone or prednisolone 30–40 mg daily).
Measurements of PEF twice daily may conﬁrm the
diurnal variations in airﬂow obstruction. Flow-volume
loops show reduced peak ﬂow and reduced maximum
expiratory ﬂow. Further lung function tests are rarely
necessary, but whole-body plethysmography shows
increased airway resistance and may show increased total
lung capacity and residual volume. Gas diffusion is usu-
ally normal, but there may be a small increase in gas
transfer in some patients.
Airway Responsiveness
The increased AHR is normally measured by metha-
choline or histamine challenge with calculation of the
provocative concentration that reduces FEV1 by 20%
(PC20).This is rarely useful in clinical practice but can be
used in the differential diagnosis of chronic cough and
when the diagnosis is in doubt in the setting of normal
pulmonary function tests. Occasionally, exercise testing
is done to demonstrate the post-exercise bronchocon-
striction if there is a predominant history of EIA. Aller-
gen challenge is rarely necessary and should only be
undertaken by a specialist if speciﬁc occupational agents
are to be identiﬁed.
Hematologic Tests
Blood tests are not usually helpful.Total serum IgE and
speciﬁc IgE to inhaled allergens (RAST) may be mea-
sured in some patients.
Imaging
Chest roentgenography is usually normal but may show
hyperinﬂated lungs in more severe patients. In exacerba-
tions, there may be evidence of a pneumothorax. Lung
shadowing usually indicates pneumonia or eosinophilic
inﬁltrates in patients with bronchopulmonary aspergillosis
(BPA). High-resolution CT may show areas of bronchiec-
tasis in patients with severe asthma, and there may be
thickening of the bronchial walls, but these changes are
not diagnostic of asthma.
Skin Tests
Skin prick tests to common inhalant allergens are posi-
tive in allergic asthma and negative in intrinsic asthma
but are not helpful in diagnosis. Positive skin responses
may be useful in persuading patients to undertake aller-
gen avoidance measures.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
It is usually not difﬁcult to differentiate asthma from
other conditions that cause wheezing and dyspnea.
Upper airway obstruction by a tumor or laryngeal
edema can mimic severe asthma, but patients typically
present with stridor localized to large airways.The diag-
nosis is conﬁrmed by a ﬂow-volume loop, which shows
a reduction in inspiratory as well as expiratory ﬂow, and
bronchoscopy to demonstrate the site of upper airway
narrowing. Persistent wheezing in a speciﬁc area of the
chest may indicate endobronchial obstruction with a
foreign body. Left ventricular failure may mimic the
wheezing of asthma, but basilar crackles are present in
contrast to asthma.
Eosinophilic pneumonias and systemic vasculitis,
including Churg-Strauss syndrome and polyarteritis
nodosa, may be associated with wheezing. Chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is usually easy
to differentiate from asthma because symptoms show less
variability, never completely remit, and show much less
(or no) reversibility to bronchodilators. Approximately
10% of COPD patients have features of asthma, with
increased sputum eosinophils and a response to oral cor-
ticosteroids; these patients probably have both diseases
concomitantly.
Diseases of the Respiratory System
70
SECTION II
Treatment:
ASTHMA
The treatment of asthma is straightforward, and the
majority of patients are now managed by internists
with effective and safe therapies.There are several aims
of therapy (Table 8-2). Most emphasis has been placed
on drug therapy,
but several nonpharmacologic
approaches have also been used. The main drugs for
asthma can be divided into bronchodilators, which give
rapid relief of symptoms mainly through relaxation of
airway smooth muscle, and controllers, which inhibit the
underlying inﬂammatory process.
TABLE 8-2
AIMS OF ASTHMA THERAPY
Minimal (ideally no) chronic symptoms, including nocturnal
Minimal (infrequent) exacerbations
No emergency visits
Minimal (ideally no) use of as-required β2-agonist
No limitations on activities, including exercise
PEF circadian variation <20%
(Near) normal PEF
Minimal (or no) adverse effects from medicine
Note: PEF, peak expiratory ﬂow.
Bronchodilator Therapies
Bronchodilators act
primarily on airway smooth muscle to reverse the bron-
choconstriction of asthma. This gives rapid relief of
symptoms but has little or no effect on the underlying
inﬂammatory process.Thus, bronchodilators are not suf-
ﬁcient to control asthma in patients with persistent
symptoms. There are three classes of bronchodilator in
current use: β2-adrenergic agonists, anticholinergics, and
theophylline; of these, β2-agonists are by far the most
effective.
β2-Agonists
β2-Agonists 
activate 
β2-adrenergic
receptors, which are widely expressed in the airways.
β2-Receptors are coupled through a stimulatory G protein
to adenylyl cyclase, resulting in increased intracellular
cyclic AMP, which relaxes smooth muscle cells and
inhibits certain inﬂammatory cells.
Mode of action
The primary action of β2-agonists
is to relax airway smooth muscle cells of all airways,
where they act as functional antagonists, reversing and
preventing contraction of airway smooth muscle cells
by all known bronchoconstrictors. This generalized
action is likely to account for their great efﬁcacy as bron-
chodilators in asthma. There are also additional non-
bronchodilator effects that may be clinically useful,
including inhibition of mast cell mediator release, reduc-
tion in plasma exudation, and inhibition of sensory
nerve activation (Table 8-3). Inﬂammatory cells express
small numbers of β2-receptors, but these are rapidly
downregulated with β2-agonist activation so that, in
contrast to corticosteroids, there are no effects on
inﬂammatory cells in the airways, and there is no reduc-
tion in AHR.
Clinical use
β2-Agonists are usually given by
inhalation to reduce side effects.Short-acting β2-agonists
(SABAs), such as albuterol and terbutaline, have a dura-
tion of action of 3 to 6 hours.They have a rapid onset of
bronchodilation and are therefore used as needed for
symptom relief. Increased use of SABAs indicates that
asthma is not controlled.They are also useful in prevent-
ing EIA if taken before exercise. SABAs are used in high
doses by nebulizer or via a metered dose inhaler with a
spacer. Long-acting β2-agonists (LABAs) include salme-
terol and formoterol, both of which have a duration of
action over 12 hours and are given twice daily. LABAs
have replaced the regular use of SABAs, but LABAs
should not be given in the absence of ICS therapy
because they do not control the underlying inﬂamma-
tion. They do, however, improve asthma control and
reduce exacerbations when added to ICS, which allows
asthma to be controlled at lower doses of corticos-
teroids. This observation has led to the widespread use
of ﬁxed combination inhalers that contain a corticos-
teroid and a LABA, which have proven to be highly
effective in the control of asthma.
Side effects
Adverse effects are not usually a prob-
lem with β2-agonists when given by inhalation. The
most common side effects are muscle tremor and palpi-
tations, which are seen more commonly in elderly
patients. There is a small decrease in plasma potassium
because of increased uptake by skeletal muscle cells,
but this effect does not usually cause a clinical problem.
Tolerance
Tolerance is a potential problem with any
agonist given chronically, but although there is down-
regulation of β2-receptors,this does not reduce the bron-
chodilator response because there is a large receptor
reserve in airway smooth muscle cells. By contrast, mast
cells become rapidly tolerant, but their tolerance may be
prevented by concomitant administration of ICS.
Safety
The safety of β2-agonists has been an impor-
tant issue.There is an association between asthma mor-
tality and the amount of SABA used, but careful analysis
demonstrates that the increased use of rescue SABAs
reﬂects poor asthma control, which is a risk factor for
asthma death. The slight excess in mortality that has
been associated with the use of LABAs is related to the
lack of use of concomitant ICS because LABA therapy
does not deal with the underlying inﬂammation. This
highlights the importance of always using an ICS when
LABAs are given, which is most conveniently achieved
by using a combination inhaler.
Anticholinergics
Muscarinic receptor antagonists,
such as ipratropium bromide, prevent cholinergic
nerve—induced bronchoconstriction and mucus secre-
tion. They are much less effective than β2-agonists in
asthma therapy because they inhibit only the choliner-
gic reﬂex component of bronchoconstriction, β2-agonists
prevent all bronchoconstrictor mechanisms. Anticholin-
ergics are therefore only used as an additional bron-
chodilator in patients with asthma that is not controlled
on other inhaled medications. High doses may be given
by nebulizer in treating acute severe asthma but should
only be given after β2-agonists because they have a
slower onset of bronchodilation.
Asthma
71
CHAPTER 8
TABLE 8-3
EFFECTS OF β-ADRENERGIC AGONISTS ON AIRWAYS
Relaxation of airway smooth muscle (proximal and
distal airways)
Inhibition of mast cell mediator release
Inhibition of plasma exudation and airway edema
Increased mucociliary clearance
Increased mucus secretion
Decreased cough
No effect on chronic inﬂammation
Side effects are not usually a problem because there
is little or no systemic absorption. The most common
side effect is dry mouth; in elderly patients, urinary
retention and glaucoma may also be observed.
Theophylline
Theophylline was widely prescribed
as an oral bronchodilator several years ago, especially
because it was inexpensive.It has now fallen out of favor
because side effects are common and inhaled β2-
agonists are much more effective as bronchodilators.
The bronchodilator effect is caused by inhibition of
phosphodiesterases in airway smooth muscle cells,
which increases cyclic AMP, but doses required for bron-
chodilation commonly cause side effects that are medi-
ated mainly by phosphodiesterase inhibition. Increasing
evidence suggests that theophylline at lower doses has
anti-inﬂammatory effects, and these are likely to be
mediated through different molecular mechanisms.
There is evidence that theophylline activates the key
nuclear enzyme histone deacetylase-2, which is a critical
mechanism for switching off activated inﬂammatory
genes.
Clinical use
Oral theophylline is usually given as a
slow-release preparation once or twice daily because
this gives more stable plasma concentrations than nor-
mal theophylline tablets. It may be used as an additional
bronchodilator in patients with severe asthma when
plasma concentrations of 10–20 mg/L are required,
although these concentrations are often associated with
side effects. Low doses of theophylline, giving plasma
concentrations of 5–10 mg/L, have additive effects to
ICSs and are particularly useful in patients with severe
asthma. Indeed, withdrawal of theophylline from these
patients may result in marked deterioration in asthma
control. The drug is well tolerated at low doses. IV
aminophylline (a soluble salt of theophylline) was used
for the treatment of patients with severe asthma but has
now been largely supplemented by inhaled SABAs,
which are more effective and have fewer side effects.
Aminophylline is occasionally used (via slow IV infusion)
in patients with severe exacerbations that are refractory
to high-dose SABAs.
Side effects
Oral theophylline is well absorbed and
is largely inactivated in the liver. Side effects are related
to plasma concentrations; measurement of plasma
theophylline may be useful in determining the correct
dose.The most common side effects—nausea, vomiting,
and headaches—are caused by phosphodiesterase inhi-
bition. Diuresis and palpitations may also occur, and at
high concentrations, cardiac arrhythmias, epileptic
seizures, and death may occur because of adenosine
receptor antagonism. Theophylline’s side effects are
related to plasma concentration and are rarely observed
at plasma concentrations below 10 mg/L. Theophylline
is metabolized by CYP450 in the liver, and thus plasma
concentrations may be elevated by drugs that block
CYP450, such as erythromycin and allopurinol. Other
drugs may also reduce clearance by other mecha-
nisms leading to increased plasma concentrations
(Table 8-4).
Controller Therapies
Inhaled Corticosteroids
ICSs are by far the most
effective controllers for asthma, and their early use has
revolutionized asthma therapy.
Mode of action
ICSs are the most effective anti-
inﬂammatory agents used in asthma therapy, reducing
the number of inﬂammatory cells and their activation in
the airways. ICSs reduce eosinophils in the airways and
sputum and numbers of activated T lymphocytes and
surface mast cells in the airway mucosa. These effects
may account for the reduction in AHR that is seen with
chronic ICS therapy.
The molecular mechanism of action of corticos-
teroids involves several effects on the inﬂammatory
process. The major effect of corticosteroids is to switch
off the transcription of multiple activated genes that
encode inﬂammatory proteins, such as cytokines,
chemokines, adhesion molecules, and inﬂammatory
enzymes. This effect involves several mechanisms,
including inhibition of the transcription factors NFκB
and AP-1, but an important mechanism is recruitment
of histone deacetylase-2 to the inﬂammatory gene
complex, which reverses the histone acetylation associ-
ated with increased gene transcription. Corticosteroids
also activate anti-inﬂammatory genes, such as mitogen-
activated protein (MAP) kinase phosphatase-1, and
increase the expression of β2-receptors. Most of the
metabolic and endocrine side effects of corticosteroids
are also mediated through transcriptional activation.
Diseases of the Respiratory System
72
SECTION II
TABLE 8-4
FACTORS AFFECTING CLEARANCE OF THEOPHYLLINE
Increased Clearance
Enzyme induction (rifampicin, phenobarbitone, ethanol)
Smoking (tobacco, marijuana)
High-protein, low-carbohydrate diet
Barbecued meat
Childhood
Decreased Clearance
Enzyme inhibition (cimetidine, erythromycin, ciproﬂoxacin, 
allopurinol, zileuton, zaﬁrlukast)
Congestive heart failure
Liver disease
Pneumonia
Viral infection and vaccination
High-carbohydrate diet
Old age
Clinical use
ICSs are by far the most effective con-
trollers in the management of asthma and are beneﬁcial
in treating asthma of any severity and age. ICSs are usu-
ally given twice daily, but some may be effective once
daily in mildly symptomatic patients. ICSs rapidly
improve the symptoms of asthma, and lung function
improves over several days. ICSs are effective in prevent-
ing asthma symptoms, such as EIA and nocturnal exac-
erbations, but they also prevent severe exacerbations.
ICSs reduce AHR, but maximal improvement may take
several months of therapy. Early treatment with ICSs
appears to prevent irreversible changes in airway func-
tion that occur with chronic asthma. Withdrawal of ICSs
results in slow deterioration of asthma control, indicat-
ing that they suppress inﬂammation and symptoms but
do not cure the underlying condition. ICSs are now
given as ﬁrst-line therapy for patients with persistent
asthma, but if they do not control symptoms at low
doses,it is usual to add a LABA as the next step.
Side effects
Local side effects include hoarseness
(dysphonia) and oral candidiasis, which may be reduced
with the use of a large-volume spacer device. There has
been concern about systemic side effects from lung
absorption, but many studies have demonstrated that
ICSs have minimal systemic effects (Fig.8-6). At the high-
est recommended doses, there may be some suppres-
sion of plasma and urinary cortisol concentrations, but
there is no convincing evidence that long-term treat-
ment leads to impaired growth in children or to osteo-
porosis in adults. Indeed, effective control of asthma
with ICSs reduces the number of courses of oral corti-
costeroids that are needed and thus reduces systemic
exposure to ICSs.
Systemic Corticosteroids
Corticosteroids (hydro-
cortisone or methylprednisolone) are used intra-
venously for the treatment of acute severe asthma,
although several studies now show that oral corticos-
teroids are as effective and easier to administer. A course
of oral corticosteroids (usually prednisone or pred-
nisolone 30–45 mg od for 5–10 days) is used to treat
acute exacerbations of asthma;no tapering of the dose is
needed. Approximately 1% of asthma patients may
require maintenance treatment with oral corticosteroids;
the lowest dose necessary to maintaining control needs
to be determined.Systemic side effects,including truncal
obesity, bruising, osteoporosis, diabetes, hypertension,
gastric ulceration, proximal myopathy, depression, and
cataracts may be a major problem, and steroid-sparing
therapies may be considered if side effects are a signiﬁ-
cant problem. If patients require maintenance treatment
with oral corticosteroids, it is important to monitor bone
density so that preventive treatment with bisphospho-
nates (or estrogen in postmenopausal women) may be
initiated if bone density is low. IM triamcinolone ace-
tonide is a depot preparation that is occasionally used in
noncompliant patients, but proximal myopathy is a
major problem with this therapy.
Antileukotrienes
Cysteinyl-leukotrienes are potent
bronchoconstrictors, cause microvascular leakage, and
increase eosinophilic inﬂammation through the activa-
tion of cys-LT1-receptors. These inﬂammatory mediators
are produced predominantly by mast cells and, to a
lesser extent, eosinophils in asthma. Antileukotrienes,
such as montelukast and zaﬁrlukast, block cys-LT1-
receptors and provide a modest clinical beneﬁt in
asthma. They are less effective than ICSs in controlling
asthma and have less effect on airway inﬂammation but
are useful as an add-on therapy in some patients not
controlled with low doses of ICSs (although they are less
effective than LABAs). They are given orally once or
twice daily and are well tolerated. Some patients show a
better response than others to antileukotrienes, but this
Asthma
73
CHAPTER 8
MDI
Mouth and
pharynx
GI tract
Liver
Systemic
circulation
Systemic
side effects
Lungs
Absorption
from GI tract
Inactivation
in liver
“first pass”
~10-20% inhaled
~80-90% swallowed
(     spacer/mouth-wash)
FIGURE 8-6
Pharmacokinetics of inhaled corti-
costeroids. GI, gastrointestinal; MDI,
metered dose inhaler.
has not been convincingly linked to any genomic differ-
ences in the leukotriene pathway.
Cromones
Cromolyn 
sodium 
and 
nedocromil
sodium are asthma controller drugs that appear to
inhibit mast cell and sensory nerve activation and are
therefore 
effective 
in 
blocking 
trigger-induced
asthma, such as EIA, and allergen- and sulfur dioxide—
induced symptoms. Cromones have relatively little ben-
eﬁt in the long-term control of asthma because of their
short duration of action (they are needed at least four
times daily by inhalation). They are very safe, and
although they were popular in the treatment of child-
hood asthma, low doses of ICSs are now preferred
because they are more effective and have a proven
safety proﬁle.
Steroid-Sparing 
Therapies
Various immuno-
modulatory treatments have been used to reduce the
requirement for oral corticosteroids in patients with
severe asthma who have serious side effects with this
therapy. Methotrexate, cyclosporine, azathioprine, gold,
and IV gamma globulin have all been used as steroid-
sparing therapies, but none of these treatments has any
long-term beneﬁt, and each is associated with a rela-
tively high risk of side effects.
Anti-IgE
Omalizumab is a blocking antibody that
neutralizes circulating IgE without binding to cell-
bound IgE; it thus inhibits IgE-mediated reactions. This
treatment has been shown to reduce the number of
exacerbations in patients with severe asthma and may
improve asthma control. However, the treatment is very
expensive and only suitable for highly selected patients
who are not controlled on maximal doses of inhaler
therapy and have a circulating IgE within a speciﬁed
range. Patients should be given a 3- to 4-month trial of
therapy to show objective beneﬁt. Omalizumab is usu-
ally given as a subcutaneous injection every 2 to 4 weeks
and appears not to have signiﬁcant side effects.
Immunotherapy
Speciﬁc immunotherapy using
injected extracts of pollens or house dust mite has not
been very effective in controlling asthma and may cause
anaphylaxis. Side effects may be reduced by sublingual
dosing. It is not recommended in most asthma treat-
ment guidelines because of lack of evidence of clinical
efﬁcacy.
Alternative Therapies
Nonpharmacologic treat-
ments, including hypnosis, acupuncture, chiropraxy,
breathing control,yoga,and speleotherapy,may be pop-
ular with some patients. However, placebo-controlled
studies have shown that each of these treatments lacks
efﬁcacy and cannot be recommended. However, they
are not detrimental and may be used as long as conven-
tional pharmacologic therapy is continued.
Future Therapies
It has proven very difﬁcult to
discover novel pharmaceutical therapies, particularly
because current therapy with corticosteroids and β2-
agonists is so effective in the majority of patients. How-
ever, there is a need for the development of new thera-
pies for patients with refractory asthma who have side
effects with systemic corticosteroids. Antagonists of
speciﬁc mediators have little or no beneﬁt in asthma,
apart from antileukotrienes, which have a rather weak
effect, presumably reﬂecting the fact that multiple
mediators are involved. Antagonists of chemokine
receptors, particularly CCR3, are in development and
may be more effective. Novel anti-inﬂammatory treat-
ments that are in clinical development include
inhibitors of phosphodiesterase-4, NFκB, p38 MAP
kinase, and phosphoinositide-3 kinase. However, these
drugs, which act on signal transduction pathways com-
mon to many cells, are likely to have troublesome side
effects, necessitating their delivery by inhalation. Safer
and more effective immunotherapy using T cell peptide
fragments of allergens or DNA vaccination are also
being investigated. Bacterial products, such as CpG
oligonucleotides that stimulate TH1 immunity or regula-
tory T cells,are also currently under evaluation.
MANAGEMENT 
OF 
CHRONIC 
ASTHMA
There are several aims of chronic therapy in asthma (see
Table 8-2). It is important to establish the diagnosis
objectively using spirometry or PEF measurements at
home. Triggers that worsen asthma control, such as
allergens or occupational agents, should be avoided, but
triggers such as exercise and fog, which result in tran-
sient symptoms, provide an indication that more con-
troller therapy is needed.
Stepwise Therapy
For patients with mild, inter-
mittent asthma, a short-acting β2-agonist is all that is
required (Fig. 8-7). However, use of a reliever medication
more than three times a week indicates the need for
Diseases of the Respiratory System
74
SECTION II
Short-acting β2-agonist as required for symptom relief
Mild
intermittent
Mild
persistent
Moderate
persistent
Severe
persistent
Very severe
persistent
ICS
Low dose
ICS
Low dose
LABA
ICS
High dose
ICS
High dose
LABA
LABA
OCS
FIGURE 8-7
Step-wise approach to asthma therapy according to the
severity of asthma and ability to control symptoms. ICS,
inhaled corticosteroid; LABA, long-acting β2-agonist; OCS,
oral corticosteroid.
regular controller therapy.The treatment of choice for all
patients is an ICS given twice daily. It is usual to start
with an intermediate dose (e.g., 200 μg bid of
beclomethasone dipropionate or equivalent) and to
decrease the dose if symptoms are controlled after 3
months. If symptoms are not controlled, an LABA should
be added, most conveniently by switching to a combi-
nation inhaler.The dose of controller should be adjusted
accordingly, as judged by the need for a rescue inhaler.
Low doses of theophylline or an antileukotriene may
also be considered as an add-on therapy, but these are
less effective than LABAs. In patients with severe
asthma, low-dose oral theophylline is also helpful, and
when there is irreversible airway narrowing, the long-
acting anticholinergic tiotropium bromide may be tried.
If asthma is not controlled despite the maximal recom-
mended dose of inhaled therapy, it is important to
check compliance and inhaler technique. In these
patients, maintenance treatment with an oral corticos-
teroid may be needed, and the lowest dose that main-
tains control should be used. Occasionally, omalizumab
may be tried in steroid-dependent asthmatics who are
not well controlled. After asthma is controlled, it is
important to slowly decrease therapy to ﬁnd the opti-
mal dose to control symptoms.
Education
Patients with asthma need to under-
stand how to use their medications and the difference
between reliever and controller therapies. Education
may improve compliance, particularly with ICSs. All
patients should be taught how to use their inhalers cor-
rectly. In particular, they need to understand how to
recognize worsening of asthma and how to step up
therapy. Written action plans have been shown to
reduce hospital admissions and morbidity in adults and
children and are recommended particularly in patients
with unstable disease who have frequent exacerbations.
but this is rarely a useful clinical sign.There is a marked
decrease in spirometric values and PEF. Arterial blood
gases on air show hypoxia and PaCO2 is usually low
because of hyperventilation. A normal or increasing
PaCO2 is an indication of impending respiratory failure
and requires immediate monitoring and therapy. Chest
radiography is not usually informative but may show
pneumonia or pneumothorax.
Asthma
75
CHAPTER 8
ACUTE SEVERE ASTHMA
Exacerbations of asthma are feared by patients and may
be life threatening. One of the main aims of controller
therapy is to prevent exacerbations; in this respect, ICS
and combination inhalers are very effective.
CLINICAL FEATURES
Patients are aware of increasing chest tightness, wheez-
ing, and dyspnea that are often not or poorly relieved by
their usual reliever inhaler. In severe exacerbations,
patients may be so breathless that they are unable to
complete sentences and may become cyanotic. Exami-
nation usually shows increased ventilation, hyperinﬂa-
tion, and tachycardia. Pulsus paradoxus may be present,
Treatment:
ACUTE SEVERE ASTHMA
A high concentration of oxygen should be given by face
mask to achieve oxygen saturation of above 90%. The
mainstay of treatment is high doses of short-acting
inhaled β2-agonists that are given either by nebulizer or
via a metered dose inhaler with a spacer. In severely ill
patients with impending respiratory failure, IV β2-
agonists may be given. An inhaled anticholinergic agent
may be added if there is not a satisfactory response to
β2-agonists alone because there are additive effects. In
patients who are refractory to inhaled therapies, a slow
infusion of aminophylline may be effective, but it is
important to monitor blood levels especially if patients
have already been treated with oral theophylline. Mag-
nesium sulfate given IV or by nebulizer has also been
shown to be effective when added to inhaled β2-
agonists, and is relatively well tolerated but is not rou-
tinely recommended. Prophylactic intubation may be
indicated for impending respiratory failure when the
PaCO2 is normal or increases.For patients with respiratory
failure, it is necessary to intubate and institute ventila-
tion. These patients may beneﬁt from an anesthetic,
such as halothane, if they have not responded to con-
ventional bronchodilators. Sedatives should never be
given because they may depress ventilation. Antibiotics
should not be used routinely unless there are signs of
pneumonia.
REFRACTORY ASTHMA
Although asthma is easily controlled in most patients with
appropriate medication, the disease is difﬁcult to control
in a small proportion of patients (∼5% of asthmatics)
despite maximal inhaled therapy. Some of these patients
require maintenance treatment with oral corticosteroids.
In managing these patients, it is important to investigate
and correct any mechanisms that may be aggravating
asthma.There are two major patterns of difﬁcult asthma:
some patients have persistent symptoms and poor lung
function despite appropriate therapy, and others may have
normal or near-normal lung function but intermittent,
severe (sometimes life-threatening) exacerbations.
MECHANISMS
The most common reason for poor control of asthma is
noncompliance with medication,
particularly ICS.
Compliance with ICS may be low because patients do
not feel any immediate clinical beneﬁt or may be con-
cerned about side effects. Compliance with ICS is
difficult to monitor because there are no useful plasma
measurements that can be made. Compliance may be
improved by giving the ICS as a combination with a
LABA that gives symptom relief. Compliance with oral
corticosteroids may be measured by suppression of
plasma cortisol and the expected concentration of pred-
nisone or prednisolone in the plasma. There are several
factors that may make asthma more difﬁcult to control,
including exposure to high ambient levels of allergens or
unidentiﬁed occupational agents. Severe rhinosinusitis
may make asthma more difﬁcult to control; upper air-
way disease should be vigorously treated. Gastroe-
sophageal reﬂux is common among asthmatics because
of bronchodilator therapy, but there is little evidence
that it is a signiﬁcant factor in worsening asthma, and
treatment of the reﬂux is not usually effective at improv-
ing asthma symptoms. Some patients may have chronic
infection with Mycoplasma pneumoniae or Chlamydophila
pneumoniae and beneﬁt from treatment with a macrolide
antibiotic. Drugs such as β-adrenergic blockers, aspirin,
and other cyclooxygenase (COX) inhibitors may worsen
asthma. Some women develop severe premenstrual
worsening of asthma, which is unresponsive to corticos-
teroids and requires treatment with progesterone or
gonadotropin-releasing factors. Few systemic diseases
make asthma more difﬁcult to control, but hyper- and
hypothyroidism may increase asthma symptoms and
should be investigated if suspected.
Relatively little is known about the pathology of
refractory asthma because biopsy studies are more difﬁ-
cult in these patients. Some patients show the typical
eosinophilic pattern of inﬂammation, but others have a
predominantly neutrophilic pattern. There may be an
increase in TH1 cells and CD8 lymphocytes compared
with mild asthma and increased expression of TNF α.
Structural changes in the airway, including ﬁbrosis,
angiogenesis, and airway smooth muscle thickening, are
more commonly seen in these patients.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Some patients who apparently have difﬁcult-to-control
asthma also have vocal cord dysfunction, resulting in
wheezing or stridor.This symptom is thought to be an
attention-seeking hysterical conversion syndrome and
may lead to escalating doses of asthma therapy, with
some patients taking high doses of oral corticosteroids. It
may be recognized by the characteristic discrepancy
between tests of forced expiration, such as FEV1 and
PEF, and relatively normal airway resistance. Direct
inspection by laryngoscopy may conﬁrm adduction of
the vocal cords at the time of symptoms.This condition
is usually difﬁcult to manage, but it is important that
patients be weaned off oral and ICSs. Speech therapy is
sometimes beneﬁcial. Some patients with COPD may
be diagnosed as asthmatic and may show the characteris-
tic poor response to corticosteroids and bronchodilators,
but this situation is complicated by the fact that some
patients with COPD also have concomitant asthma.
CORTICOSTEROID-RESISTANT ASTHMA
A few patients with asthma show a poor response to
corticosteroid therapy and may have various molecular
abnormalities that impair the anti-inﬂammatory action of
corticosteroids. Complete resistance to corticosteroids is
extremely uncommon and affects fewer than one in
1000 patients. It is deﬁned by a failure to respond to a
high dose of oral prednisone or prednisolone (40 mg od
over 2 weeks), ideally with a 2-week run-in with
matched placebo. More common is reduced responsive-
ness to corticosteroids in which control of asthma
requires oral corticosteroids (corticosteroid-dependent
asthma). In all patients with poor responsiveness to cor-
ticosteroids, there is a reduction in the response of circu-
lating monocytes and lymphocytes to the anti-inﬂammatory
effects of corticosteroids in vitro and reduced skin
blanching in response to topical corticosteroids. Several
mechanisms have been described, including an excess of
the transcription factor AP-1, an increase in the alterna-
tively spliced form of the glucocorticoid receptor GR-β,
an abnormal pattern of histone acetylation in response
to corticosteroids, a defect in IL-10 production, and a
reduction in histone deacetylase activity (as in COPD).
These observations suggest that there are likely to be
heterogeneous mechanisms for corticosteroid resistance;
whether these mechanisms are genetically determined
has yet to be determined.
BRITTLE ASTHMA
Some patients show chaotic variations in lung function
despite taking appropriate therapy. Some show a persis-
tent pattern of variability and may require oral corticos-
teroids or, at times, continuous infusion of β2-agonists
(type I brittle asthma), and others have generally normal
or near-normal lung function but precipitous, unpre-
dictable decreases in lung function that may result in
death (type 2 brittle asthma). These latter patients are
difﬁcult to manage because they do not respond well to
corticosteroids, and the worsening of asthma does not
reverse well with inhaled bronchodilators. The most
effective therapy is subcutaneous epinephrine, which
suggests that the worsening is likely to be a localized air-
way anaphylactic reaction with edema. Some of these
Diseases of the Respiratory System
76
SECTION II
patients may be allergic to speciﬁc foods.These patients
should be taught to self-administer epinephrine and
should carry a medical warning accordingly.
antileukotrienes should be effective in these patients,
they are no more effective than in those with allergic
asthma. Occasionally, aspirin desensitization is necessary,
but this should only be undertaken in specialized centers.
ASTHMA IN THE ELDERLY
Asthma may start at any age, including in elderly
patients.The principles of management are the same as
in other asthmatics, but side effects of therapy may be a
problem, including muscle tremor with β2-agonists and
more systemic side effects with ICSs. Comorbidities are
more frequent in this age group, and interactions with
drugs such as β2 blockers, COX inhibitors, and agents
that may affect theophylline metabolism need to be
considered. COPD is more likely in elderly patients and
may coexist with asthma. A trial of oral corticosteroids
may be very useful in documenting the steroid respon-
siveness of asthma.
PREGNANCY
Approximately one-third of asthmatic patients who are
pregnant improve during the course of a pregnancy,
one-third deteriorate, and one-third are unchanged. It is
important to maintain good control of asthma because
poor control may have adverse effects on fetal develop-
ment. Compliance may be a problem because there is
often concern about the effects of anti-asthma medica-
tions on fetal development. The drugs that have been
used for many years in asthma therapy have now been
shown to be safe and without teratogenic potential.
These drugs include short-acting β2-agonists, ICSs, and
theophylline; there is less safety information about
newer classes of drugs such as LABAs, antileukotrienes,
and anti-IgE. If an oral corticosteroid is needed, it is bet-
ter to use prednisone rather than prednisolone because it
cannot be converted to the active prednisolone by the
fetal liver, thus protecting the fetus from systemic effects
of the corticosteroid. There is no contraindication to
breast-feeding when patients are using these drugs.
CIGARETTE SMOKING
Approximately 20% of asthmatics smoke, which may
adversely affect asthma in several ways. Smoking asth-
matics have more severe disease, more frequent hospital
admissions, a faster decline in lung function, and a
higher risk of death from asthma than nonsmoking asth-
matics. There is evidence that smoking interferes with
the anti-inﬂammatory actions of corticosteroids, necessi-
tating higher doses for asthma control. Smoking cessa-
tion improves lung function and reverses the steroid
resistance; thus, vigorous smoking cessation strategies
should be used. Some patients report a temporary wors-
ening of asthma when they ﬁrst stop smoking, which
Asthma
77
CHAPTER 8
Treatment:
REFRACTORY ASTHMA
Refractory asthma is difﬁcult to control, by deﬁnition. It
is important to check compliance and the correct use of
inhalers and to identify and eliminate any underlying
triggers. Low doses of theophylline may be helpful in
some patients, and theophylline withdrawal has been
found to worsen many patients’ symptoms. Most of
these patients require maintenance treatment with oral
corticosteroids, and the minimal dose that achieves sat-
isfactory control should be determined by careful dose
titration. Steroid-sparing therapies are rarely effective. In
some patients with allergic asthma,omalizumab is effec-
tive, particularly when there are frequent exacerbations.
There is some evidence that anti-TNF therapy may be
effective, but this is controversial and very expensive. A
few patients may beneﬁt from infusions of β2-agonists.
New therapies are needed for these patients, who cur-
rently consume a disproportionate amount of health
care spending.
SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS
Although asthma is usually straightforward to manage,
there are some situations that may require additional
investigation and different therapy.
ASPIRIN-SENSITIVE ASTHMA
A small proportion (∼1%) of patients with asthma have
worse disease with aspirin and other COX inhibitors,
although this is much more commonly seen in severe
patients and in those with frequent hospital admission.
Aspirin-sensitive asthma is a well-deﬁned subtype of
asthma that is usually preceded by perennial rhinitis and
nasal polyps in nonatopic patients with a late onset of the
disease. Aspirin, even in small doses, characteristically
provokes rhinorrhea, conjunctival irritation, facial ﬂush-
ing, and wheezing. There is a genetic predisposition to
increased production of cysteinyl-leukotrienes with
functional polymorphism of cys-leukotriene synthase.
Asthma is triggered by COX inhibitors but is persistent
even in their absence. All nonselective COX inhibitors
should be avoided, but selective COX-2 inhibitors are
apparently safe to use when an anti-inﬂammatory anal-
gesic is needed. Patients with aspirin-sensitive asthma
respond to usual therapy with an ICS. Although
may be caused by the loss of the bronchodilating effect
of NO in cigarette smoke.
SURGERY
If asthma is well controlled, there is no contraindication
to general anesthesia and intubation. Patients who are
treated with oral corticosteroids will have adrenal sup-
pression and should be treated with an increased dose of
oral corticosteroid immediately before surgery. Patients
with FEV1 below 80% of their normal levels should also
be given a boost of oral corticosteroids before surgery.
High maintenance doses of corticosteroids may be a
contraindication to surgery because of increased risks of
infection and delayed wound healing.
BRONCHOPULMONARY ASPERGILLOSIS
BPA is uncommon and results from an allergic pul-
monary reaction to inhaled spores of Aspergillus fumigatus
and, occasionally, other Aspergillus spp. A skin prick test
to A. fumigatus is always positive, but serum Aspergillus
precipitins are low or undetectable. Characteristically,
there are ﬂeeting eosinophilic inﬁltrates in the lungs,
particularly in the upper lobes. As airways become
blocked with mucoid plugs rich in eosinophils, patients
may cough up brown plugs and have hemoptysis. BPA
may result in bronchiectasis, particularly affecting central
airways, if not suppressed by corticosteroids. Asthma is
controlled in the usual way by ICSs, but it is necessary
to give a course of oral corticosteroids if there is any
sign of worsening or pulmonary shadowing is found.
Treatment with the oral antifungal itraconazole is bene-
ﬁcial in preventing exacerbations.
FURTHER READINGS
ADCOCK IM et al. New targets for drug development in asthma.
Lancet 372:1073, 2008
ASHER MI et al:Worldwide time trends in the prevalence of symp-
toms of asthma, allergic rhinoconjunctivitis, and eczema in
childhood: ISAAC Phases One and Three repeat multicountry
cross-sectional surveys. Lancet 368:733, 2006
BARNES PJ: Immunology of asthma and chronic obstructive pul-
monary disease. Nat Immunol Rev 8:183, 2000
———, New drugs for asthma. Nat Rev Drug Discov 3:831, 2004
———, How corticosteroids control inﬂammation. Br J Pharmacol
148:245, 2006
———, Cytokine networks in asthma and chronic obstructive pul-
monary disease. J Clin Invest 118:3546, 2008
———, ADCOCK IM: How do corticosteroids work in asthma? Ann
Intern Med 139:359, 2003
——— et al: Inﬂammatory mediators of asthma:An update. Pharma-
col Rev 50:515, 1998
——— et al: Asthma and COPD. London,Academic Press, 2002
——— et al. Asthma and COPD, 2d ed. Amsterdam, Elsevier, 2009
BATEMAN ED et al: Global strategy for asthma management and pre-
vention: GINA executive summary. Eur Respir J 31:143, 2008
BUSSE WW, LEMANSKE RF:Asthma. N Engl J Med 344:350, 2001
COOKSON W, MOFFATT M: Making sense of asthma genes. N Engl J
Med 351:1794, 2004
EDER W et al:The asthma epidemic. N Engl J Med 355:2226, 2006
FANTA CH:Asthma. N Engl J Med 360:1002, 2009
FAROOQUE SP, LEE TH: Aspirin-sensitive respiratory disease. Ann
Rev Physiol 71:465, 2009
HAMID Q, TULIC M: Immunobiology of asthma. Ann Rev Physiol
71:489, 2009
HEANEY LG, ROBINSON DS: Severe asthma treatment: Need for
characterising patients. Lancet 365:974, 2005
MAPP CE et al: Occupational asthma. Am J Respir Crit Care Med
172:280, 2005
O’BYRNE PM, PARAMESWARAN K: Pharmacological management of
mild or moderate persistent asthma. Lancet 368:794, 2006
SZCZEKLIK A, STEVENSON DD: Aspirin-induced asthma: Advances in
pathogenesis,
diagnosis,
and management.
J Allergy Clin
Immunol 111:913, 2003
WENZEL SE: Asthma: Deﬁning of the persistent adult phenotypes.
Lancet 368:804, 2006
———, BUSSE WW: Severe asthma: Lessons from the Severe Asthma
Research Program. J Allergy Clin Immunol 119:14, 2007
Diseases of the Respiratory System
78
SECTION II
Joel N. Kline
I
Gary W. Hunninghake
HYPERSENSITIVITY PNEUMONITIS
First described in 1874, hypersensitivity pneumonitis
(HP), or extrinsic allergic alveolitis, is an inﬂammatory
disorder of the lung involving alveolar walls and terminal
airways that is induced in a susceptible host by repeated
inhalation of a variety of organic agents. Factors respon-
sible for the expression of HP include both those related
to the host (susceptibility) and the inciting agent. Causes
of HP are typically designated with colorful names
denoting the occupational or avocational risk associated
with the disease; for example,“farmer’s lung” is the term
most commonly used for HP caused by inhalation of
antigens present in moldy hay, such as thermophilic
actinomyces, Micropolyspora faeni, and Aspergillus spp. The
frequency of HP varies with the environmental exposure
and the speciﬁc antigen involved.
ETIOLOGY
Agents implicated as causes of HP are diverse and include
those listed in Table 9-1. In the United States, the most
common types of HP are farmer’s lung, bird fancier’s
HYPERSENSITIVITY PNEUMONITIS
AND PULMONARY INFILTRATES
WITH EOSINOPHILIA
lung, and chemical worker’s lung. In farmer’s lung, inhala-
tion of proteins such as thermophilic bacteria and fungal
spores that are present in moldy bedding and feed are
most commonly responsible for the development of HP.
These antigens are probably also responsible for the etiol-
ogy of mushroom worker’s disease (moldy composted
growth medium is the source of the proteins) and bagas-
sosis (moldy sugar cane is the source). Bird fancier’s lung
(and the related disorders of duck fever, turkey handler’s
lung, and dove pillow’s lung) is a response to inhalation of
proteins from feathers and droppings. Chemical worker’s
lung is an example of how simple chemicals, such as iso-
cyanates, may also cause immune-mediated diseases.
PATHOGENESIS
The ﬁnding that precipitating antibodies against extracts
of moldy hay were demonstrable in most patients with
farmer’s lung led to the early conclusion that HP was an
immune complex–mediated reaction. Subsequent inves-
tigations of HP in human beings and animal models
provided evidence for the importance of cell-mediated
hypersensitivity. The very early (acute) reaction is
CHAPTER 9
CHAPTER 9
79
I Hypersensitivity Pneumonitis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
Etiology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
Pathogenesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
Clinical Presentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 81
Diagnosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 81
Differential Diagnosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
I Pulmonary Inﬁltrates with Eosinophilia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 84
I Global Picture of Hypersensitivity Pneumonitis
and Pulmonary Inﬁltrates with Eosinophilia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85
I Further Readings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85
Diseases of the Respiratory System
80
SECTION II
TABLE 9-1
SELECTED EXAMPLES OF HYPERSENSITIVITY PNEUMONITIS (HP)
DISEASE
ANTIGEN
SOURCE OF ANTIGEN
Bagassosis
Thermophilic actinomycetesa
“Moldy” bagasse (sugar cane)
Bird fancier’s, breeder’s, or
Parakeet, pigeon, chicken, turkey proteins
Avian droppings or feathers
handler’s lungb
Cephalosporium HP
Contaminated basement (sewage)
Cephalosporium spp.
Cheese washer’s lung
Penicillium casei
Moldy cheese
Chemical worker’s lungb
Isocyanates
Polyurethane foam, varnishes, lacquer
Coffee worker’s lung
Coffee bean dust
Coffee beans
Compost lung
Aspergillus spp.
Compost
Detergent worker’s disease
Bacillus subtilis
Detergent
enzymes (subtilisins)
Familial HP
Bacillus subtilis
Contaminated wood dust in walls
Farmer’s lungb
Thermophilic actinomycetesa
“Moldy” hay, grain, silage
Fish food lung
Unknown
Fish food
Fish meal worker’s lung
Fish meal dust
Fish meal
Furrier’s lung
Animal fur dust
Animal pelts
Hot tub lung
Cladosporium spp., Mycobacterium
Mold on ceiling; contaminated water
avium complex
Humidiﬁer or air-conditioner
Aureobasidium pullulans, Candida albicans,
Contaminated water in humidiﬁcation
lung (ventilation 
Thermophilic actinomycetes,a
or forced-air air-conditioning systems
pneumonitis)
mycobacterium spp., other
microorganisms
Japanese summer-type HP
Trichosporon cutaneum, T. asahii,
House dust? Bird droppings
and T. mucoides
Laboratory worker’s HP
Male rat urine
Laboratory rat
Lycoperdonosis
Lycoperdon puffballs
Puffball spores
Malt worker’s lung
Aspergillus fumigatus or A. clavatus
Moldy barley
Maple bark disease
Cryptostroma corticale
Maple bark
Metalworking ﬂuid lung
Mycobacterium spp., Pseudomonas spp.
Contaminated metalworking ﬂuid
Miller’s lung
Sitophilus granarius (wheat weevil)
Infested wheat ﬂour
Miscellaneous medications
Amiodarone, bleomycin, efavirenz,
Medication
gemcitabine, hydralazine,
hydroxyurea, isoniazid, methotrexate,
paclitaxel, penicillin, procarbazine, 
propranolol, riluzole, sirolimus,
sulfasalazine
Mushroom worker’s lung
Thermophilic actinomycetes,a Hypsizigus
Mushroom compost; mushrooms
marmoreus, Bunashimeji spp., and other
exotic mushrooms
Pituitary snuff taker’s lung
Animal proteins
Heterologous pituitary snuff
Potato riddler’s lung
Thermophilic actinomycetes,
“Moldy” hay around potatoes
aAspergillus spp.
Sauna taker’s lung
Aureobasidium spp., other
Contaminated sauna water
Sausage worker’s lung
Penicillium nalgiovense
Dry sausage mold
Sequoiosis
Aureobasidium spp., Graphium spp.
Redwood sawdust
Streptomyces albus HP
Streptomyces albus
Contaminated fertilizer
Suberosis
Penicillium glabrum and 
Cork dust
Chrysonilia sitophila
Tap water lung
Mycobacteria spp.
Contaminated tap water
Thatched roof disease
Sacchoromonospora viridis
Dried grasses and leaves
Tobacco worker’s disease
Aspergillus spp.
Mold on tobacco
Winegrower’s lung
Botrytis cinerea
Mold on grapes
Wood trimmer’s disease
Rhizopus spp., Mucor spp.
Contaminated wood trimmings
Woodman’s disease
Penicillium spp.
Oak and maple trees
Woodworker’s lung
Wood dust, Alternaria
Oak, cedar, pine, and mahogany dusts
aThermophilic actinomycetes species include Micropolyspora faeni, Thermoactinomyces vulgaris, T. saccharrii, T. viridis, and T. candidus.
bMost common causes of hypersensitivity pneumonitis in the United States.
characterized by an increase in polymorphonuclear
leukocytes in the alveoli and small airways. This early
lesion is followed by an inﬂux of mononuclear cells into
the lung and the formation of granulomas that appear to
be the result of a classic delayed (T cell–mediated) hyper-
sensitivity reaction to repeated inhalation of antigen and
adjuvant-active materials. Studies in animal models sug-
gest that the disease is a TH1-mediated immune response
to antigen, with interferon γ, interleukin (IL) 12, and
possibly IL-18 contributing to disease expression. Most
likely, multiple cytokines [including also IL-1β, trans-
forming growth factor (TGF) β, tumor necrosis factor
(TNF) α and others] interact to promote HP; their
source includes both alveolar macrophages and T lym-
phocytes in the lung. Recent data support a genetic
predisposition to the development of HP; certain poly-
morphisms of the TNF-α promoter region reportedly
confer an enhanced susceptibility to pigeon breeder’s
disease.
The attraction and accumulation of inﬂammatory cells
in the lung may be caused by one or more of the follow-
ing mechanisms: induction of the adhesion molecules
L-selectin and E-selectin, elaboration by dendritic cells of
CC chemokine 1 (DC-CK-1/CCL18), and increased
expression of CXCR3/CXCL10 by CD4+ and CD8+
lymphocytes. Increased levels of Fas protein and FasL in
the lung (which would be expected to suppress inﬂam-
mation by induction of T cell apoptosis) is counterbalanced
by increased expression of the inducible antiapoptotic
gene Bcl-xL,resulting in a lower overall level of pulmonary
lymphocyte apoptosis in HP patients.
Bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) in patients with HP
consistently demonstrates an increase in T lymphocytes
in lavage ﬂuid (a ﬁnding that is also observed in patients
with other granulomatous lung disorders). Patients with
recent or continual exposure to antigen may have an
increase in polymorphonuclear leukocytes in lavage
ﬂuid; this has been associated with lung ﬁbrosis. A role
for oxidant injury has been proposed in HP. Several
markers of oxidative stress are reported to be increased
during exacerbation of HP and are reduced by treat-
ment with glucocorticoids.
CLINICAL PRESENTATION
The clinical picture is that of an interstitial pneumonitis,
which varies from patient to patient and seems related to
the frequency and intensity of exposure to the causative
antigen and perhaps other host factors. The presentation
can be acute, subacute, or chronic. In the acute form,
symptoms such as cough, fever, chills, malaise, and dysp-
nea may occur 6–8 h after exposure to the antigen and
usually clear within a few days if there is no further expo-
sure to antigen.The subacute form often appears insidiously
over a period of weeks marked by cough and dyspnea
and may progress to cyanosis and severe dyspnea requiring
hospitalization. In some patients, a subacute form of the
disease may persist after an acute presentation of the dis-
order, especially if there is continued exposure to antigen.
In most patients with the acute or subacute form of HP,
the symptoms, signs, and other manifestations of HP dis-
appear within days, weeks, or months if the causative
agent is no longer inhaled. Transformation to a chronic
form of the disease may occur in patients with continued
antigen exposure, but the frequency of such progression is
uncertain.
The chronic form of HP may be clinically indistin-
guishable from pulmonary ﬁbrosis due to a wide variety
of causes. Physical examination may reveal clubbing.This
stage may progressively worsen, resulting in dependence
on supplemental oxygen, pulmonary hypertension, and
respiratory failure. Pulmonary ﬁbrosis is the clinical man-
ifestation of HP with the greatest predictive value for
mortality. An indolent, gradually progressive form of the
disease can be associated with cough and exertional dys-
pnea without a history consistent with acute or subacute
manifestations. Such a gradual onset frequently occurs
with low-dose exposure to the antigen.
DIAGNOSIS
All forms of the disease may be associated with elevations
in erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein,
rheumatoid factor, and serum immunoglobulins. After
acute exposure to antigen, neutrophilia and lymphopenia
are frequently present. Eosinophilia is not a feature.
Examination for serum precipitins against suspected anti-
gens, such as those listed in Table 9-1, is an important part
of the diagnostic workup and should be performed on
any patient with interstitial lung disease, especially if a
suggestive exposure history is elicited. If found, precipitins
indicate sufﬁcient exposure to the causative agent for
generation of an immunologic response.The diagnosis of
HP is not established solely by the presence of precipitins,
however, because precipitins are found in sera of many
individuals exposed to appropriate antigens who demon-
strate no other evidence of HP. False-negative results may
occur because of poor-quality antigens or an inappropri-
ate choice of antigens. Extraction of antigens from the
suspected source may at times be helpful.
The chest x-ray shows no speciﬁc or distinctive
changes in HP. It can be normal even in symptomatic
patients.The acute or subacute phases may be associated
with poorly deﬁned, patchy, or diffuse inﬁltrates or with
discrete, nodular inﬁltrates. In the chronic phase, the
chest x-ray usually shows a diffuse reticulonodular inﬁl-
trate. Honeycombing may eventually develop as the con-
dition progresses. Apical sparing is common, suggesting
that disease severity correlates with inhaled antigen load,
but no particular distribution or pattern is classic for HP.
Abnormalities rarely seen in HP include pleural effusion
or thickening and hilar adenopathy. High-resolution
Hypersensitivity Pneumonitis and Pulmonary Inﬁltrates with Eosinophilia
81
CHAPTER 9
chest CT has become the procedure of choice for
imaging of HP, and a consensus is developing as to the
typical appearance of the disease. Although pathogno-
monic features have not been identiﬁed, acute HP may
appear with conﬂuent alveolar opaciﬁcation. In subacute
disease, centrilobular nodules and “ground-glass” changes
predominate in the lower lobes, and expiratory views
may demonstrate air trapping; this pattern is more com-
mon in individuals whose exposure to antigen continues
rather than those in whom removal from antigen expo-
sure has occurred. In chronic HP, patchy emphysema is
seen more often than interstitial fibrosis; subpleural
linear opacities and honeycombing are common, and
these changes may be found throughout the lung. Hilar
or mediastinal adenopathy is not associated with HP
(Fig. 9-1).
Pulmonary function studies in all forms of HP may
show a restrictive or an obstructive pattern with loss of
lung volumes, impaired diffusion capacity, decreased
compliance, and exercise-induced hypoxemia. Resting
hypoxemia may also be found. Bronchospasm and
bronchial hyperreactivity are sometimes found in acute
HP. With antigen avoidance, the pulmonary function
abnormalities are usually reversible, but they may gradu-
ally increase in severity or may occur rapidly after acute
or subacute exposure to antigen.
BAL is used in some centers to aid in diagnostic eval-
uation. A marked lymphocytic alveolitis on BAL is
almost universal, although not pathognomonic. Lym-
phocytes typically have a decreased helper/suppressor
ratio and are activated. Alveolar neutrophilia is also
prominent acutely but tends to fade in the absence of
recurrent exposure. Bronchoalveolar mastocytosis may
correlate with disease activity.
Lung biopsy, obtained through ﬂexible bronchoscopy,
open-lung procedures, or thoracoscopy, may be diagnos-
tic.Although the histopathology is distinctive, it may not
be pathognomonic of HP (Fig. 9-2).When the biopsy
is taken during the active phase of disease, typical ﬁnd-
ings include an interstitial alveolar inﬁltrate consisting of
plasma cells, lymphocytes, and occasional eosinophils
and neutrophils, usually accompanied by loose, non-
caseating peribronchial granulomas. Interstitial ﬁbrosis
may be present but most often is mild in earlier stages of
the disease. Some degree of bronchiolitis is found in
about half of cases. Rarely, bronchiolitis obliterans with
organizing pneumonia (BOOP) (Chap. 19) may be pre-
sent. The triad of mononuclear bronchiolitis; interstitial
inﬁltrates of lymphocytes and plasma cells; and single,
nonnecrotizing, and randomly scattered parenchymal
granulomas without mural vascular involvement is con-
sistent with but not speciﬁc for HP.
A prediction rule for the clinical diagnosis of HP has been
developed by the International Hypersensitivity Pneu-
monitis Study Group. Six signiﬁcant predictors of HP
(exposure to a known antigen, positive predictive antibod-
ies to the antigen, recurrent episodes of symptoms, inspira-
tory crackles, symptoms developing 4–8 hours after
exposure, and weight loss) were retrospectively developed
and then validated in a separate cohort. This diagnostic
paradigm has a high predictive value in the diagnosis of
HP without the need for invasive testing. In cases where
only a subset of the criteria are fulﬁlled, the diagnosis is
less clearly established. It is clear, however, that the diagnosis
of HP is established by (1) consistent symptoms, physical
Diseases of the Respiratory System
82
SECTION II
FIGURE 9-1
Chest CT scan of a patient with acute hypersensitivity pneu-
monitis in which scattered regions of ground-glass and
nodular inﬁltrates are seen bilaterally. (Courtesy of JS Wilson,
with permission.)
FIGURE 9-2
Open-lung biopsy from a patient with acute hypersensitivity
pneumonitis demonstrating loose, nonnecrotizing granulomas
and thickened interstitium with an associated interstitial inﬂam-
matory response. (Courtesy of B DeYoung, with permission.)
ﬁndings, pulmonary function tests, and radiographic tests;
(2) a history of exposure to a recognized antigen; and (3)
ideally, identiﬁcation of an antibody to that antigen. In
some circumstances, BAL, lung biopsy, or both may be
needed.The most important tool in diagnosing HP con-
tinues to be a high index of suspicion!
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Chronic HP may often be difﬁcult to distinguish from a
number of other interstitial lung disorders (Chap. 19). A
negative history for use of relevant drugs and no evi-
dence of a systemic disorder usually exclude the pres-
ence of drug-induced lung disease or a collagen vascular
disorder. BAL often shows predominance of neutrophils
in idiopathic pulmonary ﬁbrosis (IPF) and a predomi-
nance of CD4+ lymphocytes in sarcoidosis. Hilar or
paratracheal lymphadenopathy or evidence of multisys-
tem involvement also favors the diagnosis of sarcoidosis.
In some patients, a lung biopsy may be required to dif-
ferentiate chronic HP from other interstitial diseases.
The lung disease associated with acute or subacute HP
may clinically resemble other disorders that present with
systemic symptoms and recurrent pulmonary inﬁltrates,
including the allergic bronchopulmonary mycoses and
other eosinophilic pneumonias. Gene cluster analysis of
DNA from lung biopsies of patients with ﬁbrotic lung
disease has shown a signiﬁcantly different gene expres-
sion proﬁle in HP and IPF. Whereas HP biopsies
expressed T cell and other genes related to inﬂamma-
tion, the IPF patients had greater expression of genes
associated with pulmonary remodeling,
especially
epithelial and myoﬁbroblast genes.Although, this ﬁnding
may be related to the disease stage in which the disor-
ders were diagnosed, they suggest that such analyses may
be clinically useful in the future.
Eosinophilic pneumonia is often associated with
asthma and is typiﬁed by peripheral eosinophilia; neither
of these is a feature of HP. Allergic bronchopulmonary
aspergillosis (ABPA) is the most common example of
the allergic bronchopulmonary mycoses and is some-
times confused with HP because of the presence of pre-
cipitating antibodies to Aspergillus fumigatus. ABPA is
associated with allergic (atopic) asthma. Acute HP may
be confused with organic dust toxic syndrome (ODTS), a
condition that is more common than HP. ODTS occurs
after heavy exposure to organic dusts and is character-
ized by transient fever and muscle aches with or without
dyspnea and cough. Serum precipitins are absent, and
the chest x-ray is usually normal. This distinction is
important because ODTS is a self-limited disorder
without signiﬁcant long-term sequelae, but continued
antigen exposure in patients with HP can result in per-
manent disability. Massive exposure to moldy silage may
result in a syndrome termed pulmonary mycotoxicosis, with
fever, chills, and cough and the presence of pulmonary
inﬁltrates within a few hours of exposure. No previous
sensitization is required, and precipitins are absent to
Aspergillus spp., the suspected causative agent.
Hypersensitivity Pneumonitis and Pulmonary Inﬁltrates with Eosinophilia
83
CHAPTER 9
Treatment:
HYPERSENSITIVITY PNEUMONITIS
Because effective treatment depends largely on avoid-
ing the antigen, identification of the causative agent
and its source is essential.This is usually possible if the
physician takes a careful environmental and occupa-
tional history or, if necessary, visits the patient’s envi-
ronment. The simplest way to avoid the incriminated
agent is to remove the patient from the environment
or the source of the agent from the patient’s environ-
ment. This recommendation cannot be taken lightly
when it completely changes the lifestyle or livelihood
of the patient. In many cases, however, the source of
exposure (birds, humidifiers) can easily be removed.
Pollen masks, personal dust respirators, airstream hel-
mets, and ventilated helmets with a supply of fresh air
are increasingly efficient means of purifying inhaled
air. If symptoms recur or physiologic abnormalities
progress despite these measures, then more effective
measures to avoid antigen exposure must be pursued.
The chronic form of HP typically results from low-
grade or recurrent exposure over many months to
years, and the lung disease may already be partially or
completely irreversible. These patients are usually
advised to avoid all possible contact with the offend-
ing agent.
Patients with the acute, recurrent form of HP usually
recover without need for glucocorticoids. Subacute HP
may be associated with severe symptoms and marked
physiologic impairment and may continue to progress
for several days despite hospitalization. Urgent estab-
lishment of the diagnosis and prompt institution of
glucocorticoid treatment are indicated in such
patients. Prednisone at a dosage of 1 mg/kg per day or
its equivalent is continued for 7–14 days and then
tapered over the ensuing 2–6 weeks at a rate that
depends on the patient’s clinical status. Patients with
chronic HP may gradually recover without therapy
after environmental control. In many patients, how-
ever, a trial of prednisone may be useful to obtain
maximal reversibility of the lung disease. After initial
prednisone therapy (1 mg/kg per day for 2–4 weeks),
the drug is tapered to the lowest dosage that will
maintain the functional status of the patient. Many
patients will not require or benefit from long-term
therapy if there is no further exposure to the antigen.
Regrettably, available studies demonstrate no effect of
glucocorticoid therapy on long-term prognosis of
patients with farmer’s lung.
PULMONARY INFILTRATES
WITH EOSINOPHILIA
Pulmonary inﬁltrates with eosinophilia (PIE, eosinophilic
pneumonias) include distinct individual syndromes charac-
terized by eosinophilic pulmonary inﬁltrates and, com-
monly, peripheral blood eosinophilia. Since Loefﬂer’s
initial description of a transient, benign syndrome of
migratory pulmonary inﬁltrates and peripheral blood
eosinophilia of unknown cause, this group of disorders has
been enlarged to include several diseases of both known
and unknown etiology (Table 9-2). These diseases may
be considered as immunologically mediated lung diseases
but are not to be confused with HP, in which eosinophilia
is not a feature.
When an eosinophilic pneumonia is associated with
bronchial asthma, it is important to determine if the
patient has atopic asthma and has wheal-and-ﬂare skin
reactivity to Aspergillus spp. or other relevant fungal anti-
gens. If so, other criteria should be sought for the diag-
nosis of ABPA (Table 9-3) or other, rarer examples of
allergic bronchopulmonary mycosis such as those caused
by Penicillium, Candida, Curvularia, or Helminthosporium
spp. A. fumigatus is the most common cause of ABPA.
The chest radiograph in ABPA may show transient,
recurrent inﬁltrates or may suggest the presence of prox-
imal bronchiectasis.High-resolution chest CT is a sensitive,
noninvasive technique for the recognition of proximal
bronchiectasis. The bronchial asthma of ABPA likely
involves an IgE-mediated hypersensitivity, whereas the
bronchiectasis associated with this disorder is thought to
result from a deposition of immune complexes in proxi-
mal airways. Adequate treatment usually requires the
long-term use of systemic glucocorticoids.
A travel history or evidence of recent immigration
should prompt the consideration of parasite-associated
disorders. Tropical eosinophilia is usually caused by ﬁlarial
infection; however, eosinophilic pneumonias also occur
with other parasites such as Ascaris spp., Ancylostoma spp.,
Toxocara spp.,
and Strongyloides stercoralis. Tropical
eosinophilia caused by Wuchereria bancrofti or Wuchereria
malayi infection occurs most commonly in southern Asia,
Africa, and South America and is treated successfully with
diethylcarbamazine. Even in cases of known foreign travel,
identiﬁcation of the causative agent is not always possible,
as exempliﬁed by 18 cases (two fatal) of acute eosinophilic
pneumonia reported among U.S. military personnel
deployed in Iraq.
In the United States, drug-induced eosinophilic pneumo-
nias are the most common cause of eosinophilic pul-
monary inﬁltrates.These are exempliﬁed by acute reactions
to nitrofurantoin, which may begin 2 h to 10 days after
nitrofurantoin is started, with symptoms of dry cough,
fever, chills, and dyspnea; an eosinophilic pleural effusion
accompanying patchy or diffuse pulmonary inﬁltrates
may also occur. Other drugs associated with eosinophilic
pneumonias include sulfonamides, penicillin, chlor-
propamide, thiazides, tricyclic antidepressants, hydralazine,
gold salts, isoniazid, indomethacin, and others. One
report has identiﬁed anti–TNF α monoclonal antibody
therapy as a cause of eosinophilic pneumonitis. Treat-
ment consists of withdrawal of the incriminated drugs
and the use of glucocorticoids, if necessary.
The group of idiopathic eosinophilic pneumonias
consists of diseases of varying severity. Loefﬂer’s syndrome
was originally reported as a benign, acute eosinophilic
pneumonia of unknown cause characterized by migrat-
ing pulmonary inﬁltrates and minimal clinical manifes-
tations. In some patients, these clinical characteristics
may prove to be secondary to parasites or drugs. Acute
eosinophilic pneumonia is an idiopathic acute febrile illness
of less than 7 days’ duration with severe hypoxemia, pul-
monary inﬁltrates, and no history of asthma. Chronic
eosinophilic pneumonia presents with signiﬁcant systemic
symptoms, including fever, chills, night sweats, cough,
anorexia, and weight loss of several weeks’ to months’
Diseases of the Respiratory System
84
SECTION II
TABLE 9-2
PULMONARY INFILTRATES WITH EOSINOPHILIA
Etiology Known
Allergic bronchopulmonary mycoses
Parasitic infestations
Drug reactions
Eosinophilia-myalgia syndrome
Idiopathic
Loefﬂer’s syndrome
Acute eosinophilic pneumonia
Chronic eosinophilic pneumonia
Allergic granulomatosis of Churg and Strauss
Hypereosinophilic syndrome
TABLE 9-3
DIAGNOSTIC FEATURES OF ALLERGIC
BRONCHOPULMONARY ASPERGILLOSIS (ABPA)
Main Diagnostic Criteria
Bronchial asthma
Pulmonary inﬁltrates
Peripheral eosinophilia (>1000/μL)
Immediate wheal-and-ﬂare response to
Aspergillus fumigatus
Serum precipitins to A. fumigatus
Elevated serum IgE
Central bronchiectasis
Other Diagnostic Features
History of brownish plugs in sputum
Culture of A. fumigatus from sputum
Elevated IgE (and IgG) class antibodies speciﬁc
for A. fumigatus
duration. The chest x-ray classically shows peripheral
inﬁltrates. Some patients also have bronchial asthma of
the intrinsic or nonallergic type.Dramatic clearing of symp-
toms and chest x-rays is often noted within 48 hours
after initiation of glucocorticoid therapy.
The hypereosinophilic syndrome is characterized by the
presence of >1500 eosinophils per microliter of periph-
eral blood for 6 months or longer; lack of evidence for
parasitic, allergic, or other known causes of eosinophilia;
and signs or symptoms of multisystem organ dysfunc-
tion. Consistent features are blood and bone marrow
eosinophilia with tissue inﬁltration by relatively mature
eosinophils. The heart may be involved with tricuspid
valve abnormalities or endomyocardial ﬁbrosis and a
restrictive, biventricular cardiomyopathy. Other organs
affected typically include the lungs, liver, spleen, skin,
and nervous system.Therapy for patients with the disor-
der consists of glucocorticoids, hydroxyurea, or both
plus therapy as needed for cardiac dysfunction, which is
frequently responsible for much of the morbidity and
mortality associated with this syndrome. Pulmonary
eosinophilia has also been associated with T cell lym-
phoma and has been reported after lung and bone marrow
transplantation.
GLOBAL PICTURE OF HYPERSENSITIVITY
PNEUMONITIS AND PULMONARY
INFILTRATES WITH EOSINOPHILIA
HP is more prevalent outside of the United
States, and the range of antigen responses is
somewhat 
different.
Internationally,
bird
breeder’s lung is the most common form of HP. Rather
than being associated with avocational exposures, bird-
raising practices, highlighted by the emerging threat of
avian inﬂuenza, led to substantial exposure to workers
involved in poultry husbandry and processing. This
increases antigen exposure enormously compared with
U.S. workers and enhances the risk of HP. Importantly, it
is the most common cause of pediatric HP and has been
reported in individuals as young as 4 years, when it has
presented as a chronic cough.
Farmer’s lung, one of the earliest reported causes of
HP, is now more prevalent outside the United States, but
it appears to be waning worldwide. This is likely in
response to changing agricultural practices; increased use
of impermeable barriers in hay storage has reduced the
proliferation of thermophilic bacteria and thus HP.
In certain cases, the international manifestations of
HP resemble those of the U.S. disease. Many industrial-
ized nations have increasingly reported HP caused by
mycobacteria and pseudomonads in contaminated
metalworking ﬂuids; the prevalence of these environmen-
tal contaminants greatly depends on workplace hygiene
practices. Some forms of HP are almost exclusively geo-
graphically limited; an example of this is summer-type HP
in Japan. Likewise, cork worker’s pneumonitis (subero-
sis), caused by exposure to contaminated corks, is almost
exclusively seen in Spain and southern Europe because
of the regional cork industry. However, one of the
causative antigens (Chrysonilia sitophila) is also reported
to be an antigen in lung diseases associated with logging
in Canada. In Spain, esparto, a member of the grass fam-
ily, is used as a ﬁber for the weaving of mats, baskets, and
ropes; it is also incorporated into traditional plaster con-
struction. In both of its uses, it has been associated with
HP (most likely due to contamination with A. fumiga-
tus), again geographically limited because of the utility
of the product, though not of the underlying fungal
antigen. Exposure to exotic mushrooms is greater in Asia
than in the United States and has recently been linked
to cases of HP.
PIE is also a greater international than U.S. health
burden. In this case, parasitic infestation is far more
common than drug-induced lung disease, but the mani-
festations are similar.
FURTHER READINGS
ALLEN JN: Drug-induced eosinophilic lung disease. Clin Chest Med
25:77, 2004
BECKETT W et al: Hypersensitivity pneumonitis associated with
environmental mycobacteria. Environ Health Perspect 113:767,
2005
COORAY JH, ISMAIL MM: Re-examination of the diagnostic criteria
of tropical pulmonary eosinophilia. Respir Med 93:655, 1999
CORMIER Y et al: High-resolution computed tomographic character-
istics in acute farmer’s lung and in its follow-up. Eur Resp J
16:56, 2000
FINK JN et al: Needs and opportunities for research in hypersensitiv-
ity pneumonitis.Am J Respir Crit Care Med 171:792, 2005
LACASSE Y et al: Clinical diagnosis of hypersensitivity pneumonitis.
Am J Respir Crit Care Med 168:962, 2003
MIYAZAKI Y et al: Clinical predictors and histologic appearance of
acute exacerbations in chronic hypersensitivity pneumonitis.
Chest 134:1265, 2008
SELMAN M: Hypersensitivity pneumonitis: a multifaceted deceiving
disorder. Clin Chest Med 25:531, 2004
——— et al: Gene expression proﬁles distinguish idiopathic pul-
monary ﬁbrosis from hypersensitivity pneumonitis. Am J Respir
Crit Care Med 173:188, 2006
SHORR AF et al:Acute eosinophilic pneumonia among U.S. military
personnel deployed in or near Iraq. JAMA 292:2997, 2004
SILVA CI et al: Hypersensitivity pneumonitis: Spectrum of high-
resolution CT and pathologic ﬁndings. Am J Roentgenol
188:334, 2007
ZACHARISEN MC et al: The long-term outcome in acute, subacute,
and chronic forms of pigeon breeder’s disease hypersensitivity
pneumonitis.Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 88:175, 2002
Hypersensitivity Pneumonitis and Pulmonary Inﬁltrates with Eosinophilia
85
CHAPTER 9
Frank E. Speizer
I
John R. Balmes
This chapter provides perspectives on ways to assess pul-
monary diseases for which environmental or occupa-
tional causes are suspected. This assessment is important
because removal of the patient from harmful exposure is
often the only intervention that might prevent further
signiﬁcant deterioration or lead to improvement in a
patient’s condition. Furthermore, the identiﬁcation of an
environment-associated disease in a single patient may
lead to primary preventive strategies affecting other simi-
larly exposed people who have not yet developed disease.
The exact magnitude of the problem is unknown, but
there is no question that large numbers of individuals are
at risk for developing serious respiratory disease as a result
of occupational or environmental exposures. For example,
for populations over age 15 years, 15–20% of the burden of
asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
has been estimated to be caused by occupational factors.
HISTORY AND PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
The patient’s history is of paramount importance in assess-
ing any potential occupational or environmental exposure.
Inquiry into speciﬁc work practices should include ques-
tions about speciﬁc contaminants involved, the availability
and use of personal respiratory protection devices, the size
and ventilation of workspaces,and whether coworkers have
ENVIRONMENTAL LUNG DISEASE
similar complaints.The temporal association of exposure at
work and symptoms may provide clues to occupation-
related disease. In addition, the patient must be questioned
about alternative sources for exposure to potentially toxic
agents, including hobbies, home characteristics, exposure to
secondhand smoke, and proximity to trafﬁc or industrial
facilities. Short- and long-term exposures to potential toxic
agents in the distant past must also be considered.
Many employees are aware of the potential hazards in
their workplaces, and many states require that employees
be informed about potentially hazardous exposures.
These requirements include the provision of speciﬁc
information about potential hazardous agents in prod-
ucts being used (Material Safety Data Sheets) and train-
ing in personal protective equipment and environmental
control procedures. Reminders posted in the workplace
may warn workers about hazardous substances. Protective
clothing, lockers, and shower facilities may be consid-
ered necessary parts of the job. However, the introduc-
tion of new processes or new chemical compounds may
change exposure signiﬁcantly, and often only the
employee on the production line is aware of the change.
For the physician who regularly sees patients from a par-
ticular industry, a visit to the work site can be very
instructive. Alternatively, physicians can request inspec-
tions by appropriate federal and/or state authorities.
CHAPTER 10
CHAPTER 10
86
History and Physical Examination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 86
Pulmonary Function Tests and Chest Imaging . . . . . . . . . . . . 87
Measurement of Exposure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 87
I Occupational Exposures and Pulmonary Disease . . . . . . . . . . 88
Asbestos-Related Diseases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 88
Silicosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 90
Coal Worker’s Pneumoconiosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91
Chronic Beryllium Disease . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 92
Other Inorganic Dusts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 92
Organic Dusts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 92
Toxic Chemicals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 93
Environmental Respiratory Carcinogens . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 95
Assessment of Disability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 95
I General Environmental Exposures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 96
Outdoor Air Pollution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 96
Indoor Exposures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 96
Portal of Entry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 97
Global Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 97
I Further Readings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 97
The physical examination of patients with environment-
related lung diseases may help to determine the
nature and severity of the pulmonary condition.
Unfortunately, these findings do not typically point
to the specific causative agent, and other types of
information must be used to arrive at an etiologic
diagnosis.
PULMONARY FUNCTION
TESTS AND CHEST IMAGING
Many mineral dusts produce characteristic alterations in
the mechanics of breathing and lung volumes that
clearly indicate a restrictive pattern (Chap. 5). Similarly,
exposures to a number of organic dusts or chemical
agents may result in occupational asthma or COPD.
Measurement of change in forced expiratory volume in
1 s (FEV1) before and after a work shift can be used to
detect an acute bronchoconstrictive or inﬂammatory
response. For example, an acute decrement of FEV1 over
the ﬁrst work shift of the week is a characteristic feature
of cotton textile workers with byssinosis (an obstructive
airway disorder with features of both asthma and
chronic bronchitis).
The chest radiograph is useful in detecting and moni-
toring the pulmonary response to mineral dusts, certain
metals, and organic dusts capable of inducing hypersen-
sitivity pneumonitis. The International Labour Organi-
sation (ILO) International Classiﬁcation of Radiographs
of Pneumoconioses classiﬁes chest radiographs accord-
ing to the nature and size of opacities seen and the
extent of involvement of the parenchyma. In general,
small, rounded opacities are seen in silicosis and coal
worker’s pneumoconiosis (CWP), and small, linear opac-
ities are seen in asbestosis.The profusion of such opaci-
ties is rated using a 12-point scheme. Although useful
for epidemiologic studies and screening large numbers
of workers, the ILO system can be problematic when
applied to an individual worker’s chest radiograph.With
dusts causing rounded opacities, the degree of involve-
ment on the chest radiograph may be extensive, but pul-
monary function may be only minimally impaired. In
contrast, in pneumoconiosis causing linear, irregular
opacities like those seen in asbestosis, the radiograph
may lead to underestimation of the severity of the
impairment until relatively late in the disease. For the
individual patient with a history of exposure, conven-
tional CT and high-resolution CT (HRCT) have
improved the sensitivity of identifying diffuse parenchy-
mal abnormalities of the lung as well as pleural thicken-
ing characteristic of asbestos exposure.
Other procedures that may be of use in identifying
the role of environment exposures in causing lung dis-
ease include evaluation of heavy metal concentrations
in urine (cadmium in battery plant workers), skin prick
testing or specific IgE antibody titers for evidence of
Environmental Lung Disease
87
CHAPTER 10
immediate hypersensitivity to agents capable of induc-
ing occupational asthma (flour antigens in bakery
workers), specific IgG precipitating antibody titers for
agents capable of causing hypersensitivity pneumonitis
(pigeon antigens in bird handlers), or assays for specific
cell-mediated immune responses (beryllium lympho-
cyte proliferation testing in nuclear workers or tuber-
culin skin testing in health care workers). Sometimes, a
bronchoscopy to obtain bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL)
fluid and transbronchial biopsy of lung tissue may be
required for histologic diagnosis [chronic beryllium
disease (CBD)]. Rarely, video-assisted thoracoscopic
surgery to obtain a larger sample of lung tissue may
be required to determine the specific diagnosis of
environment-induced lung disease (hypersensitivity
pneumonitis or giant cell interstitial pneumonitis caused
by cobalt exposure).
MEASUREMENT OF EXPOSURE
If reliable environmental sampling data are available, this
information should be used in assessing a patient’s expo-
sure. Because many of the chronic diseases result from
exposure over many years, current environmental mea-
surements should be combined with work histories to
arrive at estimates of past exposure.
In situations in which individual exposure to speciﬁc
agents—either in a work setting or via ambient air
pollutants—has been determined, the chemical and phys-
ical characteristics of these agents affect both inhaled dose
and site of deposition in the respiratory tract. Water-
soluble gases such as ammonia or sulfur dioxide are
absorbed in the lining ﬂuid of the upper and proximal
airways and thus tend to produce irritative and bron-
choconstrictive responses. In contrast, nitrogen dioxide
and phosgene, which are less soluble, may penetrate to the
bronchioles and alveoli in sufﬁcient quantities to produce
acute chemical pneumonitis that can be life threatening
(acute respiratory distress syndrome with noncardiogenic
pulmonary edema).
Particle size of air contaminants must also be con-
sidered. Particles larger than 10–15 μm in diameter,
because of their settling velocities in air, do not pene-
trate beyond the upper airways. Particles smaller than
10 μm in size are deposited below the larynx and are
primarily created by the burning of fossil fuels or high-
temperature industrial processes resulting in condensation
products from gases, fumes, or vapors. These particles
are divided into three size fractions on the basis of
their size characteristics and sources. Particles of
approximately 2.5–10 μm (coarse-mode fraction)
contain crustal elements, such as silica, aluminum, and
iron. These particles mostly deposit relatively high in
the tracheobronchial tree. Although the total mass of
an ambient sample is dominated by these larger res-
pirable particles, the number of particles, and therefore
Diseases of the Respiratory System
88
SECTION II
the surface area on which potential toxic agents can
deposit and be carried to the lower airways, is domi-
nated by particles <2.5 μm (fine-mode fraction). The
smallest particles, those <0.1 μm in size, represent the
ultrafine fraction and make up the largest number of
particles, which tend to remain in the airstream and
deposit in the lung only on a random basis as they
come into contact with the alveolar walls. Besides the
size characteristics of particles and the solubility of gases,
the actual chemical composition, mechanical proper-
ties, and immunogenicity or infectivity of inhaled
material largely determine the nature of the diseases
found among exposed persons.
OCCUPATIONAL EXPOSURES
AND PULMONARY DISEASE
Table 10-1 provides broad categories of exposure in the
workplace and diseases associated with chronic exposure
in these industries.
ASBESTOS-RELATED DISEASES
Asbestos is a generic term for several different mineral
silicates, including chrysolite, amosite, anthophyllite, and
crocidolite. In addition to workers involved in the
production of asbestos products (mining, milling, and
TABLE 10-1
CATEGORIES OF OCCUPATIONAL EXPOSURE AND ASSOCIATED RESPIRATORY CONDITIONS
OCCUPATIONAL EXPOSURES
NATURE OF RESPIRATORY RESPONSES
COMMENT
Inorganic Dusts
Asbestos: mining, processing,
Fibrosis (asbestosis), pleural disease, 
Virtually all new mining and construction
construction, ship repair
cancer, mesothelioma
with asbestos done in developing
countries
Silica: mining, stone cutting,
Fibrosis (silicosis), PMF, cancer, 
Improved protection in United States, 
sandblasting, quarrying
silicotuberculosis, COPD
persistent risk in developing countries
Coal dust: mining
Fibrosis (coal workers’
Risk decreasing in United States, 
pneumoconiosis), PMF, COPD
increasing where new mines open
Beryllium: processing alloys
Acute pneumonitis, chronic 
Risk in high-tech industries persists
for high-tech industries
granulomatous disease, 
lung cancer (highly suspect)
Other metals: aluminum,
Wide variety of conditions from 
New diseases appear with new process 
chromium, cobalt, nickel,
acute pneumonitis to lung cancer 
development
titanium, tungsten carbide,
and asthma
or “hard metal” (contains cobalt)
Organic Dusts
Cotton dust: milling, processing
Byssinosis (an asthma-like syndrome),
Increasing risk in developing countries
chronic bronchitis, COPD
with a decrease in United States as
jobs shift overseas
Grain dust: elevator agents,
Asthma, chronic bronchitis, COPD
Risk shifting more to migrant labor pool
dock workers, milling, bakers
Other agricultural dusts: fungal
Hypersensitivity pneumonitis 
Important in migrant labor pool but 
spores, vegetable products,
(farmers’ lung), asthma, 
also resulting from in-home exposures
insect fragments, animal dander,
chronic bronchitis
bird and rodent feces, endotoxins,
microorganisms, pollens
Toxic chemicals: wide variety
Chronic bronchitis, COPD, 
Reduced risk with recognized hazards;
of industries; see Table 10-2
hypersensitivity pneumonitis,
increasing risk in developing countries 
pneumoconiosis, and cancer
where controlled labor practices are
less stringent
Other respiratory environmental
Estimates vary from ~3 to 10% 
In-home exposures important; 
agents (proven or highly suspect):
of all lung cancers; in addition 
in developing countries, disease 
uranium and radon daughters,
chronic bronchitis, COPD, 
rates as high or higher in females
environmental tobacco smoke,
and ﬁbrosis
than males
polycyclic hydrocarbons, biomass
fuels, diesel exhaust, welding
fumes, woods or wood-ﬁnishing
products
Environmental Lung Disease
89
CHAPTER 10
exposure has taken place for at least 10 years before the
disease becomes manifest and may occur after exposure
to any of the asbestiform ﬁber types.
Physiologic studies reveal a restrictive pattern with a
decrease in both lung volumes and diffusing capacity.
There may also be evidence of mild airﬂow obstruction
(caused by peribronchiolar ﬁbrosis).
The ﬁbrotic lesions are the end result of oxidative
injury caused by the generation of reactive oxygen
species by the transition metals on the surface of the
ﬁbers as well as from cells engaged in phagocytosis.
Diagnosis
The chest radiograph can be used to detect a number of
manifestations of asbestos exposure. Past exposure is
speciﬁcally indicated by pleural plaques, which are char-
acterized either by thickening or calciﬁcation along the
parietal pleura, particularly along the lower lung ﬁelds,
the diaphragm, and the cardiac border. Without addi-
tional manifestations, pleural plaques imply only exposure,
not pulmonary impairment. Benign pleural effusions
may also occur.The ﬂuid is typically a serous or bloody
exudate.The effusion may be slowly progressive or may
resolve spontaneously. Irregular or linear opacities, usu-
ally ﬁrst noted in the lower lung ﬁelds and spreading
into the middle and upper lung ﬁelds, occur as the dis-
ease progresses.An indistinct heart border or a “ground-
glass” appearance in the lung ﬁelds is seen in some cases.
In cases in which the x-ray changes are less obvious,
HRCT may show distinct changes of subpleural curvi-
linear lines 5–10 mm in length that appear to be parallel
to the pleural surface (Fig. 10-1).
manufacturing), many workers in the ship-building and
construction trades, including pipe ﬁtters and boiler-
makers, were occupationally exposed because asbestos
was widely used for its thermal and electrical insulation
properties. Asbestos also was used in the manufacture of
ﬁre-smothering blankets and safety garments; as ﬁller for
plastic materials; in cement and ﬂoor tiles; and in fric-
tion materials, such as brake and clutch linings.
Exposure to asbestos is not limited to persons who
directly handle the material. Cases of asbestos-related
diseases have been encountered in individuals with only
bystander exposure, such as the painter or electrician
who worked alongside the insulation worker in a ship-
yard. Community exposure resulted from the use of
asbestos-containing mine or mill tailings as landﬁll, road
surface, and playground material. Finally, exposure can
also occur from the disturbance of naturally occurring
asbestos (e.g., from increasing residential development in
the foothills of the Sierra Mountains in California).
Asbestos was ﬁrst used extensively in the 1930s. Starting
in 1975, it was mostly replaced with synthetic mineral
ﬁbers, such as ﬁberglass or slag wool, but it continues to be
used increasingly in the developing world. Despite current
regulations mandating adequate training for any worker
potentially exposed to asbestos, exposure continues among
inadequately trained and protected demolition workers.
The major health effects from exposure to asbestos are
pleural and pulmonary ﬁbrosis and cancers of the respira-
tory tract,the pleura,and (in rare cases) the peritoneum.
Asbestosis is a diffuse interstitial ﬁbrosing disease of the
lung that is directly related to the intensity and duration
of exposure.The disease resembles other forms of diffuse
interstitial ﬁbrosis (Chap. 19). Usually, moderate to severe
A
B
FIGURE 10-1
Asbestosis. A. Frontal chest radiograph showing bilateral
calciﬁed pleural plaques consistent with asbestos-related
pleural disease. Poorly deﬁned linear and reticular abnormali-
ties are seen in the lower lobes bilaterally. B. Axial high-
resolution CT of the thorax obtained through the lung bases
showing bilateral, subpleural reticulation (black arrows),
representing ﬁbrotic lung disease caused by asbestosis.
Subpleural lines are also present (arrowheads), characteristic
of, although not speciﬁc for, asbestosis. Calciﬁed pleural
plaques representing asbestos-related pleural disease (white
arrows) are also evident.
Diseases of the Respiratory System
90
SECTION II
No speciﬁc therapy is available for the management
of patients with asbestosis. The supportive care is the
same as that given to any patient with diffuse interstitial
ﬁbrosis from any cause. In general, newly diagnosed
cases will have resulted from exposure levels that were
present many years before and, despite the patients’ hav-
ing left the industry, are attributable to that former
exposure. Because the patient may be eligible for com-
pensation within a speciﬁc time frame after the diagno-
sis of an asbestos-related disease is made, the physician
making the diagnosis should be certain to inform the
patient promptly. On occasion, the physician may have
reason to suspect ongoing exposure from a patient’s cur-
rent job description. Such a patient needs to wear
appropriate respiratory protective gear according to fed-
eral regulation. Casual, nonoccupational exposure to
undisturbed sources of asbestos-containing materials—
e.g., in walls of schools or other buildings—represents
virtually no hazard of asbestosis.
Lung cancer is the most frequent cancer associated
with asbestos exposure. The excess frequency of lung
cancer (all histologic types) in asbestos workers is associ-
ated with a minimum latency of 15–19 years between
ﬁrst exposure and development of the disease. Persons
with more exposure are at greater risk of disease. In
addition, there is a signiﬁcant multiplicative effect of
smoking and asbestos exposure than would be expected
from the additive effect of each factor. The use of
HRCT in such at-risk individuals to detect lung cancer
at an earlier stage is currently under investigation.
Mesotheliomas (Chap. 21), both pleural and peritoneal,
are also associated with asbestos exposure. In contrast to
lung cancers, these tumors do not appear to be associ-
ated with smoking. Relatively short-term asbestos expo-
sures of 1–2 years or less, occurring up to 40 years in the
past, have been associated with the development of
mesotheliomas (an observation that emphasizes the
importance of obtaining a complete environmental
exposure history). Although the risk of mesothelioma is
much less than for lung cancer among asbestos-exposed
workers, more than 2000 cases were reported in the
United States per year at the start of the 21st century.
Although ∼50% of mesotheliomas metastasize, the
tumor generally is locally invasive, and death usually
results from local extension. Most patients present with
effusions that may obscure the underlying pleural
tumor. In contrast to the ﬁndings in effusion due to
other causes, because of the restriction placed on the
chest wall, no shift of mediastinal structures toward the
opposite side of the chest will be seen.The major diag-
nostic problem is differentiation from peripherally
spreading pulmonary adenocarcinoma or from adeno-
carcinoma metastasized to pleura from an extrathoracic
primary site. Although cytologic examination of pleural
ﬂuid may suggest the diagnosis, biopsy of pleural tissue,
generally with video-assisted thoracic surgery, and special
immunohistochemical staining is usually required.There
is no effective therapy.
Because epidemiologic studies have shown that more
than 80% of mesotheliomas may be associated with
asbestos exposure, documented mesothelioma in a
patient with occupational or environmental exposure to
asbestos may be compensable.
SILICOSIS
Despite the technical adequacy of existing protective
equipment, free silica (SiO2), or crystalline quartz, is still a
major occupational hazard. The major occupational
exposures include mining; stonecutting; employment
in abrasive industries, such as stone, clay, glass, and
cement manufacturing; foundry work; packing of silica
ﬂour; and quarrying, particularly of granite. Most often,
pulmonary ﬁbrosis caused by silica exposure (silicosis)
occurs in a dose-response fashion after many years of
exposure.
Workers heavily exposed through sandblasting in
conﬁned spaces, tunneling through rock with high
quartz content (15–25%), or the manufacture of abrasive
soaps may develop acute silicosis with as little as 10 months’
exposure.The clinical and pathological features of acute
silicosis are similar to those of pulmonary alveolar pro-
teinosis (Chap. 19).The chest radiograph may show pro-
fuse miliary inﬁltration or consolidation, and there is a
characteristic HRCT pattern known as “crazy paving”
(Fig. 10-2). The disease may be quite severe and pro-
gressive despite the discontinuation of exposure.Whole-
lung lavage may provide symptomatic relief and slow
progression.
With long-term, less intense exposure, small, rounded
opacities in the upper lobes may appear on the chest
radiograph after 15–20 years of exposure (simple silicosis).
Calciﬁcation of hilar nodes may occur in as many as
20% of cases and produces a characteristic “eggshell”
pattern. Silicotic nodules may be identiﬁed more readily
by HRCT (Fig. 10-3). The nodular ﬁbrosis may be
progressive in the absence of further exposure, with coa-
lescence and formation of nonsegmental conglomerates
of irregular masses >1 cm in diameter (complicated
silicosis).These masses can become quite large, and when
this occurs, the term progressive massive ﬁbrosis (PMF) is
applied. Signiﬁcant functional impairment with both
restrictive and obstructive components may be associ-
ated with this form of silicosis.
Because silica is cytotoxic to alveolar macrophages,
patients with silicosis are at greater risk of acquiring
lung infections that involve these cells as a primary
defense (Mycobacterium tuberculosis, atypical mycobacteria
and fungi). Because of the increased risk of active
tuberculosis, the recommended treatment of latent
tuberculosis in these patients is longer.Another potential
clinical complication of silicosis is autoimmune connective
tissue disorders such as rheumatoid arthritis and sclero-
derma. In addition, there are sufﬁcient epidemiologic
data that the International Agency for Research on
Cancer lists silica as a probable lung carcinogen.
Other less hazardous silicates include Fuller’s earth,
kaolin, mica, diatomaceous earths, silica gel, soapstone,
carbonate dusts, and cement dusts. The production of
ﬁbrosis in workers exposed to these agents is believed to
be related either to the free silica content of these dusts
or, for substances that contain no free silica, to the
potentially large dust loads to which these workers may
be exposed.
Other silicates, including talc dusts, may be contami-
nated with asbestos or free silica. Fibrosis and pleural or
lung cancer have been associated with chronic exposure
to commercial talc.
COAL WORKER’S PNEUMOCONIOSIS
Occupational exposure to coal dust can lead to CWP,
which has enormous social, economic, and medical sig-
niﬁcance in every nation in which coal mining is an
important industry. Simple radiographically identiﬁed
CWP is seen in about 10% of all coal miners and in
as many as 50% of anthracite miners with more than
20 years’ work on the coal face. The prevalence of dis-
ease is lower in workers in bituminous coal mines.
Because much western U.S. coal is bituminous, CWP is
less prevalent in that region.
With prolonged exposure to coal dust (i.e.,15–20 years),
small, rounded opacities similar to those of silicosis may
develop. As in silicosis, the presence of these nodules
(simple CWP) is not usually associated with pulmonary
impairment. Much of the symptomatology associated
with simple CWP appears to be due to the effects of
coal dust on the development of chronic bronchitis and
COPD (Chap. 18).The effects of coal dust are additive
to those of cigarette smoking.
Complicated CWP is manifested by the appearance on
the chest radiograph of nodules ranging from 1 cm in
diameter to the size of an entire lobe, generally conﬁned
to the upper half of the lungs.As in silicosis, this condi-
tion can progress to PMF, which is accompanied by
Environmental Lung Disease
91
CHAPTER 10
FIGURE 10-2
Acute silicosis. The high-resolution CT scan shows multiple
small nodules consistent with silicosis but also diffuse
ground-glass densities with thickened intralobular and inter-
lobular septa, producing polygonal shapes. This has been
referred to as “crazy paving.”
A
B
FIGURE 10-3
Chronic silicosis. A. Frontal chest radiograph in a patient
with silicosis showing variably sized, poorly deﬁned nodules
(arrows) predominating in the upper lobes. B. Axial thoracic
CT image through the lung apices showing numerous small
nodules that are more pronounced in the right upper lobe. A
number of the nodules are subpleural in location (arrows).
severe lung function deﬁcits and associated with prema-
ture mortality.
Caplan’s syndrome, ﬁrst described in coal miners but
subsequently found in patients with silicosis, includes
seropositive rheumatoid arthritis with characteristic
pneumoconiotic nodules. Silica has immunoadjuvant
properties and is often present in anthracitic coal dust.
CHRONIC BERYLLIUM DISEASE
Beryllium is a lightweight metal with tensile strength, has
good electrical conductivity, and is valuable in the con-
trol of nuclear reactions through its ability to quench
neutrons. Although beryllium may produce an acute
pneumonitis, it is far more commonly associated with a
chronic granulomatous inﬂammatory disease that is sim-
ilar to sarcoidosis. Unless one inquires speciﬁcally about
occupational exposures to beryllium in the manufacture
of alloys, ceramics, or high-technology electronics in a
patient with sarcoidosis, one may miss entirely the etio-
logic relationship to the occupational exposure. What
distinguishes CBD from sarcoidosis is evidence of a spe-
ciﬁc cell-mediated immune response (i.e., delayed hyper-
sensitivity) to beryllium.
The test that usually provides this evidence is the beryl-
lium lymphocyte proliferation test (BeLPT). The BeLPT
uses the in vitro proliferation of lymphocytes from blood
or BAL in the presence of beryllium salts compared with
that of unstimulated cells. Proliferation is usually measured
by lymphocyte uptake of radiolabeled thymidine.
Chest imaging ﬁndings are similar to those of sarcoido-
sis (nodules along septal lines) except that hilar adenopathy
is somewhat less common. Similar to sarcoidosis, pul-
monary function test results may show restrictive or
obstructive ventilatory deﬁcits and decreased diffusing
capacity.With early disease, both chest imaging studies and
pulmonary function test results may be normal. Fiberoptic
bronchoscopy with transbronchial lung biopsy is usually
required to make the diagnosis of CBD. In a beryllium-
sensitized individual, the presence of noncaseating granu-
lomas or monocytic inﬁltration in lung tissue establishes
the diagnosis. Accumulation of beryllium-speciﬁc CD4+
T cells occurs in the granulomatous inﬂammation seen on
lung biopsy.
Chronic beryllium disease is one of the best studied
examples of gene–environment interaction. Susceptibil-
ity to CBD is highly associated with HLA-DP alleles
possessing a glutamic acid in position 69 of the β chain.
In addition, there is also evidence that a polymorphism
in position 308 of the promoter region of tumor necro-
sis factor α is involved in mediating the severity of the
inﬂammatory response in patients with CBD.
Other metals, including aluminum and titanium
dioxide, have been rarely associated with a sarcoid-like
reaction in lung tissue. Exposure to dust containing
tungsten carbide, also known as “hard metal,” may produce
giant cell interstitial pneumonitis. Cobalt is a constituent
of tungsten carbide and is the likely etiologic agent of
both the interstitial pneumonitis and the occupational
asthma that may occur.The most common exposures to
tungsten carbide occur in tool and dye, saw blade, and
drill bit manufacture. Diamond polishing may also
involve exposure to cobalt dust. The same Glu69 poly-
morphism of the HLA-DP β chain that confers
increased risk of CBD also appears to increase risk of
cobalt-induced giant cell interstitial pneumonitis.
In patients with interstitial lung disease, one should
always inquire about exposure to metal fumes or dusts.
Especially when sarcoidosis appears to be the diagnosis,
one should always consider possible CBD.
OTHER INORGANIC DUSTS
Most of the inorganic dusts discussed thus far are associ-
ated with the production of either dust macules or
interstitial ﬁbrotic changes in the lung. Other inorganic
and organic dusts (see categories in Table 10-1), along
with some of the dusts previously discussed, are associ-
ated with chronic mucus hypersecretion (chronic bron-
chitis), with or without reduction of expiratory ﬂow
rates. Cigarette smoking is the major cause of these con-
ditions, and any effort to attribute some component of
the disease to occupational and environmental exposures
must take cigarette smoking into account. Most studies
suggest an additive effect of dust exposure and smoking.
The pattern of the irritant dust effect is similar to that of
cigarette smoking, suggesting that small airway inﬂam-
mation may be the initial site of pathologic response in
those cases, and continued exposure may lead to chronic
bronchitis and COPD.
ORGANIC DUSTS
Some of the speciﬁc diseases associated with organic
dusts are discussed in detail in the chapters on asthma
(Chap. 8) and hypersensitivity pneumonitis (Chap. 9).
Many of these diseases are named for the speciﬁc setting
in which they are found (e.g., farmer’s lung, malt
worker’s disease, mushroom worker’s disease). Often the
temporal relation of symptoms to exposure furnishes the
best evidence for the diagnosis. Three occupational
groups are singled out for discussion because they repre-
sent the largest proportion of people affected by the dis-
eases resulting from organic dusts.
Cotton Dust (Byssinosis)
Many persons are exposed occupationally to cotton,
ﬂax, or hemp in the production of yarns for cotton,
linen, and rope making.Although this discussion focuses
Diseases of the Respiratory System
92
SECTION II
on cotton, the same syndrome—albeit somewhat less
severe—has been reported in association with exposure
to ﬂax, hemp, and jute.
Exposure occurs throughout the manufacturing
process but is most pronounced in those portions of the
factory involved with the treatment of the cotton before
spinning—i.e., blowing, mixing, and carding (straighten-
ing of ﬁbers). Risk of byssinosis is associated with both
cotton dust and endotoxin levels in the workplace envi-
ronment. Attempts to control dust levels by use of
exhaust hoods, general increases in ventilation, and wet-
ting procedures in some settings have been highly suc-
cessful.
However,
respiratory protective equipment
appears to be required during certain operations to pre-
vent workers from being exposed to levels of cotton dust
that exceed the current U.S. permissible exposure level.
Byssinosis is characterized clinically as occasional
(early stage) and then regular (late stage) chest tightness
toward the end of the ﬁrst day of the workweek (“Monday
chest tightness”). In epidemiologic studies, depending on
the level of exposure via the carding room air, up to 80%
of employees may show a signiﬁcant decrease in their
FEV1 over the course of a Monday shift.
Initially, the symptoms do not recur on subsequent
days of the week. However, in 10–25% of workers, the
disease may be progressive, with chest tightness recur-
ring or persisting throughout the workweek. After
>10 years of exposure, workers with recurrent symp-
toms are more likely to have an obstructive pattern on
pulmonary function testing. The highest grades of
impairment are generally seen in smokers.
Reduction of dust exposure is of primary importance
to the management of byssinosis. All workers with per-
sistent symptoms or signiﬁcantly reduced levels of pul-
monary function should be moved to areas of lower risk
of exposure. Regular surveillance of pulmonary function
in cotton dust–exposed workers using spirometry before
and after the work shift is required by the Occupational
Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) of the U.S.
government.
Grain Dust
Although the exact number of workers at risk in the
United States is not known, at least 500,000 people
work in grain elevators, and >2 million farmers are
potentially exposed to grain dust. The presentation of
obstructive airway disease in grain dust–exposed work-
ers is virtually identical to the characteristic ﬁndings in
cigarette smokers (i.e., persistent cough, mucous hyper-
secretion, wheeze and dyspnea on exertion, and reduced
FEV1 and FEV1/FVC ratio) (Chap. 5).
Dust concentrations in grain elevators vary greatly
but appear to be >10,000 μg/m3; approximately one-
third of the particles, by weight, are in the respirable
range. The effect of grain dust exposure is additive to
that of cigarette smoking, with about 50% of workers
who smoke having symptoms. Among nonsmoking
grain elevator operators, approximately 25% have mucus
hypersecretion, about ﬁve times the number that would
be expected in unexposed nonsmokers. Smoking grain
dust–exposed workers are more likely to have obstruc-
tive ventilatory deﬁcits on pulmonary function testing.
As in byssinosis, endotoxin may play a role in grain
dust–induced chronic bronchitis and COPD.
Farmer’s Lung
This condition results from exposure to moldy hay con-
taining spores of thermophilic actinomycetes that pro-
duce a hypersensitivity pneumonitis (Chap. 9).There are
few good population-based estimates of the frequency
of occurrence of this condition in the United States.
However, among farmers in Great Britain, the rate of
disease ranges from approximately 10–50 per 1000.The
prevalence of disease varies in association with rainfall,
which determines the amount of fungal growth, and
with differences in agricultural practices related to turn-
ing and stacking hay.
The patient with acute farmer’s lung presents 4–8 h
after exposure with fever, chills, malaise, cough, and dysp-
nea without wheezing. The history of exposure is obvi-
ously essential to distinguish this disease from inﬂuenza or
pneumonia with similar symptoms. In the chronic form
of the disease, the history of repeated attacks after similar
exposure is important in differentiating this syndrome
from other causes of patchy ﬁbrosis (e.g., sarcoidosis).
A wide variety of other organic dusts are associated
with the occurrence of hypersensitivity pneumonitis
(Chap. 9). For patients who present with hypersensitivity
pneumonitis, speciﬁc and careful inquiry about occupa-
tions, hobbies, or other home environmental exposures
is necessary to uncover the source of the etiologic agent.
TOXIC CHEMICALS
Exposure to toxic chemicals affecting the lung generally
involves gases and vapors. A common accident is one in
which the victim is trapped in a conﬁned space where
the chemicals have accumulated to toxic levels. In addi-
tion to the speciﬁc toxic effects of the chemical, the vic-
tim will often sustain considerable anoxia, which can
play a dominant role in determining whether the indi-
vidual survives.
Table 10-2 lists a variety of toxic agents that can
produce acute and sometimes life-threatening reactions
in the lung. All of these agents in sufﬁcient concentra-
tions have been demonstrated, at least in animal studies,
to affect the lower airways and disrupt alveolar architec-
ture, either acutely or as a result of chronic exposure.
Some of these agents may be generated acutely in the
environment (see later).
Environmental Lung Disease
93
CHAPTER 10
Diseases of the Respiratory System
94
SECTION II
TABLE 10-2
SELECTED COMMON TOXIC CHEMICAL AGENTS AFFECTING THE LUNG
ACUTE EFFECTS FROM HIGH 
CHRONIC EFFECTS FROM 
AGENT(S)
SELECTED EXPOSURES
OR ACCIDENTAL EXPOSURE
RELATIVELY LOW EXPOSURE
Acid fumes:
Manufacture of fertilizers,
Mucous membrane 
Bronchitis and suggestion of mildly 
H2SO4, HNO3
chlorinated organic
irritation followed by 
reduced pulmonary function in 
compounds, dyes,
chemical pneumonitis
children with lifelong residential 
explosives, rubber products, 
2–3 days later
exposure to high levels; 
metal etching, plastics
clinical signiﬁcance unknown
Acrolein and
Byproduct of burning plastics, 
Mucous membrane irritant, 
Mutagen in animals, 
other aldehydes
woods, tobacco smoke
decrease in lung function
no human data
Ammonia
Refrigeration; petroleum
Same as for acid fumes
Chronic bronchitis
reﬁning; manufacture
of fertilizers, explosives,
plastics, and other chemicals
Anhydrides
Manufacture of resin
Nasal irritation, cough
Asthma, chronic bronchitis, 
esters, polyester resins,
hypersensitivity pneumonitis
thermoactivated adhesives
Cadmium fumes
Smelting, soldering,
Mucous membrane 
COPD
battery production
irritant, ARDS
Formaldehyde
Manufacture of resins,
Same as for acid fumes
Cancers in one species;  
leathers, rubber, metals,
no data on humans
and woods; laboratory
workers, embalmers;
emission from urethane
foam insulation
Halides and acid
Bleaching in pulp, paper, 
Mucous membrane irritation,
Dryness of mucous membranes,
salts (Cl, Br, F)
textile industry; manufacture
pulmonary edema; possible
epistaxis, dental ﬂuorosis,
of chemical compounds;
reduced FVC 1–2 yrs after
tracheobronchitis 
synthetic rubber, plastics,
exposure
disinfectant, rocket
fuel, gasoline
Hydrogen sulﬁde
Byproduct of many industrial 
Increase in respiratory rate
Conjunctival irritation, chronic 
processes, oil, other 
followed by respiratory arrest,
bronchitis, recurrent pneumonitis
petroleum processes and 
lactic acidosis, pulmonary 
storage
edema, death
Isocyanates
Production of polyurethane
Mucous membrane irritation,
Upper respiratory tract irritation,
(TDI, HDI, MDI)
foams, plastics, adhesives,
dyspnea, cough, wheeze, 
cough, asthma, allergic alveolitis
surface coatings
pulmonary edema
Nitrogen dioxide
Silage, metal etching,
Cough, dyspnea, pulmonary
Emphysema in animals, ?
explosives, rocket fuels,
edema may be delayed
chronic bronchitis, associated 
welding, byproduct of
4–12 h; possible result from
with reduced lung function
burning fossil fuels
acute exposure: bronchiolitis
in children with lifelong 
obliterans in 2–6 wks
residential exposure,
clinical signiﬁcance unknown
Ozone
Arc welding, ﬂour bleaching,
Mucous membrane irritant,
Chronic eye irritation and 
deodorizing, emissions from
pulmonary hemorrhage and 
slight excess in cardiopulmonary
copying equipment,
edema, reduced pulmonary 
mortality in susceptible 
photochemical air pollutant
function transiently in children
individuals
and adults, and increased
hospitalization with exposure
to summer haze
Phosgene
Organic compound, metallurgy,
Delayed onset of bronchiolitis
Chronic bronchitis
volatilization of chlorine-
and pulmonary edema
containing compounds
Sulfur dioxide
Manufacture of sulfuric acid,
Mucous membrane irritant, 
Chronic bronchitis
bleaches, coating of
epistaxis
nonferrous metals, food
processing, refrigerant,
burning of fossil fuels,
wood pulp industry
Fireﬁghters and ﬁre victims are at risk of smoke inhalation,
a numerically important cause of acute cardiorespiratory
failure. Smoke inhalation kills more ﬁre victims than does
thermal injury. Carbon monoxide poisoning with result-
ing signiﬁcant hypoxemia can be life threatening.The use
of synthetic materials (plastic, polyurethanes), which, when
burned, may release a variety of other toxic agents (e.g.,
cyanide, hydrochloric acid), must be considered when
evaluating smoke inhalation victims. Exposed victims may
have some degree of lower respiratory tract inﬂammation,
pulmonary edema,or both.
Exposure to certain highly reactive, low-molecular-
weight agents used in the manufacture of synthetic
polymers, paints, and coatings (e.g., diisocyanates
in
polyurethanes; aromatic amines and acid anhydrides in epox-
ies) are associated with a high risk of occupational asthma.
Although this occupational asthma manifests clinically as
if sensitization has occurred, there is little evidence that
an IgE antibody–mediated mechanism is involved.
Hypersensitivity pneumonitis–like reactions also have
been described in diisocyanate and acid anhydride–
exposed workers.
Fluoropolymers, such as Teﬂon, which produce no
reaction at normal temperatures, become volatilized
upon heating. The inhaled agents cause a characteristic
syndrome of fever, chills, malaise, and occasionally mild
wheezing leading to the diagnosis of polymer fume fever.A
similar self-limited, inﬂuenza-like syndrome—metal fume
fever—results from acute exposure to fumes or smoke
containing zinc oxide. The syndrome may begin several
hours after work and resolves within 24 h, only to return
on repeated exposure.Welding of galvanized steel is the
most common exposure leading to metal fume fever.
Two other agents have been recently associated with
potentially severe interstitial lung disease. Occupational
exposure to nylon ﬂock has been shown to induce lym-
phocytic bronchiolitis, and workers exposed to diacetyl
used to provide “butter” ﬂavor in the manufacture of
microwave popcorn have developed bronchiolitis oblit-
erans (Chap. 19).
World Trade Center Disaster
A consequence of the attack on the World Trade Center
(WTC) on September 11, 2001, was relatively heavy
exposure of a large number of ﬁreﬁghters and other res-
cue workers to the dust generated by the collapse of the
buildings. Environmental monitoring and chemical
characterization of WTC dust has revealed a wide vari-
ety of potentially toxic constituents, although much of
the dust was pulverized cement. Possibly because of the
high alkalinity of WTC dust signiﬁcant cough, wheeze,
and phlegm production occurred among ﬁreﬁghters and
clean-up crews. New cough and wheeze syndromes also
occurred among local residents.Initial longitudinal follow-
up of New York firefighters suggests that heavier
exposure to WTC dust is associated with an accelerated
decline of lung function.
ENVIRONMENTAL RESPIRATORY
CARCINOGENS
In addition to asbestos exposures, other occupational
exposures associated with either proven or suspected
respiratory carcinogens include those to acrylonitrile,
arsenic compounds, beryllium, bis(chloromethyl) ether,
chromium (hexavalent), formaldehyde (nasal), isopropyl
oil (nasal sinuses), mustard gas, the various ores used to
produce pure nickel, polyaromatic hydrocarbons (coke
oven emissions and diesel exhaust), secondhand tobacco
smoke, silica (both mining and processing), talc (possible
asbestos contamination in both mining and milling),
vinyl chloride (sarcomas), wood (nasal cancer only), and
uranium. The occurrence of excess cancers in uranium
miners raises the possibility that a large number of
workers are at risk by virtue of exposure to similar radi-
ation hazards. This number includes not only workers
involved in processing uranium but also workers
exposed in underground mining operations where
radon daughters may be emitted from rock formations.
ASSESSMENT OF DISABILITY
Patients who have lung disease may have difﬁculty con-
tinuing to work in their usual jobs because of respira-
tory symptoms. Such patients frequently seek assistance
from their physicians in obtaining compensation for loss
of income. Disability is the term used to describe the
decreased ability to work because of the effects of a
medical condition. Physicians are generally able to assess
physiologic dysfunction, or impairment, but the rating of
disability also involves non-medical factors such as the
education and employability of the individual. The dis-
ability rating scheme differs with the compensation-
granting agency. For example, the U.S. Social Security
Administration requires that an individual be unable to
do any work (i.e., total disability) before he or she will
receive income replacement payments. Many state
workers’ compensation systems allow for payments for
partial disability. In the Social Security scheme, no deter-
mination of cause is done, but work-relatedness must be
established in workers’ compensation systems.
Most commonly the need for disability assessment
comes about because of the patient’s complaint of short-
ness of breath. It is important to remember that dyspnea
may result from cardiac, hematologic, or neuromuscular
diseases in addition to respiratory diseases. For respiratory
disability, resting pulmonary function tests (spirometry
and diffusing capacity) are used as the initial assessment
tool, with cardiopulmonary exercise testing (to assess
maximal oxygen consumption) used if the results of the
resting tests do not correlate with the patient’s symptoms.
Environmental Lung Disease
95
CHAPTER 10
Methacholine challenge (to assess airways reactivity) can
also be useful in patients with asthma who have normal
spirometry results when evaluated. Some compensation
agencies (e.g., Social Security) have proscribed disabil-
ity classiﬁcation schemes based on pulmonary function
test results. When no specific scheme is proscribed,
the Guidelines of the American Medical Association should
be used.
Evaluating relation to work exposure requires a
detailed work history, as previously discussed in this
chapter. Occasionally, as with some cases of suspected
occupational asthma, challenge to the putative agent in
the work environment with repeated pulmonary func-
tion measures may be required.
GENERAL ENVIRONMENTAL
EXPOSURES
OUTDOOR AIR POLLUTION
In 1971, the U.S. government established national air
quality standards for several pollutants believed to be
responsible for excess cardiorespiratory diseases. Primary
standards regulated by the Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA) designed to protect the public health
with an adequate margin of safety exist for sulfur diox-
ide, particulates matter, nitrogen dioxide, ozone, lead,
and carbon monoxide. Standards for each of these pollu-
tants are updated regularly through an extensive review
process conducted by the EPA. (For details on current
standards, see http://www.epa.gov/air/criteria.html.)
Pollutants are generated from both stationary sources
(power plants and industrial complexes) and mobile
sources (automobiles), and none of the pollutants occurs
in isolation. Furthermore, pollutants may be changed by
chemical reactions after being emitted. For example,
reducing agents, such as sulfur dioxide and particulate
matter from a power plant stack, may react in air to pro-
duce acid sulfates and aerosols, which can be transported
long distances in the atmosphere. Oxidizing substances,
such as oxides of nitrogen and oxidants from automobile
exhaust, may react with sunlight to produce ozone.
Although originally a problem conﬁned to the south-
western part of the United States, in recent years, at least
during the summertime, elevated ozone and acid aerosol
levels have been documented throughout the United
States. Both acute and chronic effects of these exposures
have been documented in large population studies.
The symptoms and diseases associated with air pollu-
tion are the same as conditions commonly associated
with cigarette smoking. In addition, respiratory illness in
early childhood has been associated with chronic expo-
sure to only modestly elevated levels of trafﬁc-related
gases and respirable particles. Multiple population-based
time-series studies within cities have demonstrated
excess cardiopulmonary hospitalizations and mortality.
In addition, cohort studies comparing cities that have
relatively high levels of particulate exposures with less
polluted communities suggest excess morbidity and mor-
tality from cardiorespiratory conditions in long-term
residents of the former. These ﬁndings have led to
stricter U.S. ambient air quality standards for particulate
matter as well as greater emphasis on publicizing pollu-
tion alerts to encourage individuals with signiﬁcant car-
diopulmonary impairment to stay indoors during high
pollution episodes.
INDOOR EXPOSURES
Environmental tobacco smoke, radon gas, wood smoke,
and other biologic agents generated indoors need to be
considered. Several studies have shown that the res-
pirable particulate load in any household is directly pro-
portional to the number of cigarette smokers living in
the home. Increases in prevalence of respiratory illnesses
and reduced levels of pulmonary function measured
with simple spirometry have been found in children of
smoking parents in a number of studies. Recent meta-
analyses for lung cancer and cardiopulmonary diseases,
combining data from the best of the environmental
tobacco smoke exposure studies, suggest an approximate
25% increase in relative risk for each condition, even
after adjustment for major potential confounders.
Radon gas is believed to be a risk factor for lung can-
cer. The main radon product (radon 222) is a gas that
results from the decay series of uranium 238, with the
immediate precursor being radium 226.The amount of
radium in earth materials determines how much radon
gas will be emitted. Outdoors, the concentrations are
trivial. Indoors, levels are dependent on the sources, the
ventilation rate of the space, and the size of the space
into which the gas is emitted. Levels associated with
excess lung cancer risk may be present in as many as
10% of the houses in the United States.When smokers
reside in the household, the problem is potentially
greater because the molecular size of radon particles
allows them to readily attach to smoke particles that are
inhaled. Fortunately, technology is available for assessing
and reducing the level of exposure.
Other indoor exposures associated with an increased
risk of atopy and asthma include those to such speciﬁc
recognized putative biologic agents as cockroach anti-
gen, dust mites, and pet dander. Other indoor chemical
agents include formaldehyde, perfumes, and latex particles.
Nonspeciﬁc responses associated with “tight-building
syndrome,” in which no particular agent has been impli-
cated, have included a wide variety of complaints, among
them respiratory symptoms that are relieved only by
avoiding exposure in the building in question. The
degree to which “smells” or other sensory stimuli are
involved in the triggering of potentially incapacitat-
ing psychological or physical responses has yet to be
Diseases of the Respiratory System
96
SECTION II
determined, and the long-term consequences of such
environmental exposures are as yet unknown.
PORTAL OF ENTRY
The lung is a primary point of entry into the body for a
number of toxic agents that affect other organ systems.
For example, the lung is a route of entry for benzene
(bone marrow), carbon disulﬁde (cardiovascular and ner-
vous systems), cadmium (kidney), and metallic mercury
(kidney, central nervous system). Thus, in any disease
state of obscure origin, it is important to consider the
possibility of inhaled environmental agents. Such consider-
ation can sometimes furnish the clue needed to identify a
speciﬁc external cause for a disorder that might otherwise
be labeled “idiopathic.”
GLOBAL CONSIDERATIONS
Indoor exposure to biomass smoke (wood, dung,
crop residues, charcoal) is estimated to be respon-
sible for 2.7% of worldwide disability adjusted
life-years (DALYs) lost caused by acute lower respiratory
infections in children and COPD and lung cancer in
women. This burden of disease places indoor exposure
to biomass smoke as the second leading environmental
hazard for poor health, just behind unsafe water, sanitation,
and hygiene, and is 3.5 times larger than the burden
attributed to outdoor air pollution.
More than 50% of the world’s population uses bio-
mass fuel for cooking, heating, or baking. This occurs
predominantly in the rural areas of developing coun-
tries. Because many families burn biomass fuels in open
stoves, which are highly inefﬁcient, and inside homes
with poor ventilation, women and young children are
exposed on a daily basis to high levels of smoke. In these
homes, 24-h mean levels of ﬁne particulate matter, a
component of biomass smoke, have been reported to be
two to 30 times higher than the National Ambient Air
Quality Standards set by the U.S. EPA.
Epidemiologic studies have consistently shown asso-
ciations between exposure to biomass smoke and both
chronic bronchitis and COPD, with odds ratios ranging
between 3 and 10 and increasing with longer exposures.
In addition to the common occupational exposure to
biomass smoke of women in developing countries, men
from such countries may also be occupationally
exposed. Because of increased migration to the United
States from developing countries, clinicians need to be
aware of the chronic respiratory effects of exposure to
biomass smoke, which can also include interstitial lung
disease (Fig. 10-4).
FURTHER READINGS
BALMES JR et al: ATS Statement: Occupational contribution to the
burden of airway disease. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 167:787,
2003
CASTRANOVA V,VALLYATHAN V: Silicosis and coal workers’ pneumo-
coniosis. Environ Health Perspect 108(Suppl 4):675, 2000
CHEN TM et al: Outdoor air pollution: Overview and historical per-
spective.Am J Med Sci 333:230, 2007
DIAZ JV et al: A case of wood smoke–related pulmonary disease.
Environ Health Perspect 114:759, 2006
D’MANNETJE A et al: Exposure-response analysis and risk assessment
for silica and silicosis mortality in a pooled analysis of six
cohorts. Occup Environ Med 59:723, 2002
EKICI A et al: Obstructive airway diseases in women exposed to bio-
mass smoke. Environ Res 99:93, 2005
Environmental Lung Disease
97
CHAPTER 10
A
B
FIGURE 10-4
Histopathologic features of biomass smoke-induced
interstitial lung disease. A. Anthracitic pigment is seen
accumulating along alveolar septae (arrowheads) and within
a pigmented dust macule (single arrow). B. A high-power
photomicrograph contains a mixture of ﬁbroblasts and carbon-
laden macrophages.
FONTENOT AP, MAIER LA: Genetic susceptibility and immune-
mediated destruction in beryllium-induced disease. Trends
Immunol 26:543, 2005
KUSAKA Y et al (eds): International Classiﬁcation of HRCT for Occupa-
tional and Environmental Respiratory Diseases. New York, Springer,
2005, 145
LANDRIGAN PJ et al: Health and environmental consequences of the
World Trade Center disaster.Environ Health Perspect 112:731,2004
NEWMAN LS et al: Beryllium sensitization progresses to chronic
beryllium disease: A longitudinal study of disease risk. Am J
Respir Crit Care Med 171:54, 2005
O’REILLY KM et al:Asbestos-related lung disease.Am Fam Physician
75:683, 2007
POPE CA III et al: Cardiovascular mortality and long-term exposure
to particulate air pollution: Epidemiological evidence of general
pathophysiological pathways of disease. Circulation 109:71, 2004
Diseases of the Respiratory System
98
SECTION II
Lionel A. Mandell
I
Richard Wunderink
DEFINITION
Pneumonia is an infection of the pulmonary parenchyma.
Despite being the cause of signiﬁcant morbidity and
mortality, pneumonia is often misdiagnosed, mistreated,
and underestimated. In the past, pneumonia was typically
classiﬁed as community-acquired (CAP),
hospital-
acquired (HAP), or ventilator-associated (VAP) pneu-
monia. Over the past decade or two, however, patients
presenting to the hospital have often been found to be
infected with multidrug-resistant (MDR) pathogens
previously associated with hospital-acquired pneumonia.
Factors responsible for this phenomenon include the
development and widespread use of potent oral antibi-
otics, earlier transfer of patients out of acute-care hospi-
tals to their homes or various lower-acuity facilities,
increased use of outpatient IV antibiotic therapy,
general aging of the population, and more extensive
immunomodulatory therapies. The potential involve-
ment of these MDR pathogens has led to a revised
classiﬁcation system in which infection is categorized as
either CAP or health care–associated pneumonia (HCAP),
with subcategories of HCAP including HAP and VAP.
The conditions associated with HCAP and the likely
pathogens are listed in Table 11-1.
Although the new classiﬁcation system has been help-
ful in designing empirical antibiotic strategies, it has some
disadvantages. For instance, not all MDR pathogens are
associated with all risk factors (Table 11-1).Therefore, this
PNEUMONIA
system represents a distillation of multiple risk factors, and
each patient must be considered individually. For exam-
ple, the risk of infection with MDR pathogens for a nurs-
ing home resident with dementia who can independently
dress, ambulate, and eat is quite different from the risk for
a patient who is in a chronic vegetative state with a tra-
cheostomy and a percutaneous feeding tube in place. In
addition, risk factors for MDR infection do not preclude
the development of pneumonia caused by the usual CAP
pathogens.
This chapter deals with pneumonia in patients who
are not considered to be immunocompromised.
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Pneumonia results from the proliferation of microbial
pathogens at the alveolar level and the host’s response to
those pathogens. Microorganisms gain access to the lower
respiratory tract in several ways.The most common way is
by aspiration from the oropharynx. Small-volume aspira-
tion occurs frequently during sleep (especially in the
elderly) and in patients with decreased levels of con-
sciousness. Many pathogens are inhaled as contaminated
droplets. Rarely, pneumonia occurs via hematogenous
spread (e.g., from tricuspid endocarditis) or by contiguous
extension from an infected pleural or mediastinal space.
Mechanical factors are critically important in host
defense.The hairs and turbinates of the nares catch larger
inhaled particles before they reach the lower respiratory
CHAPTER 11
CHAPTER 11
99
Deﬁnition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 99
Pathophysiology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 99
Pathology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100
I Community-Acquired Pneumonia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
Etiology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
Epidemiology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
Clinical Manifestations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102
Diagnosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
Prognosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 108
Prevention . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 108
I Health Care–Associated Pneumonia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 108
Ventilator-Associated Pneumonia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 108
Hospital-Acquired Pneumonia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 113
I Further Readings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 114
Diseases of the Respiratory System
100
SECTION II
tract, and the branching architecture of the tracheo-
bronchial tree traps particles on the airway lining, where
mucociliary clearance and local antibacterial factors
either clear or kill the potential pathogen.The gag reﬂex
and the cough mechanism offer critical protection from
aspiration. In addition, the normal ﬂora adhering to
mucosal cells of the oropharynx, whose components are
remarkably constant, prevent pathogenic bacteria from
binding, thereby decreasing the risk of pneumonia
caused by these more virulent bacteria.
When these barriers are overcome or when the
microorganisms are small enough to be inhaled to the
alveolar level, resident alveolar macrophages are extremely
efﬁcient at clearing and killing pathogens. Macrophages
are assisted by local proteins (e.g., surfactant proteins A
and D) that have intrinsic opsonizing properties or
antibacterial or antiviral activity. After they have been
engulfed, the pathogens—even if they are not killed by
macrophages—are eliminated via either the mucociliary
elevator or the lymphatics and no longer represent an
infectious challenge. Only when the capacity of the alve-
olar macrophages to ingest or kill the microorganisms is
exceeded does clinical pneumonia become manifest. In
that situation, the alveolar macrophages initiate the
inﬂammatory response to bolster lower respiratory tract
defenses.The host inﬂammatory response, rather than the
proliferation of microorganisms, triggers the clinical syn-
drome of pneumonia.The release of inﬂammatory medi-
ators, such as interleukin (IL) 1 and tumor necrosis factor
(TNF), results in fever. Chemokines, such as IL-8 and
granulocyte colony-stimulating factor, stimulate the
release of neutrophils and their attraction to the lung,
producing both peripheral leukocytosis and increased
purulent secretions. Inﬂammatory mediators released by
macrophages and the newly recruited neutrophils create
an alveolar capillary leak equivalent to that seen in acute
respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), although in pneu-
monia, this leak is localized (at least initially). Even ery-
throcytes can cross the alveolar-capillary membrane, with
consequent hemoptysis. The capillary leak, results in a
radiographic inﬁltrate and rales detectable on ausculta-
tion, and hypoxemia results from alveolar ﬁlling. More-
over, some bacterial pathogens appear to interfere with
the hypoxic vasoconstriction that would normally occur
with ﬂuid-ﬁlled alveoli, and this interference can result in
severe hypoxemia. Increased respiratory drive in systemic
inﬂammatory response syndrome (SIRS) leads to respira-
tory alkalosis. Decreased compliance caused by capillary
leak, hypoxemia, increased respiratory drive, increased
secretions, and occasionally infection-related bronchospasm
all lead to dyspnea. If severe enough, the changes in lung
mechanics secondary to reductions in lung volume and
compliance and the intrapulmonary shunting of blood
may cause the patient’s death.
PATHOLOGY
Classic pneumonia evolves through a series of pathologic
changes. The initial phase is one of edema, with the
presence of a proteinaceous exudate—and often of
bacteria—in the alveoli. This phase is rarely evident in
clinical or autopsy specimens because it is so rapidly fol-
lowed by a red hepatization phase. The presence of ery-
throcytes in the cellular intraalveolar exudate gives this
second stage its name, but neutrophils are also present
and are important from the standpoint of host defense.
TABLE 11-1
CLINICAL CONDITIONS ASSOCIATED WITH AND LIKELY PATHOGENS IN HEALTH CARE—
ASSOCIATED PNEUMONIA
PATHOGEN
PSEUDOMONAS
ACINETOBACTER
MDR
CONDITION
MRSA
AERUGINOSA
SPP.
ENTEROBACTERIACEAE
Hospitalization for ≥48 h
X
X
X
X
Hospitalization for ≥2 days
X
X
X
X
in prior 3 months
Nursing home or extended-
X
X
X
X
care facility residence
Antibiotic therapy in 
X
X
preceding 3 months
Chronic dialysis
X
Home infusion therapy
X
Home wound care
X
Family member with
X
X
MDR infection
Note: MDR, multidrug resistant; MRSA, methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus.
Bacteria are occasionally seen in cultures of alveolar
specimens collected during this phase. In the third phase,
gray hepatization, no new erythrocytes are extravasating,
and those already present have been lysed and degraded.
The neutrophil is the predominant cell, ﬁbrin deposition
is abundant, and bacteria have disappeared. This phase
corresponds with successful containment of the infection
and improvement in gas exchange. In the ﬁnal phase, res-
olution, the macrophage is the dominant cell type in the
alveolar space, and the debris of neutrophils, bacteria, and
ﬁbrin has been cleared, as has the inﬂammatory response.
This pattern has been described best for pneumococcal
pneumonia and may not apply to pneumonias of all eti-
ologies, especially viral or Pneumocystis pneumonia. In
VAP, respiratory bronchiolitis may precede the develop-
ment of a radiologically apparent inﬁltrate. Because of the
microaspiration mechanism, a bronchopneumonia pattern
is most common in nosocomial pneumonias, but a lobar
pattern is more common in bacterial CAP. Despite the
radiographic appearance, viral and Pneumocystis pneumo-
nias represent alveolar rather than interstitial processes.
COMMUNITY-ACQUIRED PNEUMONIA
ETIOLOGY
The extensive list of potential etiologic agents in CAP
includes bacteria, fungi, viruses, and protozoa. Newly
identiﬁed pathogens include hantaviruses, metapneu-
moviruses, the coronavirus responsible for severe acute
respiratory syndrome (SARS), and community-acquired
strains of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA).
Most cases of CAP, however, are caused by relatively few
pathogens (Table 11-2). Although Streptococcus pneumoniae
is most common, other organisms must also be consid-
ered in light of the patient’s risk factors and severity of
illness. In most cases, it is most useful to think of the
potential causes as either “typical” bacterial pathogens or
“atypical” organisms. The former category includes S.
pneumoniae,Haemophilus inﬂuenzae, and (in selected patients)
S. aureus and gram-negative bacilli such as Klebsiella pneu-
moniae and Pseudomonas aeruginosa.The “atypical” organ-
isms include Mycoplasma pneumoniae, Chlamydophila pneu-
moniae, and Legionella spp. as well as respiratory viruses
such as inﬂuenza viruses, adenoviruses, and respiratory
syncytial viruses (RSVs). Data suggest that a virus may be
responsible in up to 18% of cases of CAP that require
admission to the hospital.The atypical organisms cannot
be cultured on standard media, nor can they be seen on
Gram’s stain. The frequency and importance of atypical
pathogens such as M. pneumoniae and C. pneumoniae in
outpatients and Legionella spp. in inpatients have signiﬁ-
cant implications for therapy.These organisms are intrin-
sically resistant to all β-lactam agents and must be treated
with a macrolide, a ﬂuoroquinolone, or a tetracycline. In
the ∼10–15% of CAP cases that are polymicrobial, the
etiology often includes a combination of typical and
atypical pathogens.
Anaerobes play a signiﬁcant role only when an
episode of aspiration has occurred days to weeks before
presentation for pneumonia. The combination of an
unprotected airway (e.g., in patients with alcohol or
drug overdose or a seizure disorder) and signiﬁcant gin-
givitis constitutes the major risk factor.Anaerobic pneu-
monias are often complicated by abscess formation and
signiﬁcant empyemas or parapneumonic effusions.
S. aureus pneumonia is well known to complicate
inﬂuenza infection. Recently, however, MRSA strains
have been reported as primary causes of CAP. Although
this entity is still relatively uncommon, clinicians must
be aware of its potentially serious consequences, such as
necrotizing pneumonia. Two important developments
have led to this problem: the spread of MRSA from the
hospital setting to the community and the emergence of
genetically distinct strains of MRSA in the community.
These novel community-acquired MRSA (CA-MRSA)
strains have infected healthy individuals who have had
no association with health care.
Unfortunately, despite a careful history and physical
examination as well as routine radiographic studies, it is
usually impossible to predict the pathogen in a case of
CAP with any degree of certainty; in more than half of
cases, a speciﬁc etiology is never determined. Nevertheless,
it is important to consider epidemiologic and risk factors
that might suggest certain pathogens (Table 11-3).
EPIDEMIOLOGY
In the United States, about 80% of the 4 million CAP
cases that occur annually are treated on an outpatient
Pneumonia
101
CHAPTER 11
TABLE 11-2
MICROBIAL CAUSES OF COMMUNITY-ACQUIRED
PNEUMONIA, BY SITE OF CARE
HOSPITALIZED PATIENTS
OUTPATIENTS
NON-ICU
ICU
Streptococcus
S. pneumoniae
S. pneumoniae
pneumoniae
Mycoplasma
M. pneumoniae
Staphylococcus
pneumoniae
aureus
Haemophilus
Chlamydophila
Legionella spp.
inﬂuenzae
pneumoniae
C. pneumoniae
H. inﬂuenzae
Gram-negative
bacilli
Respiratory
Legionella spp.
H. inﬂuenzae 
virusesa
Respiratory
virusesa
aInﬂuenza A and B viruses, adenoviruses, respiratory syncytial viruses,
parainﬂuenza viruses.
Note: Pathogens are listed in descending order of frequency.
ICU, intensive care unit.
basis, and about 20% are treated in the hospital. CAP
results in more than 600,000 hospitalizations, 64 million
days of restricted activity, and 45,000 deaths annually.
The overall yearly cost associated with CAP is estimated
at $9 to $10 billion (U.S.).The incidence rates are high-
est at the extremes of age. Although the overall annual
ﬁgure in the United States is 12 cases per 1000 persons,
the ﬁgure is 12 to 18 per 1000 among children younger
than 4 years of age and 20 per 1000 among persons
older than 60 years of age.
The risk factors for CAP in general and for pneumo-
coccal pneumonia in particular have implications for
treatment regimens. Risk factors for CAP include alco-
holism, asthma, immunosuppression, institutionalization,
and an age of 70 years or older versus 60 to 69 years.
Risk factors for pneumococcal pneumonia include
dementia, seizure disorders, heart failure, cerebrovascular
disease, alcoholism, tobacco smoking, chronic obstruc-
tive pulmonary disease, and HIV infection. CA-MRSA
infection is more likely in Native Americans, homeless
youths, men who have sex with men, prison inmates,
military recruits, children in daycare centers, and athletes
such as wrestlers. The Enterobacteriaceae tend to affect
patients who have recently been hospitalized or received
antibiotic therapy or who have comorbidities such as
alcoholism, heart failure, or renal failure. P. aeruginosa
may also infect these patients as well as those with severe
structural lung disease. Risk factors for Legionella infec-
tion include diabetes, hematologic malignancy, cancer,
severe renal disease, HIV infection, smoking, male gen-
der, and a recent hotel stay or ship cruise. (Many of
these risk factors would now reclassify as HCAP some
cases that were previously designated CAP.)
CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
CAP can vary from indolent to fulminant in presenta-
tion and from mild to fatal in severity.The various signs
and symptoms, which depend on the progression and
severity of the infection, include both constitutional
ﬁndings and manifestations limited to the lung and its
associated structures. In light of the pathobiology of the
disease, many of the ﬁndings are to be expected.
The patient is frequently febrile with a tachycardic
response and may have chills or sweats and cough that is
either nonproductive or productive of mucoid, purulent,
or blood-tinged sputum. In accordance with the severity
of infection, the patient may be able to speak in full sen-
tences or may be very short of breath. If the pleura is
involved, the patient may experience pleuritic chest pain.
Up to 20% of patients may have gastrointestinal symptoms
such as nausea, vomiting, or diarrhea. Other symptoms
may include fatigue,headache,myalgias,and arthralgias.
Findings on physical examination vary with the
degree of pulmonary consolidation and the presence or
absence of a signiﬁcant pleural effusion. An increased
respiratory rate and use of accessory muscles of respira-
tion are common. Palpation may reveal increased or
decreased tactile fremitus, and the percussion note can
vary from dull to ﬂat, reﬂecting underlying consolidated
lung and pleural ﬂuid, respectively. Crackles, bronchial
breath sounds, and possibly a pleural friction rub may be
heard on auscultation.The clinical presentation may not
be so obvious in the elderly, who may initially display
new-onset or worsening confusion and few other mani-
festations. Severely ill patients who have septic shock
secondary to CAP are hypotensive and may have evi-
dence of organ failure.
Diseases of the Respiratory System
102
SECTION II
TABLE 11-3
EPIDEMIOLOGIC FACTORS SUGGESTING POSSIBLE
CAUSES OF COMMUNITY-ACQUIRED PNEUMONIA
FACTOR
POSSIBLE PATHOGEN(S)
Alcoholism
Streptococcus pneumoniae,
oral anaerobes, Klebsiella
pneumoniae, Acinetobacter
spp., Mycobacterium
tuberculosis
COPD or smoking
Haemophilus inﬂuenzae,
Pseudomonas aeruginosa,
Legionella spp.,
S. pneumoniae, Moraxella
catarrhalis, Chlamydophila
pneumoniae
Structural lung
P. aeruginosa, Burkholderia
disease (e.g.,
cepacia, Staphylococcus
bronchiectasis) 
aureus 
Dementia, stroke,
Oral anaerobes, gram-
decreased level of
negative enteric bacteria 
consciousness
Lung abscess
CA-MRSA, oral anaerobes,
endemic fungi, M. tuberculosis,
atypical mycobacteria
Travel to Ohio or
Histoplasma capsulatum
St. Lawrence
River valleys
Travel to
Hantavirus, Coccidioides spp.
southwestern
United States
Travel to
Burkholderia pseudomallei,
Southeast Asia
avian inﬂuenza virus
Stay in hotel or on
Legionella spp.
cruise ship in
previous 2 weeks
Local inﬂuenza
Inﬂuenza virus, 
activity
S. pneumoniae, S. aureus
Exposure to bats
H. capsulatum
or birds
Exposure to birds
Chlamydophila psittaci
Exposure to rabbits
Francisella tularensis
Exposure to sheep,
Coxiella burnetii 
goats, parturient cats
Note: CA-MRSA, community-acquired methicillin-resistant Staphylo-
coccus aureus; COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
DIAGNOSIS
When confronted with possible CAP, the physician must
ask two questions: Is this pneumonia, and, if so, what is
the etiology? Whereas the former question is typically
answered by clinical and radiographic methods, the latter
requires the aid of laboratory techniques.
Clinical Diagnosis
The differential diagnosis includes both infectious and
noninfectious entities such as acute bronchitis, acute exac-
erbations of chronic bronchitis, heart failure, pulmonary
embolism, and radiation pneumonitis.The importance of a
careful history cannot be overemphasized. For example,
known cardiac disease may suggest worsening pulmonary
edema, and underlying carcinoma may suggest lung injury
secondary to radiation. Epidemiologic clues, such as recent
travel to areas with known endemic pathogens, may alert
the physician to speciﬁc possibilities (Table 11-3).
Unfortunately, the sensitivity and speciﬁcity of the
ﬁndings on physical examination are less than ideal,
averaging 58% and 67%, respectively. Therefore, chest
radiography is often necessary to help differentiate CAP
from other conditions. Radiographic ﬁndings serve as a
baseline and may include risk factors for increased
severity (e.g., cavitation or multilobar involvement).
Occasionally, radiographic results suggest an etiologic
diagnosis. For example, pneumatoceles suggest infection
with S. aureus, and an upper-lobe cavitating lesion sug-
gests tuberculosis. CT is rarely necessary but may be of
value in a patient with suspected postobstructive pneu-
monia caused by a tumor or foreign body. For patients
managed on an outpatient basis, the clinical and radio-
logic assessment is usually all that is done before treat-
ment is started because most laboratory test results are
not available soon enough to inﬂuence initial manage-
ment. In certain cases, however (e.g., inﬂuenza virus
infection), the availability of rapid point-of-care diag-
nostic tests and access to speciﬁc drugs for treatment and
prevention can be very important.
Etiologic Diagnosis
The cause of pneumonia usually cannot be determined
on the basis of clinical presentation; instead, the physician
must rely on the laboratory for support. Except for the
2% of CAP patients who are admitted to the intensive
care unit (ICU), no data exist to show that treatment
directed at a speciﬁc pathogen is statistically superior to
empirical therapy.The beneﬁts of establishing a microbial
etiology can therefore be questioned, particularly in light
of the cost of diagnostic testing. However, a number of
reasons can be advanced for attempting an etiologic diag-
nosis. Identiﬁcation of an unexpected pathogen allows
narrowing of the initial empirical regimen, which
decreases antibiotic selection pressure and may lessen the
risk of resistance. Pathogens with important public safety
implications, such as Mycobacterium tuberculosis and inﬂuenza
virus, may be found in some cases. Finally, without culture
and susceptibility data, trends in resistance cannot be fol-
lowed accurately, and appropriate empirical therapeutic
regimens are harder to devise.
Gram’s Stain and Culture of Sputum
The main purpose of the sputum Gram’s stain is to ensure
that a sample is suitable for culture. However, Gram’s
staining may also help to identify certain pathogens (e.g.,
S. pneumoniae, S. aureus, and gram-negative bacteria) by
their characteristic appearance.To be adequate for culture,
a sputum sample must have >25 neutrophils and <10
squamous epithelial cells per low-power ﬁeld.The sensi-
tivity and speciﬁcity of the sputum Gram’s stain and culture
are highly variable; even in cases of proven bacteremic
pneumococcal pneumonia; the yield of positive cultures
from sputum samples is ≤50%.
Some patients, particularly elderly individuals, may
not be able to produce an appropriate expectorated spu-
tum sample. Others may already have started a course of
antibiotics, which can interfere with results, at the time a
sample is obtained.The inability to produce sputum can
be a consequence of dehydration, and the correction of
this condition may result in increased sputum produc-
tion and a more obvious inﬁltrate on chest radiography.
For patients admitted to the ICU and intubated, a deep-
suction aspirate or bronchoalveolar lavage sample should
be sent to the microbiology laboratory as soon as possi-
ble. Because the causes in severe CAP are somewhat dif-
ferent from those in milder disease (Table 11-2), the
greatest beneﬁt of staining and culturing respiratory
secretions is to alert the physician of unsuspected or
resistant pathogens and to permit appropriate modiﬁca-
tion of therapy. Other stains and cultures may be useful
as well. For suspected tuberculosis or fungal infection,
speciﬁc stains are available. Cultures of pleural ﬂuid
obtained from effusions >1 cm in height on a lateral
decubitus chest radiograph may also be helpful.
Blood Cultures
The yield from blood cultures, even those obtained
before antibiotic therapy, is disappointingly low. Only
∼5–14% of cultures of blood from patients hospitalized
with CAP are positive, and the most frequently isolated
pathogen is S. pneumoniae. Because recommended empir-
ical regimens all provide pneumococcal coverage, a blood
culture positive for this pathogen has little, if any, effect
on clinical outcome. However, susceptibility data may
allow a switch from a broader-spectrum regimen (e.g., a
ﬂuoroquinolone or β-lactam plus a macrolide) to peni-
cillin in appropriate cases. Because of the low yield and
the lack of signiﬁcant impact on outcome, blood cultures
are no longer considered de rigueur for all hospitalized
CAP patients. Certain high-risk patients—including
Pneumonia
103
CHAPTER 11
those with neutropenia secondary to pneumonia, asple-
nia, or complement deﬁciencies; chronic liver disease; or
severe CAP—should have their blood cultured.
Antigen Tests
Two commercially available tests detect pneumococcal
and certain Legionella antigens in urine. The test for
Legionella pneumophila detects only serogroup 1, but this
serogroup accounts for most community-acquired cases
of Legionnaires’ disease.The sensitivity and speciﬁcity of
the Legionella urine antigen test are as high as 90% and
99%, respectively. The pneumococcal urine antigen
test is also quite sensitive and speciﬁc (80% and >90%,
respectively). Although false-positive results can be
obtained with samples from colonized children, the test
is generally reliable. Both tests can detect antigen even
after the initiation of appropriate antibiotic therapy and
after weeks of illness. Other antigen tests include a rapid
test for inﬂuenza virus and direct ﬂuorescent antibody
tests for inﬂuenza virus and RSV, although the test for
RSV is only poorly sensitive.
Polymerase Chain Reaction
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) tests are available for a
number of pathogens, including L. pneumophila and
mycobacteria. In addition, a multiplex PCR can detect
the nucleic acid of Legionella spp., M. pneumoniae, and
C. pneumoniae. However, the use of these PCR assays is
generally limited to research studies.
Serology
A fourfold increase in speciﬁc IgM antibody titer
between acute- and convalescent-phase serum samples is
generally considered diagnostic of infection with the
pathogen in question. In the past, serologic tests were
used to help identify atypical pathogens as well as some
typical but relatively unusual organisms, such as Coxiella
burnetii. Recently, however, they have fallen out of favor
because of the time required to obtain a ﬁnal result for
the convalescent-phase sample.
minimize unnecessary hospital admissions and help to
identify patients who will beneﬁt from hospital care.
There are currently two sets of criteria: the Pneumonia
Severity Index (PSI), a prognostic model used to identify
patients at low risk of dying, and the CURB-65 criteria, a
severity-of-illness score.
To determine the PSI, points are given for 20 vari-
ables, including age, coexisting illness, and abnormal
physical and laboratory ﬁndings. On the basis of the
resulting score, patients are assigned to one of ﬁve
classes with the following mortality rates: class 1, 0.1%;
class 2, 0.6%; class 3, 2.8%; class 4, 8.2%; and class 5,
29.2%.Clinical trials have demonstrated that routine use
of the PSI results in lower admission rates for class 1 and
class 2 patients. Patients in classes 4 and 5 should be
admitted to the hospital, and those in class 3 should
ideally be admitted to an observation unit until a fur-
ther decision can be made.
The CURB-65 criteria include ﬁve variables: confusion
(C); urea >7 mmol/L (U); respiratory rate ≥30/min (R);
blood pressure,systolic ≤90 mmHg or diastolic ≤60 mmHg
(B); and age ≥65 years (65). Patients with a score of 0,
among whom the 30-day mortality rate is 1.5%, can be
treated outside the hospital. With a score of 2, the
30-day mortality rate is 9.2%, and patients should be
admitted to the hospital. Among patients with scores of
≥3, mortality rates are 22% overall; these patients may
require admission to an ICU.
At present, it is difﬁcult to say which assessment tool is
superior. The PSI is less practical in a busy emergency
department setting because of the need to assess 20 vari-
ables. Although the CURB-65 criteria are easily remem-
bered, they have not been studied as extensively.
Whichever system is used, these objective criteria must
always be tempered by careful consideration of factors
relevant to individual patients, including the ability to
comply reliably with an oral antibiotic regimen and the
resources available to the patient outside the hospital.
RESISTANCE
Antimicrobial resistance is a signiﬁ-
cant problem that threatens to diminish our therapeutic
armamentarium.
Misuse of antibiotics results in
increased antibiotic selection pressure that can affect
resistance locally or even globally by clonal dissemina-
tion. For CAP, the main resistance issues currently
involve S.pneumoniae and CA-MRSA.
S. pneumoniae
In general, pneumococcal resis-
tance is acquired by (1) direct DNA incorporation and
remodeling resulting from contact with closely related
oral commensal bacteria, (2) the process of natural
transformation,or (3) mutation of certain genes.
Pneumococcal strains are classiﬁed as sensitive to
penicillin if the minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC)
is ≤0.06 μg/mL,as intermediate if the MIC is 0.1–1.0 μg/mL,
and as resistant if the MIC is ≥2 μg/mL. Strains resistant
Diseases of the Respiratory System
104
SECTION II
Treatment:
COMMUNITY-ACQUIRED PNEUMONIA
SITE OF CARE
The decision to hospitalize a patient
with CAP must take into consideration the diminishing
health care resources and the rising costs of treatment.
The cost of inpatient management exceeds that of out-
patient treatment by a factor of 20 and accounts for
most CAP-related expenditures. Certain patients clearly
can be managed at home, and others clearly require
treatment in the hospital, but the choice is sometimes
difﬁcult. Tools that objectively assess the risk of adverse
outcomes, including severe illness and death, may
to drugs from three or more antimicrobial classes with
different mechanisms of action are considered MDR iso-
lates. Pneumococcal resistance to β-lactam drugs is
solely caused by the presence of low-afﬁnity penicillin-
binding proteins. The propensity for pneumococcal
resistance to penicillin to be associated with reduced
susceptibility to other drugs, such as macrolides,
tetracyclines, and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP-
SMX), is of concern. In the United States, 58.9% of
penicillin-resistant pneumococcal isolates from blood
cultures are also resistant to macrolides. Penicillin is an
appropriate agent for the treatment of pneumococcal
infection caused by strains with MICs of ≤1 μg/mL. For
infections caused by pneumococcal strains with peni-
cillin MICs of 2–4 μg/mL, the data are conﬂicting; some
studies suggest no increase in treatment failure with
penicillin, but others suggest increased rates of death or
complications. For strains of S. pneumoniae with inter-
mediate levels of resistance, higher doses of the drug
should be used. Risk factors for drug-resistant pneumo-
coccal infection include recent antimicrobial therapy, an
age of <2 years or >65 years, attendance at a daycare
center, recent hospitalization, and HIV infection. Fortu-
nately, resistance to penicillin appears to be reaching a
plateau.
In contrast, resistance to macrolides is increasing
through several mechanisms, including target-site mod-
iﬁcation and the presence of an efﬂux pump.Target-site
modification is caused by ribosomal methylation in
23S rRNA encoded by the ermB gene and results in
resistance to macrolides, lincosamides, and strep-
togramin B–type antibiotics. This MLSB phenotype is
associated with high-level resistance, with typical MICs
of ≥64 μg/mL. The efﬂux mechanism encoded by the
mef gene (M phenotype) is usually associated with
low-level resistance (MICs, 1–32 μg/mL). These two
mechanisms account for ∼45% and ∼65%, respectively,
of resistant pneumococcal isolates in the United States.
Some pneumococcal isolates with both the erm and
mef genes have been identiﬁed, but the exact signiﬁ-
cance of this ﬁnding is unknown. High-level resistance
to macrolides is more common in Europe, and lower-
level resistance seems to predominate in North Amer-
ica. Although clinical failures with macrolides have been
reported, many experts think that these drugs still have
a role to play in the management of pneumococcal
pneumonia in North America.
Pneumococcal resistance to ﬂuoroquinolones (e.g.,
ciproﬂoxacin and levoﬂoxacin) has been reported.
Changes can occur in one or both target sites (topoiso-
merases II and IV); changes in these two sites usually
result from mutations in the gyrA and parC genes,
respectively. The increasing number of pneumococcal
isolates that, although susceptible to ﬂuoroquinolones,
already have a mutation in one target site is of concern.
Such organisms may be more likely to undergo a second-
step mutation that will render them fully resistant to ﬂuo-
roquinolones. In addition, an efﬂux pump may play a role
in pneumococcal resistance to ﬂuoroquinolones.
CA-MRSA
CAP due to MRSA may be caused by
infection with the classic hospital-acquired strains or with
the more recently identiﬁed genotypically and pheno-
typically distinct community-acquired strains. Most
infections with the former strains have been acquired
either directly or indirectly by contact with the health
care environment and, although classiﬁed as HAP in the
past,would now be classiﬁed as HCAP.In some hospitals,
CA-MRSA strains are displacing the classic hospital-
acquired strains—a trend suggesting that the newer
strains may be more robust.
Methicillin resistance in S. aureus is determined
by the mecA gene, which encodes for resistance to all
β-lactam drugs. At least ﬁve staphylococcal chromoso-
mal cassette mec (SCCmec) types have been described.
Whereas the typical hospital-acquired strain usually has
type II or III, CA-MRSA has a type IV SCCmec element.
CA-MRSA isolates tend to be less resistant than the
older hospital-acquired strains and are often suscepti-
ble to TMP-SMX, clindamycin, and tetracycline in addi-
tion to vancomycin and linezolid. However, CA-MRSA
strains may also carry genes for superantigens, such as
enterotoxins B and C and Panton-Valentine leukocidin, a
membrane-tropic toxin that can create cytolytic pores
in polymorphonuclear neutrophils, monocytes, and
macrophages.
Gram-Negative Bacilli
A detailed discussion of
resistance among gram-negative bacilli is beyond the
scope of this chapter. Fluoroquinolone resistance
among isolates of Escherichia coli from the community
appears to be increasing. Enterobacter spp. are typically
resistant to cephalosporins; the drugs of choice for use
against these bacteria are usually ﬂuoroquinolones or
carbapenems. Similarly, when infections caused by bac-
teria producing extended-spectrum β-lactamases (ESBLs)
are documented or suspected, a ﬂuoroquinolone or a
carbapenem should be used; these MDR strains are
more likely to be involved in HCAP.
INITIAL ANTIBIOTIC MANAGEMENT
Because
the physician rarely knows the etiology of CAP at the out-
set of treatment, initial therapy is usually empirical and is
designed to cover the most likely pathogens (Table 11-4).
In all cases, antibiotic treatment should be initiated as
expeditiously as possible.
The CAP treatment guidelines in the United States
(summarized in Table 11-4) represent joint statements
from the Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA)
and the American Thoracic Society (ATS); the Canadian
guidelines come from the Canadian Infectious Disease
Society and the Canadian Thoracic Society. In these
Pneumonia
105
CHAPTER 11
guidelines, coverage is always provided for the pneu-
mococcus and the atypical pathogens.In contrast, guide-
lines from some European countries do not always
include atypical coverage based on local epidemiologic
data.The U.S.–Canadian approach is supported by retro-
spective data from almost 13,000 patients >65 years of
age. Atypical pathogen coverage provided by a
macrolide or a ﬂuoroquinolone has been associated
with a signiﬁcant reduction in mortality rates compared
with those for β-lactam coverage alone.
Therapy with a macrolide or a ﬂuoroquinolone
within the previous 3 months is associated with an
increased likelihood of infection with a macrolide- or
ﬂuoroquinolone-resistant strain of S. pneumoniae. For
this reason, a ﬂuoroquinolone-based regimen should be
used for patients recently given a macrolide and vice
versa (Table 11-4).Telithromycin,a ketolide derived from
the macrolide class, differs from the macrolides in that it
binds to bacteria more avidly and at two sites rather
than one.This drug is active against pneumococci resis-
tant to penicillins, macrolides, and ﬂuoroquinolones. Its
future role in the outpatient management of CAP will
depend on the evaluation of its safety by the U.S. Food
and Drug Administration.
After the etiologic agent(s) and susceptibilities are
known, therapy may be altered to target the speciﬁc
pathogen(s).However,this decision is not always straight-
forward. If blood cultures yield S. pneumoniae sensitive
to penicillin after 2 days of treatment with a macrolide
plus a β-lactam or a fluoroquinolone, should therapy
be switched to penicillin? Penicillin alone would not be
effective in the potential 15% of cases with atypical
co-infection.No standard approach exists.Some experts
would argue that pneumococcal coverage by a switch
to penicillin is appropriate, but others would opt for
continued coverage of both the pneumococcus and
atypical pathogens. One compromise is to continue
atypical coverage with either a macrolide or a ﬂuoro-
quinolone for a few more days and then to complete
the treatment course with penicillin alone. In all cases,
the individual patient and the various risk factors must
be considered.
Management of bacteremic pneumococcal pneumo-
nia is also controversial. Data from nonrandomized
studies suggest that combination therapy (e.g., with a
macrolide and a β-lactam) is associated with a lower
mortality rate than monotherapy,
particularly in
severely ill patients. The exact reason is unknown, but
explanations include possible atypical co-infection or
the immunomodulatory effects of the macrolides.
For patients with CAP who are admitted to the ICU,
the risk of infection with P. aeruginosa or CA-MRSA is
increased, and coverage should be considered when a
patient has risk factors or a Gram’s stain suggestive of
these pathogens (see Table 11-4). The main risk factors
Diseases of the Respiratory System
106
SECTION II
TABLE 11-4
EMPIRICAL ANTIBIOTIC TREATMENT OF
COMMUNITY-ACQUIRED PNEUMONIA
Outpatients
Previously healthy and no antibiotics in the past 3 months:
• A macrolide [clarithromycin (500 mg PO bid) or
azithromycin (500 mg PO once then 250 mg od)] or
• Doxycycline (100 mg PO bid)
Comorbidities or antibiotics in the past 3 months:
select an alternative from a different class:
• A respiratory ﬂuoroquinolone [moxiﬂoxacin
(400 mg PO od), gemiﬂoxacin (320 mg PO od),
levoﬂoxacin (750 mg PO od)] or
• A β-lactam [preferred: high-dose amoxicillin (1 g tid) or
amoxicillin/clavulanate (2 g bid); alternatives: ceftriax-
one (1–2 g IV od), cefpodoxime (200 mg PO bid),
cefuroxime (500 mg PO bid)] plus a macrolidea
In regions with a high rate of “high-level” pneumococcal 
macrolide resistance,b consider the alternatives listed
above for patients with comorbidities.
Inpatients, Non-ICU
• A respiratory ﬂuoroquinolone [moxiﬂoxacin
(400 mg PO or IV od), gemiﬂoxacin (320 mg PO od),
levoﬂoxacin (750 mg PO or IV od)]
• A β-lactamc [cefotaxime (1–2 g IV q8h), ceftriaxone (1–2
g IV od), ampicillin (1–2 g IV q4–6h), ertapenem (1 g IV
od in selected patients)] plus a macrolided oral clar-
ithromycin or azithromycin [as listed above for previ-
ously healthy patients or IV azithromycin
(1 g once, then 500 mg od)]
Inpatients, ICU
• A β-lactame [cefotaxime (1–2 g IV q8h), ceftriaxone
(2 g IV od), ampicillin-sulbactam (2 g IV q8h)] plus
• Azithromycin or a ﬂuoroquinolone (as listed above
for inpatients, non-ICU)
Special Concerns
If Pseudomonas infection is a consideration:
• An antipneumococcal, antipseudomonal β-lactam
[piperacillin/tazobactam (4.5 g IV q6h), cefepime
(1–2 g IV q12h), imipenem (500 mg IV q6h), meropenem
(1 g IV q8h)] plus either ciproﬂoxacin (400 mg IV q12h)
or levoﬂoxacin (750 mg IV od)
• The above β-lactams plus an aminoglycoside [amikacin
(15 mg/kg od) or tobramycin (1.7 mg/kg od) and
azithromycin]
• The above β-lactamsf plus an aminoglycoside plus an
antipneumococcal ﬂuoroquinolone
If CA-MRSA is a consideration:
• Add linezolid (600 mg IV q12h) or vancomycin
(1 g IV q12h)
aDoxycycline (100 mg PO bid) is an alternative to the macrolide.
bMinimal inhibitory concentrations of >16 μg/mL in 25% of isolates.
cA respiratory ﬂuoroquinolone should be used for penicillin-allergic
patients.
dDoxycycline (100 mg IV q12h) is an alternative to the macrolide.
eFor penicillin-allergic patients, use a respiratory ﬂuoroquinolone and
aztreonam (2 g IV q8h).
fFor penicillin-allergic patients, substitute aztreonam.
Note: CA-MRSA, community-acquired methicillin-resistant Staphylo-
coccus aureus; ICU, intensive care unit.
for P. aeruginosa infection are structural lung disease
(e.g., bronchiectasis) and recent treatment with antibi-
otics or glucocorticoids. If CA-MRSA infection is sus-
pected, either linezolid or vancomycin should be added
to the initial empirical regimen.
Although hospitalized patients have traditionally
received initial therapy by the IV route, some drugs—
particularly the ﬂuoroquinolones—are very well absorbed
and can be given orally from the outset to select
patients. For patients initially treated IV, a switch to oral
treatment is appropriate as long as the patient can
ingest and absorb the drugs, is hemodynamically stable,
and is showing clinical improvement.
The duration of treatment for CAP has recently gen-
erated considerable interest. Patients have usually been
treated for 10–14 days, but recent studies with ﬂuoro-
quinolones and telithromycin suggest that a 5-day
course is sufficient for otherwise uncomplicated CAP.
A longer course is required for patients with bacteremia;
metastatic infection; or infection with a particularly viru-
lent pathogen, such as P. aeruginosa or CA-MRSA.
Longer-term therapy should also be considered if initial
treatment was ineffective and in most cases of severe
CAP. Data from studies with azithromycin, which sug-
gest 3–5 days of treatment for outpatient-managed
CAP, cannot be extrapolated to other drugs because of
the extremely long half-life of azithromycin.
Patients may be discharged from the hospital after
they are clinically stable and have no active medical
problems requiring ongoing hospital care. The site of
residence after discharge (in a nursing home, at home
with family, at home alone) is an important considera-
tion,particularly for elderly patients.
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
In addition to
appropriate antimicrobial therapy, certain general con-
siderations apply in dealing with either CAP or HAP.Ade-
quate hydration, oxygen therapy for hypoxemia, and
assisted ventilation (when necessary) are critical to the
success of therapy.Patients with severe CAP who remain
hypotensive despite ﬂuid resuscitation may have
adrenal insufﬁciency and may respond to glucocorticoid
treatment. Immunomodulatory therapy in the form of
drotrecogin alfa (activated) should be considered for
CAP patients with persistent septic shock and APACHE II
scores of 25 or above, particularly if the infection is
caused by S.pneumoniae.
Failure to Improve
Patients who are slow to
respond to therapy should be reevaluated at about day 3
(sooner if their condition is worsening rather than simply
not improving), and a number of possible scenarios
should be considered. (1) Is it a noninfectious condition?
(2) If it is an infection, is the correct pathogen being tar-
geted? (3) Is it a superinfection with a new nosocomial
pathogen? A number of noninfectious conditions can
mimic pneumonia, including pulmonary edema, pul-
monary embolism, lung carcinoma, radiation and hyper-
sensitivity pneumonitis, and connective tissue disease
involving the lungs. If the patient has CAP and treatment
is aimed at the correct pathogen, the lack of response
may be explained in a number of ways. The pathogen
may be resistant to the drug selected, or a sequestered
focus (e.g., a lung abscess or empyema) may be blocking
access of the antibiotic(s) to the pathogen. Alternatively,
the patient may be getting either the wrong drug or the
correct drug at the wrong dose or frequency of adminis-
tration. It is also possible that CAP is the correct
diagnosis but that a different pathogen (e.g., M. tubercu-
losis or a fungus) is the cause. In addition, nosocomial
superinfections—both pulmonary and extrapulmonary—
are possible explanations for persistence. In all cases of
delayed response or deteriorating condition, the patient
must be carefully reassessed and appropriate studies ini-
tiated. These studies may include such diverse proce-
dures as CT and bronchoscopy.
Complications
As in other severe infections, com-
mon complications of severe CAP include respiratory
failure, shock and multiorgan failure, bleeding diatheses,
and exacerbation of comorbid illnesses. Three particu-
larly noteworthy conditions are metastatic infection,
lung abscess, and complicated pleural effusion.Metasta-
tic infection (e.g., brain abscess or endocarditis), although
unusual, deserves immediate attention by the physician,
with a detailed workup and proper treatment. Lung
abscess may occur in association with aspiration or with
infection caused by a single CAP pathogen,such CA-MRSA,
P. aeruginosa, or (rarely) S. pneumoniae. Aspiration pneu-
monia is typically a mixed polymicrobial infection
involving both aerobes and anaerobes. In either sce-
nario, drainage should be established, and antibiotics
that cover the known or suspected pathogens should
be administered. A signiﬁcant pleural effusion should be
tapped for both diagnostic and therapeutic purposes. If
the ﬂuid has a pH of <7, a glucose level of <2.2 mmol/L,
and a lactate dehydrogenase concentration of >1000 U/L,
or if bacteria are seen or cultured, then the ﬂuid should
be drained,and a chest tube is usually required.
Follow-Up
Fever and leukocytosis usually resolve
within 2 and 4 days, respectively, in otherwise healthy
patients with CAP, but physical ﬁndings may persist
longer. Chest radiographic abnormalities are slowest to
resolve and may require 4–12 weeks to clear, with the
speed of clearance depending on the patient’s age and
underlying lung disease. For a patient whose condition
is improving and who (if hospitalized) has been dis-
charged,a follow-up radiograph can be done ∼4–6 weeks
later. If relapse or recurrence is documented, particularly
in the same lung segment, the possibility of an underly-
ing neoplasm must be considered.
Pneumonia
107
CHAPTER 11
PROGNOSIS
The prognosis of CAP depends on the patient’s age,
comorbidities, and site of treatment (inpatient or outpa-
tient). Young patients without comorbidity do well and
usually recover fully after ∼2 weeks. Older patients and
those with comorbid conditions can take several weeks
longer to recover fully.The overall mortality rate for the
outpatient group is <1%. For patients requiring hospital-
ization, the overall mortality rate is estimated at 10%, with
∼50% of the deaths directly attributable to pneumonia.
PREVENTION
The main preventive measure is vaccination. The rec-
ommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immu-
nization Practices should be followed for inﬂuenza and
pneumococcal vaccines. In the event of an inﬂuenza
outbreak, unprotected patients at risk from complica-
tions should be vaccinated immediately and given
chemoprophylaxis with either oseltamivir or zanamivir
for 2 weeks—i.e., until vaccine-induced antibody levels
are sufﬁciently high. Because of an increased risk of
pneumococcal infection, even among patients without
obstructive lung disease, smokers should be strongly
encouraged to stop smoking.
HEALTH CARE–ASSOCIATED
PNEUMONIA
VENTILATOR-ASSOCIATED PNEUMONIA
Most research on VAP has focused on illness in the hos-
pital setting. However, the information and principles
based on this research can be applied to HCAP not
associated with ventilator use as well.The main rationale
for the new designation HCAP is that the pathogens
and treatment strategies for VAP are more similar to
those for HAP than to those for pure CAP.The greatest
difference between VAP and HCAP or HAP—and the
greatest similarity of VAP to CAP—is the return to
dependence on expectorated sputum for a microbio-
logic diagnosis, which is further complicated by the fre-
quent colonization with pathogens among patients in
the hospital or other health care–associated settings.
Etiology
Potential etiologic agents of VAP include both MDR
and non-MDR bacterial pathogens (Table 11-5). The
non-MDR group is nearly identical to the pathogens
found in severe CAP (see Table 11-2); it is not surprising
that such pathogens predominate if  VAP develops in the
ﬁrst 5–7 days of the hospital stay. However, if patients
have other risk factors for HCAP, MDR pathogens are a
consideration, even early in the hospital course. The
relative frequency of individual MDR pathogens can
vary signiﬁcantly from hospital to hospital and even
between different critical care units within the same
institution. Many hospitals have problems with P. aeruginosa
and MRSA, but other MDR pathogens are often insti-
tution speciﬁc.
Less commonly, fungal and viral pathogens cause VAP,
most frequently affecting severely immunocompromised
patients. Rarely, community-associated viruses cause
mini epidemics, usually when introduced by ill health
care workers.
Epidemiology
Pneumonia is a common complication among patients
requiring mechanical ventilation. Prevalence estimates
vary between six and 52 cases per 100 patients, depend-
ing on the population studied. On any given day in the
ICU, an average of 10% of patients will have pneumonia—
VAP in the overwhelming majority of cases. The fre-
quency of diagnosis is not static but changes with the
duration of mechanical ventilation, with the highest
hazard ratio in the ﬁrst 5 days and a plateau in additional
cases (1% per day) after ∼2 weeks. However, the cumula-
tive rate among patients who remain ventilated for as
long as 30 days is as high as 70%. These rates often do
not reﬂect the recurrence of VAP in the same patient.
After a ventilated patient has been transferred to a
chronic care facility or to home, the incidence of pneu-
monia decreases signiﬁcantly, especially in the absence of
other risk factors for pneumonia.
Three factors are critical in the pathogenesis of
VAP: colonization of the oropharynx with pathogenic
microorganisms, aspiration of these organisms from
the oropharynx into the lower respiratory tract, and
Diseases of the Respiratory System
108
SECTION II
TABLE 11-5
MICROBIOLOGIC CAUSES OF VENTILATOR-
ASSOCIATED PNEUMONIA
NON-MDR PATHOGENS
MDR PATHOGENS
Streptococcus pneumoniae
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Other Streptococcus spp.
MRSA
Haemophilus inﬂuenzae
Acinetobacter spp.
MSSA
Antibiotic-resistant
Enterobacteriaceae
Antibiotic-sensitive
Enterobacter spp.
Enterobacteriaceae
Escherichia coli
ESBL-positive strains
Klebsiella pneumoniae
Klebsiella spp.
Proteus spp.
Legionella pneumophila
Enterobacter spp.
Burkholderia cepacia
Serratia marcescens
Aspergillus spp.
Note: ESBL, extended-spectrum β-lactamase; MDR, multidrug-
resistant; MRSA, methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus; MSSA,
methicillin-sensitive S. aureus.
compromise of the normal host defense mechanisms. Most
risk factors and their corresponding prevention strategies
pertain to one of these three factors (Table 11-6).
The most obvious risk factor is the endotracheal tube
(ET), which bypasses the normal mechanical factors, pre-
venting aspiration. Although the presence of an ET may
prevent large-volume aspiration, microaspiration is actu-
ally enhanced by secretions pooling above the cuff.The
ET and the concomitant need for suctioning can damage
the tracheal mucosa, thereby facilitating tracheal colo-
nization. In addition, pathogenic bacteria can form a gly-
cocalyx bioﬁlm on the ET surface that protects them
from both antibiotics and host defenses.The bacteria can
also be dislodged during suctioning and can reinoculate
the trachea, or tiny fragments of glycocalyx can embolize
to distal airways, carrying bacteria with them.
In a high percentage of critically ill patients, the nor-
mal oropharyngeal ﬂora is replaced by pathogenic
microorganisms. The most important risk factors are
antibiotic selection pressure, cross-infection from other
infected or colonized patients or contaminated equip-
ment, and malnutrition.
How the lower respiratory tract defenses become over-
whelmed remains poorly understood. Almost all intu-
bated patients experience microaspiration and are at least
transiently colonized with pathogenic bacteria. However,
only around one-third of colonized patients develop VAP.
Severely ill patients with sepsis and trauma appear to enter
a state of immunoparalysis several days after admission to
the ICU—a time that corresponds to the greatest risk of
developing VAP.The mechanism of this immunosuppres-
sion is not clear, although several factors have been sug-
gested. Hyperglycemia affects neutrophil function, and
recent trials suggest that keeping the blood sugar close to
normal with exogenous insulin may have beneﬁcial
effects, including a decreased risk of infection. More fre-
quent transfusions, especially of leukocyte-depleted red
blood cells, also affect the immune response positively.
Clinical Manifestations
The clinical manifestations of  VAP are generally the same
as for all other forms of pneumonia: fever, leukocyto-
sis, increase in respiratory secretions, and pulmonary
Pneumonia
109
CHAPTER 11
TABLE 11-6
PATHOGENIC MECHANISMS AND CORRESPONDING PREVENTION STRATEGIES
FOR VENTILATOR-ASSOCIATED PNEUMONIA
PATHOGENIC MECHANISM
PREVENTION STRATEGY
Oropharyngeal colonization
with pathogenic bacteria
Elimination of normal ﬂora
Avoidance of prolonged antibiotic courses
Large-volume oropharyngeal
Short course of prophylactic antibiotics for comatose patientsa
aspiration around time of
intubation
Gastroesophageal reﬂux
Postpyloric enteral feedingb; avoidance of high gastric residuals,
prokinetic agents
Bacterial overgrowth of stomach
Avoidance of GI bleeding caused by prophylactic agents that
increase gastric pHb; selective decontamination of the digestive
tract with nonabsorbable antibioticsb
Cross-infection from other
Hand washing, especially with an alcohol-based hand rub;
colonized patients
intensive infection control educationa; isolation; proper cleaning
of reusable equipment
Large-volume aspiration
Endotracheal intubation; avoidance of sedation; decompression
of small-bowel obstruction
Microaspiration around the
endotracheal tube
Endotracheal intubation
Noninvasive ventilationa
Prolonged duration of ventilation
Daily awakening from sedation,a weaning protocolsa
Abnormal swallowing function
Early percutaneous tracheostomya
Secretions pooled above 
Head of bed elevateda; continuous aspiration of subglottic
the ET
secretions with specialized ETa; avoidance of reintubation;
minimization of sedation and patient transport
Altered lower respiratory
Tight glycemic controla; lowering of hemoglobin transfusion
host defenses
threshold; specialized enteral feeding formula
aStrategies demonstrated to be effective in at least one randomized controlled trial.
bStrategies with negative randomized trials or conﬂicting results.
Note: ET, endotracheal tube; GI, gastrointestinal.
consolidation on physical examination, along with a new
or changing radiographic inﬁltrate. The frequency of
abnormal chest radiographs before the onset of pneumo-
nia in intubated patients and the limitations of portable
radiographic technique make interpretation of radi-
ographs more difﬁcult than in patients who are not intu-
bated. Other clinical features may include tachypnea,
tachycardia, worsening oxygenation, and increased minute
ventilation.
Diagnosis
No single set of criteria is reliably diagnostic of pneu-
monia in a ventilated patient. The inability to identify
such patients compromises efforts to prevent and treat
VAP and even calls into question estimates of the impact
of  VAP on mortality rates.
Application of clinical criteria consistently results in
overdiagnosis of VAP, largely because of three common
ﬁndings in at-risk patients: (1) tracheal colonization
with pathogenic bacteria in patients with ETs, (2) multi-
ple alternative causes of radiographic inﬁltrates in
mechanically ventilated patients, and (3) the high fre-
quency of other sources of fever in critically ill patients.
The differential diagnosis of VAP includes a number of
entities, such as atypical pulmonary edema, pulmonary
contusion or hemorrhage, hypersensitivity pneumonitis,
ARDS, and pulmonary embolism. Clinical ﬁndings in
ventilated patients with fever or leukocytosis may have
alternative causes, including antibiotic-associated diar-
rhea, sinusitis, urinary tract infection, pancreatitis, and
drug fever. Conditions mimicking pneumonia are often
documented in patients in whom VAP has been ruled
out by accurate diagnostic techniques. Most of these
alternative diagnoses do not require antibiotic treatment;
require antibiotics different from those used to treat
VAP; or require some additional intervention, such as
surgical drainage or catheter removal, for optimal man-
agement.
This diagnostic dilemma has led to debate and con-
troversy. The major question is whether a quantitative-
culture approach as a means of eliminating false-positive
clinical diagnoses is superior to the clinical approach
enhanced by principles learned from quantitative-culture
studies. The recent IDSA/ATS guidelines for HCAP
suggest that either approach is clinically valid.
Quantitative-Culture Approach
The essence of the quantitative-culture approach is to
discriminate between colonization and true infection by
determining the bacterial burden.The more distal in the
respiratory tree the diagnostic sampling, the more spe-
ciﬁc the results and therefore the lower the threshold of
growth necessary to diagnose pneumonia and exclude
colonization. For example, a quantitative endotracheal
aspirate yields proximate samples, and the diagnostic
threshold is 106 cfu/mL.The protected specimen brush
method, in contrast, obtains distal samples and has a
threshold of 103 cfu/mL. Conversely, sensitivity declines
as more distal secretions are obtained, especially when
they are collected blindly (i.e., by a technique other than
bronchoscopy). Additional tests that may increase the
diagnostic yield include Gram’s stain, differential cell
counts, staining for intracellular organisms, and detection
of local protein levels elevated in response to infection.
Several studies have compared patient cohorts managed
by the various quantitative-culture methods. Although
these studies documented issues of relative sensitivity and
speciﬁcity, outcomes were not signiﬁcantly different for
the various groups of patients.The IDSA/ATS guidelines
have suggested that all these methods are appropriate and
that the choice depends on availability and local
expertise.
The Achilles heel of the quantitative approach is the
effect of antibiotic therapy. With sensitive microorgan-
isms, a single antibiotic dose can reduce colony counts
below the diagnostic threshold. Recent changes in
antibiotic therapy are the most signiﬁcant. After ≥3 days
of consistent antibiotic therapy for another infection
before suspicion of pneumonia, the accuracy of diagnos-
tic tests for pneumonia is unaffected. Conversely, colony
counts above the diagnostic threshold during antibiotic
therapy suggest that the current antibiotics are ineffec-
tive. Even the normal host response may be sufﬁcient to
reduce quantitative-culture counts below the diagnostic
threshold by the time of sampling. In short, expertise in
quantitative-culture techniques is critical, with a speci-
men obtained as soon as pneumonia is suspected and
before antibiotic therapy is initiated or changed.
In a study comparing the quantitative with the clini-
cal approach, use of bronchoscopic quantitative cultures
resulted in signiﬁcantly less antibiotic use at 14 days after
study entry and lower rates of mortality and severity-
adjusted mortality at 28 days. In addition, more alterna-
tive sites of infection were found in patients randomized
to the quantitative-culture strategy. A critical aspect of
this study was that antibiotic treatment was initiated
only in patients whose gram-stained respiratory sample
was positive or who displayed signs of hemodynamic
instability. Fewer than half as many patients were treated
for pneumonia in the bronchoscopy group, and only
one-third as many microorganisms were cultured.
Clinical Approach
The lack of speciﬁcity of a clinical diagnosis of  VAP has
led to efforts to improve the diagnostic criteria. The
Clinical Pulmonary Infection Score (CPIS) was devel-
oped by weighting of the various clinical criteria usually
used for the diagnosis of VAP (Table 11-7). Use of the
CPIS allows the selection of low-risk patients who may
need only short-course antibiotic therapy or no treat-
ment at all. Moreover, studies have demonstrated that
Diseases of the Respiratory System
110
SECTION II
the absence of bacteria in gram-stained endotracheal
aspirates makes pneumonia an unlikely cause of fever or
pulmonary inﬁltrates. These ﬁndings, coupled with a
heightened awareness of the alternative diagnoses possi-
ble in patients with suspected VAP, can prevent inappro-
priate treatment for this disease. Furthermore, data show
that the absence of an MDR pathogen in tracheal aspi-
rate cultures eliminates the need for MDR coverage
when empirical antibiotic therapy is narrowed. Because
the most likely explanations for the mortality beneﬁt of
bronchoscopic quantitative cultures are decreased antibi-
otic selection pressure (which reduces the risk of subse-
quent infection with MDR pathogens) and identiﬁcation
of alternative sources of infection, a clinical diagnostic
approach that incorporates such principles may result in
similar outcomes.
However, antibiotic selection pressure leads to the fre-
quent involvement of MDR pathogens by selecting
either for drug-resistant isolates of common pathogens
(MRSA and ESBL-positive Enterobacteriaceae) or for
intrinsically resistant pathogens (P. aeruginosa and
Acinetobacter spp.). Frequent use of β-lactam drugs,
especially cephalosporins, appears to be the major risk
factor for infection with MRSA and ESBL-positive strains.
P.aeruginosa has demonstrated the ability to develop
resistance to all routinely used antibiotics.Unfortunately,
even if initially sensitive, P. aeruginosa isolates have also
shown a propensity to develop resistance during treat-
ment. Occasionally, derepression of resistance genes
may be the cause of the selection of resistant clones
within the large bacterial inoculum associated with most
pneumonias. Acinetobacter spp., Stenotrophomonas mal-
tophilia, and Burkholderia cepacia are intrinsically resis-
tant to many of the empirical antibiotic regimens listed
in Table 11-8. VAP caused by these pathogens emerges
during treatment of other infections, and resistance is
always evident at initial diagnosis.
EMPIRICAL THERAPY
Recommended options
for empirical therapy are listed in Table 11-8. Treatment
should be started after diagnostic specimens have been
obtained. The major factor in the selection of agents is
the presence of risk factors for MDR pathogens. Choices
Pneumonia
111
CHAPTER 11
TABLE 11-7
CLINICAL PULMONARY INFECTION SCORE (CPIS)
CRITERION
SCORE
Fever (°C)
≥38.5 but ≤38.9
1
>39 or <36
2
Leukocytosis
<4000 or >11,000/μL
1
Bands >50%
1 (additional)
Oxygenation (mmHg)
PaO2/FIO2 <250 and no ARDS 
2
Chest radiograph
Localized inﬁltrate
2
Patchy or diffuse inﬁltrate
1
Progression of inﬁltrate
(no ARDS or CHF)
2
Tracheal aspirate
Moderate or heavy growth
1
Same morphology on Gram’s stain
1 (additional)
Maximal scorea
12
aThe progression of the inﬁltrate is unknown, and tracheal aspirate
culture results are often unavailable at the time of the original diag-
nosis; thus, the maximal score is initially 8 to 10.
Note: ARDS, acute respiratory distress syndrome; CHF, congestive
heart failure.
Treatment: 
VENTILATOR-ASSOCIATED PNEUMONIA
Many studies have demonstrated higher mortality rates
with inappropriate than with appropriate empirical
antibiotic therapy.The key to appropriate antibiotic man-
agement of VAP is an appreciation of the patterns of resis-
tance of the most likely pathogens in any given patient.
RESISTANCE
If it were not for the risk of infection
with MDR pathogens (see Table 11-1), VAP could be
treated with the same antibiotics used for severe CAP.
TABLE 11-8
EMPIRICAL ANTIBIOTIC TREATMENT OF HEALTH
CARE—ASSOCIATED PNEUMONIA
Patients without Risk Factors for MDR Pathogens
Ceftriaxone (2 g IV q24h) or
Moxiﬂoxacin (400 mg IV q24h), ciproﬂoxacin
(400 mg IV q8h), or levoﬂoxacin (750 mg IV q24h) or
Ampicillin/sulbactam (3 g IV q6h) or
Ertapenem (1 g IV q24h)
Patients with Risk Factors for MDR Pathogens 
1. A β-lactam:
Ceftazidime (2 g IV q8h) or cefepime (2 g IV q8–12h) or
Piperacillin/tazobactam (4.5 g IV q6h), imipenem
(500 mg IV q6h or 1 g IV q8h), or meropenem
(1 g IV q8h) plus
2. A second agent active against gram-negative
bacterial pathogens:
Gentamicin or tobramycin (7 mg/kg IV q24h)
or amikacin (20 mg/kg IV q24h) or
Ciproﬂoxacin (400 mg IV q8h) or levoﬂoxacin
(750 mg IV q24h) plus
3. An agent active against gram-positive bacterial
pathogens:
Linezolid (600 mg IV q12h) or
Vancomycin (15 mg/kg, up to 1 g IV, q12h)
Note: MDR, multidrug-resistant.
among the various options listed depend on local patterns
of resistance and the patient’s prior antibiotic exposure.
The majority of patients without risk factors for MDR
infection can be treated with a single agent. The major
difference from CAP is the markedly lower incidence of
atypical pathogens in VAP; the exception is Legionella
spp., which can be a nosocomial pathogen, especially
when there are deﬁciencies in the treatment of a hospi-
tal’s potable water supply.
The standard recommendation for patients with risk
factors for MDR infection is for three antibiotics: two
directed at P.aeruginosa and one at MRSA.The choice of
a β-lactam agent provides the greatest variability in
coverage, yet the use of the broadest-spectrum agent—
a carbapenem—still represents inappropriate initial
therapy in 10–15% of cases.
SPECIFIC TREATMENT
After an etiologic diag-
nosis has been made, broad-spectrum empirical therapy
can be modiﬁed to address the known pathogen specif-
ically. For patients with MDR risk factors, antibiotic regi-
mens can be reduced to a single agent in more than
50% of cases and to a two-drug combination in more
than 20%. Only a minority of cases require a complete
course with three drugs. A negative tracheal-aspirate
culture or growth below the threshold for quantitative cul-
tures, especially if the sample was obtained before any
antibiotic change, strongly suggests that antibiotics
should be discontinued. Identiﬁcation of other con-
ﬁrmed or suspected sites of infection may require ongo-
ing antibiotic therapy, but the spectrum of pathogens
(and the corresponding antibiotic choices) may be dif-
ferent from those for VAP. If the CPIS decreases over the
ﬁrst 3 days, antibiotics should be stopped after 8 days.
An 8-day course of therapy is just as effective as a 2-week
course and is associated with less frequent emergence
of antibiotic-resistant strains.
The major controversy regarding speciﬁc therapy for
VAP concerns the need for ongoing combination treat-
ment of Pseudomonas infection. No randomized, con-
trolled trials have demonstrated a beneﬁt of combina-
tion therapy with a β-lactam and an aminoglycoside,
nor have subgroup analyses in other trials found a sur-
vival beneﬁt with such a regimen. The unacceptably
high rates of clinical failure and death for VAP caused by
P. aeruginosa despite combination therapy (see “Failure
to Improve” below) indicate that better regimens are
needed—including,perhaps,aerosolized antibiotics.
VAP caused by MRSA is associated with a 40% clinical
failure rate when treated with standard-dose van-
comycin. One proposed solution is the use of high-dose
individualized treatment, but the risk-to-beneﬁt ratio of
this approach is unknown. Linezolid appears to be more
efﬁcacious than the standard dose of vancomycin, espe-
cially in patients with renal insufﬁciency.
FAILURE TO IMPROVE
Treatment failure is not
uncommon in VAP, especially in that caused by MDR
pathogens. In addition to the 40% failure rate for MRSA
infection treated with vancomycin, VAP caused by
Pseudomonas infection has a 50% failure rate, no matter
what the regimen.The causes of clinical failure vary with
the pathogen(s) and the antibiotic(s). Inappropriate
therapy can usually be minimized by use of the recom-
mended triple-drug regimen (Table 11-8). However, the
emergence of β-lactam resistance during therapy is an
important problem,
especially in infection with
Pseudomonas and Enterobacter spp. Recurrent VAP
caused by the same pathogen is possible because the
bioﬁlm on ETs allows reintroduction of the microorgan-
ism. However, studies of VAP caused by Pseudomonas
spp.show that approximately 50% of recurrent cases are
caused by a new strain. Inadequate local levels of van-
comycin are the likely cause of treatment failure in VAP
caused by MRSA.
Treatment failure is very difﬁcult to diagnose. Pneu-
monia caused by a new superinfection, the presence of
extrapulmonary infection, and drug toxicity must be
considered in the differential diagnosis of treatment
failure. Whereas serial CPIS appears to track the clinical
response accurately, repeat quantitative cultures may
clarify the microbiologic response. A persistently ele-
vated or increasing CPIS value by day 3 of therapy is
likely to indicate failure. The most sensitive component
of the CPIS is improvement in oxygenation.
COMPLICATIONS
Apart from death, the major
complication of VAP is prolongation of mechanical ven-
tilation, with corresponding increases in length of stay
in the ICU and in the hospital. In most studies, an addi-
tional week of mechanical ventilation because of VAP is
common. The additional expense of this complication
warrants costly and aggressive efforts at prevention.
In rare cases, some types of necrotizing pneumonia
(e.g., that caused by P.aeruginosa infection) result in sig-
niﬁcant pulmonary hemorrhage. More commonly,
necrotizing infections result in the long-term complica-
tions of bronchiectasis and parenchymal scarring, lead-
ing to recurrent pneumonias. The long-term complica-
tions of pneumonia are underappreciated. Pneumonia
results in a catabolic state in a patient already nutrition-
ally at risk. The muscle loss and general debilitation
from an episode of VAP often require prolonged reha-
bilitation and, in the elderly, commonly result in an
inability to return to independent function and the
need for nursing home placement.
FOLLOW-UP
Clinical improvement, if it occurs, is
usually evident within 48 to 72 hours of the initiation of
antimicrobial treatment. Because ﬁndings on chest radi-
ography often worsen initially during treatment, they
are less helpful than clinical criteria as an indicator of
Diseases of the Respiratory System
112
SECTION II
clinical response in severe pneumonia. Although no
hard and fast rules govern the frequency of follow-up
chest radiography in seriously ill patients with pneumo-
nia, assessment every few days in a responding patient
seems appropriate. After the patient has improved sub-
stantially and has stabilized, follow-up radiographs may
not be necessary for a few weeks.
Pseudomonas spp. is rare among patients who have not
recently received antibiotics.
Minimizing the amount of microaspiration around
the ET cuff is also a strategy for avoidance of VAP. Sim-
ply elevating the head of the bed (at least 30° above
horizontal but preferably 45°) decreases VAP rates. Spe-
cially modiﬁed ETs that allow removal of the secretions
pooled above the cuff may also prevent VAP. The risk-
to-beneﬁt ratio of transporting the patient outside the
ICU for diagnostic tests or procedures should be care-
fully considered because VAP rates are increased among
transported patients.
Emphasis on the avoidance of agents that increase
gastric pH and on oropharyngeal decontamination has
been diminished by the equivocal and conﬂicting results
of more recent clinical trials.The role in the pathogene-
sis of  VAP that is played by the overgrowth of bacter-
ial components of the bowel flora in the stomach has
also been downplayed. MRSA and the nonfermenters
P. aeruginosa and Acinetobacter spp. are not normally part of
the bowel ﬂora but reside primarily in the nose and on
the skin, respectively.Therefore, an emphasis on control-
ling overgrowth of the bowel ﬂora may be relevant only
in certain populations, such as liver transplant recipients
and patients who have undergone other major intraab-
dominal procedures or who have bowel obstruction.
In outbreaks of  VAP caused by speciﬁc pathogens,
the possibility of a breakdown in infection control mea-
sures (particularly contamination of reusable equipment)
should be investigated. Even high rates of pathogens that
are already common in a particular ICU may be a result
of cross-infection. Education and reminders of the need
for consistent infection control practices can minimize
this risk.
HOSPITAL-ACQUIRED PNEUMONIA
Although signiﬁcantly less well studied than VAP, HAP in
nonintubated patients, both inside and outside the ICU,
is similar to VAP.The main differences are in the higher
frequency of non-MDR pathogens and the better
underlying host immunity in nonintubated patients.The
lower frequency of MDR pathogens allows monother-
apy in a larger proportion of cases of HAP than of  VAP.
The only pathogens that may be more common in
the non-VAP population are anaerobes.The greater risk
of macroaspiration by nonintubated patients and the
lower oxygen tensions in the lower respiratory tract of
these patients increase the likelihood of a role for anaer-
obes. As in the management of CAP, speciﬁc therapy
targeting anaerobes probably is not indicated unless
gross aspiration is a concern.
Diagnosis is even more difﬁcult for HAP in nonintu-
bated patients than for VAP. Lower respiratory tract
samples appropriate for culture are considerably more
difﬁcult to obtain from nonintubated patients. Many of
Pneumonia
113
CHAPTER 11
Prognosis
VAP is associated with signiﬁcant mortality. Crude mor-
tality rates of 50–70% have been reported, but the real
issue is attributable mortality. Many patients with VAP
have underlying diseases that would result in death even
if VAP did not occur. Attributable mortality exceeded
25% in one matched-cohort study. Patients who develop
VAP are at least twice as likely to die as those who do
not. Some of the variability in reported ﬁgures is clearly
related to the type of patient and ICU studied.VAP in
trauma patients is not associated with attributable mor-
tality, possibly because many of the patients were other-
wise healthy before being injured. However, the causative
pathogen also plays a major role. Generally, MDR
pathogens are associated with signiﬁcantly greater attrib-
utable mortality than non-MDR pathogens. Pneumonia
caused by some pathogens (e.g., S. maltophilia) is simply a
marker for a patient whose immune system is so com-
promised that death is almost inevitable.
Prevention
(Table 11-6) Because of the signiﬁcance of the ET as a
risk factor for VAP, the most important preventive inter-
vention is to avoid endotracheal intubation or at least to
minimize its duration. Successful use of noninvasive
ventilation via a nasal or full-face mask avoids many of
the problems associated with ETs. Strategies that mini-
mize the duration of ventilation have also been highly
effective in preventing VAP.
Unfortunately, a tradeoff in risks is sometimes required.
Aggressive attempts to extubate early may result in reintu-
bation(s), which pose a risk of VAP. Heavy continuous
sedation increases the risk, but self-extubation, because of
too little sedation, is also a risk. The tradeoff is probably
best illustrated by antibiotic therapy. Short-course antibi-
otic prophylaxis can decrease the risk of  VAP in comatose
patients requiring intubation, and data suggest that antibi-
otics decrease VAP rates in general. However, the major
beneﬁt appears to be a decrease in the incidence of
early-onset VAP, which is usually caused by the less patho-
genic non-MDR microorganisms. Conversely, prolonged
courses of antibiotics consistently increase the risk of
VAP caused by the more lethal MDR pathogens. Despite
its virulence and associated mortality, VAP caused by
the underlying diseases that predispose a patient to HAP
are also associated with an inability to cough adequately.
Because blood cultures are infrequently positive (<15%
of cases), the majority of patients with HAP do not have
culture data on which antibiotic modiﬁcations can be
based.Therefore, de-escalation of therapy is less likely in
patients with risk factors for MDR pathogens. Despite
these difﬁculties, the better host defenses in non-ICU
patients result in lower mortality rates than are docu-
mented for VAP. In addition, the risk of antibiotic failure
is lower in those with HAP.
FURTHER READINGS
AARTS MA et al: Empiric antibiotic therapy for suspected ventilator-
associated pneumonia: A systematic review and meta-analysis of
randomized trials. Crit Care Med 36:108, 2008 [PMID:18007262]
AMERICAN THORACIC SOCIETY/INFECTIOUS DISEASES SOCIETY OF
AMERICA: Guidelines for the management of adults with hospital-
acquired, ventilator-associated, and healthcare-associated pneu-
monia.Am J Respir Crit Care Med 171:388, 2005
CHASTRE J, FAGON JY:Ventilator-associated pneumonia.Am J Respir
Crit Care Med 165:867, 2002
FAGON JY et al: Invasive and noninvasive strategies for management
of suspected ventilator-associated pneumonia. A randomized
trial.Ann Intern Med 132:621, 2000
FINE MJ et al: A prediction rule to identify low-risk patients with
community-acquired pneumonia. N Engl J Med 336:243,
1997
KLOMPAS M: Does this patient have ventilator-associated pneumonia?
JAMA 297:1583, 2007 [PMID:17426278]
LIM WS et al: Deﬁning community acquired pneumonia severity on
presentation to hospital: An international derivation and valida-
tion study.Thorax 58:377, 2003
MANDELL LA et al: Infectious Diseases Society of America/American
Thoracic Society consensus guidelines on the management of
community-acquired pneumonia in adults. Clin Infect Dis
44(Suppl 2): S27, 2007 [PMID:17278083]
SINGH N et al: Short-course empiric antibiotic therapy for patients
with pulmonary inﬁltrates in the intensive care unit.A proposed
solution for indiscriminate antibiotic prescription. Am J Respir
Crit Care Med 162:505, 2000
VANDERKOOI OG et al: Predicting antimicrobial resistance in invasive
pneumococcal infections. Clin Infect Dis 40:1288, 2005
Diseases of the Respiratory System
114
SECTION II
Mario C. Raviglione
I
Richard J. O’Brien
Tuberculosis, one of the oldest diseases known to affect
humans, is a major cause of death worldwide. This dis-
ease, which is caused by bacteria of the Mycobacterium
tuberculosis complex, usually affects the lungs, although
other organs are involved in up to one-third of cases. If
properly treated, tuberculosis caused by drug-susceptible
strains is curable in virtually all cases. If untreated, the
disease may be fatal within 5 years in 50–65% of cases.
Transmission usually takes place through the airborne
spread of droplet nuclei produced by patients with
infectious pulmonary tuberculosis.
ETIOLOGIC AGENT
Mycobacteria belong to the family Mycobacteriaceae
and the order Actinomycetales. Of the pathogenic
species belonging to the M. tuberculosis complex, the
most common and important agent of human disease
is M. tuberculosis. The complex includes M. bovis (the
bovine tubercle bacillus—characteristically resistant to
pyrazinamide, once an important cause of tuberculosis
TUBERCULOSIS
transmitted by unpasteurized milk, and currently the
cause of a small percentage of cases worldwide), M. caprae
(related to M. bovis), M. africanum (isolated from cases in
West, Central, and East Africa), M. microti (the “vole”
bacillus, a less virulent and rarely encountered organ-
ism), M. pinnipedii (a bacillus infecting seals and sea lions
in the southern hemisphere and recently isolated from
humans), and M. canettii (a rare isolate from East African
cases that produces unusual smooth colonies on solid
media and is considered closely related to a supposed
progenitor type).
M. tuberculosis is a rod-shaped, non–spore-forming,
thin aerobic bacterium measuring 0.5 μm by 3 μm.
Mycobacteria, including M. tuberculosis, are often neutral
on Gram’s staining. However, after they have been
stained, the bacilli cannot be decolorized by acid alco-
hol; this characteristic justiﬁes their classiﬁcation as acid-
fast bacilli (AFB; Fig. 12-1). Acid fastness is mainly
attributable to the organisms’ high content of mycolic
acids, long-chain cross-linked fatty acids, and other cell-
wall lipids. Microorganisms other than mycobacteria
CHAPTER 12
CHAPTER 12
115
I Etiologic Agent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 115
I Epidemiology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 116
From Exposure to Infection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 117
From Infection to Disease . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 118
I Natural History of Disease . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 118
I Pathogenesis and Immunity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 119
Infection and Macrophage Invasion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 119
Virulence of Tubercle Bacilli . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 119
Innate Resistance to Infection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 119
The Host Response . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 119
Granuloma Formation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 119
The Macrophage-Activating Response . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 120
The Delayed-Type Hypersensitivity Reaction . . . . . . . . . . . . . 120
Role of Macrophages and Monocytes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 120
Role of T Lymphocytes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 120
Mycobacterial Lipids and Proteins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 120
Skin Test Reactivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 121
I Clinical Manifestations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 121
Pulmonary Tuberculosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 121
Extrapulmonary Tuberculosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 122
HIV-Associated Tuberculosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 126
I Diagnosis of Tuberculosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 127
Acid-Fast Bacillimicroscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 127
Mycobacterial Culture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 127
Nucleic Acid Ampliﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 127
Drug Susceptibility Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 127
Radiographic Procedures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 128
Additional Diagnostic Procedures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 128
Serologic and Other Diagnostic Tests
for Active Tuberculosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 128
Diagnosis of Latent M. Tuberculosis Infection . . . . . . . . . . . . 128
I Prevention . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 134
Bacille Calmette-Guérin Vaccination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 135
I Principles of Tuberculosis Control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 136
I Further Readings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 138
Diseases of the Respiratory System
116
SECTION II
that display some acid fastness include species of Nocardia
and Rhodococcus, Legionella micdadei, and the protozoa
Isospora and Cryptosporidium. In the mycobacterial cell
wall, lipids (e.g., mycolic acids) are linked to underlying
arabinogalactan and peptidoglycan. This structure con-
fers very low permeability of the cell wall, thus reducing
the effectiveness of most antibiotics. Another molecule
in the mycobacterial cell wall, lipoarabinomannan, is
involved in the pathogen–host interaction and facili-
tates the survival of M. tuberculosis within macrophages.
The complete genome sequence of M. tuberculosis com-
prises 4043 genes encoding 3993 proteins and 50 genes
encoding RNAs; its high guanine-plus-cytosine content
(65.6%) is indicative of an aerobic lifestyle. A large pro-
portion of genes are devoted to the production of
enzymes involved in cell wall metabolism.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
More than 5 million new cases of tuberculosis
(all forms, both pulmonary and extrapulmonary)
were reported to the World Health Organiza-
tion (WHO) in 2005; >90% of cases were reported
from developing countries. However, because of insufﬁ-
cient case detection and incomplete notiﬁcation,
reported cases represent only ∼60% of total estimated
cases. The WHO estimated that 8.8 million new cases
of tuberculosis occurred worldwide in 2005, with 95%
of them in developing countries of Asia (4.9 million),
Africa (2.6 million), the Middle East (0.6 million), and
Latin America (0.4 million). It is further estimated that
1.6 million deaths from tuberculosis occurred in 2005,
95% of them in developing countries. Estimates of
tuberculosis incidence rates (per 100,000 population)
and numbers of tuberculosis-related deaths in 2005 are
depicted in Figs. 12-2 and 12-3, respectively.
FIGURE 12-1
Acid-fast bacillus smear showing M. tuberculosis bacilli.
(Courtesy of the CDC, Atlanta.)
Incidence per 100,000
0–24
25–49
100–299
50–99
300 or more
No estimate
FIGURE 12-2
Estimated tuberculosis incidence rates (per 100,000
population) in 2005. The designations employed and the
presentation of material on this map do not imply the expres-
sion of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the WHO con-
cerning the legal status of any country, territory, city, or area
or of its authorities or concerning the delimitation of its fron-
tiers or boundaries. White lines on maps represent approxi-
mate border lines for which there may not yet be full agree-
ment. (Courtesy of the Stop TB Department, WHO, with
permission.)
During the late 1980s and early 1990s, numbers of
reported cases of tuberculosis increased in industrialized
countries.These increases were related largely to immi-
gration from countries with a high prevalence of tuber-
culosis; infection with HIV; social problems, such as
increased urban poverty, homelessness, and drug abuse;
and dismantling of tuberculosis services. During the past
few years, numbers of reported cases have begun to
decline again or stabilized in industrialized nations. In
the United States, with the implementation of stronger
control programs, the decrease resumed in 1993. In
2005, 14,097 cases of tuberculosis (4.8 cases per 100,000
population) were reported to the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention (CDC).
In the United States, tuberculosis is uncommon
among young adults of European descent, who have
only rarely been exposed to M. tuberculosis infection dur-
ing recent decades. In contrast, because of a high risk in
the past, the prevalence of M. tuberculosis infection is rel-
atively high among elderly white people, who remain at
increased risk of developing active tuberculosis. Tuber-
culosis in the United States is also a disease of young
adult members of the HIV-infected, immigrant, and dis-
advantaged or marginalized populations. Similarly, in
Europe, tuberculosis has reemerged as an important
public health problem, mainly as a result of cases among
immigrants from high-prevalence countries.
Recent data on trends indicate that in 2005, the inci-
dence of tuberculosis was stable or decreasing in most
regions; the result is a small decline globally from ﬁgures
in previous years.This global reduction is largely attribut-
able to an apparent peaking in sub-Saharan Africa, where
incidence had risen steeply since the 1980s as a result of
the HIV epidemic and the paucity of health services. In
eastern Europe, the incidence increased during the 1990s
because of deterioration in socioeconomic conditions
and the health care infrastructure; however, after peaking
in 2001, the incidence has recently stabilized.
FROM EXPOSURE TO INFECTION
M. tuberculosis is most commonly transmitted from a
person with infectious pulmonary tuberculosis to others
by droplet nuclei, which are aerosolized by coughing,
sneezing, or speaking.The tiny droplets dry rapidly; the
smallest (<5–10 μm in diameter) may remain suspended
in the air for several hours and may reach the terminal
air passages when inhaled. There may be as many as
3000 infectious nuclei per cough. Other routes of
transmission of tubercle bacilli (e.g., through the skin or
the placenta) are uncommon and of no epidemiologic
signiﬁcance.
The probability of contact with a person who has an
infectious form of tuberculosis, the intimacy and duration
of that contact, the degree of infectiousness of the case,
and the shared environment in which the contact takes
place are all important determinants of the likelihood of
transmission. Several studies of close-contact situations
have clearly demonstrated that tuberculosis patients whose
sputum contains AFB visible by microscopy are the most
likely to transmit the infection. The most infectious
patients have cavitary pulmonary disease or, much less
commonly, laryngeal tuberculosis and produce sputum
containing as many as 105–107 AFB/mL. Patients with
sputum smear–negative/culture-positive tuberculosis are
Tuberculosis
117
CHAPTER 12
Deaths from TB
0–499
500–4999
10,000–99,999
5000–9999
100,000 or more
No estimate
FIGURE 12-3
Estimated numbers of tuberculosis-related deaths in 2005. (See also disclaimer in
Fig. 12-2. Courtesy of the Stop TB Department, WHO, with permission.)
less infectious, and those with culture-negative pulmonary
disease and extrapulmonary tuberculosis are essentially
noninfectious. Because persons with both HIV infection
and tuberculosis are less likely to have cavitations, they
may be less infectious than persons without HIV co-
infection. Crowding in poorly ventilated rooms is one of
the most important factors in the transmission of tuber-
cle bacilli because it increases the intensity of contact
with a case.
In short, the risk of acquiring M. tuberculosis infection
is determined mainly by exogenous factors. Because of
delays in seeking care and in making a diagnosis, it is
estimated that in high-prevalence settings, up to 20 con-
tacts may be infected by each AFB-positive case before
the index case is found to have tuberculosis.
FROM INFECTION TO DISEASE
Unlike the risk of acquiring infection with M. tuberculosis,
the risk of developing disease after being infected
depends largely on endogenous factors, such as the
individual’s innate immunologic and nonimmunologic
defenses and level of function of cell-mediated immu-
nity (CMI). Clinical illness directly after infection is
classiﬁed as primary tuberculosis and is common among
children up to 4 years of age and among immunocom-
promised persons. Although primary tuberculosis may
be severe and disseminated, it is not generally associated
with high-level transmissibility. When infection is
acquired later in life, the chance is greater that the
mature immune system will contain it at least tem-
porarily.The majority of infected individuals who ulti-
mately develop tuberculosis do so within the ﬁrst year
or two after infection. Dormant bacilli, however, may
persist for years before reactivating to produce secondary
(or postprimary) tuberculosis, which, because of frequent
cavitation, is more often infectious than is primary dis-
ease. Overall, it is estimated that up to 10% of infected
persons will eventually develop active tuberculosis in
their lifetime. The risk is much higher among HIV-
infected persons. Reinfection of a previously infected
individual, which is common in areas with high rates of
tuberculosis transmission, may also favor the develop-
ment of disease.At the height of the tuberculosis resur-
gence in the United States in the early 1990s, molecular
typing and comparison of strains of M. tuberculosis
suggested that up to one-third of cases of active tuber-
culosis in some inner-city communities were caused by
recent transmission rather than to reactivation of latent
infection.
Age is an important determinant of the risk of disease
after infection.Among infected persons, the incidence of
tuberculosis is highest during late adolescence and early
adulthood; the reasons are unclear.The incidence among
women peaks at 25–34 years of age. In this age group,
rates among women may be higher than those among
men; at older ages, the opposite is true. The risk may
increase in elderly individuals, possibly because of wan-
ing immunity and comorbidity.
A variety of diseases and conditions favor the devel-
opment of active tuberculosis (Table 12-1). The most
potent risk factor for tuberculosis among infected indi-
viduals is clearly HIV co-infection, which suppresses
cellular immunity. The risk that latent M. tuberculosis
infection will proceed to active disease is directly related
to the patient’s degree of immunosuppression. In a study
of HIV-infected, tuberculin skin test (TST)–positive
persons, this risk varied from 2.6 to 13.3 cases per 100
person-years and increased as the CD4+ T cell count
decreased.
NATURAL HISTORY OF DISEASE
Studies conducted in various countries before the advent
of chemotherapy showed that untreated tuberculosis is
often fatal.About one-third of patients died within 1 year
after diagnosis,and one-half died within 5 years.The 5-year
mortality rate among sputum smear–positive cases was
65%. Of the survivors at 5 years, ∼60% had undergone
spontaneous remission; the remainders were still excret-
ing tubercle bacilli.
With effective, timely, and proper chemotherapy,
patients have a very high chance of being cured. How-
ever, improper use of antituberculosis drugs, while reduc-
ing mortality rates, may also result in large numbers of
chronic infectious cases, often with drug-resistant bacilli.
Diseases of the Respiratory System
118
SECTION II
TABLE 12-1
RISK FACTORS FOR ACTIVE TUBERCULOSIS AMONG
PERSONS WHO HAVE BEEN INFECTED WITH
TUBERCLE BACILLI
FACTOR
RELATIVE RISK/ODDSa
Recent infection (<1 year)
12.9
Fibrotic lesions
2–20
(spontaneously healed)
Comorbidity
HIV infection
100
Silicosis
30
Chronic renal failure or
10–25
hemodialysis
Diabetes
2–4
IV drug use
10–30
Immunosuppressive treatment
10
Gastrectomy
2–5
Jejunoileal bypass
30–60
Posttransplantation period
20–70
(renal, cardiac)
Malnutrition and severe
2
underweight
aOld infection = 1.
PATHOGENESIS AND IMMUNITY
INFECTION AND MACROPHAGE INVASION
The interaction of M. tuberculosis with the human host
begins when droplet nuclei containing microorganisms
from infectious patients are inhaled.Although the major-
ity of inhaled bacilli are trapped in the upper airways and
expelled by ciliated mucosal cells, a fraction (usually
<10%) reach the alveoli.There, alveolar macrophages that
have not yet been activated phagocytize the bacilli. Inva-
sion of macrophages by mycobacteria results largely from
binding of the bacterial cell wall with a variety of
macrophage cell-surface molecules, including comple-
ment receptors, mannose receptor, immunoglobulin
GFcγ receptor, and type A scavenger receptors. Phagocy-
tosis is enhanced by complement activation, leading to
opsonization of bacilli with C3 activation products such
as C3b.After a phagosome forms, the survival of M. tuber-
culosis within it seems to depend on reduced acidiﬁcation
because of lack of accumulation of vesicular proton-
adenosine triphosphatase. A complex series of events is
probably generated by the bacterial cell-wall glycolipid
lipoarabinomannan (LAM). LAM inhibits the intracellu-
lar increase of Ca2+.Thus, the Ca2+/calmodulin pathway
(leading to phagosome–lysosome fusion) is impaired, and
the bacilli may survive within the phagosomes. If the
bacilli are successful in arresting phagosome maturation,
then replication begins, and the macrophage eventually
ruptures and releases its bacillary contents.
VIRULENCE OF TUBERCLE BACILLI
Several genes thought to confer virulence to M. tuberculo-
sis have been identiﬁed. The katG gene encodes for
catalase/peroxidase enzymes that protect against oxidative
stress; rpoV is the main sigma factor initiating transcription
of several genes. Defects in these two genes result in loss
of virulence. The erp gene, encoding a protein required
for multiplication, also contributes to virulence. Strains of
the Beijing/W genotype family have been identiﬁed in
outbreak conditions in a variety of settings worldwide
and have been associated with higher mortality rates and
occasionally with multidrug resistance.
INNATE RESISTANCE TO INFECTION
Several observations suggest that genetic factors play a key
role in innate nonimmune resistance to infection with
M. tuberculosis and the development of disease. The exis-
tence of this resistance, which is polygenic in nature, is
suggested by the differing degrees of susceptibility to
tuberculosis in different populations. In mice, a gene
called Nramp1 (natural resistance–associated macrophage
protein 1) plays a regulatory role in resistance/susceptibil-
ity to mycobacteria.The human homologue NRAMP1,
which maps to chromosome 2q, may play a role in deter-
mining susceptibility to tuberculosis, as suggested by a
study among West Africans. Polymorphisms in multiple
genes, such as those encoding for histocompatibility
leukocyte antigen (HLA), interferon γ (IFN-γ), T cell
growth factor β (TGF-β), interleukin (IL) 10, mannose-
binding protein, IFN-γ receptor,Toll-like receptor (TLR)
2, vitamin D receptor, and IL-1, have been associated
with susceptibility to tuberculosis.
THE HOST RESPONSE
In the initial stage of host–bacterium interaction, either
fusion between phagosomes and lysosomes occurs, pre-
venting bacillary survival, or the bacilli begin to multiply,
ultimately killing the macrophage. A variety of chemoat-
tractants that are released after cell lysis (e.g., complement
components, bacterial molecules, and cytokines) recruit
additional immature monocyte-derived macrophages,
including dendritic cells, which migrate to the draining
lymph nodes and present mycobacterial antigens to T
lymphocytes.At this point, the development of CMI and
humoral immunity begins.These initial stages of infection
are usually asymptomatic.
About 2–4 weeks after infection, two host responses
to M. tuberculosis develop: a macrophage-activating CMI
response and a tissue-damaging response.The macrophage-
activating response is a T cell–mediated phenomenon result-
ing in the activation of macrophages that are capable of
killing and digesting tubercle bacilli. The tissue-damaging
response is the result of a delayed-type hypersensitivity
(DTH) reaction to various bacillary antigens; it destroys
unactivated macrophages that contain multiplying bacilli
but also causes caseous necrosis of the involved tissues
(see later). Although both of these responses can inhibit
mycobacterial growth, it is the balance between the two
that determines the form of tuberculosis that will develop
subsequently.
GRANULOMA FORMATION
With the development of speciﬁc immunity and the accu-
mulation of large numbers of activated macrophages at the
site of the primary lesion, granulomatous lesions (tuber-
cles) are formed.These lesions consist of accumulations of
lymphocytes and activated macrophages that evolve
toward epithelioid and giant cell morphologies. Initially,
the tissue-damaging response can limit mycobacterial
growth within macrophages.As stated above, this response,
mediated by various bacterial products, not only destroys
macrophages but also produces early solid necrosis in the
center of the tubercle.Although M. tuberculosis can survive,
its growth is inhibited within this necrotic environment by
low oxygen tension and low pH. At this point, some
lesions may heal by ﬁbrosis with subsequent calciﬁcation,
but inﬂammation and necrosis occur in other lesions.
Tuberculosis
119
CHAPTER 12
THE MACROPHAGE-ACTIVATING RESPONSE
CMI is critical at this early stage. In the majority of
infected individuals, local macrophages are activated when
bacillary antigens processed by macrophages stimulate T
lymphocytes to release a variety of lymphokines. These
activated macrophages aggregate around the lesion’s cen-
ter and effectively neutralize tubercle bacilli without caus-
ing further tissue destruction. In the central part of the
lesion, the necrotic material resembles soft cheese (caseous
necrosis)—a phenomenon that may also be observed in
other conditions, such as neoplasms. Even when healing
takes place, viable bacilli may remain dormant within
macrophages or in the necrotic material for many years.
These “healed” lesions in the lung parenchyma and hilar
lymph nodes may later undergo calciﬁcation.
THE DELAYED-TYPE HYPERSENSITIVITY
REACTION
In a minority of cases, the macrophage-activating response
is weak, and mycobacterial growth can be inhibited only
by intensiﬁed DTH reactions, which lead to lung tissue
destruction. The lesion tends to enlarge further, and the
surrounding tissue is progressively damaged.At the center
of the lesion, the caseous material liqueﬁes. Bronchial walls
as well as blood vessels are invaded and destroyed, and cav-
ities are formed.The liqueﬁed caseous material, containing
large numbers of bacilli, is drained through bronchi.
Within the cavity, tubercle bacilli multiply, spill into the
airways, and are discharged into the environment through
expiratory maneuvers such as coughing and talking.
In the early stages of infection, bacilli are usually trans-
ported by macrophages to regional lymph nodes, from
which they gain access to the bloodstream and dissemi-
nate widely throughout the body. The resulting lesions
may undergo the same evolution as those in the lungs,
although most tend to heal. In young children with poor
natural immunity, hematogenous dissemination may result
in fatal miliary tuberculosis or tuberculous meningitis.
ROLE OF MACROPHAGES AND
MONOCYTES
Although CMI confers partial protection against M. tuber-
culosis, humoral immunity plays a less well-deﬁned role
in protection (although evidence is accumulating on the
existence of LAM antibodies, which may prevent dis-
semination of infection in children). In the case of CMI,
two types of cells are essential: macrophages, which
directly phagocytize tubercle bacilli, and T cells (mainly
CD4+ T lymphocytes),
which induce protection
through the production of cytokines, especially IFN-γ.
After infection with M. tuberculosis, alveolar macrophages
secrete various cytokines responsible for a number of
events (e.g., the formation of granulomas) as well as sys-
temic effects (e.g., fever and weight loss). Monocytes and
macrophages attracted to the site are key components of
the immune response.Their primary mechanism is proba-
bly related to production of nitric oxide,which has antimy-
cobacterial activity and increases synthesis of cytokines
such as tumor necrosis factor α (TNF α) and IL-1, which
in turn regulate release of reactive nitrogen intermediates.
In addition, macrophages can undergo apoptosis—a defen-
sive mechanism to prevent release of cytokines and bacilli
via their sequestration in the apoptotic cell.
ROLE OF T LYMPHOCYTES
Alveolar macrophages, monocytes, and dendritic cells
are also critical in processing and presenting antigens to
T lymphocytes, primarily CD4+ and CD8+ T cells; the
result is the activation and proliferation of CD4+ T
lymphocytes, which are crucial to the host’s defense
against
M. tuberculosis. Qualitative and quantitative
defects of CD4+ T cells explain the inability of HIV-
infected individuals to contain mycobacterial prolifera-
tion. Activated CD4+ T lymphocytes can differentiate
into cytokine-producing TH1 or TH2 cells. TH1 cells
produce IFN-γ—an activator of macrophages and
monocytes—and IL-2. TH2 cells produce IL-4, IL-5,
IL-10, and IL-13 and may promote humoral immunity.
The interplay of these various cytokines and their cross-
regulation determine the host’s response. The role of
cytokines in promoting intracellular killing of mycobac-
teria, however, has not been entirely elucidated. IFN-γ
may induce the generation of reactive nitrogen interme-
diates and regulate genes involved in bactericidal effects.
TNF α also seems to be important.
Observations made originally in transgenic knockout
mice and more recently in humans suggest that other
T cell subsets, especially CD8+ T cells, may play an
important role. CD8+ T cells have been associated with
protective activities via cytotoxic responses and lysis of
infected cells as well as with production of IFN-γ and
TNF α. Finally, natural killer cells act as co-regulators of
CD8+ T cell lytic activities, and γδ T cells are increas-
ingly thought to be involved in protective responses in
humans.
MYCOBACTERIAL LIPIDS AND PROTEINS
Lipids have been involved in mycobacterial recognition
by the innate immune system, and lipoproteins (e.g.,
19-kDa lipoprotein) have been proven to trigger potent
signals through TLRs present in blood dendritic cells.
M. tuberculosis possesses various protein antigens. Some
are present in the cytoplasm and cell wall; others are
secreted.That the latter are more important in eliciting a
Diseases of the Respiratory System
120
SECTION II
T lymphocyte response is suggested by experiments
documenting the appearance of protective immunity in
animals after immunization with live, protein-secreting
mycobacteria. Among the antigens that may play a pro-
tective role are the 30-kDa (or 85B) and ESAT-6 anti-
gens. Protective immunity is probably the result of reac-
tivity to many different mycobacterial antigens.
SKIN TEST REACTIVITY
Coincident with the appearance of immunity, DTH to
M. tuberculosis develops.This reactivity is the basis of the
TST, which is used primarily for the detection of
M. tuberculosis infection in persons without symptoms.
The cellular mechanisms responsible for TST reactivity
are related mainly to previously sensitized CD4+ T lym-
phocytes, which are attracted to the skin-test site.There,
they proliferate and produce cytokines.
Although DTH is associated with protective immu-
nity (with TST-positive persons being less susceptible to
a new M. tuberculosis infection than TST-negative per-
sons), it by no means guarantees protection against reac-
tivation. In fact, cases of active tuberculosis are often
accompanied by strongly positive skin-test reactions.
There is also evidence of reinfection with a new strain
of M. tuberculosis in patients previously treated for active
disease.This evidence underscores the fact that previous
latent or active tuberculosis may not confer fully protec-
tive immunity.
CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
Tuberculosis is classiﬁed as pulmonary, extrapulmonary,
or both. Before the advent of HIV infection, ∼80% of all
new cases of tuberculosis were limited to the lungs.
However, up to two-thirds of HIV-infected patients with
tuberculosis may have both, pulmonary and extrapul-
monary disease or extrapulmonary disease alone.
PULMONARY TUBERCULOSIS
Pulmonary tuberculosis can be categorized as primary
or postprimary (secondary).
Primary Disease
Primary pulmonary tuberculosis occurs soon after the
initial infection with tubercle bacilli. In areas of high
tuberculosis transmission, this form of disease is often
seen in children. Because most inspired air is distributed
to the middle and lower lung zones, these areas of the
lungs are most commonly involved in primary tubercu-
losis. The lesion forming after infection is usually
peripheral and accompanied in more than half of cases
by hilar or paratracheal lymphadenopathy, which may
not be detectable on chest radiography. In the majority
of cases, the lesion heals spontaneously and may later be
evident as a small calciﬁed nodule (Ghon lesion).
In children and in persons with impaired immunity
(e.g., those with malnutrition or HIV infection), pri-
mary pulmonary tuberculosis may progress rapidly to
clinical illness.The initial lesion increases in size and can
evolve in different ways. Pleural effusion, which is found
in up to two-thirds of cases, results from the penetration
of bacilli into the pleural space from an adjacent sub-
pleural focus. In severe cases, the primary site rapidly
enlarges, its central portion undergoes necrosis, and cavi-
tation develops (progressive primary tuberculosis). Tubercu-
losis in young children is almost invariably accompanied
by hilar or mediastinal lymphadenopathy caused by the
spread of bacilli from the lung parenchyma through
lymphatic vessels. Enlarged lymph nodes may compress
bronchi, causing obstruction and subsequent segmental
or lobar collapse. Partial obstruction may cause obstruc-
tive emphysema, and bronchiectasis may also develop.
Hematogenous dissemination, which is common and
often asymptomatic, may result in the most severe mani-
festations of primary M. tuberculosis infection. Bacilli
reach the bloodstream from the pulmonary lesion or the
lymph nodes and disseminate into various organs, where
they may produce granulomatous lesions. Although
healing frequently takes place, immunocompromised
persons (e.g., patients with HIV infection) may develop
miliary tuberculosis, tuberculous meningitis, or both.
Postprimary Disease
Also called adult-type, reactivation, or secondary tuberculosis,
postprimary disease results from endogenous reactivation
of latent infection and is usually localized to the apical
and posterior segments of the upper lobes, where the
substantially higher mean oxygen tension (compared
with that in the lower zones) favors mycobacterial
growth. In addition, the superior segments of the lower
lobes are frequently involved. The extent of lung
parenchymal involvement varies greatly, from small inﬁl-
trates to extensive cavitary disease. With cavity forma-
tion, liqueﬁed necrotic contents are ultimately discharged
into the airways, resulting in satellite lesions within the
lungs that may in turn undergo cavitation (Figs. 12-4
and 12-5). Massive involvement of pulmonary segments
or lobes, with coalescence of lesions, produces tubercu-
lous pneumonia. Although up to one-third of untreated
patients reportedly succumb to severe pulmonary tuber-
culosis within a few weeks or months after onset (the
classical “galloping consumption” of the past), others
undergo a process of spontaneous remission or proceed
along a chronic, progressively debilitating course
(“consumption”). Under these circumstances, some pul-
monary lesions become ﬁbrotic and may later calcify, but
cavities persist in other parts of the lungs. Individuals
with such chronic disease continue to discharge tubercle
Tuberculosis
121
CHAPTER 12
bacilli into the environment. Most patients respond to treat-
ment,with defervescence,decreasing cough,weight gain,and
a general improvement in well-being within several weeks.
Early in the course of disease, symptoms and signs are
often nonspeciﬁc and insidious, consisting mainly of
fever and night sweats, weight loss, anorexia, general
malaise, and weakness. However, in the majority of cases,
cough eventually develops—often initially nonproductive
and subsequently accompanied by the production of
purulent sputum, sometimes with blood streaking. Mas-
sive hemoptysis may ensue as a consequence of the ero-
sion of a blood vessel in the wall of a cavity. Hemoptysis,
however, may also result from rupture of a dilated vessel
in a cavity (Rasmussen’s aneurysm) or from aspergilloma
formation in an old cavity. Pleuritic chest pain sometimes
develops in patients with subpleural parenchymal lesions.
Extensive disease may produce dyspnea and, in rare
instances, adult respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS).
Physical ﬁndings are of limited use in pulmonary tuber-
culosis. Many patients have no abnormalities detectable by
chest examination, but others have detectable rales in the
involved areas during inspiration, especially after coughing.
Occasionally, rhonchi caused by partial bronchial obstruc-
tion and classic amphoric breath sounds in areas with large
cavities may be heard. Systemic features include fever
(often low-grade and intermittent) in up to 80% of cases
and wasting. Absence of fever, however, does not exclude
tuberculosis. In some cases, pallor and ﬁnger clubbing
develop.The most common hematologic ﬁndings are mild
anemia and leukocytosis. Hyponatremia caused by the
syndrome of inappropriate secretion of antidiuretic hor-
mone (SIADH) has also been reported.
EXTRAPULMONARY TUBERCULOSIS
In order of frequency, the extrapulmonary sites most
commonly involved in tuberculosis are the lymph
nodes, pleura, genitourinary tract, bones and joints,
meninges, peritoneum, and pericardium. However, vir-
tually all organ systems may be affected. As a result of
hematogenous dissemination in HIV-infected individuals,
extrapulmonary tuberculosis is seen more commonly
today than in the past.
Lymph-Node Tuberculosis (Tuberculous
Lymphadenitis)
The most common presentation of extrapulmonary
tuberculosis (>40% of cases in the United States in recent
series), lymph-node disease is particularly frequent
among HIV-infected patients. In the United States, chil-
dren and women (particularly non-whites) also seem to be
especially susceptible. Once caused mainly by M. bovis,
tuberculous lymphadenitis is today largely caused by
M. tuberculosis infection. Lymph-node tuberculosis pre-
sents as painless swelling of the lymph nodes, most
commonly at posterior cervical and supraclavicular sites
(a condition historically referred to as scrofula). Lymph
nodes are usually discrete and nontender in early disease
but may be inﬂamed and have a ﬁstulous tract draining
caseous material.Associated pulmonary disease is seen in
Diseases of the Respiratory System
122
SECTION II
FIGURE 12-4
Chest radiograph showing a right upper-lobe inﬁltrate
and a cavity with an air-ﬂuid level in a patient with active
tuberculosis. (Courtesy of Dr. Andrea Gori, Department of
Infectious Diseases, S. Paolo University Hospital, Milan, Italy,
with permission.)
FIGURE 12-5
CT scan showing a large cavity in the right lung of a patient
with active tuberculosis. (Courtesy of Dr. Enrico Girardi,
National Institute for Infectious Diseases, Spallanzani Hospital,
Rome, Italy, with permission.)
>40% of cases. Systemic symptoms are usually limited to
HIV-infected patients. The diagnosis is established only
by ﬁne-needle aspiration or surgical biopsy.AFB are seen
in up to 50% of cases, cultures are positive in 70–80%,
and histologic examination shows granulomatous lesions.
Among HIV-infected patients, granulomas usually are
not seen. The differential diagnosis includes a variety of
infectious conditions; neoplastic diseases such as lym-
phomas or metastatic carcinomas; and rare disorders such
as Kikuchi disease (necrotizing histiocytic lymphadenitis),
Kimura’s disease, and Castleman’s disease.
Pleural Tuberculosis
Involvement of the pleura, which accounts for ∼20% of
extrapulmonary cases in the United States, is common
in primary tuberculosis and may result from either con-
tiguous spread of parenchymal inﬂammation or, as in
many cases of pleurisy accompanying postprimary dis-
ease, actual penetration by tubercle bacilli into the
pleural space. Depending on the extent of reactivity,
the effusion may be small, remain unnoticed, and resolve
spontaneously or may be sufﬁciently large to cause
symptoms such as fever, pleuritic chest pain, and dysp-
nea. Physical ﬁndings are those of pleural effusion: dull-
ness to percussion and absence of breath sounds.A chest
radiograph reveals the effusion and, in up to one-third
of cases, also shows a parenchymal lesion.Thoracentesis
is required to ascertain the nature of the effusion and to
differentiate it from manifestations of other etiologies.
The ﬂuid is straw colored and at times hemorrhagic; it is
an exudate with a protein concentration >50% of that in
serum (usually ∼4–6 g/dL), a normal to low glucose
concentration, a pH of ∼7.3 (occasionally <7.2), and
detectable white blood cells (usually 500–6000/μL).
Neutrophils may predominate in the early stage, and
mononuclear cells are the typical ﬁnding later. Mesothe-
lial cells are generally rare or absent. AFB are seen on
direct smear in only 10–25% of cases, but cultures may
be positive for M. tuberculosis in 25–75% of cases; positive
cultures are more common among postprimary cases.
Determination of the pleural concentration of adeno-
sine deaminase (ADA) is a useful screening test: tubercu-
losis is virtually excluded if the value is very low. Needle
biopsy of the pleura is often required for diagnosis and
reveals granulomas or yields a positive culture in up to
80% of cases.This form of pleural tuberculosis responds
well to chemotherapy and may resolve spontaneously.
The usefulness of glucocorticoid administration is
doubtful.
Tuberculous empyema is a less common complication
of pulmonary tuberculosis. It is usually the result of the
rupture of a cavity, with spillage of a large number of
organisms into the pleural space.This process may create
a bronchopleural ﬁstula with evident air in the pleural
space. A chest radiograph shows hydropneumothorax
with an air-ﬂuid level.The pleural ﬂuid is purulent and
thick and contains large numbers of lymphocytes. Acid-
fast smears and mycobacterial cultures are often positive.
Surgical drainage is usually required as an adjunct to
chemotherapy. Tuberculous empyema may result in
severe pleural ﬁbrosis and restrictive lung disease. Removal
of the thickened visceral pleura (decortication) is occa-
sionally necessary to improve lung function.
Tuberculosis of the Upper Airways
Nearly always a complication of advanced cavitary pul-
monary tuberculosis, tuberculosis of the upper airways
may involve the larynx, pharynx, and epiglottis. Symp-
toms include hoarseness, dysphonia, and dysphagia in
addition to chronic productive cough. Findings depend
on the site of involvement, and ulcerations may be seen
on laryngoscopy. Acid-fast smear of the sputum is often
positive, but biopsy may be necessary in some cases to
establish the diagnosis. Carcinoma of the larynx may
have similar features but is usually painless.
Genitourinary Tuberculosis
Genitourinary tuberculosis, which accounts for ∼15% of
all extrapulmonary cases in the United States, may
involve any portion of the genitourinary tract. Local
symptoms predominate, and up to one-third of patients
may concomitantly have pulmonary disease. Urinary
frequency, dysuria, nocturia, hematuria, and ﬂank or
abdominal pain are common presentations. However,
patients may be asymptomatic and the disease discovered
only after severe destructive lesions of the kidneys have
developed. Urinalysis gives abnormal results in 90% of
cases, revealing pyuria and hematuria. The documenta-
tion of culture-negative pyuria in acidic urine raises the
suspicion of tuberculosis. IV pyelography, abdominal CT,
or MRI (Fig. 12-6) may show deformities and obstruc-
tions, and calciﬁcations and ureteral strictures are sugges-
tive ﬁndings. Culture of three morning urine specimens
yields a deﬁnitive diagnosis in nearly 90% of cases.
Severe ureteral strictures may lead to hydronephrosis and
renal damage.
Genital tuberculosis is diagnosed more commonly in
female than in male patients. In female patients, it affects
the fallopian tubes and the endometrium and may cause
infertility, pelvic pain, and menstrual abnormalities.
Diagnosis requires biopsy or culture of specimens
obtained by dilatation and curettage. In male patients,
tuberculosis preferentially affects the epididymis, pro-
ducing a slightly tender mass that may drain externally
through a ﬁstulous tract; orchitis and prostatitis may also
develop. In almost half of cases of genitourinary tuber-
culosis, urinary tract disease is also present. Genitouri-
nary tuberculosis responds well to chemotherapy.
Tuberculosis
123
CHAPTER 12
Skeletal Tuberculosis
In the United States, tuberculosis of the bones and joints
is responsible for about 10% of extrapulmonary cases. In
bone and joint disease, pathogenesis is related to reactiva-
tion of hematogenous foci or to spread from adjacent
paravertebral lymph nodes. Weight-bearing joints (the
spine in 40% of cases, the hips in 13%, and the knees in
10%) are most commonly affected. Spinal tuberculosis
(Pott’s disease or tuberculous spondylitis; Fig. 12-7)
often involves two or more adjacent vertebral bodies.
Although the upper thoracic spine is the most common
site of spinal tuberculosis in children, the lower thoracic
and upper lumbar vertebrae are usually affected in adults.
From the anterior superior or inferior angle of the verte-
bral body, the lesion slowly reaches the adjacent body,
later affecting the intervertebral disk.With advanced dis-
ease, collapse of vertebral bodies results in kyphosis
(gibbus). A paravertebral “cold” abscess may also form. In
the upper spine, this abscess may track to and penetrate
the chest wall, presenting as a soft tissue mass; in the
lower spine, it may reach the inguinal ligaments or pre-
sent as a psoas abscess. CT or MRI reveals the character-
istic lesion and suggests its etiology.The differential diag-
nosis includes tumors and other infections. Pyogenic
bacterial osteomyelitis, in particular, involves the disk
very early and produces rapid sclerosis. Aspiration of the
abscess or bone biopsy conﬁrms the tuberculous etiology
because cultures are usually positive and histologic ﬁnd-
ings highly typical. A catastrophic complication of Pott’s
disease is paraplegia, which is usually caused by an abscess
or a lesion compressing the spinal cord. Paraparesis caused
by a large abscess is a medical emergency and requires
rapid drainage. Tuberculosis of the hip joints, usually
involving the head of the femur, causes pain; tuberculosis
of the knee produces pain and swelling. If the disease goes
unrecognized, the joints may be destroyed. Diagnosis
requires examination of the synovial ﬂuid, which is thick
in appearance, with a high protein concentration and a
variable cell count.Although synovial ﬂuid culture is pos-
itive in a high percentage of cases, synovial biopsy and tis-
sue culture may be necessary to establish the diagnosis.
Skeletal tuberculosis responds to chemotherapy, but severe
cases may require surgery.
Tuberculous Meningitis and Tuberculoma
Tuberculosis of the central nervous system (CNS)
accounts for ∼5% of extrapulmonary cases in the United
States. It is seen most often in young children but also
develops in adults, especially those infected with HIV.
Tuberculous meningitis results from the hematogenous
spread of primary or postprimary pulmonary disease or
from the rupture of a subependymal tubercle into the
subarachnoid space. In more than half of cases, evidence
of old pulmonary lesions or a miliary pattern is found
on chest radiography.The disease often presents subtly as
headache and slight mental changes after a prodrome of
weeks of low-grade fever, malaise, anorexia, and irri-
tability. If not recognized, tuberculous meningitis may
evolve acutely with severe headache, confusion, lethargy,
Diseases of the Respiratory System
124
SECTION II
FIGURE 12-6
MRI of culture-conﬁrmed renal tuberculosis. T2-weighted
coronary plane: coronal sections showing several renal lesions
in both the cortical and the medullary tissues of the right
kidney. (Courtesy of Dr. Alberto Matteelli, Department of Infec-
tious Diseases, University of Brescia, Italy, with permission.)
FIGURE 12-7
CT scan demonstrating destruction of the right pedicle of
T10 due to Pott’s disease. The patient, a 70-year-old Asian
woman, presented with back pain and weight loss and had
biopsy-proven tuberculosis. (Courtesy of Charles L. Daley,
M.D., University of California, San Francisco, with permission.)
altered sensorium, and neck rigidity.Typically, the disease
evolves over 1–2 weeks, a course longer than that of
bacterial meningitis. Paresis of the cranial nerves (ocular
nerves in particular) is a frequent ﬁnding, and the
involvement of the cerebral arteries may produce focal
ischemia. The ultimate evolution is toward coma, with
hydrocephalus and intracranial hypertension.
Lumbar puncture is the cornerstone of diagnosis. In
general, examination of the cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF)
reveals a high leukocyte count (up to 1000/μL), usually
with a predominance of lymphocytes but sometimes
with a predominance of neutrophils in the early stage; a
protein content of 1–8 g/L (100–800 mg/dL); and a low
glucose concentration. However, any of these three
parameters can be within the normal range. AFB are
seen on direct smear of CSF sediment in up to one-
third of cases, but repeated lumbar punctures increase
the yield. Culture of CSF is diagnostic in up to 80% of
cases and remains the gold standard. Polymerase chain
reaction (PCR) has a sensitivity of up to 80%, but rates
of false-positivity reach 10%. The ADA concentration
may be a sensitive test but has low speciﬁcity. Imaging
studies (CT and MRI) may show hydrocephalus and
abnormal enhancement of basal cisterns or ependyma.
If unrecognized, tuberculous meningitis is uniformly
fatal. This disease responds to chemotherapy; however,
neurologic sequelae are documented in 25% of treated
cases, in most of which the diagnosis has been delayed.
Clinical trials have demonstrated that patients given
adjunctive glucocorticoids may experience faster resolu-
tion of CSF abnormalities and elevated CSF pressure. In
a recent study, adjunctive dexamethasone (0.4 mg/kg
per day given IV and tapering by 0.1 mg/kg per week
until the fourth week, when 0.1 mg/kg per day was
administered; followed by 4 mg/d given by mouth and
tapering by 1 mg per week until the fourth week, when
1 mg/d was administered) signiﬁcantly enhanced the
chances of survival among persons >14 years of age but
did not reduce the frequency of neurologic sequelae.
Tuberculoma, an uncommon manifestation of CNS
tuberculosis, presents as one or more space-occupying
lesions and usually causes seizures and focal signs. CT or
MRI reveals contrast-enhanced ring lesions, but biopsy
is necessary to establish the diagnosis.
Gastrointestinal Tuberculosis
Gastrointestinal tuberculosis is uncommon, making up
3.5% of extrapulmonary cases in the United States.Various
pathogenetic mechanisms are involved: swallowing of spu-
tum with direct seeding, hematogenous spread, or (largely
in developing areas) ingestion of milk from cows affected
by bovine tuberculosis. Although any portion of the gas-
trointestinal tract may be affected, the terminal ileum and
the cecum are the most commonly involved sites.
Abdominal pain (at times similar to that associated with
appendicitis) and swelling, obstruction, hematochezia, and
a palpable mass in the abdomen are common ﬁndings at
presentation. Fever, weight loss, anorexia, and night sweats
are also common.With intestinal wall involvement, ulcera-
tions and ﬁstulae may simulate Crohn’s disease; the differ-
ential diagnosis with this entity is always difﬁcult. Anal
ﬁstulae should prompt an evaluation for rectal tuberculo-
sis. Because surgery is required in most cases, the diagnosis
can be established by histologic examination and culture
of specimens obtained intraoperatively.
Tuberculous peritonitis follows either the direct
spread of tubercle bacilli from ruptured lymph nodes
and intraabdominal organs (e.g., genital tuberculosis in
women) or hematogenous seeding. Nonspeciﬁc abdom-
inal pain, fever, and ascites should raise the suspicion of
tuberculous peritonitis. The coexistence of cirrhosis in
patients with tuberculous peritonitis complicates the
diagnosis. In tuberculous peritonitis, paracentesis reveals
an exudative ﬂuid with a high protein content and
leukocytosis that is usually lymphocytic (although neu-
trophils occasionally predominate). The yield of direct
smear and culture is relatively low; culture of a large vol-
ume of ascitic ﬂuid can increase the yield, but peritoneal
biopsy (with a specimen best obtained by laparoscopy) is
often needed to establish the diagnosis.
Pericardial Tuberculosis
(Tuberculous Pericarditis)
Because of direct progression of a primary focus within
the pericardium to reactivation of a latent focus or to rup-
ture of an adjacent subcarinal lymph node, pericardial
tuberculosis has often been a disease of the elderly in
countries with low tuberculosis prevalence but also devel-
ops frequently in HIV-infected patients. Case-fatality rates
are as high as 40% in some series.The onset may be suba-
cute, although an acute presentation, with dyspnea, fever,
dull retrosternal pain, and a pericardial friction rub, is pos-
sible. An effusion eventually develops in many cases; car-
diovascular symptoms and signs of cardiac tamponade may
ultimately appear. In the presence of effusion, tuberculosis
must be suspected if the patient belongs to a high-risk
population (HIV infected, originating in a high-prevalence
country); if there is evidence of previous tuberculosis in
other organs; or if echocardiography, CT, or MRI shows
effusion and thickness across the pericardial space.A deﬁn-
itive diagnosis can be obtained by pericardiocentesis under
echocardiographic guidance.The pericardial ﬂuid must be
submitted for biochemical, cytologic, and microbiologic
study. The effusion is exudative in nature, with a high
count of leukocytes (predominantly mononuclear cells).
Hemorrhagic effusion is frequent. Direct smear examina-
tion is very rarely positive.Whereas culture of pericardial
ﬂuid reveals M. tuberculosis in up to two-thirds of cases,
pericardial biopsy has a higher yield. High levels of ADA
and IFN-γ may also suggest a tuberculous etiology.
Tuberculosis
125
CHAPTER 12
Without treatment, pericardial tuberculosis is usually
fatal. Even with treatment, complications may develop,
including chronic constrictive pericarditis with thicken-
ing of the pericardium, ﬁbrosis, and sometimes calciﬁca-
tion, which may be visible on a chest radiograph. A
course of glucocorticoid treatment (e.g., prednisone,
20–60 mg/d for up to 6 weeks) is useful in the manage-
ment of acute disease, reducing effusion, facilitating
hemodynamic recovery, and thus decreasing mortality
rates. Progression to chronic constrictive pericarditis,
however, seems unaffected by such therapy.
Miliary or Disseminated Tuberculosis
Miliary tuberculosis is caused by hematogenous spread of
tubercle bacilli. Although it is often the consequence of
primary infection in children, it may be caused by either
recent infection or reactivation of old disseminated foci
in adults. The lesions are usually yellowish granulomas
1–2 mm in diameter that resemble millet seeds (thus the
term miliary, coined by nineteenth-century pathologists).
The clinical manifestations are nonspeciﬁc and pro-
tean, depending on the predominant site of involve-
ment. Fever, night sweats, anorexia, weakness, and
weight loss are presenting symptoms in the majority of
cases. At times, patients have a cough and other respira-
tory symptoms caused by pulmonary involvement as
well as abdominal symptoms. Physical ﬁndings include
hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, and lymphadenopathy. Eye
examination may reveal choroidal tubercles, which are
pathognomonic of miliary tuberculosis, in up to 30% of
cases. Meningismus occurs in <10% of cases.
A high index of suspicion is required for the diagnosis
of miliary tuberculosis. Frequently, chest radiography reveals
a miliary reticulonodular pattern (more easily seen on
underpenetrated ﬁlm), although no radiographic abnor-
mality may be evident early in the course and among
HIV-infected patients. Other radiologic ﬁndings include
large inﬁltrates, interstitial inﬁltrates (especially in HIV-
infected patients), and pleural effusion. Sputum smear
microscopy results are negative in 80% of cases. Various
hematologic abnormalities may be seen, including anemia
with leukopenia, lymphopenia, neutrophilic leukocytosis
and leukemoid reactions, and polycythemia. Disseminated
intravascular coagulation has been reported. Elevation of
alkaline phosphatase levels and other abnormal values in
liver function tests are detected in patients with severe
hepatic involvement.The TST may be negative in up to
half of cases, but reactivity may be restored during
chemotherapy. Bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) and trans-
bronchial biopsy are more likely to provide bacteriologic
conﬁrmation, and granulomas are evident in liver or bone
marrow biopsy specimens from many patients. If it goes
unrecognized, miliary tuberculosis is lethal; with proper
early treatment, however, it is amenable to cure. Gluco-
corticoid therapy has not proved beneﬁcial.
A rare presentation seen in the elderly is cryptic miliary
tuberculosis, which has a chronic course characterized by
mild intermittent fever,
anemia,
and—ultimately—
meningeal involvement preceding death. An acute sep-
ticemic form, nonreactive miliary tuberculosis, occurs very
rarely and is caused by massive hematogenous dissemina-
tion of tubercle bacilli. Pancytopenia is common in this
form of disease, which is rapidly fatal. At postmortem
examination, multiple necrotic but nongranulomatous
(“nonreactive”) lesions are detected.
Less Common Extrapulmonary Forms
Tuberculosis may cause chorioretinitis, uveitis, panoph-
thalmitis, and painful hypersensitivity-related phlyctenular
conjunctivitis. Tuberculous otitis is rare and presents as
hearing loss, otorrhea, and tympanic membrane perfora-
tion. In the nasopharynx, tuberculosis may simulate
Wegener’s granulomatosis. Cutaneous manifestations of
tuberculosis include primary infection caused by direct
inoculation, abscesses and chronic ulcers, scrofuloderma,
lupus vulgaris (a smoldering disease with nodules, plaques,
and ﬁssures), miliary lesions, and erythema nodosum.
Adrenal tuberculosis is a manifestation of disseminated dis-
ease presenting rarely as adrenal insufﬁciency. Finally, con-
genital tuberculosis results from transplacental spread of
tubercle bacilli to the fetus or from ingestion of contami-
nated amniotic ﬂuid. This rare disease affects the liver,
spleen,lymph nodes,and various other organs.
HIV-ASSOCIATED TUBERCULOSIS
Tuberculosis is one of the most common diseases among
HIV-infected persons worldwide. In some African coun-
tries, the rate of HIV infection among tuberculosis
patients reaches 70–80% in certain urban settings.A per-
son with a positive TST result who acquires HIV infection
has a 3–13% annual risk of developing active tuberculo-
sis. A new tuberculosis infection acquired by an HIV-
infected individual may evolve to active disease in a
matter of weeks rather than months or years.
Tuberculosis can appear at any stage of HIV infec-
tion, and its presentation varies with the stage. When
CMI is only partially compromised, pulmonary tubercu-
losis presents in a typical manner (Figs. 12-4 and 12-5),
with upper-lobe inﬁltrates and cavitation and without
signiﬁcant lymphadenopathy or pleural effusion. In late
stages of HIV infection, a primary tuberculosis–like pat-
tern, with diffuse interstitial or miliary inﬁltrates, little or
no cavitation, and intrathoracic lymphadenopathy, is more
common. Overall, sputum smears may be positive less
frequently among tuberculosis patients with HIV infec-
tion than among those without; thus, the diagnosis of
tuberculosis may be unusually difﬁcult, especially in
view of the variety of HIV-related pulmonary conditions
mimicking tuberculosis.
Diseases of the Respiratory System
126
SECTION II
Extrapulmonary tuberculosis is common among
HIV-infected patients. In various series, extrapulmonary
tuberculosis—alone or in association with pulmonary
disease—has been documented in 40–60% of all cases in
HIV–co-infected individuals. The most common forms
are lymphatic, disseminated, pleural, and pericardial.
Mycobacteremia and meningitis are also frequent, par-
ticularly in patients with advanced HIV disease.
The diagnosis of tuberculosis in HIV-infected patients
may be difﬁcult not only because of the increased fre-
quency of sputum-smear negativity (up to 40% in culture-
proven pulmonary cases) but also because of atypical
radiographic ﬁndings, a lack of classic granuloma forma-
tion in the late stages, and a negative TST result. Delays
in treatment may prove fatal.
Recommendations for the prevention and treatment
of tuberculosis in HIV-infected individuals are provided
below.
DIAGNOSIS OF TUBERCULOSIS
The key to the diagnosis of tuberculosis is a high index
of suspicion. Diagnosis is not difﬁcult with a high-risk
patient—e.g., a homeless alcoholic who presents with
typical symptoms and a classic chest radiograph showing
upper-lobe inﬁltrates with cavities (Fig. 12-4). On the
other hand, the diagnosis can easily be missed in an
elderly nursing home resident or a teenager with a focal
inﬁltrate.
Often, the diagnosis is ﬁrst entertained when the
chest radiograph of a patient being evaluated for
respiratory symptoms is abnormal. If the patient has no
complicating medical conditions that cause immuno-
suppression, the chest radiograph may show typical
upper-lobe inﬁltrates with cavitation (Fig. 12-4). The
longer the delay between the onset of symptoms and
the diagnosis, the more likely is the ﬁnding of cavitary
disease. In contrast, immunosuppressed patients, includ-
ing those with HIV infection, may have “atypical” ﬁnd-
ings on chest radiography (e.g., lower-zone inﬁltrates
without cavity formation).
ACID-FAST BACILLIMICROSCOPY
A presumptive diagnosis is commonly based on the ﬁnding
of AFB on microscopic examination of a diagnostic speci-
men, such as a smear of expectorated sputum or of tissue
(e.g., a lymph node biopsy). Although rapid and inexpen-
sive, AFB microscopy has relatively low sensitivity
(40–60%) in conﬁrmed cases of pulmonary tuberculosis.
Most modern laboratories processing large numbers of
diagnostic specimens use auramine-rhodamine staining and
ﬂuorescence microscopy. The more traditional method—
light microscopy of specimens stained with Kinyoun or
Ziehl-Neelsen basic fuchsin dyes—is satisfactory, although
more time consuming. For patients with suspected pul-
monary tuberculosis, three sputum specimens, preferably
collected early in the morning, should be submitted to the
laboratory for AFB smear and mycobacterial culture. If tis-
sue is obtained, it is critical that the portion of the speci-
men intended for culture not be put in formaldehyde.The
use of AFB microscopy on urine or gastric lavage ﬂuid is
limited by the presence of commensal mycobacteria that
can cause false-positive results.
MYCOBACTERIAL CULTURE
Deﬁnitive diagnosis depends on the isolation and identiﬁ-
cation of M. tuberculosis from a clinical specimen or the
identiﬁcation of speciﬁc sequences of DNA in a nucleic
acid ampliﬁcation test (see below). Specimens may be
inoculated onto egg- or agar-based medium (e.g.,
Löwenstein-Jensen or Middlebrook 7H10) and incubated
at 37°C (under 5% CO2 for Middlebrook medium).
Because most species of mycobacteria, including M. tuber-
culosis, grow slowly, 4–8 weeks may be required before
growth is detected. Although M. tuberculosis may be pre-
sumptively identiﬁed on the basis of growth time and
colony pigmentation and morphology, a variety of bio-
chemical tests have traditionally been used to speciate
mycobacterial isolates. In modern, well-equipped labora-
tories, the use of broth-based culture for isolation and
speciation by molecular methods or high-pressure liquid
chromatography of mycolic acids has replaced isolation
on solid media and identiﬁcation by biochemical tests.
These new methods have decreased the time required for
bacteriologic conﬁrmation to 2–3 weeks.
NUCLEIC ACID AMPLIFICATION
Several test systems based on ampliﬁcation of mycobacte-
rial nucleic acid are available. These systems permit the
diagnosis of tuberculosis in as little as several hours, with
high speciﬁcity and sensitivity approaching that of culture.
These tests are most useful for the rapid conﬁrmation of
tuberculosis in persons with AFB-positive specimens but
also have utility for the diagnosis of AFB-negative pul-
monary and extrapulmonary tuberculosis.
DRUG SUSCEPTIBILITY TESTING
In general, the initial isolate of M. tuberculosis should be
tested for susceptibility to isoniazid, rifampin, and etham-
butol. In addition, expanded susceptibility testing is
mandatory when resistance to one or more of these
drugs is found or the patient either fails to respond to
initial therapy or has a relapse after the completion of
treatment (see “Treatment Failure and Relapse” below).
Susceptibility testing may be conducted directly (with
the clinical specimen) or indirectly (with mycobacterial
cultures) on solid or liquid medium. Results are obtained
Tuberculosis
127
CHAPTER 12
most rapidly by direct susceptibility testing on liquid
medium, with an average reporting time of 3 weeks.With
indirect testing on solid medium, results may be unavail-
able for ≥8 weeks. Molecular methods for the rapid iden-
tiﬁcation of genetic mutations known to be associated
with resistance to rifampin and isoniazid have been devel-
oped but are not marketed in the United States.
RADIOGRAPHIC PROCEDURES
As noted above, the initial suspicion of pulmonary tuber-
culosis is often based on abnormal chest radiographic
ﬁndings in a patient with respiratory symptoms.Although
the “classic” picture is that of upper-lobe disease with
inﬁltrates and cavities (Fig. 12-4), virtually any radi-
ographic pattern—from a normal ﬁlm or a solitary pul-
monary nodule to diffuse alveolar inﬁltrates in a patient
with ARDS—may be seen. In the era of AIDS, no radi-
ographic pattern can be considered pathognomonic. CT
(Fig. 12-5) may be useful in interpreting questionable
ﬁndings on plain chest radiography and may be helpful in
diagnosing some forms of extrapulmonary tuberculosis
[e.g., Pott’s disease; (Fig. 12-7)]. MRI is useful in the diag-
nosis of intracranial tuberculosis.
ADDITIONAL DIAGNOSTIC PROCEDURES
Other diagnostic tests may be used when pulmonary
tuberculosis is suspected. Sputum induction by ultrasonic
nebulization of hypertonic saline may be useful for
patients who cannot produce a sputum specimen sponta-
neously. Frequently, patients with radiographic abnor-
malities that are consistent with other diagnoses (e.g.,
bronchogenic carcinoma) undergo ﬁberoptic bron-
choscopy with bronchial brushings and endobronchial or
transbronchial biopsy of the lesion. BAL of a lung seg-
ment containing an abnormality may also be performed.
In all cases, it is essential that specimens be submitted for
AFB smear and mycobacterial culture. For the diagnosis
of primary pulmonary tuberculosis in children, who
often do not expectorate sputum, specimens from early-
morning gastric lavage may yield positive cultures.
Invasive diagnostic procedures are indicated for patients
with suspected extrapulmonary tuberculosis. In addition
to testing of specimens from involved sites (e.g., CSF for
tuberculous meningitis, pleural ﬂuid and biopsy samples
for pleural disease), biopsy and culture of bone marrow
and liver tissue have a good diagnostic yield in dissemi-
nated (miliary) tuberculosis, particularly in HIV-infected
patients, who also have a high frequency of positive blood
cultures.
In some cases, cultures are negative, but a clinical diag-
nosis of tuberculosis is supported by consistent epidemio-
logic evidence (e.g., a history of close contact with an
infectious patient), a positive TST result, and a compatible
clinical and radiographic response to treatment. In the
United States and other industrialized countries with low
rates of tuberculosis, some patients with limited abnormal-
ities on chest radiographs and sputum positive for AFB are
infected with nontuberculous mycobacteria, most com-
monly organisms of the M. avium complex (MAC) or M.
kansasii. Factors favoring the diagnosis of nontuberculous
mycobacterial disease over tuberculosis include an absence
of risk factors for tuberculosis, a negative TST result, and
underlying chronic pulmonary disease.
Patients with HIV-associated tuberculosis pose several
diagnostic problems (see “HIV-Associated Tuberculosis”
above). Moreover, HIV-infected patients with sputum
culture–positive, AFB-positive tuberculosis may present
with a normal chest radiograph. With the advent of
highly active antiretroviral therapy, the occurrence of
disseminated MAC disease that can be confused with
tuberculosis has become much less common.
SEROLOGIC AND OTHER DIAGNOSTIC
TESTS FOR ACTIVE TUBERCULOSIS
A number of serologic tests based on detection of anti-
bodies to a variety of mycobacterial antigens are mar-
keted in developing countries but not in the United
States. Careful independent assessments of these tests sug-
gest that they are not useful as diagnostic aids, especially
in persons with a low probability of tuberculosis.Various
methods aimed at detection of mycobacterial antigens in
diagnostic specimens are being investigated but are lim-
ited at present by low sensitivity. Determination of ADA
levels in pleural ﬂuid may be useful in the diagnosis of
pleural tuberculosis; the utility of this test in the diagnosis
of other forms of extrapulmonary tuberculosis (e.g., peri-
cardial, peritoneal, and meningeal) is less clear.
DIAGNOSIS OF LATENT
M. TUBERCULOSIS INFECTION
Tuberculin Skin Testing
In 1891, Robert Koch discovered that components of
M. tuberculosis in a concentrated liquid culture medium,
subsequently named “old tuberculin” (OT), were capa-
ble of eliciting a skin reaction when injected subcuta-
neously into patients with tuberculosis. In 1932, Seibert
and Munday puriﬁed this product by ammonium sulfate
precipitation to produce an active protein fraction
known as tuberculin puriﬁed protein derivative (PPD). In
1941, PPD-S, developed by Seibert and Glenn, was cho-
sen as the international standard. Later, the WHO and
UNICEF sponsored large-scale production of a master
batch of PPD (RT23) and made it available for general
use. The greatest limitation of PPD is its lack of
mycobacterial species speciﬁcity, a property caused by
the large number of proteins in this product that are
highly conserved in the various species. In addition,
subjectivity of the skin-reaction interpretation,deterioration
Diseases of the Respiratory System
128
SECTION II
of the product, and batch-to-batch variations limit the
usefulness of PPD.
Skin testing with tuberculin-PPD (TST) is most
widely used in screening for latent M. tuberculosis infec-
tion (LTBI).The test is of limited value in the diagnosis
of active tuberculosis because of its relatively low sensi-
tivity and speciﬁcity and its inability to discriminate
between latent infection and active disease. False-negative
reactions are common in immunosuppressed patients
and in those with overwhelming tuberculosis. False-
positive reactions may be caused by infections with
nontuberculous mycobacteria and by bacille Calmette-
Guérin (BCG) vaccination.
IFN-γ Release Assays (IGRAs)
Recently, two in vitro assays that measure T cell release
of IFN-γ in response to stimulation with the highly
tuberculosis-speciﬁc antigens ESAT-6 and CFP-10 have
become commercially available.
QuantiFERON-TB
Gold® (Cellestis Ltd., Carnegie, Australia) is a whole-
blood enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) for
measurement of IFN-γ, and T-SPOT.TB® (Oxford
Immunotec,Oxford,UK) is an enzyme-linked immunospot
(ELISpot) assay.
IGRAs are more speciﬁc than the TST as a result of
less cross-reactivity because of BCG vaccination and sen-
sitization by nontuberculous mycobacteria. IGRAs also
appear to be at least as sensitive as the TST for active
tuberculosis (used as a surrogate for LTBI). Although
diagnostic sensitivity for LTBI cannot be directly esti-
mated because of the absence of a gold standard, these
tests have shown better correlation than the TST with
exposure to M. tuberculosis in contact investigations in
low-incidence settings.
Other potential advantages of IGRAs include logistical
convenience, the need for fewer patient visits to complete
testing, the avoidance of unreliable and somewhat subjec-
tive measurements such as skin induration, and the ability
to perform serial testing without inducing the boosting
phenomenon (a spurious TST conversion due to boosting
of reactivity on subsequent TSTs among BCG-vaccinated
persons and those infected with other mycobacteria).
Because of the high speciﬁcity and other potential advan-
tages, IGRAs are likely to replace the TST for LTBI
diagnosis in low-incidence, high-income settings where
cross-reactivity because of BCG might adversely impact
the interpretation and utility of the TST. Direct compara-
tive studies in routine practice thus far suggest that the
ELISpot has a lower rate of indeterminate results and
probably a higher degree of diagnostic sensitivity than the
whole-blood ELISA. Further studies are under way to
assess the performance of these tests in contact investiga-
tions and in persons with suspected tuberculosis disease,
health care workers, HIV-infected individuals, persons
with iatrogenic immunosuppression, and children.
Treatment: 
TUBERCULOSIS
The two aims of tuberculosis treatment are to interrupt
tuberculosis transmission by rendering patients nonin-
fectious and to prevent morbidity and death by curing
patients with tuberculosis. Chemotherapy for tuberculo-
sis became possible with the discovery of streptomycin
in the mid-1940s. Randomized clinical trials clearly indi-
cated that the administration of streptomycin to patients
with chronic tuberculosis reduced mortality rates and
led to cure in the majority of cases. However, monother-
apy with streptomycin was frequently associated with
the development of resistance to this drug and the
attendant failure of treatment. With the discovery of
para-aminosalicylic acid (PAS) and isoniazid, it became
axiomatic that cure of tuberculosis required the con-
comitant administration of at least two agents to which
the organism was susceptible. Furthermore, early clinical
trials demonstrated that a long period of treatment (i.e.,
12–24 months) was required to prevent recurrence.
The introduction of rifampin in the early 1970s her-
alded the era of effective short-course chemotherapy,
with a treatment duration of <12 months.The discovery
that pyrazinamide, which was ﬁrst used in the 1950s,
augmented the potency of isoniazid/rifampin regimens
led to the use of a 6-month course of this triple-drug
regimen as standard therapy.
DRUGS
Four major drugs are considered the ﬁrst-
line agents for the treatment of tuberculosis: isoniazid,
rifampin, pyrazinamide, and ethambutol (Table 12-2).
These drugs are well absorbed after oral administration,
with peak serum levels at 2–4 h and nearly complete
elimination within 24 h.These agents are recommended
on the basis of their bactericidal activity (i.e., their ability
to rapidly reduce the number of viable organisms and
render patients noninfectious), their sterilizing activity
(i.e., their ability to kill all bacilli and thus sterilize the
affected tissues, measured in terms of the ability to pre-
vent relapses), and their low rate of induction of drug
resistance. Rifapentine and rifabutin, two drugs related
to rifampin, are also available in the United States and
are useful for selected patients.
Because of a lower degree of efﬁcacy and a higher
degree of intolerability and toxicity, six classes of second-
line drugs are generally used only for the treatment of
patients with tuberculosis resistant to ﬁrst-line drugs.
Included in this group are the injectable aminoglycosides
streptomycin (formerly a ﬁrst-line agent), kanamycin, and
amikacin; the injectable polypeptide capreomycin; the
oral agents ethionamide, cycloserine, and PAS; and the
ﬂuoroquinolone antibiotics. Of the quinolones, third-
generation agents are preferred:levoﬂoxacin,gatiﬂoxacin
(no longer marketed in the United States), and moxi-
ﬂoxacin. Amithiozone (thiacetazone) is still used in some
Tuberculosis
129
CHAPTER 12
developing countries but is associated with severe and
sometimes even fatal skin reactions among HIV-infected
patients. Other drugs of unproven efﬁcacy that have
been used in the treatment of patients with resistance to
most of the ﬁrst- and second-line agents include clofaz-
imine,amoxicillin/clavulanic acid,and linezolid.
REGIMENS
Standard short-course regimens are
divided into an initial, or bactericidal, phase and a con-
tinuation, or sterilizing, phase. During the initial phase,
the majority of the tubercle bacilli are killed, symptoms
resolved, and the patient usually becomes noninfec-
tious. The continuation phase is required to eliminate
persisting mycobacteria and prevent relapse.
The treatment regimen of choice for virtually all forms
of tuberculosis in both adults and children consists of a
2-month initial phase of isoniazid, rifampin, pyrazi-
namide, and ethambutol followed by a 4-month contin-
uation phase of isoniazid and rifampin (Table 12-3).
Treatment may be given daily throughout the course or
intermittently (either three times weekly throughout the
course or twice weekly after an initial phase of daily
therapy, although the twice-weekly option is not
recommended by the WHO). A continuation phase of
once-weekly rifapentine and isoniazid is equally
effective for HIV-seronegative patients with noncavitary
pulmonary tuberculosis who have negative sputum cul-
tures at 2 months. Intermittent treatment is especially
useful for patients whose therapy is being directly
observed (see later). Patients with cavitary pulmonary
tuberculosis and delayed sputum-culture conversion
(i.e., those who remain culture-positive at 2 months)
should have the continuation phase extended by 3 months,
for a total course of 9 months. For patients with sputum
culture–negative pulmonary tuberculosis, the duration
of treatment may be reduced to a total of 4 months.
To prevent isoniazid-related neuropathy, pyridoxine
(10–25 mg/d) should be added to the regimen given to
persons at high risk of vitamin B6 deficiency (e.g.,
alcoholics; malnourished persons; pregnant and lactat-
ing women;and patients with conditions such as chronic
renal failure, diabetes, and HIV infection, which are also
associated with neuropathy). A full course of therapy
(completion of treatment) is deﬁned more accurately by
the total number of doses taken than by the duration of
treatment. Speciﬁc recommendations on the required
numbers of doses for each of the various treatment regi-
mens have been published jointly by the American Tho-
racic Society, the Infectious Diseases Society of America,
and the CDC. In some developing countries where the
ability to ensure compliance with treatment is limited, a
continuation-phase regimen of daily isoniazid and
ethambutol for 6 months is acceptable. However, this
regimen is associated with a higher rate of relapse and
failure,especially among HIV-infected patients.
Lack of adherence to treatment is recognized world-
wide as the most important impediment to cure. More-
over, the tubercle bacilli infecting patients who do not
adhere to the prescribed regimen are likely to become
drug resistant. Both patient- and provider-related factors
may affect compliance. Patient-related factors include a
lack of belief that the illness is signiﬁcant or that treat-
ment will have a beneﬁcial effect; the existence of con-
comitant medical conditions (notably substance abuse);
lack of social support; and poverty, with attendant job-
lessness and homelessness. Provider-related factors that
may promote compliance include the education and
encouragement of patients, the offering of convenient
clinic hours, and the provision of incentives and enablers
such as meals and travel vouchers.
In addition to speciﬁc measures addressing noncom-
pliance, two other strategic approaches are used: direct
observation of treatment and provision of fixed-
drug-combination (FDC) products. Because it is difﬁcult
to predict which patients will adhere to the recom-
mended treatment,all patients should have their therapy
directly supervised, especially during the initial phase. In
the United States, personnel to supervise therapy are
usually available through tuberculosis control programs
of local public health departments.Supervision increases
Diseases of the Respiratory System
130
SECTION II
TABLE 12-2
RECOMMENDED DOSAGEa FOR INITIAL TREATMENT
OF TUBERCULOSIS IN ADULTSb
DOSAGE
THRICE-WEEKLY 
DRUG
DAILY DOSE
DOSEc
Isoniazid
5 mg/kg, 
15 mg/kg,
max 300 mg
max 900 mg
Rifampin
10 mg/kg, 
10 mg/kg,
max 600 mg
max 600 mg
Pyrazinamide
20–25 mg/kg,
30–40 mg/kg,
max 2 g
max 3 g
Ethambutold
15–20 mg/kg
25–30 mg/kg
aThe duration of treatment for individual drugs varies by regimen, as
detailed in Table 12-3.
bDosages for children are similar, except that some authorities rec-
ommend higher doses of isoniazid (10–15 mg/kg/d; 20–30 mg/kg
intermittent) and rifampin (10–20 mg/kg).
cDosages for twice-weekly administration are the same for isoniazid
and rifampin but are higher for pyrazinamide (50 mg/kg, with a maxi-
mum of 4 g/d) and ethambutol (40–50 mg/d).
dIn certain settings, streptomycin (15 mg/kg/d, with a maximum
dose of 1 g; or 25–30 mg/kg thrice weekly, with a maximum dose of
1.5 g) can replace ethambutol in the initial phase of treatment. How-
ever, streptomycin is no longer considered a ﬁrst-line drug by the
American Thoracic Society, the Infectious Diseases Society of America,
or the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
Source: Based on recommendations of the American Thoracic Soci-
ety, the Infectious Diseases Society of America, and the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention.
the proportion of patients completing treatment and
greatly lessens the chances of relapse and acquired
drug resistance. FDC products (e.g., isoniazid/rifampin,
isoniazid/rifampin/pyrazinamide, and isoniazid/rifampin/
pyrazinamide/ethambutol) are available (except, in the
United States, for the four-drug FDC) and are strongly
recommended as a means of minimizing the likelihood
of prescription error and of the development of drug
resistance as the result of monotherapy. In some formu-
lations of these combination products,the bioavailability
of rifampin has been found to be substandard. In North
America and Europe, regulatory authorities ensure that
combination products are of good quality; however, this
type of quality assurance cannot be assumed to take
place in less afﬂuent countries. Alternative regimens for
patients who exhibit drug intolerance or adverse reac-
tions are listed in Table 12-3. However, severe side
effects prompting discontinuation of any of the first-
line drugs and use of these alternative regimens are
uncommon.
MONITORING TREATMENT RESPONSE AND
DRUG TOXICITY
Bacteriologic evaluation is the
preferred method of monitoring the response to treat-
ment for tuberculosis. Patients with pulmonary disease
should have their sputum examined monthly until cul-
tures become negative. With the recommended regi-
men, >80% of patients will have negative sputum
cultures at the end of the second month of treatment.
By the end of the third month, virtually all patients
should be culture negative. In some patients, especially
those with extensive cavitary disease and large numbers
of organisms, AFB smear conversion may lag behind
culture conversion. This phenomenon is presumably
Tuberculosis
131
CHAPTER 12
TABLE 12-3
RECOMMENDED ANTITUBERCULOSIS TREATMENT REGIMENS
INITIAL PHASE
CONTINUATION PHASE
DURATION, 
DURATION, 
INDICATION
MONTHS
DRUGS
MONTHS
DRUGS
New smear- or culture-positive cases
2
HRZEa,b
4
HRa,c,d
New culture-negative cases
2
HRZEa
2
HRa
Pregnancy
2
HREe
7
HR
Failure and relapsef
—
—
—
—
Resistance (or intolerance) to H
Throughout (6)
RZEg
Resistance to H + R
Throughout (12–18)
ZEQ + S (or another 
injectable agenth)
Resistance to all ﬁrst-line drugs
Throughout (24)
1 injectable agenth
+ 3 of these 4:
ethionamide,
cycloserine, Q, PAS
Standardized retreatment
3
HRZESi
5
HRE
(susceptibility testing unavailable)
Drug intolerance to R
Throughout (12)j
HZE
Drug intolerance to Z
2
HRE
7
HR
aAll drugs can be given daily or intermittently (three times weekly throughout or twice weekly after 2–8 weeks of daily therapy during the initial phase).
bStreptomycin can be used in place of ethambutol but is no longer considered to be a ﬁrst-line drug by the American Thoracic Society, the Infec-
tious Diseases Society of America, or the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
cThe continuation phase should be extended to 7 months for patients with cavitary pulmonary tuberculosis who remain sputum culture positive
after the initial phase of treatment.
dHIV-negative patients with noncavitary pulmonary tuberculosis who have negative sputum AFB smears after the initial phase of treatment can
be given once-weekly rifapentine/isoniazid in the continuation phase.
eThe 6-month regimen with pyrazinamide can probably be used safely during pregnancy and is recommended by the World Health Organization
and the International Union Against Tuberculosis and Lung Disease. If pyrazinamide is not included in the initial treatment regimen, the minimum
duration of therapy is 9 months.
fRegimen is tailored according to the results of drug susceptibility tests.
gA ﬂuoroquinolone may strengthen the regimen for patients with extensive disease.
hAmikacin, kanamycin, or capreomycin. All these agents should be discontinued after 2 to 6 months, depending on tolerance and response.
iStreptomycin should be discontinued after 2 months. This regimen is less effective for patients in whom treatment has failed, who have an
increased probability of rifampin-resistant disease. In such cases, the retreatment regimen might include second-line drugs chosen in light of the
likely pattern of drug resistance.
jStreptomycin for the initial 2 months or a ﬂuoroquinolone might strengthen the regimen for patients with extensive disease.
Note: E, ethambutol; H, isoniazid; PAS, para-aminosalicylic acid; Q, a quinolone antibiotic; R, rifampin; S, streptomycin; Z, pyrazinamide.
caused by the expectoration and microscopic visualiza-
tion of dead bacilli. As noted above, patients with
cavitary disease who do not achieve sputum culture
conversion by 2 months require extended treatment.
When a patient’s sputum cultures remain positive at
≥3 months, treatment failure and drug resistance or
poor adherence with the regimen should be suspected
(see later). A sputum specimen should be collected by
the end of treatment to document cure. If mycobacterial
cultures are not practical, then monitoring by AFB smear
examination should be undertaken at 2, 5, and 6 months.
Smears that are positive after 5 months of treatment in a
patient known to be adherent are indicative of treat-
ment failure.
Bacteriologic monitoring of patients with extrapul-
monary tuberculosis is more difﬁcult and often not fea-
sible. In these cases, the response to treatment must be
assessed clinically and radiographically.
Monitoring of the response to treatment during
chemotherapy by serial chest radiographs is not recom-
mended because radiographic changes may lag behind
bacteriologic response and are not highly sensitive.After
the completion of treatment, neither sputum examina-
tion nor chest radiography is recommended for routine
follow-up purposes. However, a chest radiograph
obtained at the end of treatment may be useful for com-
parative purposes if the patient develops symptoms of
recurrent tuberculosis months or years later. Patients
should be instructed to report promptly for medical
assessment if they develop any such symptoms.
During treatment, patients should be monitored for
drug toxicity.The most common adverse reaction of sig-
niﬁcance is hepatitis. Patients should be carefully edu-
cated about the signs and symptoms of drug-induced
hepatitis (e.g.,dark urine,loss of appetite) and should be
instructed to discontinue treatment promptly and see
their health care provider if these symptoms occur.
Although biochemical monitoring is not routinely rec-
ommended, all adult patients should undergo baseline
assessment of liver function (e.g., measurement of
serum levels of hepatic aminotransferases and serum
bilirubin). Older patients, those with concomitant dis-
eases, those with a history of hepatic disease (especially
hepatitis C), and those using alcohol daily should be
monitored especially closely (i.e.,
monthly),
with
repeated measurements of aminotransferases, during
the initial phase of treatment. Up to 20% of patients
have small increases in aspartate aminotransferase (up
to three times the upper limit of normal) that are not
accompanied by symptoms and are of no consequence.
For patients with symptomatic hepatitis and those with
marked (ﬁve- to sixfold) elevations in serum levels of
aspartate aminotransferase,
treatment should be
stopped and drugs reintroduced one at a time after
liver function has returned to normal.
Hypersensitivity reactions usually require the discon-
tinuation of all drugs and rechallenge to determine
which agent is the culprit. Because of the variety of regi-
mens available, it is usually not necessary—although it is
possible—to desensitize patients. Hyperuricemia and
arthralgia caused by pyrazinamide can usually be man-
aged by the administration of acetylsalicylic acid;
however, pyrazinamide treatment should be stopped if
the patient develops gouty arthritis. Individuals who
develop autoimmune thrombocytopenia secondary to
rifampin therapy should not receive the drug thereafter.
Similarly, the occurrence of optic neuritis with ethambu-
tol is an indication for permanent discontinuation of this
drug.Other common manifestations of drug intolerance,
such as pruritus and gastrointestinal upset,can generally
be managed without the interruption of therapy.
TREATMENT FAILURE AND RELAPSE
As
stated above, treatment failure should be suspected
when a patient’s sputum cultures remain positive after
3 months or when AFB smears remain positive after
5 months. In the management of such patients, it is
imperative that the current isolate be tested for suscep-
tibility to ﬁrst- and second-line agents. When the results
of susceptibility testing are expected to become available
within a few weeks, changes in the regimen can be post-
poned until that time. However, if the patient’s clinical
condition is deteriorating, an earlier change in regimen
may be indicated. A cardinal rule in the latter situation is
to always add more than one drug at a time to a failing
regimen—at least two and preferably three drugs that
have never been used and to which the bacilli are likely to
be susceptible should be added. The patient may con-
tinue to take isoniazid and rifampin along with these new
agents pending the results of susceptibility tests.
The mycobacterial strains infecting patients who
experience a relapse after apparently successful treat-
ment are less likely to have acquired drug resistance
(see below) than are strains from patients in whom
treatment has failed. However, if the regimen adminis-
tered initially does not contain rifampin, the probability
of isoniazid resistance is high. Acquired resistance is
uncommon among strains from patients who relapse
after completing a standard short-course regimen.
However, it is prudent to begin the treatment of all
patients who have relapsed with all four ﬁrst-line drugs
plus streptomycin, pending the results of susceptibility
testing. In less afﬂuent countries and other settings
where facilities for culture and drug susceptibility test-
ing are not available, a standard regimen should be
used in all instances of relapse and treatment failure
(Table 12-3).
DRUG-RESISTANT 
TUBERCULOSIS
Strains
of M. tuberculosis resistant to individual drugs arise
by spontaneous point mutations in the mycobacterial
Diseases of the Respiratory System
132
SECTION II
genome, which occur at low but predictable rates.
Because there is no cross-resistance among the com-
monly used drugs, the probability that a strain will be
resistant to two drugs is the product of the probabilities
of resistance to each drug and thus is low. The develop-
ment of drug-resistant tuberculosis is invariably the
result of monotherapy—i.e., the failure of the health
care provider to prescribe at least two drugs to which
tubercle bacilli are susceptible or of the patient to take
properly prescribed therapy.
Drug-resistant tuberculosis may be either primary or
acquired. Primary drug resistance is that in a strain
infecting a patient who has not previously been treated.
Acquired resistance develops during treatment with an
inappropriate regimen. In North America and Europe,
rates of primary resistance are generally low, and isoni-
azid resistance is most common. In the United States,
although primary isoniazid resistance was stable at
∼7–8% between 1993 and 2002, the rate of primary
multidrug-resistant (MDR) tuberculosis (deﬁned as
tuberculosis caused by a strain resistant at least to isoni-
azid and rifampin) declined from 2.5% to 1%. Resistance
rates are higher among foreign-born and HIV-infected
patients.Worldwide, MDR tuberculosis is a serious prob-
lem in some regions, especially in the former Soviet
Union and parts of Asia (Fig. 12-8). As noted above,
drug-resistant tuberculosis can be prevented by adher-
ence to the principles of sound therapy—the inclusion
of at least two bactericidal drugs to which the organism
is susceptible, the use of FDC products, and the veriﬁca-
tion that patients complete the prescribed course.
Although the 6-month regimen described in Table
12-3 is generally effective for patients with initial isoni-
azid-resistant disease, it is prudent to include ethambu-
tol and pyrazinamide for the full 6 months. In such
cases, isoniazid probably does not contribute to a suc-
cessful outcome and should be omitted. MDR tubercu-
losis is more difﬁcult to manage than is disease caused
by a drug-susceptible organism, especially because
resistance to other ﬁrst-line drugs as well as to isoniazid
and rifampin is common. For strains resistant to isoni-
azid and rifampin, combinations of a ﬂuoroquinolone,
ethambutol, pyrazinamide, and streptomycin (or, for
strains resistant to streptomycin as well, another
injectable agent such as amikacin or kanamycin), given
for 18–24 months and for at least 9 months after spu-
tum culture conversion, may be effective. For patients
with bacilli resistant to all of the ﬁrst-line agents, cure
may be attained with a combination of four second-line
drugs, including one injectable agent (Table 12-3). The
optimal duration of treatment in this situation is
unknown; however, a duration of 24 months is recom-
mended. MDR strains of M. tuberculosis that are also
resistant to at least the ﬂuoroquinolones and one or
more of the injectable drugs amikacin, kanamycin, or
capreomycin [extensive drug-resistant (XDR) strains]
have fewer treatment options and a much poorer prog-
nosis. For patients with localized disease and sufﬁcient
pulmonary reserve, lobectomy or pneumonectomy may
be helpful. Because the management of patients with
MDR and XDR tuberculosis is complicated by both
social and medical factors, care of these patients should
Tuberculosis
133
CHAPTER 12
% of MDR among new TB cases
<1%
1–2%
5–10%
2–5%
>10%
No data
FIGURE 12-8
Percentage of new tuberculosis (TB) cases exhibiting
multidrug resistance (MDR) in all countries surveyed by the
WHO/Union Global Drug Resistance Surveillance Project from
1994 to 2005. (See also disclaimer in Fig. 12-2. Courtesy of
the Stop TB Department, WHO, with permission.)
be restricted to tuberculosis control programs with
resources and capacity and to specialized centers.
HIV-ASSOCIATED TUBERCULOSIS
In general,
the standard treatment regimens are equally efﬁcacious
in HIV-negative and HIV-positive patients. However,
adverse drug effects may be more pronounced in HIV-
infected patients. Because these effects may include
serious or even fatal skin reactions to amithiozone (thi-
acetazone), this drug, which has been used in place of
ethambutol in developing countries,is no longer recom-
mended by the WHO.
Three important considerations are relevant to
tuberculosis treatment in HIV-infected patients: an
increased frequency of paradoxical reactions, drug inter-
actions between antiretroviral therapy and rifamycins,
and development of rifampin monoresistance with
widely spaced intermittent treatment. Exacerbations in
symptoms, signs, and laboratory or radiographic mani-
festations 
of 
tuberculosis—termed 
the 
immune
reconstitution inﬂammatory syndrome (IRIS)—have been
associated with the administration of antiretroviral regi-
mens. IRIS is more common among patients with
advanced immunosuppression and extrapulmonary
tuberculosis. The presumed pathogenesis of IRIS is an
immune response that is elicited by antigens released
as bacilli are killed during effective chemotherapy and
that is temporally associated with improving immune
function.The ﬁrst priority in the management of a possi-
ble case of IRIS is to ensure that the clinical syndrome
does not represent a failure of tuberculosis treatment or
the development of another infection. Mild paradoxical
reactions can be managed with symptom-based treat-
ment. Glucocorticoids have been used for more severe
reactions,although their use in this setting has not been
formally evaluated in clinical trials.
Most HIV-infected tuberculosis patients are candi-
dates for antiretroviral therapy, although the optimal
timing of this treatment is not known. Rifampin, a
potent inducer of enzymes of the cytochrome P450
system, lowers serum levels of many HIV protease
inhibitors and some nonnucleoside reverse transcrip-
tase inhibitors—essential drugs used in antiretroviral
regimens. In such cases, rifabutin, which has much less
enzyme-inducing activity, has been recommended in
place of rifampin. However, dosage adjustment for
rifabutin, the antiretroviral drugs, or both may be nec-
essary.
Because recommendations are frequently
updated, consultation of the CDC website is advised
(www.cdc.gov/tb/TB_HIV_Drugs/default.htm).
Several clinical trials of HIV-associated tuberculosis
have found that patients with advanced immunosup-
pression (CD4+ T cell counts of <100/μL) are prone to
treatment failure and relapse with rifampin-resistant
organisms when treated with “highly intermittent” (i.e.,
once- or twice-weekly) rifamycin-containing regimens.
Consequently, it is recommended that these patients
receive daily or thrice-weekly therapy for the entire
course.
SPECIAL 
CLINICAL 
SITUATIONS
Although
comparative clinical trials of treatment for extrapul-
monary tuberculosis are limited, the available evidence
indicates that most forms of disease can be treated with
the 6-month regimen recommended for patients with
pulmonary disease.The American Academy of Pediatrics
recommends that children with bone and joint tubercu-
losis, tuberculous meningitis, or miliary tuberculosis
receive 9–12 months of treatment.
Treatment for tuberculosis may be complicated by
underlying medical problems that require special con-
sideration. As a rule, patients with chronic renal failure
should not receive aminoglycosides and should receive
ethambutol only if serum levels can be monitored.Isoni-
azid, rifampin, and pyrazinamide may be given in the
usual doses in cases of mild to moderate renal failure,
but the dosages of isoniazid and pyrazinamide should
be reduced for all patients with severe renal failure
except those undergoing hemodialysis. Patients with
hepatic disease pose a special problem because of the
hepatotoxicity of isoniazid, rifampin, and pyrazinamide.
Patients with severe hepatic disease may be treated
with ethambutol, streptomycin, and possibly another
drug (e.g., a ﬂuoroquinolone); if required, isoniazid and
rifampin may be administered under close supervision.
The use of pyrazinamide by patients with liver failure
should be avoided. Silicotuberculosis necessitates the
extension of therapy by at least 2 months.
The regimen of choice for pregnant women (Table 12-3)
is 9 months of treatment with isoniazid and rifampin
supplemented by ethambutol for the ﬁrst 2 months.
Although the WHO has recommended routine use of
pyrazinamide in pregnant women,this drug has not been
recommended in the United States because of insufﬁcient
data documenting its safety in pregnancy.Streptomycin is
contraindicated because it is known to cause eighth cra-
nial nerve damage in fetuses. Treatment for tuberculosis
is not a contraindication to breast-feeding; most of the
drugs administered are present in small quantities in
breast milk,albeit at concentrations far too low to provide
any therapeutic or prophylactic beneﬁt to the child.
Medical consultation on difﬁcult-to-manage cases is
provided by the CDC Regional Training and Medical Con-
sultation Centers (http://www.cdc.gov/tb/rtmcc.htm).
Diseases of the Respiratory System
134
SECTION II
PREVENTION
By far the best way to prevent tuberculosis is to diagnose
and isolate infectious cases rapidly and administer appro-
priate treatment until patients are rendered noninfectious
and the disease is cured. Additional strategies include
BCG vaccination and treatment of persons with latent
tuberculosis infection who are at high risk of developing
active disease.
BACILLE CALMETTE-GUÉRIN
VACCINATION
BCG was derived from an attenuated strain of M. bovis
and ﬁrst administered to humans in 1921. Many BCG
vaccines are available worldwide; all are derived from the
original strain, but the vaccines vary in efﬁcacy, ranging
from 80% to nil in randomized, placebo-controlled tri-
als. A similar range of efﬁcacy was found in recent
observational studies (case-control, historic cohort, and
cross-sectional) in areas where infants are vaccinated at
birth.These studies also found higher rates of efﬁcacy in
the protection of infants and young children from rela-
tively serious forms of tuberculosis, such as tuberculous
meningitis and miliary tuberculosis.
BCG vaccine is safe and rarely causes serious com-
plications. The local tissue response begins 2–3 weeks
after vaccination, with scar formation and healing
within 3 months. Side effects—most commonly, ulcera-
tion at the vaccination site and regional lymphadenitis—
occur in 1–10% of vaccinated persons. Some vaccine
strains have caused osteomyelitis (∼1 case per million
doses administered). Disseminated BCG infection and
death have occurred in 1–10 cases per 10 million doses
administered, although this problem is restricted almost
exclusively to persons with impaired immunity, such as
children with severe combined immunodeﬁciency syn-
drome or adults with HIV infection. BCG vaccination
induces TST reactivity, which tends to wane with time.
The presence or size of TST reactions after vaccination
does not predict the degree of protection afforded.
BCG vaccine is recommended for routine use at
birth in countries with high tuberculosis prevalence.
However, because of the low risk of transmission of
tuberculosis in the United States, the unreliable protec-
tion afforded by BCG, and its impact on the TST, the
vaccine has never been recommended for general use in
the United States. The CDC has recommended that
HIV-infected adults and children not receive BCG vac-
cine, although the WHO has recommended that
asymptomatic HIV-infected children residing in tuber-
culosis-endemic areas receive BCG.
on the results of a large number of randomized,
placebo-controlled clinical trials demonstrating that a 6-
to 12-month course of isoniazid reduces the risk of
active tuberculosis in infected people by up to 90%.
Analysis of available data indicates that the optimal
duration of treatment is 9–10 months. In the absence of
reinfection, the protective effect is believed to be life-
long. Clinical trials have shown that isoniazid reduces
rates of tuberculosis among TST-positive persons with
HIV infection. Studies in HIV-infected patients have also
demonstrated the effectiveness of shorter courses of
rifampin-based treatment.
In most cases, candidates for treatment of LTBI
(Table 12-4) are identiﬁed by the TST of persons in
deﬁned high-risk groups. For skin testing, 5 tuberculin
units of polysorbate-stabilized PPD should be injected
intradermally into the volar surface of the forearm
(Mantoux method). Multipuncture tests are not recom-
mended.Reactions are read at 48–72 h as the transverse
diameter (in millimeters) of induration; the diameter of
erythema is not considered. In some persons, TST reac-
tivity wanes with time but can be recalled by a second
skin test administered ≥1 week after the ﬁrst (i.e., two-
step testing). For persons periodically undergoing the
TST, such as health care workers and individuals admit-
ted to long-term care institutions, initial two-step testing
may preclude subsequent misclassiﬁcation of persons
with boosted reactions as TST converters.
Tuberculosis
135
CHAPTER 12
Treatment:
LATENT TUBERCULOSIS INFECTION
Treatment of selected persons with LTBI aims at pre-
venting active disease.This intervention (formerly called
preventive chemotherapy or chemoprophylaxis) is based
TABLE 12-4
TUBERCULIN REACTION SIZE AND TREATMENT OF
LATENT TUBERCULOSIS INFECTION
TUBERCULIN
REACTION
RISK GROUP
SIZE, MM
HIV-infected persons or persons
≥5
receiving immunosuppressive
therapy
Close contacts of tuberculosis patients
≥5a
Persons with ﬁbrotic lesions on
≥5
chest radiography
Recently infected persons (≤2 years) 
≥10
Persons with high-risk medical
≥10
conditionsb
Low-risk personsc
≥15
aTuberculin-negative contacts, especially children, should receive
prophylaxis for 2 to 3 months after contact ends and should then
undergo a repeat tuberculin skin test (TST). Those whose results
remain negative should discontinue prophylaxis. HIV-infected contacts
should receive a full course of treatment regardless of TST results.
bIncludes diabetes mellitus, some hematologic and reticuloendothelial
diseases, injection drug use (with HIV seronegativity), end-stage renal
disease, and clinical situations associated with rapid weight loss.
cExcept for employment purposes in which longitudinal TST screening
is anticipated, TST is not indicated for these low-risk persons. A deci-
sion to treat should be based on individual risk–beneﬁt considerations.
The cutoff for a positive TST result (and thus for treat-
ment) is related both to the probability that the reac-
tion represents true infection and to the likelihood that
the individual, if truly infected, will develop tuberculosis
(Table 12-4). Thus, positive reactions for close contacts
of infectious cases, persons with HIV infection, persons
receiving drugs that suppress the immune system, and
previously untreated persons whose chest radiographs
are consistent with healed tuberculosis are deﬁned as
an area of induration 5 mm or more in diameter.A 10-mm
cutoff is used to deﬁne positive reactions in most other
at-risk persons.For persons with a very low risk of devel-
oping tuberculosis if infected, a cutoff of 15 mm is used.
(Except for employment purposes in which longitudinal
screening is anticipated, the TST is not indicated for
these low-risk persons.) Treatment should be consid-
ered for persons from tuberculosis-endemic countries
who have a history of BCG vaccination. A positive reac-
tion in an IGRA is not based on the degree of response
(i.e.,the level of IFN-γ induced).
Some TST-negative individuals are also candidates for
treatment.Infants and children who have come into con-
tact with infectious cases should be treated and should
have a repeat skin test 2 or 3 months after contact ends.
Those whose test results remain negative should discon-
tinue treatment. HIV-infected persons who have been
exposed to an infectious tuberculosis patient should
receive treatment regardless of the TST result.
Isoniazid is administered at a daily dose of 5 mg/kg
(up to 300 mg/d) for 9 months (Table 12-5). On the
basis of cost-benefit analyses, a 6-month period of
treatment has been recommended in the past and may
be considered for HIV-negative adults with normal
chest radiographs when ﬁnancial considerations are
important. When supervised treatment is desirable and
feasible, isoniazid may be given at a dose of 15 mg/kg
(up to 900 mg) twice weekly. An alternative regimen for
adults is 4 months of daily rifampin. A 3-month regimen
of isoniazid and rifampin is recommended in the United
Kingdom for both adults and children. A previously rec-
ommended regimen of 2 months of rifampin and pyraz-
inamide has been associated with serious and fatal
hepatotoxicity and is now generally not recommended.
The rifampin regimen should be considered for persons
who are likely to have been infected with an isoniazid-
resistant strain.
Isoniazid should not be given to persons with active
liver disease. All persons at increased risk of hepatotoxi-
city (e.g., those abusing alcohol daily and those with a
history of liver disease) should undergo baseline and
then monthly assessment of liver function. All patients
should be carefully educated about hepatitis and
instructed to discontinue use of the drug immediately if
any symptoms develop. Moreover, patients should be
seen and questioned monthly during therapy about
adverse reactions and should be given no more than
1 month’s supply of drug at each visit.
It may be more difﬁcult to ensure compliance when
treating persons with latent infection than when treat-
ing those with active tuberculosis. If family members of
active cases are being treated, compliance and monitor-
ing may be easier.When feasible,twice-weekly supervised
therapy may increase the likelihood of completion.As in
active cases, the provision of incentives may also be
helpful.
Diseases of the Respiratory System
136
SECTION II
PRINCIPLES OF TUBERCULOSIS
CONTROL
The highest priority in any tuberculosis control program
is the prompt detection of cases and the provision of
short-course chemotherapy to all tuberculosis patients
under proper case-management conditions, including
directly observed therapy. In addition, in low-prevalence
countries with adequate resources, screening of high-risk
groups (e.g., immigrants from high-prevalence countries,
migratory workers, prisoners, homeless people, substance
abusers, and HIV-seropositive persons) is recommended.
TST-positive high-risk persons should be treated for
latent infection. Contact investigation is an important
component of efﬁcient tuberculosis control. In the
United States, a great deal of attention has been given to
the transmission of tuberculosis (particularly in association
with HIV infection) in institutional settings such as hos-
pitals, homeless shelters, and prisons. Measures to limit
such transmission include respiratory isolation of persons
with suspected tuberculosis until they are proven to be
noninfectious (i.e., by sputum AFB smear negativity),
proper ventilation in rooms of patients with infectious
tuberculosis, use of ultraviolet irradiation in areas of
increased risk of tuberculosis transmission, and periodic
screening of personnel who may come into contact with
known or unsuspected cases of tuberculosis. In the past,
radiographic surveys, especially those conducted with
portable equipment and miniature ﬁlms, were advocated
for case ﬁnding.Today, however, the prevalence of tuber-
culosis in industrialized countries is sufﬁciently low that
“mass miniature radiography” is not cost effective.
In high-prevalence countries, many tuberculosis control
programs have made good progress in reducing morbidity
and mortality during the past decade by adopting and
implementing the DOTS strategy promoted by the
WHO.This strategy consists of (1) political commitment
with increased and sustained ﬁnancing; (2) case detection
through quality-assured bacteriology (starting with micro-
scopic examination of sputum from patients with cough
of >2–3 weeks’ duration); (3) administration of standard-
ized treatment, with supervision and patient support;
(4) an effective drug supply and management system; and
(5) a monitoring and evaluation system, with impact mea-
surement (including assessment of treatment outcomes—
e.g., cure, completion of treatment without bacteriologic
proof of cure, death, treatment failure, and default—in all
cases registered and notiﬁed). In 2006, the WHO indicated
that although DOTS remains the essential component of
any control strategy, additional steps must be undertaken
to reach the 2015 tuberculosis control targets set within
the United Nations Millennium Development Goals.
Thus, a new “Stop TB Strategy” with six components has
been promoted: (1) pursue high-quality DOTS expansion
and enhancement; (2) address HIV-associated tuberculosis,
MDR tuberculosis, and other special challenges; (3) con-
tribute to health system strengthening; (4) engage all care
providers; (5) empower people with tuberculosis and com-
munities; and (6) enable and promote research. As part of
Tuberculosis
137
CHAPTER 12
TABLE 12-5
REVISED DRUG REGIMENS FOR TREATMENT OF LATENT TUBERCULOSIS INFECTION (LTBI) IN ADULTS
RATINGb (EVIDENCEc)
INTERVAL 
HIV 
HIV 
DRUG
AND DURATION
COMMENTSa
NEGATIVE
INFECTED
Isoniazid
Daily for
In HIV-infected persons, isoniazid may be 
A (II)
A (II)
9 monthsd,e
administered concurrently with nucleoside
reverse transcriptase inhibitors, protease
inhibitors, or nonnucleoside reverse transcriptase
inhibitors (NNRTIs).
Twice weekly
Directly observed therapy (DOT) must be used
B (II)
B (II)
for 9 monthsd,e
with twice-weekly dosing.
Daily for
Regimen is not indicated for HIV-infected 
B (I)
C (I)
6 monthse
persons, those with ﬁbrotic lesions on chest
radiographs, or children.
Twice weekly
DOT must be used with twice-weekly dosing.
B (II)
C (I)
for 6 monthse
Rifampinf
Daily for
Regimen is used for contacts of patients with 
B (II)
B (III)
4 months
isoniazid-resistant, rifampin-susceptible
tuberculosis. In HIV-infected persons, most
protease inhibitors and delavirdine should not
be administered concurrently with rifampin.
Rifabutin, with appropriate dose adjustments,
can be used with protease inhibitors (saquinavir
should be augmented with ritonavir) and NNRTIs
(except delavirdine). Clinicians should consult
Web-based updates for the latest speciﬁc
recommendations.
Rifampin plus
Daily for
Regimen generally should not be offered for 
D (II)
D (II)
pyrazinamide (RZ)
2 months
treatment of LTBI in either HIV-infected or 
HIV-negative persons.
Twice weekly
D (III)
D (III)
for 2–3 months
aInteractions with HIV-related drugs are updated frequently and are available at http://www.aidsinfo.nih.gov/guidelines.
bStrength of the recommendation: A. Both strong evidence of efﬁcacy and substantial clinical beneﬁt support recommendation for use. Should
always be offered. B. Moderate evidence for efﬁcacy or strong evidence for efﬁcacy but only limited clinical beneﬁt supports recommendation
for use. Should generally be offered. C. Evidence for efﬁcacy is insufﬁcient to support a recommendation for or against use, or evidence for efﬁ-
cacy might not outweigh adverse consequences (e.g., drug toxicity, drug interactions) or cost of the treatment or alternative approaches.
Optional. D. Moderate evidence for lack of efﬁcacy or for adverse outcome supports a recommendation against use. Should generally not be
offered. E. Good evidence for lack of efﬁcacy or for adverse outcome supports a recommendation against use. Should never be offered.
cQuality of evidence supporting the recommendation: I. Evidence from at least one properly randomized controlled trial. II. Evidence from at least
one well-designed clinical trial without randomization, from cohort or case-controlled analytic studies (preferably from more than one center),
from multiple time-series studies, or from dramatic results in uncontrolled experiments. III. Evidence from opinions of respected authorities
based on clinical experience, descriptive studies, or reports of expert committees.
dRecommended regimen for persons aged <18 years.
eRecommended regimen for pregnant women.
fThe substitution of rifapentine for rifampin is not recommended because rifapentine’s safety and effectiveness have not been established for
patients with LTBI.
Source: Adapted from CDC: Targeted tuberculin testing and treatment of latent tuberculosis infection. MMWR 49(RR-6), 2000.
the fourth component, new evidence-based International
Standards for Tuberculosis Care, focused on diagnosis,
treatment, and public health responsibilities, have recently
been introduced for wide adoption by medical and profes-
sional societies, academic institutions, and all practitioners
worldwide.
FURTHER READINGS
AMERICAN THORACIC SOCIETY, CENTERS FOR DISEASE CONTROL
AND PREVENTION: Targeted tuberculin testing and treatment of
latent tuberculosis infection. Am J Respir Crit Care Med
161:S221, 2000
AMERICAN THORACIC SOCIETY, INFECTIOUS DISEASES SOCIETY OF
AMERICA, CENTERS FOR DISEASE CONTROL AND PREVENTION:
Treatment of tuberculosis.Am J Respir Crit Care Med 167:603,
2003
CENTERS FOR DISEASE CONTROL AND PREVENTION: Control of
tuberculosis in the United States: Recommendations from the
American Thoracic Society, CDC, and the Infectious Diseases
Society of America. MMWR 54:RR1, 2005
HOPEWELL PC et al: International standards for tuberculosis care.
Lancet Infect Dis 6:710, 2006
MENZIES D et al: Meta-analysis: New tests for the diagnosis of latent
tuberculosis infection:Areas of uncertainty and recommendations
for research. Ann Intern Med 146:340, 2007 [PMID:17339619]
NAHID P et al:Treatment outcomes of patients with HIV and tuberculo-
sis.Am J Respir Crit Care Med 175:1199, 2007 [PMID:17290042]
ONYEBUJOH PC et al:Treatment options for HIV-associated tubercu-
losis. J Infect Dis 196(Suppl 1):S35, 2007 [PMID:17726832]
PAI M et al: New tools and emerging technologies for the
diagnosis of tuberculosis. Part I: Latent tuberculosis. Part II:
Active tuberculosis and drug resistance. Expert Rev Mol Diagn
6:413, 2006
RAVIGLIONE MC, SMITH IM: XDR tuberculosis—Implications
for global public health. N Engl J Med 356:656, 2007
[PMID:17301295]
———, UPLEKAR M: WHO’s new Stop TB Strategy. Lancet
367:952, 2006
REID A et al:Towards universal access to HIV prevention, treatment,
care and support: The role of tuberculosis/HIV collaboration.
Lancet Infect Dis 6:483, 2006
VOLMINK J, GARNER P: Directly observed therapy for treating tuber-
culosis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev Oct 17(4):CD003343, 2007
[PMID:17943789]
WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION: Guidelines for the program-
matic management of drug-resistant tuberculosis. Geneva,WHO,
2006
WRIGHT A et al: Global project on anti-tuberculosis drug resistance
surveillance. Epidemiology of antituberculosis drug resistance
2002–07: An updated analysis of the Global Project on Anti-
Tuberculosis Drug Resistance Surveillance. Lancet 373:186,
2009
Diseases of the Respiratory System
138
SECTION II
Raphael Dolin
DEFINITION
Inﬂuenza is an acute respiratory illness caused by infec-
tion with inﬂuenza viruses.The illness affects the upper
or lower respiratory tract (or both) and is often accom-
panied by systemic signs and symptoms such as fever,
headache, myalgia, and weakness. Outbreaks of illness of
variable extent and severity occur nearly every winter.
Such outbreaks result in signiﬁcant morbidity in the
general population and in increased mortality rates
among certain high-risk patients, mainly as a result of
pulmonary complications.
ETIOLOGIC AGENT
Inﬂuenza viruses are members of the Orthomyxoviridae
family, of which inﬂuenza A, B, and C viruses constitute
three separate genera.The designation of inﬂuenza viruses
as type A, B, or C is based on antigenic characteristics of
the nucleoprotein (NP) and matrix (M) protein antigens.
Inﬂuenza A viruses are further subdivided (subtyped) on
the basis of the surface hemagglutinin (H) and neu-
raminidase (N) antigens (see later); individual strains are
designated according to the site of origin, isolate number,
year of isolation, and subtype—for example, inﬂuenza
A/Hiroshima/52/2005 (H3N2). Inﬂuenza A has 16 dis-
tinct H subtypes and nine distinct N subtypes, of which
INFLUENZA
only H1, H2, H3, N1, and N2 have been associated with
epidemics of disease in humans. Inﬂuenza B and C
viruses are similarly designated, but H and N antigens
from these viruses do not receive subtype designations
because intratypic variations in inﬂuenza B antigens are
less extensive than those in inﬂuenza A viruses and may
not occur with inﬂuenza C virus.
Inﬂuenza A and B viruses are major human pathogens
and the most extensively studied of the Orthomyxoviri-
dae.Type A and type B viruses are morphologically simi-
lar.The virions are irregularly shaped spherical particles,
measure 80 to 120 nm in diameter, and have a lipid
envelope from the surface of which the H and N glyco-
proteins project (Fig. 13-1).Whereas the hemagglutinin
is the site by which the virus binds to sialic acid cell
receptors, the neuraminidase degrades the receptor and
plays a role in the release of the virus from infected cells
after replication has taken place. Inﬂuenza viruses enter
cells by receptor-mediated endocytosis, forming a virus-
containing endosome. The viral hemagglutinin mediates
fusion of the endosomal membrane with the virus enve-
lope, and viral nucleocapsids are subsequently released
into the cytoplasm. Whereas immune responses to the
H antigen are the major determinants of protection
against infection with inﬂuenza virus,those to the N antigen
limit viral spread and contribute to reduction of the
infection. The lipid envelope of inﬂuenza A virus also
CHAPTER 13
CHAPTER 13
139
Deﬁnition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 139
Etiologic Agent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 139
Epidemiology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 140
Avian Inﬂuenza . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 140
Pathogenesis and Immunity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 142
Clinical Manifestations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 143
Complications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 143
Laboratory Findings and Diagnosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 145
Differential Diagnosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 145
Prophylaxis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 146
I Further Readings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 148
Diseases of the Respiratory System
140
SECTION II
contains the M proteins M1 and M2, which are involved
in stabilization of the lipid envelope and in virus assembly.
The virion also contains the NP antigen, which is associ-
ated with the viral genome, as well as three polymerase
(P) proteins that are essential for transcription and synthe-
sis of viral RNA.Two nonstructural proteins function as
an interferon antagonist and posttranscriptional regulator
(NS1) and a nuclear export factor (NS2 or NEP).
The genomes of inﬂuenza A and B viruses consist of
eight single-stranded RNA segments, which code for the
structural and nonstructural proteins. Because the genome
is segmented, the opportunity for gene reassortment dur-
ing infection is high; reassortment often occurs during
infection of cells with more than one inﬂuenza A virus.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
Inﬂuenza outbreaks are recorded virtually every year,
although their extent and severity vary widely. Localized
outbreaks take place at variable intervals, usually every
1–3 years. Global pandemics have occurred at variable
intervals but much less frequently than interpandemic
outbreaks (Table 13-1). The most recent pandemic
occurred in 1977—some 30 years ago as of this writing;
because of this relatively long interval, concern exists
that the next pandemic may be imminent.
Inﬂuenza A Virus
Antigenic Variation and Inﬂuenza Outbreaks
The most extensive and severe outbreaks are caused by
inﬂuenza A viruses, in part because of the remarkable
propensity of the H and N antigens of these viruses to
undergo periodic antigenic variation. Major antigenic
variations, called antigenic shifts, may be associated with
pandemics and are restricted to inﬂuenza A viruses.
Minor variations are called antigenic drifts.These types of
antigenic variation may involve the hemagglutinin
alone or both the hemagglutinin and the neuraminidase.
An example of an antigenic shift involving both the
hemagglutinin and the neuraminidase is that of 1957,
when the predominant inﬂuenza A virus subtype shifted
from H1N1 to H2N2; this shift resulted in a severe pan-
demic, with an estimated 70,000 excess deaths (i.e.,
deaths in excess of the number expected without an
inﬂuenza epidemic) in the United States alone. In 1968,
an antigenic shift involving only the hemagglutinin
occurred (H2N2 to H3N2); the subsequent pandemic
was less severe than that of 1957. In 1977, an H1N1
virus emerged and caused a pandemic that primarily
affected younger individuals (i.e., those born after 1957).
As can be seen in Table 13-1, H1N1 viruses circulated
from 1918 to 1956; thus, individuals born before 1957
are expected to have some degree of immunity to
H1N1 viruses. During most outbreaks of inﬂuenza A, a
single subtype has circulated at a time. However, since
1977, H1N1 and H3N2 viruses have circulated simulta-
neously, resulting in outbreaks of varying severity. In
some outbreaks, inﬂuenza B viruses have also circulated
simultaneously with inﬂuenza A viruses.
AVIAN INFLUENZA
In 1997, human cases of inﬂuenza caused by avian
inﬂuenza viruses (A/H5N1) were detected in
Hong Kong during an extensive outbreak of
inﬂuenza in poultry. Between that time and January 2007,
261 cases of avian inﬂuenza in humans were reported in
10 countries in Asia and the Middle East.Nearly all of these
cases were associated with contact with infected poultry.
FIGURE 13-1
An electron micrograph of inﬂuenza A virus (× 40,000).
TABLE 13-1
EMERGENCE OF ANTIGENIC SUBTYPES OF
INFLUENZA A VIRUS ASSOCIATED WITH PANDEMIC
OR EPIDEMIC DISEASE
YEARS
SUBTYPE
EXTENT OF OUTBREAK
1889–1890
H2N8a
Severe pandemic
1900–1903
H3N8a
Moderate epidemic
1918–1919
H1N1b
Severe pandemic
(formerly
HswN1)
1933–1935
H1N1b
Mild epidemic
(formerly
H0N1)
1946–1947
H1N1
Mild epidemic
1957–1958
H2N2
Severe pandemic
1968–1969
H3N2
Moderate pandemic
1977–1978c
H1N1
Mild pandemic
aAs determined by retrospective serologic survey of individuals alive
during those years (“seroarcheology”).
bHemagglutinins formerly designated as Hsw and H0 are now classi-
ﬁed as variants of H1.
cFrom this time until the present (2006–2007), viruses of the H1N1
and H3N2 subtypes have circulated either in alternating years or
concurrently.
Efﬁcient person-to-person transmission has not been
observed to date. Mortality rates have been high (60%), and
clinical manifestations have differed somewhat from
those associated with “typical” outbreaks of inﬂuenza (see
below). Transmission of avian inﬂuenza A/H7N7 viruses
from infected poultry to humans has been observed in The
Netherlands, resulting predominantly in cases of conjunc-
tivitis and some respiratory illnesses. Infection with avian
A/H9N2 viruses along with mild respiratory illness has
been reported in children in Hong Kong. Because of the
absence of widespread immunity to the H5, H7, and H9
viruses,concern has been raised that avian-to-human trans-
mission may be the basis for the emergence of pandemic
strains.
The origin of actual pandemic inﬂuenza A virus
strains has now been partially elucidated with molecular
virologic techniques. It appears that the pandemic strains
of 1957 and 1968 resulted from a genetic reassortment
between human viruses and avian viruses with novel
surface glycoproteins (H2N2, H3). The inﬂuenza virus
responsible for the most severe pandemic of modern
times (1918–1919) appears to have represented an adap-
tation of an avian virus to efﬁcient infection of humans.
Close molecular surveillance of the avian viruses cur-
rently infecting humans is being conducted to provide
early detection of possible pandemic strains.
Features of Pandemic and Interpandemic
Inﬂuenza A
Pandemics provide the most dramatic evidence of the
impact of inﬂuenza A. However, illnesses occurring
between pandemics (i.e., interpandemic disease) account
for extensive mortality and morbidity, albeit over a
longer period. In the United States, inﬂuenza was associ-
ated with at least 19,000 excess deaths per season from
1976 to 1990 and with 36,000 excess deaths per season
from 1990 to 1999. On average, there were 226,000
inﬂuenza-associated hospitalizations per year in this
country from 1979 to 2001.
Inﬂuenza A viruses that circulate between pandemics
demonstrate antigenic drifts in the H antigen.These anti-
genic drifts result from point mutations involving the
RNA segment that codes for the hemagglutinin, which
occur most frequently in ﬁve hypervariable regions. Epi-
demiologically signiﬁcant strains—i.e., those with the
potential to cause widespread outbreaks—exhibit changes
in amino acids in at least two of the major antigenic sites
in the hemagglutinin molecule. Because two point muta-
tions are unlikely to occur simultaneously, it is believed
that antigenic drifts result from point mutations occur-
ring sequentially during the spread of virus from person
to person. Antigenic drifts have been reported nearly
annually since 1977 for H1N1 viruses and since 1968 for
H3N2 viruses.
Inﬂuenza A epidemics begin abruptly, peak over a 2- to
3-week period, generally last for 2 to 3 months, and
often subside almost as rapidly as they began. The ﬁrst
indication of inﬂuenza activity in a community is an
increase in the number of children with febrile respira-
tory illnesses who present for medical attention. This
increase is followed by increases in rates of inﬂuenza-like
illnesses among adults and eventually by an increase in
hospital admissions for patients with pneumonia, wors-
ening of congestive heart failure, and exacerbations of
chronic pulmonary disease. Rates of absence from work
and school also increase at this time. An increase in the
number of deaths caused by pneumonia and inﬂuenza is
generally a late observation in an outbreak. Attack rates
have been highly variable from outbreak to outbreak
but most commonly are in the range of 10–20% of the
general population. During the pandemic of 1957, it was
estimated that the attack rate of clinical inﬂuenza
exceeded 50% in urban populations and that an addi-
tional 25% or more of individuals in these populations
may have been subclinically infected with inﬂuenza A
virus. Among institutionalized populations and in semi-
closed settings with many susceptible individuals, even
higher attack rates have been reported.
Epidemics of inﬂuenza A occur almost exclusively
during the winter months in the temperate zones of the
northern and southern hemispheres. In those locations, it
is highly unusual to detect inﬂuenza A virus at other
times, although increases in serum antibody titer or even
outbreaks have been noted rarely during the warm
months. In contrast, inﬂuenza virus infections occur
throughout the year in the tropics.Where or how inﬂuenza
A virus persists between outbreaks in temperate zones is
unknown. It is possible that inﬂuenza A viruses are main-
tained in the human population on a worldwide basis by
person-to-person transmission and that large population
clusters support a low level of interepidemic transmis-
sion. Alternatively, human strains may persist in animal
reservoirs. Convincing evidence to support either expla-
nation is not available. In the modern era, rapid trans-
portation may contribute to the transmission of viruses
among widespread geographic locales.
The factors that result in the inception and termina-
tion of outbreaks of inﬂuenza A are incompletely under-
stood.A major determinant of the extent and severity of
an outbreak is the level of immunity in the population
at risk. With the emergence of an antigenically novel
inﬂuenza virus to which little or no immunity is present
in a community, extensive outbreaks may occur. When
the absence of immunity is worldwide, epidemic disease
may spread around the globe, resulting in a pandemic.
Such pandemic waves can continue for several years
until immunity in the population reaches a high level. In
the years after pandemic inﬂuenza, antigenic drifts
among inﬂuenza viruses result in outbreaks of variable
severity in populations with high levels of immunity to
the pandemic strain that circulated earlier.This situation
persists until another antigenically novel pandemic strain
Inﬂuenza
141
CHAPTER 13
emerges. On the other hand, outbreaks sometimes end
despite the persistence of a large pool of susceptible
individuals in the population. It has been suggested that
certain inﬂuenza A viruses, such as recently circulating
A/H1N1 strains, may be intrinsically less virulent and
cause less severe disease than other variants, even in
immunologically virgin subjects. If so, then other (unde-
ﬁned) factors besides the level of preexisting immunity
must play a role in the epidemiology of inﬂuenza.
Inﬂuenza B and C Viruses
Inﬂuenza B virus causes outbreaks that are generally less
extensive and are associated with less severe disease than
those caused by inﬂuenza A virus. The hemagglutinin
and neuraminidase of inﬂuenza B virus undergo less fre-
quent and less extensive variation than those of inﬂuenza
A viruses; this characteristic may account, in part, for the
lesser extent of disease. Inﬂuenza B outbreaks are seen
most frequently in schools and military camps, although
outbreaks in institutions in which elderly individuals
reside have also been noted on occasion.The most seri-
ous complication of inﬂuenza B virus infection is Reye’s
syndrome.
In contrast to inﬂuenza A and B viruses, inﬂuenza C
virus appears to be a relatively minor cause of disease in
humans. It has been associated with common cold-like
symptoms and occasionally with lower respiratory tract ill-
ness. Serum antibody to this virus is widely prevalent and
indicates that asymptomatic infection may be common.
Inﬂuenza-Associated Morbidity and Mortality
The morbidity and mortality caused by inﬂuenza out-
breaks continue to be substantial. Most individuals who
die in this setting have underlying diseases that place them
at high risk for complications of inﬂuenza. Excess hospi-
talizations for groups of adults and children with high-
risk medical conditions ranged from 56 to 1900 per
100,000 during outbreaks of inﬂuenza from 1973 to
1993. The most prominent high-risk conditions are
chronic cardiac and pulmonary diseases and old age. Mor-
tality rates among individuals with chronic metabolic or
renal disease or certain immunosuppressive diseases have
also been elevated, albeit lower than those among patients
with chronic cardiopulmonary diseases. The morbidity
attributable to inﬂuenza in the general population is con-
siderable. It is estimated that interpandemic outbreaks of
influenza currently incur annual costs of more than
$12 billion in the United States. If a pandemic were to
occur, it is estimated that annual costs would range from
$71 to $167 billion for attack rates of 15–35%.
PATHOGENESIS AND IMMUNITY
The initial event in inﬂuenza is infection of the respira-
tory epithelium with influenza virus acquired from
respiratory secretions of acutely infected individuals. In
all likelihood, the virus is transmitted via aerosols gener-
ated by coughs and sneezes, although hand-to-hand
contact, other personal contact, and even fomite trans-
mission may take place. Experimental evidence suggests
that infection by a small-particle aerosol (particle diame-
ter, <10 μm) is more efﬁcient than that by larger
droplets. Initially, viral infection involves the ciliated
columnar epithelial cells, but it may also involve other
respiratory tract cells, including alveolar cells, mucous
gland cells, and macrophages. In infected cells, virus
replicates within 4–6 h, after which infectious virus is
released to infect adjacent or nearby cells. In this way,
infection spreads from a few foci to a large number of
respiratory cells over several hours. In experimentally
induced infection, the incubation period of illness has
ranged from 18 to 72 h, depending on the size of the
viral inoculum. Histopathologic study reveals degenera-
tive changes,
including granulation,
vacuolization,
swelling, and pyknotic nuclei, in infected ciliated cells.
The cells eventually become necrotic and desquamate;
in some areas, previously columnar epithelium is
replaced by ﬂattened and metaplastic epithelial cells.The
severity of illness is correlated with the quantity of virus
shed in secretions; thus, the degree of viral replication
itself may be an important factor in pathogenesis. Despite
the frequent development of systemic signs and symp-
toms such as fever, headache, and myalgias, inﬂuenza
virus has only rarely been detected in extrapulmonary
sites (including the bloodstream). Evidence suggests that
the pathogenesis of systemic symptoms in inﬂuenza may
be related to the induction of certain cytokines, particu-
larly tumor necrosis factor α, interferon α, interleukin 6,
and interleukin 8, in respiratory secretions and in the
bloodstream.
The host response to inﬂuenza infections involves a
complex interplay of humoral antibody, local antibody,
cell-mediated immunity, interferon, and other host
defenses. Serum antibody responses, which can be
detected by the second week after primary infection, are
measured by a variety of techniques: hemagglutination
inhibition (HI), complement ﬁxation (CF), neutraliza-
tion, enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), and
antineuraminidase antibody assay. Antibodies to the
hemagglutinin appear to be the most important media-
tors of immunity; in several studies, HI titers of ≥40 have
been associated with protection from infection. Secretory
antibodies produced in the respiratory tract are predomi-
nantly of the IgA class and also play a major role in pro-
tection against infection. Secretory antibody neutraliza-
tion titers of ≥4 have also been associated with
protection.A variety of cell-mediated immune responses,
both antigen-speciﬁc and antigen-nonspeciﬁc, can be
detected early after infection and depend on the prior
immune status of the host.These responses include T cell
proliferative, T cell cytotoxic, and natural killer cell
Diseases of the Respiratory System
142
SECTION II
activity. In humans, CD8+ HLA class I–restricted cyto-
toxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) are directed at conserved
regions of internal proteins (NP, M, and polymerases) as
well as against the surface proteins (H and N). Interferons
can be detected in respiratory secretions shortly after the
shedding of virus has begun, and increases in interferon
titers coincide with decreases in virus shedding.
The host defense factors responsible for cessation of
virus shedding and resolution of illness have not been
deﬁned speciﬁcally. Virus shedding generally stops
within 2 to 5 days after symptoms ﬁrst appear, at a time
when serum and local antibody responses often are not
detectable by conventional techniques (although anti-
body increases may be detected earlier by use of highly
sensitive techniques, particularly in individuals with pre-
vious immunity to the virus). It has been suggested that
interferon, cell-mediated immune responses, or nonspe-
ciﬁc inﬂammatory responses all contribute to the reso-
lution of illness. CTL responses may be particularly
important in this regard.
CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
Inﬂuenza has most frequently been described as an ill-
ness characterized by the abrupt onset of systemic symp-
toms, such as headache, feverishness, chills, myalgia, or
malaise, and accompanying respiratory tract signs, partic-
ularly cough and sore throat. In many cases, the onset is
so abrupt that patients can recall the precise time they
became ill. However, the spectrum of clinical presenta-
tions is wide, ranging from a mild, afebrile respiratory
illness similar to the common cold (with either a grad-
ual or an abrupt onset) to severe prostration with rela-
tively few respiratory signs and symptoms. In most of
the cases that come to a physician’s attention, the
patient has a fever, with a temperature of 38°–41°C
(100.4°–105.8°F). A rapid temperature increase within
the ﬁrst 24 h of illness is generally followed by gradual
defervescence over 2–3 days, although, on occasion,
fever may last as long as 1 week. Patients report a fever-
ish feeling and chilliness, but true rigors are rare.
Headache, either generalized or frontal, is often particu-
larly troublesome. Myalgias may involve any part of the
body but are most common in the legs and lumbosacral
area.Arthralgias may also develop.
Respiratory symptoms often become more prominent
as systemic symptoms subside. Many patients have a sore
throat or persistent cough, which may last for ≥1 week
and which is often accompanied by substernal discom-
fort. Ocular signs and symptoms include pain on motion
of the eyes, photophobia, and burning of the eyes.
Physical ﬁndings are usually minimal in uncompli-
cated inﬂuenza. Early in the illness, the patient appears
ﬂushed, and the skin is hot and dry, although diaphoresis
and mottled extremities are sometimes evident, particu-
larly in older patients. Examination of the pharynx may
yield surprisingly unremarkable results despite a severe
sore throat, but injection of the mucous membranes and
postnasal discharge are apparent in some cases. Mild cer-
vical lymphadenopathy may be noted, especially in
younger individuals.The results of chest examination are
largely negative in uncomplicated inﬂuenza, although
rhonchi, wheezes, and scattered rales have been reported
with variable frequency in different outbreaks. Frank
dyspnea, hyperpnea, cyanosis, diffuse rales, and signs of
consolidation indicate pulmonary complications. Patients
with apparently uncomplicated inﬂuenza have been
reported to have a variety of mild ventilatory defects and
increased alveolar-capillary diffusion gradients; thus, sub-
clinical pulmonary involvement may be more common
than is appreciated.
In uncomplicated inﬂuenza, the acute illness generally
resolves over 2–5 days, and most patients have largely
recovered in 1 week,although cough may persist 1–2 weeks
longer. In a signiﬁcant minority (particularly the elderly),
however, symptoms of weakness or lassitude (postin-
ﬂuenzal asthenia) may persist for several weeks and may
prove troublesome for persons who wish to resume their
full level of activity promptly.The pathogenetic basis for
this asthenia is unknown, although pulmonary function
abnormalities may persist for several weeks after uncom-
plicated inﬂuenza.
COMPLICATIONS
Complications of inﬂuenza occur most frequently in
patients >64 years and in those with certain chronic
disorders, including cardiac or pulmonary diseases, dia-
betes mellitus, hemoglobinopathies, renal dysfunction,
and immunosuppression. Pregnancy in the second or
third trimester also predisposes to complications with
inﬂuenza. Children younger than age 2 years (especially
infants) are also at high risk for complications.
Pulmonary Complications
Pneumonia
The most significant complication of influenza is
pneumonia: “primary” influenza viral pneumonia, sec-
ondary bacterial pneumonia, or mixed viral and bacte-
rial pneumonia.
Primary Inﬂuenza Viral Pneumonia
Primary inﬂuenza viral pneumonia is the least common
but most severe of the pneumonic complications. It pre-
sents as acute inﬂuenza that does not resolve but instead
progresses relentlessly, with persistent fever, dyspnea, and
eventual cyanosis. Sputum production is generally
scanty, but the sputum can contain blood. Few physical
signs may be evident early in the illness. In more
advanced cases, diffuse rales may be noted, and chest
x-ray ﬁndings consistent with diffuse interstitial inﬁltrates
Inﬂuenza
143
CHAPTER 13
or acute respiratory distress syndrome may be present. In
such cases, arterial blood gas determinations show
marked hypoxia. Viral cultures of respiratory secretions
and lung parenchyma, especially if samples are taken
early in illness, yield high titers of virus. In fatal cases of
primary viral pneumonia, histopathologic examination
reveals a marked inﬂammatory reaction in the alveolar
septa, with edema and inﬁltration by lymphocytes,
macrophages, occasional plasma cells, and variable num-
bers of neutrophils. Fibrin thrombi in alveolar capillar-
ies, along with necrosis and hemorrhage, have also been
noted. Eosinophilic hyaline membranes can be found
lining alveoli and alveolar ducts.
Primary inﬂuenza viral pneumonia has a predilection
for individuals with cardiac disease, particularly those with
mitral stenosis, but has also been reported in otherwise
healthy young adults as well as in older individuals with
chronic pulmonary disorders. In some epidemics of
inﬂuenza (notably those of 1918 and 1957), pregnancy
increased the risk of primary inﬂuenza pneumonia. Sub-
sequent epidemics of inﬂuenza have been associated with
increased rates of hospitalization among pregnant women.
Secondary Bacterial Pneumonia
Secondary bacterial pneumonia occurs after acute
inﬂuenza. Improvement of the patient’s condition over
2–3 days is followed by a reappearance of fever along
with clinical signs and symptoms of bacterial pneumo-
nia, including cough, production of purulent sputum,
and physical and x-ray signs of consolidation.The most
common bacterial pathogens in this setting are Strepto-
coccus pneumoniae, Staphylococcus aureus, and Haemophilus
inﬂuenzae—organisms that can colonize the nasophar-
ynx and that cause infection in the wake of changes in
bronchopulmonary defenses. The etiology can often be
determined by Gram’s staining and culture of an appro-
priately obtained sputum specimen. Secondary bacterial
pneumonia occurs most frequently in high-risk individ-
uals with chronic pulmonary and cardiac disease and in
elderly individuals. Patients with secondary bacterial
pneumonia often respond to antibiotic therapy when it
is instituted promptly.
Mixed Viral and Bacterial Pneumonia
Perhaps the most common pneumonic complications
during outbreaks of inﬂuenza have mixed features of
viral and bacterial pneumonia. Patients may experience
a gradual progression of their acute illness or may show
transient improvement followed by clinical exacerba-
tion, with eventual manifestation of the clinical features
of bacterial pneumonia. Sputum cultures may contain
both inﬂuenza A virus and one of the bacterial
pathogens described above. Patchy inﬁltrates or areas of
consolidation may be detected by physical examination
and chest x-ray. Patients with mixed viral and bacterial
pneumonia generally have less widespread involvement
of the lung than those with primary viral pneumonia,
and their bacterial infections may respond to appropriate
antibacterial drugs. Mixed viral and bacterial pneumonia
occurs primarily in patients with chronic cardiovascular
and pulmonary diseases.
Other Pulmonary Complications
Other 
pulmonary 
complications 
associated 
with
inﬂuenza include worsening of chronic obstructive pul-
monary disease and exacerbation of chronic bronchitis
and asthma. In children, inﬂuenza infection may present
as croup. Sinusitis as well as otitis media (the latter occur-
ring particularly often in children) may also be associated
with inﬂuenza.
Extrapulmonary Complications
In addition to the pulmonary complications of inﬂuenza,
a number of extrapulmonary complications may occur.
These include Reye’s syndrome, a serious complication in
children that is associated with inﬂuenza B and to a lesser
extent with inﬂuenza A virus infection as well as with
varicella-zoster virus infection.An epidemiologic associa-
tion between Reye’s syndrome and aspirin therapy for
the antecedent viral infection has been noted, and the
syndrome’s incidence has decreased markedly with wide-
spread warnings regarding aspirin use by children with
acute viral respiratory infections.
Myositis, rhabdomyolysis, and myoglobinuria are occa-
sional complications of inﬂuenza infection. Although
myalgias are exceedingly common in inﬂuenza, true
myositis is rare. Patients with acute myositis have exquis-
ite tenderness of the affected muscles, most commonly in
the legs, and may not be able to tolerate even the slight-
est pressure, such as the touch of bedsheets. In the most
severe cases, there is frank swelling and bogginess of mus-
cles. Serum levels of creatine phosphokinase and aldolase
are markedly elevated, and an occasional patient develops
renal failure from myoglobinuria. The pathogenesis of
inﬂuenza-associated myositis is also unclear, although the
presence of inﬂuenza virus in affected muscles has been
reported.
Myocarditis and pericarditis were reported in associa-
tion with inﬂuenza virus infection during the 1918–1919
pandemic; these reports were based largely on histopatho-
logic ﬁndings, and these complications have been
reported only infrequently since that time. Electrocardio-
graphic changes during acute inﬂuenza are common
among patients who have cardiac disease but have been
ascribed most often to exacerbations of the underlying
cardiac disease rather than to direct involvement of the
myocardium with inﬂuenza virus.
Central nervous system (CNS) diseases, including
encephalitis, transverse myelitis, and Guillain-Barré syn-
drome, have been reported during inﬂuenza. The etio-
logic relationship of inﬂuenza virus to such CNS illnesses
Diseases of the Respiratory System
144
SECTION II
remains uncertain.Toxic shock syndrome associated with
S. aureus or group A streptococcal infection after acute
inﬂuenza infection has also been reported.
In addition to complications involving the speciﬁc
organ systems described above, inﬂuenza outbreaks
include a number of cases in which elderly and other
high-risk individuals develop inﬂuenza and subsequently
experience a gradual deterioration of underlying cardio-
vascular, pulmonary, or renal function—changes that
occasionally are irreversible and lead to death. These
deaths contribute to the overall excess mortality rate asso-
ciated with inﬂuenza A outbreaks.
Complications of Avian Inﬂuenza
Cases of inﬂuenza caused by avian A/H5N1 virus are
reportedly associated with high rates of pneumonia
(>50%) and extrapulmonary manifestations such as diar-
rhea and CNS involvement. Deaths have been associated
with multisystem dysfunction, including cardiac and renal
failure.
LABORATORY FINDINGS AND DIAGNOSIS
During acute inﬂuenza, virus may be detected in throat
swabs, nasopharyngeal washes, or sputum.The virus can
be isolated by use of tissue culture—or, less commonly,
chick embryos—within 48–72 h after inoculation. Most
commonly, the laboratory diagnosis is established with
rapid viral tests that detect viral nucleoprotein or neu-
raminidase by means of immunologic or enzymatic tech-
niques that are highly sensitive and 60–90% as speciﬁc as
tissue culture.Viral nucleic acids can also be detected in
clinical samples by reverse transcriptase polymerase chain
reaction.The type of the infecting inﬂuenza virus (A or
B) may be determined by either immunoﬂuorescence or
HI techniques, and the hemagglutinin subtype of
inﬂuenza A virus (H1, H2, or H3) may be identiﬁed by
HI with use of subtype-speciﬁc antisera. Serologic meth-
ods for diagnosis require comparison of antibody titers in
sera obtained during the acute illness with those in sera
obtained 10–14 days after the onset of illness and are
useful primarily in retrospect. Fourfold or greater titer
increases as detected by HI or CF or signiﬁcant increases
as measured by ELISA are diagnostic of acute infection.
CF tests are generally less sensitive than other serologic
techniques, but because they detect type-speciﬁc anti-
gens, they may be particularly useful when subtype-
speciﬁc reagents are not available.
Other laboratory tests generally are not helpful in the
speciﬁc diagnosis of inﬂuenza virus infection. Leukocyte
counts are variable, frequently being low early in illness
and normal or slightly elevated later. Severe leukopenia
has been described in overwhelming viral or bacterial
infection, and leukocytosis with >15,000 cells/μL raises
the suspicion of secondary bacterial infection.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
During a community-wide outbreak, a clinical diagnosis
of inﬂuenza can be made with a high degree of certainty
in patients who present to a physician’s ofﬁce with the
typical febrile respiratory illness described above. In the
absence of an outbreak (i.e., in sporadic or isolated cases),
inﬂuenza may be difﬁcult to differentiate on clinical
grounds alone from an acute respiratory illness caused by
any of a variety of respiratory viruses or by Mycoplasma
pneumoniae. Severe streptococcal pharyngitis or early bac-
terial pneumonia may mimic acute inﬂuenza, although
bacterial pneumonias generally do not run a self-limited
course. Purulent sputum in which a bacterial pathogen
can be detected by Gram’s staining is an important diag-
nostic feature in bacterial pneumonia.
Inﬂuenza
145
CHAPTER 13
Treatment:
INFLUENZA
In uncomplicated cases of inﬂuenza, symptom-based
therapy with acetaminophen for the relief of headache,
myalgia,and fever may be considered,but the use of sal-
icylates should be avoided in children <18 years of age
because of the possible association of salicylates with
Reye’s syndrome.Because cough is ordinarily self-limited,
treatment with cough suppressants generally is not
indicated, although codeine-containing compounds
may be used if the cough is particularly troublesome.
Patients should be advised to rest and maintain hydra-
tion during acute illness and to return to full activity
only gradually after illness has resolved, especially if it
has been severe.
Speciﬁc antiviral therapy is available for inﬂuenza
(Table 13-2): the neuraminidase inhibitors zanamivir
and oseltamivir for both inﬂuenza A and inﬂuenza B and
the adamantane agents amantadine and rimantadine
for inﬂuenza A (Chap. 43). In 2005 to 2006, resistance to
amantadine was reported in >90% of A/H3N2 viral
isolates; thus, amantadine and rimantadine are no
longer recommended, but their use may be reconsid-
ered if sensitivity becomes reestablished.
Oseltamivir (administered orally at a dose of 75 mg
twice a day for 5 days) or zanamivir (which must be
given by an oral inhalation device; 10 mg twice a day for
5 days) reduces the duration of signs and symptoms of
influenza by 1–1.5 days if treatment is started within
2 days of the onset of illness. Zanamivir may exacerbate
bronchospasm in asthmatic patients, and oseltamivir
has been associated with nausea and vomiting, whose
frequency can be reduced by administration of the drug
with food. Oseltamivir has also been associated with
neuropsychiatric side effects in children.
If begun within 48 h of the onset of illness caused
by sensitive inﬂuenza A virus strains, treatment with
amantadine or rimantadine reduces the duration of sys-
temic and respiratory symptoms of inﬂuenza by ~50%.
Of individuals who receive amantadine, 5–10% experi-
ence mild CNS side effects, primarily jitteriness, anxiety,
insomnia, or difﬁculty concentrating. These side effects
disappear promptly upon cessation of therapy.Rimanta-
dine appears to be equally efﬁcacious and is associated
with less frequent CNS side effects than is amantadine.
In adults, the usual dose of amantadine or rimantadine
is 200 mg/d for 3–7 days. Because both drugs are
excreted via the kidney, the dose should be reduced to
≤100 mg/d in elderly patients and in patients with renal
insufﬁciency. Resistant viruses emerge frequently dur-
ing treatment with amantadine or rimantadine and can
be transmitted among family members. Development
of resistance to zanamivir or oseltamivir appears to be
less common but can occur. Ribavirin is a nucleoside
analogue with activity against inﬂuenza A and B viruses
in vitro. It has been reported to be variably effective
against inﬂuenza when administered as an aerosol but
ineffective when administered orally. Its efﬁcacy in the
treatment of inﬂuenza A or B is unestablished.
Studies demonstrating the therapeutic efﬁcacy of
antiviral compounds in inﬂuenza have primarily
involved young adults with uncomplicated disease. A
meta-analysis of studies with oseltamivir suggests that
treatment may reduce the likelihood of some lower res-
piratory tract complications of inﬂuenza. However, it is
not known whether antiviral agents are themselves
effective in the treatment of inﬂuenza pneumonia or of
other complications of inﬂuenza. Therapy for primary
inﬂuenza pneumonia is directed at maintaining oxy-
genation and is most appropriately undertaken in an
intensive care unit, with aggressive respiratory and
hemodynamic support as needed. Bypass membrane
oxygenators have been used in this setting with vari-
able results.When an acute respiratory distress syndrome
develops, ﬂuids must be administered cautiously, with
close monitoring of blood gases and hemodynamic
function.
Antibacterial drugs should be reserved for the treat-
ment of bacterial complications of acute influenza,
such as secondary bacterial pneumonia. The choice of
antibiotics should be guided by Gram’s staining and
culture of appropriate specimens of respiratory secre-
tions, such as sputum or transtracheal aspirates. If the
etiology of a case of bacterial pneumonia is unclear
from an examination of respiratory secretions, empiri-
cal antibiotics effective against the most common
bacterial pathogens in this setting (S.pneumoniae,S.aureus,
and H.influenzae) should be selected.
Diseases of the Respiratory System
146
SECTION II
TABLE 13-2
ANTIVIRAL MEDICATIONS FOR TREATMENT AND PROPHYLAXIS OF INFLUENZA
AGE GROUP (YEARS)
ANTIVIRAL DRUG
CHILDREN (≤12)
13–64
≥65
Oseltamivir
Treatment, inﬂuenza A and B
Age 1–12, dose varies by weighta
75 mg PO bid
75 mg PO bid
Prophylaxis, inﬂuenza A and B
Age 1–12, dose varies by weightb
75 PO qd
75 mg PO qd
Zanamivir
Treatment, inﬂuenza A and B
Age 7–12, 10 mg bid by inhalation
10 mg bid by inhalation
10 mg bid by inhalation
Prophylaxis, inﬂuenza A and B
Age 5–12, 10 mg qd by inhalation
10 mg qd by inhalation
10 mg qd by inhalation
Amantadinec
Treatment, inﬂuenza A
Age 1–9, 5 mg/kg in 2 divided 
Age ≥10, 100 mg PO bid
≤100 mg/d
doses, ≤150 mg/d
Prophylaxis, inﬂuenza A
Age 1–9, 5 mg/kg in 2 divided 
Age ≥10, 100 mg PO bid
≤100 mg/d
doses, ≤150 mg/d
Rimantadinec
Treatment, inﬂuenza A
Not approved
100 mg PO bid
100–200 mg/d
Prophylaxis, inﬂuenza A
Age 1–9, 5 mg/kg in 2 divided 
Age ≥10, 100 mg PO bid
100–200 mg/d
doses, ≤150 mg/d
a<15 kg: 30 mg bid; >15–23 kg: 45 mg bid; >23–40 kg: 60 mg bid; >40 kg: 75 mg bid.
b<15 kg: 30 mg qd; >15–23 kg: 45 mg qd; >23–40 kg: 60 mg qd; >40 kg: 75 mg qd.
cAmantadine and rimantadine are not currently recommended (2006–2007) because of widespread resistance in inﬂuenza A/H3N2 viruses. Their
use may be reconsidered if viral susceptibility is reestablished.
PROPHYLAXIS
Inactivated and live attenuated vaccines against inﬂuenza
are available, and their use represents the major public
health measure for prevention of inﬂuenza. The vast
majority of currently used vaccines are inactivated (“killed”)
preparations derived from inﬂuenza A and B viruses that
circulated during the previous inﬂuenza season. If the
vaccine virus and the currently circulating viruses are
closely related, 50–80% protection against inﬂuenza
would be expected from inactivated vaccines.The avail-
able inactivated vaccines have been highly puriﬁed and
are associated with few reactions. Up to 5% of individu-
als experience low-grade fever and mild systemic symp-
toms 8–24 h after vaccination and up to one-third
develop mild redness or tenderness at the vaccination
site. Because the vaccine is produced in eggs, individuals
with true hypersensitivity to egg products either should
be desensitized or should not be vaccinated. Although
the 1976 swine inﬂuenza vaccine appears to have been
associated with an increased frequency of Guillain-Barré
syndrome, inﬂuenza vaccines administered since 1976
generally have not been. Possible exceptions were noted
during the 1992–1993 and 1993–1994 inﬂuenza seasons,
when there may have been an excess risk of Guillain-
Barré syndrome of slightly more than one case per mil-
lion vaccine recipients. However, the overall health risk
after influenza outweighs the potential risk associated
with vaccination.
The U.S. Public Health Service recommends the
administration of inactivated inﬂuenza vaccine to indi-
viduals who, because of age or underlying disease, are at
increased risk for complications of inﬂuenza and to the
contacts of these individuals (Table 13-3). Inactivated
vaccines may be administered safely to immunocompro-
mised patients. Inﬂuenza vaccination is not associated
with exacerbations of chronic CNS diseases such as
multiple sclerosis. Vaccine should be administered early
in the autumn before inﬂuenza outbreaks occur and
should then be given annually to maintain immunity
against the most current inﬂuenza virus strains.
A live attenuated inﬂuenza vaccine that is administered
by intranasal spray is also available.The vaccine is gener-
ated by reassortment between currently circulating strains
of inﬂuenza A and B virus and a cold-adapted, attenuated
master strain. The cold-adapted vaccine is well tolerated
and highly efﬁcacious (92% protective) in young children;
in one study, it provided protection against a circulating
inﬂuenza virus that had drifted antigenically away from
the vaccine strain. Live attenuated vaccine is approved for
use in healthy persons 5–49 years of age.
Antiviral drugs may also be used as chemoprophylaxis
against influenza (see Table 13-2). Chemoprophy-
laxis with oseltamivir (75 mg/d by mouth) or zanamivir
(10 mg/d inhaled) has been 84-89% efﬁcacious against
inﬂuenza A and B. Chemoprophylaxis with amantadine
or rimantadine is no longer recommended because of
reports of widespread resistance to these drugs. In earlier
studies with sensitive viruses, prophylaxis with amanta-
dine or rimantadine (100–200 mg/d) was 70-100%
effective against illness associated with inﬂuenza A.
Chemoprophylaxis is most likely to be used for high-risk
individuals who have not received inﬂuenza vaccine or
in a situation where the vaccines previously administered
are relatively ineffective because of antigenic changes in
the circulating virus. During an outbreak, antiviral
chemoprophylaxis can be administered simultaneously
with inactivated vaccine, since the drugs do not interfere
with an immune response to the vaccine. In fact, evidence
suggests that the protective effects of chemoprophylaxis
and inactivated vaccine may be additive. However, con-
current administration of chemoprophylaxis and the live
attenuated vaccine may interfere with the immune
response to the latter. Antiviral drugs should not be
administered until at least 2 weeks after administration of
live vaccine, and vaccination with live vaccine should not
begin until at least 48 h after antiviral drug administra-
tion has been stopped. Chemoprophylaxis may also be
used to control nosocomial outbreaks of inﬂuenza. For
that purpose, prophylaxis should be instituted promptly
when inﬂuenza activity is detected and must be contin-
ued daily for the duration of the outbreak.
Inﬂuenza
147
CHAPTER 13
TABLE 13-3
PERSONS FOR WHOM ANNUAL INFLUENZA
VACCINATION IS RECOMMENDED
Children 6–59 months old
Women who will be pregnant during the inﬂuenza season
Persons ≥50 years old
Children and adolescents (6 months–18 years old)
who are receiving long-term aspirin therapy and
therefore may be at risk for developing Reye’s
syndrome after inﬂuenza
Adults and children who have chronic disorders of the
pulmonary or cardiovascular systems, including asthmaa
Adults and children who have required regular medical
follow-up or hospitalization during the preceding year
because of chronic metabolic diseases (including
diabetes mellitus), renal dysfunction,
hemoglobinopathies, or immunodeﬁciency (including
immunodeﬁciency caused by medications or by HIV)
Adults and children who have any condition (e.g.,
cognitive dysfunction, spinal cord injuries, seizure
disorders, or other neuromuscular disorders) that can
compromise respiratory function or the handling of
respiratory secretions or can increase the risk of
aspiration
Residents of nursing homes and other chronic-care
facilities that house persons of any age who have
chronic medical conditions 
Persons who live with or care for persons at high risk for
inﬂuenza-related complications, including healthy
household contacts of and caregivers for children from
birth through 59 months of age
Health care workers
aHypertension itself is not considered a chronic disorder for which
inﬂuenza vaccination is recommended.
Source: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Prevention and
control of inﬂuenza: Recommendations of the Advisory Committee
on Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR 55(RR-11):1, 2006.
FURTHER READINGS
BEIGEL JH et al: Avian influenza A (H5N1) infection in humans.
N Engl J Med 353:1374, 2005
BELSHE RB et al:The efﬁcacy of live attenuated, cold adapted triva-
lent, intranasal inﬂuenza vaccine in children. N Engl J Med
38:1405, 1998
CENTERS FOR DISEASE CONTROL AND PREVENTION (CDC): Preven-
tion and control of inﬂuenza. MMWR 55(RR–11):1, 2006
———: Severe Methicillin-Resistant Staphylococcus aureus Community-
Acquired Pneumonia Associated with Inﬂuenza. Louisiana and
Georgia,December 2006–January 2007
COOPER NJ et al: Effectiveness of neuraminidase inhibitors in treat-
ment and prevention of inﬂuenza A and B: Systematic review
and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. BMJ 326:1235,
2003
DOLIN R: Interpandemic as well as pandemic disease. N Engl J Med
353:2535, 2005
FIORE AE et al: Prevention and control of inﬂuenza. Recommendations
of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP),
2007.MMWR Recomm Rep 56:1,2007 [PMID:17625497]
HATAKEYAMA S et al: Emergence of inﬂuenza B viruses with reduced
sensitivity to neuraminidase inhibitors. JAMA 297:1435, 2007
[PMID:17405969]
HAYDEN FG et al: Use of the selective oral neuraminidase inhibitor
oseltamivir to prevent inﬂuenza. N Engl J Med 341:1336, 1999
MELTZER MI et al:The economic impact of pandemic inﬂuenza in
the United States: Priorities for intervention. Emerg Infect Dis
5:659, 1999
MIST [MANAGEMENT OF INFLUENZA IN THE SOUTHERN HEMI-
SPHERE TRIALISTS] STUDY GROUP: Randomized trial of efﬁcacy
and safety of inhaled zanamivir in treatment of inﬂuenza A and
B infections. Lancet 352:1871, 1998
NEUZIL KM et al: Inﬂuenza-associated morbidity and mortality in
young and middle-aged women. JAMA 281:901, 1999
NOVEL SWINE-ORIGIN INFLUENZA A (H1N1) VIRUS INVESTIGATION
TEAM et al: Emergence of a novel swine-origin inﬂuenza A
(H1N1) virus in humans.N Engl J Med,360(25),2009,pp 2605–15
ROTHBERG MB, HAESSLER SD, BROWN RB: Complications of viral
inﬂuenza.Am J Med 121:258, 2008 [PMID:18374680]
SHINDE V et al:Triple-reassortant swine inﬂuenza A (H1) in humans
in the United States, 2005-2009. N Engl J Med, J360(25), 2009,
pp 2616–25 
SIMONSEN L et al: Pandemic vs epidemic mortality: A pattern of
changing age distribution. J Infect Dis 178:53, 1998
TREANOR JJ: Inﬂuenza virus, in Principles and Practice of Infectious
Diseases, 6th ed, GL Mandell et al (eds). Philadelphia, Elsevier,
2005, pp 2201–2203
WRITING COMMITTEE OF THE SECOND WORLD HEALTH ORGANI-
ZATION CONSULTATION
ON CLINICAL ASPECTS
OF HUMAN
INFECTION WITH AVIAN INFLUENZA A (H5N1) VIRUS et al:
Update on avian inﬂuenza A (H5N1) virus infection in
humans. N Engl J Med 358:261, 2008 [PMID:18199865]
Diseases of the Respiratory System
148
SECTION II
Raphael Dolin
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
Acute viral respiratory illnesses are among the most
common of human diseases, accounting for one-half or
more of all acute illnesses.The incidence of acute respi-
ratory disease in the United States is 3 to 5.6 cases per
person per year. The rates are highest among children
<1 year old (6.1–8.3 cases per year) and remain high
until age 6 years, when a progressive decrease begins.
Adults have three to four cases per person per year.
Morbidity from acute respiratory illnesses accounts for
30–50% of time lost from work by adults and for 60–80%
of time lost from school by children.The use of antibacte-
rial agents to treat viral respiratory infections represents a
major source of abuse of that category of drugs.
COMMON VIRAL RESPIRATORY INFECTIONS
AND SEVERE ACUTE RESPIRATORY 
SYNDROME (SARS)
It has been estimated that two-thirds to three-fourths
of cases of acute respiratory illnesses are caused by viruses.
More than 200 antigenically distinct viruses from 10 gen-
era have been reported to cause acute respiratory illness,
and it is likely that additional agents will be described in
the future. The vast majority of these viral infections
involve the upper respiratory tract, but lower respiratory
tract disease can also develop, particularly in younger
age groups, in the elderly, and in certain epidemiologic
settings.
The illnesses caused by respiratory viruses tradition-
ally have been divided into multiple distinct syndromes,
such as the “common cold,” pharyngitis, croup (laryngo-
tracheobronchitis), tracheitis, bronchiolitis, bronchitis,
and pneumonia. Each of these general categories of
CHAPTER 14
CHAPTER 14
149
General Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 149
I Rhinovirus Infections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 150
Etiologic Agent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 150
Epidemiology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 151
Pathogenesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 151
Clinical Manifestations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 151
Diagnosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 152
Prevention . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 152
I Coronavirus Infections, Including SARS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 152
Etiologic Agent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 152
Epidemiology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .152
Pathogenesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 153
Clinical Manifestations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 153
Laboratory Findings and Diagnosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 153
Prevention . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 154
I Human Respiratory Syncytial Virus Infections . . . . . . . . . . . . 155
Etiologic Agent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 155
Epidemiology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 155
Pathogenesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 155
Clinical Manifestations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 156
Laboratory Findings and Diagnosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 156
Prevention . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 156
I Human Metapneumovirus Infections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 157
Etiologic Agent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 157
Epidemiology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 157
Clinical Manifestations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 157
Diagnosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 157
Prevention . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 157
I Parainﬂuenza Virus Infections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 157
Etiologic Agent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 157
Epidemiology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 157
Pathogenesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 158
Clinical Manifestations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 158
Laboratory Findings and Diagnosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 158
Prevention . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 158
I Adenovirus Infections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 158
Etiologic Agent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 158
Epidemiology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 159
Clinical Manifestations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 159
Laboratory Findings and Diagnosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 159
Prevention . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 160
I Further Readings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 160
Diseases of the Respiratory System
150
SECTION II
illness has a certain epidemiologic and clinical proﬁle;
for example, croup occurs exclusively in very young
children and has a characteristic clinical course. Some
types of respiratory illness are more likely to be associ-
ated with certain viruses (e.g., the common cold with
rhinoviruses), but others occupy characteristic epidemi-
ologic niches (e.g., adenovirus infections in military
recruits). The syndromes most commonly associated
with infections with the major respiratory virus groups
are summarized in Table 14-1. Most respiratory viruses
clearly have the potential to cause more than one type
of respiratory illness, and features of several types of ill-
ness may be found in the same patient. Moreover, the
clinical illnesses induced by these viruses are rarely sufﬁ-
ciently distinctive to permit an etiologic diagnosis on
clinical grounds alone, although the epidemiologic set-
ting increases the likelihood that one group of viruses
rather than another is involved. In general, laboratory
methods must be relied on to establish a speciﬁc viral
diagnosis.
This chapter reviews viral infections caused by six of
the major groups of respiratory viruses: rhinoviruses,
coronaviruses, respiratory syncytial viruses, metapneu-
moviruses, parainﬂuenza viruses, and adenoviruses. The
extraordinary outbreaks of lower respiratory tract disease
associated with coronaviruses (severe acute respiratory
syndrome, or SARS) in 2002 to 2003 are also discussed.
Inﬂuenza viruses, which are a major cause of death as well
as morbidity, are reviewed in Chap. 13. Herpesviruses
occasionally cause pharyngitis and also cause lower respi-
ratory tract disease in immunosuppressed patients.
Enteroviruses account for occasional respiratory illnesses
during the summer months.
RHINOVIRUS INFECTIONS
ETIOLOGIC AGENT
Rhinoviruses are members of the Picornaviridae family,
small (15–30 nm) nonenveloped viruses that contain a
TABLE 14-1
ILLNESSES ASSOCIATED WITH RESPIRATORY VIRUSES
FREQUENCY OF RESPIRATORY SYNDROMES
VIRUS
MOST FREQUENT
OCCASIONAL
INFREQUENT
Rhinoviruses
Common cold
Exacerbation of chronic
Pneumonia in children
bronchitis and asthma
Coronavirusesa
Common cold
Exacerbation of chronic
Pneumonia and bronchiolitis
bronchitis and asthma
Human respiratory
Pneumonia and bronchiolitis
Common cold in adults
Pneumonia in elderly and
syncytial virus
in young children
immunosuppressed patients
Parainﬂuenza
Croup and lower respiratory
Pharyngitis and 
Tracheobronchitis in adults; 
viruses
tract disease in 
common cold
lower respiratory tract disease
young children
in immunosuppressed patients
Adenoviruses
Common cold and 
Outbreaks of acute 
Pneumonia in children; lower
pharyngitis in children
respiratory disease in 
respiratory tract and
military recruitsb
disseminated disease in
immunosuppressed patients
Inﬂuenza A viruses
Inﬂuenzac
Pneumonia and excess
Pneumonia in healthy individuals
mortality in high-risk patients
Inﬂuenza B viruses
Inﬂuenzac
Rhinitis or pharyngitis alone
Pneumonia
Enteroviruses
Acute undifferentiated
Rhinitis or pharyngitis alone
Pneumonia
febrile illnessesd
Herpes simplex
Gingivostomatitis in children;
Tracheitis and pneumonia in
Disseminated infection in 
viruses
pharyngotonsillitis in adults
immunocompromised 
immunocompromised 
patients
patients
Human
metapneumovirusese
Lower respiratory tract
Upper respiratory tract 
Pneumonia in elderly and 
disease in children
illness in adults
immunosuppressed patients
aSevere acute respiratory syndrome–associated coronavirus (SARS-CoV) caused epidemics of pneumonia from November 2002 to July 2003
(see text).
bSerotypes 4 and 7.
cFever, cough, myalgia, malaise.
dMay or may not have a respiratory component.
eNewly recognized human metapneumoviruses cause upper and lower respiratory tract illnesses; their relative frequency is under investigation.
single-stranded RNA genome. In contrast to other mem-
bers of the picornavirus family, such as enteroviruses,
rhinoviruses are acid labile and are almost completely
inactivated at pH ≤3. Rhinoviruses grow preferentially
at 33°–34°C (the temperature of the human nasal pas-
sages) rather than at 37°C (the temperature of the lower
respiratory tract). Of the 102 recognized serotypes of
rhinovirus, 91 use intercellular adhesion molecule 1
(ICAM-1) as a cellular receptor and constitute the “major”
receptor group, 10 use the low-density lipoprotein recep-
tor and constitute the “minor” receptor group, and one
uses decay-accelerating factor.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
Rhinoviruses are a prominent cause of the common
cold and have been detected in up to 50% of common
cold–like illnesses by tissue culture and polymerase chain
reaction (PCR) techniques. Overall rates of rhinovirus
infection are higher among infants and young children
and decrease with increasing age. Rhinovirus infections
occur throughout the year, with seasonal peaks in early
fall and spring in temperate climates. These infections
are most often introduced into families by preschool or
grade-school children <6 years old. Of initial illnesses in
family settings, 25–70% are followed by secondary cases,
with the highest attack rates among the youngest sib-
lings at home.Attack rates also increase with family size.
Rhinoviruses appear to spread through direct contact
with infected secretions, usually respiratory droplets. In
some studies of volunteers, transmission was most efﬁ-
cient by hand-to-hand contact, with subsequent self-
inoculation of the conjunctival or nasal mucosa. Other
studies demonstrated transmission by large- or small-
particle aerosol.Virus can be recovered from plastic sur-
faces inoculated 1–3 hours previously; this observation
suggests that environmental surfaces contribute to trans-
mission. In studies of married couples in which neither
partner had detectable serum antibody, transmission was
associated with prolonged contact (≥122 h) during a
7-day period. Transmission was infrequent unless (1)
virus was recoverable from the donor’s hands and nasal
mucosa, (2) at least 1000 TCID50 of virus was present in
nasal washes from the donor, and (3) the donor was at
least moderately symptomatic with the “cold.” Despite
anecdotal observations, exposure to cold temperatures,
fatigue, and sleep deprivation have not been associated
with increased rates of rhinovirus-induced illness in
volunteers, although some studies have suggested that
psychologically deﬁned “stress” may contribute to devel-
opment of symptoms.
Infection with rhinoviruses is worldwide in distribu-
tion. By adulthood, nearly all individuals have neutralizing
antibodies to multiple serotypes, although the prevalence
of antibody to any one serotype varies widely. Multiple
serotypes circulate simultaneously, and generally no single
serotype or group of serotypes has been more prevalent
than the others.
PATHOGENESIS
Rhinoviruses infect cells through attachment to speciﬁc
cellular receptors; as mentioned above, most serotypes
attach to ICAM-1, but a few use the low-density lipopro-
tein receptor. Relatively limited information is available on
the histopathology and pathogenesis of acute rhinovirus
infections in humans. Examination of biopsy specimens
obtained during experimentally induced and naturally
occurring illness indicates that the nasal mucosa is edema-
tous, is often hyperemic, and—during acute illness—is
covered by a mucoid discharge. There is a mild inﬁltrate
with inﬂammatory cells, including neutrophils, lympho-
cytes, plasma cells, and eosinophils. Mucus-secreting glands
in the submucosa appear hyperactive; the nasal turbinates
are engorged, a condition that may lead to obstruction of
nearby openings of sinus cavities. Several mediators—e.g.,
bradykinin; lysylbradykinin; prostaglandins; histamine;
interleukins 1β, 6, and 8; and tumor necrosis factor α—
have been linked to the development of signs and symp-
toms in rhinovirus-induced colds.
The incubation period for rhinovirus illness is short,
generally 1–2 days. Virus shedding coincides with the
onset of illness or may begin shortly before symptoms
develop. The mechanisms of immunity to rhinovirus are
not well worked out. In some studies, the presence of
homotypic antibody has been associated with signiﬁcantly
reduced rates of subsequent infection and illness, but data
conﬂict regarding the relative importance of serum and
local antibody in protection from rhinovirus infection.
CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
The most common clinical manifestations of rhinovirus
infections are those of the common cold. Illness usually
begins with rhinorrhea and sneezing accompanied by
nasal congestion. The throat is frequently sore, and in
some cases, sore throat is the initial complaint. Systemic
signs and symptoms, such as malaise and headache,
are mild or absent, and fever is unusual. Illness generally
lasts for 4–9 days and resolves spontaneously without
sequelae. In children, bronchitis, bronchiolitis, and bron-
chopneumonia have been reported; nevertheless, it appears
that rhinoviruses are not major causes of lower respira-
tory tract disease in children. Rhinoviruses may cause
exacerbations of asthma and chronic pulmonary disease
in adults. The vast majority of rhinovirus infections
resolve without sequelae, but complications related to
obstruction of the eustachian tubes or sinus ostia,
including otitis media or acute sinusitis, can develop. In
immunosuppressed patients, particularly bone marrow
transplant recipients, severe and even fatal pneumonias
have been associated with rhinovirus infections.
Common Viral Respiratory Infections and Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS)
151
CHAPTER 14
DIAGNOSIS
Although rhinoviruses are the most frequently recognized
cause of the common cold, similar illnesses are caused by
a variety of other viruses, and a speciﬁc viral etiologic
diagnosis cannot be made on clinical grounds alone.
Rather, rhinovirus infection is diagnosed by isolation of
the virus from nasal washes or nasal secretions in tissue
culture. In practice, this procedure is rarely undertaken
because of the benign, self-limited nature of the illness. In
most settings, detection of rhinovirus RNA by PCR is
more sensitive than that by tissue culture; however, PCR
for rhinoviruses is largely a research procedure. Given the
many serotypes of rhinovirus, diagnosis by serum anti-
body tests is currently impractical. Likewise, common
laboratory tests, such as white blood cell count and ery-
throcyte sedimentation rate, are not helpful.
name derives from the crownlike appearance produced
by the club-shaped projections that stud the viral
envelope. Coronaviruses infect a wide variety of animal
species and have been divided into three antigenic
groups. Previously recognized coronaviruses that infect
humans fell into two of these groups (serogroups I and II),
which include human isolates HCoV-229E and HCoV-
OC43, respectively. The coronavirus associated with
SARS (SARS-CoV) was ﬁrst believed to represent a novel
group but now is considered to be a distantly related
member of group II (Fig. 14-1).To date, the SARS-CoV
strains that have been fully sequenced have shown only
minimal variation.
In general, human coronaviruses have been difﬁcult
to cultivate in vitro, and some strains grow only in
human tracheal organ cultures rather than in tissue cul-
ture. SARS-CoV is an exception whose ready growth in
African green monkey kidney (Vero E6) cells greatly
facilitates its study.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
Generally, human coronavirus infections are pre-
sent throughout the world. Seroprevalence studies
of strains HCoV-229E and HCoV-OC43 have
demonstrated that serum antibodies are acquired early in
life and increase in prevalence with advancing age, so
Diseases of the Respiratory System
152
SECTION II
FIGURE 14-1
Electron micrograph of severe acute respiratory syn-
drome (SARS)–associated coronavirus (SARS-CoV) iso-
lated in fetal rhesus kidney tissue culture from a lung biopsy
sample from a patient with SARS. Viral particles are
55–90 mm in diameter. [Reprinted with permission from Else-
vier (JSM Peiris et al., Lancet 361:1319, 2003).]
Treatment:
RHINOVIRUS INFECTIONS
Because rhinovirus infections are generally mild and
self-limited, treatment is not usually necessary. Therapy
in the form of ﬁrst-generation antihistamines and nons-
teroidal antiinﬂammatory drugs may be beneﬁcial in
patients with particularly pronounced symptoms, and
an oral decongestant may be added if nasal obstruction
is particularly troublesome. Reduction of activity is pru-
dent in instances of signiﬁcant discomfort or fatigability.
Antibacterial agents should be used only if bacterial
complications such as otitis media or sinusitis develop.
Speciﬁc antiviral therapy is not available.
PREVENTION
Intranasal application of interferon sprays has been effec-
tive in the prophylaxis of rhinovirus infections but is also
associated with local irritation of the nasal mucosa. Studies
of the prevention of rhinovirus infection by administration
of antibodies to ICAM-1 or by the soluble puriﬁed recep-
tors themselves have yielded disappointing results. Experi-
mental vaccines to certain rhinovirus serotypes have been
generated,but their usefulness is questionable because of the
myriad serotypes and the uncertainty about mechanisms
of immunity. Thorough hand washing, environmental
decontamination, and protection against autoinoculation
may help to reduce rates of transmission of infection.
CORONAVIRUS INFECTIONS,
INCLUDING SARS
ETIOLOGIC AGENT
Coronaviruses are pleomorphic, single-stranded RNA
viruses that measure 100–160 nm in diameter. The
that >80% of adult populations have antibodies as mea-
sured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA).
Overall, coronaviruses account for 10–35% of common
colds, depending on the season. Coronavirus infections
appear to be particularly prevalent in the late fall, winter,
and early spring—times when rhinovirus infections are
less common.
An extraordinary outbreak of the coronavirus-associated
illness known as SARS occurred in 2002–2003. The
outbreak apparently began in southern China and even-
tually resulted in 8096 recognized cases in 28 countries in
Asia, Europe, and North and South America; ~90% of
cases occurred in China and Hong Kong. The natural
reservoir of SARS-CoV appears to be the horseshoe bat,
and the outbreak may have originated from human con-
tact with infected semidomesticated animals such as the
palm civet. In most cases, however, the infection was
transmitted from human to human. Case-fatality rates
varied among the outbreaks, with an overall ﬁgure of
~9.5%. The disease appeared to be somewhat milder in
cases in the United States and was clearly less severe
among children. The outbreak ceased in 2003; 17 cases
were detected in 2004, mostly in laboratory-associated
settings, and no cases were reported in 2005 or 2006.
The mechanisms of transmission of SARS are incom-
pletely understood. Clusters of cases suggest that spread
may occur by both large and small aerosols and perhaps
by the fecal–oral route as well.The outbreak of illness in
a large apartment complex in Hong Kong suggested
that environmental sources, such as sewage or water, may
also play a role in transmission. Some ill individuals
(“super-spreaders”) appeared to be hyperinfectious and
were capable of transmitting infection to 10–40 con-
tacts, although most infections resulted in spread either
to no one or to three or fewer individuals.
PATHOGENESIS
Coronaviruses that cause the common cold (e.g., strains
HCoV-229E and HCoV-OC43) infect ciliated epithelial
cells in the nasopharynx via the aminopeptidase N
receptor (group I) or a sialic acid receptor (group II).
Viral replication leads to damage of ciliated cells and
induction of chemokines and interleukins, with conse-
quent common-cold symptoms similar to those induced
by rhinoviruses.
SARS-CoV infects cells of the respiratory tract via the
angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 receptor.The result is a
systemic illness in which virus is also found in the blood-
stream, in the urine, and (for ≤2 months) in the stool.
Virus persists in the respiratory tract for 2–3 weeks,
and titers peak ∼10 days after the onset of systemic ill-
ness. Pulmonary pathology consists of hyaline membrane
formation, desquamation of pneumocytes in alveolar
spaces, and an interstitial inﬁltrate made up of lympho-
cytes and mononuclear cells. Giant cells are frequently
seen, and coronavirus particles have been detected in
type II pneumocytes. Elevated levels of proinﬂammatory
cytokines and chemokines have been detected in sera
from patients with SARS.
CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
After an incubation period that generally lasts 2–7 days
(range, 1–14 days), SARS usually begins as a systemic ill-
ness marked by the onset of fever, which is often accom-
panied by malaise, headache, and myalgias and is followed
in 1–2 days by a nonproductive cough and dyspnea.
Approximately 25% of patients have diarrhea. Chest
x-rays show a variety of inﬁltrates, including patchy areas
of consolidation—most frequently in peripheral and
lower lung ﬁelds—or interstitial inﬁltrates, which can
progress to diffuse involvement (Fig. 14-2).
In severe cases, respiratory function may worsen dur-
ing the second week of illness and progress to frank adult
respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) accompanied by
multiorgan dysfunction. Risk factors for severe disease
include an age older than 50 years and comorbidities
such as cardiovascular disease, diabetes, or hepatitis. Illness
in pregnant women may be particularly severe, but
SARS-CoV infection appears to be milder in children
than in adults.
The clinical features of common colds caused by human
coronaviruses are similar to those of illness caused by rhi-
noviruses. In studies of volunteers, the mean incubation
period of colds induced by coronaviruses (3 days) is
somewhat longer than that of illness caused by rhi-
noviruses, and the duration of illness is somewhat shorter
(mean, 6–7 days). In some studies, the amount of nasal
discharge was greater in colds induced by coronaviruses
than in those induced by rhinoviruses. Coronaviruses
other than SARS-CoV have been recovered occasionally
from infants with pneumonia and from military recruits
with lower respiratory tract disease and have been
associated with worsening of chronic bronchitis. Two
novel coronaviruses, HCoV-NL63 (group I) and HCoV-
HKU1 (group II), have recently been isolated from
patients hospitalized with acute respiratory illness. Their
role as causes of human respiratory disease remains to be
determined.
LABORATORY FINDINGS AND DIAGNOSIS
Laboratory abnormalities in SARS include lymphope-
nia, which is present in ∼50% of cases and which mostly
affects CD4+ T cells but also involves CD8+ T cells and
natural killer (NK) cells. Total white blood cell counts
are normal or slightly low, and thrombocytopenia may
develop as the illness progresses. Elevated serum levels of
aminotransferases, creatine kinase, and lactate dehydro-
genase have been reported.
Common Viral Respiratory Infections and Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS)
153
CHAPTER 14
A rapid diagnosis of SARS-CoV infection can be
made by reverse-transcriptase PCR (RT-PCR) of respi-
ratory tract samples and plasma early in illness and of
urine and stool later on. SARS-CoV can also be grown
from respiratory tract samples by inoculation into Vero
E6 tissue culture cells, in which a cytopathic effect is
seen within days. RT-PCR appears to be more sensitive
than tissue culture, but only around one-third of cases
are positive by PCR at initial presentation. Serum anti-
bodies can be detected by ELISA or immunoﬂuores-
cence, and nearly all patients develop detectable serum
antibodies within 28 days after the onset of illness.
Laboratory diagnosis of coronavirus-induced colds is
rarely required. Coronaviruses that cause those illnesses
are frequently difﬁcult to cultivate in vitro but can be
detected in clinical samples by ELISA or immunoﬂuo-
rescence assays or by RT-PCR for viral RNA. These
research procedures can be used to detect coronaviruses
in unusual clinical settings.
been widely used, but their beneﬁt, if any, is likewise
unestablished. Supportive care to maintain pulmonary
and other organ system functions remains the mainstay
of therapy.
The approach to the treatment of common colds
caused by coronaviruses is similar to that discussed
above for rhinovirus-induced illnesses.
Diseases of the Respiratory System
154
SECTION II
A
B
FIGURE 14-2
Chest x-rays of a 46-year-old man with severe acute res-
piratory syndrome. The left lower lung inﬁltrate seen initially
(A) progressed to multiple bilateral opacities (B). (Reprinted
with permission from N Lee et al. © 2003 Massachusetts
Medical Society.)
Treatment:
CORONAVIRUS INFECTIONS
There is no speciﬁc therapy of established efﬁcacy for
SARS. Although ribavirin has frequently been used, it has
little,if any,activity against SARS-CoV in vitro,and no ben-
eﬁcial effect on the course of illness has been demon-
strated. Because of suggestions that immunopathology
may contribute to the disease, glucocorticoids have also
PREVENTION
The recognition of SARS led to a worldwide
mobilization of public health resources to apply
infection-control practices to contain the disease.
Case deﬁnitions were established, travel advisories were
proposed, and quarantines were imposed in certain
locales. As of this writing, no additional cases of SARS
have been reported since 2004. However, it remains
unknown whether the disappearance of cases is a result
of control measures, whether it is part of a seasonal or
otherwise unexplained epidemiologic pattern of SARS,
or when or whether SARS might reemerge. The U.S.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the
World Health Organization maintain recommendations
for surveillance and assessment of potential cases of
SARS (www.cdc.gov/ncidod/sars/).The frequent transmis-
sion of the disease to health care workers makes it
mandatory that strict infection-control practices be used
by health care facilities to prevent airborne, droplet, and
contact transmission from any suspected cases of SARS.
Health care workers who enter areas in which patients
with SARS may be present should don gowns, gloves,
and eye and respiratory protective equipment (e.g., an
N95 ﬁltering facepiece respirator certiﬁed by the
National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health).
Vaccines have been developed against several animal
coronaviruses but not against known human coronaviruses.
The emergence of SARS-CoV has stimulated interest in
the development of vaccines against such agents.
HUMAN RESPIRATORY SYNCYTIAL
VIRUS INFECTIONS
ETIOLOGIC AGENT
Human respiratory syncytial virus, previously referred to
as RSV and now designated HRSV, is a member of the
Paramyxoviridae family (genus Pneumovirus). HRSV, an
enveloped virus ∼150–350 nm in diameter, is so named
because its replication in vitro leads to the fusion of
neighboring cells into large multinucleated syncytia.The
single-stranded RNA genome codes for 11 virus-speciﬁc
proteins.Viral RNA is contained in a helical nucleocap-
sid surrounded by a lipid envelope bearing two glyco-
proteins: the G protein, by which the virus attaches to
cells, and the F (fusion) protein, which facilitates entry
of the virus into the cell by fusing host and viral mem-
branes. HRSV was once considered to be of a single
antigenic type, but two distinct subgroups (A and B) and
multiple subtypes within each subgroup have now been
described. Antigenic diversity is reﬂected by differences
in the G protein, and the F protein is highly conserved.
Both antigenic groups can circulate simultaneously in
outbreaks, although there are typically alternating pat-
terns in which one subgroup predominates over 1- to
2-year periods. Infections with group B viruses may be
somewhat milder than those with group A viruses.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
HRSV is a major respiratory pathogen of young chil-
dren and the foremost cause of lower respiratory disease
in infants. Infection with HRSV is seen throughout the
world in annual epidemics that occur in the late fall,
winter, or spring and last up to 5 months. The virus is
rarely encountered during the summer. Rates of illness
are highest among infants 1–6 months of age, peaking at
2–3 months of age. The attack rates among susceptible
infants and children are extraordinarily high, approach-
ing 100% in settings such as day care centers where large
numbers of susceptible infants are present. By age 2 years,
virtually all children will have been infected with
HRSV. HRSV accounts for 20–25% of hospital admis-
sions of young infants and children for pneumonia and
for up to 75% of cases of bronchiolitis in this age group.
It has been estimated that more than 50% of infants
who are at risk will become infected during an HRSV
epidemic.
In older children and adults, reinfection with HRSV
is frequent, but the disease is milder than in infancy. A
common cold–like syndrome is the illness most com-
monly associated with HRSV infection in adults. Severe
lower respiratory tract disease with pneumonitis can
occur in elderly (often institutionalized) adults and in
patients with immunocompromising disorders or treat-
ment, including recipients of stem cell and solid-organ
transplants. HRSV is also an important nosocomial
pathogen; during an outbreak, it can infect pediatric
patients and up to 25–50% of the staff on pediatric wards.
The spread of HRSV among families is efﬁcient: up to
40% of siblings may become infected when the virus is
introduced into the family setting.
HRSV is transmitted primarily by close contact with
contaminated ﬁngers or fomites and by self-inoculation
of the conjunctiva or anterior nares.The virus may also
be spread by coarse aerosols produced by coughing or
sneezing, but it is inefﬁciently spread by ﬁne-particle
aerosols. The incubation period is ∼4–6 days, and virus
shedding may last for ≥2 weeks in children and for
shorter periods in adults. In immunosuppressed patients,
shedding can continue for weeks.
PATHOGENESIS
Little is known about the histopathology of minor HRSV
infection. Severe bronchiolitis or pneumonia is charac-
terized by necrosis of the bronchiolar epithelium and a
peribronchiolar inﬁltrate of lymphocytes and mononu-
clear cells. Interalveolar thickening and ﬁlling of alveolar
spaces with ﬂuid can also be found. The correlates of
protective immunity to HRSV are incompletely under-
stood. Because reinfection occurs frequently and is often
associated with illness, the immunity that develops after
single episodes of infection clearly is not complete or
long lasting. However, the cumulative effect of multiple
reinfections is to temper subsequent disease and to pro-
vide some temporary measure of protection against
infection. Studies of experimentally induced disease in
healthy volunteers indicate that the presence of nasal
IgA neutralizing antibody correlates more closely with
protection than does the presence of serum antibody.
Studies in infants, however, suggest that maternally
acquired antibody provides some protection from lower
respiratory tract disease, although illness can be severe
even in infants who have moderate levels of maternally
derived serum antibody. The relatively severe disease
observed in immunosuppressed patients and experimen-
tal animal models indicates that cell-mediated immunity
is an important mechanism of host defense against
HRSV. Evidence suggests that class I MHC-restricted
cytotoxic T cells may be particularly important in this
regard.
Common Viral Respiratory Infections and Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS)
155
CHAPTER 14
CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
HRSV infection leads to a wide spectrum of respiratory
illnesses. In infants, 25–40% of infections result in lower
respiratory tract involvement, including pneumonia, bron-
chiolitis, and tracheobronchitis. In this age group, illness
begins most frequently with rhinorrhea, low-grade fever,
and mild systemic symptoms, often accompanied by
cough and wheezing. Most patients recover gradually over
1–2 weeks. In more severe illness, tachypnea and dyspnea
develop, and eventually frank hypoxia, cyanosis, and apnea
can ensue. Physical examination may reveal diffuse wheez-
ing, rhonchi, and rales. Chest radiography shows hyperex-
pansion, peribronchial thickening, and variable inﬁltrates
ranging from diffuse interstitial inﬁltrates to segmental or
lobar consolidation. Illness may be particularly severe in
children born prematurely and in those with congenital
cardiac disease, bronchopulmonary dysplasia, nephrotic
syndrome, or immunosuppression. One study documented
a 37% mortality rate among infants with HRSV pneumo-
nia and congenital cardiac disease.
In adults, the most common symptoms of HRSV
infection are those of the common cold, with rhinor-
rhea, sore throat, and cough. Illness is occasionally associ-
ated with moderate systemic symptoms such as malaise,
headache, and fever. HRSV has also been reported to
cause lower respiratory tract disease with fever in adults,
including severe pneumonia in the elderly—particularly
in nursing-home residents, among whom its impact can
rival that of inﬂuenza. HRSV pneumonia can be a sig-
niﬁcant cause of morbidity and death among patients
undergoing stem cell and solid-organ transplantation,
whose case-fatality rates of 20–80% have been reported.
Sinusitis, otitis media, and worsening of chronic obstruc-
tive and reactive airway disease have also been associated
with HRSV infection.
LABORATORY FINDINGS AND DIAGNOSIS
The diagnosis of HRSV infection can be suspected on
the basis of a suggestive epidemiologic setting—i.e., severe
illness among infants during an outbreak of HRSV in
the community. Infections in older children and adults
cannot be differentiated with certainty from those caused
by other respiratory viruses. The speciﬁc diagnosis is
established by detection of HRSV in respiratory secre-
tions, such as sputum, throat swabs, or nasopharyngeal
washes.Virus can be isolated in tissue culture and is iden-
tiﬁed speciﬁcally by immunoﬂuorescence, ELISA, or other
immunologic techniques. Rapid viral diagnosis is avail-
able by immunoﬂuorescence techniques or ELISA of
nasopharyngeal washes, aspirates, and (less satisfactorily)
nasopharyngeal swabs.With specimens from children, these
techniques have sensitivities and speciﬁcities of 80–95%;
they are somewhat less sensitive with specimens from
adults. Serologic diagnosis may be made by comparison of
acute- and convalescent-phase serum specimens by ELISA
or by neutralization or complement-ﬁxation tests.These
tests may be useful in older children and adults but are
less sensitive in children <4 months of age.
Diseases of the Respiratory System
156
SECTION II
Treatment:
HUMAN RESPIRATORY SYNCYTIAL
VIRUS INFECTIONS
Treatment of upper respiratory tract HRSV infection is
aimed primarily at the alleviation of symptoms and is
similar to that for other viral infections of the upper res-
piratory tract. For lower respiratory tract infections,
respiratory therapy, including hydration, suctioning of
secretions, and administration of humidiﬁed oxygen and
antibronchospastic agents, is given as needed. In severe
hypoxia, intubation and ventilatory assistance may be
required. Studies of infants with HRSV infection who
were given aerosolized ribavirin, a nucleoside analogue
active in vitro against HRSV, demonstrated a modest
beneﬁcial effect on the resolution of lower respiratory
tract illness, including alleviation of blood-gas abnormal-
ities. The American Academy of Pediatrics recommends
that treatment with aerosolized ribavirin “may be consid-
ered” for infants who are severely ill or who are at high
risk for complications of HRSV infection; included are
premature infants and those with bronchopulmonary
dysplasia, congenital heart disease, or immunosuppres-
sion.The efﬁcacy of ribavirin against HRSV pneumonia in
older children and adults, including those with immuno-
suppression, has not been established. Administration of
standard immunoglobulin, immunoglobulin with high
titers of antibody to HRSV (RSVIg), or chimeric mouse-
human monoclonal IgG antibody to HRSV (palivizumab)
has not been found to be beneﬁcial in the treatment of
HRSV pneumonia. Combined therapy with aerosolized
ribavirin and palivizumab is being evaluated in immuno-
suppressed patients with HRSV pneumonia.
PREVENTION
Monthly administration of RSVIg or palivizumab has
been approved as prophylaxis against HRSV for children
<2 years of age who have bronchopulmonary dysplasia
or cyanotic heart disease or who were born prematurely.
Considerable interest exists in the development of vac-
cines against HRSV. Inactivated whole-virus vaccines
have been ineffective; in one study, they actually potenti-
ated disease in infants. Other approaches include immu-
nization with puriﬁed F and G surface glycoproteins of
HRSV or generation of stable, live attenuated virus vac-
cines. In settings such as pediatric wards where rates of
transmission are high, barrier methods for the protection
of hands and conjunctivae may be useful in reducing the
spread of virus.
HUMAN METAPNEUMOVIRUS
INFECTIONS
ETIOLOGIC AGENT
Human metapneumovirus (HMPV) is a recently described
viral respiratory pathogen that has been assigned to the
Paramyxoviridae family (genus Metapneumovirus). Its mor-
phology and genomic organization are similar to those
of avian metapneumoviruses, which are recognized respi-
ratory pathogens of turkeys. HMPV particles may be
spherical, ﬁlamentous, or pleomorphic in shape and mea-
sure 150–600 nm in diameter. Particles contain 15-nm
projections from the surface that are similar in appearance
to those of other Paramyxoviridae. The single-stranded
RNA genome codes for nine proteins that, except for the
absence of nonstructural proteins, generally correspond to
those of HRSV. There is only one antigenic type; two
closely related genetic subgroups (A and B) have been
described.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
HMPV infections are worldwide in distribution, are most
frequent during the winter, and occur early in life, so that
serum antibodies to the virus are present in nearly all
children by age of 5 years. HMPV infections have been
detected in older age groups, including elderly adults, and
in both immunocompetent and immunosuppressed hosts.
To date, studies indicate that HMPV infections account
for 4% of respiratory tract illnesses requiring hospitaliza-
tion of children, 12% of outpatient lower respiratory
illnesses, and 2–4% of acute respiratory illnesses in ambu-
latory adults and elderly patients. HMPV has been detected
in a few cases of SARS, but its role (if any) in these ill-
nesses has not been established. Assessment of the overall
signiﬁcance of HMPV infections awaits the conduct of
large-scale epidemiologic studies.
CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
The spectrum of clinical illnesses associated with HMPV
is similar to that associated with HRSV and includes both
upper and lower respiratory tract illnesses, such as bron-
chiolitis, croup, and pneumonia. Reinfection with HMPV
is common in older children and adults and has manifes-
tations ranging from subclinical infections to common
cold syndromes and occasionally pneumonia, which is seen
primarily in elderly patients and those with cardiopul-
monary diseases. Serious HMPV infections occur in
immunocompromised patients, including those with neo-
plasia and stem cell transplants.
DIAGNOSIS
HMPV can be detected in nasal aspirates and respiratory
secretions by PCR or by growth in rhesus monkey kidney
(LLC-MK2) tissue cultures. Rapid immunodetection
methods are under development.A serologic diagnosis can
be made by ELISA, which uses HMPV-infected tissue
culture lysates as sources of antigens.
Common Viral Respiratory Infections and Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS)
157
CHAPTER 14
Treatment:
HUMAN METAPNEUMOVIRUS
INFECTIONS
Treatment for HMPV infections is primarily supportive
and symptom based.Ribavirin and RSVIg are both active
against HMPV in vitro, but their efﬁcacy in vivo is
unknown.
PREVENTION
Vaccines against HMPV are in the early stages of devel-
opment.
PARAINFLUENZA VIRUS INFECTIONS
ETIOLOGIC AGENT
Parainﬂuenza viruses belong to the Paramyxoviridae
family (genera Respirovirus and Rubulavirus). They are
150–200 nm in diameter, are enveloped, and contain a
single-stranded RNA genome.The envelope is studded
with two glycoproteins: one possesses both hemagglu-
tinin and neuraminidase activity, and the other contains
fusion activity.The viral RNA genome is enclosed in a
helical nucleocapsid and codes for six structural and sev-
eral accessory proteins.There are four distinct serotypes
of parainﬂuenza virus, all of which share certain antigens
with other members of the Paramyxoviridae family,
including mumps and Newcastle disease viruses.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
Parainﬂuenza viruses are distributed throughout
the world; infection with type 4 (subtypes 4A
and 4B) has been reported less widely, probably
because type 4 is more difﬁcult to grow in tissue culture.
Infection is acquired in early childhood, so that by 5 years
of age most children have antibodies to serotypes 1, 2,
and 3. Types 1 and 2 cause epidemics during the fall,
often occurring in an alternate-year pattern.Type 3 infec-
tion has been detected during all seasons of the year, but
epidemics have occurred annually in the spring.
The contribution of parainﬂuenza infections to respi-
ratory disease varies with both the location and the year.
In studies conducted in the United States, parainﬂuenza
virus infections have accounted for 4.3–22% of respiratory
illnesses in children. In adults, parainﬂuenza infections
are generally mild and account for <10% of respiratory
illnesses.The major importance of parainﬂuenza viruses
is as a cause of respiratory illness in young children, in
whom they rank second only to HRSV as causes of
lower respiratory tract illness. Parainﬂuenza virus type 1
is the most frequent cause of croup (laryngotracheo-
bronchitis) in children; serotype 2 causes similar, although
generally less severe, disease.Type 3 is an important cause
of bronchiolitis and pneumonia in infants, but illnesses
associated with type 4 have generally been mild. Unlike
types 1 and 2, type 3 frequently causes illness during the
ﬁrst month of life, when passively acquired maternal
antibody is still present. Parainﬂuenza viruses are spread
through infected respiratory secretions, primarily by
person-to-person contact or by large droplets.The incu-
bation period has varied from 3 to 6 days in experimen-
tal infections but may be somewhat shorter for naturally
occurring disease in children.
PATHOGENESIS
Immunity to parainﬂuenza viruses is incompletely under-
stood, but evidence suggests that immunity to infections
with serotypes 1 and 2 is mediated by local IgA antibod-
ies in the respiratory tract. Passively acquired serum neu-
tralizing antibodies also confer some protection against
infection with types 1, 2, and (to a lesser degree) 3. Stud-
ies in experimental animal models and in immunosup-
pressed patients suggest that T cell–mediated immunity
may also be important in parainﬂuenza virus infections.
CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
Parainﬂuenza virus infections occur most frequently
among children, in whom initial infection with serotype
1, 2, or 3 is associated with an acute febrile illness
50–80% of the time. Children may present with coryza,
sore throat, hoarseness, and cough that may or may not
be croupy. In severe croup, fever persists, with worsening
coryza and sore throat. A brassy or barking cough may
progress to frank stridor. Most children recover over the
next 1 or 2 days, although progressive airway obstruc-
tion and hypoxia ensue occasionally. If bronchiolitis or
pneumonia develops, progressive cough accompanied by
wheezing, tachypnea, and intercostal retractions may
occur. In this setting, sputum production increases mod-
estly. Physical examination shows nasopharyngeal dis-
charge and oropharyngeal injection, along with rhonchi,
wheezes, or coarse breath sounds. Chest x-rays can show
air trapping and occasionally interstitial inﬁltrates.
In older children and adults, parainﬂuenza infections
tend to be milder, presenting most frequently as a com-
mon cold or as hoarseness, with or without cough.
Lower respiratory tract involvement in older children
and adults is uncommon, but tracheobronchitis in adults
has been reported. Severe, prolonged, and even fatal
parainﬂuenza infection has been reported in children and
adults with severe immunosuppression, including stem
cell and solid-organ transplant recipients.
LABORATORY FINDINGS AND DIAGNOSIS
The clinical syndromes caused by parainﬂuenza viruses
(with the possible exception of croup in young children)
are not sufﬁciently distinctive to be diagnosed on clinical
grounds alone.A speciﬁc diagnosis is established by detec-
tion of virus in respiratory tract secretions, throat swabs, or
nasopharyngeal washings.Viral growth in tissue culture is
detected either by hemagglutination or by a cytopathic
effect. Rapid viral diagnosis may be made by identiﬁcation
of parainﬂuenza antigens in exfoliated cells from the respi-
ratory tract with immunoﬂuorescence or ELISA, although
these techniques appear to be less sensitive than tissue cul-
ture. Highly speciﬁc and sensitive PCR assays have also
been developed. Serologic diagnosis can be established by
hemagglutination inhibition, complement-ﬁxation, or neu-
tralization tests of acute- and convalescent-phase specimens.
However, because frequent heterotypic responses occur
among the parainﬂuenza serotypes, the serotype causing
illness often cannot be identiﬁed by serologic techniques
alone.
Acute epiglottitis caused by Haemophilus inﬂuenzae type
B must be differentiated from viral croup. Inﬂuenza A virus
is also a common cause of croup during epidemic periods.
Diseases of the Respiratory System
158
SECTION II
Treatment:
PARAINFLUENZA VIRUS INFECTIONS
For upper respiratory tract illness, symptoms can be
treated as discussed for other viral respiratory tract ill-
nesses. If complications such as sinusitis, otitis, or
superimposed bacterial bronchitis develop, appropriate
antibacterial antibiotics should be administered. Mild
cases of croup should be treated with bed rest and moist
air generated by vaporizers. More severe cases require
hospitalization and close observation for the develop-
ment of respiratory distress. If acute respiratory distress
develops, humidiﬁed oxygen and intermittent racemic
epinephrine are usually administered. Aerosolized or sys-
temically administered glucocorticoids are beneﬁcial;the
latter have a more profound effect. No speciﬁc antiviral
therapy is available, although ribavirin is active against
parainfluenza viruses in vitro and anecdotal reports
describe its use clinically, particularly in immunosup-
pressed patients.
PREVENTION
Vaccines against parainfluenza viruses are under devel-
opment.
ADENOVIRUS INFECTIONS
ETIOLOGIC AGENT
Adenoviruses are complex DNA viruses that measure
70–80 nm in diameter. Human adenoviruses belong to
the genus Mastadenovirus, which includes 51 serotypes.
Adenoviruses have a characteristic morphology consist-
ing of an icosahedral shell composed of 20 equilateral
triangular faces and 12 vertices.The protein coat (capsid)
consists of hexon subunits with group-speciﬁc and type-
speciﬁc antigenic determinants and penton subunits at
each vertex primarily containing group-speciﬁc antigens.
A ﬁber with a knob at the end projects from each pen-
ton; this ﬁber contains type-speciﬁc and some group-
speciﬁc antigens. Human adenoviruses have been divided
into six subgenera (A through F) on the basis of the
homology of DNA genomes and other properties. The
adenovirus genome is a linear double-stranded DNA
that codes for structural and nonstructural polypeptides.
The replicative cycle of adenovirus may result either in
lytic infection of cells or in the establishment of a latent
infection (primarily involving lymphoid cells). Some
adenovirus types can induce oncogenic transformation,
and tumor formation has been observed in rodents; how-
ever, despite intensive investigation, adenoviruses have
not been associated with tumors in humans.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
Adenovirus infections most frequently affect infants and
children. Infections occur throughout the year but are
most common from the fall to the spring. Adenoviruses
account for ∼10% of acute respiratory infections in chil-
dren but for <2% of respiratory illnesses in civilian
adults. Nearly 100% of adults have serum antibody to
multiple serotypes—a ﬁnding indicating that infection is
common in childhood.Types 1, 2, 3, and 5 are the most
frequent isolates from children. Certain adenovirus
serotypes—particularly 4 and 7 but also 3, 14, and 21—
are associated with outbreaks of acute respiratory disease
in military recruits in the winter and spring.Adenovirus
infection can be transmitted by inhalation of aerosolized
virus, by inoculation of virus into conjunctival sacs, and
probably by the fecal–oral route as well. Type-speciﬁc
antibody generally develops after infection and is associ-
ated with protection, albeit incomplete, against infection
with the same serotype.
CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
In children, adenoviruses cause a variety of clinical syn-
dromes.The most common is an acute upper respiratory
tract infection with prominent rhinitis. On occasion,
lower respiratory tract disease, including bronchiolitis
and pneumonia, also develops.Adenoviruses, particularly
types 3 and 7, cause pharyngoconjunctival fever, a char-
acteristic acute febrile illness of children that occurs in
outbreaks, most often in summer camps.The syndrome
is marked by bilateral conjunctivitis in which the bulbar
and palpebral conjunctivae have a granular appearance.
Low-grade fever is frequently present for the first
3–5 days, and rhinitis, sore throat, and cervical adenopathy
develop. The illness generally lasts for 1–2 weeks and
resolves spontaneously. Febrile pharyngitis without con-
junctivitis has also been associated with adenovirus
infection. Adenoviruses have been isolated from cases of
whooping cough with or without Bordetella pertussis; the
signiﬁcance of adenovirus in that disease is unknown.
In adults, the most frequently reported illness has been
acute respiratory disease caused by adenovirus types 4 and
7 in military recruits. This illness is marked by a promi-
nent sore throat and the gradual onset of fever, which
often reaches 39°C (102.2°F) on the second or third day
of illness. Cough is almost always present, and coryza and
regional lymphadenopathy are frequently seen. Physical
examination may show pharyngeal edema, injection, and
tonsillar enlargement with little or no exudate. If pneu-
monia has developed, auscultation and x-ray of the chest
may indicate areas of patchy inﬁltration.
Adenoviruses have been associated with a number of
non–respiratory tract diseases, including acute diarrheal
illness caused by types 40 and 41 in young children and
hemorrhagic cystitis caused by types 11 and 21. Epidemic
keratoconjunctivitis, caused most frequently by types 8,
19, and 37, has been associated with contaminated
common sources such as ophthalmic solutions and roller
towels.Adenoviruses have also been implicated in dissem-
inated disease and pneumonia in immunosuppressed
patients, including recipients of solid-organ or stem cell
transplants. In stem cell transplant recipients, adenovirus
infections have manifested as pneumonia, hepatitis, nephri-
tis, colitis, encephalitis, and hemorrhagic cystitis. In solid-
organ transplant recipients, adenovirus infection may
involve the organ transplanted (e.g., hepatitis in liver
transplants, nephritis in renal transplants) but can dissemi-
nate to other organs as well. In patients with AIDS, high-
numbered and intermediate adenovirus serotypes have
been isolated, usually in the setting of low CD4+ T cell
counts, but their isolation often has not been clearly
linked to disease manifestations. Adenovirus nucleic acids
have been detected in myocardial cells from patients with
“idiopathic” myocardiopathies, and adenoviruses have
been suggested as causative agents in some cases.
LABORATORY FINDINGS AND DIAGNOSIS
Adenovirus infection should be suspected in the epi-
demiologic setting of acute respiratory disease in mili-
tary recruits and in certain of the clinical syndromes
(e.g., pharyngoconjunctival fever or epidemic kerato-
conjunctivitis) in which outbreaks of characteristic ill-
nesses occur. In most cases, however, illnesses caused by
adenovirus infection cannot be differentiated from those
caused by a number of other viral respiratory agents and
Mycoplasma pneumoniae. A deﬁnitive diagnosis of aden-
ovirus infection is established by detection of the virus
in tissue culture (as evidenced by cytopathic changes)
and by speciﬁc identiﬁcation with immunoﬂuorescence
or other immunologic techniques. Rapid viral diagnosis
Common Viral Respiratory Infections and Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS)
159
CHAPTER 14
can be established by immunoﬂuorescence or ELISA of
nasopharyngeal aspirates, conjunctival or respiratory
secretions, urine, or stool. Highly sensitive and speciﬁc
PCR assays and nucleic acid hybridization are also avail-
able.Adenovirus types 40 and 41, which have been asso-
ciated with diarrheal disease in children, require special
tissue-culture cells for isolation, and these serotypes are
most commonly detected by direct ELISA of stool. Serum
antibody rises can be demonstrated by complement-
ﬁxation or neutralization tests, ELISA, radioimmunoas-
say, or (for adenoviruses that hemagglutinate red cells)
hemagglutination inhibition tests.
cause disease but stimulates local and systemic antibodies
that are protective against subsequent acute respiratory dis-
ease caused by those serotypes.This vaccine has not been
produced since 1999, and outbreaks of acute respiratory
illness caused by adenovirus types 4 and 7 have reemerged
among military recruits.Therefore, a program to redevelop
type 4 and 7 vaccines is under way. Adenoviruses are also
being studied as live-virus vectors for the delivery of vac-
cine antigens and for gene therapy.
FURTHER READINGS
AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS: Diagnosis and management of
bronchiolitis. Pediatrics 118:1774, 2006
CHANOCK RM et al: Serious respiratory tract disease caused by res-
piratory syncytial virus: Prospects for improved therapy and
effective immunization. Pediatrics 90:137, 1992
CHRISTIAN MD et al: Severe acute respiratory syndrome. Clin Infect
Dis 38:1420, 2004
GRAHAM BS et al: Respiratory syncytial virus immunobiology and
pathogenesis.Virology 297:1, 2002
GWALTNEY JM: Rhinoviruses, in Principles and Practice of Infectious
Diseases, 6th ed, GF Mandell et al (eds). Philadelphia, Elsevier,
2005, pp 2185–2193
LEE N et al: A major outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome
in Hong Kong. N Engl J Med 348:1986, 2003
PEIRIS JS et al: Severe acute respiratory syndrome. Nat Med 10:S88,
2004
PERET T et al: Characterization of human metapneumoviruses iso-
lated from patients in North America. J Infect Dis 185:1660,
2002
STOCKTON J et al: Human metapneumovirus as a cause of community-
acquired respiratory illness.Emerg Infect Dis 8:897,2002
WHEELER AP, BERNARD GR: Acute lung injury and the acute respi-
ratory distress syndrome:A clinical review. Lancet 369:1553, 2007
WRIGHT PF: Parainﬂuenza viruses, in Viral Infections of the Respiratory
Tract, R Dolin, PF Wright (eds). New York, Marcel Dekker, 1999
Diseases of the Respiratory System
160
SECTION II
Treatment:
ADENOVIRUS INFECTIONS
Only symptom-based treatment and supportive therapy
are available for adenovirus infections,and clinically use-
ful antiviral therapy has not been established. Ribavirin
and cidofovir have activity in vitro against certain aden-
oviruses. Retrospective studies and anecdotes describe
the use of these agents in disseminated adenovirus
infections, but deﬁnitive efﬁcacy data from controlled
studies are not available.
PREVENTION
Live vaccines have been developed against adenovirus
types 4 and 7 and have been used to control illness among
military recruits. These vaccines consist of live, unattenu-
ated virus administered in enteric-coated capsules. Infection
of the gastrointestinal tract with types 4 and 7 does not
A. George Smulian
I
Peter D. Walzer
DEFINITION AND DESCRIPTION
Pneumocystis is an opportunistic fungal pulmonary pathogen
that is an important cause of pneumonia in the immuno-
compromised host. Although organisms within the
Pneumocystis genus are morphologically very similar, they
are genetically diverse and host speciﬁc. Whereas P. jirovecii
infects humans, P. carinii—the original species described in
1909—infects rats. For clarity, only the genus designation
Pneumocystis will be used in this chapter.
Developmental stages of the organism include the
trophic form, the cyst, and the precyst (an intermediate
stage). The life cycle of Pneumocystis probably involves
sexual and asexual reproduction, although deﬁnitive proof
awaits the development of a reliable culture system.
Pneumocystis contains several different antigen groups, the
most prominent of which is the 95- to 140-kDa major
surface glycoprotein (MSG). MSG plays a central role in
the interaction of Pneumocystis with its host.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
Serologic surveys have demonstrated that Pneumocystis has
a worldwide distribution and that most healthy children
have been exposed to the organism by 3–4 years of age.
Airborne transmission of Pneumocystis has been docu-
mented in animal studies; person-to-person transmission
has been suggested by hospital outbreaks of Pneumocystis
pneumonia (PcP) and by molecular epidemiologic analysis
PNEUMOCYSTIS INFECTION
of isolates. Pneumocystis colonization of immunocompetent
individuals has been detected by polymerase chain reac-
tion (PCR) techniques.
PATHOGENESIS AND PATHOLOGY
The host factors that predispose to the development of
PcP include defects in cellular and humoral immunity.
The risk of PcP among HIV-infected patients increases
markedly when circulating CD4+ T cell counts decrease
below 200/μL. Other persons at risk for PcP are patients
receiving immunosuppressive agents (particularly gluco-
corticoids) for cancer and organ transplantation; those
receiving biologic agents such as inﬂiximab and etaner-
cept for rheumatoid arthritis and inﬂammatory bowel
disease; children with primary immunodeﬁciency diseases;
and premature malnourished infants.
The principal host effector cells against Pneumocystis
are alveolar macrophages, which ingest and kill the
organism, releasing a variety of inﬂammatory mediators.
Proliferating organisms remain extracellular within the
alveolus, attaching tightly to type I cells.Alveolar damage
results in increased alveolar-capillary permeability and
surfactant abnormalities, including a decrease in phos-
pholipids and an increase in surfactant proteins A and D.
The host inﬂammatory response to lung injury leads to
increases in levels of interleukin 8 and in neutrophil
counts in bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) ﬂuid.These changes
correlate with disease severity.
CHAPTER 15
CHAPTER 15
161
Deﬁnition and Description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 161
Epidemiology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 161
Pathogenesis and Pathology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 161
Clinical Features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 162
Diagnosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 162
Course and Prognosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 163
Prevention . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 164
I Further Readings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 164
Diseases of the Respiratory System
162
SECTION II
On lung sections stained with hematoxylin and eosin,
the alveoli are ﬁlled with a typical foamy, vacuolated exu-
date. Severe disease may include interstitial edema, ﬁbrosis,
and hyaline membrane formation.The host inﬂammatory
changes usually consist of hypertrophy of alveolar type II
cells, a typical reparative response, and a mild mononuclear
cell interstitial inﬁltrate. Malnourished infants display an
intense plasma cell inﬁltrate that gave the disease its early
name:interstitial plasma cell pneumonia.
CLINICAL FEATURES
Patients with PcP develop dyspnea, fever, and nonpro-
ductive cough. HIV-infected patients are usually ill for
several weeks and may have relatively subtle manifesta-
tions. Symptoms in non–HIV-infected patients are of
shorter duration and often begin after the glucocorticoid
dose has been tapered. A high index of suspicion and a
thorough history are key factors in early detection.
Physical ﬁndings include tachypnea, tachycardia, and
cyanosis, but lung auscultation reveals few abnormalities.
Reduced arterial oxygen pressure (PaO2), increased
alveolar-arterial oxygen gradient (PAO2 – PaO2), and respi-
ratory alkalosis are evident. Diffusion capacity is reduced,
and heightened uptake with nonspeciﬁc nuclear imaging
techniques (gallium scan) may be noted. Elevated serum
concentrations of lactate dehydrogenase, reﬂecting lung
parenchymal damage, have been reported; however, the
increase is not speciﬁc for PcP.
The classic ﬁndings on chest radiography consist of
bilateral diffuse inﬁltrates beginning in the perihilar
regions (Fig. 15-1A), but various atypical manifesta-
tions (nodular densities, cavitary lesions) have also been
reported. Pneumothorax occurs, and its management is
often difﬁcult. Early in the course of PcP, the chest radi-
ograph may be normal, although high-resolution CT of
the lung may reveal ground-glass opacities at this stage
(Fig. 15-1B).
Although Pneumocystis usually remains conﬁned to the
lungs, cases of disseminated infection have occurred in
both HIV-infected and non–HIV-infected patients.
Common sites of involvement include the lymph nodes,
spleen, liver, and bone marrow.
DIAGNOSIS
Because of the nonspeciﬁc nature of the clinical picture,
the diagnosis must be based on speciﬁc identiﬁcation of
the organism.A deﬁnitive diagnosis is made by histopatho-
logic staining.Whereas traditional cell wall stains such as
methenamine silver selectively stain the wall of Pneumocys-
tis cysts, reagents such as Wright-Giemsa stain the nuclei of
all developmental stages. Immunoﬂuorescence with mon-
oclonal antibodies is more sensitive and speciﬁc than his-
tologic staining. DNA ampliﬁcation by PCR may become
part of routine diagnostics but may not distinguish colo-
nization from infection.
The successful diagnosis of PcP depends on the col-
lection of proper specimens. In general, the yield from
different diagnostic procedures is higher in HIV-infected
patients than in non–HIV-infected patients because of the
higher organism burden in the former group. Sputum
A
B
FIGURE 15-1
A. Chest radiograph depicting diffuse infiltrates in an
HIV-infected patient with Pneumocystis pneumonia (PcP).
B. High-resolution CT of the lung showing ground-glass
opaciﬁcation in an HIV-infected patient with PcP. (Courtesy of
Dr. Cristopher Meyer, with permission.)
induction and oral washes have gained popularity as sim-
ple, noninvasive techniques; however, these procedures
require trained and dedicated personnel. Fiberoptic
bronchoscopy with BAL, which provides information
about the organism burden,the host inﬂammatory response,
and the presence of other opportunistic infections, con-
tinues to be the mainstay of Pneumocystis diagnosis.Trans-
bronchial biopsy and open lung biopsy, the most invasive
procedures, are used only when a diagnosis cannot be
made by BAL.
COURSE AND PROGNOSIS
In the typical case of untreated PcP, progressive respira-
tory embarrassment leads to death. Therapy is most
effective when instituted early before extensive alveolar
damage occurs. If examination of induced sputum is
nondiagnostic and BAL cannot be performed in a timely
manner, empirical therapy for PcP is reasonable. How-
ever, this practice does not eliminate the need for a spe-
ciﬁc etiologic diagnosis.With improved management of
HIV and its complications, mortality from PcP is
15–20% at 1 month and 50–55% at 1 year. Rates of early
death remain high among patients who require mechan-
ical ventilation (60%) and among non–HIV-infected
patients (40%).
Treatment:
PNEUMOCYSTIS INFECTION
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole 
(TMP-SMX),
which
acts by inhibiting folic acid synthesis, is considered the
drug of choice for all forms of PcP (Table 15-1). Ther-
apy is continued for 14 days in non–HIV-infected
patients and for 21 days in persons infected with HIV.
Because HIV-infected patients respond more slowly
than non–HIV-infected patients, it is prudent to wait at
least 7 days after the initiation of treatment before
concluding that therapy has failed. TMP-SMX is well
tolerated by non–HIV-infected patients, whereas more
than half of HIV-infected patients experience serious
adverse reactions.
Several alternative regimens are available for the
treatment of mild to moderate cases of PcP (a PaO2 of
>70 mmHg or a PAO2 – PaO2 of <35 mmHg on breathing
room air). TMP plus dapsone and clindamycin plus pri-
maquine are about as effective as TMP-SMX. Dapsone
and primaquine should not be administered to patients
with glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deﬁ-
ciency.Atovaquone is less effective than TMP-SMX but is
better tolerated. Because Pneumocystis lacks ergosterol,
it is not susceptible to antifungal agents that inhibit
ergosterol synthesis.
Pneumocystis Infection
163
CHAPTER 15
TABLE 15-1
TREATMENT OF PNEUMOCYSTOSIS
DRUG(S), DOSE, ROUTE
ADVERSE EFFECTS
First Choicea
TMP-SMX (5 mg/kg TMP, 25 mg/kg SMXb)
Fever, rash, cytopenias, hepatitis, 
q6–8 h PO or IV
hyperkalemia, GI disturbances
Other Agentsa
TMP, 5 mg/kg q6–8h, plus dapsone,
Hemolysis (G6PD deﬁciency), methemoglobinemia,
100 mg qd PO
fever, rash, GI disturbances
Atovaquone, 750 mg bid PO
Rash, fever, GI and hepatic disturbances
Clindamycin, 300–450 mg q6h PO or
Hemolysis (G6PD deﬁciency), methemoglobinemia,
600 mg q6–8h IV, plus primaquine,
rash, colitis, neutropenia
15–30 mg qd PO
Pentamidine, 3–4 mg/kg qd IV
Hypotension, azotemia, cardiac arrhythmias,
pancreatitis, dysglycemias, hypocalcemia,
neutropenia, hepatitis
Trimetrexate, 45 mg/m2 qd IV, plus
Cytopenias, peripheral neuropathy, hepatic 
leucovorin,c 20 mg/kg q6h PO or IV
disturbances
Adjunctive Agent
Prednisone, 40 mg bid × 5 d, 40 mg qd ×
Immunosuppression, peptic ulcer, hyperglycemia,
5 d, 20 mg qd × 11 d; PO or IV
mood changes, hypertension
aTherapy is administered for 14 days to non–HIV-infected patients and for 21 days to HIV-infected patients.
bEquivalent of 2 double-strength (DS) tablets. (One DS tablet contains 160 mg of TMP and 800 mg of SMX.)
cLeucovorin prevents bone marrow toxicity from trimetrexate.
Note: GI, gastrointestinal; G6PD, glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase; TMP-SMX, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole.
Alternative regimens that are recommended for the
treatment of moderate to severe PcP (a PaO2 of ≤70 mmHg
or a PAO2 – PaO2 of ≥35 mmHg) are parenteral pentami-
dine, parenteral clindamycin plus primaquine, or trime-
trexate plus leucovorin. Parenteral clindamycin plus
primaquine may be more efﬁcacious than pentamidine.
Molecular evidence of resistance to sulfonamides and
to atovaquone has emerged among human Pneumocystis
isolates. Although prior sulfonamide exposure is a risk
factor, this resistance has also occurred in HIV-infected
patients who have never received sulfonamides. The
outcome of therapy appears to be linked more strongly
to traditional measures—e.g., high Acute Physiology,
Age, and Chronic Health Evaluation III (APACHE III)
scores, need for positive-pressure ventilation, delayed
intubation, and development of pneumothorax—than
to the presence of molecular markers of sulfonamide
resistance. HIV-infected patients frequently experience
deterioration of respiratory function shortly after receiv-
ing anti-Pneumocystis drugs. The adjunctive administra-
tion of tapering doses of glucocorticoids to HIV-infected
patients with moderate to severe PcP can prevent this
problem and improve the rate of survival (see Table 15-1).
For maximal beneﬁt, this adjunctive therapy should be
started early in the course of the illness. The use of
steroids as adjunctive therapy in HIV-infected patients
with mild PcP or in non–HIV-infected patients remains
to be evaluated.
PREVENTION
Prophylaxis is indicated for HIV-infected patients with
CD4+ T cell counts of <200/μL or a history of oropha-
ryngeal candidiasis and for both HIV-infected and
non–HIV-infected patients who have recovered from PcP.
Prophylaxis may be discontinued in HIV-infected patients
after CD4+ T cell counts have risen to >200/μL and
remained at that level for ≥3 months. Primary prophylaxis
guidelines for immunocompromised hosts not infected
with HIV are less clear.
TMP-SMX is the drug of choice for primary and sec-
ondary prophylaxis (Table 15-2). This agent also pro-
vides protection against toxoplasmosis and some bacterial
infections. Alternative regimens are available for individ-
uals intolerant of TMP-SMX (Table 15-2). Although
there are no speciﬁc recommendations for preventing the
spread of Pneumocystis in health care facilities, it seems
prudent to prevent direct contact between patients with
PcP and other susceptible hosts.
FURTHER READINGS
CENTERS FOR DISEASE CONTROL AND PREVENTION:Treating oppor-
tunistic infections among HIV-infected adults and adolescents:
Recommendations from the CDC, the National Institutes of
Health and the HIV Medicine Association/Infectious Diseases
Society of America. MMWR 53(RR-15):1, 2004
DALY KR et al:Antibody responses to the Pneumocystis jirovecii major
surface glycoprotein. Emerg Infect Dis 12:1231, 2006
Diseases of the Respiratory System
164
SECTION II
TABLE 15-2
PROPHYLAXIS OF PNEUMOCYSTOSISa
DRUG(S), DOSE, ROUTE
COMMENTS
First Choice
TMP-SMX, 1 DS tablet or 1 SS tablet qd POb
TMP-SMX can be safely reintroduced in some
patients who have experienced mild to 
moderate side effects.
Other Agents
Dapsone, 50 mg bid or 100 mg qd PO
—
Dapsone, 50 mg qd PO, plus pyrimethamine,
Leucovorin prevents bone marrow toxicity
50 mg weekly PO, plus leucovorin,
from pyrimethamine.
25 mg weekly PO
Dapsone, 200 mg weekly PO, plus
Leucovorin prevents bone marrow toxicity
pyrimethamine, 75 mg weekly PO, plus
from pyrimethamine.
leucovorin, 25 mg weekly PO
Pentamidine, 300 mg monthly via
Adverse reactions include cough and 
Respirgard II nebulizer
bronchospasm.
Atovaquone, 1500 mg qd PO
—
TMP-SMX, 1 DS tablet three times weekly PO
TMP-SMX can be safely reintroduced in some
patients who have experienced mild to moderate
side effects.
aFor list of adverse effects, see Table 15-1.
bOne DS tablet contains 160 mg of TMP and 800 mg of SMX.
Note: DS, double strength; SS, single strength; TMP-SMX, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole.
FESTIC E et al:Acute respiratory failure due to Pneumocystis pneumo-
nia in patients without human immunodeﬁciency virus infec-
tion: Outcome and associated features. Chest 128:573, 2005
MEDRANO FJ et al: Pneumocystis jirovecii in general population. Emerg
Infect Dis 11:245, 2005
MILLER RF et al: Improved survival for HIV infected patients with
severe Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia is independent of highly
active antiretroviral therapy.Thorax 61:716, 2006
REDHEAD SA et al: Pneumocystis and Trypanosoma cruzi: Nomenclature
and typiﬁcations. J Eukaryot Microbiol 53:1, 2006
THOMAS CF JR, LIMPER AH: Pneumocystis pneumonia. N Engl J Med
350:2487, 2004
ZAR HJ: Pneumonia in HIV-infected and HIV-uninfected children
in developing countries: Epidemiology, clinical features, and
management. Curr Opin Pulm Med 10:176, 2004
Pneumocystis Infection
165
CHAPTER 15
Gregory Tino
I
Steven E. Weinberger
BRONCHIECTASIS
DEFINITION
Bronchiectasis is an abnormal and permanent dilatation
of bronchi. It may be either focal, involving airways sup-
plying a limited region of pulmonary parenchyma, or
diffuse, involving airways in a more widespread distribu-
tion. Recent studies have estimated there to be about
110,000 patients with bronchiectasis in the United States.
It is a disorder that typically affects older individuals;approx-
imately two-thirds of patients are women.
PATHOLOGY
The bronchial dilatation of bronchiectasis is associated
with destructive and inﬂammatory changes in the walls
of medium-sized airways, often at the level of segmental
or subsegmental bronchi.Airway inﬂammation is primarily
mediated by neutrophils and results in up-regulation of
enzymes such as elastase and matrix metalloproteinases.
The normal structural components of the wall, includ-
ing cartilage, muscle, and elastic tissue, are destroyed and
may be replaced by ﬁbrous tissue. The dilated airways
frequently contain pools of thick, purulent material,
and the more peripheral airways are often occluded by
BRONCHIECTASIS AND LUNG ABSCESS
secretions or obliterated and replaced by ﬁbrous tissue.
Additional microscopic features include bronchial and
peribronchial inﬂammation and ﬁbrosis, ulceration of the
bronchial wall, squamous metaplasia, and mucous gland
hyperplasia. The parenchyma normally supplied by the
affected airways is abnormal, containing varying combi-
nations of ﬁbrosis, emphysema, bronchopneumonia, and
atelectasis.As a result of the inﬂammation, vascularity of
the bronchial wall increases, with associated enlargement
of the bronchial arteries and anastomoses between the
bronchial and pulmonary arterial circulations.
Three different patterns of bronchiectasis have been
described. In cylindrical bronchiectasis, the involved bronchi
appear uniformly dilated and end abruptly at the point
that smaller airways are obstructed by secretions. In varicose
bronchiectasis, the affected bronchi have an irregular or
beaded pattern of dilatation resembling varicose veins. In
saccular (cystic) bronchiectasis, the bronchi have a ballooned
appearance at the periphery, ending in blind sacs without
recognizable bronchial structures distal to the sacs.
ETIOLOGY AND PATHOGENESIS
Bronchiectasis is a consequence of inﬂammation and
destruction of the structural components of the bronchial
wall. Infection is the usual cause of the inﬂammation;
CHAPTER 16
CHAPTER 16
I Bronchiectasis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 166
Deﬁnition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 166
Pathology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 166
Etiology and Pathogenesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 166
Clinical Manifestations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 168
Radiographic and Laboratory Findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 168
I Lung Abscess . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 169
Microbiology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 169
Clinical Manifestations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 170
Diagnosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 170
I Further Readings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 171
166
microorganisms such as Pseudomonas aeruginosa and
Haemophilus inﬂuenzae produce pigments, proteases, and
other toxins that injure the respiratory epithelium and
impair mucociliary clearance. The host inflammatory
response induces epithelial injury, largely as a result of
mediators released from neutrophils.As protection against
infection is compromised,the dilated airways become more
susceptible to colonization and growth of bacteria.Thus, a
reinforcing cycle can result, with inﬂammation producing
airway damage, impaired clearance of microorganisms,
and further infection, which then completes the cycle by
inciting more inﬂammation.
Infectious Causes
Adenovirus and inﬂuenza virus are the main viruses that
cause bronchiectasis in association with lower respiratory
tract involvement. Virulent bacterial infections, especially
with potentially necrotizing organisms such as Staphylococcus
aureus,Klebsiella spp.,and anaerobes,remain important causes
of bronchiectasis when antibiotic treatment of a pneumo-
nia is not given or is signiﬁcantly delayed. Infection with
Bordetella pertussis, particularly in childhood, has also been
classically associated with chronic suppurative airways dis-
ease. Bronchiectasis has been reported in patients with
HIV infection, perhaps at least partly because of recurrent
bacterial infections. Tuberculosis, a major cause of
bronchiectasis worldwide, can produce airway dilatation by
a necrotizing effect on pulmonary parenchyma and airways
and indirectly as a consequence of airway obstruction
from bronchostenosis or extrinsic compression by lymph
nodes. Nontuberculous mycobacteria are frequently cul-
tured from patients with bronchiectasis, often as secondary
infections or colonizing organisms. However, it has also
been recognized that these organisms, especially those of
the Mycobacterium avium complex, can serve as primary
pathogens associated with the development or progression
of bronchiectasis.
Impaired host defense mechanisms are often involved
in the predisposition to recurrent infections.The major
cause of localized impairment of host defenses is endo-
bronchial obstruction. Bacteria and secretions cannot be
cleared adequately from the obstructed airway, which
develops recurrent or chronic infection. Slowly growing
endobronchial neoplasms such as carcinoid tumors may
be associated with bronchiectasis. Foreign-body aspira-
tion is another important cause of endobronchial
obstruction, particularly in children.Airway obstruction
can also result from bronchostenosis, from impacted secre-
tions, or from extrinsic compression by enlarged lymph
nodes.
Generalized impairment of pulmonary defense mech-
anisms occurs with immunoglobulin deﬁciency, primary
ciliary disorders, or cystic ﬁbrosis (CF). Infections and
bronchiectasis are therefore often more diffuse. With
panhypogammaglobulinemia, the best described of the
immunoglobulin disorders associated with recurrent infec-
tion and bronchiectasis, patients often also have a history
of sinus or skin infections. Selective deﬁciency of an IgG
subclass, especially IgG2, has also been described in a
small number of patients with bronchiectasis.
The primary disorders associated with ciliary dys-
function, termed primary ciliary dyskinesia, are responsible
for 5–10% of cases of bronchiectasis. Primary ciliary
dyskinesia is inherited in an autosomal recessive fashion.
Numerous defects are encompassed under this category,
including structural abnormalities of the dynein arms,
radial spokes, and microtubules; mutations in heavy and
intermediate chain dynein have been described in a
small number of patients. The cilia become dyskinetic;
their coordinated, propulsive action is diminished, and
bacterial clearance is impaired. The clinical effects
include recurrent upper and lower respiratory tract
infections, such as sinusitis, otitis media, and bronchiec-
tasis. Because normal sperm motility also depends on
proper ciliary function, men are generally infertile.Addi-
tionally, because visceral rotation during development
depends on proper ciliary motion, the positioning of
normally lateralized organs becomes random.As a result,
approximately half of patients with primary ciliary dysk-
inesia fall into the subgroup of Kartagener’s syndrome, in
which situs inversus accompanies bronchiectasis and
sinusitis.
In CF (Chap. 17), the tenacious secretions in the
bronchi are associated with impaired bacterial clearance,
resulting in colonization and recurrent infection with
a variety of organisms, particularly mucoid strains of
P. aeruginosa but also S. aureus, H. inﬂuenzae, Escherichia
coli, and Burkholderia cepacia.
Noninfectious Causes
Some cases of bronchiectasis are associated with expo-
sure to a toxic substance that incites a severe inﬂamma-
tory response. Examples include inhalation of a toxic gas
such as ammonia or aspiration of acidic gastric contents,
although the latter problem is often also complicated by
aspiration of bacteria. An immune response in the air-
way may also trigger inﬂammation, destructive changes,
and bronchial dilatation. This mechanism is presumably
important for bronchiectasis with allergic bronchopul-
monary aspergillosis (ABPA), which is caused at least
partly by an immune response to Aspergillus organisms
that have colonized the airway (Chap. 9).
In α1-antitrypsin deﬁciency, the usual respiratory
complication is the early development of panacinar emphy-
sema, but affected individuals may occasionally have
bronchiectasis. In the yellow nail syndrome, which is caused
by hypoplastic lymphatics, the triad of lymphedema,
pleural effusion, and yellow discoloration of the nails is
accompanied by bronchiectasis in approximately 40% of
patients.
167
Bronchiectasis and Lung Abscess
CHAPTER 16
CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
Patients typically present with persistent or recurrent
cough and purulent sputum production. Repeated,
purulent respiratory tract infections should raise clinical
suspicion for bronchiectasis. Hemoptysis occurs in
50–70% of cases and can be caused by bleeding from
friable, inﬂamed airway mucosa (Chap. 3). More signiﬁ-
cant, even massive bleeding is often a consequence of
bleeding from hypertrophied bronchial arteries. Systemic
symptoms such as fatigue, weight loss, and myalgias can
also occur.
When a speciﬁc infectious episode initiates bronchiec-
tasis, patients may describe a severe pneumonia followed
by chronic cough and sputum production. Alternatively,
patients without a dramatic initiating event often describe
the insidious onset of symptoms. In some cases, patients
are either asymptomatic or have a nonproductive cough,
often associated with “dry” bronchiectasis in an upper
lobe. Dyspnea or wheezing generally reﬂects either wide-
spread bronchiectasis or underlying chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. With exacerbations of infection, the
amount of sputum increases, and it becomes more puru-
lent and often more bloody; systemic symptoms, includ-
ing fever, may also be prominent.
Physical examination of the chest overlying an area of
bronchiectasis is quite variable.Any combination of crack-
les, rhonchi, and wheezes may be heard, all of which
reﬂect the damaged airways containing signiﬁcant secre-
tions.As with other types of chronic intrathoracic infec-
tion, clubbing may be present. Patients with severe
diffuse disease, particularly those with chronic hypox-
emia, may have associated cor pulmonale and right ven-
tricular failure.
RADIOGRAPHIC AND
LABORATORY FINDINGS
Although the chest radiograph is important in the eval-
uation of suspected bronchiectasis, the ﬁndings are often
nonspeciﬁc. At one extreme, the radiograph may be
normal with mild disease. Alternatively, patients with
saccular bronchiectasis may have prominent cystic
spaces, either with or without air-liquid levels, corre-
sponding to the dilated airways. These may be difﬁcult
to distinguish from enlarged airspaces because of bul-
lous emphysema or from regions of honeycombing in
patients with severe interstitial lung disease. Other ﬁnd-
ings are caused by dilated airways with thickened walls,
which result from peribronchial inﬂammation. These
dilated airways are often crowded together in parallel.
When seen longitudinally, the airways appear as “tram
tracks”; when seen in cross-section, they produce “ring
shadows.” Because the dilated airways may be ﬁlled
with secretions, the lumen may appear dense rather
than radiolucent, producing an opaque tubular or branched
tubular structure.
CT, especially with high-resolution images 1.0–1.5 mm
thick, provides an excellent view of dilated airways
(Fig. 16-1). Consequently, it is now the standard tech-
nique for detecting or conﬁrming the diagnosis of
bronchiectasis.
Examination of sputum often reveals an abundance of
neutrophils and colonization or infection with a variety
of possible organisms.Appropriate staining and culturing
of sputum often provide a guide to antibiotic therapy.
When bronchiectasis is focal, ﬁberoptic bronchoscopy
may reveal an underlying endobronchial obstruction. In
other cases, upper lobe involvement may be suggestive of
either tuberculosis or ABPA.With more widespread dis-
ease, measurement of sweat chloride levels for CF, struc-
tural or functional assessment of nasal or bronchial cilia
or sperm for primary ciliary dyskinesia, and quantitative
assessment of immunoglobulins may explain recurrent air-
way infection.
Pulmonary function tests may demonstrate airﬂow
obstruction as a consequence of diffuse bronchiectasis or
associated chronic obstructive lung disease. Bronchial
hyperreactivity (e.g., to methacholine challenge) and some
reversibility of the airﬂow obstruction with inhaled bron-
chodilators are relatively common.
Figure 16-2 illustrates a diagnostic approach based on
clinical suspicion and radiographic ﬁndings. Because the
differential diagnosis for focal versus diffuse bronchiectasis
is different, the radiographic distribution of disease can
serve as a starting point of the diagnostic workup. This
algorithm should not imply that all studies be obtained
in all patients with bronchiectasis. Rather, the workup
168
Diseases of the Respiratory System
SECTION II
FIGURE 16-1
High-resolution CT scan of bronchiectasis showing dilated
airways in both lower lobes and in the lingula. When seen in
cross-section, the dilated airways have a ringlike appearance.
(From SE Weinberger: Principles of Pulmonary Medicine,
4th ed. Philadelphia, Saunders, 2004, with permission.)
LUNG ABSCESS
Lung abscess is defined as pulmonary parenchymal
necrosis and cavitation resulting from infection. The
development of a lung abscess implies a high microor-
ganism burden as well as inadequate microbial clearance
from the airways.Aspiration is the most common cause;
factors that portend an increased risk of aspiration include
esophageal dysmotility, seizure disorders, and neurologic
conditions causing bulbar dysfunction. Other predispos-
ing conditions for lung abscess include periodontal disease
and alcoholism.
MICROBIOLOGY
Anaerobic bacteria are the most common causative organ-
isms for lung abscess. Aerobic or facultative bacteria
such as S. aureus, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Nocardia spp., and
quinolone or parenteral therapy with an aminoglyco-
side, carbapenem, or third-generation cephalosporin is
appropriate based on antibiotic sensitivity patterns.
There are no ﬁrm guidelines for length of therapy, but a
10- to 14-day course or longer is typically administered.
A variety of mechanical methods and devices accom-
panied by appropriate positioning can facilitate drainage
in patients with copious secretions. Although commonly
used and probably beneﬁcial, these airway-clearance
techniques have been poorly studied, and their efﬁcacy
is not proven.Pharmacologic agents are also used to pro-
mote bronchopulmonary hygiene. Mucolytic agents to
thin secretions and allow better clearance are controver-
sial. Aerosolized recombinant DNase, which decreases
viscosity of sputum by breaking down DNA released
from neutrophils,has been shown to improve pulmonary
function in patients with CF but may be deleterious and
should be avoided in bronchiectasis that is not associ-
ated with CF. Bronchodilators to improve obstruction
and aid clearance of secretions are particularly useful in
patients with airway hyperreactivity and reversible air-
ﬂow obstruction.
Although surgical therapy was common in the past,
more effective antibiotic and supportive therapy has
largely replaced surgery. However, when bronchiectasis
is localized and the morbidity is substantial despite ade-
quate medical therapy, surgical resection of the involved
region of lung should be considered.
When massive hemoptysis, often originating from the
hypertrophied bronchial circulation, does not resolve
with conservative therapy, including rest and antibiotics,
therapeutic options are either surgical resection or
bronchial arterial embolization (Chap.3).Although resec-
tion may be successful if the disease is localized,
embolization is preferable with widespread disease.
169
Bronchiectasis and Lung Abscess
CHAPTER 16
Consider:
CF genotyping, sweat chloride test
Quantitative immunoglobulin analysis
Induced sputum for AFB
Studies of ciliary morphology and function
Semen analysis
α1-antitrypsin level
Aspergillus skin testing, serum IgE levels
Rheumatic disease serologies
HIV test
Appropriate Clinical Scenario
CXR, PFT, sputum analysis
HRCT
Normal
Abnormal
Consider:
Close observation
Bronchoscopy
Evaluation for GERD/aspiration
Consider:
Bronchoscopy
Induced sputum for AFB
Focal Bronchiectasis
Diffuse Bronchiectasis
FIGURE 16-2
Diagnostic approach to bronchiectasis. AFB, acid-fast
bacilli; CXR, chest x-ray; GERD, gastroesophageal reﬂux
disease; HRCT, high-resolution computed tomography; PFT,
pulmonary function testing.
Treatment:
BRONCHIECTASIS
Therapy has several major goals: (1) treatment of
infection, particularly during acute exacerbations; (2)
improved clearance of tracheobronchial secretions; (3)
reduction of inﬂammation; and (4) treatment of an iden-
tiﬁable underlying problem.
Antibiotics are the cornerstone of bronchiectasis
management. For patients with infrequent exacerba-
tions characterized by an increase in quantity and puru-
lence of the sputum, antibiotics are used only during
acute episodes. Although choice of an antibiotic should
be guided by Gram’s stain and culture of sputum,
empiric coverage (e.g., with amoxicillin, trimethoprim-
sulfamethoxazole, or levoﬂoxacin) is often given initially.
Infection with P. aeruginosa is of particular concern
because it appears to be associated with greater rate of
deterioration of lung function and worse quality of life.
When Pseudomonas spp. is present, oral therapy with a
should be dictated by a careful assessment of the clinical
scenario. In a patient with focal bronchiectasis, for exam-
ple, documentation of a prior pneumonia in the same
location may sufﬁce. Evaluation for immunoglobulin deﬁ-
ciency and CF should be considered for young patients
with bronchiectasis and sinopulmonary disease.
gram-negative organisms, as well as nonbacterial pathogens
such as fungi and parasites, may also cause abscess for-
mation. In an immunocompromised host, aerobic bacte-
ria and opportunistic pathogens may predominate.
Multiple isolates are more commonly seen in all patients
when anaerobic and aerobic cultures are done.
CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
The symptoms of lung abscess are typical of pul-
monary infection in general and may include cough,
purulent sputum production, pleuritic chest pain, fever,
and hemoptysis. In anaerobic infection, the clinical
course may evolve over an extended period of time,
and some patients may be asymptomatic. More acute
presentations are typical of infection with aerobic
bacteria.
Physical examination is often unrevealing. Rales or
evidence of consolidation may be present. Fetid breath
and poor dentition may be diagnostic clues. Clubbing or
hypertrophic pulmonary osteoarthropathy may occur in
chronic cases.
The chest radiograph classically reveals one or two
thick-walled cavities in dependent areas of the lung, par-
ticularly the upper lobes and posterior segments of the
lower lobes (Fig. 16-3). An air-ﬂuid level is often pre-
sent. CT of the chest is helpful in deﬁning the size and
location of the abscess, as well as to evaluate for addi-
tional cavities and the presence of pleural disease.
Cavitary lesions in nondependent regions such as the
right middle lobe or anterior segments of the upper lobes
should raise the possibility of other causes, including
malignancy.
Laboratory studies may reveal leukocytosis, anemia,
and an elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate.
DIAGNOSIS
The diagnosis of lung abscess is based on clinical symp-
toms, identiﬁcation of predisposing conditions, and chest
radiographic ﬁndings.The differential diagnosis includes
mycobacterial infection, pulmonary sequestration, malig-
nancy, pulmonary infarction, and an infected bulla.
Identiﬁcation of a causative organism is an ideal but
challenging goal. Anaerobic bacteria are particularly dif-
ﬁcult to isolate. Blood, sputum cultures, and (when
appropriate) pleural ﬂuid cultures should be obtained
from patients with lung abscess. The role of ﬁberoptic
bronchoscopy with bronchoalveolar lavage or protected-
specimen brush for diagnosis or drainage of lung abscess
is controversial.The relatively low yield, especially with
anaerobic lung abscess, should be balanced against the
risk of rupture of the abscess cavity with spillage into
the airways. Bronchoscopy is perhaps most useful to
rule out airway obstruction, mycobacterial infection, or
malignancy. Other less commonly used methods for
microbiologic sampling are transtracheal or transthoracic
aspiration.
170
Diseases of the Respiratory System
SECTION II
FIGURE 16-3
Cross-sectional CT image from a patient with an anaerobic
lung abscess showing two contiguous thick-walled cavi-
tary lesions in the right lower lobe with air-fluid levels.
(From WT Miller Jr: Diagnostic Thoracic Imaging. New York,
McGraw-Hill, 2006, with permission.)
Treatment:
LUNG ABSCESS
For many years, penicillin was the mainstay of empiric
antibiotic therapy for lung abscess. Because of the
emergence of β-lactamase–producing organisms,
clindamycin (150–300 mg q6 h) is now standard ther-
apy. Other agents, such as carbapenems and β-lactam/
β-lactamase inhibitor combinations, may be useful in
selected cases. Metronidazole alone is associated with a
high treatment failure rate. When possible, the choice of
antibiotics should be guided by microbiologic results.
The duration of treatment for lung abscess is contro-
versial. Four to 6 weeks of antibiotic therapy is typically
used, although a more extended course is favored by
some experts. Treatment failure suggests the possibility
of a noninfectious etiology.
Although surgery has had a limited role in treatment
in the antibiotic era, indications include refractory
hemoptysis, inadequate response to medical therapy, or
the need for a tissue diagnosis when there is concern for
a noninfectious etiology.
In general,outcomes for patients with classic anaerobic
lung abscess are favorable, with a 90%–95% cure rate.
Higher mortality rates have been reported in immuno-
compromised patients; those with signiﬁcant comorbidi-
ties; and those with infection with P. aeruginosa, S. aureus,
and K.pneumoniae.
FURTHER READINGS
BARKER AF: Bronchiectasis. N Engl J Med 346:1383, 2002
MANSHARAMANI N et al: Lung abscess in adults: Clinical comparison
of immunocompromised to non-immunocompromised patients.
Respir Med 96:178, 2002
MANSHARAMANI N, KOZIEL H: Chronic lung sepsis: Lung abscess,
bronchiectasis, and empyema. Curr Opin Pulm Med 9:181, 2003
NOONE PG et al: Primary ciliary dyskinesia: Diagnostic and pheno-
typic features.Am J Respir Crit Care Med 169:459, 2004
PASTEUR MC et al:An investigation into causative factors in patients
with bronchiectasis.Am J Respir Crit Care Med 162:1277, 2000
ROSEN MJ: Chronic cough due to bronchiectasis. ACCP evidence-
based clinical practice guidelines. Chest 129:122S, 2006
SCHEINBERG P, SHORE E: A pilot study of the safety and efﬁcacy of
tobramycin solution for inhalation in patients with severe
bronchiectasis. Chest 127:1420, 2005
WEYCKER D et al: Prevalence and economic burden of bronchiectasis.
Clin Pulm Med 12:205, 2005
WILLS P, GREENSTONE M: Inhaled hyperosmolar agents for bronchiec-
tasis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2:CD002996, 2006
171
Bronchiectasis and Lung Abscess
CHAPTER 16
Richard C. Boucher, Jr.
Cystic ﬁbrosis (CF) is a monogenic disorder that presents
as a multisystem disease. The ﬁrst signs and symptoms
typically occur in childhood, but about 5% of patients in
the United States are diagnosed as adults. Because of
improvements in therapy, >41% of patients are now adults
(≥18 years old) and 13% are past the age of 30 years.The
median survival is >41 years for patients with CF. Thus,
CF is no longer only a pediatric disease, and internists
must be prepared to recognize and treat its many compli-
cations. This disease is characterized by chronic bacterial
infection of the airways that ultimately leads to bronchiec-
tasis and bronchiolectasis, exocrine pancreatic insufﬁ-
ciency and intestinal dysfunction, abnormal sweat gland
function, and urogenital dysfunction.
PATHOGENESIS
GENETIC CONSIDERATIONS
CF is an autosomal recessive disease resulting from
mutations in the gene that encodes the CF trans-
membrane conductance regulator (CFTR) protein
located on chromosome 7.The mutations in the CFTR
gene fall into four major classes, as depicted in Fig. 17-1.
Class I to III mutations are considered “severe,” as
indexed by pancreatic insufﬁciency and high sweat NaCl
values (see below). Class IV mutations can be “mild,” i.e.,
CYSTIC FIBROSIS
associated with pancreatic sufﬁciency and intermediate
or normal sweat NaCl values. Of note, Class I mutations
that encode for premature stop codons are important to
identify because they may in the future be treated with
agents that promote “read-through” of the stop codon
with production of functional CFTR.
The prevalence of CF varies with the ethnic origin
of a population. CF is detected in approximately one
in 3000 live births in the white population of North
America and northern Europe, one in 17,000 live
births of African Americans, and one in 90,000 live
births of the Asian population of Hawaii. The most
common mutation in the CF gene (∼70% of CF chro-
mosomes) is a 3-bp deletion (a Class III mutation) that
results in an absence of phenylalanine at amino acid
position 508 (ΔF508) of the CF gene protein product,
known as CFTR. The large number (>1400) of rela-
tively uncommon (<2% each) mutations identiﬁed in
the CF gene makes it difﬁcult to use DNA diagnostic
technologies for identifying heterozygotes in popula-
tions at large.
CFTR PROTEIN
The CFTR protein is a single polypeptide chain con-
taining 1480 amino acids that appears to function both
CHAPTER 17
CHAPTER 17
I Pathogenesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 172
Genetic Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 172
CFTR Protein . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 172
Epithelial Dysfunction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 173
Organ-Speciﬁc Pathophysiology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 173
I Clinical Features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 174
Respiratory Tract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 174
Gastrointestinal Tract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 175
Genitourinary System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 175
I Diagnosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 175
I Further Readings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 177
172
as a cyclic AMP (cAMP)–regulated Cl– channel and, as
its name implies, a regulator of other ion channels.The
fully processed form of CFTR is found in the plasma
membrane in normal epithelia. Biochemical studies
indicate that the ΔF508 mutation leads to improper pro-
cessing and intracellular degradation of the CFTR pro-
tein.Thus, absence of CFTR in the plasma membrane is
central to the molecular pathophysiology of the ΔF508
mutation and other Class I–II mutations. However,
Class IIIIV mutations produce CFTR proteins that are
fully processed but are nonfunctional or only partially
functional in the plasma membrane.
EPITHELIAL DYSFUNCTION
The epithelia affected by CF exhibit different functions
in their native state, i.e., whereas some are volume absorb-
ing (airways and distal intestinal epithelia), and some are
salt but not volume absorbing (sweat duct), others are
volume secretory (proximal intestine and pancreas).
Given this diversity of native activities, it is not surpris-
ing that CF produces organ-speciﬁc effects on electrolyte
and water transport. However, the unifying concept is
that all affected tissues express abnormal ion transport
function.
ORGAN-SPECIFIC PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Lung
The diagnostic biophysical hallmark of CF airway
epithelia is the increased transepithelial electric potential
difference (PD).The transepithelial PD reﬂects both the
rate of active ion transport and epithelial resistance to
ion ﬂow. CF airway epithelia exhibit abnormalities in
both active Na+ absorption and active Cl– secretion
(Fig. 17-2).The Cl– secretory defect reﬂects the absence
of cAMP–dependent kinase and protein kinase C–regulated
Cl– transport mediated by CFTR itself. An important
observation is that there is also a molecularly distinct
Ca2+-activated Cl– channel (CaCC) expressed in the
apical membrane.This channel can substitute for CFTR
with regard to Cl– secretion and may be a potential
therapeutic target.
Abnormal regulation of Na+ absorption is a key
feature of CF airway epithelia.This abnormality reﬂects
a second function of CFTR, its function as a tonic
inhibitor of the epithelial Na+ channel. The molecular
mechanisms mediating this action of CFTR remain
unknown.
Mucus clearance is the primary innate airways
defense mechanism against infection by inhaled bacteria.
Normal airways vary the rates of active Na+ absorption
and Cl– secretion to adjust the volume of liquid (water),
i.e., “hydration,” on airway surfaces for efﬁcient mucus
clearance. The central hypothesis of CF airways patho-
physiology is that the faulty regulation of Na+ absorp-
tion and inability to secrete Cl– via CFTR reduce the
volume of liquid on airway surfaces (i.e., they are “dehy-
drated”). Both the thickening of mucus and the deple-
tion of the periciliary liquid lead to adhesion of mucus
to the airway surface. Mucus adhesion leads to a failure
to clear mucus from the airways both by ciliary and
airﬂow-dependent (cough) mechanisms.The absence of
a strict correspondence between gene mutation class
and severity of lung disease suggests important roles for
modiﬁer genes and gene–environmental interactions.
The infection that characterizes CF airways involves
the mucus layer rather than epithelial or airway wall
invasion. The predisposition of CF airways to chronic
infection by Staphylococcus aureus and Pseudomonas aeruginosa
is consistent with failure to clear mucus. Recently, it has
been demonstrated that the O2 tension is very low in
the mucus of individuals with CF, and adaptations to
173
Cystic Fibrosis
CHAPTER 17
Class I:
defective
protein
synthesis
Class II:
defective
processing
Class III:
defective
regulation
Class IV:
defective
conduction
PKA
ER
Apical
Basolateral
Golgi
+
FIGURE 17-1
Schema describing classes of genetic mutations in CFTR
gene and effects on CFTR protein/function. Note the ΔF508
mutation is a class II mutation and, similar to class I muta-
tions, would be predicted to produce no mature CFTR
protein in the apical membrane. CFTR, cystic ﬁbrosis trans-
membrane conductance regulator.
hypoxia are important determinants of the physiology of
bacteria in the CF lung. Indeed, both mucus stasis and
mucus hypoxia may contribute to the propensity for
Pseudomonas spp. to grow in bioﬁlm colonies within
mucus plaques adherent to CF airway surfaces.
Gastrointestinal Tract
The gastrointestinal effects of CF are diverse. In the
exocrine pancreas, the absence of the CFTR Cl– chan-
nel in the apical membrane of pancreatic ductal epithelia
limits the function of an apical membrane Cl–-HCO3
–
exchanger to secrete bicarbonate and Na+ (by a passive
process) into the duct.The failure to secrete Na+ HCO3
–
and water leads to retention of enzymes in the pancreas
and ultimately destruction of virtually all pancreatic tis-
sue.The CF intestinal epithelium, because of the lack of
Cl– and water secretion, fails to ﬂush secreted mucins
and other macromolecules from intestinal crypts. The
diminished CFTR-mediated secretion of liquid may be
exacerbated by excessive absorption of liquid, reﬂecting
abnormalities of CFTR-mediated regulation of Na+
absorption (both mediated by Na+ channels and possibly
other Na+ transporters, e.g., Na+-H+ exchangers). Both
dysfunctions lead to desiccated intraluminal contents
and obstruction of both the small and large intestine. In
the hepatobiliary system, defective hepatic ductal salt
(Cl–) and water secretion causes thickened biliary secre-
tions, focal biliary cirrhosis, and bile duct proliferation in
approximately 25–30% of patients with CF. The
inability of the CF gallbladder epithelium to secrete salt
and water can lead to both chronic cholecystitis and
cholelithiasis.
Sweat Gland
CF patients secrete nearly normal volumes of sweat in
the sweat acinus. However, CF patients are not able to
absorb NaCl from sweat as it moves through the sweat
duct because of the inability to absorb Cl– across the
ductal epithelial cells. This dysfunction in the sweat
gland is typically measured by collecting sweat after ion-
tophoresing a cholinergic agonist into the forearm.
CLINICAL FEATURES
Most patients with CF present with signs and symptoms
of the disease in childhood.Approximately 20% of patients
present within the ﬁrst 24 hours of life with gastrointesti-
nal obstruction, termed meconium ileus. Other common
presentations within the ﬁrst year or two of life include
respiratory tract symptoms, most prominently cough or
recurrent pulmonary inﬁltrates, and failure to thrive. A
signiﬁcant proportion of patients (∼5%), however, are
diagnosed after age 18 years.
RESPIRATORY TRACT
Upper respiratory tract disease is almost universal in
patients with CF. Chronic sinusitis is common in child-
hood and leads to nasal obstruction and rhinorrhea.The
occurrence of nasal polyps approaches 25% and often
requires treatment with topical steroids, surgery, or both.
In the lower respiratory tract, the ﬁrst symptom of
CF is cough. With time, the cough becomes persistent
and produces viscous, purulent, often greenish-colored
sputum. Inevitably, periods of clinical stability are inter-
rupted by “exacerbations,” deﬁned by increased cough,
174
Diseases of the Respiratory System
SECTION II
Cl–
2Cl–
CaCC
Na+
ENaC
Na+
Na+
Na+
K+
K+
K+
K+
K+
H2O
Cl–
2Cl–
CaCC
CFTR
Cl–
CFTR
Na+
Na+
Na+
Na+
K+
K+
K+
H2O
(–)
(–)
A
B
FIGURE 17-2
Comparison of ion transport properties of normal (A) and
cystic ﬁbrosis (CF) (B) airway epithelia. The vectors
describe routes and magnitudes of Na+ and Cl– transport that
is accompanied by osmotically driven water ﬂow. The normal
basal pattern for ion transport is absorption of Na+ from the
lumen via an amiloride-sensitive Na+ channel. This process is
accelerated in CF. The capacity to initiate cyclic AMP–medi-
ated Cl– secretion is diminished in CF airway epithelia
because of absence or dysfunction of the cystic ﬁbrosis
transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) Cl– channel.
The accelerated Na+ absorption in CF reﬂects the absence of
CFTR inhibitory effects on Na+ channels.
weight loss, low-grade fever, increased sputum volume,
and decrements in pulmonary function. Over the course
of years, the exacerbations become more frequent and
the recovery of lost lung function incomplete, leading to
respiratory failure.
CF patients exhibit characteristic sputum microbiol-
ogy. Haemophilus inﬂuenzae and S. aureus are often the
ﬁrst organisms recovered from lung secretions in newly
diagnosed patients with CF. P. aeruginosa, often mucoid
and antibiotic resistant, is typically cultured from lower
respiratory tract secretions thereafter. Burkholderia spp.
(formerly Pseudomonas cepacia) is also recovered from CF
sputum and is pathogenic. Patient-to-patient spread of
certain strains of this organism mandates strict infection
control in the hospital. Other gram-negative rods recov-
ered from CF sputum include Alcaligenes xylosoxidans;
B. gladioli; and occasionally mucoid forms of Proteus,
Escherichia coli, and Klebsiella spp. Up to 50% of CF
patients have Aspergillus fumigatus in their sputum, and
up to 10% of these patients exhibit the syndrome of
allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis. Mycobacterium
tuberculosis is rare in patients with CF. However, 10–20%
of adult patients with CF have sputum cultures positive
for nontuberculous mycobacteria and in some patients,
these microorganisms are associated with disease.
The ﬁrst lung-function abnormalities observed in CF
children, increased ratios of residual volume to total lung
capacity, suggest that small-airways disease is the ﬁrst
functional lung abnormality in CF. As the disease pro-
gresses, both reversible and irreversible changes in forced
vital capacity (FVC) and forced expiratory volume in 1 s
(FEV1) develop. The reversible component reﬂects the
accumulation of intraluminal secretions or airway reac-
tivity, which occurs in 40–60% of patients with CF.The
irreversible component reﬂects chronic destruction of
the airway wall and bronchiolitis.
The earliest chest x-ray change in CF lungs is hyper-
inﬂation, reﬂecting small-airways obstruction. Later, signs
of luminal mucus impaction, bronchial cufﬁng, and ﬁnally
bronchiectasis (e.g., ring shadows) are noted. For reasons
that remain speculative, the right upper lobe displays the
earliest and most severe changes.
CF pulmonary disease is associated with many inter-
mittent complications. Pneumothorax is common (>10%
of patients).The production of small amounts of blood in
sputum is common in CF patients with advanced pul-
monary disease. Massive hemoptysis is life threatening.
With advanced lung disease, digital clubbing appears in
virtually all patients with CF. As late events, respiratory
failure and cor pulmonale are prominent features of CF.
GASTROINTESTINAL TRACT
The syndrome of meconium ileus in infants presents
with abdominal distension, failure to pass stool, and
emesis.The abdominal ﬂat plate can be diagnostic, with
small intestinal air-fluid levels, a granular appearance
representing meconium, and a small colon. In children
and young adults, a syndrome termed meconium ileus equiv-
alent or distal intestinal obstruction syndrome (DIOS) occurs.
The syndrome presents with right lower quadrant pain,
loss of appetite, occasionally emesis, and often a palpable
mass. The syndrome can be confused with appendicitis,
whose frequency is not increased in CF patients.
Exocrine pancreatic insufﬁciency occurs in >90% of
patients with CF. Insufﬁcient pancreatic enzyme secre-
tion yields the typical pattern of protein and fat malab-
sorption, with frequent, bulky, foul-smelling stools. Signs
and symptoms of malabsorption of fat-soluble vitamins,
including vitamins E and K, are also noted. Pancreatic
beta cells are spared early, but its function decreases with
age.This effect, plus inﬂammation-induced insulin resis-
tance, causes hyperglycemia and a requirement for insulin
in >15% of older patients with CF (age >35 years).
GENITOURINARY SYSTEM
Late onset of puberty is common in both boys and girls
with CF.The delayed maturational pattern is likely sec-
ondary to the effects of chronic lung disease and inade-
quate nutrition on reproductive endocrine function.
More than 95% of male patients with CF are azoosper-
mic, reﬂecting obliteration of the vas deferens caused by
defective liquid secretion. Some 20% of CF women are
infertile because of effects of chronic lung disease on the
menstrual cycle; thick, tenacious cervical mucus that
blocks sperm migration; and possibly fallopian tube or
uterine wall abnormalities in liquid transport. Most
pregnancies produce viable infants, and women with CF
are able to breastfeed infants normally.
DIAGNOSIS
The diagnosis of CF rests on the combination of clinical
criteria and abnormal CFTR function as demonstrated
by sweat tests, nasal PD measurements, and CFTR muta-
tion analysis. Elevated sweat Cl– values are nearly
pathognomonic for CF. The values for the Cl– (and Na+)
concentrations in sweat vary with age, but typically in
adults, a Cl– concentration of >70 meq/L discriminates
between patients with CF and those with other lung
diseases. DNA analysis of the most common mutations
can identify CF mutations in >90% of affected patients.
The nasal PD measurement can document CFTR dys-
function if the sweat Cl– test is normal or borderline and
two CF mutations are not identiﬁed. DNA analysis is
performed routinely in patients with CF because pan-
creatic genotype–phenotype relationships have been
identiﬁed, and mutation class-speciﬁc treatments are
being developed.
Between 1 and 2% of patients with the clinical syn-
drome of CF have normal sweat Cl– values. In most of
175
Cystic Fibrosis
CHAPTER 17
these patients, the nasal transepithelial PD is raised into
the diagnostic range for CF, and sweat acini do not
secrete in response to injected β-adrenergic agonists. A
single mutation of the CFTR gene, 3849 + 10 kb
C→T, is associated with most CF patients with normal
sweat Cl– values.
Early intervention with antibiotics in infants with infec-
tion may eradicate P. aeruginosa for extended periods. In
older patients with established infection, suppression of
bacterial growth is the therapeutic goal. Azithromycin
(250 mg/day or 500 mg three times weekly) is often used
chronically, although it is unclear whether its actions are
antimicrobial or antiinﬂammatory. Inhaled aminoglyco-
sides (e.g., tobramycin 300 mg bid) for alternating
monthly intervals are also used. “Mild exacerbations,” as
deﬁned by increased cough and mucus production, are
treated with additional oral antibiotics. Oral agents used
to treat Staphylococcus infection include a semisynthetic
penicillin or a cephalosporin. Oral ciproﬂoxacin may
reduce pseudomonal bacterial counts and control symp-
toms, but its clinical utility may be limited by rapid emer-
gence of resistant organisms. Accordingly, it is often used
with an inhaled antibiotic, either tobramycin or colistin
(75 mg bid). More severe exacerbations, or exacerbations
associated with bacteria resistant to oral antibiotics,
require IV antibiotics.IV therapy is given both in the hospi-
tal and in the outpatient setting. Usually, two drugs with
different mechanisms of action (e.g., a cephalosporin and
an aminoglycoside) are used to treat P. aeruginosa to
minimize emergence of resistant organisms. Drug
dosage should be monitored so that levels for gentamicin
or tobramycin peak at ranges of ∼10 μg/mL and
exhibit troughs of <2 μg/mL. Antibiotics directed at
Staphylococcus, H.inﬂuenzae,or both are added,depend-
ing on culture results.
Inhaled β-adrenergic agonists can be useful to con-
trol airways constriction, but long-term beneﬁt has not
been shown. Oral glucocorticoids may reduce airways
inﬂammation, but their long-term use is limited by
adverse side effects; however, they may be useful for
treating allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis.
The chronic damage to airway walls partly reﬂects
the destructive activities of inﬂammatory enzymes gen-
erated in part by inﬂammatory cells. Speciﬁc therapies
with antiproteases have not been developed. However,
a subset of adolescents with CF may beneﬁt from long-
term,high-dose nonsteroidal (ibuprofen) therapy.
A number of pulmonary complications require acute
interventions.Atelectasis requires treatment with inhaled
hypertonic saline, chest physiotherapy, and antibiotics.
Pneumothoraces involving ≤10% of the lung can be
observed, but chest tubes are required to expand col-
lapsed, diseased lung. Small-volume hemoptysis typically
requires treatment of lung infection and assessment of
coagulation and vitamin K status. For massive hemopty-
sis, bronchial artery embolization should be performed.
The most ominous complications of CF are respiratory
failure and cor pulmonale. The most effective conven-
tional therapy for these conditions is vigorous medical
management of the lung disease and O2 supplementation.
Ultimately, the only effective treatment for respiratory
176
Diseases of the Respiratory System
SECTION II
Treatment:
CYSTIC FIBROSIS
The major objectives of therapy for CF are to promote
clearance of secretions and control infection in the lung,
provide adequate nutrition, and prevent intestinal
obstruction. Ultimately, therapies that restore the pro-
cessing of misfolded mutant CFTR or gene therapy may
be the treatments of choice.
LUNG DISEASE
More than 95% of CF patients die
of complications resulting from lung infection.Theoreti-
cally, increasing clearance of adherent mucus should
both treat and prevent progression of CF lung disease,
whereas antibiotics principally reduce the bacterial bur-
den in the CF lung.
The time-honored techniques for clearing pulmonary
secretions are breathing exercises,ﬂutter valves,and chest
percussion. Regular use of these maneuvers is effective in
preserving lung function. A major advance has been the
demonstrated efﬁcacy of inhaled hypertonic saline (7%)
in restoring mucus clearance and pulmonary function in
short-term studies and its efﬁcacy in reducing acute exac-
erbations in long-term (1 year) studies. Hypertonic saline
is safe but can produce bronchoconstriction in some
patients, which can be prevented with coadministered
bronchodilators.Studies are ongoing to establish whether
inhaled hypertonic saline should be the base therapy for
all CF patients.
Pharmacologic agents for increasing mucus clearance
are in use and in development. An important adjunct to
secretion clearance can be recombinant human DNAse,
which degrades the concentrated DNA in CF sputum,
increases airﬂow during short-term administration, and
increases the time between pulmonary exacerbations.
Most patients receive a therapeutic trial of DNAse for
several months to test for efﬁcacy. Clinical trials of exper-
imental drugs aimed at restoring salt and water content
of secretions are underway, but these drugs are not yet
available for clinical use.
Antibiotics are used for treating lung infection, and
their use is guided by sputum culture results. It should
be noted, however, that because routine hospital micro-
biologic cultures are performed under conditions that
do not mimic conditions in the CF lung (e.g., hypoxia),
clinical efﬁcacy often does not correlate with sensitivity
testing. Because of increased total-body clearance and
volume of distribution of antibiotics in CF patients, the
required doses are higher for patients with CF.
failure in CF is lung transplantation (Chap. 24). The 2-year
survival for lung transplantation exceeds 60%, and trans-
plant patient deaths result principally from graft rejection,
often involving obliterative bronchiolitis.The transplanted
lungs do not develop a CF-speciﬁc phenotype.
GASTROINTESTINAL DISEASE
Maintenance of
adequate nutrition is critical for the health of patients
with CF.Most (>90%) CF patients require pancreatic enzyme
replacement. Capsules generally contain between 4000
and 20,000 units of lipase.The dose of enzymes (typically
no more than 2500 units/kg per meal, to avoid risk of
ﬁbrosing colonopathy) should be adjusted on the basis
of weight,abdominal symptomatology,and stool charac-
ter. Replacement of fat-soluble vitamins, particularly vita-
mins E and K, is usually required. Hyperglycemia most
often becomes manifest in adulthood and typically requires
insulin treatment.
For treatment of the distal intestinal obstruction syn-
drome, megalodiatrizoate or other hypertonic radiocon-
trast materials delivered by enema to the terminal ileum
are used. For control of symptoms, adjustment of pan-
creatic enzymes and use of salt solutions containing
osmotically active agents (e.g. propyleneglycol) is rec-
ommended. Persistent symptoms may indicate a diag-
nosis of gastrointestinal malignancy, which is increased
in incidence in patients with CF.
Cholestatic liver disease occurs in about 8% of CF
patients. Treatment with urodeoxycholic acid is typi-
cally initiated if there is an increase in alkaline phos-
phatase and gammaglutamyl transpeptidase (GGT)
(3 x normal), but this treatment has not been shown to
inﬂuence the course of hepatic disease. End-stage liver
disease occurs in about 5% of CF patients and can be
treated by transplantation.
OTHER ORGAN COMPLICATIONS
Dehydra-
tion caused by heat-induced salt loss from sweat ducts
occurs more readily in CF patients. CF patients also have
an increased incidence of osteoarthropy, renal stones,
and osteoporosis,particularly after transplant.
Psychosocial Factors
CF imposes a tremen-
dous burden on patients, and depression is common.
Health insurance, career options, family planning, and
life expectancy become major issues. Thus, assisting
patients with the psychosocial adjustments required by
CF is critical.
FURTHER READINGS
BOUCHER RC: Airway surface dehydration in cystic ﬁbrosis: Patho-
genesis and therapy. Ann Rev Med 58:157, 2007
DAVIES JC et al: Cystic ﬁbrosis. Br Med J 335:1255, 2007
DAVIS PB: Cystic ﬁbrosis since 1938. Am J Respir Crit Care Med
173:475, 2006
FLUME PA, STENBIT A: Making the diagnosis of cystic ﬁbrosis. Am J
Med Sci 335:51, 2008
GROMAN JD et al: Phenotypic and genetic characterization of
patients with features of “nonclassic” forms of cystic fibrosis.
J Pediatr 146:675, 2006
GUGGINO WB, STANTON BA: New insights into cystic fibrosis:
Molecular switches that regulate CFTR. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol
7:426, 2006
PRINCE AS: Bioﬁlms, antimicrobial resistance, and airway infection.
N Engl J Med 347:1110, 2002
ROWE SM et al: Cystic ﬁbrosis. N Engl J Med 352:1992, 2005
WORLITSCH D et al: Effects of reduced mucus oxygen concentration
in airway pseudomonas infections of cystic ﬁbrosis patients. J Clin
Invest 109:317, 2002
177
Cystic Fibrosis
CHAPTER 17
John J. Reilly, Jr.
I
Edwin K. Silverman
I
Steven D. Shapiro
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) has been
deﬁned by the Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive
Lung Disease (GOLD), an international collaborative effort
to improve awareness, diagnosis, and treatment of COPD,
as a disease state characterized by airﬂow limitation that
is not fully reversible (http://www.goldcopd.com/). COPD
includes emphysema, an anatomically deﬁned condition
characterized by destruction and enlargement of the lung
alveoli; chronic bronchitis, a clinically deﬁned condition with
chronic cough and phlegm; and small airways disease, a con-
dition in which small bronchioles are narrowed. COPD is
present only if chronic airﬂow obstruction occurs; chronic
bronchitis without chronic airﬂow obstruction is not included
within COPD.
COPD is the fourth leading cause of death and affects
>16 million persons in the United States. COPD is also a
disease of increasing public health importance around the
world. GOLD estimates suggest that COPD will increase
from the sixth to the third most common cause of death
worldwide by 2020.
RISK FACTORS
Cigarette Smoking
By 1964, the Advisory Committee to the Surgeon General
of the United States had concluded that cigarette smoking
CHRONIC OBSTRUCTIVE 
PULMONARY DISEASE
was a major risk factor for mortality from chronic bron-
chitis and emphysema. Subsequent longitudinal studies
have shown accelerated decline in the volume of air
exhaled within the ﬁrst second of the forced expiratory
volume in 1 second (FEV1) in a dose-response relation-
ship to the intensity of cigarette smoking, which is typi-
cally expressed as pack-years (average number of packs
of cigarettes smoked per day multiplied by the total
number of years of smoking).This dose-response relation-
ship between reduced pulmonary function and cigarette
smoking intensity accounts for the higher prevalence rates
for COPD with increasing age. The historically higher
rate of smoking among men is the likely explanation for
the higher prevalence of COPD among men; however,
the prevalence of COPD among women is increasing
because the gender gap in smoking rates has diminished
in the past 50 years.
Although the causal relationship between cigarette smok-
ing and the development of COPD has been absolutely
proven, there is considerable variability in the response to
smoking.Although pack-years of cigarette smoking is the
most highly signiﬁcant predictor of FEV1 (Fig. 18-1),
only 15% of the variability in FEV1 is explained by pack-
years.This ﬁnding suggests that additional environmental
or genetic factors (or both) contribute to the impact of
smoking on the development of airﬂow obstruction.
CHAPTER 18
CHAPTER 18
178
Risk Factors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 178
I Genetic Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 180
Natural History . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 180
Pathophysiology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 181
Pathology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 182
Pathogenesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 183
Clinical Presentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 184
I Further Readings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 189
Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease
179
CHAPTER 18
Although cigar and pipe smoking may also be associ-
ated with the development of COPD, the evidence sup-
porting such associations is less compelling, likely related
to the lower dose of inhaled tobacco by-products during
cigar and pipe smoking.
Airway Responsiveness and COPD
A tendency for increased bronchoconstriction in response
to a variety of exogenous stimuli, including methacholine
and histamine, is one of the deﬁning features of asthma
(Chap. 8). However, many patients with COPD also share
this feature of airway hyperresponsiveness.The consider-
able overlap between persons with asthma and those with
COPD in airway responsiveness, airﬂow obstruction, and
pulmonary symptoms led to the formulation of the Dutch
hypothesis.This suggests that asthma, chronic bronchitis,
and emphysema are variations of the same basic disease,
which is modulated by environmental and genetic factors
to produce these pathologically distinct entities.The alter-
native British hypothesis contends that asthma and COPD
are fundamentally different diseases: asthma is viewed as
largely an allergic phenomenon, but COPD results from
smoking-related inﬂammation and damage. Determina-
tion of the validity of the Dutch hypothesis versus the
British hypothesis awaits identification of the genetic
predisposing factors for asthma and COPD, as well as the
interactions between these postulated genetic factors and
environmental risk factors.
Longitudinal studies that compared airway responsive-
ness at the beginning of the study with subsequent decline
in pulmonary function have demonstrated that increased
airway responsiveness is clearly a signiﬁcant predictor of
subsequent decline in pulmonary function. Thus, airway
hyperresponsiveness is a risk factor for COPD.
Respiratory Infections
These have been studied as potential risk factors for the
development and progression of COPD in adults; child-
hood respiratory infections have also been assessed as
potential predisposing factors for the eventual development
of COPD.The impact of adult respiratory infections on
decline in pulmonary function is controversial, but signiﬁ-
cant long-term reductions in pulmonary function are not
typically seen after an episode of bronchitis or pneumonia.
The impact of the effects of childhood respiratory illnesses
on the subsequent development of COPD has been difﬁ-
cult to assess because of a lack of adequate longitudinal
data.Thus, although respiratory infections are important
causes of exacerbations of COPD, the association of both
adult and childhood respiratory infections to the develop-
ment and progression of COPD remains to be proven.
Occupational Exposures
Increased respiratory symptoms and airﬂow obstruction
have been suggested as resulting from general exposure to
dust at work. Several speciﬁc occupational exposures,
including coal mining, gold mining, and cotton textile
dust, have been suggested as risk factors for chronic airﬂow
obstruction. However, although nonsmokers in these occu-
pations developed some reductions in FEV1,the importance
of dust exposure as a risk factor for COPD, independent
of cigarette smoking, is not certain. Among workers
exposed to cadmium (a speciﬁc chemical fume), FEV1,
FEV1/FVC (forced vital capacity), and DLCO (carbon
monoxide diffusing capacity of the lung) were signiﬁcantly
reduced (Chap. 5), consistent with airﬂow obstruction and
emphysema. Although several speciﬁc occupational dusts
and fumes are likely risk factors for COPD, the magnitude
of these effects appears to be substantially less important
than the effect of cigarette smoking.
Ambient Air Pollution
Some investigators have reported increased respiratory
symptoms in those living in urban compared with rural
areas, which may relate to increased pollution in the
0 Pack-years (945)
Median
–1 S.D.
Mean
+1 S.D.
% of Population
20
10
0
0–20 Pack-years (578)
20
10
0
21–40 Pack-years (271)
20
10
0
41–60 Pack-years (154)
61+ Pack-years (100)
20
10
0
20
40
10
0
60
80
100
% FEV1
120
140
160
FIGURE 18-1
Distributions of forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1)
values in a general population sample, stratiﬁed by pack-
years of smoking. Means, medians, and ± 1 standard devia-
tion of percent predicted FEV1 are shown for each smoking
group. Although a dose–response relationship between smok-
ing intensity and FEV1 was found, marked variability in pul-
monary function was observed among subjects with similar
smoking histories. (From R Burrows et al: Am Rev Respir Dis
115:95, 1977, with permission.)
urban settings. However, the relationship of air pollution to
chronic airﬂow obstruction remains unproven. Prolonged
exposure to smoke produced by biomass combustion—a
common mode of cooking in some countries—also appears
to be a signiﬁcant risk factor for COPD among women in
those countries. However, in most populations, ambient air
pollution is a much less important risk factor for COPD
than cigarette smoking.
Passive, or Second-Hand, Smoking Exposure
Exposure of children to maternal smoking results in sig-
niﬁcantly reduced lung growth. In utero tobacco smoke
exposure also contributes to signiﬁcant reductions in post-
natal pulmonary function.Although passive smoke expo-
sure has been associated with reductions in pulmonary
function, the importance of this risk factor in the devel-
opment of the severe pulmonary function reductions in
COPD remains uncertain.
GENETIC CONSIDERATIONS
Although cigarette smoking is the major environ-
mental risk factor for the development of COPD,
the development of airﬂow obstruction in smokers
is highly variable. Severe α1 antitrypsin (α1AT) deﬁciency
is a proven genetic risk factor for COPD; increasing evi-
dence suggests that other genetic determinants also exist.
α1 Antitrypsin Deﬁciency
Many variants of the protease inhibitor (PI or SERPINA1)
locus that encodes α1AT have been described.The com-
mon M allele is associated with normal α1AT levels.The
S allele, associated with slightly reduced α1AT levels, and
the Z allele, associated with markedly reduced α1AT lev-
els, also occur with frequencies >1% in most white pop-
ulations. Rare individuals inherit null alleles, which lead
to the absence of any α1AT production through a hetero-
geneous collection of mutations. Individuals with two
Z alleles or one Z and one null allele are referred to as
PiZ, which is the most common form of severe α1AT
deﬁciency.
Although only 1–2% of COPD patients are found to
have severe α1AT deﬁciency as a contributing cause of
COPD, these patients demonstrate that genetic factors
can have a profound inﬂuence on the susceptibility for
developing COPD. PiZ individuals often develop early-
onset COPD, but the ascertainment bias in the published
series of PiZ individuals—which have usually included
many PiZ subjects who were tested for α1AT deﬁciency
because they had COPD—means that the fraction of PiZ
individuals who will develop COPD and the age-of-onset
distribution for the development of COPD in PiZ subjects
remain unknown. Approximately one in 3000 individ-
uals in the United States inherits severe α1AT deﬁciency,
but only a small minority of these individuals has been
Diseases of the Respiratory System
180
SECTION II
recognized. The clinical laboratory test used most fre-
quently to screen for α1AT deﬁciency is measurement of
the immunologic level of α1AT in serum (see “Laboratory
Findings” later in the chapter).
A signiﬁcant percentage of the variability in pul-
monary function among PiZ individuals is explained by
cigarette smoking; cigarette smokers with severe α1AT
deﬁciency are more likely to develop COPD at early
ages. However, the development of COPD in PiZ sub-
jects, even among current or ex-smokers, is not absolute.
Among PiZ nonsmokers, impressive variability has been
noted in the development of airﬂow obstruction. Other
genetic and environmental factors likely contribute to
this variability.
Speciﬁc treatment in the form of α1AT augmentation
therapy is available for severe α1AT deﬁciency as a weekly
IV infusion (see “Treatment” later in the chapter).
The risk of lung disease in heterozygous PiMZ individu-
als, who have intermediate serum levels of α1AT (~60% of
PiMM levels), is controversial. Although previous general
population surveys have not typically shown increased rates
of airﬂow obstruction in PiMZ compared with PiMM indi-
viduals, case-control studies that compared COPD patients
with control subjects have usually found an excess of PiMZ
genotypes in the COPD patient group. Several recent large
population studies have suggested that PiMZ subjects are
at slightly increased risk for the development of airﬂow
obstruction, but it remains unclear if all PiMZ subjects are at
slightly increased risk for COPD or if a subset of PiMZ sub-
jects are at substantially increased risk for COPD because
of other genetic or environmental factors.
Other Genetic Risk Factors
Studies of pulmonary function measurements performed
in general population samples have suggested that
genetic factors other than PI type inﬂuence variation in
pulmonary function. Familial aggregation of airflow
obstruction within families of COPD patients has also
been demonstrated.
Association studies have compared the distribution of
variants in genes hypothesized to be involved in the devel-
opment of COPD in COPD patients and control subjects.
However, the results have been quite inconsistent, and
no genetic determinants of COPD other than severe
α1AT deﬁciency have been deﬁnitively proven using this
approach. Genome scan linkage analyses of early-onset
COPD families have found evidence for linkage of spiro-
metric phenotypes to several chromosomal regions, but
the speciﬁc genetic determinants in those regions have
yet to be deﬁnitively identiﬁed.
NATURAL HISTORY
The effects of cigarette smoking on pulmonary function
appear to depend on the intensity of smoking exposure,
the timing of smoking exposure during growth, and the
baseline lung function of the individual;other environmen-
tal factors may have similar effects.Although rare individ-
uals may demonstrate precipitous declines in pulmonary
function, most individuals follow a steady trajectory of
increasing pulmonary function with growth during child-
hood and adolescence followed by a gradual decline with
aging. Individuals appear to track in their quartile of
pulmonary function based on environmental and genetic
factors that put them on different tracks.The risk of even-
tual mortality from COPD is closely associated with
reduced levels of FEV1.A graphic depiction of the natural
history of COPD is shown as a function of the inﬂuences
on tracking curves of FEV1 in Fig. 18-2. Death or dis-
ability from COPD can result from a normal rate of
decline after a reduced growth phase (curve C), an early
initiation of pulmonary function decline after normal
growth (curve B), or an accelerated decline after normal
growth (curve D).The rate of decline in pulmonary func-
tion can be modiﬁed by changing environmental expo-
sures (i.e., quitting smoking), with smoking cessation at an
earlier age providing a more beneﬁcial effect than smoking
cessation after marked reductions in pulmonary function
have already developed. Genetic factors likely contribute to
the level of pulmonary function achieved during growth
and to the rate of decline in response to smoking and
potentially to other environmental factors as well.
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Persistent reduction in forced expiratory ﬂow rates is the
most typical ﬁnding in COPD. Increases in the residual
volume (RV) and the RV/TLC (total lung capacity) ratio,
nonuniform distribution of ventilation, and ventilation-
perfusion mismatching also occur.
Airﬂow Obstruction
Airﬂow limitation, also known as airﬂow obstruction, is
typically determined by spirometry, which involves forced
expiratory maneuvers after the subject has inhaled to TLC
(see Fig. 5-4). Key phenotypes obtained from spirometry
include FEV1 and the total volume of air exhaled during
the entire spirometric maneuver (FVC). Patients with air-
ﬂow obstruction related to COPD have a chronically
reduced FEV1/FVC ratio. In contrast to asthma, the reduced
FEV1 in COPD seldom shows large responses to inhaled
bronchodilators, although improvements up to 15% are
common.Asthma patients can also develop chronic (not
fully reversible) airﬂow obstruction. Maximal inspiratory
ﬂow can be relatively well preserved in the presence of a
markedly reduced FEV1.
Airﬂow during forced exhalation is the result of the
balance between the elastic recoil of the lungs promoting
ﬂow and the resistance of the airways limiting ﬂow. In nor-
mal lungs, as well as in lungs affected by COPD, maximal
expiratory ﬂow diminishes as the lungs empty because the
lung parenchyma provides progressively less elastic recoil
and because the cross-sectional area of the airways falls,
increasing the resistance to airﬂow.The decrease in ﬂow
coincident with decreased lung volume is readily apparent
on the expiratory limb of a ﬂow-volume curve. In the
early stages of COPD, the abnormality in airﬂow is only
evident at lung volumes at or below the functional residual
capacity (FRC; closer to RV), appearing as a scooped-out
lower part of the descending limb of the ﬂow-volume
curve. In more advanced disease, the entire curve has
decreased expiratory ﬂow compared with normal.
Hyperinﬂation
Lung volumes are also routinely assessed in pulmonary
function testing. In COPD, there is often “air trapping”
(increased RV and increased ratio of RV to TLC) and
progressive hyperinﬂation (increased tTLC) late in the
disease. Hyperinﬂation of the thorax during tidal breath-
ing preserves maximum expiratory airﬂow because as
lung volume increases, elastic recoil pressure increases
and airways enlarge so that airway resistance decreases.
Hyperinﬂation helps to compensate for airway obstruc-
tion. However, hyperinﬂation can push the diaphragm
into a ﬂattened position with a number of adverse effects.
First, by decreasing the zone of apposition between the
diaphragm and the abdominal wall, positive abdominal
pressure during inspiration is not applied as effectively to
the chest wall, hindering rib cage movement and impairing
inspiration. Second, because the muscle ﬁbers of the ﬂat-
tened diaphragm are shorter than those of a more normally
Age, year
Respiratory symptoms
Reduced growth
Rapid decline
Early decline
Normal
A
B
C
D
FEV1, % nomal level at age 20
50
100
80
75
25
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
FIGURE 18-2
Hypothetical tracking curves of forced expiratory volume
in 1 second (FEV1) for individuals throughout their life
spans. The normal pattern of growth and decline with age is
shown by curve A. Signiﬁcantly reduced FEV1 (<65% of pre-
dicted value at age 20 years) can develop from a normal rate
of decline after a reduced pulmonary function growth phase
(curve C), early initiation of pulmonary function decline after
normal growth (curve B), or accelerated decline after normal
growth (curve D). (From B Rijcken: Doctoral dissertation, p 133,
University of Groningen, 1991, with permission.)
Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease
181
CHAPTER 18
curved diaphragm, they are less capable of generating
inspiratory pressures than normal. Third, the ﬂattened
diaphragm (with increased radius of curvature, r) must
generate greater tension (t) to develop the transpulmonary
pressure (p) required to produce tidal breathing. This
follows from Laplace’s law, p = 2t/r. Also, because the
thoracic cage is distended beyond its normal resting vol-
ume, during tidal breathing, the inspiratory muscles must
do work to overcome the resistance of the thoracic cage
to further inﬂation instead of gaining the normal assis-
tance from the chest wall recoiling outward toward its
resting volume.
Gas Exchange
Although there is considerable variability in the relation-
ships between the FEV1 and other physiologic abnor-
malities in COPD, certain generalizations may be made.
The PaO2 usually remains near normal until the FEV1 is
decreased to ~50% of predicted, and even much lower
FEV1s can be associated with a normal PaO2, at least at
rest. An elevation of PaCO2 is not expected until the
FEV1 is <25% of predicted and even then may not
occur. Pulmonary hypertension severe enough to cause
cor pulmonale and right ventricular failure caused by
COPD occurs only in individuals who have marked
decreases in FEV1 (<25% of predicted) together with
chronic hypoxemia (PaO2 <55 mmHg), although earlier
in the course, some elevation of pulmonary artery pres-
sure, particularly with exercise, may occur.
Nonuniform ventilation and ventilation-perfusion mis-
matching are characteristic of COPD, reﬂecting the het-
erogeneous nature of the disease process within the airways
and lung parenchyma. Nitrogen washout while breathing
100% oxygen is delayed because of regions that are poorly
ventilated, and the proﬁle of the nitrogen washout curve
is consistent with multiple parenchymal compartments
having different washout rates because of regional differ-
ences in compliance and airway resistance. Ventilation/
perfusion mismatching accounts for essentially all of the
reduction in PaO2 that occurs in COPD; shunting is
minimal.This ﬁnding explains the effectiveness of modest
elevations of inspired oxygen in treating hypoxemia caused
by COPD and therefore the need to consider problems
other than COPD when hypoxemia is difﬁcult to correct
with modest levels of supplemental oxygen in patients
with COPD.
PATHOLOGY
Cigarette smoke exposure may affect the large airways,
small airways (≤2 mm diameter), and alveolar space.
Whereas changes in large airways cause cough and spu-
tum, changes in small airways and alveoli are responsible
for physiologic alterations. Emphysema and small airway
pathology are both present in most persons with COPD,
Diseases of the Respiratory System
182
SECTION II
and their relative contributions to obstruction vary from
one person to another.
Large Airway
Cigarette smoking often results in mucous gland enlarge-
ment and goblet cell hyperplasia.These changes are pro-
portional to cough and mucus production that deﬁne
chronic bronchitis, but these abnormalities are not related
to airﬂow limitation. Goblet cells not only increase in
number but also in extent through the bronchial tree.
Bronchi also undergo squamous metaplasia, which not
only predisposes to carcinogenesis but also disrupts
mucociliary clearance. Although not as prominent as in
asthma, patients may have smooth muscle hypertrophy
and bronchial hyperreactivity, leading to airﬂow limita-
tion. Neutrophil inﬂux has been associated with purulent
sputum of upper respiratory tract infections that hamper
patients with COPD. Independent of its proteolytic
activity, neutrophil elastase is among the most potent sec-
retagogues identiﬁed.
Small Airways
The major site of increased resistance in most individu-
als with COPD is in airways ≤2 mm diameter. Charac-
teristic cellular changes include goblet cell metaplasia
and replacement of surfactant-secreting Clara cells with
mucus-secreting and inﬁltrating mononuclear inﬂamma-
tory cells.Smooth muscle hypertrophy may also be present.
These abnormalities may cause luminal narrowing by
excess mucus, edema, and cellular inﬁltration. Reduced
surfactant may increase surface tension at the air-tissue
interface, predisposing to airway narrowing or collapse.
Fibrosis in the wall may cause airway narrowing directly
or, as in asthma, predispose to hyperreactivity. Respira-
tory bronchiolitis with mononuclear inﬂammatory cells
collecting in distal airway tissues may cause proteolytic
destruction of elastic ﬁbers in the respiratory bronchioles
and alveolar ducts where the ﬁbers are concentrated as
rings around alveolar entrances.
Because small airway patency is maintained by the sur-
rounding lung parenchyma that provides radial traction
on bronchioles at points of attachment to alveolar septa,
loss of bronchiolar attachments as a result of extracellular
matrix destruction may cause airway distortion and nar-
rowing in COPD. Although the signiﬁcance of alveolar
attachments is not resolved, the concept of decreased
alveolar attachments leading to small airway obstruction is
appealing because it underscores the mechanistic relation-
ship between loss of elastic recoil and increased resistance
to airﬂow in small airways.
Lung Parenchyma
Emphysema is characterized by destruction of gas-
exchanging airspaces (i.e., the respiratory bronchioles,
matrix cell attachment leads to apoptosis of structural cells
of the lung. (4) Ineffective repair of elastin and perhaps
other extracellular matrix components result in airspace
enlargement that deﬁnes pulmonary emphysema.
The Elastase:Antielastase Hypothesis
Elastin, the principal component of elastic ﬁbers, is a
highly stable component of the extracellular matrix that
is critical to the integrity of both the small airways and
the lung parenchyma.The elastase:antielastase hypothesis
proposed in the mid-1960s states that the balance of
elastin-degrading enzymes and their inhibitors determines
the susceptibility of the lung to destruction, resulting in
airspace enlargement. This hypothesis was based on the
clinical observation that patients with genetic deﬁciency
in α1AT, the inhibitor of the serine proteinase neutrophil
elastase, were at increased risk of emphysema and that
instillation of elastases, including neutrophil elastase, to
experimental animals results in emphysema. To this day,
the elastase:antielastase hypothesis is the prevailing mech-
anism for the development of emphysema. However, a
complex network of inﬂammatory cells and additional
proteinases that contribute to emphysema have subse-
quently been identiﬁed.
Neutrophil
Macrophage
Cigarette smoke
Inflammatory cell recruitment
MMP
Serine
proteinases
Proteinase  inhibitors
MMP
Cysteine
proteinases
ECM degradation; lung destruction
Emphysema
Repair
FIGURE 18-3
Pathogenesis of emphysema. Upon long-term exposure to
cigarette smoke, inﬂammatory cells are recruited to the lung;
they release proteinases in excess of inhibitors, and if repair
is abnormal, this leads to airspace destruction and enlarge-
ment or emphysema. ECM, extracellular matrix; MMP, matrix
metalloproteinase.
alveolar ducts, and alveoli). Their walls become perfo-
rated and later obliterated with coalescence of small dis-
tinct airspaces into abnormal and much larger airspaces.
Macrophages accumulate in respiratory bronchioles of
essentially all young smokers. Bronchoalveolar lavage
ﬂuid from such individuals contains roughly ﬁve times as
many macrophages as lavage from nonsmokers. In smok-
ers’ lavage ﬂuid, macrophages comprise >95% of the total
cell count, and neutrophils, nearly absent in nonsmokers’
lavage, account for 1–2% of the cells.T lymphocytes, par-
ticularly CD8+ cells, are also increased in the alveolar
space of smokers.
Emphysema is classiﬁed into distinct pathologic types,
the most important being centriacinar and panacinar.
Centriacinar emphysema, the type most frequently associated
with cigarette smoking, is characterized by enlarged air-
spaces found (initially) in association with respiratory
bronchioles. Centriacinar emphysema is most prominent
in the upper lobes and superior segments of lower lobes
and is often quite focal. Panacinar emphysema refers to abnor-
mally large airspaces evenly distributed within and across
acinar units. Panacinar emphysema is usually observed in
patients with α1AT deﬁciency, which has a predilection
for the lower lobes. Distinctions between centriacinar and
panacinar emphysema are interesting and may ultimately
be shown to have different mechanisms of pathogenesis.
However, garden-variety smoking-related emphysema is
usually mixed, particularly in advanced cases, and these
pathologic classiﬁcations are not helpful in the care of
patients with COPD.
PATHOGENESIS
Airflow limitation, the major physiologic change in
COPD, can result from both small airway obstruction and
emphysema, as discussed above. Pathologic ﬁndings that
can contribute to small airway obstruction are described
above, but their relative importance is unknown. Fibrosis
surrounding the small airways appears to be a signiﬁcant
contributor. Mechanisms leading to collagen accumula-
tion around the airways in the face of increased collagenase
activity remain an enigma.Although seemingly counter-
intuitive, there are several potential mechanisms whereby
a proteinase can predispose to ﬁbrosis, including prote-
olytic activation of transforming growth factor β (TGF-β)
and insulin-like growth factor (IGF) binding protein degra-
dation releasing proﬁbrotic IGF. Largely because of the
availability of suitable animal models, we know much more
about mechanisms involved in emphysema than small air-
way obstruction.
The pathogenesis of emphysema can be dissected into
four interrelated events (Fig. 18-3): (1) Chronic exposure
to cigarette smoke may lead to inﬂammatory cell recruit-
ment within the terminal airspaces of the lung. (2) These
inﬂammatory cells release elastolytic proteinases, which
damage the extracellular matrix of the lung. (3) Loss of
Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease
183
CHAPTER 18
Inﬂammation and Extracellular
Matrix Proteolysis
Macrophages patrol the lower airspace under normal
conditions. Upon exposure to oxidants from cigarette
smoke, histone deacetylase-2 is inactivated, shifting the
balance toward acetylated or loose chromatin, exposing
nuclear factor κB sites and resulting in transcription of
matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9), proinﬂammatory
cytokines interleukin 8 (IL-8), and tumor necrosis factor
α (TNF α); this leads to neutrophil recruitment. CD8+
T cells are also recruited in response to cigarette smoke
and release interferon inducible protein-10 (IP-10,CXCL-7)
that in turn leads to macrophage production of macrophage
elastase (MMP-12). MMPs and serine proteinases, most
notably neutrophil elastase, work together by degrading
the inhibitor of the other, leading to lung destruction.
Proteolytic cleavage products of elastin also serve as a
macrophage chemokine, fueling this destructive positive
feedback loop.
Concomitant cigarette smoke-induced loss of cilia in
the airway epithelium predisposes to bacterial infection
with neutrophilia. Surprisingly, in end-stage lung disease,
long after smoking cessation, an exuberant inﬂammatory
response remains, suggesting that mechanisms of cigarette
smoke-induced inflammation that initiate the disease
differ from mechanisms that sustain inﬂammation after
smoking cessation.
Collagen turnover in COPD is complex.The three col-
lagenases (MMP-1, MMP-8, and MMP-13) that initiate
the cleavage of interstitial collagens are also induced in
both inﬂammatory cells and structural cells in COPD.
Although collagen is disrupted as alveolar units are obliter-
ated, overall there is a net increase in collagen content in
the COPD lung, with prominent accumulation in the air-
way submucosa.
Cell Death
Airspace enlargement with loss of alveolar units obviously
requires disappearance of both extracellular matrix and
cells. Traditional theories suggest that inﬂammatory cell
proteinases degrade lung extracellular matrix as the pri-
mary event, with subsequent loss of cell anchoring lead-
ing to apoptosis. Animal models have used endothelial
and epithelial cell death as a means to generate transient
airspace enlargement. Whether apoptosis is a primary or
secondary event in COPD remains to be determined.
Ineffective Repair
The ability of the adult lung to repair damaged alveoli
appears limited. Whether the process of septation that is
responsible for alveogenesis during lung development can
be reinitiated is not clear. In animal models, treatment
with all-trans retinoic acid has resulted in some repair.
Also, lung resection results in compensatory lung growth
in the remaining lung in animal models. In addition to
restoring cellularity after injury, it appears difﬁcult for an
adult to completely restore an appropriate extracellular
matrix, particularly functional elastic ﬁbers.
CLINICAL PRESENTATION
History
The three most common symptoms in COPD are cough,
sputum production, and exertional dyspnea. Many patients
have such symptoms for months or years before seeking
medical attention. Although the development of airﬂow
obstruction is a gradual process, many patients date the
onset of their disease to an acute illness or exacerbation.A
careful history, however, usually reveals the presence of
symptoms before the acute exacerbation. The develop-
ment of exertional dyspnea, often described as increased
effort to breathe, heaviness, air hunger, or gasping, can be
insidious. It is best elicited by a careful history focused on
typical physical activities and how the patient’s ability to
perform them has changed.Activities involving signiﬁcant
arm work, particularly at or above shoulder level, are par-
ticularly difﬁcult for patients with COPD. Conversely,
activities that allow the patient to brace the arms and
use accessory muscles of respiration are better tolerated.
Examples of such activities include pushing a shopping
cart, walking on a treadmill, or pushing a wheelchair. As
COPD advances, the principal feature is worsening dysp-
nea on exertion with increasing intrusion on the ability
to perform vocational or avocational activities. In the most
advanced stages, patients are breathless doing simple activ-
ities of daily living.
Accompanying worsening airflow obstruction is an
increased frequency of exacerbations (described later in
this chapter). Patients may also develop resting hypox-
emia and require institution of supplemental oxygen.
Physical Findings
In the early stages of COPD, patients usually have an
entirely normal physical examination. Current smokers
may have signs of active smoking, including an odor of
smoke or nicotine staining of ﬁngernails. In patients with
more severe disease, the physical examination is notable for
a prolonged expiratory phase and expiratory wheezing. In
addition, signs of hyperinﬂation include a barrel chest and
enlarged lung volumes with poor diaphragmatic excursion
as assessed by percussion. Patients with severe airﬂow
obstruction may also exhibit use of accessory muscles of
respiration, sitting in the characteristic “tripod” position to
facilitate the actions of the sternocleidomastoid, scalene,
and intercostal muscles. Patients may develop cyanosis,
which is visible in the lips and nail beds.
Although traditional teaching is that patients with pre-
dominant emphysema, termed “pink puffers,” are thin and
noncyanotic at rest and have prominent use of accessory
Diseases of the Respiratory System
184
SECTION II
Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease
185
CHAPTER 18
muscles, and patients with chronic bronchitis are more
likely to be heavy and cyanotic (“blue bloaters”), current
evidence demonstrates that most patients have elements
of both bronchitis and emphysema and that the physical
examination does not reliably differentiate the two entities.
Advanced disease may be accompanied by systemic
wasting, with signiﬁcant weight loss, bitemporal wasting,
and diffuse loss of subcutaneous adipose tissue.This syn-
drome has been associated with both inadequate oral
intake and elevated levels of inﬂammatory cytokines
(TNF α). Such wasting is an independent poor prognostic
factor in COPD. Some patients with advanced disease
have paradoxical inward movement of the rib cage with
inspiration (Hoover’s sign), the result of alteration of the
vector of diaphragmatic contraction on the rib cage as a
result of chronic hyperinﬂation.
Signs of overt right heart failure, termed cor pulmonale,
are relatively infrequent since the advent of supplemental
oxygen therapy.
Clubbing of the digits is not a sign of COPD, and its
presence should alert the clinician to initiate an investi-
gation for causes of clubbing. In this population, the
development of lung cancer is the most likely explana-
tion for newly developed clubbing.
Laboratory Findings
The hallmark of COPD is airﬂow obstruction (discussed
earlier in chapter). Pulmonary function testing shows air-
ﬂow obstruction with a reduction in FEV1 and FEV1/FVC
ratio (Chap. 5).With worsening disease severity, lung vol-
umes may increase, resulting in an increase in tTLC, FRC,
and RV. In patients with emphysema, the diffusing capac-
ity may be reduced, reﬂecting the parenchymal destruc-
tion characteristic of the disease. The degree of airﬂow
obstruction is an important prognostic factor in COPD
and is the basis for the GOLD disease classiﬁcation
(Table 18-1). More recently, it has been shown that a mul-
tifactorial index incorporating airﬂow obstruction, exercise
performance, dyspnea, and body mass index is a better pre-
dictor of mortality than pulmonary function alone.
Although arterial blood gases and oximetry are not sen-
sitive (discussed earlier in this chapter), they may demon-
strate resting or exertional hypoxemia.Arterial blood gases
provide additional information about alveolar ventilation
and acid-base status by measuring arterial PCO2 and pH.
The change in pH with PCO2 is 0.08 units/10 mmHg
acutely and 0.03 units/10 mmHg in the chronic state.
Knowledge of the arterial pH therefore allows the classiﬁ-
cation of ventilatory failure, deﬁned as PCO2 >45 mmHg,
into acute or chronic conditions.The arterial blood gas is
an important component of the evaluation of patients pre-
senting with symptoms of an exacerbation. An elevated
hematocrit suggests the presence of chronic hypoxemia, as
does the presence of signs of right ventricular hypertrophy.
Radiographic studies may assist in the classiﬁcation of
the type of COPD. Obvious bullae, paucity of parenchy-
mal markings, or hyperlucency suggest the presence of
emphysema. Increased lung volumes and ﬂattening of
the diaphragm suggest hyperinﬂation but do not provide
information about chronicity of the changes. CT scan-
ning is the current deﬁnitive test for establishing the
presence or absence of emphysema in living subjects
(Fig. 18-4). From a practical perspective, the CT scan
does little to inﬂuence therapy of COPD except in
individuals considering surgical therapy for their disease
(described later in the chapter).
Recent guidelines have suggested testing for α1AT
deﬁciency in all subjects with COPD or asthma with
chronic airﬂow obstruction. Measurement of the serum
TABLE 18-1
GOLD CRITERIA FOR COPD SEVERITY
GOLD STAGE
SEVERITY
SYMPTOMS
SPIROMETRY
0
At risk
Chronic cough, sputum production
Normal
I
Mild
With or without chronic cough or 
FEV1/FVC ratio <0.7 and FEV1
sputum production
≥80% predicted
IIA
Moderate
With or without chronic cough or 
FEV1/FVC ratio <0.7 and 50% 
sputum production
≤FEV1 <80% predicted
III
Severe
With or without chronic cough or 
FEV1/FVC ratio <0.7 and 30%
sputum production
≤FEV1 <50% predicted
IV
Very severe
With or without chronic cough or 
FEV1/FVC ratio <0.7 and FEV1
sputum production
<30% predicted
or
FEV1 <50% predicted with 
respiratory failure or signs 
of right heart failure
Note: FVC, forced vital capacity; FEV1, forced expiratory volume in 1 second; GOLD, Global Initiative for Chronic Obstruc-
tive Pulmonary Disease.
Source: From Pauwels et al.
Diseases of the Respiratory System
186
SECTION II
α1AT level is a reasonable initial test. For subjects with
low α1AT levels, the deﬁnitive diagnosis of α1AT deﬁ-
ciency requires PI type determination. This is typically
performed by isoelectric focusing of serum, which
reﬂects the genotype at the PI locus for the common
alleles and many of the rare PI alleles as well. Molecular
genotyping of DNA can be performed for the common
PI alleles (M, S, and Z).
costs, and beneﬁts of therapy. This should be followed
by an assessment of response to therapy, and a decision
should be made whether or not to continue treatment.
PHARMACOTHERAPY
Smoking Cessation
It has been shown that
middle-aged smokers who were able to successfully stop
smoking experienced a signiﬁcant improvement in the
rate of decline in pulmonary function,returning to annual
changes similar to that of nonsmoking patients.Thus, all
patients with COPD should be strongly urged to quit
and educated about the beneﬁts of quitting. An emerg-
ing body of evidence demonstrates that combining
pharmacotherapy with traditional supportive approaches
considerably enhances the chances of successful smok-
ing cessation. There are two principal pharmacologic
approaches to the problem: bupropion, originally devel-
oped as an antidepressant medication, and nicotine
replacement therapy. The latter is available as a gum,
transdermal patches, an inhaler, and a nasal spray.
Current recommendations from the U.S. Surgeon
General are that all adult, nonpregnant smokers con-
sidering quitting be offered pharmacotherapy in the
absence of any contraindication to treatment.
Bronchodilators
In general, bronchodilators are
used for symptomatic beneﬁt in patients with COPD.
The inhaled route is preferred for medication delivery
because the incidence of side effects is lower than that
seen with the use of parenteral medication delivery.
Anticholinergic Agents
Although regular use of
ipratopium bromide does not appear to inﬂuence the
rate of decline of lung function, it improves symptoms
and produces acute improvement in FEV1. Tiotropium, a
long-acting anticholinergic, has been shown to improve
symptoms and reduce exacerbations. Side effects are
minor, and a trial of inhaled anticholinergics is recom-
mended in symptomatic patients with COPD.
β-Agonists
These provide symptomatic beneﬁt.The
main side effects are tremor and tachycardia. Long-
acting inhaled β-agonists, such as salmeterol, have bene-
ﬁts comparable to ipratopium bromide.Their use is more
convenient than short-acting agents. The addition of a
β-agonist to inhaled anticholinergic therapy has been
demonstrated to provide incremental beneﬁt. A recent
report in asthma suggests that patients, particularly
African Americans, using a long-acting β-agonist without
concomitant inhaled corticosteroids have an increased
risk of deaths from respiratory causes.The applicability of
these data to patients with COPD is unclear.
Inhaled Glucocorticoids
Several trials have failed
to ﬁnd a beneﬁcial effect for the regular use of inhaled
glucocorticoids on the rate of decline of lung function,
as assessed by FEV1. Patients studied included those
FIGURE 18-4
Chest CT scan of a patient with chronic obstructive pul-
monary disease who underwent a left single-lung trans-
plant. Note the reduced parenchymal markings in the right
lung (left side of ﬁgure) compared with the left lung, represent-
ing emphysematous destruction of the lung, and mediastinal
shift to the left, indicative of hyperinﬂation.
Treatment:
CHRONIC OBSTRUCTIVE PULMONARY
DISEASE
STABLE PHASE COPD
Only three interventions—
smoking cessation, oxygen therapy in chronically
hypoxemic patients, and lung volume reduction surgery
in selected patients with emphysema—have been
demonstrated to inﬂuence the natural history of
patients with COPD. There is currently suggestive, but
not deﬁnitive,evidence that the use of inhaled glucocor-
ticoids may alter mortality (but not lung function). All
other current therapies are directed at improving symp-
toms and decreasing the frequency and severity of
exacerbations. The institution of these therapies should
involve an assessment of symptoms, potential risks,
with mild to severe airﬂow obstruction and current and
ex-smokers. Patients with signiﬁcant acute response to
inhaled β agonists were excluded from these trials.Their
use has been associated with increased rates of oropha-
ryngeal candidiasis and an increased rate of loss of bone
density. Some analyses suggest that inhaled glucocorti-
coids reduce exacerbation frequency by ∼25%. A more
recent meta-analysis suggests that they may also reduce
mortality by ∼25%.A deﬁnitive conclusion regarding the
mortality beneﬁts awaits the results of ongoing prospec-
tive trials. A trial of inhaled glucocorticoids should be
considered in patients with frequent exacerbations,
deﬁned as two or more per year, and in patients who
demonstrate a signiﬁcant amount of acute reversibility
in response to inhaled bronchodilators.
Oral Glucocorticoids
The chronic use of oral glu-
cocorticoids for treatment of COPD is not recommended
because of an unfavorable beneﬁt/risk ratio. The chronic
use of oral glucocorticoids is associated with signiﬁcant
side effects, including osteoporosis, weight gain, cataracts,
glucose intolerance, and increased risk of infection. A
recent study demonstrated that patients tapered off
chronic low-dose prednisone (∼10 mg/d) did not experi-
ence any adverse effect on the frequency of exacerba-
tions, health-related quality of life, or lung function. On
average,patients lost ∼4.5 kg (∼10 lb) when steroids were
withdrawn.
Theophylline
Theophylline produces modest improve-
ments in expiratory ﬂow rates and vital capacity and a
slight improvement in arterial oxygen and carbon diox-
ide levels in patients with moderate to severe COPD.
Nausea is a common side effect; tachycardia and tremor
have also been reported.
Oxygen
Supplemental O2 is the only pharmacologic
therapy demonstrated to decrease mortality in patients
with COPD. For patients with resting hypoxemia (resting
O2 saturation <88% or <90% with signs of pulmonary
hypertension or right heart failure), the use of O2 has
been demonstrated to have a signiﬁcant impact on
mortality. Patients meeting these criteria should be on
continual oxygen supplementation because the mortal-
ity beneﬁt is proportional to the number of hours per
day oxygen is used. Various delivery systems are avail-
able, including portable systems that patients may carry
to allow mobility outside the home.
Supplemental O2 is commonly prescribed for patients
with exertional hypoxemia or nocturnal hypoxemia.
Although the rationale for supplemental O2 in these
settings is physiologically sound, the beneﬁts of such
therapy are not well substantiated.
Other Agents
N-acetyl cysteine has been used in
patients with COPD for both its mucolytic and antioxi-
dant properties. A prospective trial failed to ﬁnd any
beneﬁt with respect to decline in lung function or pre-
vention of exacerbations. Speciﬁc treatment in the form
of intravenous α1AT augmentation therapy is available
for individuals with severe α1AT deﬁciency. Despite ster-
ilization procedures for these blood-derived products
and the absence of reported cases of viral infection from
therapy, some physicians recommend hepatitis B vacci-
nation before patients start augmentation therapy.
Although biochemical efﬁcacy of α1AT augmentation
therapy has been shown, a randomized controlled trial
of α1AT augmentation therapy has never proven the
efﬁcacy of augmentation therapy in reducing decline of
pulmonary function. Eligibility for α1AT augmentation
therapy requires a serum α1AT level <11 μM (approxi-
mately 50 mg/dL). Typically, PiZ individuals will qualify,
although other rare types associated with severe deﬁ-
ciency (e.g., null-null) are also eligible. Because only a
fraction of individuals with severe α1AT deﬁciency will
develop COPD, α1AT augmentation therapy is not rec-
ommended for severely α1AT-deﬁcient persons with
normal pulmonary function and a normal chest CT scan.
NONPHARMACOLOGIC THERAPIES
General Medical Care
Patients with COPD should
receive the inﬂuenza vaccine annually. Polyvalent pneu-
mococcal vaccine is also recommended,although proof of
efﬁcacy in this patient population is not deﬁnitive.
Pulmonary Rehabilitation
This refers to a
treatment program that incorporates education and
cardiovascular conditioning. In COPD, pulmonary reha-
bilitation has been demonstrated to improve health-
related quality of life, dyspnea, and exercise capacity. It
has also been shown to reduce rates of hospitalization
over a 6- to 12-month period.
Lung Volume Reduction Surgery (LVRS)
Surgery to reduce the volume of lung in patients with
emphysema was ﬁrst introduced with minimal success
in the 1950s and was reintroduced in the 1990s. The
operation may be performed via either a median ster-
notomy or a thoracoscopic approach. Patients are
excluded if they have signiﬁcant pleural disease, a pul-
monary artery systolic pressure >45 mmHg, extreme
deconditioning, congestive heart failure, or other severe
comorbid conditions. Recent data demonstrate that
patients with an FEV1 <20% of predicted and either dif-
fusely distributed emphysema on CT scan or DLCO <20%
of predicted have an increased mortality after the pro-
cedure and thus are not candidates for LVRS.
The National Emphysema Treatment trial demon-
strated that LVRS offers both a mortality beneﬁt and a
symptomatic beneﬁt in certain patients with emphysema.
The anatomic distribution of emphysema and postreha-
bilitation exercise capacity are important prognostic
characteristics. Patients with upper lobe–predominant
Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease
187
CHAPTER 18
Diseases of the Respiratory System
188
SECTION II
emphysema and a low postrehabilitation exercise capac-
ity are most likely to beneﬁt from LVRS.
Lung Transplantation (See also Chap. 24)
COPD is the single leading indication for lung transplan-
tation (see Fig. 18-4). Current recommendations are that
candidates for lung transplantation should be younger
than 65 years old; have severe disability despite maximal
medical therapy;and be free of comorbid conditions such
as liver, renal, or cardiac disease. In contrast to LVRS, the
anatomic distribution of emphysema and the presence
of pulmonary hypertension are not contraindications to
lung transplantation. Unresolved issues concerning lung
transplantation and COPD include whether single- or
double-lung transplant is the preferred procedure.
EXACERBATIONS OF COPD
Exacerbations are
a prominent feature of the natural history of COPD.Exacer-
bations are commonly considered to be episodes of
increased dyspnea and cough and change in the amount
and character of sputum.They may or may not be accom-
panied by other signs of illness, including fever, myalgias,
and sore throat. Self-reported health-related quality of life
correlates with frequency of exacerbations more closely
than it does with the degree of airﬂow obstruction.
Economic analyses have shown that >70% of COPD-
related health care expenditures go to emergency depart-
ment visits and hospital care; this translates to >$10 billion
annually in the United States.The frequency of exacerba-
tions increases as airﬂow obstruction increases; patients
with moderate to severe airﬂow obstruction (GOLD stages
III and IV; Table 18-1) have one to three episodes per year.
The approach to a patient experiencing an exacerba-
tion includes an assessment of the severity of the
patient’s illness, both acute and chronic components; an
attempt to identify the precipitant of the exacerbation;
and the institution of therapy.
Precipitating Causes and Strategies to
Reduce Frequency of Exacerbations
A vari-
ety of stimuli may result in the ﬁnal common pathway of
airway inﬂammation and increased symptoms that are
characteristic of COPD exacerbations. Bacterial infections
play a role in many,but by no means all,episodes.Viral res-
piratory infections are present in approximately one-third of
COPD exacerbations. In a signiﬁcant minority of instances
(20–35%),no speciﬁc precipitant can be identiﬁed.
Despite the frequent implication of bacterial infec-
tion, chronic suppressive, or “rotating,”antibiotics are not
beneﬁcial in patients with COPD. This is in contrast to
their apparent efﬁcacy in patients with signiﬁcant
bronchiectasis.In patients with bronchiectasis caused by
cystic ﬁbrosis, suppressive antibiotics have been shown
to reduce the frequency of hospital admissions.
The role of anti-inﬂammatory therapy in reducing
exacerbation frequency is less well studied. Chronic oral
glucocorticoids are not recommended for this purpose.
Inhaled glucocorticoids did reduce the frequency of
exacerbations by 25–30% in some analyses. The use of
inhaled glucocorticoids should be considered in patients
with frequent exacerbations or those who have an
asthmatic component (i.e., signiﬁcant reversibility on
pulmonary function testing or marked symptomatic
improvement after the use of inhaled bronchodilators).
Patient Assessment
An attempt should be made
to establish the severity of the exacerbation as well as
the severity of preexisting COPD.The more severe either
of these two components, the more likely that the
patient will require hospital admission. The history
should include quantiﬁcation of the degree of dyspnea
by asking about breathlessness during activities of daily
living and typical activities for the patient. The patient
should be asked about fever; change in character of spu-
tum; any ill contacts; and associated symptoms such as
nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, myalgias, and chills. Inquiring
about the frequency and severity of prior exacerbations
can provide important information.
The physical examination should incorporate an
assessment of the degree of distress of the patient.
Speciﬁc attention should be focused on tachycardia,
tachypnea, use of accessory muscles, signs of perioral or
peripheral cyanosis, the ability to speak in complete
sentences, and the patient’s mental status. The chest
examination should establish the presence or absence
of focal ﬁndings, degree of air movement, presence or
absence of wheezing, asymmetry in the chest examina-
tion (suggesting large airway obstruction or pneumoth-
orax mimicking an exacerbation), and the presence or
absence of paradoxical motion of the abdominal wall.
Patients with severe underlying COPD who are in
moderate or severe distress or those with focal ﬁndings
should have a chest x-ray. Approximately 25% of x-rays
in this clinical situation will be abnormal, with the most
frequent ﬁndings being pneumonia and congestive
heart failure. Patients with advanced COPD, those with a
history of hypercarbia, those with mental status changes
(confusion, sleepiness), or those in signiﬁcant distress
should have an arterial blood gas measurement. The
presence of hypercarbia, deﬁned as a PCO2 >45 mmHg,
has important implications for treatment (discussed
below). In contrast to its utility in the management of
exacerbations of asthma, measurement of pulmonary
function has not been demonstrated to be helpful in the
diagnosis or management of exacerbations of COPD.
There are no deﬁnitive guidelines concerning the need
for inpatient treatment of exacerbations. Patients with res-
piratory acidosis and hypercarbia,signiﬁcant hypoxemia,or
severe underlying disease or those whose living situation
is not conducive to careful observation and the delivery of
prescribed treatment should be admitted to the hospital.
ACUTE EXACERBATIONS
Bronchodilators
Typically, patients are treated with
an inhaled β-agonist, often with the addition of an anti-
cholinergic agent. These may be administered separately
or together, and the frequency of administration depends
on the severity of the exacerbation. Patients are often
treated initially with nebulized therapy because such
treatment is often easier to administer in older patients
and to those in respiratory distress. It has been shown,
however, that conversion to metered-dose inhalers is
effective when accompanied by education and training of
patients and staff.This approach has signiﬁcant economic
beneﬁts and also allows an easier transition to outpatient
care. The addition of methylxanthines (e.g., theophylline)
to this regimen can be considered, although convincing
proof of its efﬁcacy is lacking.If added,serum levels should
be monitored in an attempt to minimize toxicity.
Antibiotics
Patients with COPD are frequently colo-
nized with potential respiratory pathogens, and it is
often difﬁcult to identify conclusively a speciﬁc species
of bacteria responsible for a particular clinical event.
Bacteria frequently implicated in COPD exacerbations
include Streptococcus pneumoniae,Haemophilus inﬂuenzae,
and Moraxella catarrhalis. In addition, Mycoplasma pneu-
moniae or Chlamydia pneumoniae are found in 5–10% of
exacerbations. The choice of antibiotic should be based
on local patterns of antibiotic susceptibility of the above
pathogens as well as the patient’s clinical condition.Most
practitioners treat patients with moderate or severe
exacerbations with antibiotics, even in the absence of
data implicating a speciﬁc pathogen.
Glucocorticoids
Among patients admitted to the
hospital, the use of glucocorticoids has been demon-
strated to reduce the length of stay,hasten recovery,and
reduce the chance of subsequent exacerbation or
relapse for a period of up to 6 months. One study
demonstrated that 2 weeks of glucocorticoid therapy
produced beneﬁt indistinguishable from 8 weeks of
therapy. The GOLD guidelines recommend 30–40 mg
of oral prednisolone or its equivalent for 10–14 days.
Hyperglycemia, particularly in patients with preexisting
diagnosis of diabetes, is the most frequently reported
acute complication of glucocorticoid treatment.
Oxygen
Supplemental O2 should be supplied to
keep arterial saturations ≥90%.Hypoxic respiratory drive
plays a small role in patients with COPD. Studies have
demonstrated that in patients with both acute and
chronic hypercarbia, the administration of supplemental
O2 does not reduce minute ventilation. It does, in some
patients, result in modest increases in arterial PCO2, chieﬂy
by altering ventilation-perfusion relationships within the
lung. This should not deter practitioners from providing
the oxygen needed to correct hypoxemia.
Mechanical Ventilatory Support
The initiation of
noninvasive positive pressure ventilation (NIPPV) in patients
with respiratory failure,deﬁned as PaCO2 >45 mmHg,results
in a signiﬁcant reduction in mortality, need for intubation,
complications of therapy, and hospital length of stay.
Contraindications to NIPPV include cardiovascular instabil-
ity,impaired mental status or inability to cooperate,copious
secretions or the inability to clear secretions, craniofacial
abnormalities or trauma precluding effective ﬁtting of the
mask,extreme obesity,or signiﬁcant burns.
Invasive (conventional) mechanical ventilation via an
endotracheal tube is indicated for patients with severe
respiratory distress despite initial therapy,life-threatening
hypoxemia, severe hypercapnia or acidosis, markedly
impaired mental status, respiratory arrest, hemodynamic
instability,or other complications.The goal of mechanical
ventilation is to correct the aforementioned conditions.
Factors to consider during mechanical ventilatory sup-
port include the need to provide sufﬁcient expiratory
time in patients with severe airﬂow obstruction and the
presence of auto-PEEP (positive end-expiratory pressure),
which can result in patients having to generate signiﬁ-
cant respiratory effort to trigger a breath during a
demand mode of ventilation. The mortality of patients
requiring mechanical ventilatory support is 17–30% for
that particular hospitalization.For patients >65 years who
are admitted to the intensive care unit for treatment, the
mortality doubles over the next year to 60%, regardless
of whether mechanical ventilation was required.
FURTHER READINGS
AMERICAN THORACIC SOCIETY/EUROPEAN RESPIRATORY SOCIETY
TASK FORCE: Standards for the diagnosis and management of
patients with COPD [Internet].Version 1.2. New York:American
Thoracic Society; 2004 [updated 2005 September 8]. Available
from: http://www-test.thoracic.org/copd/
FIORE MC et al: Treating Tobacco Use and Dependence, Clinical Practice
Guideline. Rockville, MD: U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services. Public Health Service, June 2000
ITO K et al: Decreased histone deacetylase activity in chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. N Engl J Med 352:1967, 2005
MANNINO DM, BUIST AS: Global burden of COPD: Risk factors,
prevalence, and future trends. Lancet 370:765, 2007
PAUWELS et al: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Global strategy
for the diagnosis, management, and prevention of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease [updated 2009]. Available from:
www.goldcopd.com
RABE KF et al: Global strategy for the diagnosis, management and
prevention of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: GOLD
executive summary. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 176:532, 2007
——— et al: Update in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 2006.
Am J Respir Crit Care Med 175:1222, 2007
SIN DD et al: Inhaled corticosteroids and mortality in chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease.Thorax 60:992, 2005
WISE RA,TASHKIN DP: Optimizing treatment of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease: An assessment of current therapies. Am J
Med 120(Suppl):S4, 2007
Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease
189
CHAPTER 18
Talmadge E. King, Jr.
Patients with interstitial lung diseases (ILDs) come to
medical attention mainly because of the onset of progres-
sive exertional dyspnea or a persistent, nonproductive
cough. Hemoptysis, wheezing, and chest pain may be
present. Often, the identiﬁcation of interstitial opacities
on chest x-ray focuses the diagnostic approach toward
one of the ILDs.
ILDs represent a large number of conditions that
involve the parenchyma of the lung—the alveoli, the
alveolar epithelium, the capillary endothelium, and the
spaces between these structures, as well as the perivascu-
lar and lymphatic tissues. This heterogeneous group of
disorders is classiﬁed together because of similar clinical,
radiographic, physiologic, or pathologic manifestations.
These disorders are often associated with considerable
morbidity and mortality, and there is little consensus
regarding the best management of most of them.
ILDs have been difﬁcult to classify because >200
known individual diseases are characterized by diffuse
parenchymal lung involvement, either as the primary
condition or as a signiﬁcant part of a multiorgan process,
INTERSTITIAL LUNG DISEASES
as may occur in the connective tissue diseases (CTDs).
One useful approach to classiﬁcation is to separate the
ILDs into two groups based on the major underlying
histopathology: (1) those associated with predominant
inﬂammation and ﬁbrosis and (2) those with a predomi-
nantly granulomatous reaction in interstitial or vascular
areas (Table 19-1). Each of these groups can be further
subdivided according to whether the cause is known or
unknown. For each ILD, there may be an acute phase, and
there is usually a chronic one as well. Rarely, some are
recurrent, with intervals of subclinical disease.
Sarcoidosis, idiopathic pulmonary ﬁbrosis (IPF), and
pulmonary ﬁbrosis associated with CTDs are the most
common ILDs of unknown cause. Among the ILDs of
known cause, the largest group comprises occupational
and environmental exposures, especially the inhalation
of inorganic dusts, organic dusts, and various fumes or
gases (Chaps. 9 and 10) (Table 19-2).A clinical diagno-
sis is possible for many forms of ILD, especially if an
occupational and environmental history is aggressively
pursued. For other forms, tissue examination, usually
CHAPTER 19
CHAPTER 19
190
Pathogenesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .191
Respiratory Symptoms and Signs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .194
Physical Examination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .194
Laboratory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .194
Chest Imaging Studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .194
Pulmonary Function Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .195
Cardiopulmonary Exercise Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .195
Fiberoptic Bronchoscopy and Bronchoalveolar Lavage . . . . .195
Tissue and Cellular Examination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .195
I Individual Forms of ILD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .197
Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .197
Nonspeciﬁc Interstitial Pneumonia (NSIP) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .197
Acute Interstitial Pneumonia (Hamman-Rich Syndrome) . . . .198
Cryptogenic Organizing Pneumonia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .198
Interstitial Lung Disease Associated
with Cigarette Smoking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .198
Interstitial Lung Disease Associated with
Connective Tissue Disorders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .199
Drug-Induced Interstitial Lung Disease . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .200
Eosinophilic Pneumonia  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .200
Pulmonary Alveolar Proteinosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .200
Pulmonary Lymphangioleiomyomatosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .200
Syndromes of Interstitial Lung Disease with
Diffuse Alveolar Hemorrhage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .201
Inherited Disorders Associated with
Interstitial Lung Diseases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .201
Interstitial Lung Disease with a Granulomatous
Response in Lung Tissue or Vascular Structures . . . . . . . . .202
Lymphocytic Inﬁltrative Disorders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .202
Bronchocentric Granulomatosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .202
Global Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .202
I Further Readings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .202
Interstitial Lung Diseases
191
CHAPTER 19
obtained by thoracoscopic lung biopsy, is critical to con-
ﬁrmation of the diagnosis. High-resolution computed
tomography (HRCT) scanning improves diagnostic accu-
racy as experience with histologic-image correlation is
perfected.
PATHOGENESIS
The ILDs are nonmalignant disorders and are not
caused by identiﬁed infectious agents.The precise path-
way(s) leading from injury to ﬁbrosis is not known.
Although there are multiple initiating agent(s) of injury,
the immunopathogenic responses of lung tissue are lim-
ited, and the mechanisms of repair have common features
(Fig. 19-1).
As mentioned above, the two major histopathologic
patterns are a granulomatous pattern and a pattern in
which inﬂammation and ﬁbrosis predominate.
Granulomatous Lung Disease
This process is characterized by an accumulation of
T lymphocytes, macrophages, and epithelioid cells orga-
nized into discrete structures (granulomas) in the lung
parenchyma.The granulomatous lesions can progress to
ﬁbrosis. Many patients with granulomatous lung disease
remain free of severe impairment of lung function, or
when symptomatic, they improve after treatment. The
main differential diagnosis is between sarcoidosis and
hypersensitivity pneumonitis (Chap. 9).
TABLE 19-1
MAJOR CATEGORIES OF ALVEOLAR AND INTERSTITIAL INFLAMMATORY LUNG DISEASE
LUNG RESPONSE: ALVEOLITIS, INTERSTITIAL INFLAMMATION, AND FIBROSIS
Known Cause
Asbestos
Radiation
Fumes, gases
Aspiration pneumonia
Drugs (antibiotics, amiodarone, gold)
Residual of adult respiratory distress syndrome
and chemotherapy drugs
Unknown Cause
Idiopathic interstitial pneumonias
Pulmonary alveolar proteinosis
Idiopathic pulmonary ﬁbrosis
Lymphocytic inﬁltrative disorders (lymphocytic
(usual interstitial pneumonia)
interstitial pneumonitis associated with 
Desquamative interstitial pneumonia
connective tissue disease)
Respiratory bronchiolitis-associated
Eosinophilic pneumonias
interstitial lung disease
Lymphangioleiomyomatosis
Acute interstitial pneumonia (diffuse
Amyloidosis
alveolar damage)
Inherited diseases
Cryptogenic organizing pneumonia (bronchiolitis
Tuberous sclerosis, neuroﬁbromatosis, Niemann-Pick
obliterans with organizing pneumonia)
disease, Gaucher’s disease, Hermansky-Pudlak
Nonspeciﬁc interstitial pneumonia
syndrome
Connective tissue diseases
Gastrointestinal or liver diseases (Crohn’s disease, 
Systemic lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis,
primary biliary cirrhosis, chronic active hepatitis, 
ankylosing spondylitis, systemic sclerosis,
ulcerative colitis) 
Sjögren’s syndrome, polymyositis-dermatomyositis
Graft-vs.-host disease (bone marrow transplantation,
Pulmonary hemorrhage syndromes
solid organ transplantation)
Goodpasture’s syndrome, idiopathic pulmonary
hemosiderosis, isolated pulmonary capillaritis
LUNG RESPONSE: GRANULOMATOUS
Known Cause
Hypersensitivity pneumonitis (organic dusts)
Inorganic dusts: beryllium, silica
Unknown Cause
Sarcoidosis
Bronchocentric granulomatosis
Langerhans’ cell granulomatosis
Lymphomatoid granulomatosis
(eosinophilic granuloma of the lung)
Granulomatous vasculitides
Wegener’s granulomatosis, allergic
granulomatosis of Churg-Strauss
Diseases of the Respiratory System
192
SECTION II
TABLE 19-2
ESTIMATED RELATIVE FREQUENCY OF THE
INTERSTITIAL LUNG DISEASES
RELATIVE 
DIAGNOSIS
FREQUENCY, %
Idiopathic interstitial pneumonias
40
Idiopathic pulmonary ﬁbrosis
55
Nonspeciﬁc interstitial pneumonia
25
Respiratory bronchiolitis—interstitial 
15
lung disease and desquamative 
interstitial pneumonia
Cryptogenic organizing pneumonia
3
Acute interstitial pneumonia
<1
Occupational and environmental
26
Sarcoidosis
10
Connective tissue diseases
9
Drug and radiation
1
Pulmonary hemorrhage syndromes
<1
Other
13
Source: From DB Coultas, R Hubbard, in JP Lynch III (ed): Lung
Biology in Health and Disease. New York, Marcel Dekker, 2004; and
Garantziotis S et al: J Clin Invest 114:319, 2004.
Inﬂammation and Fibrosis
The initial insult is an injury to the epithelial surface
causing inﬂammation in the air spaces and alveolar walls
(Fig. 19-2). If the disease becomes chronic, inﬂammation
spreads to adjacent portions of the interstitium and vas-
culature and eventually causes interstitial ﬁbrosis. Impor-
tant histopathologic patterns found in the ILDs include
usual interstitial pneumonia (UIP), nonspeciﬁc interstitial
pneumonia (NSIP), respiratory bronchiolitis, organizing
pneumonia [bronchiolitis obliterans with organizing pneu-
monia (BOOP) pattern], diffuse alveolar damage (acute
or organizing), desquamative interstitial pneumonia (DIP),
and lymphocytic interstitial pneumonia. The develop-
ment of irreversible scarring (ﬁbrosis) of alveolar walls,
airways, or vasculature is the most feared outcome in all
of these conditions because it is often progressive and leads
to signiﬁcant derangement of ventilatory function and gas
exchange.
History
Duration of Illness
Acute presentation (days to weeks), although unusual, occurs
with allergy (drugs, fungi, helminths), acute interstitial
pneumonia (AIP), eosinophilic pneumonia, and hypersen-
sitivity pneumonitis. These conditions may be confused
with atypical pneumonias because of diffuse alveolar opac-
ities on chest x-ray. Subacute presentation (weeks to months)
may occur in all ILDs but is seen especially in sarcoidosis,
drug-induced ILDs, the alveolar hemorrhage syndromes,
cryptogenic organizing pneumonia (COP), and the acute
immunologic pneumonia that complicates systemic lupus
erythematosus (SLE) or polymyositis. In most ILDs the
symptoms and signs form a chronic presentation (months to
years). Examples include IPF, sarcoidosis, pulmonary
Langerhans cell histiocytosis (PLCH) (also known as
Langerhans cell granulomatosis,eosinophilic granuloma,or
histiocytosis X), pneumoconioses, and CTDs. Episodic pre-
sentations are unusual and include eosinophilic pneumonia,
hypersensitivity pneumonitis, COP, vasculitides, pulmonary
hemorrhage,and Churg-Strauss syndrome.
Age
Most patients with sarcoidosis, ILD associated with CTD,
lymphangioleiomyomatosis (LAM), PLCH, and inher-
ited forms of ILD (familial IPF, Gaucher’s disease,
Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome) present between the ages
of 20 and 40 years. Most patients with IPF are older
than 50 years.
Gender
LAM and pulmonary involvement in tuberous sclerosis
occur exclusively in premenopausal women.Also, ILD in
Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome and in the CTDs is more
common in women; an exception is ILD in rheumatoid
arthritis (RA), which is more common in men. Because
of occupational exposures, pneumoconioses also occur
more frequently in men.
Exogenous and endogenous stimuli
PATHOGENESIS OF PULMONARY FIBROSIS
Dust, fumes, 
cigarette smoke, 
autoimmune 
conditions
Drugs, 
infections, 
radiation, other 
diseases
Microscopic lung injury: 
separated spatially and temporally
Genetic predisposition
Autoimmune conditions
Intact
Wound healing
Aberrant
Lung homeostasis
Pulmonary fibrosis
FIGURE 19-1
Proposed mechanism for the pathogenesis of pulmonary
ﬁbrosis. The lung is naturally exposed to repetitive injury from
a variety of exogenous and endogenous stimuli. Several local
and systemic factors (e.g., ﬁbroblasts, circulating ﬁbrocytes,
chemokines, growth factors, and clotting factors) contribute
to tissue healing and functional recovery. Dysregulation of this
intricate network through genetic predisposition, autoimmune
conditions, or superimposed diseases can lead to aberrant
wound healing with the result of pulmonary ﬁbrosis. Alterna-
tively, excessive injury to the lung may overwhelm even intact
reparative mechanisms and lead to pulmonary ﬁbrosis. (From
S Garantziotis, et al: J Clin Invest 114:319, 2004.)
Interstitial Lung Diseases
193
CHAPTER 19
Family History
Family associations (with an autosomal dominant pat-
tern) have been identiﬁed in tuberous sclerosis and
neuroﬁbromatosis. An autosomal recessive pattern of
inheritance occurs in Niemann-Pick disease, Gaucher’s
disease, and the Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome. Familial
clustering has been increasingly identiﬁed in sarcoidosis.
Familial lung ﬁbrosis has been associated with mutations
in the surfactant protein C gene and is characterized by
several patterns of interstitial pneumonia, including
NSIP, DIP, and UIP.
Smoking History
Two-thirds to 75% of patients with IPF have a history of
smoking. Patients with PLCH, DIP, Goodpasture’s syn-
drome,respiratory bronchiolitis,and pulmonary alveolar pro-
teinosis (PAP) are almost always current or former smokers.
Occupation and Environmental History
A strict chronologic listing of the patient’s lifelong
employment must be sought, including speciﬁc duties
and known exposures. In hypersensitivity pneumonitis
(see Fig. 9-1), respiratory symptoms, fever, chills, and an
abnormal chest radiograph are often temporally related
to a hobby (e.g., pigeon breeder’s disease) or to the
workplace (e.g., farmer’s lung) (Chap. 9). Symptoms may
diminish or disappear after the patient leaves the site of
exposure for several days; similarly, symptoms may reap-
pear on returning to the exposure site.
Other Important Past History
Parasitic infections may cause pulmonary eosinophilia,
so a travel history should be taken in patients with
known or suspected ILD. History of risk factors for HIV
infection should be elicited from all patients with ILD
Epithelial damage
and activation
Fibroblast
migration and
proliferation
Basement membrane
disruption
Myofibroblast
foci formation
Angiogenesis
Fibrosis and impaired
reepithelialization
Epithelial
apoptosis
Injury
Tissue factor
PAI-1,2
Wound clot
Gelatinases A,B
FGF-2
VEGF
Angiotensin II
MMPs/TIMPs
imbalance
PDGF
TGF β
TNF α
A
C
D
B
FIGURE 19-2
Cellular bases for the pathogenesis of interstitial lung dis-
ease. Multiple microinjuries damage and activate alveolar
epithelial cells (A), which in turn induce an antiﬁbrinolytic envi-
ronment in the alveolar spaces, enhancing wound clot forma-
tion. Alveolar epithelial cells secrete growth factors and
induce migration and proliferation of ﬁbroblasts and differenti-
ation into myoﬁbroblasts (C). Subepithelial myoﬁbroblasts
and alveolar epithelial cells produce gelatinases that may
increase basement membrane disruption and allow ﬁbrob-
last–myoﬁbroblast migration (D). Angiogenic factors induce
neovascularization. Both intraalveolar and interstitial myoﬁ-
broblasts secrete extracellular matrix proteins, mainly collagens.
An imbalance between interstitial collagenases and tissue
inhibitors of metalloproteinases provokes the progressive
deposit of extracellular matrix (B). Signals responsible for
myoﬁbroblast apoptosis seem to be absent or delayed in
usual interstitial pneumonia, increasing cell survival. Myoﬁ-
broblasts produce angiotensinogen that as angiotensin II
provokes alveolar epithelial cell death, further impairing reep-
ithelialization. FGF-2, ﬁbroblast growth factor 2; MMPs, met-
alloproteinases; PAI-1, PAI-2, plasminogen activator inhibitor
1, 2; PDGF, platelet-derived growth factor; TGF-β, transform-
ing growth factor β; TIMPs, tissue inhibitors of metallopro-
teinases; TNF-α, tumor necrosis factor α; VEGF, vascular
endothelial growth factor. (From M Selman et al: Idiopathic
pulmonary ﬁbrosis: Prevailing and evolving hypotheses about
its pathogenesis and implications for therapy. Ann Intern Med
134:136, 2001; with permission.)
because several processes may occur at the time of initial
presentation or during the clinical course [e.g., HIV
infection, BOOP, AIP, lymphocytic interstitial pneu-
monitis, diffuse alveolar hemorrhage (DAH)].
RESPIRATORY SYMPTOMS AND SIGNS
Dyspnea is a common and prominent complaint in
patients with ILD, especially the idiopathic interstitial
pneumonias, hypersensitivity pneumonitis, COP, sarcoido-
sis, eosinophilic pneumonias, and PLCH. Some patients,
especially patients with sarcoidosis, silicosis, PLCH, hyper-
sensitivity pneumonitis, lipoid pneumonia, or lymphangitis
carcinomatosis, may have extensive parenchymal lung dis-
ease on chest x-ray without signiﬁcant dyspnea, especially
early in the course of the illness.Wheezing is an uncom-
mon manifestation of ILD but has been described in
patients with chronic eosinophilic pneumonia, Churg-
Strauss syndrome, respiratory bronchiolitis, and sarcoidosis.
Clinically signiﬁcant chest pain is uncommon in most
ILDs. However, substernal discomfort is common in sar-
coidosis. Sudden worsening of dyspnea, especially if associ-
ated with acute chest pain, may indicate a spontaneous
pneumothorax, which occurs in PLCH, tuberous sclerosis,
LAM, and neuroﬁbromatosis. Frank hemoptysis and
blood-streaked sputum are rarely presenting manifestations
of ILD but can be seen in the DAH syndromes, LAM,
tuberous sclerosis, and the granulomatous vasculitides.
Fatigue and weight loss are common in all ILDs.
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
The ﬁndings are usually not speciﬁc. Most commonly,
physical examination reveals tachypnea and bibasilar end-
inspiratory dry crackles, which are common in most
forms of ILD associated with inﬂammation but are less
likely to be heard in the granulomatous lung diseases.
Crackles may be present in the absence of radiographic
abnormalities on the chest radiograph. Scattered late
inspiratory high-pitched rhonchi—so-called inspiratory
squeaks—are heard in patients with bronchiolitis. The
cardiac examination is usually normal except in the mid
or late stages of the disease, when ﬁndings of pulmonary
hypertension and cor pulmonale may become evident.
Cyanosis and clubbing of the digits occur in some
patients with advanced disease.
LABORATORY
Antinuclear antibodies and anti-immunoglobulin anti-
bodies (rheumatoid factors) are identiﬁed in some
patients, even in the absence of a deﬁned CTD. An
increased lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) level is a nonspe-
cific finding common to ILDs. Elevation of the
serum angiotensin-converting enzyme level is common
in sarcoidosis. Serum precipitins conﬁrm exposure when
hypersensitivity pneumonitis is suspected, although they
are not diagnostic of the process. Antineutrophil cyto-
plasmic or anti–basement membrane antibodies are use-
ful if vasculitis is suspected. The electrocardiogram is
usually normal unless pulmonary hypertension is pre-
sent; then it demonstrates right-axis deviation, right
ventricular hypertrophy, or right atrial enlargement or
hypertrophy. Echocardiography also reveals right ven-
tricular dilatation, hypertrophy, or both in the presence
of pulmonary hypertension.
CHEST IMAGING STUDIES
Chest X-ray
ILD may be ﬁrst suspected based on an abnormal chest
radiograph, which most commonly reveals a bibasilar
reticular pattern. A nodular or mixed pattern of alveolar
ﬁlling and increased reticular markings may also be pre-
sent. A subgroup of ILDs—sarcoidosis, PLCH, chronic
hypersensitivity pneumonitis, silicosis, berylliosis, RA
(necrobiotic nodular form), ankylosing spondylitis—
exhibit nodular opacities with a predilection for the
upper lung zones.The chest x-ray correlates poorly with
the clinical or histopathologic stage of the disease. The
radiographic ﬁnding of honeycombing correlates with
pathologic ﬁndings of small cystic spaces and progressive
ﬁbrosis; when present, it portends a poor prognosis. In
most cases, the chest radiograph is nonspeciﬁc and usu-
ally does not allow a speciﬁc diagnosis.
Computed Tomography
HRCT is superior to the plain chest x-ray for early
detection and conﬁrmation of suspected ILD (Fig. 19-3).
Diseases of the Respiratory System
194
SECTION II
FIGURE 19-3
Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. High-resolution CT image
shows bibasal, peripheral predominant reticular abnormality
with traction bronchiectasis and honeycombing. The lung
biopsy showed the typical features of usual interstitial
pneumonia.
Interstitial Lung Diseases
195
CHAPTER 19
Also, HRCT allows better assessment of the extent and
distribution of disease and is especially useful in the inves-
tigation of patients with normal chest radiographs. Coex-
isting disease (e.g., mediastinal adenopathy, carcinoma, or
emphysema) is often best recognized on HRCT scan-
ning. In the appropriate clinical setting, HRCT may be
sufﬁciently characteristic to preclude the need for lung
biopsy in patients with IPF, sarcoidosis, hypersensitivity
pneumonitis, asbestosis, lymphangitic carcinoma, and
PLCH.When a lung biopsy is required, HRCT scanning
is useful for determining the most appropriate area from
which biopsy samples should be taken.
PULMONARY FUNCTION TESTING
Spirometry and Lung Volumes
Measurement of lung function is important in assessing
the extent of pulmonary involvement in patients with
ILD. Most forms of ILD produce a restrictive defect with
reduced total lung capacity (TLC), functional residual
capacity, and residual volume (Chap. 5). Forced expira-
tory volume in 1 s (FEV1) and forced vital capacity
(FVC) are reduced, but these changes are related to the
decreased TLC. The FEV1/FVC ratio is usually normal
or increased. Lung volumes decrease as lung stiffness
worsens with disease progression. A few disorders pro-
duce interstitial opacities on chest x-ray and obstructive
airﬂow limitation on lung function testing (uncommon
in sarcoidosis and hypersensitivity pneumonitis but com-
mon in tuberous sclerosis and LAM). Pulmonary func-
tion studies have proven to have prognostic value in
patients with idiopathic interstitial pneumonias, particu-
larly, IPF or NSIP.
Diffusing Capacity
A reduction in the diffusing capacity of the lung for carbon
monoxide (DLCO) is a common but nonspeciﬁc ﬁnding
in most ILDs.This decrease is caused partly by effacement
of the alveolar capillary units but, more importantly, to
mismatching of ventilation and perfusion ( .V/˙Q). Lung
regions with reduced compliance because of either ﬁbro-
sis or cellular inﬁltration may be poorly ventilated but may
still maintain adequate blood ﬂow, and the ventilation-
perfusion mismatch in these regions acts like true venous
admixture. The severity of the reduction in DLCO does
not correlate with the disease stage.
Arterial Blood Gas
The resting arterial blood gas analysis results may be
normal or reveal hypoxemia (secondary to a mismatch-
ing of ventilation to perfusion) and respiratory alkalosis.
A normal arterial O2 tension (or saturation by oximetry)
at rest does not rule out signiﬁcant hypoxemia during
exercise or sleep. CO2 retention is rare and is usually a
manifestation of end-stage disease.
CARDIOPULMONARY EXERCISE TESTING
Because hypoxemia at rest is not always present and because
severe exercise-induced hypoxemia may go undetected, it
is useful to perform exercise testing with measurement of
arterial blood gases to detect abnormalities of gas
exchange.Arterial oxygen desaturation, a failure to decrease
dead space appropriately with exercise (i.e., a high
VD/VT ratio; Chap. 5), and an excessive increase in respi-
ratory rate with a lower-than-expected recruitment of
tidal volume provide useful information about physio-
logic abnormalities and extent of disease. Serial assess-
ment of resting and exercise gas exchange is an excellent
method for following disease activity and responsiveness
to treatment, especially in patients with IPF. Increasingly,
the 6-min walk test is used to obtain a global evaluation
of submaximal exercise capacity in patients with ILD.The
walk distance and level of oxygen desaturation tend to
correlate with the patient’s baseline lung function.
FIBEROPTIC BRONCHOSCOPY AND
BRONCHOALVEOLAR LAVAGE
In selected diseases (e.g., sarcoidosis, hypersensitivity pneu-
monitis, DAH syndrome, cancer, PAP), cellular analysis of
bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) ﬂuid may be useful in nar-
rowing the differential diagnostic possibilities among
various types of ILD (Table 19-3).The role for BAL in
deﬁning the stage of disease and assessment of disease pro-
gression or response to therapy remains poorly under-
stood, and the usefulness of BAL in clinical assessment and
management remains to be established.
TISSUE AND CELLULAR EXAMINATION
Lung biopsy is the most effective method for conﬁrming
the diagnosis and assessing disease activity.The ﬁndings may
identify a more treatable process than originally suspected,
particularly chronic hypersensitivity pneumonitis, COP,
respiratory bronchiolitis–associated ILD, or sarcoidosis.
Biopsy should be obtained before initiation of treatment.
A deﬁnitive diagnosis avoids confusion and anxiety later in
the clinical course if the patient does not respond to ther-
apy or experiences serious side effects from it.
Fiberoptic bronchoscopy with multiple transbronchial
lung biopsies (four to eight biopsy samples) is often the
initial procedure of choice, especially when sarcoidosis,
lymphangitic carcinomatosis, eosinophilic pneumonia,
Goodpasture’s syndrome, or infection is suspected. If a
speciﬁc diagnosis is not made by transbronchial biopsy,
then surgical lung biopsy by video-assisted thoracic
surgery or open thoracotomy is indicated.Adequate-sized
biopsies from multiple sites, usually from two lobes, should
be obtained. Relative contraindications to lung biopsy
include serious cardiovascular disease, honeycombing and
other radiographic evidence of diffuse end-stage disease,
severe pulmonary dysfunction, or other major operative
risks, especially in the elderly.
Diseases of the Respiratory System
196
SECTION II
Treatment:
INTERSTITIAL LUNG DISEASE
Although the course of ILD is variable, progression is
common and often insidious. All treatable possibilities
should be carefully considered. Because therapy does
not reverse ﬁbrosis, the major goals of treatment are
permanent removal of the offending agent, when
known, and early identiﬁcation and aggressive suppres-
sion of the acute and chronic inﬂammatory process,
thereby reducing further lung damage.
Hypoxemia (PaO2 <55 mmHg) at rest or with exercise
should be managed by supplemental oxygen. If cor pul-
monale develops,diuretic therapy and phlebotomy may
occasionally be required.
DRUG THERAPY
Glucocorticoids are the mainstay
of therapy for suppression of the alveolitis present in
ILD, but the success rate is low. There have been no
TABLE 19-3
DIAGNOSTIC VALUE OF BRONCHOALVEOLAR LAVAGE IN INTERSTITIAL LUNG DISEASE
CONDITION
BRONCHOALVEOLAR LAVAGE FINDING
Sarcoidosis
Lymphocytosis; CD4:CD8 ratio >3.5 most
speciﬁc of diagnosis
Hypersensitivity pneumonitis
Marked lymphocytosis (>50%)
Organizing pneumonia
Foamy macrophages; mixed pattern of increased
cells characteristic; decreased CD4:CD8 ratio
Eosinophilic lung disease
Eosinophils >25%
Diffuse alveolar bleeding
Hemosiderin-laden macrophages, red blood cells
Diffuse alveolar damage, drug toxicity
Atypical hyperplastic type II pneumocytes
Opportunistic infections
Pneumocystis carinii, fungi, cytomegalovirus-
transformed cells
Lymphangitic carcinomatosis, alveolar
Malignant cells
cell carcinoma, pulmonary lymphoma
Alveolar proteinosis
Milky efﬂuent, foamy macrophages and lipoproteinaceous
intraalveolar material (periodic acid–Schiff stain positive)
Lipoid pneumonia
Fat globules in macrophages
Pulmonary Langerhans’ cell histiocytosis
Increased CD1+ Langerhans’ cells
Electron microscopy demonstrating Birbeck
granule in lavaged macrophage (expensive
and difﬁcult to perform)
Asbestos-related pulmonary disease
Dust particles, ferruginous bodies
Berylliosis
Positive lymphocyte transformation test to beryllium
Silicosis
Dust particles by polarized light microscopy
Lipoidosis
Accumulation of speciﬁc lipopigment in
alveolar macrophages
placebo-controlled trials of glucocorticoids in ILD, so
there is no direct evidence that steroids improve sur-
vival in many of the diseases for which they are com-
monly used.Glucocorticoid therapy is recommended for
symptomatic ILD patients with eosinophilic pneumo-
nias,COP,CTD,sarcoidosis,acute inorganic dust exposures,
acute radiation pneumonitis, DAH, and drug-induced
ILD. In organic dust disease, glucocorticoids are recom-
mended for both the acute and chronic stages.
The optimal dose and proper length of therapy
with glucocorticoids in the treatment of most ILDs are
not known. A common starting dose is prednisone,
0.5–1 mg/kg in a once-daily oral dose (based on the
patient’s lean body weight). This dose is continued for
4–12 weeks, at which time the patient is reevaluated. If
the patient is stable or improved, the dose is tapered to
0.25–0.5 mg/kg and is maintained at this level for an
additional 4–12 weeks depending on the course. Rapid
tapering or a shortened course of glucocorticoid treat-
ment can result in recurrence. If the patient’s condition
continues to decline while on glucocorticoids, a sec-
ond agent (see later) is often added, and the pred-
nisone dose is lowered to or maintained at 0.25 mg/kg
per day.
Cyclophosphamide and azathioprine (1–2 mg/kg lean
body weight per day), with or without glucocorticoids,
Interstitial Lung Diseases
197
CHAPTER 19
INDIVIDUAL FORMS OF ILD
IDIOPATHIC PULMONARY FIBROSIS
IPF is the most common form of idiopathic interstitial
pneumonia. Separating IPF from other forms of lung
ﬁbrosis is an important step in the evaluation of all
patients presenting with ILD. IPF has a distinctly poor
response to therapy and a bad prognosis.
Clinical Manifestations
Exertional dyspnea, a nonproductive cough, and inspiratory
crackles with or without digital clubbing may be present
on physical examination.The HRCT lung scans typically
show patchy, predominantly basilar, subpleural reticular
opacities, often associated with traction bronchiectasis and
honeycombing (see Fig.19-3).Atypical ﬁndings that should
suggest an alternative diagnosis include extensive ground-
glass abnormality, nodular opacities, upper or mid-zone
predominance, and prominent hilar or mediastinal lym-
phadenopathy. Pulmonary function tests often reveal a
restrictive pattern, a reduced DLCO, and arterial hypox-
emia that is exaggerated or elicited by exercise.
Histologic Findings
Conﬁrmation of the presence of the UIP pattern on his-
tologic examination is essential to conﬁrm this diagnosis.
Transbronchial biopsies are not helpful in making the
diagnosis of UIP, and surgical biopsy is usually required.
The histologic hallmark and chief diagnostic criterion of
UIP is a heterogeneous appearance at low magniﬁcation
with alternating areas of normal lung, interstitial inﬂam-
mation, foci of proliferating ﬁbroblasts, dense collagen
ﬁbrosis, and honeycomb changes.These histologic changes
affect the peripheral, subpleural parenchyma most severely.
The interstitial inﬂammation is usually patchy and consists
of a lymphoplasmacytic inﬁltrate in the alveolar septa,
associated with hyperplasia of type 2 pneumocytes. The
ﬁbrotic zones are composed mainly of dense collagen,
although scattered foci of proliferating ﬁbroblasts are a
consistent ﬁnding.The extent of ﬁbroblastic proliferation
is predictive of disease progression. Areas of honeycomb
change are composed of cystic ﬁbrotic air spaces that are
frequently lined by bronchiolar epithelium and ﬁlled with
mucin. Smooth muscle hyperplasia is commonly seen in
areas of ﬁbrosis and honeycomb change.A ﬁbrotic pattern
with some features similar to UIP may be found in the
chronic stage of several speciﬁc disorders such as pneu-
moconioses (e.g., asbestosis), radiation injury, certain
drug-induced lung diseases (e.g., nitrofurantoin), chronic
aspiration, sarcoidosis, chronic hypersensitivity pneumoni-
tis, organized chronic eosinophilic pneumonia, and PLCH.
Commonly, other histopathologic features are present in
these situations, thus allowing separation of these lesions
from the UIP-like pattern. Consequently, the term UIP is
used for patients in whom the lesion is idiopathic and not
associated with another condition.
Patients with IPF may experience acute deterioration
secondary to infections, pulmonary embolism, pneumoth-
orax, or heart failure.These patients also commonly suffer
an accelerated phase of rapid clinical decline that is associ-
ated with a poor prognosis (so-called acute exacerbations of
IPF).These acute exacerbations are deﬁned by worsening
of dyspnea within a few days to 4 weeks; newly develop-
ing diffuse radiographic opacities; worsening hypoxemia;
and absence of infectious pneumonia, heart failure, and
sepsis. The rate of these acute exacerbations ranges from
10–57%, apparently depending on the length of fol-
low-up. During these episodes, the histopathologic pattern
of diffuse alveolar damage is often found on the back-
ground of UIP.
have been tried with variable success in IPF, vasculitis,
and other ILDs.An objective response usually requires at
least 8–12 weeks to occur. In situations in which these
drugs have failed or could not be tolerated, other
agents, including methotrexate, colchicine, penicil-
lamine,and cyclosporine,have been tried.However,their
role in the treatment of ILDs remains to be determined.
Many cases of ILD are chronic and irreversible
despite the therapy discussed above, and lung trans-
plantation may then be considered (Chap.24).
Treatment:
IDIOPATHIC PULMONARY FIBROSIS
No therapy has been found to be effective in the man-
agement of patients with acute exacerbations of IPF.
Often mechanical ventilation is required but is usually
not successful, with a hospital mortality rate of up to
three-fourths of the patients. In those who survive, a
recurrence of acute exacerbation is common and usu-
ally results in death at those times.
Lung transplantation should be considered for patients
who experience progressive deterioration despite optimal
medical management and who meet the established cri-
teria (Chap.24).
NONSPECIFIC INTERSTITIAL
PNEUMONIA (NSIP)
This condition deﬁnes a subgroup of the idiopathic inter-
stitial pneumonias that can be distinguished clinically and
pathologically from UIP, DIP,AIP, and idiopathic BOOP.
Importantly, many patients with this histopathologic pat-
tern occur in the context of an underlying disorder, such
as a connective tissue disease, drug-induced ILD, or
chronic hypersensitivity pneumonitis. Idiopathic NSIP is
a subacute restrictive process with a presentation similar
to IPF but usually at a younger age, most commonly in
women who have never smoked. It is often associated
with a febrile illness. HRCT shows bilateral, subpleural
ground-glass opacities, often associated with lower lobe
volume loss (Fig. 19-4). Patchy areas of airspace consoli-
dation and reticular abnormalities may be present, but
honeycombing is unusual.The key histopathologic features
of NSIP are the uniformity of interstitial involvement
across the biopsy section, and this may be predominantly
cellular or ﬁbrosing. There is less temporal and spatial
heterogeneity than in UIP, and little or no honeycomb-
ing is found.The cellular variant is rare. Unlike patients
with IPF (UIP), the majority of patients with NSIP
have a good prognosis (5-year mortality rate estimated at
<15%) with most showing improvement after treatment
with glucocorticoids, often used in combination with
azathioprine.
ACUTE INTERSTITIAL PNEUMONIA
(HAMMAN-RICH SYNDROME)
AIP is a rare, fulminant form of lung injury character-
ized histologically by diffuse alveolar damage on lung
biopsy. Most patients are older than age 40 years. AIP is
similar in presentation to the acute respiratory distress
syndrome (ARDS) (Chap. 30) and probably corresponds
to the subset of cases of idiopathic ARDS. The onset
is usually abrupt in a previously healthy individual. A
prodromal illness, usually lasting 7–14 days before
presentation, is common. Fever, cough, and dyspnea are
frequent manifestations at presentation. Diffuse, bilateral,
air-space opaciﬁcation is present on chest radiography.
HRCT scans show bilateral, patchy, symmetric areas of
ground-glass attenuation. Bilateral areas of air-space
consolidation may also be present.A predominantly sub-
pleural distribution may be seen. The diagnosis of AIP
requires the presence of a clinical syndrome of idio-
pathic ARDS and pathologic conﬁrmation of organiz-
ing diffuse alveolar damage. Therefore, lung biopsy is
required to conﬁrm the diagnosis. Most patients have
moderate to severe hypoxemia and develop respiratory
failure. Mechanical ventilation is often required. The
mortality rate is high (>60%), with most patients dying
within 6 months of presentation. Recurrences have
been reported. However, those who recover often have
substantial improvement in lung function. The main
treatment is supportive. It is not clear that glucocorti-
coid therapy is effective.
CRYPTOGENIC ORGANIZING PNEUMONIA
Also known as idiopathic BOOP, COP is a clinicopatho-
logic syndrome of unknown etiology.The onset is usually
in the ﬁfth and sixth decades of life.The presentation may
be of a ﬂulike illness with cough, fever, malaise, fatigue,
and weight loss. Inspiratory crackles are frequently present
on examination. Pulmonary function is usually impaired,
with a restrictive defect and arterial hypoxemia being
most common. The roentgenographic manifestations are
distinctive, revealing bilateral, patchy, or diffuse alveolar
opacities in the presence of normal lung volume. Recur-
rent and migratory pulmonary opacities are common.
HRCT shows areas of air-space consolidation, ground-
glass opacities, small nodular opacities, and bronchial wall
thickening and dilatation.These changes occur more fre-
quently in the periphery of the lung and in the lower
lung zone. Lung biopsy shows granulation tissue within
small airways, alveolar ducts, and airspaces, with chronic
inﬂammation in the surrounding alveoli. Glucocorticoid
therapy induces clinical recovery in two-thirds of patients.
A few patients have rapidly progressive courses with fatal
outcomes despite glucocorticoids.
Foci of organizing pneumonia (i.e., a “BOOP pattern”)
is a nonspeciﬁc reaction to lung injury found adjacent to
other pathologic processes or as a component of other pri-
mary pulmonary disorders (e.g., cryptococcosis,Wegener’s
granulomatosis, lymphoma, hypersensitivity pneumonitis,
and eosinophilic pneumonia). Consequently, the clinician
must carefully reevaluate any patient found to have this
histopathologic lesion to rule out these possibilities.
INTERSTITIAL LUNG DISEASE ASSOCIATED
WITH CIGARETTE SMOKING
Desquamative Interstitial Pneumonia
DIP is a rare but distinct clinical and pathologic entity
found exclusively in cigarette smokers. The histologic
Diseases of the Respiratory System
198
SECTION II
FIGURE 19-4
Nonspeciﬁc interstitial pneumonia.
High-resolution CT
through the lower lung showing volume loss with extensive
ground-glass abnormality, reticular abnormality, and traction
bronchiectasis. There is sparing on the lung immediately
adjacent to the pleura. Histology showed a combination of
inﬂammation and mild ﬁbrosis.
Interstitial Lung Diseases
199
CHAPTER 19
hallmark is the extensive accumulation of macrophages
in intraalveolar spaces with minimal interstitial ﬁbrosis.
The peak incidence is in the fourth and ﬁfth decades of
life. Most patients present with dyspnea and cough.
Lung function testing shows a restrictive pattern with
reduced DLCO and arterial hypoxemia. The chest x-ray
and HRCT scans usually show diffuse hazy opacities.
Clinical recognition of DIP is important because the
process is associated with a better prognosis (10-year
survival rate, ∼70%) and a better response to smoking
cessation and systemic glucocorticoids than IPF.
Respiratory Bronchiolitis–Associated
Interstitial Lung Disease
Respiratory bronchiolitis–associated ILD (RB-ILD) is
considered to be a subset of DIP and is characterized by
the accumulation of macrophages in peribronchial alveoli.
The clinical presentation is similar to DIP. Rales are often
heard on chest examination and occur throughout inspi-
ration; sometimes they continue into expiration. The
process is seen best on HRCT lung scanning, which
shows bronchial wall thickening, centrilobular nodules,
ground-glass opacity, and emphysema with air trapping.
RB-ILD appears to resolve in most patients after smoking
cessation alone.
Pulmonary Langerhans Cell Histiocytosis
Pulmonary Langerhans cell histiocytosis (PLCH) is a rare
smoking-related, diffuse lung disease that primarily affects
men between the ages of 20 and 40 years. The clinical
presentation varies from an asymptomatic state to a
rapidly progressive condition.The most common clinical
manifestations at presentation are cough, dyspnea, chest
pain, weight loss, and fever. Pneumothorax occurs in
∼25% of patients. Hemoptysis and diabetes insipidus are
rare manifestations. The radiographic features vary with
the stage of the disease.The combination of ill-deﬁned or
stellate nodules (2–10 mm in diameter), reticular or
nodular opacities, bizarre-shaped upper zone cysts, preser-
vation of lung volume, and sparing of the costophrenic
angles are characteristics of PLCH. HRCT that reveals a
combination of nodules and thin-walled cysts is virtually
diagnostic of PLCH.The most frequent pulmonary func-
tion abnormality is a markedly reduced DLCO, although
varying degrees of restrictive disease, airﬂow limitation,
and diminished exercise capacity may occur.The charac-
teristic histopathologic ﬁnding in PLCH is the presence
of nodular sclerosing lesions that contain Langerhans’ cells
accompanied by mixed cellular inﬁltrates. The nodular
lesions are poorly deﬁned and are distributed in a bron-
chiolocentric fashion with intervening normal lung
parenchyma. As the disease progresses, ﬁbrosis progresses
to involve adjacent lung tissue, leading to pericicatricial
airspace enlargement, which accounts for the concomitant
cystic changes. Discontinuance of smoking is the key
treatment, resulting in clinical improvement in one-third
of patients. Most patients with PLCH experience persis-
tent or progressive disease. Death from respiratory failure
occurs in ∼10% of patients.
INTERSTITIAL LUNG DISEASE ASSOCIATED
WITH CONNECTIVE TISSUE DISORDERS
Clinical ﬁndings suggestive of a CTD (musculoskeletal
pain, weakness, fatigue, fever, joint pains or swelling, pho-
tosensitivity, Raynaud’s phenomenon, pleuritis, dry eyes,
dry mouth) should be sought in any patient with ILD.The
CTDs may be difﬁcult to rule out since the pulmonary
manifestations occasionally precede the more typical sys-
temic manifestations by months or years.The most com-
mon form of pulmonary involvement is the NSIP
histopathologic pattern. However, determining the precise
nature of lung involvement in most of the CTDs is dif-
ﬁcult because of the high incidence of lung involvement
caused by disease-associated complications of esophageal
dysfunction (predisposing to aspiration and secondary
infections), respiratory muscle weakness (atelectasis and
secondary infections), complications of therapy (oppor-
tunistic infections), and associated malignancies.
Progressive Systemic Sclerosis
Clinical evidence of ILD is present in about one-half of
patients with progressive systemic sclerosis (PSS), and
pathologic evidence is present in three-quarters. Pulmonary
function tests show a restrictive pattern and impaired dif-
fusing capacity, often before any clinical or radiographic
evidence of lung disease appears. Pulmonary vascular
disease alone or in association with pulmonary ﬁbrosis,
pleuritis, or recurrent aspiration pneumonitis is strikingly
resistant to current modes of therapy.
Rheumatoid Arthritis
ILD associated with RA is more common in men. Pul-
monary manifestations of RA include pleurisy with or
without effusion, ILD in up to 20% of cases, necrobiotic
nodules (nonpneumoconiotic intrapulmonary rheuma-
toid nodules) with or without cavities, Caplan’s syndrome
(rheumatoid pneumoconiosis), pulmonary hypertension
secondary to rheumatoid pulmonary vasculitis, BOOP,
and upper airway obstruction caused by cricoarytenoid
arthritis.
Systemic Lupus Erythematosus
Lung disease is a common complication in SLE. Pleuritis
with or without effusion is the most common pulmonary
manifestation. Other lung manifestations include: atelecta-
sis, diaphragmatic dysfunction with loss of lung volumes,
pulmonary vascular disease, pulmonary hemorrhage, ure-
mic pulmonary edema, infectious pneumonia, and BOOP.
Acute lupus pneumonitis characterized by pulmonary
capillaritis leading to alveolar hemorrhage is uncommon.
Chronic, progressive ILD is uncommon. It is important to
exclude pulmonary infection. Although pleuropulmonary
involvement may not be evident clinically, pulmonary
function testing, particularly DLCO, reveals abnormalities in
many patients with SLE.
Polymyositis and Dermatomyositis
ILD occurs in ∼10% of patients with polymyositis and
dermatomyositis (PM/DM). Diffuse reticular or nodular
opacities with or without an alveolar component occur
radiographically, with a predilection for the lung bases.
ILD occurs more commonly in the subgroup of patients
with an anti–Jo-1 antibody that is directed to histidyl
tRNA synthetase.Weakness of respiratory muscles con-
tributing to aspiration pneumonia may be present. A
rapidly progressive illness characterized by diffuse alveo-
lar damage may cause respiratory failure.
Sjögren’s Syndrome
General dryness and lack of airways secretion cause the
major problems of hoarseness, cough, and bronchitis. Lym-
phocytic interstitial pneumonitis, lymphoma, pseudolym-
phoma, bronchiolitis, and bronchiolitis obliterans are
associated with this condition. Lung biopsy is frequently
required to establish a precise pulmonary diagnosis. Gluco-
corticoids have been used in the management of ILD
associated with Sjögren’s syndrome with some degree of
clinical success.
DRUG-INDUCED INTERSTITIAL
LUNG DISEASE
Many classes of drugs have the potential to induce diffuse
ILD, which is manifest most commonly as exertional
dyspnea and nonproductive cough.A detailed history of
the medications taken by the patient, including over-
the-counter medications, oily nose drops, or petroleum
products (mineral oil), is needed to identify drug-induced
disease. In most cases, the pathogenesis is unknown,
although a combination of direct toxic effects of the drug
(or its metabolite) and indirect inﬂammatory and
immunologic events are likely. The onset of the illness
may be abrupt and fulminant, or it may be insidious,
extending over weeks to months. The drug may have
been taken for several years before a reaction develops
(e.g., amiodarone), or the lung disease may occur weeks
to years after the drug has been discontinued (e.g., car-
mustine). The extent and severity of disease are usually
dose related.Treatment consists of discontinuation of any
possible offending drug and supportive care.
EOSINOPHILIC PNEUMONIA 
(See Chap. 9)
PULMONARY ALVEOLAR PROTEINOSIS
Although not strictly an ILD, PAP resembles and is there-
fore considered with these conditions. It has been proposed
that a defect in macrophage function, more speciﬁcally an
impaired ability to process surfactant, may play a role in
the pathogenesis of PAP.This diffuse disease is character-
ized by the accumulation of an amorphous, periodic acid-
Schiff–positive lipoproteinaceous material in the distal air
spaces. There is little or no lung inﬂammation, and the
underlying lung architecture is preserved. Mutant mice
lacking the gene for granulocyte-macrophage colony-
stimulating factor (GM-CSF) have a similar accumulation
of surfactant and surfactant apoprotein in the alveolar
spaces. Moreover, reconstitution of the respiratory epithe-
lium of GM-CSF knockout mice with the GM-CSF gene
completely corrects the alveolar proteinosis. Data from
BAL studies in patients suggest that PAP is an autoim-
mune disease with neutralizing antibody of immunoglob-
ulin G isotype against GM-CSF. These ﬁndings suggest
that neutralization of GM-CSF bioactivity by the anti-
body causes dysfunction of alveolar macrophages, which
results in reduced surfactant clearance.There are three dis-
tinct classes of PAP: acquired (>90% of all cases), congeni-
tal, and secondary. Congenital PAP is transmitted in an
autosomal recessive manner and is caused by homozygos-
ity for a frame shift mutation (121ins2) in the SP-B gene,
which leads to an unstable SP-B mRNA, reduced
protein levels, and secondary disturbances of SP-C processing.
Secondary PAP is rare among adults and is caused by
lysinuric protein intolerance, acute silicosis and other
inhalational syndromes, immunodeﬁciency disorders, and
malignancies (almost exclusively of hematopoietic origin)
and hematopoietic disorders.
The typical age of presentation is 30–50 years, and
men predominate. The clinical presentation is usually
insidious and manifested by progressive exertional
dyspnea, fatigue, weight loss, and low-grade fever.A non-
productive cough is common, but occasionally expecto-
ration of “chunky” gelatinous material may occur.
Polycythemia, hypergammaglobulinemia, and increased
LDH levels are frequent. Markedly elevated serum levels
of lung surfactant proteins A and D have been found in
patients with PAP. Radiographically, bilateral symmetric
alveolar opacities located centrally in the mid and lower
lung zones result in a “bat-wing” distribution. HRCT
shows a ground-glass opaciﬁcation and thickened intralob-
ular structures and interlobular septa.Whole-lung lavage(s)
through a double-lumen endotracheal tube provides relief
to many patients with dyspnea or progressive hypoxemia
and may provide long-term beneﬁt.
PULMONARY
LYMPHANGIOLEIOMYOMATOSIS
Pulmonary LAM is a rare condition that afﬂicts pre-
menopausal women and should be suspected in young
Diseases of the Respiratory System
200
SECTION II
Interstitial Lung Diseases
201
CHAPTER 19
women with “emphysema,” recurrent pneumothorax, or
chylous pleural effusion. It is often misdiagnosed as
asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Patho-
logically, LAM is characterized by the proliferation of
atypical pulmonary interstitial smooth muscle and cyst
formation.The immature-appearing smooth muscle cells
react with monoclonal antibody HMB45, which recog-
nizes a 100-kDa glycoprotein (gp100) originally found
in human melanoma cells. Whites are affected much
more commonly than members of other racial groups.
The disease accelerates during pregnancy and abates after
oophorectomy. Common complaints at presentation are
dyspnea, cough, and chest pain. Hemoptysis may be life
threatening. Spontaneous pneumothorax occurs in 50%
of patients; it may be bilateral and necessitate pleurodesis.
Meningioma and renal angiomyolipomas (hamartomas),
characteristic ﬁndings in the genetic disorder tuberous
sclerosis, are also common in patients with LAM. Chy-
lothorax, chyloperitoneum (chylous ascites), chyluria, and
chylopericardium are other complications. Pulmonary
function testing usually reveals an obstructive or mixed
obstructive-restrictive pattern, and gas exchange is often
abnormal. HRCT shows thin-walled cysts surrounded
by normal lung without zonal predominance. Progres-
sion is common, with a median survival of 8–10 years
from diagnosis. Progesterone (10 mg/d) and luteinizing
hormone–releasing hormone analogues have been used.
Oophorectomy is no longer recommended and estro-
gen-containing drugs should be discontinued. Lung
transplantation offers the only hope for cure despite
reports of recurrent disease in the transplanted lung.
SYNDROMES OF INTERSTITIAL LUNG
DISEASE WITH DIFFUSE ALVEOLAR
HEMORRHAGE
Injury to arterioles, venules, and the alveolar septal (alveo-
lar wall or interstitial) capillaries can result in hemoptysis
secondary to disruption of the alveolar-capillary basement
membrane. This results in bleeding into the alveolar
spaces, which characterizes DAH. Pulmonary capillaritis,
characterized by a neutrophilic inﬁltration of the alveolar
septae, may lead to necrosis of these structures, loss of cap-
illary structural integrity, and the pouring of red blood
cells into the alveolar space. Fibrinoid necrosis of the
interstitium and red blood cells within the interstitial
space are sometimes seen. Bland pulmonary hemorrhage
(i.e., DAH without inﬂammation of the alveolar struc-
tures) may also occur.
The clinical onset is often abrupt, with cough, fever, and
dyspnea. Severe respiratory distress requiring ventilatory
support may be evident at initial presentation. Although
hemoptysis is expected, it can be absent at the time of pre-
sentation in one-third of the cases. For patients without
hemoptysis, new alveolar opacities, a decreasing hemoglo-
bin level, and hemorrhagic BAL ﬂuid point to the diagno-
sis.The chest radiograph is nonspeciﬁc and most commonly
shows new patchy or diffuse alveolar opacities. Recurrent
episodes of DAH may lead to pulmonary ﬁbrosis, resulting
in interstitial opacities on the chest radiograph.An elevated
white blood cell count and decreasing hematocrit are fre-
quent.Evidence for impaired renal function caused by focal
segmental necrotizing glomerulonephritis, usually with
crescent formation,may also be present.
Varying degrees of hypoxemia may occur and are often
severe enough to require ventilatory support. The DLCO
may be increased, resulting from the increased hemoglobin
within the alveoli compartment. Evaluation of either lung
or renal tissue by immunoﬂuorescent techniques indicates
an absence of immune complexes (pauci-immune) in
Wegener’s granulomatosis, microscopic polyangiitis pauci-
immune glomerulonephritis, and isolated pulmonary
capillaritis. A granular pattern is found in the CTDs, par-
ticularly SLE, and a characteristic linear deposition is
found in Goodpasture’s syndrome. Granular deposition of
IgA-containing immune complexes is present in Henoch-
Schönlein purpura.
The mainstay of therapy for the DAH associated with
systemic vasculitis, CTD, Goodpasture’s syndrome, and
isolated pulmonary capillaritis is IV methylprednisolone,
0.5–2.0 g/d in divided doses for up to 5 days, followed
by a gradual tapering and then maintenance on an oral
preparation. Prompt initiation of therapy is important,
particularly in the face of renal insufﬁciency, because
early initiation of therapy has the best chance of preserv-
ing renal function.The decision to start other immuno-
suppressive therapy (cyclophosphamide or azathioprine)
acutely depends on the severity of illness.
Goodpasture’s Syndrome
Pulmonary hemorrhage and glomerulonephritis are fea-
tures in most patients with this disease. Autoantibodies
to renal glomerular and lung alveolar basement mem-
branes are present.This syndrome can present and recur
as DAH without an associated glomerulonephritis. In
such case, circulating anti–basement membrane antibody
is often absent, and the only way to establish the diagno-
sis is by demonstrating linear immunoﬂuorescence in
lung tissue. The underlying histology may be bland
hemorrhage or DAH associated with capillaritis. Plasma-
pheresis has been recommended as adjunctive treatment.
INHERITED DISORDERS ASSOCIATED WITH
INTERSTITIAL LUNG DISEASES
Pulmonary opacities and respiratory symptoms typical
of ILD can develop in related family members and in
individuals with several inherited diseases.These include
the phakomatoses;tuberous sclerosis and neuroﬁbromatosis;
and the lysosomal storage diseases, Niemann-Pick disease
and Gaucher’s disease. The Hermansky-Pudlak syn-
drome is an autosomal recessive disorder in which gran-
ulomatous colitis and ILD may occur. It is characterized
by oculocutaneous albinism; bleeding diathesis secondary
to platelet dysfunction; and the accumulation of a chro-
molipid, lipofuscin material in cells of the reticuloen-
dothelial system. A ﬁbrotic pattern is found on lung
biopsy, but the alveolar macrophages may contain cyto-
plasmic ceroid-like inclusions.
INTERSTITIAL LUNG DISEASE WITH A
GRANULOMATOUS RESPONSE IN LUNG
TISSUE OR VASCULAR STRUCTURES
Inhalation of organic dusts, which cause hypersensitivity
pneumonitis, or of inorganic dust, such as silica, which
elicits a granulomatous inﬂammatory reaction leading to
ILD, produces diseases of known etiology (see Table 19-1)
that are discussed in Chaps. 9 and 10. Sarcoidosis is
prominent among granulomatous diseases of unknown
cause in which ILD is an important feature.
Granulomatous Vasculitides
The granulomatous vasculitides are characterized by pul-
monary angiitis (i.e., inﬂammation and necrosis of blood
vessels) with associated granuloma formation (i.e., inﬁl-
trates of lymphocytes, plasma cells, epithelioid cells, or
histiocytes, with or without the presence of multinucle-
ated giant cells, sometimes with tissue necrosis).The lungs
are almost always involved, although any organ system
may be affected. Wegener’s granulomatosis and allergic
angiitis and granulomatosis (Churg-Strauss syndrome)
primarily affect the lungs but are associated with a sys-
temic vasculitis as well. The granulomatous vasculitides
generally limited to the lungs include necrotizing sarcoid
granulomatosis and benign lymphocytic angiitis and
granulomatosis. Granulomatous infection and pulmonary
angiitis due to irritating embolic material (e.g., talc) are
important known causes of pulmonary vasculitis.
LYMPHOCYTIC INFILTRATIVE DISORDERS
This group of disorders features lymphocyte and plasma cell
inﬁltration of the lung parenchyma.The disorders either are
benign or can behave as low-grade lymphomas. Included
are angioimmunoblastic lymphadenopathy with dyspro-
teinemia, a rare lymphoproliferative disorder characterized
by diffuse lymphadenopathy, fever, hepatosplenomegaly, and
hemolytic anemia,with ILD in some cases.
Lymphocytic Interstitial Pneumonitis
This rare form of ILD occurs in adults, some of whom
have an autoimmune disease or dysproteinemia. It has
been reported in patients with Sjögren’s syndrome and
HIV infection.
Lymphomatoid Granulomatosis
This multisystem disorder of unknown etiology is an
angiocentric malignant (T cell) lymphoma characterized
by a polymorphic lymphoid infiltrate, an angiitis, and
granulomatosis. Although it may affect virtually any
organ, it is most frequently characterized by pulmonary,
skin, and central nervous system involvement.
BRONCHOCENTRIC GRANULOMATOSIS
Rather than a speciﬁc clinical entity, bronchocentric
granulomatosis (BG) is a descriptive histologic term that
describes an uncommon and nonspeciﬁc pathologic
response to a variety of airway injuries. Evidence suggests
that BG is caused by a hypersensitivity reaction to
Aspergillus spp. or other fungi in patients with asthma.
About half of the patients described have chronic asthma
with severe wheezing and peripheral blood eosinophilia.
In patients with asthma, BG probably represents one
pathologic manifestation of allergic bronchopulmonary
aspergillosis or another allergic mycosis. In patients with-
out asthma, BG has been associated with RA and a vari-
ety of infections, including tuberculosis, echinococcosis,
histoplasmosis, coccidioidomycosis, and nocardiosis.The
chest roentgenogram reveals irregularly shaped nodular
or mass lesions with ill-deﬁned margins, which are usu-
ally unilateral and solitary, with upper lobe predomi-
nance. Glucocorticoids are the treatment of choice,
often with excellent outcome, although recurrences may
occur as therapy is tapered or stopped.
GLOBAL CONSIDERATIONS
Limited epidemiologic data exist describing the
prevalence or incidence of ILD in the general
population. With a few exceptions (e.g., sar-
coidosis, certain occupational and environmental expo-
sures), there appear to be no signiﬁcant differences in
the prevalence or incidence of ILD among various pop-
ulations. For sarcoidosis, there are important environ-
mental, racial, and genetic differences.
FURTHER READINGS
AMERICAN THORACIC SOCIETY/EUROPEAN RESPIRATORY SOCIETY:
Idiopathic pulmonary ﬁbrosis: Diagnosis and treatment. Interna-
tional consensus statement.Am J Respir Crit Care Med 161:646,
2000
———: International multidisciplinary consensus classiﬁcation of the
idiopathic interstitial pneumonias. Am J Respir Crit Care Med
165:277, 2002
COLLARD HR et al: Acute exacerbations of idiopathic pulmonary
ﬁbrosis.Am J Respir Crit Care Med 176:636, 2007
EL-ZAMMAR OA, KATZENSTEIN AL: Pathological diagnosis of granu-
lomatous lung disease:A review. Histopathology 50:289, 2007
FREEMER M, KING TE JR: Connective tissue disease, in Interstitial
Lung Diseases, 4th ed, MI Schwarz,TE King, Jr (eds). Hamilton,
Ontario, BC Decker, 2003, pp 535–598
KINDER BW et al: Idiopathic nonspeciﬁc interstitial pneumonia:
Lung manifestation of undifferentiated connective tissue disease?
Am J Respir Crit Care Med 176:691, 2007
Diseases of the Respiratory System
202
SECTION II
Interstitial Lung Diseases
203
CHAPTER 19
KING TE JR: Clinical advances in the diagnosis and therapy of the
interstitial lung diseases. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 172:268,
2005
MARTINEZ FJ: Idiopathic interstitial pneumonias: Usual interstitial
pneumonia versus nonspeciﬁc interstitial pneumonia. Proc Am
Thorac Soc 3:81, 2006
RAGHU G et al: Idiopathic pulmonary ﬁbrosis: Evidence based guide-
lines for diagnosis and management a joint ATS/ERS/JRS/ALAT
statement.Am J Respir Crit Care Med, in press, 2010
SELMAN M et al: Idiopathic pulmonary ﬁbrosis: Prevailing and evolv-
ing hypotheses about its pathogenesis and implications for therapy.
Ann Intern Med 134:136, 2001
SEYMOUR JF, PRESNEILL JJ: Pulmonary alveolar proteinosis: Progress
in the ﬁrst 44 years. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 166:215, 2002
TRAVIS WD et al: Idiopathic nonspeciﬁc interstitial pneumonia:
Report of an American Thoracic Society Project. Am J Respir
Crit Care Med 177:1338, 2008
WALTER N et al: Current perspectives on the treatment of pul-
monary ﬁbrosis. Proc Am Thorac Soc 3:330, 2006
Samuel Z. Goldhaber
EPIDEMIOLOGY
A quiet revolution has occurred in the ﬁeld of venous
thromboembolism (VTE), which encompasses deep venous
thrombosis (DVT) and pulmonary embolism (PE).VTE
is no longer an orphan disease. Its adverse public health
impact has been acknowledged in the United States by
the National Quality Forum,The Joint Commission, the
National Comprehensive Cancer Network, and the Sur-
geon General’s Ofﬁce. Public service announcements
have educated laypersons on the deﬁnition and medical
consequences of DVT and PE, along with risk factors
and warning signs. VTE-related deaths in the United
States are estimated at 300,000 annually: 7% diagnosed
with VTE and treated, 34% sudden fatal PE, and 59% as
undetected PE. Approximately two-thirds of sympto-
matic VTE events are hospital acquired, and the remain-
der are community acquired. Residents of skilled nursing
facilities are especially vulnerable. The most recent esti-
mates of hospitalized patients at risk for VTE in the
United States total 13.4 million patients annually:5.8 million
surgical patients at moderate to high risk and 7.6 million
medical patients with comorbidities such as heart failure,
cancer, and stroke.These new data provide the rationale
for changing the prophylaxis paradigm from voluntary to
mandatory compliance with guidelines to prevent VTE
among hospitalized patients.
VTE is also a major European health problem, with
an estimated 370,000 per year PE-related deaths, when
DEEP VENOUS THROMBOSIS 
AND PULMONARY THROMBOEMBOLISM
data in France, Germany, Spain, Italy, Sweden, and the
United Kingdom are combined. The estimated direct
cost for VTE-associated care in Europe exceeds 3 billion
Euros per year.
Although DVT and PE encompass one disease entity,
VTE, there are important differences. DVT occurs about
three times more often than PE.The major adverse out-
come of DVT alone, without PE, is the development of
postphlebitic syndrome, which occurs in more than half of
patients with DVT. Postphlebitic syndrome is a late
adverse effect of DVT that is caused by permanent dam-
age to the venous valves of the leg, which become
incompetent and permit abnormal exudation of intersti-
tial ﬂuid from the venous system. It may not become
clinically manifest until several years after the initial DVT.
There is no effective medical therapy for this condition,
which impairs quality of life and disables. Most patients
describe chronic ankle swelling and calf swelling and
aching, especially after prolonged standing. In its most
severe form, postphlebitic syndrome causes skin ulcera-
tion, especially in the medial malleolus of the leg. PE can
be fatal or can cause chronic thromboembolic pulmonary
hypertension, with breathlessness at rest or with mild
exertion. Patients with PE are more likely to experience
recurrent VTE than patients with DVT alone.
Genetic and acquired factors contribute to the likeli-
hood of VTE.The two most common autosomal domi-
nant genetic mutations are the factor V Leiden and the
CHAPTER 20
CHAPTER 20
Epidemiology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 204
Pathophysiology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 205
Diagnosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 205
Prevention of Venous Thromboembolism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 213
I Further Readings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 214
204
prothrombin gene mutations. However, only a minority
of patients with VTE have identiﬁable predisposing
genetic factors.The majority of patients with predispos-
ing genetic factors will not develop clinical evidence of
clotting. Acquired predispositions include long-haul air
travel; obesity; cigarette smoking; use of oral contracep-
tives; pregnancy; postmenopausal hormone replacement;
surgery; trauma; and medical conditions such as antiphos-
pholipid antibody syndrome, cancer, systemic arterial
hypertension, and chronic obstructive pulmonary dis-
ease. Thrombophilia contributes to the risk of venous
thrombosis, often because of an inherited risk factor in
combination with an acquired predisposition.
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Embolization
When venous thrombi dislodge from their site of for-
mation, they embolize to the pulmonary arterial circula-
tion or, paradoxically, to the arterial circulation through
a patent foramen ovale or atrial septal defect.About half
of patients with pelvic vein thrombosis or proximal leg
DVT develop PE, which is usually asymptomatic. Isolated
calf vein thrombi pose a much lower risk of PE, but they
are the most common source of paradoxical embolism.
These tiny thrombi can cross a small patent foramen
ovale or atrial septal defect, unlike larger, more proximal
leg thrombi. With increased use of chronic indwelling
central venous catheters for hyperalimentation and
chemotherapy, as well as more frequent insertion of per-
manent pacemakers and internal cardiac deﬁbrillators,
upper extremity venous thrombosis is becoming a more
common problem. These thrombi rarely embolize and
cause PE.
Physiology
The most common gas exchange abnormalities are
hypoxemia (decreased arterial PO2) and an increased
alveolar-arterial O2 tension gradient, which represents the
inefﬁciency of O2 transfer across the lungs.Anatomic dead
space increases because breathed gas does not enter gas
exchange units of the lung. Physiologic dead space
increases because ventilation to gas exchange units exceeds
venous blood ﬂow through the pulmonary capillaries.
Other pathophysiological abnormalities include:
1. Increased pulmonary vascular resistance caused by vascular
obstruction or platelet secretion of vasoconstricting
neurohumoral agents such as serotonin. Release of
vasoactive mediators can produce ventilation-perfusion
mismatching at sites remote from the embolus, thereby
accounting for a potential discordance between a small
PE and a large alveolar-arterial O2 gradient.
2. Impaired gas exchange caused by increased alveolar dead
space from vascular obstruction, hypoxemia from
alveolar hypoventilation relative to perfusion in the
nonobstructed lung,right-to-left shunting,and impaired
carbon monoxide transfer because of loss of gas
exchange surface.
3. Alveolar hyperventilation caused by reﬂex stimulation
of irritant receptors
4. Increased airway resistance caused by constriction of air-
ways distal to the bronchi
5. Decreased pulmonary compliance caused by lung edema,
lung hemorrhage, or loss of surfactant
Right Ventricular Dysfunction
Progressive right heart failure is the usual cause of death
from PE. In the International Cooperative Pulmonary
Embolism Registry (ICOPER), the presence of right
ventricular (RV) dysfunction on baseline echocardiogra-
phy of PE patients who presented with a systolic blood
pressure >90 mmHg was associated with a doubling of
the 3-month mortality rate.As pulmonary vascular resis-
tance increases, RV wall tension increases and causes fur-
ther RV dilatation and dysfunction. RV contraction
continues even after the left ventricle (LV) starts relaxing
at end-systole. Consequently, the interventricular sep-
tum bulges into and compresses an intrinsically normal
LV. Diastolic LV impairment develops, attributable to
septal displacement, and results in reduced LV distensi-
bility and impaired LV ﬁlling during diastole. Increased
RV wall tension also compresses the right coronary artery,
diminishes subendocardial perfusion, limits myocardial
oxygen supply, and may precipitate myocardial ischemia
and RV infarction. Underﬁlling of the LV may lead to a
decrease in LV cardiac output and systemic arterial pres-
sure, thereby provoking myocardial ischemia because of
compromised coronary artery perfusion. Eventually, cir-
culatory collapse and death may ensue.
DIAGNOSIS
Clinical Evaluation
The diagnosis is challenging because the symptoms and
signs are nonspeciﬁc. VTE mimics other illnesses, and
PE is known as “the great masquerader.”
For patients who have DVT, the most frequent his-
tory is a cramp in the lower calf that persists for several
days and that becomes more uncomfortable as time pro-
gresses. For patients who have PE, the most frequent
history is unexplained breathlessness.
When evaluating patients with possible DVT, the initial
task is to decide whether the clinical likelihood for DVT
is low.When evaluating patients with possible PE, the ini-
tial task is to decide whether the clinical likelihood is
high. Patients with a low likelihood of DVT or a non-
high (i.e., low or moderate) likelihood of PE can undergo
initial diagnostic evaluation with D-dimer testing alone
(see later) without obligatory imaging tests (Fig. 20-1).
205
Deep Venous Thrombosis and Pulmonary Thromboembolism
CHAPTER 20
Point score methods are useful for estimating the
clinical likelihood of DVT and PE (Table 20-1).
Clinical Syndromes
The differential diagnosis is critical because not all leg
pain is caused by DVT, and not all dyspnea is caused by
PE (Table 20-2). Sudden, severe calf discomfort suggests
a ruptured Baker’s cyst. Fever and chills usually herald cel-
lulitis rather than DVT, though DVT may be present con-
comitantly. Physical ﬁndings, if present at all, may simply
consist of mild palpation discomfort in the lower calf.
Massive DVT is much easier to recognize. The patient
presents with severe thigh swelling and marked tenderness
when the inguinal area and common femoral vein are
palpated. In extreme cases, patients will be unable to walk
or may require a cane, crutches, or walker.
If the leg is diffusely edematous, DVT is unlikely.
Much more common is an acute exacerbation of venous
insufﬁciency caused by postphlebitic syndrome. Upper
extremity venous thrombosis may present with asymme-
try in the supraclavicular fossa or in the circumference
of the upper arms. A prominent superﬁcial venous pat-
tern may be evident on the anterior chest wall.
Patients with massive PE present with systemic arterial
hypotension and usually have an anatomically widespread
thromboembolism.Those with moderate to large PE have
RV hypokinesis on echocardiography but normal systemic
arterial pressure. Patients with small to moderate PE have
both normal right heart function and normal systemic
arterial pressure. They have an excellent prognosis with
adequate anticoagulation.
The presence of pulmonary infarction usually indicates a
small PE but one that is exquisitely painful because it
lodges peripherally, near the innervation of pleural nerves.
Pleuritic chest pain is more common with small, periph-
eral emboli. However, larger, more central PEs can occur
concomitantly with peripheral pulmonary infarction.
Nonthrombotic PE may be easily overlooked. Possible
etiologies include fat embolism after blunt trauma and
206
Diseases of the Respiratory System
SECTION II
ALGORITHM FOR DIAGNOSTIC IMAGING
Suspect DVT or PE
Assess clinical likelihood
Low
D-dimer
D-dimer
Normal
No DVT
Imaging test needed
No PE
Imaging test needed
High
Normal
High
Not low
Not high
High
DVT
PE
FIGURE 20-1
How to decide whether diagnostic imaging is needed. For
assessment of clinical likelihood, see Table 20-1. DVT, deep
venous thrombosis; LDH, PE, pulmonary embolism.
TABLE 20-1
CLINICAL DECISION RULES
Low Clinical Likelihood of Deep Venous Thrombosis if
the Point Score Is Zero or Less
CLINICAL VARIABLE
SCORE
Active cancer
1
Paralysis, paresis, or recent cast
1
Bedridden for >3 days; major surgery <12 weeks
1
Tenderness along distribution of deep veins
1
Entire leg swelling
1
Unilateral calf swelling >3 cm
1
Pitting edema
1
Collateral superﬁcial nonvaricose veins
1
Alternative diagnosis at least as likely as DVT
–2
High Clinical Likelihood of Pulmonary Embolism
if the Point Score Exceeds 4
CLINICAL VARIABLE
SCORE
Signs and symptoms of DVT
3.0
Alternative diagnosis less likely than PE
3.0
Heart rate >100 bpm
1.5
Immobilization >3 days; surgery within 4 weeks
1.5
Prior PE or DVT
1.5
Hemoptysis
1.0
Cancer
1.0
Note: DVT, deep venous thrombosis; PE, pulmonary embolism.
TABLE 20-2
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
DVT
Ruptured Baker’s cyst
Cellulitis
Postphlebitic syndrome or venous insufﬁciency
PE
Pneumonia, asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
Congestive heart failure
Pericarditis
Pleurisy: “viral syndrome,” costochondritis, 
musculoskeletal discomfort
Rib fracture, pneumothorax
Acute coronary syndrome
Anxiety
Note: DVT, deep venous thrombosis; PE, pulmonary embolism.
long bone fractures, tumor embolism, bone marrow, or
air embolism. Cement embolism and bony fragment
embolism can occur after total hip or knee replacement.
IV drug users may inject themselves with a wide array
of substances, such as hair, talc, or cotton. Amniotic ﬂuid
embolism occurs when fetal membranes leak or tear at
the placental margin. Pulmonary edema in this syn-
drome is probably caused by alveolar capillary leakage.
Dyspnea is the most frequent symptom of PE, and
tachypnea is its most frequent sign. Whereas dyspnea,
syncope, hypotension, or cyanosis indicates a massive PE,
pleuritic pain, cough, or hemoptysis often suggests a
small embolism located distally near the pleura. On phys-
ical examination, young and previously healthy individu-
als may appear anxious but otherwise seem deceptively
well, even with an anatomically large PE.They may only
have dyspnea with moderate exertion. They often lack
“classic” signs such as tachycardia, low-grade fever, neck
vein distension, or an accentuated pulmonic component
of the second heart sound. Sometimes paradoxical brady-
cardia occurs.
Some patients have occult PE and an overt coexisting
illness such as pneumonia or heart failure. In such cir-
cumstances, clinical improvement often fails to occur
despite standard medical treatment of the concomitant
illness. This situation can serve as a clinical clue to the
possible coexistence of PE.
Nonimaging Diagnostic Modalities
Nonimaging tests are best used in combination with a
clinical likelihood of DVT or PE (Fig. 20-2).
Blood Tests
The quantitative plasma D-dimer enzyme-linked immunosor-
bent assay (ELISA) increases in the presence of DVT or
PE because of plasmin’s breakdown of ﬁbrin. Elevation
of D-dimer indicates endogenous although often clini-
cally ineffective thrombolysis.The sensitivity of the D-dimer
is greater than 80% for DVT (including isolated calf
DVT) and greater than 95% for PE.The D-dimer is less
sensitive for DVT than PE because the DVT thrombus
size is smaller.The D-dimer is a useful “rule out” test. It is
normal (<500 ng/mL) in more than 95% of patients
without PE. In patients with low clinical suspicion of
DVT, it is normal in more than 90% without DVT.
The D-dimer assay is not speciﬁc. Levels increase in
patients with myocardial infarction, pneumonia, sepsis, can-
cer, the postoperative state, and during the second or third
trimester of pregnancy.Therefore, it rarely has a useful role
among hospitalized patients because their D-dimers are fre-
quently elevated because of some systemic illness.
Contrary to classic teaching, arterial blood gases lack
diagnostic utility for PE, even though both the PO2 and
PCO2 often decrease. Among patients suspected of PE,
neither the room air arterial PO2 nor calculation of the
alveolar-arterial O2 gradient can reliably differentiate or
triage patients who actually have PE at angiography.
Elevated Cardiac Biomarkers
Serum troponin levels increase in RV microinfarction.
Myocardial stretch often results in elevation of brain
natriuretic peptide or NT-pro-brain natriuretic peptide.
Elevated cardiac biomarkers predict an increase in major
complications and mortality from PE.
Electrocardiography
The most cited abnormality, in addition to sinus tachy-
cardia, is the S1Q3T3 sign: an S wave in lead I, Q wave
in lead III, and inverted T wave in lead III.This ﬁnding
is relatively speciﬁc but insensitive. Perhaps the most fre-
quent abnormality is T-wave inversion in leads V1 to V4.
Noninvasive Imaging Modalities
Venous Ultrasonography
Ultrasonography of the deep venous system (Table 20-3)
relies on loss of vein compressibility as the primary crite-
rion for DVT. When a normal vein is imaged in cross-
section, it readily collapses with gentle manual pressure
from the ultrasound transducer. This creates the illusion
of a “wink.”With acute DVT, the vein loses its compress-
ibility because of passive distension by acute thrombus.
The diagnosis of acute DVT is even more secure when
thrombus is directly visualized. It appears homogeneous
and has low echogenicity (Fig. 20-2). The vein itself
often appears mildly dilated, and collateral channels may
be absent.
207
Deep Venous Thrombosis and Pulmonary Thromboembolism
CHAPTER 20
FIGURE 20-2
Acute deep venous thrombosis (DVT) on venous ultrasound
examination. The vein is not compressible, and thrombus (far
left arrow) is visualized directly in the deep venous system.
DFV, deep femoral vein (synonymous with profunda femoral
vein); SFV, superﬁcial femoral vein (which is a deep vein
despite the terminology “superﬁcial”). (From the personal col-
lection of Samuel Z. Goldhaber, MD, with permission.)
Venous ﬂow dynamics can be examined with Doppler
imaging. Normally, manual calf compression causes aug-
mentation of the Doppler ﬂow pattern. Loss of normal
respiratory variation is caused by obstructing DVT or by
any obstructive process within the pelvis. Because DVT
and PE are so closely related and are both treated with
anticoagulation (see later), conﬁrmed DVT is usually an
adequate surrogate for PE. In contrast, normal venous
ultrasonography results do not exclude PE.The majority
of patients with PE have no imaging evidence of DVT,
probably because the clot has already embolized to the
lung or is in the pelvic veins, where ultrasonography is
usually inadequate. In patients without DVT, the ultra-
sound examination may identify other reasons for leg dis-
comfort such as a Baker’s cyst (also known as a popliteal
or synovial cyst) or a hematoma. For patients with a tech-
nically poor or nondiagnostic venous ultrasonography
examination, alternative imaging modalities for DVT,
such as CT or MRI, should be considered.
Chest Roentgenography
A normal or near-normal chest x-ray in a dyspneic
patient often occurs in PE.Well-established abnormalities
include focal oligemia (Westermark’s sign), a peripheral
wedged-shaped density above the diaphragm (Hampton’s
hump), or an enlarged right descending pulmonary
artery (Palla’s sign).
Chest Computed Tomography
CT of the chest with IV contrast is the principal imaging
test for the diagnosis of PE (Fig. 20-3). Multidetector-row
spiral CT acquires all chest images with ≤1 mm resolu-
tion during a short breath hold.This generation of CT
scanners can image small peripheral emboli. Sixth-order
branches can be visualized with resolution superior to
conventional invasive contrast pulmonary angiography.
The CT scan also obtains excellent images of the RV and
LV and can be used for a risk stratiﬁcation as well as a
diagnostic tool. In patients with PE, RV enlargement on
chest CT indicates a ﬁvefold increased likelihood of death
within the next 30 days compared with PE patients with
normal RV size on chest CT.When imaging is continued
below the chest to the knee, pelvic and proximal leg
DVT can also be diagnosed by CT scanning. In patients
without PE, the lung parenchymal images may establish
alternative diagnoses not apparent on chest x-ray that
explain the presenting symptoms and signs, such as pneu-
monia, emphysema, pulmonary ﬁbrosis, pulmonary mass,
or aortic pathology. Sometimes asymptomatic early-stage
lung cancer is diagnosed incidentally.
Lung Scanning
Lung scanning is now a second-line diagnostic test for
PE. It is mostly used for patients who cannot tolerate IV
contrast. Small particulate aggregates of albumin labeled
with a gamma-emitting radionuclide are injected IV and
are trapped in the pulmonary capillary bed. The perfu-
sion scan defect indicates absent or decreased blood ﬂow,
possibly caused by PE. Ventilation scans, obtained with
radiolabeled inhaled gases such as xenon or krypton,
improve the speciﬁcity of the perfusion scan. Abnormal
ventilation scans indicate abnormal nonventilated lung,
208
Diseases of the Respiratory System
SECTION II
TABLE 20-3
ULTRASONOGRAPHY OF THE DEEP LEG VEINS
Criteria for Establishing the Diagnosis of Acute Deep
Venous Thrombosis
Lack of vein compressibility (the principal criterion)
Vein does not “wink” when gently compressed in 
cross-section
Failure to appose the walls of the vein because of passive 
distension
Direct Visualization of Thrombus
Homogenous
Low echogenicity
Abnormal Doppler Flow Dynamics
Normal response: calf compression augments Doppler 
ﬂow signal and conﬁrms vein patency proximal and 
distal to Doppler
Abnormal response: ﬂow blunted rather than augmented 
with calf compression
FIGURE 20-3
Large bilateral proximal pulmonary embolism on chest CT
after radical prostatectomy.
providing possible explanations for perfusion defects other
than acute PE, such as asthma or chronic obstructive pul-
monary disease.A high probability scan for PE is deﬁned
as having two or more segmental perfusion defects in the
presence of normal ventilation.
The diagnosis of PE is very unlikely in patients with
normal and near-normal scans but is about 90% certain
in patients with high-probability scans. Unfortunately,
most patients have nondiagnostic scans, and fewer than
50% of patients with angiographically conﬁrmed PE
have a high-probability scan. As many as 40% of
patients with high clinical suspicion for PE and “low-
probability” scans do, in fact, have PE at angiography.
Contrast-Enhanced Magnetic
Resonance Imaging
When ultrasonography is equivocal, MR venography is
an excellent imaging modality to diagnose DVT. MR
uses a gadolinium contrast agent, which, unlike iodinated
contrast agents used in venography and CT angiography,
is not nephrotoxic. MRI should be considered for sus-
pected DVT or PE patients with renal insufﬁciency or
contrast dye allergy. MR pulmonary angiography detects
large proximal PE but is not reliable for smaller segmen-
tal and subsegmental PE.
Echocardiography
Echocardiography is not a reliable diagnostic imaging tool
for acute PE because most patients with PE have normal
echocardiograms. However, echocardiography is a very
useful diagnostic tool for detecting conditions that might
mimic PE, such as acute myocardial infarction, pericardial
tamponade, or aortic dissection.
Transthoracic echocardiography rarely images a throm-
bus directly. The best-known indirect sign of PE on
transthoracic echocardiography is McConnell’s sign, which
is hypokinesis of the RV free wall with normal motion of
the RV apex.
Transesophageal echocardiography should be consid-
ered when CT scanning facilities are not available or
when a patient has renal failure or severe contrast allergy
that precludes administration of contrast despite premed-
ication with high-dose steroids. This imaging modality
can directly visualize large proximal PE.
Invasive Diagnostic Modalities
Pulmonary Angiography
Chest CT with contrast (see earlier) has virtually replaced
invasive pulmonary angiography as a diagnostic test. Inva-
sive catheter-based diagnostic testing is reserved for patients
with technically unsatisfactory chest CTs or for those in
whom an interventional procedure such as catheter-
directed thrombolysis or embolectomy is planned. A
deﬁnitive diagnosis of PE depends upon visualization of an
intraluminal ﬁlling defect in more than one projection.
Secondary signs of PE include abrupt occlusion (“cut-off”)
of vessels; segmental oligemia or avascularity; a prolonged
arterial phase with slow ﬁlling; or tortuous, tapering
peripheral vessels.
Contrast Phlebography
Venous ultrasonography has virtually replaced contrast
phlebography as the diagnostic test for suspected DVT.
Integrated Diagnostic Approach
An integrated diagnostic approach (see Fig. 20-1) stream-
lines the workup of suspected DVT and PE (Fig. 20-4).
209
Deep Venous Thrombosis and Pulmonary Thromboembolism
CHAPTER 20
FIGURE 20-4
Imaging tests to diagnose deep venous thrombosis (DVT)
and pulmonary embolism (PE). ECHO, echocardiography.
ALGORITHM FOR DVT AND PE DIAGNOSIS
DVT imaging test
Venous ultrasonography
Venous ultrasonography
Diagnostic
Nondiagnostic
Stop
MR
CT
Phlebography
PE Imaging Test
Chest CT
Diagnostic
Nondiagnostic, unavailable, or unsafe
Stop
Stop
Lung scan
Diagnostic
Nondiagnostic
Positive
Negative
Treat for PE
Transesophageal ECHO or MR or
invasive pulmonary angiography
Treatment:
DEEP VENOUS THROMBOSIS
PRIMARY THERAPY VERSUS SECONDARY 
PREVENTION
Primary therapy consists of clot dis-
solution with thrombolysis or removal of PE by
of anticoagulation, residual thrombus begins to become
endothelialized in the vein or pulmonary artery. How-
ever, anticoagulants do not directly dissolve thrombus
that already exists.
Unfractionated Heparin
UFH anticoagulates by
binding to and accelerating the activity of antithrombin III,
thus preventing additional thrombus formation and per-
mitting endogenous ﬁbrinolytic mechanisms to lyse clot
that has already formed. UFH is dosed to achieve a target
aPTT that is two to three times the upper limit of the labo-
ratory normal. This is usually equivalent to an aPTT of
60–80 s. For UFH, a typical IV bolus is 5000–10,000 units
followed by a continuous infusion of 1000–1500 units/h.
Nomograms based on a patient’s weight may assist in
adjusting the dose of heparin. The most popular nomo-
gram uses an initial bolus of 80 units/kg followed by an
initial infusion rate of 18 units/kg per hour.
The major advantage of UFH is that it has a short
half-life. Its anticoagulant effect abates after several
hours.This is especially useful if the patient will undergo
an invasive procedure such as surgical embolectomy.
The major disadvantage of UFH is that achieving the
target aPTT can be difﬁcult and may require repeated
blood sampling and heparin dose adjustment every 4–6 h.
Furthermore, by using UFH, patients are at risk of devel-
oping heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT).
Low-Molecular-Weight Heparins
These frag-
ments of UFH exhibit less binding to plasma proteins
210
Diseases of the Respiratory System
SECTION II
embolectomy. Anticoagulation with heparin and war-
farin or placement of an inferior vena caval ﬁlter (IVC)
constitutes secondary prevention of recurrent PE rather
than primary therapy.
RISK STRATIFICATION
Rapid and accurate risk
stratiﬁcation is critical in determining optimal treatment
strategy. The presence of hemodynamic instability, RV
dysfunction, or elevation of the troponin level caused by
RV microinfarction can identify high-risk patients.Detec-
tion of RV hypokinesis on echocardiography is the most
widely used approach to risk stratiﬁcation. However, RV
enlargement on chest CT also predicts an increased
mortality rate from PE. The combination of RV dysfunc-
tion plus elevated biomarkers such as troponin por-
tends an especially ominous prognosis.
Primary therapy should be reserved for patients at
high risk of an adverse clinical outcome. When RV func-
tion remains normal in a hemodynamically stable
patient,a good clinical outcome is highly likely with anti-
coagulation alone (Fig.20-5).
MASSIVE PULMONARY EMBOLISM
Anticoagulation
Anticoagulation is the foundation
for successful treatment of DVT and PE (Table 20-4).
Immediately effective anticoagulation is initiated with a
parenteral drug: unfractionated heparin (UFH), low-
molecular-weight heparin (LMWH),or fondaparinux.These
parenteral drugs (see later) are continued as a transi-
tion or “bridge”to stable, long-term anticoagulation with
a vitamin K antagonist (exclusively warfarin in the
United States).The ﬁrst dose of warfarin may be given as
soon as several hours after the bridging anticoagulant if
LMWH or fondaparinux is used. Otherwise, with UFH a
therapeutic activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT)
must first be documented. Warfarin requires 5–7 days
to achieve a therapeutic effect. During that period, the
parenteral and oral agents are overlapped.After 5–7 days
FIGURE 20-5
Acute management of pulmonary thromboembolism (PE).
IVC, inferior vena caval; RV, right ventricular.
Risk stratify
Normotension
plus normal RV
Normotension
plus RV hypokinesis
Hypotension
Anticoagulation
plus
thrombolysis
IVC filter
Embolectomy:
Catheter/surgical
Anticoagulation
alone
Secondary
prevention
Individualize
therapy
Primary
therapy
ALGORITHM FOR PE MANAGEMENT
TABLE 20-4
ANTICOAGULATION OF VENOUS THROMBOEMBOLISM
Immediate Parenteral Anticoagulation
UFH, bolus and continuous infusion, to achieve aPTT two 
to three times the upper limit of the laboratory normal
or
Enoxaparin 1 mg/kg twice daily with normal renal function
or
Tinzaparin 175 U/kg once daily with normal renal function
or
Weight-based fondaparinux once daily; adjust for 
impaired renal function
Warfarin Anticoagulation
Usual start dose is 5–10 mg.
Titrate to INR, target 2.0–3.0.
Continue parenteral anticoagulation for a minimum of 
5 days and until two sequential INR values, at least 1 day 
apart, return in the target range.
Note: aPTT, activated partial thromboplastin time; INR, International
Normalized Ratio; UFH, unfractionated heparin.
and endothelial cells and consequently have greater
bioavailability, a more predictable dose response, and a
longer half-life than UFH. No monitoring or dose adjust-
ment is needed unless the patient is markedly obese or
has renal insufﬁciency.
Enoxaparin 1 mg/kg twice daily and tinzaparin
175 units/kg once daily have received U.S. Food and
Drug Administration (FDA) approval for treatment of
patients who present with DVT. The weight-adjusted
doses must be adjusted downward in those with renal
insufﬁciency because the kidneys excrete LMWH.
Fondaparinux
Fondaparinux, an anti-Xa pentasac-
charide, is administered by once-daily subcutaneous
injection and has been approved by the FDA to treat
patients with DVT and PE. No laboratory monitoring is
required.Patients weighing <50 kg receive 5 mg,patients
weighing 50–100 kg receive 7.5 mg, and patients weigh-
ing >100 kg receive 10 mg. The dose must be adjusted
downward for patients with renal dysfunction because
the drug is excreted by the kidneys.
Warfarin
This vitamin K antagonist prevents car-
boxylation activation of coagulation factors II, VII, IX,
and X.The full effect of warfarin requires at least 5 days,
even if the prothrombin time, used for monitoring,
becomes elevated more rapidly. If warfarin is initiated as
monotherapy during an acute thrombotic illness,a para-
doxical exacerbation of hypercoagulability can increase
the likelihood of thrombosis rather than prevent it.
Overlapping UFH, LMWH, or fondaparinux with warfarin
for at least 5 days can counteract the early procoagulant
effect of unopposed warfarin.
Dosing
In an average-sized adult, warfarin is usually
initiated as a dose of 5 mg. Doses of 7.5 or 10 mg can be
used in obese or large-framed young patients who are
otherwise healthy. Patients who are malnourished or
who have received prolonged courses of antibiotics are
probably deﬁcient in vitamin K and should receive
smaller initial doses of warfarin, such as 2.5 mg.The pro-
thrombin time is standardized with the International
Normalized Ratio (INR), which assesses the anticoagu-
lant effect of warfarin. The target INR is usually 2.5, with
a range of 2.0–3.0.
The warfarin dose is titrated to achieve the target INR.
Proper dosing is difﬁcult because hundreds of drug–drug
and drug–food interactions affect warfarin metabolism.
Furthermore,variables such as increasing age and comor-
bidities such as systemic illness, malabsorption, and diar-
rhea reduce the warfarin-dosing requirement.
No reliable nomogram has been established to pre-
dict how individual patients will respond to warfarin.
Therefore, dosing is adjusted according to an “educated
guess.”Centralized anticoagulation clinics have improved
the efﬁcacy and safety of warfarin dosing. Based on a
meta-analysis of trials comparing anticoagulation clinic
care versus self-monitoring, patients beneﬁt if they can
self-monitor their INR with a home point-of-care ﬁnger-
stick machine. The subgroup with the best results also
learns to self-adjust warfarin doses.
Pharmacogenomics may provide the gateway to
rational dosing of warfarin. A recent discovery is that
ﬁve polymorphisms of the vitamin K receptor gene
explain 25% of the variance in warfarin dosing. These
polymorphisms can stratify patients into low-, interme-
diate-, and high-dose warfarin groups. An additional
10% of dosing variance can be explained by allelic vari-
ants of the cytochrome P-450 enzyme 2C9.These muta-
tions decrease warfarin dosing because they impair the
metabolism of the S-enantiomer of warfarin. In the
future, if rapid turnaround of genetic testing becomes
possible, warfarin could be dosed according to speciﬁc
pharmacogenomic proﬁles.
Complications of Anticoagulants
The most
important adverse effect of anticoagulation is hemor-
rhage. For life-threatening or intracranial hemorrhage
caused by use of heparin or LMWH, protamine sulfate
can be administered. There is no speciﬁc antidote for
bleeding from fondaparinux.
Major bleeding from warfarin is traditionally man-
aged with cryoprecipitate or fresh-frozen plasma (usually
2–4 units) to achieve rapid hemostasis. Recombinant
human coagulation factor VIIa (rFVIIa), which is FDA
approved for bleeding in patients with hemophilia, is
widely used off label to manage catastrophic bleeding
from warfarin.The optimal dose appears to be 40 μg/kg.
The greatest risk of this therapy is rebound thromboem-
bolism. For minor bleeding or to manage an excessively
high INR in the absence of bleeding, a small 2.5-mg
dose of oral vitamin K may be administered.
HIT and osteopenia are far less common with LMWH
than with UFH.Thrombosis caused by use of HIT should be
managed with a direct thrombin inhibitor—argatroban
for patients with renal insufﬁciency or lepirudin for
patients with hepatic failure.
In the setting of percutaneous coronary intervention,
bivalirudin should be administered.
The most common nonbleeding side effect of war-
farin is alopecia. A rare complication is warfarin-induced
skin necrosis, which may be related to warfarin-induced
reduction of protein C.
During pregnancy, warfarin should be avoided if pos-
sible because of warfarin embryopathy, which is most
common with exposure during the sixth through twelfth
weeks of gestation. However, women can take warfarin
postpartum and breastfeed safely. Warfarin can also be
administered safely during the second trimester.
Duration of Hospital Stay
Patients with acute DVT
who have good family and social support, a permanent
211
Deep Venous Thrombosis and Pulmonary Thromboembolism
CHAPTER 20
residence,a telephone,and no hearing or language impair-
ment can often be managed as outpatients.They or a family
member or a visiting nurse can administer a parenteral anti-
coagulant. Warfarin dosing can be titrated to the INR and
adjusted on an outpatient basis.
Patients with acute PE, who traditionally have
required 5 to 7-day hospital stays for IV heparin as a
“bridge” to warfarin, can be considered for abbreviated
hospitalization if they have an excellent prognosis. The
latter are characterized by clinical stability, absence of
chest pain or shortness of breath, normal RV size and
function,and normal levels of cardiac biomarkers.
Duration of Anticoagulation
Patients with PE
after surgery or trauma ordinarily have a low rate of
recurrence after 3–6 months of anticoagulation. For DVT
isolated to an upper extremity or calf that has been pro-
voked by surgery or trauma,3 months of anticoagulation
sufﬁces. For provoked proximal leg DVT or PE, 6 months
of anticoagulation is sufﬁcient.
However, among patients with “idiopathic,” unpro-
voked DVT or PE, the recurrence rate is surprisingly high
after cessation of anticoagulation. VTE that occurs dur-
ing long-haul air travel is considered unprovoked.
Current American College of Chest Physicians (ACCP)
guidelines recommend anticoagulation for an indeﬁnite
duration with a target INR between 2.0 and 3.0 for
patients with idiopathic VTE. However, it is recom-
mended that the intensity of anticoagulation be tai-
lored to the patient’s risk of recurrent VTE versus risk of
bleeding. For a patient at high risk of recurrent VTE (e.g.,
someone with multiple thrombophilic disorders) and a
low risk of bleeding (e.g., young age and no comorbidi-
ties), I recommend standard-intensity anticoagulation.
However, for a patient with a high bleeding risk (e.g.,
older age and a history of gastrointestinal bleeding),
I advise low-intensity anticoagulation (INR, 1.5–2.0) after
6 months.
Several years ago, the presence of genetic mutations
such as factor V Leiden or prothrombin gene mutation
was thought to markedly increase the risk of recurrent
VTE. Now, however, the clinical circumstances in which
the DVT or PE occurs rather than underlying throm-
bophilia are considered much more important in decid-
ing the risk of recurrence and the optimal duration of
anticoagulation. However, patients with moderate or
high levels of anticardiolipin antibodies probably war-
rant indeﬁnite duration anticoagulation, even if the ini-
tial VTE was provoked by trauma or surgery.
INFERIOR VENA CAVAL FILTERS
The two
principal indications for insertion of an IVC ﬁlter are
active bleeding that precludes anticoagulation and
recurrent venous thrombosis despite intensive antico-
agulation. Prevention of recurrent PE in patients with
right heart failure who are not candidates for ﬁbrinolysis
or prophylaxis of extremely high-risk patients are “softer”
indications for ﬁlter placement. The ﬁlter itself may fail
by permitting the passage of small- to medium-sized
clots. Large thrombi may embolize to the pulmonary
arteries via collateral veins that develop. A more com-
mon complication is caval thrombosis with marked
bilateral leg swelling.
Paradoxically, by providing a nidus for clot formation,
ﬁlters double the DVT rate over the ensuing 2 years
after placement. Therefore, if clinically safe, patients
receiving IVC ﬁlters should also receive concomitant
anticoagulation.
Retrievable ﬁlters can now be placed for patients with
an anticipated temporary bleeding disorder or for
patients at temporary high risk of PE, such as individuals
undergoing bariatric surgery with a history of periopera-
tive PE.The ﬁlters can be retrieved up to several months
after insertion unless a thrombus forms and is trapped
within the ﬁlter. The retrievable ﬁlter becomes perma-
nent if it remains in place or if, for technical reasons such
as rapid endothelialization,it cannot be removed.
MAINTAINING 
ADEQUATE 
CIRCULATION
For patients with massive PE and hypotension, the most
common initial approach is administration of 500–1000 mL
of normal saline. However, ﬂuids should be used with
extreme caution. Excessive ﬂuid administration exacer-
bates RV wall stress, causes more profound RV ischemia,
and worsens LV compliance and ﬁlling by causing further
interventricular septal shift toward the LV. Dopamine and
dobutamine are ﬁrst-line inotropic agents for the treat-
ment of PE-related shock. There should be a low thresh-
old to initiate these pressors. However, a “trial and error”
approach may be necessary with other agents such as
norepinephrine,vasopressin,and phenylephrine.
FIBRINOLYSIS
Successful ﬁbrinolytic therapy rapidly
reverses right heart failure and leads to a lower rate of
death and recurrent PE.Thrombolysis usually (1) dissolves
much of the anatomically obstructing pulmonary arterial
thrombus; (2) prevents the continued release of serotonin
and other neurohumoral factors that exacerbate pul-
monary hypertension; and (3) dissolves much of the
source of the thrombus in the pelvic or deep leg veins,
thereby decreasing the likelihood of recurrent PE.
The preferred ﬁbrinolytic regimen is 100 mg of
recombinant tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) admin-
istered as a continuous peripheral IV infusion over 2 h.
Patients appear to respond to ﬁbrinolysis for up to 14 days
after the PE has occurred.
Contraindications to ﬁbrinolysis include intracranial
disease, recent surgery, or trauma. The overall major
bleeding rate is about 10%, including a 1–3% risk of
intracranial hemorrhage. Careful screening of patients
for contraindications to ﬁbrinolytic therapy (Chap. 34) is
the best way to minimize the bleeding risk.
212
Diseases of the Respiratory System
SECTION II
The only FDA-approved indication for PE fibrinolysis
is massive PE. For patients with preserved systolic
blood pressure and submassive PE, guidelines recom-
mend individual patient risk assessment of the throm-
botic burden versus bleeding risk. I concur with these
guidelines. Younger patients with submassive PE but
without comorbidities are generally excellent candi-
dates for fibrinolysis. For older patients (age >70 years)
with a risk of intracranial hemorrhage, a “watch and
wait” approach is suitable, with frequent serial evalua-
tion of RV function by echocardiography; fibrinolysis
should be considered in those with deterioration of RV
function.
PULMONARY 
EMBOLECTOMY
The risk of
intracranial hemorrhage with ﬁbrinolysis has prompted
the renaissance of surgical embolectomy for acute PE.At
Brigham and Women’s Hospital, 47 patients with mas-
sive PE underwent emergency surgery in 53 months,
with a 94% survival rate. This high survival rate may be
attributed to improved surgical technique,rapid diagno-
sis and triage, and careful patient selection. A possible
alternative to open surgical embolectomy is catheter
embolectomy. New-generation catheters are under
development.
PULMONARY THROMBOENDARTERECTOMY
Chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension is
caused by vascular obstruction at the capillary level, not
direct thromboembolic occlusion. It used to be consid-
ered a rare complication (about one of 500) of acute PE.
Now, however, it appears that chronic thromboembolic
pulmonary hypertension is a more common develop-
ment, occurring in approximately 4% of patients who
develop acute PE. Therefore, PE patients should be fol-
lowed to ensure that if they have initial pulmonary
hypertension,it abates over time (usually 6 weeks).
Patients severely impaired with dyspnea caused
by chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension
should be considered for pulmonary thromboendarterec-
tomy, which, if successful, can markedly reduce and at
times even cure pulmonary hypertension. The operation
requires median sternotomy, cardiopulmonary bypass,
deep hypothermia, and periods of hypothermic circula-
tory arrest. The ﬁbrotic, thromboembolic material is
grasped with a forceps and circumferentially dissected
from the vessel wall. The mortality rate at experienced
centers is approximately 5%.The two most common com-
plications are “pulmonary steal,” in which blood rushes
from previously perfused areas to newly revascularized
areas of the lung,and reperfusion pulmonary edema.
EMOTIONAL SUPPORT
Many patients with VTE
appear healthy and ﬁt. However, they may be burdened
with fear about the possible genetic implications of DVT
or PE. They often feel overwhelmed when advised to
continue lifelong anticoagulation.Many patients in whom
anticoagulation is discontinued after 3–6 months of ther-
apy feel vulnerable to a future recurrent VTE.They may be
reluctant to discontinue warfarin. Support groups are
useful for these patients. Responses to frequently asked
questions by these patients have been posted on the
website http://web.mit.edu/karen/www/faq.html.
PREVENTION 
OF 
POSTPHLEBITIC 
SYN-
DROME
The only therapy to prevent postphlebitic
syndrome is daily use of below-knee 30- to 40-mmHg
vascular compression stockings. They halve the rate of
developing postphlebitic syndrome. These vascular
compression stockings should be prescribed as soon as
DVT is diagnosed, and the stockings should be ﬁtted
carefully to maximize their beneﬁt.When patients are in
bed,the stockings do not need to be worn.
213
Deep Venous Thrombosis and Pulmonary Thromboembolism
CHAPTER 20
PREVENTION OF VENOUS
THROMBOEMBOLISM
Prophylaxis is of paramount importance because VTE is
difﬁcult to detect and poses an excessive medical and
economic burden. Mechanical and pharmacologic mea-
sures often succeed in preventing this complication
(Table 20-5).Patients at high risk can receive a combination
TABLE 20-5
PREVENTION OF VENOUS THROMBOEMBOLISM
CONDITION
PROPHYLAXIS STRATEGY
High-risk general surgery
Mini-UFH + GCS or
LMWH + GCS
Thoracic surgery
Mini-UFH + IPC
Cancer surgery, including 
LMWH; consider 1 month 
gynecologic cancer surgery
of prophylaxis
Total hip replacement, total 
LMWH, fondaparinux (a 
knee replacement, hip 
pentasaccharide) 2.5 mg 
fracture surgery
SC, once daily or (except
for total knee replacement)
warfarin (target INR, 2.5)
Neurosurgery
GCS + IPC
Neurosurgery for brain 
Mini-UFH or LMWH, + IPC,
tumor
+ predischarge venous
ultrasonography
Benign gynecologic surgery
Mini-UFH + GCS
Medically ill patients
Mini-UFH or LMWH
Anticoagulation 
GCS + IPC
contraindicated
Long-haul air travel
Consider LMWH for very 
high-risk patients
Note: Mini-UFH, minidose unfractionated heparin, 5000 U SC twice
(less effective) or three times daily (more effective); GCS, graduated
compression stockings, usually 10–18 mmHg; IPC, intermittent pneu-
matic compression devices; LMWH, low-molecular-weight heparin,
typically in the United States, enoxaparin, 40 mg once daily, or dal-
teparin, 2500 or 5000 U once daily; UFH, unfractionated heparin.
of mechanical and pharmacologic modalities. Graduated
compression stockings and pneumatic compression devices
may complement mini-dose UFH (5000 U subcuta-
neously twice or preferably three times daily), LMWH,
a pentasaccharide (fondaparinux 2.5 mg daily), or war-
farin administration. Computerized reminder systems can
increase the use of preventive measures and at Brigham
and Women’s Hospital reduced the symptomatic VTE
rate by more than 40%. Patients who have undergone
total hip replacement, total knee replacement, or cancer
surgery beneﬁt from extended pharmacologic prophy-
laxis for a total of 4–6 weeks.
FURTHER READINGS
AGENO W et al: Cardiovascular risk factors and venous thromboem-
bolism:A meta-analysis. Circulation 117:93, 2008
BLAIVAS M: Ultrasound in the detection of venous thromboem-
bolism. Crit Care Med 35:S224, 2007
DALEN JE: Should patients with venous thromboembolism be
screened for thrombophilia? Am J Med 121:458, 2008
DENNIS M et al: Effectiveness of thigh-length graduated compression
stockings to reduce the risk of deep vein thrombosis after stroke
(CLOTS trial 1): A multicentre, randomised controlled trial.
Lancet 373:1958, 2009
DENTALI F et al: Meta-analysis: Anticoagulant prophylaxis to prevent
symptomatic venous thromboembolism in hospitalized medical
patients.Ann Intern Med 146:278, 2007
FIUMARA K et al: Predictors of major hemorrhage following ﬁbri-
nolysis for acute pulmonary embolism. Am J Cardiol 97:127,
2006
GEERTS WH et al: Prevention of venous thromboembolism: The
Seventh ACCP Conference on Antithrombotic and Throm-
bolytic Therapy. Chest 126:338S, 2004
——— et al: Prevention of venous thromboembolism: American
College of Chest Physicians Evidence-based Clinical Practice
Guidelines, 8th edition. Chest 133(Suppl):381S, 2008
GLYNN RJ et al:A randomized trial of rosuvastatin in the prevention
of venous thromboembolism. N Engl J Med 360:1851, 2009
HILL J,TREASURE T: Reducing the risk of venous thromboembolism
(deep vein thrombosis and pulmonary embolism) in patients
having surgery: Summary of NICE guidance. Br Med J
334:1053, 2007
KUCHER N et al: Electronic alerts to prevent venous thromboem-
bolism among hospitalized patients. N Engl J Med 352:969,
2005
——— et al: Percutaneous catheter thrombectomy device for acute
pulmonary embolism: In vitro and in vivo testing. Radiology
236:852, 2005
——— et al: Prognostic role of echocardiography among patients
with acute pulmonary embolism and a systolic arterial pressure
of 90 mm Hg or higher.Arch Intern Med 165:1777, 2005
KUCHER N, GOLDHABER SZ: Management of massive pulmonary
embolism. Circulation 112:e28, 2005
LEACCHE M et al: Modern surgical treatment of massive pulmonary
embolism: Results in 47 consecutive patients after rapid diagno-
sis and aggressive surgical approach. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg
129:1018, 2005
PARK B et al: Recent trends in clinical outcomes and resource uti-
lization for pulmonary embolism in the United States: Findings
from the nationwide inpatient sample. Chest 136(4):983, 2009
PIAZZA G, GOLDHABER SZ:The acutely decompensated right ventricle.
Chest 128:1836, 2005
PRANDONI P et al: Residual thrombosis on ultrasonography to guide
the duration of anticoagulation in patients with deep venous
thrombosis: A randomized trial. Ann Intern Med 150:577, 2009
RIDKER P et al: Long-term, low-intensity warfarin therapy for the
prevention of recurrent venous thromboembolism. N Engl J
Med 348:1425, 2003
RIEDER MJ et al: Effect of VKORC1 haplotypes on transcriptional
regulation and warfarin dose. N Engl J Med 352:2285, 2005
SEGAL JB et al: Management of venous thromboembolism:A systematic
review for a practice guideline.Ann Intern Med 146:211,2007
SPENCER FA et al:Venous thromboembolism in the outpatient set-
ting.Arch Intern Med 167:1471, 2007
TODD JL, TAPSON VF: Thrombolytic therapy for acute pulmonary
embolism:A critical appraisal. Chest 135:1321, 2009
TORBICKI A et al: Guidelines on the diagnosis and management of
acute pulmonary embolism.The Task Force for the diagnosis and
management of acute pulmonary embolism of the European
Society of Cardiology (ESC). Eur Heart J 29:2276, 2008
VAN BELLE A et al: Effectiveness of managing suspected pulmonary
embolism using an algorithm combining clinical probability, D-
dimer testing, and computed tomography. JAMA 295:172, 2006
——— et al, WRITING GROUP FOR THE CHRISTOPHER INVESTIGA-
TORS: Effectiveness of managing suspected pulmonary embolism
using an algorithm combining clinical probability, D-dimer test-
ing, and computed tomography. JAMA 295:172, 2006
WELLS PS et al: Does this patient have deep vein thrombosis? JAMA
295:199, 2006
WRITING GROUP FOR THE CHRISTOPHER INVESTIGATORS: Effective-
ness of managing suspected pulmonary embolism using an algo-
rithm combining clinical probability, D-dimer testing, and com-
puted tomography. JAMA 295:172, 2006
214
Diseases of the Respiratory System
SECTION II
Richard W. Light
DISORDERS OF THE PLEURA
PLEURAL EFFUSION
The pleural space lies between the lung and chest wall
and normally contains a very thin layer of fluid, which
serves as a coupling system. A pleural effusion is pre-
sent when there is an excess quantity of fluid in the
pleural space.
Etiology
Pleural ﬂuid accumulates when pleural ﬂuid formation
exceeds pleural ﬂuid absorption. Normally, ﬂuid enters
the pleural space from the capillaries in the parietal
pleura and is removed via the lymphatics situated in the
parietal pleura. Fluid can also enter the pleural space
from the interstitial spaces of the lung via the visceral
pleura or from the peritoneal cavity via small holes in
the diaphragm. The lymphatics have the capacity to
absorb 20 times more ﬂuid than is normally formed.
Accordingly, a pleural effusion may develop when there
is excess pleural ﬂuid formation (from the interstitial
spaces of the lung, the parietal pleura, or the peritoneal
DISORDERS OF THE PLEURA 
AND MEDIASTINUM
cavity) or when there is decreased ﬂuid removal by the
lymphatics.
Diagnostic Approach
When a patient is found to have a pleural effusion, an
effort should be made to determine the cause (Fig. 21-1).
The ﬁrst step is to determine whether the effusion is a
transudate or an exudate.A transudative pleural effusion occurs
when systemic factors that inﬂuence the formation and
absorption of pleural ﬂuid are altered.The leading causes
of transudative pleural effusions in the United States are
left ventricular failure and cirrhosis. An exudative pleural
effusion occurs when local factors that inﬂuence the forma-
tion and absorption of pleural ﬂuid are altered.The lead-
ing causes of exudative pleural effusions are bacterial
pneumonia, malignancy, viral infection, and pulmonary
embolism (PE).The primary reason to make this differ-
entiation is that additional diagnostic procedures are
indicated with exudative effusions to deﬁne the cause of
the local disease.
Transudative and exudative pleural effusions are distin-
guished by measuring the lactate dehydrogenase (LDH)
and protein levels in the pleural ﬂuid.Whereas exudative
CHAPTER 21
CHAPTER 21
215
I Disorders of the Pleura . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 215
Pleural Effusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 215
Effusion Secondary to Viral Infection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 217
Pneumothorax . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 219
I Disorders of the Mediastinum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 219
Mediastinal Masses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 219
Acute Mediastinitis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 220
Chronic Mediastinitis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 220
Pneumomediastinum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 220
I Further Readings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 220
pleural effusions meet at least one of the following crite-
ria, transudative pleural effusions meet none:
1. Pleural ﬂuid protein/serum protein >0.5
2. Pleural ﬂuid LDH/serum LDH >0.6
3. Pleural ﬂuid LDH more than two-thirds the normal
upper limit for serum
The above criteria misidentify ∼25% of transudates as
exudates. If one or more of the exudative criteria are
met and the patient is clinically thought to have a con-
dition producing a transudative effusion, the difference
between the protein levels in the serum and the pleural
ﬂuid should be measured. If this gradient is greater than
31 g/L (3.1 g/dL), the exudative categorization by the
above criteria can be ignored because almost all such
patients have a transudative pleural effusion.
If a patient has an exudative pleural effusion, the fol-
lowing tests on the pleural ﬂuid should be obtained:
description of the ﬂuid, glucose level, differential cell
count, microbiologic studies, and cytology.
Effusion Caused by Heart Failure
The most common cause of pleural effusion is left ventric-
ular failure. The effusion occurs because the increased
amounts of ﬂuid in the lung interstitial spaces exit in part
across the visceral pleura.This overwhelms the capacity of
the lymphatics in the parietal pleura to remove ﬂuid. Iso-
lated right-sided pleural effusions are more common than
left-sided effusions in heart failure.A diagnostic thoracen-
tesis should be performed if the effusions are not bilateral
and comparable in size, if the patient is febrile, or if the
patient has pleuritic chest pain, to verify that the patient
has a transudative effusion. Otherwise, the patient is best
treated with diuretics. If the effusion persists despite
diuretic therapy, a diagnostic thoracentesis should be per-
formed. A pleural ﬂuid N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic
peptide (NT-proBNP) >1500 pg/mL is virtually diagnos-
tic of an effusion secondary to congestive heart failure.
Hepatic Hydrothorax
Pleural effusions occur in ∼5% of patients with cirrhosis
and ascites. The predominant mechanism is the direct
movement of peritoneal ﬂuid through small openings in
the diaphragm into the pleural space. The effusion is
usually right sided and frequently is large enough to
produce severe dyspnea.
Parapneumonic Effusion
Parapneumonic effusions are associated with bacterial
pneumonia, lung abscess, or bronchiectasis and are prob-
ably the most common cause of exudative pleural effu-
sion in the United States. Empyema refers to a grossly
purulent effusion.
Patients with aerobic bacterial pneumonia and pleural
effusion present with an acute febrile illness consisting of
chest pain, sputum production, and leukocytosis. Patients
with anaerobic infections present with a subacute illness
with weight loss, a brisk leukocytosis, mild anemia, and a
history of some factor that predisposes them to aspiration.
The possibility of a parapneumonic effusion should
be considered whenever a patient with a bacterial pneu-
monia is initially evaluated.The presence of free pleural
ﬂuid can be demonstrated with a lateral decubitus radi-
ograph, CT of the chest, or ultrasonography. If the free
ﬂuid separates the lung from the chest wall by >10 mm,
Diseases of the Respiratory System
216
SECTION II
Perform diagnostic thoracentesis
Measure pleural fluid protein and LDH
Exudate
Further diagnostic procedures
Transudate
Treat CHF, cirrhosis, nephrosis
Measure PF glucose, amylase
Obtain PF cytology
Obtain differential cell count
Culture, stain PF
PF marker for TB
Consider: Esophageal rupture
Pancreatic pleural
effusion
Malignancy
Amylase elevated
Consider: Malignancy
Bacterial infections
Rheumatoid
pleuritis
Glucose < 60 mg/dL
No diagnosis
Consider pulmonary
embolus (spiral CT
or lung scan)
Treat for PE
Treat for TB
PF marker for TB
Observe
Consider thoracoscopy
or open pleural biopsy
Any of following met?
PF/serum protein > 0.5
PF/serum LDH > 0.6
PF LDH > 2/3 upper normal serum limit
Pleural effusion
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
SYMPTOMS IMPROVING
DIAGNOSTIC ALGORITHM OF PLEURAL EFFUSION
FIGURE 21-1
Approach to the diagnosis of pleural effusions. CHF, conges-
tive heart failure; CT, computed tomography; LDH, lactate
dehydrogenase; PE, pulmonary embolism; PF, pleural ﬂuid;
TB, tuberculosis.
a therapeutic thoracentesis should be performed. Factors
indicating the likely need for a procedure more invasive
than a thoracentesis (in increasing order of importance)
include:
1. Loculated pleural ﬂuid
2. Pleural ﬂuid pH <7.20
3. Pleural ﬂuid glucose <3.3 mmol/L (<60 mg/dL)
4. Positive Gram stain or culture of the pleural ﬂuid
5. The presence of gross pus in the pleural space
If the ﬂuid recurs after the initial therapeutic thoracentesis
and if any of the above characteristics are present, a repeat
thoracentesis should be performed. If the ﬂuid cannot be
completely removed with the therapeutic thoracentesis,
consideration should be given to inserting a chest tube and
instilling a ﬁbrinolytic (e.g., 250,000 U of streptokinase) or
performing thoracoscopy with the breakdown of adhe-
sions. Decortication should be considered when the above
are ineffective.
Effusion Secondary to Malignancy
Malignant pleural effusions secondary to metastatic disease
are the second most common type of exudative pleural
effusion.The three tumors that cause ∼75% of all malig-
nant pleural effusions are lung carcinoma, breast carci-
noma, and lymphoma. Most patients complain of dyspnea,
which is frequently out of proportion to the size of the
effusion. The pleural ﬂuid is an exudate, and its glucose
level may be reduced if the tumor burden in the pleural
space is high.
The diagnosis is usually made via cytology of the
pleural fluid. If the initial cytologic examination is
negative, then thoracoscopy is the best next procedure
if malignancy is strongly suspected. At the time of tho-
racoscopy, a procedure such as pleural abrasion should
be performed to effect a pleurodesis. If thoracoscopy is
unavailable, then needle biopsy of the pleura should be
performed.
Patients with a malignant pleural effusion are treated
symptomatically for the most part because the presence
of the effusion indicates disseminated disease and most
malignancies associated with pleural effusion are not cur-
able with chemotherapy.The only symptom that can be
attributed to the effusion itself is dyspnea. If the patient’s
lifestyle is compromised by dyspnea and if the dyspnea is
relieved with a therapeutic thoracentesis, then one of the
following procedures should be considered: (1) insertion
of a small indwelling catheter or (2) tube thoracostomy
with the instillation of a sclerosing agent such as 500 mg
of doxycycline.
Mesothelioma
Malignant mesotheliomas are primary tumors that arise
from the mesothelial cells that line the pleural cavities;
most are related to asbestos exposure. Patients with
mesothelioma present with chest pain and shortness of
breath. The chest radiograph reveals a pleural effusion,
generalized pleural thickening, and a shrunken hemitho-
rax.Thoracoscopy or open pleural biopsy is usually neces-
sary to establish the diagnosis. Chest pain should be treated
with opiates and shortness of breath with oxygen, opiates,
or both.
Effusion Secondary to Pulmonary
Embolization
The diagnosis most commonly overlooked in the differ-
ential diagnosis of a patient with an undiagnosed pleural
effusion is PE. Dyspnea is the most common symptom.
The pleural ﬂuid is almost always an exudate.The diag-
nosis is established by spiral CT scan or pulmonary arte-
riography (Chap. 20). Treatment of a patient with a
pleural effusion secondary to PE is the same as for any
patient with pulmonary emboli. If the pleural effusion
increases in size after anticoagulation, the patient proba-
bly has recurrent emboli or another complication such as
a hemothorax or a pleural infection.
Tuberculous Pleuritis
(See also Chap. 12) In many parts of the world, the most
common cause of an exudative pleural effusion is tuber-
culosis (TB), but tuberculous effusions are relatively
uncommon in the United States. Tuberculous pleural
effusions are usually associated with primary TB and are
thought to be primarily caused by a hypersensitivity reac-
tion to tuberculous protein in the pleural space. Patients
with tuberculous pleuritis present with combinations of
fever, weight loss, dyspnea, or pleuritic chest pain. The
pleural ﬂuid is an exudate with predominantly small lym-
phocytes. The diagnosis is established by demonstrating
high levels of TB markers in the pleural ﬂuid (adenosine
deaminase >40 IU/L; interferon γ >140 pg/mL, or posi-
tive polymerase chain reaction for tuberculous DNA).
Alternatively, the diagnosis can be established by culture
of the pleural ﬂuid, needle biopsy of the pleura, or thora-
coscopy. The recommended treatment of patients with
pleural and pulmonary TB is identical (Chap. 12).
EFFUSION SECONDARY 
TO VIRAL INFECTION
Viral infections are probably responsible for a sizable per-
centage of undiagnosed exudative pleural effusions. In
many series, no diagnosis is established for ∼20% of exuda-
tive effusions, and these effusions resolve spontaneously
with no long-term residua. The importance of these
effusions is that one should not be too aggressive in try-
ing to establish a diagnosis for the undiagnosed effusion,
particularly if the patient is improving clinically.
Disorders of the Pleura and Mediastinum
217
CHAPTER 21
AIDS
Pleural effusions are uncommon in patients with AIDS.
The most common cause is Kaposi’s sarcoma followed
by parapneumonic effusion. Other common causes are
TB, cryptococcosis, and primary effusion lymphoma.
Pleural effusions are very uncommon with Pneumocystis
carinii infection.
Chylothorax
A chylothorax occurs when the thoracic duct is dis-
rupted and chyle accumulates in the pleural space. The
most common cause of chylothorax is trauma, but it may
also result from tumors in the mediastinum. Patients with
chylothorax present with dyspnea, and a large pleural
effusion is present on the chest radiograph.Thoracentesis
reveals milky ﬂuid, and biochemical analysis reveals a
triglyceride level that exceeds 1.2 mmol/L (110 mg/dL).
Patients with chylothorax and no obvious trauma should
have a lymphangiogram and a mediastinal CT scan to
assess the mediastinum for lymph nodes. The treatment
of choice for most chylothoraces is insertion of a chest
tube plus the administration of octreotide. If these modal-
ities fail, a pleuroperitoneal shunt should be placed unless
the patient has chylous ascites. Patients with chylothoraces
should not undergo prolonged tube thoracostomy with
chest tube drainage because this will lead to malnutrition
and immunologic incompetence.
Hemothorax
When a diagnostic thoracentesis reveals bloody pleural
ﬂuid, a hematocrit should be obtained on the pleural
ﬂuid. If the hematocrit is more than half of that in the
peripheral blood, the patient is considered to have a
hemothorax. Most hemothoraces are the result of trauma;
other causes include rupture of a blood vessel or tumor.
Most patients with hemothorax should be treated with
tube thoracostomy, which allows continuous quantiﬁca-
tion of bleeding. If the bleeding emanates from a lacera-
tion of the pleura, apposition of the two pleural surfaces is
likely to stop the bleeding. If the pleural hemorrhage
exceeds 200 mL/h, consideration should be given to tho-
racoscopy or thoracotomy.
Miscellaneous Causes of Pleural Effusion
There are many other causes of pleural effusion
(Table 21-1). Key features of some of these conditions
are as follows: If the pleural ﬂuid amylase level is ele-
vated, the diagnosis of esophageal rupture or pancreatic
disease is likely. If the patient is febrile, has predominantly
polymorphonuclear cells in the pleural ﬂuid, and has no
pulmonary parenchymal abnormalities, an intraabdomi-
nal abscess should be considered.
The diagnosis of an asbestos pleural effusion is one of
exclusion. Benign ovarian tumors can produce ascites
and a pleural effusion (Meigs’ syndrome), as can ovarian
hyperstimulation syndrome. Several drugs can cause pleural
effusion; the associated ﬂuid is usually eosinophilic. Pleural
effusions commonly occur after coronary artery bypass
surgery. Effusions occurring within the ﬁrst weeks are
typically left sided and bloody with large numbers of
eosinophils and respond to one or two therapeutic tho-
racenteses. Effusions occurring after the ﬁrst few weeks
are typically left sided and clear yellow with predomi-
nantly small lymphocytes and tend to recur. Other
medical manipulations that induce pleural effusions
include abdominal surgery; radiation therapy; liver, lung,
Diseases of the Respiratory System
218
SECTION II
TABLE 21-1
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSES OF PLEURAL EFFUSIONS
Transudative Pleural Effusions
1. Congestive heart failure
6. Superior vena cava 
2. Cirrhosis
obstruction
3. Pulmonary embolization
7. Myxedema
4. Nephrotic syndrome
8. Urinothorax
5. Peritoneal dialysis
Exudative Pleural Effusions
1. Neoplastic diseases
6. Post–coronary artery 
a. Metastatic disease
bypass surgery
b. Mesothelioma
7. Asbestos exposure
2. Infectious diseases
8. Sarcoidosis
a. Bacterial infections
9. Uremia
b. Tuberculosis
10. Meigs’ syndrome
c. Fungal infections
11. Yellow nail syndrome
d. Viral infections
12. Drug-induced pleural 
e. Parasitic infections
disease
3. Pulmonary embolization
a. Nitrofurantoin
4. Gastrointestinal disease
b. Dantrolene
a. Esophageal perforation
c. Methysergide
b. Pancreatic disease
d. Bromocriptine
c. Intraabdominal 
e. Procarbazine
abscesses
f. Amiodarone
d. Diaphragmatic hernia
13. Trapped lung
e. After abdominal surgery 14. Radiation therapy
f. Endoscopic variceal 
15. Post–cardiac injury 
sclerotherapy
syndrome
g. After liver transplant
16. Hemothorax
5. Collagen vascular 
17. Latrogenic injury
diseases
18. Ovarian hyperstimulation
a. Rheumatoid pleuritis
syndrome
b. Systemic lupus 
19. Pericardial disease
erythematosus
20. Chylothorax
c. Drug-induced lupus
d. Immunoblastic 
lymphadenopathy
e. Sjögren’s syndrome
f. Wegener’s 
granulomatosis
g. Churg-Strauss syndrome
or heart transplantation; and intravascular insertion of
central lines.
PNEUMOTHORAX
Pneumothorax is the presence of gas in the pleural space.
A spontaneous pneumothorax is one that occurs without
antecedent trauma to the thorax.Whereas a primary sponta-
neous pneumothorax occurs in the absence of underlying
lung disease, a secondary pneumothorax occurs in its presence.
A traumatic pneumothorax results from penetrating or non-
penetrating chest injuries. A tension pneumothorax is a
pneumothorax in which the pressure in the pleural space
is positive throughout the respiratory cycle.
Primary Spontaneous Pneumothorax
Primary spontaneous pneumothoraces are usually caused
by rupture of apical pleural blebs, small cystic spaces that
lie within or immediately under the visceral pleura.Primary
spontaneous pneumothoraces occur almost exclusively in
smokers, which suggests that these patients have subclini-
cal lung disease. Approximately 50% of patients with an
initial primary spontaneous pneumothorax will have a
recurrence. The initial recommended treatment for pri-
mary spontaneous pneumothorax is simple aspiration. If
the lung does not expand with aspiration or if the patient
has a recurrent pneumothorax, thoracoscopy with stapling
of blebs and pleural abrasion is indicated. Thoracoscopy
or thoracotomy with pleural abrasion is almost 100%
successful in preventing recurrences.
Secondary Pneumothorax
Most secondary pneumothoraces are caused by chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease, but pneumothoraces have
been reported with virtually every lung disease. Pneu-
mothorax in patients with lung disease is more life threat-
ening than it is in normal individuals because of the lack
of pulmonary reserve in these patients. Nearly all patients
with secondary pneumothorax should be treated with
tube thoracostomy. Most of them should also be treated
with thoracoscopy or thoracotomy with the stapling of
blebs and pleural abrasion. If the patient is not a good
operative candidate or refuses surgery, then pleurodesis
should be attempted by the intrapleural injection of a
sclerosing agent such as doxycycline.
Traumatic Pneumothorax
Traumatic pneumothoraces can result from both pene-
trating and nonpenetrating chest trauma. Traumatic
pneumothoraces should be treated with tube thoracos-
tomy unless they are very small. If a hemopneumothorax
is present, one chest tube should be placed in the superior
part of the hemithorax to evacuate the air, and another
should be placed in the inferior part of the hemithorax
to remove the blood. Iatrogenic pneumothorax is a type
of traumatic pneumothorax that is becoming more com-
mon. The leading causes are transthoracic needle aspira-
tion, thoracentesis, and the insertion of central intravenous
catheters. Most can be managed with supplemental oxy-
gen or aspiration, but if these are unsuccessful, a tube tho-
racostomy should be performed.
Tension Pneumothorax
This condition usually occurs during mechanical ventila-
tion or resuscitative efforts.The positive pleural pressure is
life threatening both because ventilation is severely com-
promised and because the positive pressure is transmitted
to the mediastinum, which results in decreased venous
return to the heart and reduced cardiac output.
Difficulty in ventilation during resuscitation or high
peak inspiratory pressures during mechanical ventilation
strongly suggests the diagnosis.The diagnosis is made by
physical examination showing an enlarged hemithorax
with no breath sounds, hyperresonance to percussion, and
shift of the mediastinum to the contralateral side.Tension
pneumothorax must be treated as a medical emergency. If
the tension in the pleural space is not relieved, the patient
is likely to die from inadequate cardiac output or marked
hypoxemia. A large-bore needle should be inserted into
the pleural space through the second anterior intercostal
space. If large amounts of gas escape from the needle after
insertion, the diagnosis is conﬁrmed.The needle should be
left in place until a thoracostomy tube can be inserted.
DISORDERS OF THE MEDIASTINUM
The mediastinum is the region between the pleural sacs.It is
separated into three compartments.The anterior mediastinum
extends from the sternum anteriorly to the pericardium and
brachiocephalic vessels posteriorly. It contains the thymus
gland, the anterior mediastinal lymph nodes, and the inter-
nal mammary arteries and veins.The middle mediastinum lies
between the anterior and posterior mediastina and contains
the heart; the ascending and transverse arches of the aorta;
the venae cavae; the brachiocephalic arteries and veins; the
phrenic nerves; the trachea, main bronchi, and their con-
tiguous lymph nodes; and the pulmonary arteries and veins.
The posterior mediastinum is bounded by the pericardium and
trachea anteriorly and the vertebral column posteriorly. It
contains the descending thoracic aorta, esophagus, thoracic
duct, azygos and hemiazygos veins, and the posterior group
of mediastinal lymph nodes.
MEDIASTINAL MASSES
The ﬁrst step in evaluating a mediastinal mass is to place
it in one of the three mediastinal compartments because
each has different characteristic lesions. The most com-
mon lesions in the anterior mediastinum are thymomas,
Disorders of the Pleura and Mediastinum
219
CHAPTER 21
lymphomas, teratomatous neoplasms, and thyroid masses.
The most common masses in the middle mediastinum are
vascular masses, lymph node enlargement from metastases
or granulomatous disease, and pleuropericardial and bron-
chogenic cysts. In the posterior mediastinum, neurogenic
tumors, meningoceles, meningomyeloceles, gastroenteric
cysts, and esophageal diverticula are commonly found.
CT scanning is the most valuable imaging technique
for evaluating mediastinal masses and is the only imaging
technique that should be done in most instances. Barium
studies of the gastrointestinal tract are indicated in many
patients with posterior mediastinal lesions because her-
nias, diverticula, and achalasia are readily diagnosed in this
manner.An 131I scan can efﬁciently establish the diagnosis
of intrathoracic goiter.
A deﬁnite diagnosis can be obtained with medi-
astinoscopy or anterior mediastinotomy in many patients
with masses in the anterior or middle mediastinal compart-
ments.A diagnosis can be established without thoracotomy
via percutaneous ﬁne-needle aspiration biopsy or endo-
scopic transesophageal or endobronchial ultrasound-guided
biopsy of mediastinal masses in most cases.Alternative ways
to establish the diagnosis are video-assisted thoracoscopy,
mediastinoscopy, or mediastinotomy. In many cases, the
diagnosis can be established and the mediastinal mass
removed with video-assisted thoracoscopy.
ACUTE MEDIASTINITIS
Most cases of acute mediastinitis either are caused by
esophageal perforation or occur after median sternotomy
for cardiac surgery. Patients with esophageal rupture are
acutely ill with chest pain and dyspnea caused by the
mediastinal infection. The esophageal rupture can occur
spontaneously or as a complication of esophagoscopy or
the insertion of a Blakemore tube.Appropriate treatment
is exploration of the mediastinum with primary repair of
the esophageal tear and drainage of the pleural space and
the mediastinum.
The incidence of mediastinitis after median sternotomy
is 0.4–5.0%. Patients most commonly present with wound
drainage. Other presentations include sepsis or a widened
mediastinum. The diagnosis is usually established with
mediastinal needle aspiration.Treatment includes immedi-
ate drainage,debridement,and parenteral antibiotic therapy,
but the mortality rate still exceeds 20%.
CHRONIC MEDIASTINITIS
The spectrum of chronic mediastinitis ranges from gran-
ulomatous inﬂammation of the lymph nodes in the
mediastinum to ﬁbrosing mediastinitis. Most cases are
caused by TB or histoplasmosis, but sarcoidosis, silicosis,
and other fungal diseases are at times causative. Patients
with granulomatous mediastinitis are usually asympto-
matic.Those with ﬁbrosing mediastinitis usually have signs
of compression of some mediastinal structure such as the
superior vena cava or large airways, phrenic or recurrent
laryngeal nerve paralysis, or obstruction of the pulmonary
artery or proximal pulmonary veins. Other than antitu-
berculous therapy for tuberculous mediastinitis, no medical
or surgical therapy has been demonstrated to be effective
for mediastinal ﬁbrosis.
PNEUMOMEDIASTINUM
In this condition, there is gas in the interstices of the
mediastinum.The three main causes are (1) alveolar rup-
ture with dissection of air into the mediastinum; (2) per-
foration or rupture of the esophagus, trachea, or main
bronchi; and (3) dissection of air from the neck or the
abdomen into the mediastinum.Typically, the patient has
severe substernal chest pain with or without radiation
into the neck and arms.The physical examination usually
reveals subcutaneous emphysema in the suprasternal
notch and Hamman’s sign, which is a crunching or click-
ing noise synchronous with the heartbeat and best heard
in the left lateral decubitus position.The diagnosis is con-
ﬁrmed with the chest radiograph. Usually no treatment is
required, but the mediastinal air will be absorbed faster
if the patient inspires high concentrations of oxygen. If
mediastinal structures are compressed, the compression
can be relieved with needle aspiration.
FURTHER READINGS
GILBERT S et al: Endobronchial ultrasound as a diagnostic tool in
patients with mediastinal lymphadenopathy. Ann Thorac Surg
88:896, 2009
LIGHT RW: Pleural Diseases, 5th ed. Philadelphia, Lippincott Williams
& Wilkins, 2006
———: Pleural effusion. N Engl J Med 346:1971, 2002
PORCEL JM:The use of probrain natriuretic peptide in pleural ﬂuid
for the diagnosis of pleural effusions resulting from heart failure.
Curr Opin Pulm Med 11:329, 2005
——— et al: Biomarkers of heart failure in pleural ﬂuid. Chest
163:671, 2009
——— et al: Biomarkers of infection for the differential diagnosis of
pleural effusions. Eur Respir J 2009 Jun 18, epub ahead of print
RAHMAN NM et al: Investigating suspected malignant pleural effu-
sion. BMJ 334:206, 2007
TREMBLAY A et al: Single-center experience with 250 tunnelled
pleural catheter insertions for malignant pleural effusion. Chest
129:362, 2006
VILMANN P et al:Transesophageal endoscopic ultrasound-guided ﬁne-
needle aspiration and endobronchial ultrasound-guided trans-
bronchial needle aspiration biopsy: A combined approach in the
evaluation of mediastinal lesions. Endoscopy 37:833, 2005
WARREN WH et al: Identiﬁcation of clinical factors predicting Pleurx
catheter removal in patients treated for malignant pleural effusion.
Eur J Cardiothorac Surg 33:89, 2008
Diseases of the Respiratory System
220
SECTION II
Eliot A. Phillipson
HYPOVENTILATION
DEFINITION AND ETIOLOGY
By definition, alveolar hypoventilation exists when
arterial PCO2 (PaCO2) increases above the normal range
of 37–43 mmHg, but in clinically important hypoventi-
lation syndromes, PaCO2 is generally in the range of
50–80 mmHg. Hypoventilation disorders can be acute
or chronic.This chapter deals with chronic hypoventila-
tion syndromes. The acute disorders, which represent
life-threatening emergencies, are discussed in Chap. 30.
Chronic hypoventilation can result from numerous
disease entities (Table 22-1), but in all cases, the
underlying mechanism involves a defect in the metabolic
respiratory control system, the respiratory neuromuscu-
lar system, or the ventilatory apparatus. Disorders asso-
ciated with impaired respiratory drive, defects in the
respiratory neuromuscular system, some chest wall dis-
orders such as obesity, and upper airway obstruction
produce an increase in PaCO2, despite normal lungs,
because of a reduction in overall minute volume of
ventilation and hence in alveolar ventilation. In con-
trast, most disorders of the chest wall and disorders of
the lower airways and lungs may produce an increase
in PaCO2 despite a normal or even increased minute
volume of ventilation because of severe ventilation-
perfusion mismatching that results in net alveolar
hypoventilation.
DISORDERS OF VENTILATION
Several hypoventilation syndromes involve combined
disturbances in two elements of the respiratory system.
For example, patients with chronic obstructive pul-
monary disease may hypoventilate not simply because of
impaired ventilatory mechanics but also because of a
reduced central respiratory drive, which can be inherent
or secondary to a coexisting metabolic alkalosis (related
to diuretic and steroid therapy).
PHYSIOLOGIC AND CLINICAL FEATURES
Regardless of cause, the hallmark of all alveolar hypoven-
tilation syndromes is an increase in alveolar PCO2 (PACO2)
and therefore in PaCO2 (Fig. 22-1).The resulting respira-
tory acidosis eventually leads to a compensatory increase
in plasma HCO3
– concentration and a decrease in Cl–
concentration.The increase in PACO2 produces an oblig-
atory decrease in PAO2, resulting in hypoxemia. If severe,
the hypoxemia manifests clinically as cyanosis and can
stimulate erythropoiesis and induce secondary poly-
cythemia. The combination of chronic hypoxemia and
hypercapnia may also induce pulmonary vasoconstric-
tion, leading eventually to pulmonary hypertension, right
ventricular hypertrophy, and congestive heart failure.The
disturbances in arterial blood gases are typically magni-
ﬁed during sleep because of a further reduction in cen-
tral respiratory drive. The resulting increased nocturnal
hypercapnia may cause cerebral vasodilation leading to
morning headache; sleep quality may also be severely
CHAPTER 22
CHAPTER 22
221
I Hypoventilation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 221
Deﬁnition and Etiology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 221
Physiologic and Clinical Features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 221
Diagnosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 222
I Hypoventilation Syndromes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 224
Primary Alveolar Hypoventilation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 224
Respiratory Neuromuscular Disorders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 224
Obesity-Hypoventilation Syndrome . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 225
I Hyperventilation and Its Syndromes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 225
Deﬁnition and Etiology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 225
Physiologic and Clinical Features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 226
Diagnosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 226
I Further Readings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 227
Diseases of the Respiratory System
222
SECTION II
impaired, resulting in morning fatigue, daytime somno-
lence, mental confusion, and intellectual impairment.
Other clinical features associated with hypoventilation
syndromes are related to the speciﬁc underlying disease
(see Table 22-1).
DIAGNOSIS
Investigation of a patient with chronic hypoventilation
involves several laboratory tests that will usually localize
the disorder to the metabolic respiratory control sys-
tem, the neuromuscular system, or the ventilatory appa-
ratus (Fig. 22-2). Defects in the control system impair
responses to chemical stimuli, including ventilatory,
occlusion pressure, and diaphragmatic electromyographic
(EMG) responses. During sleep, hypoventilation is usu-
ally more marked, and central apneas and hypopneas
are common. However, because the behavioral respira-
tory control system (which is anatomically distinct
from the metabolic control system), the neuromuscular
system, and the ventilatory apparatus are intact, such
TABLE 22-1
CHRONIC HYPOVENTILATION SYNDROMES
MECHANISM 
SITE OF DEFECT
DISORDER
Impaired
Peripheral and 
Carotid body dysfunction, trauma
respiratory drive
central chemoreceptors
Prolonged hypoxia
Metabolic alkalosis
Brainstem respiratory
Bulbar poliomyelitis, encephalitis
neurons
Brainstem infarction, hemorrhage, trauma
Brainstem demyelination, degeneration
Chronic drug administration
Hypothyroidism
Primary alveolar hypoventilation
syndrome
Defective respiratory
Spinal cord and 
High cervical trauma
neuromuscular system
peripheral nerves
Poliomyelitis
Motor neuron disease
Peripheral neuropathy
Respiratory muscles
Myasthenia gravis
Muscular dystrophy
Chronic myopathy
Impaired ventilatory
Chest wall
Kyphoscoliosis
apparatus
Fibrothorax
Thoracoplasty
Ankylosing spondylitis
Obesity hypoventilation
Airways and lungs
Laryngeal and tracheal stenosis
Obstructive sleep apnea
Cystic ﬁbrosis
Chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease
Source: From EA Phillipson, AS Slutsky, in Murray JF, Nadel JA (eds), Textbook of Respiratory Medicine, 3d ed,
Philadelphia, Saunders, 2000, with permission.
Cerebral
vasodilation
Primary
Physiologic
Events
Secondary
Physiologic
Events
Clinical Features
↑ PaCO2
PaO2
↓ pH
↓ 
↑ HCO3
–
↓ Cl –
Arousals from
sleep
Hb desaturation
↑erythropoiesis
Pulmonary
vasoconstriction
Pulmonary hypertension
Congestive heart failure
Cyanosis
Polycythemia
Disturbed sleep
Daytime somnolence,
  confusion, fatigue
Morning headache
FIGURE 22-1
Physiologic and clinical features of alveolar hypoventilation.
Hb, hemoglobin; PaCO2, arterial PCO2; PaO2, arterial PO2.
[Adapted from Phillipson EA, Slutsky AS: in Murray JF, Nadel JA
(eds), Textbook of Respiratory Medicine, 3d ed, Philadelphia,
Saunders, 2000.]
patients can usually hyperventilate voluntarily, generate
normal inspiratory and expiratory muscle pressures
(PImax, PEmax, respectively) against an occluded airway,
generate normal lung volumes and ﬂow rates on rou-
tine spirometry, and have normal respiratory system
resistance and compliance and a normal alveolar-arterial
PO2[(A–a)PO2] difference.
Patients with defects in the respiratory neuromuscular
system also have impaired responses to chemical stimuli
but in addition are unable to hyperventilate voluntarily
or to generate normal static respiratory muscle pressures,
lung volumes, and ﬂow rates. However, at least in the
early stages of the disease, the resistance and compliance
of the respiratory system and the alveolar-arterial oxy-
gen difference are normal.
In contrast to patients with disorders of the respira-
tory control or neuromuscular systems, patients with dis-
orders of the chest wall, lungs, and airways typically
demonstrate abnormalities of respiratory system resis-
tance and compliance and have a widened (A–a)PO2.
Because of the impaired mechanics of breathing, routine
spirometric tests are abnormal, as is the ventilatory response
to chemical stimuli. However, because the neuromuscu-
lar system is intact, tests that are independent of resis-
tance and compliance are usually normal, including tests
of respiratory muscle strength and respiratory control
that do not involve airﬂow.
Disorders of Ventilation
223
CHAPTER 22
Site of defect
Metabolic control system
  (chemoreceptors,
  brainstem integrating neurons)
Respiratory neuromuscular
  system (brainstem motoneurons,
  spinal cord, respiratory nerves,
  and muscles)
Ventilatory apparatus
  (chest wall, lungs, airways)
N
N
Responses to CO2, hypoxia
Ventil.  P.1  EMGdi
Sleep studies
Hypoventil,
central apneas
Hypoventil,
central apneas
Variable
Voluntary
hyperventil.
N
Plmax
PEmax
N
N
Volume
flow rates
N
Abnormal
Resistance,
compliance
N
N
Abnormal
(A–a) Po2
N
N
FIGURE 22-2
Pattern of laboratory test results in alveolar hypoventila-
tion syndromes based on the site of defect. Defects in the
metabolic control system impair central respiratory drive in
response to chemical stimuli (CO2 or hypoxia); therefore,
responses of EMGdi, P.1, and minute volume of ventilation
are reduced, and hypoventilation during sleep is aggravated.
In contrast, tests of voluntary respiratory control, muscle
strength, lung mechanics, and gas exchange [(A–a)PO2] are
normal. Defects in the respiratory neuromuscular system
impair muscle strength; therefore, all tests dependent on
muscular activity (voluntary or in response to metabolic stim-
uli) are abnormal, but lung resistance, lung compliance, and
gas exchange are normal. Defects in the ventilatory appara-
tus usually impair gas exchange. Because resistance and
compliance are also impaired, all tests dependent on ventila-
tion (whether voluntary or in response to chemical stimuli) are
abnormal; in contrast, tests of muscle activity or strength
that do not involve airﬂow (i.e., P.1, EMGdi, PImax, PEmax) are
normal. (A–a)PO2, alveolar-arterial PO2 difference; EMGdi,
diaphragmatic EMG; N, normal; P.1, mouth pressure gener-
ated after 0.1 s of inspiration against an occluded airway;
PImax, PEmax, maximum inspiratory or expiratory pressure that
can be generated against an occluded airway; Ventil, ventila-
tion. (Adapted from Phillipson and Dufﬁn.)
Treatment:
HYPOVENTILATION
The management of chronic hypoventilation must
be individualized to the patient’s particular disorder,
circumstances, and needs and should include measures
directed toward the underlying disease. Coexistent
metabolic alkalosis should be corrected,including eleva-
tions of HCO3
– that are inappropriately high for the
degree of chronic hypercapnia. Administration of sup-
plemental oxygen is effective in attenuating hypoxemia,
polycythemia, and pulmonary hypertension but can
aggravate CO2 retention and the associated neurologic
symptoms. For this reason, supplemental oxygen must
be prescribed judiciously and the results monitored
carefully. Pharmacologic agents that stimulate respira-
tion, such as progesterone and methylxanthines, are of
beneﬁt in some patients, but the results are generally
disappointing.
Most patients with chronic hypoventilation related to
impairment of respiratory drive or neuromuscular dis-
ease eventually require mechanical ventilatory assis-
tance for effective management. When hypoventilation
is severe,treatment may be required on a 24-h basis,but
in most patients, ventilatory assistance only during
sleep produces dramatic improvement in clinical fea-
tures and daytime arterial blood gases. In patients with
reduced respiratory drive but intact respiratory lower
motor neurons, phrenic nerves, and respiratory muscles,
diaphragmatic pacing through an implanted phrenic
electrode can be very effective. However, for patients
with defects in the respiratory nerves and muscles, elec-
trophrenic pacing is contraindicated. Such patients can
usually be managed effectively with either intermittent
negative-pressure ventilation in a cuirass or intermittent
positive-pressure ventilation delivered through a tra-
cheostomy or nose mask. For patients who require ven-
tilatory assistance only during sleep, positive-pressure
ventilation through a nose mask is the preferred
method because it obviates a tracheostomy and avoids
the problem of upper airway occlusion that can arise in
a negative-pressure ventilator. Hypoventilation related
to restrictive disorders of the chest wall (Table 22-1) can
also be managed effectively with nocturnal intermittent
positive-pressure ventilation through a nose mask or
tracheostomy.
may not be demonstrable in a single arterial blood sam-
ple, but the presence of an elevated plasma HCO3
– level
should draw attention to the underlying chronic distur-
bance. Despite normal ventilatory mechanics and respira-
tory muscle strength, ventilatory responses to chemical
stimuli are reduced or absent (Fig. 22-2), and breath-
holding time may be markedly prolonged without any
sensation of dyspnea.
Patients with PAH maintain rhythmic respiration
when awake, although the level of ventilation is below
normal. However, during sleep, when breathing is criti-
cally dependent on the metabolic control system, there
is typically a further deterioration in ventilation, with
frequent episodes of central hypopnea or apnea.
PAH must be distinguished from other central
hypoventilation syndromes that are secondary to under-
lying neurologic disease of the brainstem or chemore-
ceptors (Table 22-1). This distinction requires a careful
neurologic investigation for evidence of brainstem or
autonomic disturbances. Unrecognized respiratory neu-
romuscular disorders, particularly those that produce
diaphragmatic weakness, are often misdiagnosed as PAH.
However, such disorders can usually be suspected on
clinical grounds (see later) and can be conﬁrmed by the
ﬁnding of reduced voluntary hyperventilation, as well as
PImax and PEmax.
Patients with PAH must be cautioned against the use
of sedative medications, which may readily induce acute
respiratory failure. Some patients respond favorably to res-
piratory stimulant medications and to supplemental oxy-
gen. However, the majority eventually require mechanical
ventilatory assistance. Excellent long-term beneﬁts can be
achieved with diaphragmatic pacing by electrophrenic
stimulation or with negative- or positive-pressure mechan-
ical ventilation.The administration of such treatment only
during sleep is sufﬁcient in most patients.
RESPIRATORY NEUROMUSCULAR
DISORDERS
Several primary disorders of the spinal cord,peripheral res-
piratory nerves, and respiratory muscles produce a chronic
hypoventilation syndrome (Table 22-1). Hypoventilation
usually develops gradually over a period of months to
years and often ﬁrst comes to attention when a relatively
trivial increase in mechanical ventilatory load (e.g., mild
airways obstruction) produces severe respiratory failure. In
some of the disorders (e.g., motor neuron disease, myas-
thenia gravis, and muscular dystrophy), involvement of the
respiratory nerves or muscles is usually a later feature of a
more widespread disease. In other disorders, respiratory
involvement can be an early or even isolated feature, and
hence the underlying problem is often not suspected.
Included in this category are postpolio syndrome (a form
of chronic respiratory insufficiency that develops
20–30 years after recovery from poliomyelitis), myopathy
Diseases of the Respiratory System
224
SECTION II
HYPOVENTILATION SYNDROMES
PRIMARY ALVEOLAR HYPOVENTILATION
Primary alveolar hypoventilation (PAH) is a disorder of
unknown cause characterized by chronic hypercapnia
and hypoxemia in the absence of identiﬁable neuromus-
cular disease or mechanical ventilatory impairment.The
disorder is thought to arise from a defect in the meta-
bolic respiratory control system, but few neuropatho-
logic studies have been reported in such patients. Studies
in animals suggest an important role for genetic factors
in the pathogenesis of hypoventilation, and familial
cases in humans have been described. Isolated PAH is
relatively rare, and although it occurs in all age groups,
the majority of reported cases in adults have been in
men aged 20–50 years. The disorder typically develops
insidiously and often ﬁrst comes to attention when
severe respiratory depression occurs after administration
of standard doses of sedatives or anesthetics. As the
degree of hypoventilation increases, patients typically
develop lethargy, fatigue, daytime somnolence, disturbed
sleep, and morning headaches; eventually, cyanosis, poly-
cythemia, pulmonary hypertension, and congestive heart
failure occur (Fig. 22-1). Despite severe arterial blood
gas derangements, dyspnea is uncommon, presumably
because of impaired chemoreception and ventilatory
drive. If left untreated, PAH is usually progressive over a
period of months to years and is ultimately fatal.
The key diagnostic ﬁnding in PAH is a chronic respi-
ratory acidosis in the absence of respiratory muscle
weakness or impaired ventilatory mechanics (Fig. 22-2).
Because patients can hyperventilate voluntarily and reduce
PaCO2 to normal or even hypocapnic levels, hypercapnia
associated with adult acid maltase deﬁciency, and idio-
pathic diaphragmatic paralysis.
Generally, respiratory neuromuscular disorders do not
result in chronic hypoventilation unless the patient has
significant weakness of the diaphragm. Distinguishing
features of bilateral diaphragmatic weakness include
orthopnea, paradoxical movement of the abdomen in
the supine posture, and paradoxical diaphragmatic
movement under ﬂuoroscopy. However, the absence of
these features does not exclude diaphragmatic weakness.
Important laboratory features are a decrease in forced
vital capacity in the supine compared with the upright
posture, a rapid deterioration of ventilation during a
maximum voluntary ventilation maneuver, and reduced
PImax and PEmax (Fig. 22-2). More sophisticated investiga-
tions reveal reduced or absent transdiaphragmatic pres-
sures, calculated from simultaneous measurement of
esophageal and gastric pressures; reduced diaphragmatic
EMG responses (recorded from an esophageal electrode)
to transcutaneous phrenic nerve stimulation; and marked
hypopnea and arterial oxygen desaturation during rapid
eye movement sleep, when there is normally a physio-
logic inhibition of all nondiaphragmatic respiratory
muscles and breathing becomes critically dependent on
diaphragmatic activity.
The management of patients with chronic alveolar
hypoventilation caused by respiratory neuromuscular dis-
ease involves treatment of the underlying disorder when
feasible and mechanical ventilatory assistance as described
for the PAH syndrome. However, electrophrenic
diaphragmatic pacing is contraindicated in patients with
these disorders, except for those with high cervical spinal
cord lesions in whom the phrenic lower motor neurons
and nerves are intact.
OBESITY-HYPOVENTILATION SYNDROME
Massive obesity represents a mechanical load to the res-
piratory system because the added weight on the rib
cage and abdomen serves to reduce the compliance of
the chest wall.As a result, the functional residual capacity
(i.e., end-expiratory lung volume) is reduced, particu-
larly in the recumbent posture. An important conse-
quence of breathing at a low lung volume is that some
airways, particularly those in the lung bases, may be
closed throughout part or even all of each tidal breath,
resulting in underventilation of the lung bases and
widening of the (A–a)PO2. Nevertheless, in the majority
of obese individuals, central respiratory drive is increased
sufﬁciently to maintain a normal PaCO2. However, a
small proportion of obese patients develop chronic
hypercapnia, hypoxemia, and eventually polycythemia,
pulmonary hypertension, and right-sided heart failure.
Studies in mice demonstrate that genetically obese mice
lacking circulating leptin also develop chronic hypoven-
tilation that can be reversed by leptin infusions. In
humans with obesity-hypoventilation syndrome, serum
leptin levels are elevated, suggesting that leptin resistance
may play a role in the pathogenesis of the disorder.
In many patients, obstructive sleep apnea (Chap. 23) is
a prominent feature, and even in patients without sleep
apnea, sleep-induced hypoventilation is an important ele-
ment of the disorder and contributes to its progression.
Most patients demonstrate a decrease in central respira-
tory drive, which may be inherent or acquired, and many
have mild to moderate degrees of airﬂow obstruction,
usually related to smoking. Based on these considera-
tions, several therapeutic measures can be of considerable
beneﬁt, including weight loss, cessation of smoking,
elimination of obstructive sleep apnea, and enhancement
of respiratory drive by medications such as progesterone.
HYPERVENTILATION
AND ITS SYNDROMES
DEFINITION AND ETIOLOGY
Alveolar hyperventilation exists when PaCO2 decreases
below the normal range of 37–43 mmHg. Hyperventila-
tion is not synonymous with hyperpnea, which refers to
an increased minute volume of ventilation without ref-
erence to PaCO2.Although hyperventilation is frequently
associated with dyspnea, patients who are hyperventilat-
ing do not necessarily complain of shortness of breath,
and conversely, patients with dyspnea need not be
hyperventilating.
Numerous disease entities can be associated with alve-
olar hyperventilation (Table 22-2), but in all cases, the
underlying mechanism involves an increase in respiratory
drive that is mediated through either the behavioral or
the metabolic respiratory control systems (Fig. 22-3).
Thus, hypoxemia drives ventilation by stimulating the
peripheral chemoreceptors, and several pulmonary disor-
ders and congestive heart failure drive ventilation by
stimulating afferent vagal receptors in the lungs and air-
ways. Low cardiac output and hypotension stimulate the
peripheral chemoreceptors and inhibit the baroreceptors,
both of which increase ventilation. Metabolic acidosis, a
potent respiratory stimulant, excites both the peripheral
and central chemoreceptors and increases the sensitivity
of the peripheral chemoreceptors to coexistent hypox-
emia. Hepatic failure can also produce hyperventilation,
presumably as a result of metabolic stimuli acting on the
peripheral and central chemoreceptors.
Several neurologic and psychological disorders are
thought to drive ventilation through the behavioral
respiratory control system. Included in this category are
psychogenic or anxiety hyperventilation and severe cere-
brovascular insufﬁciency, which may interfere with the
inhibitory inﬂuence normally exerted by cortical structures
on the brainstem respiratory neurons. Rarely, disorders of
Disorders of Ventilation
225
CHAPTER 22
the midbrain and hypothalamus induce hyperventilation,
and it is conceivable that fever and sepsis also cause
hyperventilation through effects on these structures. Sev-
eral drugs cause hyperventilation by stimulating the cen-
tral or peripheral chemoreceptors or by direct action on
the brainstem respiratory neurons. Chronic hyperventila-
tion is a normal feature of pregnancy and results from the
effects of progesterone and other hormones acting on the
respiratory neurons.
PHYSIOLOGIC AND CLINICAL FEATURES
Because hyperventilation is associated with increased
respiratory drive, muscle effort, and minute volume of
ventilation, the most frequent symptom associated with
hyperventilation is dyspnea. However, there is considerable
discrepancy between the degree of hyperventilation, as
measured by PaCO2, and the degree of associated dyspnea.
From a physiologic standpoint, hyperventilation is beneﬁ-
cial in patients who are hypoxemic because the alveolar
hypocapnia is associated with an increase in alveolar and
arterial PO2. Conversely, hyperventilation can also be
detrimental. In particular, the alkalemia associated with
hypocapnia may produce neurologic symptoms, including
dizziness, visual impairment, syncope, and seizure activity
(secondary to cerebral vasoconstriction); paresthesia, car-
popedal spasm, and tetany (secondary to decreased free
serum calcium); and muscle weakness (secondary to
hypophosphatemia). It may also be associated with panic
attacks, and severe alkalemia can induce cardiac arrhyth-
mias and evidence of myocardial ischemia. Patients with a
primary respiratory alkalosis are also prone to periodic
breathing and central sleep apnea (Chap. 23).
DIAGNOSIS
In most patients with a hyperventilation syndrome, the
cause is readily apparent on the basis of history, physical
examination, and knowledge of coexisting medical disor-
ders (see Table 22-2). In patients in whom the cause is not
clinically apparent, investigation begins with arterial blood
gas analysis, which establishes the presence of alveolar
hyperventilation (decreased PaCO2) and its severity.
Equally important is the arterial pH, which generally
allows the disorder to be classiﬁed as either a primary res-
piratory alkalosis (elevated pH) or a primary metabolic
acidosis (decreased pH). Also of importance is the PaO2
and calculation of the (A–a)PO2, because a widened alveo-
lar-arterial oxygen difference suggests a pulmonary disor-
der as the underlying cause. The ﬁnding of a reduced
plasma HCO3
– level establishes the chronic nature of the
disorder and points toward an organic cause. Measure-
ments of ventilation and arterial or transcutaneous PCO2
during sleep are very useful in suspected psychogenic
hyperventilation because such patients do not maintain
the hyperventilation during sleep.
The disorders that most frequently give rise to unex-
plained hyperventilation are pulmonary vascular disease
(particularly chronic or recurrent thromboembolism)
and psychogenic or anxiety hyperventilation. Hyperven-
tilation caused by pulmonary vascular disease is associ-
ated with exertional dyspnea, a widened (A–a)PO2, and
maintenance of hyperventilation during exercise. In
contrast, patients with psychogenic hyperventilation
typically complain of dyspnea at rest, but not during
mild exercise, and of the need to sigh frequently. They
are also more likely to complain of dizziness, sweating,
palpitations, and paresthesia. During mild to moderate
exercise, their hyperventilation tends to disappear and
(A–a)PO2 is normal, but heart rate and cardiac output
may be increased relative to the metabolic rate.
Diseases of the Respiratory System
226
SECTION II
TABLE 22-2
HYPERVENTILATION SYNDROMES
1. Hypoxemia
4. Metabolic disorders
a. High altitude
a. Acidosis (diabetic,
b. Pulmonary disease
renal, lactic)
c. Cardiac shunts
b. Hepatic failure
2. Pulmonary disorders
5. Neurologic and
a. Pneumonia
psychogenic disorders
b. Interstitial 
a. Psychogenic or anxiety
pneumonitis,
hyperventilation
ﬁbrosis, edema
b. Central nervous system
c. Pulmonary emboli,
infection, tumors
vascular disease
6. Drug induced
d. Bronchial asthma
a. Salicylates
e. Pneumothorax
b. Methylxanthine
f. Chest wall disorders
derivatives 
3. Cardiovascular 
c. β-Adrenergic agonists
disorders
d. Progesterone
a. Congestive
7. Miscellaneous
heart failure
a. Fever, sepsis
b. Hypotension
b. Pain
c. Pregnancy
Cortex
Mid-brain
Hypothalamus
Central
chemoreceptor
Peripheral
chemoreceptors
Vagal afferents
Inputs
Control Systems
Behavioral control system
Metabolic control system
Respiratory muscles
FIGURE 22-3
Schematic diagram of the mechanisms involved in alveo-
lar hyperventilation. [Adapted from Phillipson EA, Slutsky
AS: in Murray JF, Nadel JA (eds), Textbook of Respiratory
Medicine, 3d ed, Philadelphia, Saunders, 2000.]
Disorders of Ventilation
227
CHAPTER 22
Treatment:
HYPERVENTILATION
Mild alveolar hyperventilation is usually of relatively
minor clinical consequence and therefore is generally
managed by appropriate treatment of the underlying
cause. In the few patients in whom alkalemia is thought
to be inducing signiﬁcant cerebral vasoconstriction,
paresthesia, tetany, or cardiac disturbances, acute inhala-
tion of a low concentration of CO2 can be very beneﬁcial.
For patients with disabling psychogenic hyperventilation,
careful explanation of the basis of their symptoms can be
reassuring and is often sufﬁcient. Others have beneﬁted
from β-adrenergic antagonists or an exercise program.
Speciﬁc treatment for anxiety may also be indicated.
FURTHER READINGS
ANNANE D et al: Nocturnal mechanical ventilation for chronic
hypoventilation in patients with neuromuscular and chest wall
disorders. Cochrane Database Sys Rev 2:CD001941, 2000
CHUNG F et al: STOP Questionnaire: A tool to screen patients for
obstructive sleep apnea.Anesthesiology 108:812, 2008
DOUGLAS IS et al:Acute-on-Chronic respiratory failure, in Principles
of Critical Care, 3d ed, Hall JB, Schmidt GS and Wood LDH
(eds). New York, McGraw-Hill, 2005, pp 549-565
FANBURG BL, SICILIAN L (eds): Respiratory dysfunction in neuro-
muscular disease. Clin Chest Med 15:607, 1994
GARDNER WN: The pathophysiology of hyperventilation disorders.
Chest 109:516, 1996
LAFFEY JG, KAVANAGH BP: Hypocapnia. N Engl J Med 347:43,
2002
LITTLETON SW, MOKHLESI B: The Pickwickian Syndrome-Obesity
Hypoventilation Syndrome. Clin Chest Med 30:467, 2009
O’DONNELL CP et al: Leptin prevents respiratory depression in obe-
sity.Am J Respir Crit Care Med 159:1477, 1999
OLSON AL, ZWILLICH C:The obesity hypoventilation syndrome.Am
J Med 118:948, 2005
PHILLIPSON EA, DUFFIN J: Hypoventilation and hyperventilation
syndromes, in Murray and Nadel’s Textbook of Respiratory Medicine,
4th ed, RJ Mason et al (eds). Philadelphia, Saunders, 2005,
pp 2069–2091
PHIPPS PR: Association of serum leptin with hypoventilation in
human obesity.Thorax 57:75, 2002
SIMONDS AK: Recent advances in respiratory care for neuromuscular
disease. Chest 130:1879, 2006
TANKERSLEY CG et al: Genetic control of differential baseline
breathing pattern. J Appl Physiol 82:874, 1997
Neil J. Douglas
OBSTRUCTIVE SLEEP APNEA
Obstructive sleep apnea/hypopnea syndrome (OSAHS)
is one of the most important medical conditions identi-
ﬁed in the past 50 years. It is a major cause of morbidity,
a signiﬁcant cause of mortality throughout the world,
and the most common medical cause of daytime sleepi-
ness. Central sleep apnea (CSA) is a less common clini-
cal problem.
DEFINITION
OSAHS may be deﬁned as the coexistence of unex-
plained excessive daytime sleepiness with at least ﬁve
obstructed breathing events (apnea or hypopnea) per
hour of sleep (Table 23-1). This event threshold may
need to be reﬁned upward in the elderly. Apneas are
defined in adults as breathing pauses lasting ≥10 s and
hypopneas as ≥10 s during which there is continued
breathing but the ventilation is reduced by at least 50%
from the previous baseline during sleep. As a syndrome,
OSAHS is the association of a clinical picture with spe-
ciﬁc abnormalities on testing; asymptomatic individuals
with abnormal breathing during sleep should not be
labeled as having OSAHS.
SLEEP APNEA
MECHANISM OF OBSTRUCTION
Apneas and hypopneas are caused by the airway being
sucked closed on inspiration during sleep.This occurs as the
upper airway dilating muscles—like all striated muscles—
normally relax during sleep. In patients with OSAHS, the
dilating muscles can no longer successfully oppose nega-
tive pressure within the airway during inspiration. The
primary defect is not in the upper airway muscles, which
function normally in OSAHS patients when awake.These
patients have narrow upper airways already during wake-
fulness, but when they are awake, their airway-dilating
muscles have higher than normal activity, which ensures
airway patency. However, when they are asleep, muscle
tone decreases, and the airway narrows; snoring may
commence before the airway occludes, and apnea results.
Apneas and hypopneas terminate when the subject
arouses (i.e., wakens brieﬂy) from sleep. This arousal is
sometimes too subtle to be seen on the electroencephalo-
gram but may be detected by cardiac acceleration, blood
pressure elevation, or sympathetic tone increase. The
arousal results in return of upper airway dilating muscle
tone, and thus airway patency is resumed.
The factors predisposing to OSAHS by narrowing the
pharynx include obesity—around 50% have a body mass
index (BMI) >30 kg/m2 in Western populations—and
CHAPTER 23
CHAPTER 23
228
I Obstructive Sleep Apnea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 228
Deﬁnition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 228
Mechanism of Obstruction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 228
Epidemiology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 229
Clinical Features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 229
I Central Sleep Apnea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 232
Clinical Features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 232
Investigation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 232
I Further Readings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 232
shortening of the mandible, maxilla, or both.This change
in jaw shape may be subtle and can be familial. Hypothy-
roidism and acromegaly predispose individuals to OSAHS
by narrowing the upper airway with tissue inﬁltration.
Other predisposing factors for OSAHS include male gen-
der and middle age (40–65 years), myotonic dystrophy,
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, and perhaps also smoking.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
Broadly, the frequency of OSAHS is in the range of
1–4% of the middle-aged male population; it is around
half as common in women.The syndrome also occurs in
childhood, usually associated with tonsil or adenoid
enlargement, and in elderly individuals, although the
frequency is slightly lower in old age. Irregular breathing
during sleep without daytime sleepiness is much more
common, occurring in perhaps 25% of the middle-aged
male population. However, because these individuals are
asymptomatic, they do not have OSAHS, and there is no
evidence at present that these events are harmful.
CLINICAL FEATURES
Randomized controlled treatment trials have shown that
OSAHS causes daytime sleepiness; impaired vigilance,
cognitive performance, and driving; depression; disturbed
sleep; and hypertension. Daytime sleepiness may range
from mild to irresistible, and the sleep attacks can be
indistinguishable from those in narcolepsy.The sleepiness
may result in an inability to work effectively and may
damage interpersonal relationships and prevent socializ-
ing.The somnolence is dangerous when driving, with a
three- to sixfold risk in accidents on the road or when
Sleep Apnea
229
CHAPTER 23
operating machinery. Experiments with normal subjects
repeatedly aroused from sleep indicate that the sleepiness
results, at least in part, from the repetitive sleep disruption
associated with the breathing abnormality. The possible
contribution from the recurrent hypoxemia requires fur-
ther evaluation.
Other symptoms include difﬁculty concentrating,
unrefreshing nocturnal sleep, nocturnal choking, noc-
turia, and decreased libido. Partners report nightly loud
snoring in all postures, which may be punctuated by the
silence of apneas. Partners often give a markedly differ-
ent assessment of the extent of sleepiness.
Cardiovascular and Cerebrovascular Events
OSAHS increases 24-h mean blood pressure. The
increase is greater in those with recurrent nocturnal
hypoxemia, is at least 4–5 mmHg, and may be as great as
10 mmHg in those with >20% arterial oxygen desatu-
rations per hour of sleep. This increase probably results
from a combination of surges in blood pressure accom-
panying each arousal from sleep that end each apnea or
hypopnea and from the associated 24-h increases in
sympathetic tone.
Epidemiologic data in normal populations indicate
that this increase in blood pressure would increase the
risk of myocardial infarction by around 20% and stroke
by about 40%. Although there have been no long-term
randomized controlled trials (RCTs) to indicate whether
this is true in OSAHS patients—and such studies would
not be ethically defensible—observational studies suggest
an increase in the risk of myocardial infarction and stroke
in individuals with untreated OSAHS. Furthermore, epi-
demiologic studies suggest, but do not prove, increased
vascular risk in normal subjects with increased apneas
and hypopneas during sleep. Patients with recent stroke
have a high frequency of apneas and hypopneas during
sleep. These seem largely to be a consequence, not a
cause, of the stroke and to decline over the weeks after
the vascular event.There is no evidence that treating the
apneas and hypopneas improves stroke outcome.
There has been debate for decades whether OSAHS is
an adult form of sudden infant death syndrome.Although
earlier studies showed no increase in sudden nocturnal
deaths in OSAHS, a recent large study reported excess
nocturnal deaths in subjects previously shown to have
apneas and hypopneas during sleep.
Diabetes Mellitus
The association of OSAHS with diabetes mellitus is not
just because obesity is common in both conditions.
Recent data suggest that increased apneas and hypopneas
during sleep are associated with insulin resistance inde-
pendent of obesity. In addition, uncontrolled trials suggest
that OSAHS can aggravate diabetes and that treatment of
TABLE 23-1
CLINICAL INDICATORS IN THE SLEEPY PATIENT
OSAHS
NARCOLEPSY
IHS
Age of onset 
35–60
10–30
10–30
(years)
Cataplexy
No
Yes
No
Night sleep
Duration
Normal
Normal
Long
Awakenings
Occasional
Frequent
Rare
Snoring
Yes, loud
Occasional
Occasional
Morning 
Occasional
Occasional
Common
drunkenness
Daytime naps
Frequency
Usually few
Many
Few
Time of day
Afternoon/
Afternoon/
Morning
evening
evening
Duration
<1 h
<1 h
>1 h
Note: Features suggesting obstructive sleep apnea/hypopnea syn-
drome (OSAHS), narcolepsy, or idiopathic hypersomnolence (IHS).
OSAHS in patients who also have diabetes decreases their
insulin requirements.
Liver
Hepatic dysfunction has also been associated with irreg-
ular breathing during sleep. Non–alcohol-drinking sub-
jects with apneas and hypopneas during sleep were
found to have increased liver enzymes and more steato-
sis and ﬁbrosis on liver biopsy independent of body
weight.
Anesthestic Risk
Patients with OSAHS are at increased risk perioperatively
because their upper airway may obstruct during the
recovery period or as a consequence of sedation. Patients
whose anesthesiologists have difﬁculty intubating are
much more likely to have irregular breathing during
sleep.Anesthesiologists should thus take sleep histories on
patients preoperatively and take the appropriate precau-
tions with those who might have OSAHS. This should
include referring patients suspected of having OSAHS for
investigation, and some elective operations may need to
be postponed until the OSAHS is treated.
Differential Diagnosis
Causes of sleepiness that may need to be distinguished
include (see Table 23-1):
• Insufﬁcient sleep:This can usually be diagnosed by history.
• Shift work: This is a major cause of sleepiness, espe-
cially in those older than age 40 years old on either
rotating shift or night shift work patterns.
• Psychological/psychiatric causes: Depression is a major cause
of sleepiness.
• Drugs: Both stimulant and sedative drugs can produce
sleepiness.
• Narcolepsy: Around 50 times less common than
OSAHS, narcolepsy is usually evident from childhood
or the teenage years and is associated with cataplexy.
• Idiopathic hypersomnolence: This is an ill-deﬁned condi-
tion typiﬁed by long sleep duration and sleepiness.
• Phase alteration syndromes: Both the phase delay and the
less common phase advancement syndromes are char-
acterized by sleepiness at the characteristic time of day.
Who to Refer for Diagnosis
Anyone whose troublesome sleepiness is not readily
explained and rectiﬁed by considering the above differen-
tial diagnosis should be referred to a sleep specialist.The
guideline I use for patients with troublesome sleepiness
includes those with an Epworth Sleepiness Score >11
(Table 23-2) and those for whom sleepiness during work
or driving poses problems. However, the Epworth Score
is not a perfect measure for detecting troublesome sleepi-
ness because many whose life is troubled by frequently
ﬁghting sleepiness but who never doze will correctly
score themselves as having a low Epworth Score. The
patient and his or her partner often give divergent scores
for the patient’s sleepiness, and in such cases, the higher of
the two scores should be used.
Diagnosis
OSAHS is a condition requiring lifelong treatment, and
the diagnosis needs to be made or excluded with cer-
tainty, when possible, by a specialist.This hinges on obtain-
ing a good sleep history from the patient and partner,
including asking both to complete sleep questionnaires,
including the Epworth Sleepiness Score (see Table 23-2).
Physical examination must include assessment of obe-
sity; jaw structure; the upper airway; blood pressure; and
possible predisposing causes, including hypothyroidism
and acromegaly (see earlier).
In those with appropriate clinical features, the diag-
nostic test must demonstrate recurrent breathing pauses
during sleep. This may be a full polysomnographic
examination with recording of multiple respiratory and
neurophysiologic signals during sleep. Increasingly, and
especially outside the United States, most diagnostic tests
are “limited studies”—recording respiratory and oxy-
genation patterns overnight without neurophysiologic
Diseases of the Respiratory System
230
SECTION II
TABLE 23-2
EPWORTH SLEEPINESS SCORE
How often are you likely to doze off or fall asleep in the
following situations, in contrast to feeling just tired?
This refers to your usual way of life in recent times.
Even if you have not done some of these things recently,
try to work out how they would have affected you.
Use the following scale to choose the most appropriate
number for each situation:
0 = would never doze
1 = slight chance of dozing
2 = moderate chance of dozing
3 = high chance of dozing
Sitting and reading                                                      .........
Watching TV                                                                .........
Sitting, inactive in a public place (e.g., a theater       .........
or a meeting)
As a passenger in a car for 1 h without a break  
.........
Lying down to rest in the afternoon when                
.........
circumstances permit
Sitting and talking to someone                                 .........
Sitting quietly after lunch without alcohol                  .........
In a car while stopped for a few minutes in trafﬁc    .........
TOTAL                                                                .........
Source: From Johns MW: A new method for measuring daytime
sleepiness: The Epworth sleepiness scale. Sleep 14:540, 1991.
recording. Such approaches in expert hands produce
good patient outcomes and are cost effective. It is sensi-
ble to use such limited sleep studies as the ﬁrst-line diag-
nostic test and then allow positively diagnosed patients to
proceed to treatment. However, a reasonable approach at
present is for patients with troublesome sleepiness but
negative limited studies to then have polysomnography
to exclude or conﬁrm OSAHS.
the day to prepare for the overnight trial. An overnight
monitored trial of CPAP is used to identify the pressure
required to keep the patient’s airway patent. The devel-
opment of pressure-varying CPAP machines may make
the in-laboratory CPAP night trial unnecessary, but treat-
ment must be initiated in a supportive environment.
Thereafter, patients can be treated with ﬁxed-pressure
CPAP machines set at the determined pressure or by a
self-adjusting, intelligent CPAP device. The main side
effect of CPAP is airway drying, which can be countered
using an integral heated humidifier. CPAP use, like
that of all therapies, is imperfect, but around 94% of
patients with severe OSAHS are still using their therapy
after 5 years on objective monitoring.
Mandibular Repositioning Splint
Also called
oral devices, mandibular repositioning splints (MRSs)
work by holding the lower jaw and the tongue forward,
thereby widening the pharyngeal airway. MRSs have
been shown in RCTs to improve OSAHS patients’ breath-
ing during sleep, daytime somnolence, and blood pres-
sure. Because many devices of differing design with
unknown relative efﬁcacy are available, these results
cannot be generalized to all MRSs. Self-reports of the
long-term use of devices suggest high dropout rates.
Surgery
Four forms of surgery have a role in OSAHS,
although it must always be remembered that these
patients have an increased perioperative risk. Bariatric
surgery can be curative in morbidly obese patients. Ton-
sillectomy can be highly effective in children but rarely in
adults. Tracheostomy is curative but rarely used because
of the associated morbidity; nevertheless, it should not
be overlooked in extremely advanced cases. Jaw
advancement surgery—particularly maxillo-mandibular
osteotomy—is effective in those with retrognathia (pos-
terior displacement of the mandible) and should be par-
ticularly considered in young and thin patients. There is
no robust evidence that pharyngeal surgery, including
uvulopalatopharyngoplasty (whether by scalpel, laser, or
thermal techniques) helps OSAHS.
Drugs
Unfortunately, no drugs are clinically useful in
the prevention or reduction of apneas and hypopneas.
A marginal improvement in sleepiness in patients who
remain sleepy despite CPAP can be produced by
modaﬁnil, but the clinical value is debatable and the
ﬁnancial cost signiﬁcant.
CHOICE OF TREATMENT
CPAP and MRS are the
two most widely used and best evidence-based thera-
pies. Direct comparisons in RCTs indicate better out-
comes with CPAP in terms of apneas and hypopneas,
nocturnal oxygenation, symptoms, quality of life, mood,
and vigilance. Adherence to CPAP is generally better
than to an MRS, and evidence suggests that CPAP
improves driving; there are no such data on MRSs. Thus,
Sleep Apnea
231
CHAPTER 23
Treatment:
OBSTRUCTIVE SLEEP APNEA
WHOM TO TREAT
Evidence obtained from robust
RCTs suggests that treatment improves symptoms,
sleepiness, driving, cognition, mood, quality of life, and
blood pressure in patients who have Epworth scores of
>11, troublesome sleepiness while driving or working,
and >15 apneas + hypopneas per hour of sleep. For
those with similar degrees of sleepiness and 5–15 events
per hour of sleep, RCTs indicate improvements in
symptoms, including subjective sleepiness, with less
strong evidence indicating gains in cognition and qual-
ity of life. There is no evidence of blood pressure
improvements in this group, nor is there is evidence that
treating nonsleepy subjects improves their symptoms,
function, or blood pressure. Thus, treatment cannot be
advocated for this large group.
HOW TO TREAT
All patients diagnosed with
OSAHS should have the condition and its signiﬁcance
explained to them and to their partner. This should be
accompanied by provision of written or Web-based
information and a discussion of the implications of the
local regulations for driving. Rectiﬁable predispositions
should be discussed; this often includes weight loss and
sometimes reduction of alcohol consumption to reduce
caloric intake and because alcohol acutely decreases
upper airway dilating muscle tone, thus predisposing
patients to obstructed breathing. Sedative drugs, which
also affect airway tone, should be carefully withdrawn.
Continuous Positive Airway Pressure
Con-
tinuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) therapy works
by blowing the airway open during sleep, usually with
pressures of 5–20 cmHg. CPAP has been shown in ran-
domized placebo-controlled trials to improve breathing
during sleep, sleep quality, sleepiness, blood pressure,
vigilance, cognition, and driving ability, as well as mood
and quality of life in patients with OSAHS. However, this
is obtrusive therapy, and care must be taken to explain
the need for the treatment to the patient and his or her
partner and to support all patients on CPAP intensively,
providing access to telephone support and regular
follow-up. Initiation should include ﬁnding the most
comfortable mask from the ranges of several manufac-
turers and trying the system for at least 30 min during
CPAP is the current treatment of choice. However, MRSs
are evidence-based second-line therapy in those who
fail CPAP. In younger, thinner patients, maxillo-mandibular
advancement should be considered.
HEALTH RESOURCES
Untreated OSAHS patients
are heavy users of health care and dangerous drivers; they
also work beneath their potential. Treatment of OSAHS
with CPAP is cost-effective in terms of reducing health care
costs of associated illness and associated accidents.
Treatment:
CENTRAL SLEEP APNEA
Patients with underlying cardiac failure should have
their failure treated appropriately. CPAP may improve
outcome but is difﬁcult to initiate and has not been
shown to improve survival. Patients with spontaneous
normocapnic CSA may be successfully treated with
acetazolamide. In a minority of patients, CPAP is effec-
tive, perhaps because in some patients with OSAHS,
pharyngeal collapse initiates reﬂex inhibition of respira-
tion, and these episodes are prevented by CPAP. Oxygen
and nocturnal nasal positive-pressure ventilation may
also be tried.
Diseases of the Respiratory System
232
SECTION II
CENTRAL SLEEP APNEA
CSAs are respiratory pauses caused by lack of respiratory
effort.These occur occasionally in normal subjects, par-
ticularly at sleep onset and in REM sleep, and are tran-
siently increased after ascent to altitude. Recurrent CSA
is most commonly found in the presence of cardiac fail-
ure or neurologic disease, especially stroke. Spontaneous
central sleep syndrome is rare and can be classiﬁed on
the basis of the arterial PCO2.
Hypercapnic CSA occurs in conjunction with dimin-
ished ventilatory drive in Ondine’s curse (central alveolar
hypoventilation). Patients with normocapnic sponta-
neous CSA have a normal or low arterial PCO2 when
awake, with brisk ventilatory responses to hypercapnia.
This combination results in unstable ventilatory control,
with subjects breathing close to or below their apneic
threshold for PCO2 during sleep; this apneic tendency is
compounded by cycles of arousal-induced hyperventila-
tion, inducing further hypocapnia.
CLINICAL FEATURES
Patients may present with sleep maintenance insomnia,
which is relatively unusual in those with OSAHS. Day-
time sleepiness may occur.
INVESTIGATION
Many apneas previously labeled central because of absent
thoracoabdominal movement are actually obstructive;
identiﬁcation of movement is particularly difﬁcult in very
obese patients. CSA can only be identiﬁed with certainty
if either esophageal pressure or respiratory muscle elec-
tromyography is recorded and shown to be absent during
the events.
FURTHER READINGS
BRADLEY TD et al: Obstructive sleep apnoea and its cardiovascular
consequences. Lancet 373:82, 2009
DOUGLAS NJ: Clinicians’ Guide to Sleep Medicine. London, Arnold,
2002
———: Home diagnosis of the obstructive sleep apnoea/hypopnoea
syndrome. Sleep Med Rev 7:53, 2003
ECKERT DJ et al: Central sleep apnea: Pathophysiology and treat-
ment. Chest 131:595, 2007
ENGLEMAN HM et al: Randomized crossover trial of two treatments
for sleep apnea/hypopnea syndrome: Continuous positive airway
pressure and mandibular repositioning splint. Am J Respir Crit
Care Med 165:855, 2002
MARIN JM et al: Long-term cardiovascular outcomes in men with
obstructive sleep apnoea-hypopnoea with or without treatment
with continuous positive airway pressure:An observational study.
Lancet 365:1046, 2005
PACK AL et al: Risk factors for excessive sleepiness in older adults.
Ann Neurol 59:893, 2006
SOMERS VK et al: Sleep apnea and vascular disease. Circulation
118:1080, 2008
SUNDARAM S et al: Surgery for obstructive sleep apnoea. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev 2005, CD001004
WHITELAW WA et al: Clinical usefulness of home oximetry com-
pared with polysomnography for assessment of sleep apnea.Am J
Respir Crit Care Med 171:188, 2005
YAGGI HK et al: Obstructive sleep apnea as a risk factor for stroke
and death. N Engl J Med 353:2034, 2005
YOUNG T et al: Sleep disordered breathing and mortality: eighteen-
year follow-up of the Wisconsin sleep cohort. Sleep 31:1071,
2008
Elbert P. Trulock
Lung transplantation is a therapeutic consideration for
patients with most nonmalignant end-stage lung dis-
eases. After an initial period of rapid growth from 1990
through 1995, activity has increased slowly to ∼1700
transplants per year worldwide. The demand for trans-
plantation exceeds the supply of donor organs, and the
waiting time is often lengthy. Recognizing the window
of opportunity for transplantation in the clinical course
of various lung diseases is crucial because deaths while
awaiting transplantation are not unusual. In appropri-
ately selected recipients, transplantation prolongs survival
and improves quality of life, but it is also associated with
signiﬁcant morbidity and mortality.
INDICATIONS
The indications for lung transplantation span the gamut of
lung diseases (Table 24-1). The distribution reﬂects the
prevalence and natural history of the diseases, and the most
common indications are chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD), idiopathic pulmonary ﬁbrosis (IPF), cys-
tic ﬁbrosis (CF), α1-antitrypsin deﬁciency emphysema, and
primary pulmonary hypertension (PPH). Others indica-
tions given in Table 24-1 comprise many less prevalent
lung diseases.
RECIPIENT SELECTION
Transplantation should be considered when other thera-
peutic options have been exhausted and when the patient’s
LUNG TRANSPLANTATION
prognosis will be improved by the procedure. Survival
rates after transplantation can be compared with predictive
indices for the underlying disease, but each patient’s clini-
cal course must be integrated into the assessment, too. In
any case, projected survival after transplantation should
exceed life expectancy without the procedure. Quality of
life is the primary motive for transplantation for many
patients, and the prospect of an improved quality-adjusted
survival is often attractive, even if the survival advantage
itself might be marginal.
Disease-speciﬁc guidelines for referring patients for
transplantation are summarized in Table 24-2, and
these are intended to identify patients who may beneﬁt
from transplantation. Candidates for lung transplantation
are thoroughly screened for any comorbidity that might
adversely affect the outcome. Suitable candidates should
have clinically and physiologically severe lung disease,
but otherwise they must be in reasonably good health.
The upper age limit is ∼65 years at most centers.
Typical exclusions include HIV infection, chronic
hepatitis B antigenemia or chronic active hepatitis C
infection, uncured malignancy, active cigarette smoking,
drug or alcohol dependency or abuse, uncontrolled or
untreatable pulmonary or extrapulmonary infection, irre-
versible physical deconditioning, chronic noncompliance
with medical care, and signiﬁcant disease of any vital
organ other than the lungs. Other problems that might
increase the risk of complications or might be aggravated
by the posttransplantation medical regimen constitute
CHAPTER 24
CHAPTER 24
233
Indications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 233
Recipient Selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 233
Waiting List and Organ Allocation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 234
Transplant Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 234
Posttransplantation Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 235
Outcomes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 235
I Further Readings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 238
Diseases of the Respiratory System
234
SECTION II
relative contraindications.Some typical issues are ventilator-
dependent respiratory failure, previous thoracic surgical
procedures, osteoporosis, systemic hypertension, diabetes
mellitus, obesity or cachexia, and psychosocial problems.
Chronic infection with antibiotic-resistant Pseudomonas spp.,
some Burkholderia spp., Aspergillus spp., or nontuberculous
mycobacteria is a unique concern in some patients with
CF or other diseases that have a component of bronchiec-
tasis or chronic bronchitis.The potential impact of these
and many other factors has to be judged in clinical con-
text to determine an individual candidate’s suitability for
transplantation.
WAITING LIST AND ORGAN ALLOCATION
Organ allocation policies are inﬂuenced by ethical, med-
ical, geographical, and political factors, and systems vary
from country to country. Regardless of the system,
potential recipients are placed on a waiting list and must
be matched for blood group compatibility and, with
some latitude, for lung size with an acceptable donor. In
the United States, a priority algorithm for allocating
donor lungs was implemented in May 2005. Priority is
determined by a lung allocation score that weighs both
the patient’s risk of death on the waiting list and the
likelihood of survival after transplantation. Both the type
and the severity of lung disease affect the allocation
score; relevant parameters must be updated periodically
but can be submitted whenever the patient’s condition
changes. However, this priority system does not dimin-
ish the importance of timely referral.
The impact of the priority allocation scheme on key
outcome measures has not been analyzed yet;however,this
information will be forthcoming and may lead to further
reﬁnement of the allocation system. Under the previous
seniority system, the median time to transplantation was
1104 days for patients who initially registered on the
national waiting list in 1998. Approximately 10% of the
patients on the waiting list died before transplantation, but
the death rate while waiting was much higher for
patients with IPF, PPH, or CF than for those with COPD
or α1-antitrypsin deﬁciency emphysema.
TRANSPLANT PROCEDURE
Bilateral transplantation is mandatory for patients with
bronchiectasis because the risk of spillover infection
from a remaining native lung precludes single lung
transplantation. Heart–lung transplantation is obligatory
for those with Eisenmenger’s syndrome with complex
anomalies that cannot be readily repaired in conjunction
with lung transplantation and for concomitant end-stage
lung and heart disease. However, cardiac replacement is
not necessary for those with cor pulmonale because
right ventricular function will recover when pulmonary
vascular afterload is normalized by lung transplantation.
Either bilateral or single lung transplantation is an
acceptable alternative for patients with other diseases
unless there is a special consideration. Bilateral transplan-
tation provides more reserve lung function as a buffer
against complications, and it has been increasingly used
for many indications. In recipients with COPD and
α1-antitrypsin deﬁciency emphysema, survival has been
signiﬁcantly better after bilateral transplantation, but there
has not been a signiﬁcant difference in survival between
the two procedures for other diseases.
Living donor lobar transplantation has a limited role in
adult lung transplantation.It has been performed predomi-
nantly in teenagers and young adults with CF. A right
lower lobe is obtained from one living donor and a left
lower lobe from another, and these lobes are implanted
to replace the right and left lungs, respectively, in the
TABLE 24-1
INDICATIONS FOR ADULT LUNG TRANSPLANTATION (1995–2004)
SINGLE LUNG
BILATERAL LUNG 
TRANSPLANTATION
TRANSPLANTATION 
DIAGNOSIS
(n = 6731)
(n = 6276)
TOTAL (n = 13,007)
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
3,541
52.6%
1,462
23.3%
5,003
38.5%
Idiopathic pulmonary ﬁbrosis
1,618
24.0%
639
10.0%
2,257
17.4%
Cystic ﬁbrosis
151
2.2%
2,002
31.9%
2,153
16.6%
α1-Antitrypsin deﬁciency emphysema
554
8.2%
571
9.1%
1,125
8.6%
Primary pulmonary hypertension
79
1.2%
436
6.9%
515
4.0%
Sarcoidosis
157
2.3%
166
2.6%
323
2.5%
Bronchiectasis
45
0.7%
309
4.9%
354
2.7%
Eisenmenger’s syndrome
13
0.2%
118
1.9%
131
1.0%
Lymphoangioleiomyomatosis
55
0.8%
83
1.3%
138
1.0%
Retransplantation
129
1.9%
104
1.7%
233
1.8%
Others
389
5.8%
386
6.2%
775
6.0%
Source: Adapted from Trulock et al.
recipient.Because a lobe must replace a whole lung,donor–
recipient size considerations are crucial. The results have
been comparable to those with transplantation from cadav-
eric donors.The usual morbidities associated with a lobec-
tomy have been encountered in the donors, but no death
has yet been reported. Because of ethical concerns, this
approach is usually restricted to patients who are unlikely
to survive the wait for a cadaveric donor.
POSTTRANSPLANTATION MANAGEMENT
Induction therapy with an antilymphocyte globulin or an
interleukin 2 receptor antagonist is used by some centers,
and a three-drug maintenance immunosuppressive regi-
men that includes a calcineurin inhibitor (cyclosporine or
tacrolimus), a purine synthesis antagonist (azathioprine or
mycophenolate mofetil), and prednisone is customary.
Subsequently, other drugs such as sirolimus may be substi-
tuted in the maintenance regimen for various reasons.
Prophylaxis for Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia is standard,
and prophylaxis against cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection
is prescribed in many protocols.The dose of cyclosporine
or tacrolimus is adjusted by blood-level monitoring. Both
are metabolized by the hepatic cytochrome P450 system,
and interactions with medications that affect this pathway
can signiﬁcantly alter the clearance and blood levels of
these key immunosuppressants.
Routine management is designed to monitor the allo-
graft, regulate immunosuppressive therapy, and detect
problems or complications expeditiously. The techniques
include periodic contact with a transplant nurse coordina-
tor, appointments with a physician, chest radiographs,
blood tests, spirometry, and bronchoscopy. Lung function
rapidly improves and then stabilizes by 3 to 6 months after
transplantation. Subsequently, the coefﬁcient of variation
in spirometric measurements is small, and a sustained
decline of 10% to 15% or more signals a potentially signif-
icant problem.
OUTCOMES
Survival
Major registries publish survival (Table 24-3) and other
outcomes annually, and these reports are accessible via
the Internet (http://www.ishlt.org; http://www.ustrans-
plant.org).
The main sources of perioperative mortality include
technical complications of the operation, primary graft
dysfunction, and infections. Acute rejection and CMV
infection are common problems in the ﬁrst year, but nei-
ther is usually fatal. Beyond the ﬁrst year, chronic rejection
and non-CMV infections cause the majority of deaths.
Function
Regardless of the disease, successful transplantation
impressively restores cardiopulmonary function. After
bilateral transplantation, standard pulmonary function test
results are typically normal; after single lung transplanta-
tion, the remaining diseased lung typically contributes a
mild abnormality. Formal exercise testing usually demon-
strates some impairment in maximum work rate and
maximum oxygen uptake, but few recipients report any
limitation to activity.
Quality of Life
Both overall and health-related quality of life are enhanced.
With multidimensional profiles, improvements extend
Lung Transplantation
235
CHAPTER 24
TABLE 24-2
DISEASE-SPECIFIC GUIDELINES FOR SELECTING
CANDIDATES FOR LUNG TRANSPLANTATION
COPD and α1-antitrypsin deﬁciency emphysema
FEV1 < 25% of predicted normal value
(post-bronchodilator)
PaCO2 ≥55 mmHg
Pulmonary arterial hypertension (mean pulmonary
artery pressure >25 mmHg)
Cystic ﬁbrosis/bronchiectasis
FEV1 <30% of predicted normal value
PaCO2 >50 mmHg
PaO2 <50 mmHg (on room air)
Pulmonary arterial hypertension
Adverse clinical course in spite of optimal
medical management
Increasing hospitalizations
Recurrent, massive hemoptysis
Rapidly declining FEV1
Idiopathic pulmonary ﬁbrosis
VC or TLC <60%–70% of predicted normal value
DLCO <50%–60% of predicted normal value
Pulmonary arterial hypertension
Hypoxemia (PaO2 <60 mmHg or SpO2 <90%)
at rest or with activity (on room air)
Progressive disease despite drug therapy
Primary pulmonary hypertension
NYHA functional class III or IV despite optimal drug therapy
Unfavorable hemodynamic proﬁle
Right atrial pressure >15 mmHg
Mean pulmonary artery pressure >55 mmHg
Cardiac index <2 (L/min)/m2
Note: COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; DLCO, diffusing
capacity for carbon monoxide; FEV1, forced expiratory volume in
1 second; NYHA, New York Heart Association; PaO2, partial pressure
of oxygen in arterial blood; PaCO2, partial pressure of oxygen carbon
dioxide in arterial blood; SpO2, oxygen saturation by pulse oximetry;
TLC, total lung capacity; VC, vital capacity.VC, vital capacity; TLC,
total lung capacity; FEV1, forced expiratory volume in 1 s; DLCO, dif-
fusing capacity for carbon monoxide; PaO2 and PaCO2, partial pres-
sure of oxygen and carbon dioxide, respectively, in arterial blood;
SpO2, oxygen saturation by pulse oximetry.
Source: Modiﬁed from International Guidelines for the Selection of
Lung Transplant Candidates: Am J Respir Crit Care Med 158:335, 1998.
across most domains and are sustained longitudinally unless
chronic rejection or some other complication develops.
Other problems that detract from quality of life include
renal dysfunction and drug side effects.
Cost
The cost of transplantation depends on the health care
system, other health care policies, and economic factors
that vary from country to country. In the 1990s, trans-
plant hospitalization costs in the range of $160,000 were
reported from two centers in the United States. At one
of these centers, the average charge for posttransplanta-
tion care was ∼$132,000 in the ﬁrst year and $54,000 in
subsequent years. The distribution of costs after lung
transplantation was estimated by a center in the United
Kingdom as 57% for routine care, including medica-
tions, clinic appointments, and tests; 17% for rejection
episodes; and 26% for infectious complications.
Complications
Lung transplantation can be complicated by a variety of
problems.Aside from those that are unique to transplan-
tation, side effects and toxicities of the immunosuppres-
sive medications can cause new medical problems or
aggravate preexisting conditions (Table 24-4).
Graft Dysfunction
Primary graft dysfunction is an acute lung injury that
is a manifestation of insults that are inherent in the
transplantation process, and it has been referred to as
reperfusion edema, reimplantation response, and ischemia-reper-
fusion injury. The principal clinical features are diffuse
pulmonary inﬁltrates and hypoxemia within 72 h of
transplantation, but the severity is variable. Pulmonary
venous obstruction and hyperacute rejection can pro-
duce a similar pattern, and cardiogenic pulmonary edema
and pneumonia must also be excluded.The treatment is
the conventional, supportive paradigm for acute lung
injury, but inhaled nitric oxide and extracorporeal mem-
brane oxygenation have been used successfully in severe
cases. Most recipients recover, but severe primary graft
dysfunction is a leading cause of early morbidity and
mortality.
Airway Complications
The bronchial blood supply to the donor lung is dis-
rupted, and bronchial revascularization is not widely
practiced. Consequently, when the lung is implanted in
the recipient, the bronchus is dependent on retrograde
bronchial blood ﬂow through the pulmonary circulation
and is vulnerable to ischemia.
The prevalence of major airway complications—
dehiscence, stenosis, and bronchomalacia—has ranged
from 4–20%, but the associated mortality has been very
low. Bronchoscopic debridement or dilatation is sufﬁ-
cient in many cases, but stent placement is often neces-
sary if a stricture or bronchomalacia evolves.
Acute Rejection
This is an immunologic response to alloantigen recogni-
tion, and it is characterized by arteriolar and bronchiolar
lymphocytic inﬂammation. With current immunosup-
pressive regimens, ∼50% recipients have at least one
episode of acute rejection in the ﬁrst year. Acute rejec-
tion can be clinically silent, or it can be manifested by
nonspeciﬁc symptoms or signs that may include cough,
low-grade fever, dyspnea, hypoxemia, inspiratory crack-
les, interstitial inﬁltrates, and declining lung function;
however, the clinical impression is not reliable.The diag-
nosis should be conﬁrmed by transbronchial biopsy, and
a standardized pathologic classiﬁcation scheme for rejec-
tion is used to grade the biopsies. Treatment usually
includes a short course of high-dose steroid therapy and
adjustment of the maintenance immunosuppressive
Diseases of the Respiratory System
236
SECTION II
TABLE 24-3
RECIPIENT SURVIVAL, BY PRETRANSPLANTATION DIAGNOSIS (1994–2003)
SURVIVAL RATE, %
DIAGNOSIS
n
3 MONTHS
1 YEAR
3 YEARS
5 YEARS
10 YEARS
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
4888
90
81
63
48
19
α1-Antitrypsin deﬁciency emphysema
1127
86
76
60
51
31
Cystic ﬁbrosis
1934
88
81
65
54
32
Idiopathic pulmonary ﬁbrosis
2058
81
69
54
42
15
Primary pulmonary hypertension
553
73
65
56
46
26
Source: Data from Trulock et al.
regimen, but more intensive therapy may be necessary
for persistent or recurrent episodes.
Chronic Rejection
This complication is the main impediment to better
medium-term survival rates, and it is the source of
substantial morbidity because of its impact on lung
function and quality of life. The pathogenesis is still a
conundrum, but both alloimmune inﬂammatory and
nonalloimmune ﬁbroproliferative mechanisms are prob-
ably important.
Clinically, chronic rejection is a form of graft dys-
function that is synonymous with bronchiolitis
obliterans syndrome (BOS). BOS is characterized physi-
ologically by airﬂow limitation and pathologically by
bronchiolitis obliterans.Transbronchial biopsies are rela-
tively insensitive for detecting bronchiolitis obliterans,
and the diagnosis of BOS is usually based on a sustained
decrement (≥20%) in the forced expiratory volume in
1 second (FEV1).A smaller decline in FEV1 (≥10%) or a
decrease in the forced expiratory ﬂow (FEF)25–75% may
presage BOS.
The prevalence of BOS approaches 50% by 5 years
after transplantation. Both antecedent acute rejection and
lymphocytic bronchiolitis are risk factors for subsequent
BOS, and CMV pneumonitis has been implicated incon-
sistently. Patients with BOS are usually treated with aug-
mented immunosuppression.Although immunosuppressive
therapy may stabilize lung function, the overall results of
treatment have been disappointing, probably because the
fibroproliferative process is already well established.
Retransplantation may be an option in ambulatory recipi-
ents without other complications, but in many cases, the
risk is prohibitive.
Infection
The lung allograft is especially susceptible to infection,
and infection has been one of the leading causes of death.
In addition to a blunted immune response from immuno-
suppressive drugs, other normal defenses are breached—
the cough reﬂex is diminished, and mucociliary clearance
is impaired in the transplanted lung. The spectrum of
infections includes both opportunistic and nonoppor-
tunistic pathogens.
Bacterial bronchitis and pneumonia can occur at any
time but are almost universal in the postoperative period.
Later, episodes of bronchitis are quite common, especially
in recipients with BOS, and Pseudomonas aeruginosa or
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus is often the culprit.
CMV is the most frequent viral infection.Although gas-
troenteritis, colitis, and hepatitis can occur, CMV viremia
and CMV pneumonia are the main illnesses. Most episodes
occur in the ﬁrst 6 months, and treatment with ganciclovir
is effective unless resistance develops with repeated expo-
sure. Other community-acquired viruses, such as inﬂuenza,
parainﬂuenza, and respiratory syncytial virus, also con-
tribute to respiratory complications. Aspergillus spp. has
been the most problematic fungal infection.
Lung Transplantation
237
CHAPTER 24
TABLE 24-4
MAJOR POTENTIAL COMPLICATIONS OF LUNG TRANSPLANTATION AND
POSTTRANSPLANTATION IMMUNOSUPPRESSION
CATEGORY
COMPLICATION
Allograft
Acute graft dysfunction; anastomotic dehiscence or stenosis; ischemic airway injury with
bronchostenosis or bronchomalacia; rejection; infections
Thoracic
Phrenic nerve injury (diaphragmatic dysfunction; recurrent laryngeal nerve injury) vocal cord
dysfunction; cervical ganglia injury (Horner’s syndrome); chylothorax; pneumothorax; pleural effusion
Cardiovascular
Air embolism; postoperative pericarditis; venous thromboembolism; supraventricular dysrhythmias;
systemic hypertension
Gastrointestinal
Esophagitis (especially Candida spp. or CMV); gastroparesis; gastroesophageal reﬂux; Clostridium
difﬁcile toxin diarrhea or pseudomembranous colitis
Hepatobiliary
Hepatitis (especially CMV or drug induced)
Renal
Calcineurin inhibitor nephropathy; hemolytic-uremic syndrome (thrombotic microangiopathy)
Neurologic
Tremors; seizures; reversible posterior leukoencephalopathy; headaches
Musculoskeletal
Steroid myopathy; rhabdomyolysis (cyclosporine + HMG-CoA reductase inhibitor treatment);
osteoporosis; avascular necrosis
Metabolic
Obesity; diabetes mellitus; hyperlipidemia; idiopathic hyperammonemia
Hematologic
Anemia; leukopenia; thrombocytopenia; thrombotic microangiopathy
Oncologic
Lymphoproliferative disease and lymphoma; skin cancers; other malignancies
Note: CMV, cytomegalovirus; HMG-CoA, 3-hydroxy-3-methyl-glutaryl-CoA.
Other Complications
Other potential complications are summarized in
Table 24-4, and many of these are related to side effects
or toxicities of the immunosuppressive drugs.The man-
agement of patients with most of these general medical
problems is guided by standard practices for the condi-
tion, but the complex milieu of transplantation dictates
close collaboration and good communication among
health care providers.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Dr. G.Alexander Patterson and Dr. Joel D. Cooper were co-authors
of this chapter in the 16th edition of Harrison’s Principles of Internal
Medicine. Some of the materials have been carried over into this
edition.
FURTHER READINGS
BOASQUEVISCUQ CH et al. Surgical therapies for lung disease:Trans-
plant and lung reduction. Proc Am Thorac Soc 6(1), 2009
ESTENNE M et al: Bronchiolitis obliterans syndrome 2001:An update
of the diagnostic criteria. J Heart Lung Transplant 21:297, 2002
KOTLOFF RM,AHYA VN: Medical complications of lung transplanta-
tion. Eur Respir J 23:334; 2004
LANDE JD et al: Novel insights into lung transplant rejection by
microarray analysis. Proc Am Thorac Soc 4:44, 2007
ORENS JB et al: International guidelines for the selection of lung
transplant candidates: 2006 update—A consensus report from the
Pulmonary Scientiﬁc Council of the International Society for Heart
and Lung Transplantation.J Heart Lung Transplant 25:745,2006
TRULOCK EP et al: Registry of the International Society for Heart
and Lung Transplantation:Twenty-second ofﬁcial adult lung and
heart-lung transplant report—2005. J Heart Lung Transplant
24:956, 2005
Diseases of the Respiratory System
238
SECTION II
Robert Finberg
I
Joyce Fingeroth
The evaluation of infections in transplant recipients
involves consideration of both the donor and the recipi-
ent of the transplanted organ. Infections after trans-
plantation are complicated by the use of drugs that are
necessary to enhance the likelihood of survival of the
transplanted organ but that also cause the host to be
immunocompromised. Thus, what might have been a
latent or asymptomatic infection in an immunocompe-
tent donor or in the recipient before therapy can become
a life-threatening problem when the recipient becomes
immunosuppressed.
PRETRANSPLANTATION EVALUATION
A variety of organisms have been transmitted by organ
transplantation. Careful attention to the sterility of the
medium used to process the organ combined with
meticulous microbiologic evaluation reduces rates of
transmission of bacteria that may be present or grow in
the organ culture medium. From 2% to >20% of donor
kidneys are estimated to be contaminated with bacteria—
in most cases, with the organisms that colonize the skin
or grow in the tissue culture medium used to bathe the
donor kidney while it awaits implantation.The reported
rate of bacterial contamination of transplanted stem cells
(bone marrow, peripheral blood, cord blood) is as high
as 17% but is most commonly ∼1%.The use of enrich-
ment columns and monoclonal-antibody depletion pro-
cedures results in a higher incidence of contamination.
INFECTIONS IN LUNG
TRANSPLANT RECIPIENTS
In one series of patients receiving contaminated products,
14% had fever or bacteremia, but none died. Results of
cultures performed at the time of cryopreservation and
at the time of thawing were helpful in guiding therapy
for the recipient.
In many transplantation centers, transmission of
infections that may be latent or clinically inapparent in
the donor organ has resulted in the development of spe-
ciﬁc donor-screening protocols. In addition to ordering
serologic studies focused on viruses such as herpes-
group viruses [herpes simplex virus types 1 and 2 (HSV-1,
HSV-2), varicella-zoster virus (VZV), cytomegalovirus
(CMV), human herpesvirus (HHV) type 6, Epstein-Barr
virus (EBV), and Kaposi’s sarcoma–associated her-
pesvirus (KSHV)] as well as hepatitis B and C viruses,
human immunodeﬁciency virus (HIV), human T cell
lymphotropic virus type I, and West Nile virus, donors
should be screened for parasites such as Toxoplasma gondii
and Trypanosoma cruzi (the latter particularly in Latin
America). Clinicians caring for prospective organ donors
should also consider assessing stool for parasites, should
examine chest radiographs for evidence of granuloma-
tous disease, and should perform puriﬁed protein deriv-
ative (PPD) skin testing or obtain blood for immune
cell–based assays that detect active or latent Mycobac-
terium tuberculosis infection. An investigation of the
donor’s dietary habits (e.g., consumption of raw meat or
ﬁsh or of unpasteurized dairy products), occupations or
avocations (e.g., gardening or spelunking), and travel
CHAPTER 25
CHAPTER 25
239
Pretransplantation Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 239
I Infections in Lung Transplant Recipients . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 240
Miscellaneous Infections in Lung Transplantation . . . . . . . . . 241
I Vaccination of Transplant Recipients . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 242
I Further Readings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .243
Diseases of the Respiratory System
240
SECTION II
history (e.g., travel to areas with endemic fungi) is also
mandatory. It is expected that the recipient will have
been likewise assessed. Because of immune dysfunction
resulting from chemotherapy or underlying chronic
disease, however, direct testing of the recipient may
prove less reliable.This chapter considers aspects of infec-
tion unique to various transplantation settings.
INFECTIONS IN LUNG
TRANSPLANT RECIPIENTS
Morbidity and mortality among lung transplant (LT)
recipients are reduced by the use of effective antibiotics.
The organisms that cause acute infections in LT recipients
are different from those that infect hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation (HSCT) recipients because LT recipients
do not go through a period of neutropenia. Because the
transplantation procedure involves major surgery, however,
LT recipients are subject to infections at anastomotic sites
and to wound infections. Compared with HSCT recipi-
ents, LT patients are immunosuppressed for longer periods
(often permanently).Thus, they are susceptible to many of
the same organisms as patients with chronically impaired
T cell immunity.
During the early period (<1 month after transplanta-
tion), infections are most commonly caused by extracel-
lular bacteria (staphylococci, streptococci, enterococci,
E. coli, other gram-negative organisms), which often orig-
inate in surgical wound or anastomotic sites.The type of
transplant largely determines the spectrum of infection.
In subsequent weeks, the consequences of the adminis-
tration of agents that suppress cell-mediated immunity
become apparent, and acquisition or reactivation of viruses
and parasites (from the recipient or from the transplanted
organ) can occur. CMV infection is often a problem, par-
ticularly in the ﬁrst 6 months after transplantation, and
may present as severe systemic disease or as infection of
the transplanted organ. HHV-6 reactivation (assessed by
plasma polymerase chain reaction) occurs within the ﬁrst
2–4 weeks after transplantation and may be associated
with fever, leukopenia, and possibly encephalitis. Data
suggest that replication of HHV-6 and HHV-7 may exac-
erbate CMV-induced disease. CMV is associated not only
with generalized immunosuppression but also with organ-
speciﬁc, rejection-related syndromes, including glomeru-
lopathy in kidney transplant recipients, bronchiolitis
obliterans in LT recipients, vasculopathy in heart trans-
plant recipients, and the vanishing bile duct syndrome in
liver transplant recipients. A complex interplay between
increased CMV replication and enhanced graft rejection
is well established: increasing immunosuppression leads to
increased CMV replication, which is associated with graft
rejection. For this reason, considerable attention has been
focused on the diagnosis, prophylaxis, and treatment of
CMV infection in LT recipients. Early transmission of
West Nile virus to transplant recipients from an organ
donor has been reported; however, the risk of West
Nile acquisition has been reduced by implementation of
screening procedures.
Beyond 6 months after transplantation, infections char-
acteristic of patients with defects in cell-mediated
immunity—e.g., infections with Listeria, Nocardia, and
Rhodococcus spp.; various fungi; and other intracellular
pathogens—may be a problem. International patients and
global travelers may experience reactivation of dormant
infections with trypanosomes; Leishmania, Plasmodium, and
Strongyloides spp.; and other parasites. Elimination of these
late infections is not possible until the patient develops
speciﬁc tolerance to the transplanted organ in the absence
of drugs that lead to generalized immunosuppression.
Meanwhile, vigilance, prophylaxis or preemptive therapy
(when indicated), and rapid diagnosis and treatment of
infections can be lifesaving in LT recipients, who, unlike
most HSCT recipients, continue to be immunosuppressed.
LT recipients are susceptible to EBV-LPD from as
early as 2 months to many years after transplantation.The
prevalence of this complication is increased by potent and
prolonged use of T cell-suppressive drugs. In some cases,
decreasing the degree of immunosuppression may reverse
the condition. Among LT patients, those with heart and
lung transplants—who receive the most intensive immuno-
suppressive regimens—are most likely to develop EBV-
LPD, particularly in the lungs. Although the disease
usually originates in recipient B cells, several cases of
donor origin, particularly in the transplanted organ, have
been noted. High organ-speciﬁc content of B lymphoid
tissues (e.g., bronchial-associated lymphoid tissue in the
lung), anatomic factors (e.g., lack of access of host T cells
to the transplanted organ because of disturbed lymphat-
ics), and differences in major histocompatibility loci
between the host T cells and the organ (e.g., lack of cell
migration or lack of effective T cell/macrophage cooper-
ation) may result in defective elimination of EBV-infected
B cells. LT recipients are also highly susceptible to the
development of Kaposi’s sarcoma and less frequently to
the B cell proliferative disorders associated with KSHV,
such as primary effusion lymphoma and multicentric
Castleman’s disease. Kaposi’s sarcoma is much more com-
mon (550–1000 times more common than in the general
population), can develop very rapidly after transplanta-
tion, and can also occur in the allograft. However, because
the seroprevalence of KSHV is very low in Western
countries, Kaposi’s sarcoma is not often observed.
Early Infections
It is not surprising that LT recipients are predisposed to
the development of pneumonia. The combination of
ischemia and the resulting mucosal damage, together with
accompanying denervation and lack of lymphatic drainage,
probably contributes to the high rate of pneumonia
(66% in one series).The prophylactic use of high doses of
broad-spectrum antibiotics for the first 3–4 days after
surgery may decrease the incidence of pneumonia. Gram-
negative pathogens (Enterobacteriaceae and Pseudomonas
spp.) are troublesome in the ﬁrst 2 weeks after surgery
(the period of maximal vulnerability). Pneumonia can
also be caused by Candida spp. (possibly as a result of
colonization of the donor lung), Aspergillus spp., and
Cryptococcus spp.
Mediastinitis may occur at an even higher rate among
LT recipients than among heart transplant recipients and
most commonly develops within 2 weeks of surgery.
In the absence of prophylaxis, pneumonitis caused by
CMV (which may be transmitted as a consequence of
transplantation) usually presents between 2 weeks and
3 months after surgery, with primary disease occurring
later than reactivation disease.
Middle-Period Infections
The incidence of CMV infection, either reactivated or
primary, is 75–100% if either the donor or the recipient
is seropositive for CMV. CMV-induced disease appears to
be most severe in recipients of lung and heart– lung
transplants.Whether this severity relates to the mismatch
in lung antigen-presenting and host immune cells or is
attributable to other (nonimmunologic) factors is not
known. More than half of LT recipients with sympto-
matic CMV disease have pneumonia. Difﬁculty in distin-
guishing the radiographic picture of CMV infection
from other infections and organ rejection further com-
plicates therapy. CMV can also cause bronchiolitis oblit-
erans in LTs.The development of pneumonitis related to
HSV has led to the prophylactic use of acyclovir. Such
prophylaxis may also decrease rates of CMV disease, but
ganciclovir is more active against CMV and is also active
against HSV.The prophylaxis of CMV infection with IV
ganciclovir—or increasingly with valganciclovir, the oral
alternative—is recommended for LT recipients. Antiviral
alternatives are discussed in the earlier section on HSCT.
Although the overall incidence of serious disease is
decreased during prophylaxis, late disease may occur when
prophylaxis is stopped, a pattern observed increasingly in
recent years.With recovery from peritransplantation com-
plications and, in many cases, a decrease in immunosup-
pression, the recipient is often better equipped to combat
late infection.
Late Infections
The incidence of Pneumocystis infection (which may pre-
sent with a paucity of ﬁndings) is high among lung and
heart–lung transplant recipients. Some form of prophy-
laxis for Pneumocystis pneumonia is indicated in all organ
transplant situations. Prophylaxis with trimethoprim–
sulfamethoxazole for 12 months after transplantation may
be sufﬁcient to prevent Pneumocystis disease in patients
whose degree of immunosuppression is not increased.
As in other transplant recipients, infection with EBV
may cause either a mononucleosis-like syndrome or
EBV-LPD.The tendency of the B cell blasts to present in
the lung appears to be greater after lung transplantation
than after the transplantation of other organs. Reduction
of immunosuppression and switching of regimens, as dis-
cussed in earlier sections, causes remission in some cases,
but airway compression can be fatal, and more rapid inter-
vention may therefore become necessary.The approach to
EBV-LPD is similar to that described in other sections.
MISCELLANEOUS INFECTIONS
IN LUNG TRANSPLANTATION
Indwelling Intravenous Catheter Infections
The prolonged use of indwelling IV catheters for adminis-
tration of medications, blood products, and nutrition is
common in diverse transplantation settings and poses a risk
of local and bloodstream infections. Signiﬁcant insertion-
site infection is most commonly caused by Staphylococcus
aureus. Bloodstream infection most frequently develops
within a week of catheter placement or in patients who
become neutropenic. Coagulase-negative staphylococci are
the most common isolates from the blood.
Tuberculosis
The incidence of tuberculosis occurring within the ﬁrst
12 months after solid organ transplantation (SOT) is
greater than that observed after HSCT (0.23–0.79%) and
ranges broadly worldwide (1.2–15%), reﬂecting the
prevalences of tuberculosis in local populations. Lesions
suggesting prior tuberculosis on chest x-ray, older age,
diabetes, chronic liver disease, graft-versus-host disease
(GVHD), and intense immunosuppression are predictive
of tuberculosis reactivation and development of dissemi-
nated disease in a host with latent disease.Tuberculosis has
rarely been transmitted from the donor organ. In contrast
to the low mortality rate among HSCT recipients, mor-
tality rates among SOT patients are reported to be as high
as 30%.Vigilance is indicated because the presentation of
disease is often extrapulmonary (gastrointestinal, geni-
tourinary, central nervous, endocrine, musculoskeletal,
laryngeal) and atypical, sometimes manifesting as a fever
of unknown origin.A careful history and a direct evalua-
tion of both the recipient and the donor prior to trans-
plantation are optimal. Skin testing of the recipient with
puriﬁed protein derivative may be unreliable because of
chronic disease and/or immunosuppression, but newer
cell-based assays that measure interferon and/or cytokine
production may prove more sensitive in the future.
Isoniazid toxicity has not been a signiﬁcant problem
except in the setting of liver transplantation. Therefore,
appropriate prophylaxis should proceed. An assessment of
Infections in Lung Transplant Recipients
241
CHAPTER 25
the need to treat latent disease should include careful con-
sideration of the possibility of a false-negative test result.
Pending ﬁnal conﬁrmation of suspected tuberculosis,
aggressive multidrug treatment in accordance with the
guidelines of the Centers for Disease Control and Preven-
tion (CDC), Infectious Diseases Society of America, and
American Thoracic Society is indicated because of the
high mortality rates among these patients. Altered drug
metabolism (e.g., upon co-administration of rifampin and
certain immunosuppressive agents) can be managed with
careful monitoring of drug levels and appropriate dose
adjustment. Close follow-up of hepatic enzymes is war-
ranted, particularly during treatment with isoniazid,
pyrazinamide, or rifampin. Drug-resistant tuberculosis is
especially problematic in these individuals.
Virus-Associated Malignancies
In addition to malignancy associated with gammaher-
pesvirus infection (EBV, KSHV) and simple warts (HPV),
other tumors that are virus associated or suspected of
being virus associated are more likely to develop in
transplant recipients, particularly those who require
long-term immunosuppression, than in the general pop-
ulation. The interval to tumor development is usually
>1 year. Transplant recipients develop nonmelanoma
skin or lip cancers that, in contrast to de novo skin can-
cers, have a high ratio of squamous cells to basal cells.
HPV may play a major role in these lesions. Cervical
and vulvar carcinomas, quite clearly associated with
HPV, develop with increased frequency in female trans-
plant recipients. Among renal transplant recipients, rates
of melanoma are modestly increased, and rates of can-
cers of the kidney and bladder are increased.
VACCINATION OF TRANSPLANT
RECIPIENTS
In addition to receiving antibiotic prophylaxis, transplant
recipients should be vaccinated against likely pathogens
(Table 25-1). In the case of HSCT recipients, optimal
responses cannot be achieved until after immune recon-
stitution despite previous immunization of both donor
and recipient. Recipients of allogeneic HSCTs must be
reimmunized if they are to be protected against
pathogens. The situation is less clear-cut in the case of
autologous transplantation.T and B cells in the periph-
eral blood may reconstitute the immune response if they
are transferred in adequate numbers. However, cancer
patients (particularly those with Hodgkin’s disease, in
whom vaccination has been extensively studied) who
are undergoing chemotherapy do not respond normally
to immunization, and titers of antibodies to infectious
agents decrease more rapidly than in healthy individuals.
Therefore, even immunosuppressed patients who have
not had HSCTs may need booster vaccine injections. If
memory cells are speciﬁcally eliminated as part of a stem
cell “cleanup” procedure, it will be necessary to reim-
munize the recipient with a new primary series. Optimal
times for immunizations of different transplant popula-
tions are being evaluated. Yearly immunization of
household and other contacts (including health care
personnel) against inﬂuenza beneﬁts the patient by pre-
venting local spread.
In the absence of compelling data as to optimal tim-
ing, it is reasonable to administer the pneumococcal and
Haemophilus inﬂuenzae type b conjugate vaccines to both
autologous and allogeneic HSCT recipients beginning
12 months after transplantation. A series that includes
both the seven-valent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine
and the 23-valent Pneumovax is now recommended
(following CDC guidelines). The pneumococcal and
H. inﬂuenzae type b vaccines are particularly important for
patients who have undergone splenectomy. In addition,
diphtheria, tetanus, acellular pertussis, and inactivated
polio vaccines can all be given at these same intervals
(12 months and, as required, 24 months after transplan-
tation). Neisseria meningitidis polysaccharide (a new con-
jugate vaccine) is now available and will probably be
recommended in the future. Some authorities recommend
a new primary series for tetanus/diphtheria/pertussis
and inactivated polio vaccine beginning 12 months after
Diseases of the Respiratory System
242
SECTION II
TABLE 25-1
VACCINATION FOR HEMATOPOIETIC STEM CELL
TRANSPLANT OR SOLID ORGAN TRANSPLANT
RECIPIENTSa
VACCINE
TYPE OF TRANSPLANTATION
Streptococcus
Immunize before transplantation
pneumoniae,
and every 5 years for Pneumovax
Haemophilus
(others not established)
inﬂuenzae,
See CDC recommendations
Neisseria
meningitidis
Seasonal inﬂuenza
Vaccinate in the fall
Vaccinate close contacts
Poliomyelitis
Administer inactivated vaccine
Measles/
Immunize before transplantation
mumps/rubella
with attenuated vaccine 
Tetanus, diphtheria
Immunize before transplantation;
give boosters at 10 years or as
required; primary series not
required
Hepatitis A and B
Immunize before transplantation
as appropriate
Human
Recommendations pending
papillomavirus
aImmunizations should be given before transplantation whenever
possible.
Note: CDC, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
transplantation. Because of the risk of spread, household
contacts of HSCT recipients (or of patients immuno-
suppressed as a result of chemotherapy) should receive
only inactivated polio vaccine. Live-virus measles/
mumps/rubella vaccine can be given to autologous
HSCT recipients 24 months after transplantation and to
most allogeneic HSCT recipients at the same point if
they are not receiving maintenance therapy with immuno-
suppressive drugs and do not have ongoing GVHD.The
risk of spread from a household contact is lower for
measles/mumps/rubella (MMR) vaccine than for polio
vaccine. Neither patients nor their household contacts
should be vaccinated with vaccinia unless they have
been exposed to the smallpox virus. Among patients
who have active GVHD or are taking high maintenance
doses of glucocorticoids, it may be prudent to avoid all
live-virus vaccines. Vaccination to prevent hepatitis B
and hepatitis A also seems advisable.
In the case of SOT recipients, administration of all the
usual vaccines and of the indicated booster doses should
be completed before immunosuppression, if possible, to
maximize responses. For patients taking immunosuppres-
sive agents, the administration of pneumococcal vaccine
should be repeated every 5 years. No data are available
for the meningococcal vaccine, but it is probably reason-
able to administer it along with the pneumococcal vac-
cine. H. inﬂuenzae conjugate vaccine is safe and should be
efﬁcacious in this population; therefore, its administration
before transplantation is recommended. Booster doses of
this vaccine are not recommended for adults. SOT recip-
ients who continue to receive immunosuppressive drugs
should not receive live-virus vaccines. A person in this
group who is exposed to measles should be given immune
globulin. Similarly, an immunocompromised patient who
is seronegative for varicella and who comes into contact
with a person who has chickenpox should be given
varicella-zoster immune globulin as soon as possible (and
certainly within 96 h) or, if this is not possible, should be
started immediately on a 10- to 14-day course of acy-
clovir therapy. Upon discontinuation of treatment, clini-
cal disease may still occur in a small number of patients;
thus, vigilance is indicated. Rapid retreatment should
limit the symptoms of disease. Household contacts of
transplant recipients can receive live attenuated VZV
vaccine, but vaccinees should avoid direct contact with
the patient if a rash develops. Virus-like particle (VLP)
vaccines (not live attenuated) have recently been licensed
for the prevention of infection with several HPV
serotypes most commonly implicated in cervical and anal
carcinomas and in anogenital and laryngeal warts. For
example, the tetravalent vaccine contains HPV serotypes
6, 11, 16, and 18. At present, no information is available
about the safety, immunogenicity, or efﬁcacy of this vac-
cine in transplant recipients.
Immunocompromised patients who travel may
beneﬁt from some but not all vaccines. In general,
these patients should receive any killed or inacti-
vated vaccine preparation appropriate to the area they are
visiting; this recommendation includes the vaccines for
Japanese encephalitis, hepatitis A and B, poliomyelitis,
meningococcal infection, and typhoid. The live typhoid
vaccines are not recommended for use in most immuno-
compromised patients, but inactivated or puriﬁed poly-
saccharide typhoid vaccine can be used. Live yellow fever
vaccine should not be administered. On the other hand,
primary immunization or boosting with the puriﬁed-
protein hepatitis B vaccine is indicated if patients are
likely to be exposed.Patients who will reside for >6 months
in areas where hepatitis B is common (Africa, Southeast
Asia, the Middle East, Eastern Europe, parts of South
America, and the Caribbean) should receive hepatitis B
vaccine. Inactivated hepatitis A vaccine should also be
used in the appropriate setting. A combined vaccine is
now available that provides dual protection against hepati-
tis A and hepatitis B. If hepatitis A vaccine is not adminis-
tered, travelers should consider receiving passive protection
with immune globulin (the dose depending on the dura-
tion of travel in the high-risk area).
FURTHER READINGS
CORNELY OA et al: Posaconazole vs. ﬂuconazole or itraconazole
prophylaxis in patients with neutropenia. N Engl J Med
356:348, 2007
KOTTON CN et al: Prevention of infection in adult travelers after
solid organ transplantation.Am J Transplant 5:8, 2004
MUNOZ P et al: Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection in recipients of
solid organ transplants. Clin Infect Dis 40:581, 2005
Infections in Lung Transplant Recipients
243
CHAPTER 25
This page intentionally left blank 
GENERAL APPROACH
TO THE CRITICALLY
ILL PATIENT
SECTION III
John P. Kress
I
Jesse B. Hall
The care of critically ill patients requires a thorough
understanding of pathophysiology and is centered ini-
tially around resuscitation of patients at the extremes of
physiologic deterioration. This resuscitation is often
fast paced and may occur in the early stages without a
detailed awareness of the patient’s chronic medical
problems.While physiologic stabilization is taking place,
intensivists attempt to gather important background
medical information to supplement the real-time
assessment of the patient’s current physiologic condi-
tions. Numerous tools are available to assist intensivists
in the accurate assessment of pathophysiology and to
support incipient organ failures, thus offering a win-
dow of opportunity for diagnosing and treating
underlying disease(s) in a stabilized patient. Indeed, the
use of invasive interventions such as mechanical venti-
lation and renal replacement therapy as well as diagnostic
tools such as central venous catheters are commonplace
in the intensive care unit (ICU). An appreciation of the
risks and benefits of such aggressive and often invasive
interventions is vital to ensure optimal patient out-
comes. Intensivists must also recognize when a patient’s
chance for recovery is remote or impossible and work
to counsel and comfort dying patients and their signif-
icant others. Critical care physicians must often redi-
rect the goals of care from resuscitation and cure to
comfort when the resolution of an underlying illness is
not possible.
PRINCIPLES OF CRITICAL CARE MEDICINE
ASSESSMENT OF SEVERITY OF ILLNESS
Categorization of a patient’s illness into grades of severity
occurs frequently in the ICU. Numerous severity-of-illness
scoring systems have been developed and validated over
the past two decades. Although these scoring systems
have been validated as tools to accurately assess popula-
tions of critically ill patients, their utility in predicting
individual patient outcomes is not clear.
Severity-of-illness scoring systems are important for
deﬁning populations of critically ill patients. This allows
effective comparison of groups of patients enrolled in
clinical trials.To be assured that a purported beneﬁt of a
therapy is real, investigators must be assured that different
groups involved in a clinical trial have similar illness sever-
ities. Severity-of-illness scores are also useful in guiding
hospital administrative policies. Allocation of resources,
such as nursing and ancillary care, can be directed by such
scoring systems. Severity-of-illness scoring systems can
also assist in the assessment of quality of ICU care over
time. Scoring system validations are based on the premise
that increasing age, the presence of chronic medical ill-
nesses, and increasingly severe derangements from normal
physiology are each associated with increased mortality.
All currently existing severity-of-illness scoring systems
are derived from patients who have been already admitted
to the ICU. There are no established scoring systems
available that allege to direct clinicians’ decision-making
CHAPTER 26
CHAPTER 26
Assessment of Severity of Illness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 246
APACHE II Scoring System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 247
The SAPS and MPM Scoring Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 247
I Shock . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 247
Initial Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 247
Mechanical Ventilatory Support . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 249
I Respiratory Failure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 250
I Care of the Mechanically Ventilated Patient . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 251
I Multiorgan System Failure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 252
I Monitoring in the Intensive Care Unit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 252
Pulse Oximetry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 252
Circulatory Status . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 253
I Prevention of Complications of Critical Illness . . . . . . . . . . . . 254
I Neurologic Dysfunction in Critically Ill Patients . . . . . . . . . . . . 255
I Withholding and Withdrawing Care . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 256
I Further Readings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 256
246
processes regarding what constitute criteria for admission
to an ICU.
Currently, the most commonly used scoring systems
are the APACHE (Acute Physiology and Chronic Health
Evaluation) system, the MPM (Mortality Probability
Model), and the SAPS (Simplified Acute Physiology
Score) system. These were all designed to predict out-
comes in critical illness and use severity-of-illness scoring
systems with common variables.These include age; vital
signs; assessments of respiratory, renal, and neurologic
function; and an evaluation of chronic medical illnesses.
APACHE II SCORING SYSTEM
The APACHE II system is the most commonly used
severity-of-illness scoring system in North America.Age,
type of ICU admission (after elective surgery vs. nonsur-
gical or after emergency surgery), a chronic health prob-
lem score, and 12 physiologic variables (the most severely
abnormal of each in the ﬁrst 24 h of ICU admission) are
used to derive a score.The predicted hospital mortality is
derived from a formula that takes into account the
APACHE II score; the need for emergency surgery;
and a weighted, disease-speciﬁc diagnostic category
(Table 26-1).The relationship between the APACHE II
score and mortality is illustrated in Fig. 26-1. More
recently, the APACHE III scoring system has been
released.This scoring system is similar to APACHE II in
that it is based on age, physiologic abnormalities, and
chronic medical comorbidities.The database from which
this score was derived is larger.
THE SAPS AND MPM SCORING SYSTEMS
The SAPS II score, used more frequently in Europe, was
derived in a manner similar to the APACHE scores.This
score is not disease speciﬁc but rather incorporates three
underlying disease variables (AIDS, metastatic cancer,
and hematologic malignancy).The MPM can be used to
calculate a direct probability of death in patients admit-
ted to the ICU.
Severity-of-illness scoring systems suffer from the
problem of inability to predict survival in individual
patients.Accordingly, the use of these scoring systems to
direct therapy and clinical decision making cannot be
recommended at present. Rather, these tools should be
used as important data to complement clinical bedside
decision-making processes.
SHOCK
(See also Chap. 28)
INITIAL EVALUATION
Shock is a common condition necessitating admission to
the ICU or occurring in the course of critical care.
Shock is deﬁned by the presence of multisystem end-organ
hypoperfusion. Clinical indicators include reduced mean
arterial pressure (MAP), tachycardia, tachypnea, cool
skin and extremities, acute altered mental status, and
oliguria. Hypotension is usually, although not always,
present. The end result of multiorgan hypoperfusion is
tissue hypoxia, often clinically manifested by lactic aci-
dosis. Because the MAP is the product of cardiac output
(CO) and systemic vascular resistance (SVR), reductions
in blood pressure can be caused by decreased CO,
decreased SVR, or both. Accordingly, the initial evalua-
tion of a hypotensive patient should evaluate the ade-
quacy of the CO. This should be part of the earliest
assessment of the patient by the clinician at the bedside
when shock is contemplated (Fig. 26-2). Clinical evi-
dence of diminished CO includes a narrow pulse pressure—
a marker that correlates with stroke volume—and cool
extremities with delayed capillary reﬁll. Signs of increased
CO include a widened pulse pressure (particularly with
a reduced diastolic pressure), warm extremities with
bounding pulses, and rapid capillary reﬁll. If a hypoten-
sive patient has clinical signs of increased CO, one can
infer that the reduced blood pressure is a result of
decreased SVR.
In hypotensive patients with clinical signs of a reduced
CO, an assessment of intravascular and cardiac volume
status is appropriate.A hypotensive patient with decreased
intravascular and cardiac volume status may have a history
suggesting hemorrhage or other volume losses (e.g., vom-
iting, diarrhea, polyuria). Whereas the jugular venous
pressure (JVP) is often reduced in such a patient, the
change in pulse pressure as a function of respiration is
increased. A hypotensive patient with increased intravas-
cular volume status and cardiac dysfunction may have S3
or S4 gallops (or both) on cardiac examination, increased
JVP, extremity edema, and crackles on lung auscultation.
The chest x-ray may show cardiomegaly, widening of the
vascular pedicle, Kerley B lines, and pulmonary edema.
Chest pain and electrocardiographic changes consistent
with ischemia may also be noted (Chap. 31).
In hypotensive patients with clinical evidence of
increased CO, a search for causes of decreased SVR is
appropriate. The most common cause of high cardiac
output hypotension is sepsis (Chap. 29). Other causes of
high CO hypotension include liver failure, severe pan-
creatitis, burns and other trauma that elicit the systemic
inﬂammatory response syndrome (SIRS), anaphylaxis,
thyrotoxicosis, and peripheral arteriovenous shunts.
In summary, the three most common categories of
shock are hypovolemic, cardiogenic, and high CO with
decreased SVR (high-output hypotension). Certainly,
these categories may overlap and occur simultaneously
(e.g., hypovolemic and septic shock, septic and cardio-
genic shock).
The initial assessment of a patient in shock as outlined
above should take only a few minutes. It is important
Principles of Critical Care Medicine
247
CHAPTER 26
General Approach to the Critically Ill Patient
248
SECTION III
TABLE 26-1
CALCULATION OF ACUTE PHYSIOLOGY AND CHRONIC HEALTH EVALUATION II (APACHE II)a
Acute Physiology Score
SCORE
4
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
Rectal
≥41
39.0–40.9
38.5–38.9
36.0–38.4
34.0–35.9
32.0–33.9
30.0–31.9
≤29.9
temperature, °C
Mean blood
≥160
130–159
110–129
70–109
50–69
≤49
pressure, mmHg
Heart rate, bpm
≥180
140–179
110–139
70–109
55–69
40–54
≤39
Respiratory
≥50
35–49
25–34
12–24
10–11
6–9
≤5
rate, bpm
Arterial pH
≥7.70
7.60–7.69
7.50–7.59
7.33–7.49
7.25–7.32
7.15–7.24
<7.15
Oxygenation
If FIo2 >0.5,
≥500
350–499
200–349
<200
use (A - a) Do2
If FIo2 ≤0.5,
>70
61–70
55–60
<55
use Pao2
Serum
≥180
160–179
155–159
150–154
130–149
120–129
111–119
≤110
sodium, meq/L
Serum
≥7.0
6.0–6.9
5.5–5.9
3.5–5.4
3.0–3.4
2.5–2.9
<2.5
potassium, meq/L
Serum
≥3.5
2.0–3.4
1.5–1.9
0.6–1.4
<0.6
creatinine, mg/dL
Hematocrit
≥60
50–59.9
46–49.9
30–45.9
20–29.9
<20
WBC count, 
≥40
20–39.9
15–19.9
3–14.9
1–2.9
<1
103/mL
Glasgow Coma Scoreb,c
EYE OPENING
VERBAL (NONINTUBATED)
VERBAL (INTUBATED)
MOTOR ACTIVITY
4—Spontaneous
5—Oriented and talks
5—Seems able to talk
6—Verbal command
3—Verbal stimuli
4—Disoriented and talks
3—Questionable ability to talk
5—Localizes to pain
2—Painful stimuli
3—Inappropriate words
1—Generally unresponsive
4—Withdraws to pain
1—No response
2—Incomprehensible sounds
3—Decorticate
1—No response
2—Decerebrate
1—No response
Points Assigned to Age and Chronic Disease as Part of the APACHE II Score
AGE, YEARS
SCORE
<45
0
45–54
2
55–64
3
65–74
5
≥75
6
CHRONIC HEALTH (HISTORY OF CHRONIC CONDITIONS)d
SCORE
None
0
If patient is admitted after elective surgery
2
If patient is admitted after emergency surgery or for
5
reason other than after elective surgery
aThe APACHE II score is the sum of the acute physiology score (vital signs, oxygenation, laboratory values), Glasgow Coma Score (GCS), age,
and chronic health points. The worst values during ﬁrst 24 h in the ICU should be used.
bGCS = eye-opening score + verbal (intubated or nonintubated) score + motor score.
cFor the GCS component of acute physiology score, subtract GCS from 15 to obtain the points assigned.
dChronic health conditions include liver, cirrhosis with portal hypertension or encephalopathy; cardiovascular, class IV angina (at rest or with min-
imal self-care activities); pulmonary, chronic hypoxemia or hypercapnia, polycythemia, ventilator dependent; kidney, chronic peritoneal or
hemodialysis; immune, immunocompromised host.
Note: (A – a) DO2, alveolar-arterial oxygen difference; WBC, white blood (cell) count.
that aggressive, early resuscitation be instituted based on
the initial assessment, particularly because early resuscita-
tion of patients with septic and cardiogenic shock may
improve their survival (see later). If the initial bedside
assessment yields equivocal or confounding data, more
objective assessments such as echocardiography or inva-
sive vascular monitoring may be useful.The goal of early
resuscitation is to reestablish adequate tissue perfusion to
prevent or minimize end-organ injury.
MECHANICAL VENTILATORY SUPPORT
(See also Chap. 27) During the initial resuscitation of
patients in shock, principles of advanced cardiac life sup-
port should be followed. Because patients in shock may
be obtunded and unable to protect the airway, an early
assessment of the patient’s airway is mandatory during
resuscitation from shock. Early intubation and mechani-
cal ventilation are often required. Reasons for institution
of endotracheal intubation and mechanical ventilation
include acute hypoxemic respiratory failure as well as ven-
tilatory failure, which frequently accompany shock.
Acute hypoxemic respiratory failure may occur in patients
with cardiogenic shock and pulmonary edema (Chap. 31)
as well as in those in septic shock with pneumonia or
acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) (Chap. 29).
Ventilatory failure often occurs as a result of an increased
load on the respiratory system.This load may present in
the form of acute metabolic acidosis (often lactic acido-
sis) or decreased compliance of the lungs (“stiff” lungs) as
a result of pulmonary edema. Inadequate perfusion to
respiratory muscles in the setting of shock may be
another reason for early intubation and mechanical ven-
tilation. Normally, the respiratory muscles receive a very
small percentage of the CO. However, in patients who
are in shock with respiratory distress for the reasons listed
above, the percentage of CO dedicated to respiratory
muscles may increase 10-fold or more. Lactic acid pro-
duction from inefﬁcient respiratory muscle activity pre-
sents an additional ventilatory load.
Mechanical ventilation may relieve the patient of the
work of breathing and allow redistribution of a limited
CO to other vital organs, often with an improvement
in lactic acidosis. Patients demonstrate signs of respira-
tory muscle fatigue with a number of clinical signs,
including an inability to speak full sentences, accessory
respiratory muscle use, paradoxical abdominal muscle
activity, extreme tachypnea (>40 breaths/min), and
decreasing respiratory rate despite an increasing drive to
breathe. When patients with shock are treated with
mechanical ventilation, a major goal of ventilator set-
tings is to assume all or the majority of work of breath-
ing, facilitating a state of minimal respiratory muscle
work.With the institution of mechanical ventilation for
shock, further worsening of MAP is frequently seen.
The reasons for this include impedance of venous
Principles of Critical Care Medicine
249
CHAPTER 26
0–4
10–14
5–9
15–19
APACHE II Score
25–29
35+
20–24
30–34
Mortality rate, %
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
FIGURE 26-1
APACHE (Acute Physiology and Chronic Health Evaluation) II
survival curve. Blue, nonoperative; green, postoperative.
Inotropes, afterload
reduction
Antibiotics, EGDT, low-dose
steroids, activated protein C
Heart is “full”
(cardiogenic shock)
Evaluate for myocardial
ischemia
Cold, clammy
extremities
Warm, bounding
extremities
High cardiac output
No improvement
What does not fit?
Adrenal crisis, right heart syndrome,
pericardial disease
Consider echocardiogram,
invasive vascular monitoring
Consider echocardiogram,
invasive vascular monitoring
Septic shock,
liver failure
Low cardiac output
JVP, crackles
JVP, orthostasis
IV fluids
May
convert
to
SHOCK
Heart is “empty”
(hypovolemic shock)
FIGURE 26-2
Approach to a patient in shock. EGDT, early goal-directed
therapy; JVP, jugular venous pressure.
return with positive-pressure ventilation, reduced
endogenous catecholamine secretion after the stress
associated with respiratory failure is abated, and drugs
used to facilitate endotracheal intubation (e.g., barbitu-
rates, benzodiazepines, opiates), all of which may result
in hypotension. Accordingly, hypotension should be
anticipated after endotracheal intubation and positive-
pressure ventilation. Many of these patients have a com-
ponent of hypovolemia, which may respond to IV volume
administration. Figure 26-2 summarizes the diagnosis and
treatment of patients with different types of shock.
For further discussion of individual forms of shock,
see Chaps. 28, 29, and 31.
RESPIRATORY FAILURE
Respiratory failure is one of the most common reasons
patients are admitted to the ICU. In some ICU settings,
≥75% of patients require mechanical ventilation during
their ICU stay. Respiratory failure can be categorized
mechanistically, based on pathophysiologic derange-
ments in respiratory function.Accordingly, four different
types of respiratory failure can be described based on
these pathophysiologic derangements.
Type I, or Acute Hypoxemic,
Respiratory Failure
This occurs when alveolar ﬂooding and subsequent intra-
pulmonary shunt physiology occurs. Alveolar ﬂooding
may be a consequence of pulmonary edema, pneumonia,
or alveolar hemorrhage. Pulmonary edema can be further
categorized as occurring because of elevated intravascular
pressures seen in heart failure and intravascular volume
overload or because of acute lung injury (“low-pressure
pulmonary edema”; Chap. 31). ARDS (Chap. 30) repre-
sents an extreme degree of lung injury.This syndrome is
deﬁned by diffuse bilateral airspace edema seen by chest
radiography, the absence of left atrial hypertension, and
profound shunt physiology (Fig. 30-2) in a clinical setting
in which this syndrome is known to occur.This includes
sepsis, gastric aspiration, pneumonia, near drowning, mul-
tiple blood transfusions, and pancreatitis. The mortality
rate of patients with ARDS was traditionally very high
(50–70%), although recent changes in ventilator manage-
ment strategy have led to reports of mortality in the low
30% range (see later).
For many years, physicians have suspected that mechan-
ical ventilation of patients with acute lung injury and
ARDS may propagate lung injury. Cyclical collapse and
reopening of alveoli may be partly responsible for this.As
seen in Fig. 26-3, the pressure-volume relationship of the
lung in ARDS is not linear. Alveoli may collapse at very
low lung volumes. Animal studies have suggested that
stretching and overdistention of injured alveoli during
mechanical ventilation can further injure the lung.
Concern over this alveolar overdistention,termed ventilator-
induced “volutrauma,” led to a multicenter, randomized,
prospective trial comparing traditional ventilator strate-
gies for acute lung injury and ARDS (large tidal volume,
12 mL/kg ideal body weight) with a low tidal volume
(6 mL/kg ideal body weight). This study showed a dra-
matic reduction in mortality in the low tidal volume
group (large tidal volume, 39.8% mortality versus low
tidal volume, 31% mortality) and conﬁrmed that ventila-
tor management could impact outcomes in these patients.
In addition, a “ﬂuid conservative” management strategy
[maintaining a relatively low central venous pressure
(CVP)] or pulmonary capillary wedge pressure (PCWP)
is associated with the need for fewer days of mechanical
ventilation compared with a “ﬂuid liberal” management
strategy (maintaining a relatively high CVP or PCWP) in
acute lung injury and ARDS.
Type II Respiratory Failure
This type of respiratory failure occurs as a result of alveolar
hypoventilation and results in the inability to eliminate
carbon dioxide effectively. Mechanisms by which this
occurs are categorized by impaired central nervous system
(CNS) drive to breathe, impaired strength with failure of
neuromuscular function in the respiratory system, and
increased load(s) on the respiratory system. Reasons for
diminished CNS drive to breathe include drug overdose,
brainstem injury, sleep-disordered breathing, and hypothy-
roidism. Reduced strength can be caused by impaired
neuromuscular transmission (e.g.,myasthenia gravis,Guillain-
Barré syndrome, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, phrenic
nerve injury) or respiratory muscle weakness (e.g., myopa-
thy,electrolyte derangements,fatigue).
General Approach to the Critically Ill Patient
250
SECTION III
Pressure, cmH2O
0
500
Alveoli
15
Lower inflection
point
Upper deflection
point
Volume, mL
30
250
C
D
B
A
FIGURE 26-3
Pressure-volume relationship of the lungs of a patient
with acute respiratory distress syndrome. At the lower
inﬂection point, collapsed alveoli begin to open, and the lung
compliance changes. At the upper deﬂection point, alveoli
become overdistended. The shape and size of alveoli are
illustrated at the top of the ﬁgure.
The overall load on the respiratory system can be clas-
siﬁed into increased resistive loads (e.g., bronchospasm),
loads caused by reduced lung compliance [e.g., alveolar
edema, atelectasis, intrinsic positive end-expiratory pres-
sure (auto-PEEP); see later in this chapter], loads caused
by reduced chest wall compliance (e.g., pneumothorax,
pleural effusion, abdominal distension), and loads caused by
increased minute ventilation requirements (e.g., pulmonary
embolus with increased dead space fraction,sepsis).
The mainstays of therapy for type II respiratory failure
are treatments directed at reversing the underlying cause(s)
of ventilatory failure. Noninvasive positive-pressure venti-
lation using a mechanical ventilator with a tight-ﬁtting
face or nasal mask that avoids endotracheal intubation can
often stabilize these patients. This approach has been
shown to be beneﬁcial in treating patients with exacerba-
tions of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
Noninvasive ventilation has been tested less extensively in
other types of type II respiratory failure but may be
attempted nonetheless in the absence of contraindications
(hemodynamic instability, inability to protect the airway,
respiratory arrest).
Type III Respiratory Failure
This form of respiratory failure occurs as a result of lung
atelectasis. Because atelectasis occurs so commonly in
the perioperative period, this is also called perioperative
respiratory failure. After general anesthesia, decreases in
functional residual capacity lead to collapse of depen-
dent lung units. Such atelectasis can be treated by fre-
quent changes in position, chest physiotherapy, upright
positioning, and aggressive control of incisional or
abdominal pain. Noninvasive positive-pressure ventila-
tion may also be used to reverse regional atelectasis.
Type IV Respiratory Failure
This form occurs because of hypoperfusion of respira-
tory muscles in patients in shock. Normally, respiratory
muscles consume <5% of the total CO and O2 delivery.
Patients in shock often suffer respiratory distress because
of pulmonary edema (e.g., patients in cardiogenic shock),
lactic acidosis, and anemia. In this setting, ≤40% of the
CO may be distributed to the respiratory muscles. Intu-
bation and mechanical ventilation can allow redistribu-
tion of the CO away from the respiratory muscles and
back to vital organs while the shock is treated.
CARE OF THE MECHANICALLY
VENTILATED PATIENT
(See also Chap. 27) Although a thorough understanding
of the pathophysiology of respiratory failure is essential
to optimize patient care, recognition of a patient’s readi-
ness to be liberated from mechanical ventilation is similarly
important. Several studies have shown that subjecting
patients to daily spontaneous breathing trials can identify
those ready for extubation. Accordingly, all intubated,
mechanically ventilated patients should undergo a daily
screening of respiratory function. If oxygenation is stable
(i.e., PAO2/FIO2 >200 and PEEP ≤5 cmH2O), cough and
airway reﬂexes are intact, and no vasopressor agents or
sedatives are being administered, the patient has passed
the screening test and should undergo a spontaneous
breathing trial.This trial consists of a period of breathing
through the endotracheal tube without ventilator sup-
port [both continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP)]
of 5 cmH2O and an open T-piece breathing system can
be used) for 30–120 min. The spontaneous breathing
trial is declared a failure and stopped if any of the follow-
ing occur: (1) respiratory rate >35/min for >5 min, (2)
O2 saturation < 90%, (3) heart rate >140/min or a 20%
increase or decrease from baseline, (4) systolic blood pres-
sure < 90 mmHg or >180 mmHg, or  (5) increased anxi-
ety or diaphoresis. If, at the end of the spontaneous
breathing trial, the ratio of the respiratory rate and tidal
volume in liters (f/VT) is <105, the patient can be extu-
bated. Such protocol-driven approaches to patient care
can have an important impact on the duration of
mechanical ventilation and length of stay in the ICU.
Despite such a careful approach to liberation from mechan-
ical ventilation, up to 10% of patients develop respiratory
distress after extubation and may require resumption of
mechanical ventilation. Many of these patients require
re-intubation. A recent study suggested that the use of
noninvasive ventilation in patients who fail extubation
may be associated with worse outcomes compared with
immediate re-intubation.
Mechanically ventilated patients frequently require
sedatives and analgesics. Most patients undergoing
mechanical ventilation experience pain, which can be
elicited by the presence of the endotracheal tube and
endotracheal suctioning.Accordingly, early and aggressive
attention to pain control is extremely important. Opiates
are the mainstay of therapy for pain control in mechani-
cally ventilated patients. After assuring adequate pain
control, additional indications for sedation for mechani-
cally ventilated patients include anxiolysis; treatment of
subjective dyspnea; psychosis; facilitation of nursing care;
reduction of autonomic hyperactivity, which may precip-
itate myocardial ischemia; and reducing total O2 con-
sumption (VO2).
Neuromuscular blocking agents are occasionally needed
to facilitate mechanical ventilation in patients with pro-
found dyssynchrony with the ventilator despite optimal
sedation. The use of neuromuscular blocking agents may
result in prolonged weakness—a myopathy known as the
postparalytic syndrome. As such, these agents are typically
used as a last resort, when aggressive sedation fails to
achieve patient–ventilator synchrony. Because neuromus-
cular blocking agents result in pharmacologic paralysis
without altering mental status, sedative-induced amnesia is
mandatory when these agents are administered.
Principles of Critical Care Medicine
251
CHAPTER 26
Amnesia can be reliably achieved with benzodi-
azepines such as lorazepam or midazolam, as well as the
IV anesthetic agent propofol. Outside of the setting of
pharmacologic paralysis, few data support the idea that
amnesia is mandatory in all patients who require intuba-
tion and mechanical ventilation. Because many of these
patients are critically ill with impaired hepatic and renal
function, sedatives and opiates may accumulate in them
when given for prolonged periods of time. A protocol-
driven approach to sedation of mechanically ventilated
patients with daily interruption of sedative infusions has
been shown to prevent excessive drug accumulation and
shorten the durations of mechanical ventilation and
length of stay in the ICU.
MULTIORGAN SYSTEM FAILURE
The syndrome of multiorgan system failure is a com-
mon problem associated with critical illness. This
syndrome is deﬁned by the simultaneous presence of
physiologic dysfunction or failure of two or more
organs.Typically, this occurs in the setting of severe sep-
sis, shock of any kind, severe inﬂammatory conditions
such as pancreatitis, and trauma.That multiorgan system
failure occurs commonly in the ICU is a testament to
our current ability to stabilize and support single organ
failure.The ability to support single organ failure aggres-
sively (e.g., with mechanical ventilation for respiratory
failure, renal replacement therapy for acute renal failure)
has greatly impacted early mortality in critical illness.As
such, it is uncommon for critically ill patients to die in
the initial stages of resuscitation. Instead, many patients
succumb to critical illness later in the ICU stay after the
initial presenting problem has been stabilized.
Although there is debate regarding speciﬁc deﬁnitions
of organ failure, several general principles governing the
syndrome of multiorgan system failure apply. First, organ
failure, no matter how deﬁned, must persist beyond 24 h.
Second, the mortality risk increases as patients accrue
additional organ failures.Third, prognosis is worsened by
increased duration of organ failure. These observations
remain true across various critical care settings (e.g.,
medical versus surgical). SIRS is a common basis for
multiorgan system failure. Although infection is a com-
mon cause of SIRS,“sterile” triggers such as pancreatitis,
trauma, and burns are often invoked to explain multior-
gan system failure.
MONITORING IN THE INTENSIVE
CARE UNIT
Because respiratory failure occurs commonly in critically
ill patients, monitoring of the respiratory and cardiovascu-
lar systems is undertaken frequently in the ICU. Evalua-
tion of respiratory gas exchange is routine in critical
illness. The “gold standard” remains arterial blood gas
analysis (ABG), in which pH, partial pressures of O2 and
CO2, and O2 saturation are measured directly.With ABG,
the two main functions of the lung—oxygenation of
arterial blood and elimination of CO2—can be directly
assessed. Importantly, the blood pH, which has a profound
effect on the drive to breathe, can be assessed only by
sampling of arterial blood. Although sampling of arterial
blood is generally safe, it may be painful and cannot pro-
vide continuous information for clinicians routinely.
Given these limitations, noninvasive monitoring of respi-
ratory function is often used in the critical care setting.
PULSE OXIMETRY
This is the most commonly used noninvasive monitor of
respiratory function. This technique takes advantage of
differences in the absorptive properties of oxygenated
and deoxygenated hemoglobin. At wavelengths of
660 nm, oxyhemoglobin reﬂects light more effectively
than deoxyhemoglobin; the reverse is true in the infrared
spectrum (940 nm). A pulse oximeter passes both wave-
lengths of light through a perfused digit such as a ﬁnger,
and the relative intensity of light transmission at these
two wavelengths is recorded. This allows the derivation
of the relative percent of oxyhemoglobin. Because arter-
ial pulsations produce phasic changes in the intensity of
transmitted light, the pulse oximeter is designed to
detect only light of alternating intensity.This allows dis-
tinction of arterial and venous blood O2 saturations.
Respiratory System Mechanics
These can be measured in patients during mechanical
ventilation (Chap. 27). When volume-controlled modes
of mechanical ventilation are used, accompanying airway
pressures can be easily measured. The peak airway pres-
sure is determined by two variables—the airways resis-
tance and respiratory system compliance. At the end of
inspiration, inspiratory ﬂow can be stopped transiently.
This end-inspiratory pause (plateau pressure) is a static
measurement, impacted only by respiratory system com-
pliance, not airways resistance.Therefore, during volume-
controlled ventilation, the difference between the peak
(airways resistance + respiratory system compliance) and
plateau (respiratory system compliance only) airway pres-
sures provides a quantitative assessment of airways resis-
tance.Accordingly, during volume-controlled ventilation,
patients with increases in airways resistance typically have
increased peak airway pressures as well as abnormally
high gradients between peak and plateau airway pressures
(typically >15 cmH2O). The compliance of the respira-
tory system is deﬁned by the change in pressure of the
respiratory system per unit change in volume.
The respiratory system can be divided further into two
components—the lungs and the chest wall. Normally, the
General Approach to the Critically Ill Patient
252
SECTION III
respiratory system compliance is ∼100 mL/cmH2O.
Pathophysiologic processes such as pleural effusions, pneu-
mothorax, or increased abdominal girth from ascites or
obesity all reduce chest wall compliance. Lung compliance
may be reduced by pneumonia, pulmonary edema from
any cause, or auto-PEEP.Accordingly, patients with abnor-
malities in compliance of the respiratory system (lungs or
chest wall) typically have elevated peak and plateau airway
pressures but a normal gradient between peak and plateau
airway pressures.Auto-PEEP occurs when there is insufﬁ-
cient time for emptying of alveoli before the next inspira-
tory cycle. Because the alveoli have not decompressed
completely, alveolar pressure remains positive at end-
exhalation (functional residual capacity). This phenome-
non occurs most commonly because of critical narrowing
of distal airways in disease processes such as asthma and
COPD. Auto-PEEP with resulting alveolar overdistention
may result in diminished lung compliance, reﬂected by
abnormally increased plateau airway pressures. Modern
mechanical ventilators allow breath-to-breath display of
pressure and ﬂow, which may allow detection of problems
such as patient–ventilator dyssynchrony, airﬂow obstruc-
tion,and auto-PEEP (Fig. 26-4).
CIRCULATORY STATUS
Monitors to characterize the circulation status of criti-
cally ill patients are used commonly in the ICU. One of
the most frequently used is the pulmonary artery
catheter, also known as the right heart catheter or Swan-
Ganz catheter.This catheter was originally designed as a
tool to guide therapy in patients with acute myocardial
infarction but is currently used in the ICU for evalua-
tion and treatment of a variety of other conditions such
as ARDS, septic shock, congestive heart failure, and
acute renal failure.This device has never been validated
as a tool associated with reduction in morbidity and
mortality. Indeed, despite numerous prospective studies,
there has been no report of mortality or morbidity ben-
eﬁt associated with the use of the pulmonary artery
catheter in any setting.
Pulmonary artery catheters are invasive monitors and
may be associated with a number of complications.
Because the catheter is inserted via a central vein, all of
the complications associated with central venous catheter-
ization are present.These include central venous catheter–
related infections, pneumothorax, arterial puncture with
or without cannulation, bleeding, air embolism, venous
thrombosis, and catheter embolism.The insertion of the
pulmonary artery catheter also carries a number of risks,
including dysrhythmias, heart block, cardiac perforation,
and balloon fragmentation. After the catheter is placed,
pulmonary infarction, pulmonary artery rupture, and
pulmonic valve insufﬁciency may occur. Fortunately,
most of these complications are quite rare. Indeed, misin-
terpretation of data derived from central venous and pul-
monary artery catheters may be the most common
“complication” seen with these monitors. Pressure mea-
surements in various cardiac chambers require careful
zeroing of the pressure transducer relative to atmospheric
pressure. In addition, the transducer must also be at the
same level as the cardiac chamber whose pressure is
being measured. If the transducer is either higher or
lower by several centimeters, the value recorded may be
quite inaccurate.
Atrial pressure measurements should be made at end-
expiration when there is no movement of air in or out
of the thorax. It is during this period, with the lungs at
functional residual capacity (cessation of gas ﬂow), that
gas ﬂow in or out of the chest cannot complicate mea-
surements of the atrial pressure. Many critically ill
patients with respiratory distress may never come to a
point where airﬂow in and out of the thorax ceases,
instead breathing with continuous inspiratory and expi-
ratory movements. In such patients, atrial pressure may
be difﬁcult to measure accurately. Failure to recognize
this limitation may lead to reliance on inaccurate data
obtained from the central venous or pulmonary artery
catheter. Indeed, studies have shown that many clinicians
are unable to accurately obtain and interpret data from
such catheters. Accordingly, it appears that the routine
use of pulmonary artery catheterization is not indicated
as a monitor to characterize the circulatory status in
most critically ill patients.
Principles of Critical Care Medicine
253
CHAPTER 26
Pressure–Time
Flow–Time
cmH2O
L/s
90
0
1.2
–1.2
0
4
4
FIGURE 26-4
Increased airway resistance with auto-PEEP (alveolar
edema, atelectasis, intrinsic positive end-expiratory
pressure). The top waveform (airway pressure versus time)
shows a large difference between the peak airway pressure
(80 cmH2O) and the plateau airway pressure (20 cmH2O). The
bottom waveform (ﬂow versus time) demonstrates airﬂow
throughout expiration (reﬂected by the ﬂow tracing on the
negative portion of the abscissa) that persists up to the next
inspiratory effort.
Oxygen delivery (QO2) is a function of CO and the
content of O2 in the arterial blood (CaO2).The CaO2 is
determined by the hemoglobin concentration, the arter-
ial hemoglobin saturation, and dissolved O2 not bound
to hemoglobin. For normal adults:
QO2 = 50 dL/min × (1.39 × 15 g/dL
[hemoglobin concentration] × 1.0
[hemoglobin % saturation] + 0.0031 
× 100 [PaO2])
= 50 dL/min (CO) × 21.16 mL O2/dL
blood (CaO2)
= 1058 mL O2/min
It is apparent that the vast majority of O2 delivered to
tissues is bound to hemoglobin and that the dissolved
O2 (PaO2) contributes very little to O2 content in arter-
ial blood or O2 delivery. Normally, the content of O2 in
mixed venous blood (C-vO2) is 15.95 mL O2/dL blood
because the mixed venous blood is 75% saturated.
Therefore, the normal tissue extraction ratio for O2 is
CaO2 – C-vO2/CaO2 (21.16 – 15.95/21.16) or ∼25%. A
pulmonary artery catheter allows measurements of O2
delivery and O2 extraction ratio.
The mixed venous O2 saturation allows assessment of
global tissue perfusion.A reduced mixed venous O2 sat-
uration may be caused by inadequate cardiac output,
reduced hemoglobin concentration, or reduced arterial
O2 saturation. An abnormally high O2 consumption
(VO2) may also lead to a reduced mixed venous O2 satu-
ration if O2 delivery is not concomitantly increased.
Abnormally increased VO2 by peripheral tissues may be
caused by a multitude of problems such as fever, agita-
tion, shivering, or thyrotoxicosis.
PREVENTION OF COMPLICATIONS
OF CRITICAL ILLNESS
Sepsis in the Critical Care Unit
(See also Chap. 29) Sepsis is a signiﬁcant problem in the
care of critically ill patients. It is the leading cause of
death in noncoronary ICUs in the United States. Cur-
rent estimates suggest that >750,000 patients are affected
with this condition each year, and these numbers are
expected to increase as the population continues to age
and a greater percentage of persons vulnerable to infec-
tion seek medical care.
Many therapeutic interventions in the ICU are invasive
and predispose patients to infectious complications.These
interventions include endotracheal intubation, indwelling
vascular catheters, nasally placed enteral feeding tubes,
transurethral bladder catheters, and other catheters placed
into sterile body cavities (e.g., tube thoracostomy, percuta-
neous intraabdominal drainage catheters).The longer such
devices remain in place, the more prone to infections these
patients become. For example, ventilator-associated pneu-
monia correlates strongly with the duration of intubation
and mechanical ventilation.Therefore, an important aspect
of preventive care is the timely removal of invasive devices
as soon as they are no longer needed. Multidrug-resistant
organisms are common in the ICU.
An important aspect of critical care is infection con-
trol in the ICU. Simple measures such as frequent hand-
washing are effective but underused strategies. Protective
isolation of patients with colonization or infection by
drug-resistant organisms is another frequently used strat-
egy in the critical care setting.Antibiotic-coated vascular
catheters or endotracheal tubes with specialized suction
ports above the cuff to decrease pooling and aspiration
of oral secretions are other strategies that may be used,
with varying degrees of effectiveness reported. Surveil-
lance programs monitoring adherence to infection con-
trol practices such as those described here may reduce
the incidence of nosocomial infections.
Deep Venous Thromboses
All ICU patients are at high risk for this complication
given their predilection toward immobility.Therefore, all
ICU patients should receive some form of prophylaxis
against deep venous thrombosis (DVT).The most com-
monly used forms of prophylaxis are subcutaneous
low-dose heparin injections and sequential compression
devices for the lower extremities. Observational studies
report an alarming incidence of the occurrence of DVTs
despite the use of these standard prophylactic regimens.
Heparin prophylaxis may result in heparin-induced throm-
bocytopenia (HIT), another relatively common nosoco-
mial complication in critically ill patients.
Low-molecular-weight heparins such as enoxaparin
are more effective than unfractionated heparin for DVT
prophylaxis in high-risk patients, such as those undergo-
ing orthopedic surgery, and they have a lower incidence
of HIT. Fondaparinux, a selective factor Xa inhibitor, is
even more effective than enoxaparin in high-risk ortho-
pedic patients.
Stress Ulcers
Prophylaxis against stress ulcers is frequently administered
in most ICUs. Typically, histamine-2 antagonists are
administered. Currently available data suggest that high-
risk patients, such as those with coagulopathy, shock, or
respiratory failure requiring mechanical ventilation, bene-
ﬁt from such prophylactic treatment.
Nutrition and Glycemic Control
These are important issues in critically ill patients that
may be associated with respiratory failure,impaired wound
healing, and dysfunctional immune response. Early enteral
General Approach to the Critically Ill Patient
254
SECTION III
feeding is reasonable, but no data are available to suggest
that this improves patient outcome per se. Certainly,
enteral feeding, if possible, is preferred over parenteral
nutrition, which is associated with numerous complica-
tions, including hyperglycemia, fatty liver, cholestasis,
and sepsis. In addition, enteral feeding may prevent bac-
terial translocation across the gut mucosa.
Intensive insulin therapy to normalize glucose levels
is associated with improved survival in surgical ICU
patients.
Intensive Care Unit–Acquired Weakness
Weakness occurs frequently in patients who survive crit-
ical illness. It is particularly common in those with SIRS
and sepsis. Neuropathies and myopathies both have been
described, most commonly after ∼1 week in the ICU.
The mechanisms behind ICU-acquired weakness syn-
dromes are poorly understood. Intensive insulin therapy
may reduce polyneuropathy of critical illness.Apart from
this, no preventative measures against this complication
of critical illness have been described.
Anemia
Anemia is a common problem in critically ill patients.
Studies have shown that the vast majority of ICU patients
are anemic. Furthermore, most have anemia of chronic
inﬂammation. Phlebotomy contributes signiﬁcantly to
anemia in ICU patients. Studies have demonstrated that
erythropoietin levels are inappropriately reduced in most
ICU patients and that exogenous erythropoietin adminis-
tration may reduce transfusion requirements in the ICU.
The hemoglobin level that merits transfusion in critically
ill patients has been a long-standing area of controversy.A
large, multicenter study involving patients in many differ-
ent ICU settings challenged the conventional notion that
a hemoglobin level of 100 g/L (10 g/dL) is needed in
critically ill patients. Red blood cell transfusion is associ-
ated with impairment of immune function and increased
risk of infections, as well as acute lung injury and volume
overload—all of which may explain the ﬁndings in this
study. A conservative transfusion strategy should be the
rule in managing critically ill patients who are not actively
hemorrhaging.
Acute Renal Failure
(See also Chap. 37) This occurs in a signiﬁcant percent-
age of critically ill patients.The most common underly-
ing cause is acute tubular necrosis, usually precipitated
by hypoperfusion or nephrotoxic agents. Currently, no
pharmacologic agents are available for prevention of
renal injury in critical illness. A recent study showed
convincingly that low-dose dopamine is not effective in
protecting the kidneys from acute injury.
NEUROLOGIC DYSFUNCTION
IN CRITICALLY ILL PATIENTS
Neurologic dysfunction is common in critically ill patients.
Delirium
(See also Chap. 35) This state is deﬁned by (1) an acute
onset of changes or ﬂuctuations in the course of mental
status, (2) inattention, (3) disorganized thinking, and (4)
an altered level of consciousness (i.e., other than alert).
Delirium has been reported to occur in >80% of a
cohort of patients admitted to the ICU. A rapid test—
the Confusion Assessment Method (CAM)—to assess
critically ill patients for delirium is available and has
been validated. This assessment asks patients to answer
simple questions and perform simple tasks and can be
completed by the bedside nurse in ∼2 min. The differ-
ential diagnosis of delirium in ICU patients is broad and
includes infectious etiologies (including sepsis), medica-
tions (particularly sedatives and analgesics), drug with-
drawal,
metabolic and electrolyte derangements,
intracranial pathology (e.g., stroke, intracranial hemor-
rhage), seizures, hypoxia, hypertensive crisis, shock, and
vitamin deﬁciencies (particularly thiamine).
Anoxic Cerebral Injury
(See also Chap. 36) This condition is common after car-
diac arrest and often results in severe and permanent
brain injury in patients whose cardiac arrest is resusci-
tated. Active cooling of patients after cardiac arrest has
been shown to improve neurologic outcomes. As such,
patients who present to the ICU after circulatory arrest
from ventricular ﬁbrillation or pulseless ventricular tachy-
cardia should be actively cooled with cooling blankets
and ice packs, if necessary, to achieve a core body tem-
perature of 32–34°C.
Stroke
Stroke is a common cause of neurologic critical illness.
Hypertension must be managed carefully because abrupt
reductions in blood pressure may be associated with fur-
ther brain ischemia and injury. Acute ischemic stroke
treated with tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) shows
improved neurologic outcome when treatment is
given within 3 h of onset of symptoms. Mortality is not
improved when tPA is compared with placebo despite
improved neurologic outcome. Cerebral hemorrhage is
signiﬁcantly higher in patients given tPA. A treatment
benefit is not seen when tPA therapy is given beyond
3 h. Heparin has not been shown to demonstrate
improved outcomes convincingly in patients with acute
ischemic stroke.
Principles of Critical Care Medicine
255
CHAPTER 26
Subarachnoid Hemorrhage
Subarachnoid hemorrhage may occur secondary to
aneurysm rupture and is often complicated by cerebral
vasospasm, rebleeding, and hydrocephalus.Vasospasm can
be detected by either transcranial Doppler assessment or
cerebral angiography; it is typically treated with the cal-
cium channel blocker nimodipine; aggressive IV ﬂuid
administration; and therapy aimed at increasing the blood
pressure, typically with vasoactive drugs such as phenyle-
phrine.The IV ﬂuids and vasoactive drugs (hypertensive
hypervolemic therapy) are used to overcome the cere-
bral vasospasm. Early surgical clipping of aneurysms is
advocated by most authorities to prevent complications
related to rebleeding. Hydrocephalus, typically heralded
by a decreased level of consciousness, may require ven-
triculostomy drainage.
Status Epilepticus
Recurrent or relentless seizure activity is a medical
emergency. Cessation of seizure activity is required to
prevent irreversible neurologic injury. Lorazepam is the
most effective benzodiazepine for treating status epilep-
ticus and is the treatment of choice for controlling
seizures acutely. Phenytoin or fosphenytoin should be
given concomitantly because lorazepam has a short half-
life. Other drugs such as gabapentin, carbamazepine, and
phenobarbital should be reserved for patients with con-
traindications to phenytoin (e.g., allergy or pregnancy)
or ongoing seizures despite use of phenytoin.
Brain Death
(See also Chap. 36) Although critically ill patients usually
die from irreversible cessation of circulatory and respira-
tory function, a diagnosis of death may also be established
by irreversible cessation of all functions of the entire brain,
including the brainstem, even if circulatory and respiratory
function remains intact by artiﬁcial life support. Patients
must demonstrate absence of cerebral function (unrespon-
sive to all external stimuli) and brainstem functions [e.g.,
nonreactive pupils, absent ocular movement to head turn-
ing or ice water irrigation of ear canals, positive apnea test
(no drive to breathe)]. Absence of brain function must
have an established cause and be permanent without pos-
sibility of recovery (e.g., must conﬁrm the absence of
sedative effect, hypothermia, hypoxemia, neuromuscular
paralysis, or severe hypotension). If there is uncertainty
about the cause of coma, studies of cerebral blood ﬂow
and electroencephalography should be performed.
WITHHOLDING AND
WITHDRAWING CARE
The withholding and withdrawing of care occurs com-
monly in the ICU setting.The Task Force on Ethics of
the Society of Critical Care Medicine reported that it
is ethically sound to withhold or withdraw care if a
patient or surrogate makes such a request or if the goals
of therapy are not achievable according to the physi-
cian. Because all medical treatments are justified by
their expected beneﬁts, the loss of such an expectation
justiﬁes the act of withdrawing or withholding such a
treatment. As such, the act of withdrawing care is fun-
damentally similar to the act of withholding care. An
underlying stipulation derived from this Task Force
report is that the informed patient should have his or
her wishes respected with regard to life-sustaining ther-
apy. Implicit in this stipulation is the need to ensure
that patients are thoroughly and accurately informed
regarding the plausibility and expected results of vari-
ous therapies.
The act of informing patients, surrogate decision mak-
ers, or both is the responsibility of the physician and
other health care providers. In the event that a patient
or surrogate desires therapy deemed futile by the treat-
ing physician, the latter is not obligated ethically to
provide such treatment. Rather, arrangements may be
made to transfer the patient’s care to another care
provider. Critical care providers should meet regularly
with patients, surrogates, or both to discuss prognosis
when the withholding or withdrawal of care is being
considered. After a consensus among caregivers has
been reached regarding withholding or withdrawal of
care, this should be relayed to the patient, surrogate
decision maker, or both. If a decision to withhold or
withdraw life-sustaining care for a patient has been
reached, aggressive attention to analgesia and anxiolysis
is needed. Opiates and benzodiazepines are typically
used to achieve these goals.
FURTHER READINGS
ABRAHAM E et al: Drotrecogin alfa (activated) for adults with severe
sepsis and a low risk of death. N Engl J Med 353:1332, 2005
COOK DJ et al: Deep venous thrombosis in medical-surgical criti-
cally ill patients: Prevalence, incidence, and risk factors. Crit Care
Med 33:1565, 2005
ESTEBAN A et al: Noninvasive positive-pressure ventilation for respi-
ratory failure after extubation. N Engl J Med 350:2452, 2004
GIRARD T et al: Efﬁcacy and safety of a paired sedation and ventilator
weaning protocol for mechanically ventilated patients in intensive
care (Awakening and Breathing Controlled trial): A randomised
controlled trial. Lancet 371:126, 2008
PRONOVOST P et al: An intervention to decrease catheter-related
bloodstream infections in the ICU. N Engl J Med 355:2725, 2006
SCHWEICKERT WD et al: Early physical and occupational therapy in
mechanically ventilated, critically ill patients:A randomized con-
trolled trial. Lancet 373:1874, 2009
SHAH MR et al: Impact of the pulmonary artery catheter in critically
ill patients: Meta-analysis of randomized clinical trials. JAMA
294:1664, 2005
TASK FORCE ON ETHICS OF THE SOCIETY OF CRITICAL CARE MEDI-
CINE: Consensus report on the ethics of forgoing life-sustaining
treatments in the critically ill. Crit Care Med 18:1424, 1990
General Approach to the Critically Ill Patient
256
SECTION III
THE ACUTE RESPIRATORY DISTRESS SYNDROME NETWORK:Ventila-
tion with lower tidal volumes as compared with traditional tidal
volumes for acute lung injury and the acute respiratory distress
syndrome. N Engl J Med 342:1301, 2000
THE HYPOTHERMIA AFTER CARDIAC ARREST STUDY GROUP: Mild
therapeutic hypothermia to improve the neurologic outcome
after cardiac arrest. N Engl J Med 346:549, 2002
THE NATIONAL HEART, LUNG, AND BLOOD INSTITUTE ACUTE
RESPIRATORY DISTRESS SYNDROME (ARDS) CLINICAL TRIALS
NETWORK: Comparison of two ﬂuid-management strategies in
acute lung injury. N Engl J Med 354:2564, 2006
THE NICE-SUGAR STUDY INVESTIGATORS: Intensive versus glucose
control in critically ill patients. N Engl J Med 360:1283, 2009
VAN DEN BERGHE G et al: Intensive insulin therapy in the medical
ICU. N Engl J Med 354:449, 2006
Principles of Critical Care Medicine
257
CHAPTER 26
Edward P. Ingenito
Ventilators are special pumps that can support the venti-
latory function of the respiratory system and improve
oxygenation through application of high oxygen con-
tent gas and positive pressure (Chap. 26).
INDICATIONS FOR MECHANICAL
VENTILATION
The primary indication for initiation of mechanical ven-
tilation is respiratory failure, of which there are two basic
types.
1. Hypoxemic respiratory failure most commonly results
from conditions such as pneumonia, pulmonary
edema, pulmonary hemorrhage, and respiratory
distress syndrome that cause ventilation-perfusion
( .V/ ˙Q) mismatch and shunt. Hypoxemic respiratory
failure is present when arterial O2 saturation (SaO2)
<90% occurs despite an inspired O2 fraction (FIO2)
>0.6.The goal of ventilator treatment in this setting
is to provide adequate SaO2 through a combination
of supplemental O2 and speciﬁc patterns of ventila-
tion that improve .V/ ˙Q  matching and reduce intra-
pulmonary shunt.
2. Hypercarbic respiratory failure results from conditions that
decrease minute ventilation or increase physiologic
dead space such that alveolar ventilation is inadequate
MECHANICAL VENTILATORY SUPPORT
to meet metabolic demands. Clinical conditions
associated with hypercarbic respiratory failure include
neuromuscular diseases, such as myasthenia gravis,
ascending polyradiculopathy, and myopathies, and
diseases that cause respiratory muscle fatigue due to
increased workload, such as asthma, chronic obstruc-
tive pulmonary disease, and restrictive lung disease.
Acute hypercarbic respiratory failure is characterized
by arterial Pco2 values >50 mmHg and an arterial
pH <7.30.
Mechanical ventilation generally should be instituted in
acute hypercarbic respiratory failure. In contrast, initia-
tion of ventilator support when components of both
acute and chronic hypercarbic respiratory failure are
present depends on blood gas parameters and clinical
evaluation. If a patient is not in respiratory distress and is
not mentally impaired by CO2 accumulation, it is not
mandatory to initiate mechanical ventilation while other
forms of treatment are being administered. The goal of
ventilator treatment in patients with hypercarbic respira-
tory failure is to normalize arterial pH through changes
in CO2 tensions. In patients with severe obstructive or
restrictive lung disease, potentially injurious elevation in
airway pressures may limit tidal volumes such that nor-
malization of pH is not possible, a situation known as
permissive hypercapnia. This strategy generally requires
CHAPTER 27
CHAPTER 27
258
Indications for Mechanical Ventilation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 258
Physiology of Mechanical Ventilation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 259
Establishing and Maintaining an Airway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 259
Ventilator Operation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 259
I Ventilator Management Principles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 263
I General Support During Ventilation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 263
Complications of Mechanical Ventilation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 264
Weaning from Mechanical Ventilation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 264
I Further Readings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 265
sufficient sedation to prevent tachypnea and dyssyn-
chrony between patient and ventilator.
Accepted therapeutic applications of mechanical ven-
tilation include controlled hyperventilation to reduce
cerebral blood ﬂow in patients with increased intracranial
pressure (ICP) or to improve pulmonary hemodynamics
in patients with postoperative pulmonary hypertension.
Mechanical ventilation has also been used to reduce the
work of breathing and decrease cardiac preload and after-
load in patients with congestive heart failure or myocar-
dial ischemia.Ventilator support is also frequently used in
conjunction with endotracheal intubation to prevent
aspiration of gastric contents in otherwise unstable patients
during gastric lavage for suspected drug overdose or dur-
ing upper gastrointestinal endoscopy. In critically ill
patients, intubation and mechanical ventilation are indi-
cated before essential diagnostic or therapeutic studies if
it appears that respiratory failure may occur during these
maneuvers.
PHYSIOLOGY OF MECHANICAL
VENTILATION
Mechanical ventilators provide warmed and humidiﬁed
gas to the airway in conformance with various speciﬁc
volume, pressure, and time patterns.The ventilator serves
as the energy source for inspiration, replacing the muscles
of the diaphragm and chest wall. Expiration is passive,
driven by the recoil of the lungs and chest wall; at the
completion of inspiration, internal ventilator circuitry
vents the airway to atmospheric pressure or a speciﬁed
level of positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP).
PEEP helps maintain the patency of the alveoli and
small airways in the presence of destabilizing factors,
improving matching of ventilation and perfusion by revers-
ing atelectasis. PEEP levels between 0 and 10 cmH2O are
generally safe and effective; higher levels can be used with
caution in the management of signiﬁcant refractory hypox-
emia unresponsive to increments in FIO2 up to 0.6 but
increase the risk of barotrauma and hypotension.
Positive-pressure ventilation affects the cardiovascular
system through transmission of intrathoracic pressures to
the heart and great vessels. Initiation of positive-pressure
ventilation decreases both preload and afterload; discon-
tinuation increases both.The potential clinical impact of
these effects should be considered when modifying ven-
tilator support in hemodynamically tenuous patients.
ESTABLISHING AND MAINTAINING
AN AIRWAY
A cuffed endotracheal tube is often inserted to allow
positive-pressure ventilators to deliver conditioned gas
to the lungs at pressures above atmospheric pressure. If
neuromuscular paralysis is used during intubation, the
Mechanical Ventilatory Support
259
CHAPTER 27
use of agents whose mechanism of action includes
depolarization at the neuromuscular junction, such as
succinylcholine chloride, should be avoided in patients
with renal failure, tumor lysis syndrome, crush injuries,
medical conditions associated with elevated serum
potassium levels, and muscular dystrophy syndromes. Opi-
ates and benzodiazepines can have a deleterious effect
on hemodynamics in patients with depressed cardiac
function or low systemic vascular resistance. Morphine
can promote histamine release from tissue mast cells and
may worsen bronchospasm in patients with asthma; fen-
tanyl, sufentanil, and alfentanil are acceptable alterna-
tives. Ketamine may increase systemic arterial pressure as
well as ICP and has been associated with hallucinatory
responses; it should be used with caution in patients
with hypertensive crisis, increased ICP, or a history of
psychiatric disorders. Newer agents such as etomidate
and propofol have also been used for both induction and
maintenance of anesthesia in ventilated patients. They
are shorter acting, and etomidate has fewer adverse hemo-
dynamic effects, but both agents are signiﬁcantly more
expensive than older agents.
Although deﬁnitive guidelines for performing a tra-
cheostomy in ventilated patients have not been estab-
lished, in current clinical practice, patients who are likely
to require ventilator therapy for >3 weeks should be
considered for this procedure. Although it does not
clearly reduce the incidence of laryngeal injury or tra-
cheal stenosis, tracheostomy has been associated with
improved patient comfort and enhanced ability to par-
take in rehabilitation-oriented activities.
VENTILATOR OPERATION
Terminology
Mode refers to the manner in which ventilator breaths are
triggered, cycled, and limited; commonly used modes of
mechanical ventilation are given in Table 27-1. The
trigger, either an inspiratory effort or a time-based signal,
deﬁnes what the ventilator senses to initiate an assisted
breath. Cycle refers to the factors that determine the end
of inspiration. For example, in volume-cycled ventilation,
inspiration ends when a speciﬁc tidal volume is deliv-
ered. Other types of cycling include pressure cycling, time
cycling, and ﬂow cycling. Limiting factors are operator-
speciﬁed values, such as airway pressure, that are moni-
tored by transducers internal to the ventilator circuit
throughout the respiratory cycle; if the speciﬁed values
are exceeded, inspiratory ﬂow is terminated, and the
ventilator circuit is vented to atmospheric pressure or the
speciﬁed PEEP.
Assist Control Mode Ventilation
An inspiratory cycle is initiated either by the patient’s
inspiratory effort or, if none is detected within a speciﬁed
260
General Approach to the Critically Ill Patient
SECTION III
TABLE 27-1
CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS OF COMMONLY USED MODES OF MECHANICAL VENTILATION
INDEPENDENT 
DEPENDENT 
VENTILATOR 
VARIABLES 
VARIABLES
TRIGGER/
MODE
(SET BY USER)
(MONITORED BY USER)
CYCLE LIMIT
ADVANTAGES
DISADVANTAGES
INITIAL SETTINGS
ACMVa
FIO2
Peak airway pressure,
Patient/timer
Timer backup
Not useful for 
FIO2 = 1.0b
Tidal volume
PaO2, PaCO2
Pressure limit
Patient–ventilator 
weaning
Vt = 10–15 mL/kga
Ventilator rate
Mean airway pressure
synchrony
Potential for 
f = 12–15/min
Level of PEEP
I/E ratio
Patient controls 
dangerous 
PEEP = 0–5 cmH2O
Inspiratory ﬂow pattern
minute ventilation
respiratory alkalosis
Inspiratory ﬂow =
Peak inspiratory ﬂow
60 L/min
Pressure limit
SIMVa
Same as for ACMV
Same as for ACMV
Same as for ACMV
Timer backup
Potential 
Same as for ACMVa
useful for weaning
dyssynchrony
CPAP
FIO2
Tidal volume
No trigger
Allows assessment
No backup
FIO2 = 0.5–1.0b
Level of CPAP
Rate, ﬂow pattern
Pressure limit
of spontaneous
CPAP =
Airway pressure
function
5–15 cmH2O
PaO2, PaCO2, I/E ratio
Helps prevent
atelectasis
PCVa
FIO2
Tidal volume
Timer/patient
System pressures
Requires heavy 
FIO2 = 1.0b
Inspiratory
Flow rate, pattern
Timer/pressure limit
regulated
sedation
PC = 20–40 cmH2Oa
pressure level
Minute ventilation
Useful for 
Not useful 
PEEP = 5–10 cmH2O
Ventilator rate
PaO2, PaCO2
barotrauma 
for weaning
f = 12–15/min
Level of PEEP
treatment
I/E = 0.7/1–4/1
Pressure limit
Timer backup
I/E ratio
PSV
FIO2
Same as for PCV +
Inspiratory ﬂow
Assures synchrony
No timer backup
FIO2 = 0.5–1.0b
Inspiratory
I/E ratio
Pressure limit
Good for weaning
PS = 10–30 cmH2O
pressure level
5 cmH2O usually
PEEP
the level used
Pressure limit
PEEP = 0–5 cmH2O
aOpen lung ventilation (OLV) involves the use of any of these speciﬁc modes with tidal volumes (or applied pressures) to achieve 5–6 mL/kg and positive end-expiratory pressures (PEEPs) achieve
maximal alveolar recruitment.
bFIO2 is usually set to 1.0 initially unless there is a speciﬁc clinical indication to minimize FIO2 (inspired O2), such as history of chemotherapy with bleomycin. After adequate oxygenation is docu-
mented by blood gas analysis, FIO2 should be decreased in decrements of 0.1 to 0.2 as tolerated, until the lowest FIO2 required for an SaO2 >90% is achieved.
Note: ACMV, assist control mode ventilation; CPAP, continuous positive airway pressure; f, frequency; I/E, inspiration/expiration; PCV, pressure-control ventilation; PSV, pressure-support ventila-
tion; SIMV, synchronized intermittent mandatory ventilation; Vt , tidal ventilation.
Mechanical Ventilatory Support
261
CHAPTER 27
time window, by a timer signal within the ventilator.
Every breath delivered, whether patient or timer triggered,
consists of the operator-speciﬁed tidal volume.The venti-
latory rate is determined either by the patient or by the
operator-speciﬁed backup rate, whichever is of higher fre-
quency (Fig. 27-1A). Assist control mode ventilation
(ACMV) is commonly used for initiation of mechanical
ventilation because it ensures a backup minute ventilation
in the absence of an intact respiratory drive and allows for
synchronization of the ventilator cycle with the patient’s
inspiratory effort.
Problems can arise when ACMV is used in patients
with tachypnea because of nonrespiratory or nonmeta-
bolic factors such as anxiety,pain,or airway irritation.Res-
piratory alkalemia may develop and trigger myoclonus or
seizures. Dynamic hyperinﬂation (so-called auto-PEEP)
may occur if the patient’s respiratory mechanics are such
that inadequate time is available for complete exhalation
between inspiratory cycles. Auto-PEEP can limit venous
return, decrease cardiac output, and increase airway pres-
sures, predisposing patients to barotrauma. ACMV is not
effective for weaning patients from mechanical ventilation
because it provides full ventilator assistance on each breath.
Synchronized Intermittent Mandatory Ventilation
The major difference between synchronized intermit-
tent mandatory ventilation (SIMV) and ACMV is that
in the former the patient is allowed to breathe sponta-
neously (i.e., without ventilator assist) between delivered
ventilator breaths. However, mandatory breaths are
delivered in synchrony with the patient’s inspiratory
efforts at a frequency determined by the operator. If the
patient fails to initiate a breath, the ventilator delivers a
ﬁxed-tidal-volume breath and resets the internal timer
for the next inspiratory cycle (Fig. 27-1B). SIMV differs
from ACMV in that only the preset number of breaths is
ventilator assisted.
SIMV allows patients with an intact respiratory drive
to exercise inspiratory muscles between assisted breaths,
making it useful for both supporting and weaning intu-
bated patients. SIMV may be difﬁcult to use in patients
with tachypnea because they may attempt to exhale
during the ventilator-programmed inspiratory cycle.
When this occurs, the airway pressure may exceed the
inspiratory pressure limit, the ventilator-assisted breath
will be aborted, and minute volume may decrease below
that programmed by the operator. In this setting, if the
tachypnea is in response to respiratory or metabolic aci-
dosis, a change to ACMV will increase minute ventila-
tion and help normalize pH while the underlying
process is further evaluated and treated.
Continuous Positive Airway Pressure
This is not a true support mode of ventilation, inasmuch
as all ventilation occurs through the patient’s spontaneous
efforts.The ventilator provides fresh gas to the breathing
PaO2-airway
0
FRC
PaO2-airway
0
B
C
FRC
Spontaneous
tidal volume
Ventilator tidal
volume
Volume
cycled
Time
Airway
0
Level of CPAP
Inspiration
Expiration
FRC
Spontaneous
tidal volumes
Assist breath
"Backup" control
period = T
Control
breath
Pressure
limit
A
Tidal breath
Volume
cycled
Time
Pressure
limit
Spontaneous
breath
Ventilator-assisted 
patient-triggered breath
Ventilator-
controlled
timer-triggered
breath
"Backup" ventilator period = T
pressure
pressure
Volume
Volume
pressure
Volume
Time
FIGURE 27-1
Airway pressure and lung volume versus time proﬁles. A.
During assist control mode ventilation (ACMV). Assisted
breaths are triggered by the patient’s effort. Controlled breaths
are triggered by the ventilator timer. Every breath, whether trig-
gered by the patient or by the timer, is a complete volume-
cycled breath, with airway pressure as a dependent variable.
The pressure limit is set above the peak inspiratory pressure.
B. During synchronized intermittent mandatory ventilation
(SIMV). Spontaneous breaths occur between patient-triggered
assisted breaths and timer-triggered breaths. The tidal volume
of the spontaneous breaths is determined by the patient’s
effort and lung impedance. Assisted and controlled breaths
are volume cycled. C. During continuous positive airway pres-
sure (CPAP). Breathing is spontaneous, and no ventilator
assist is provided. The spontaneous proﬁle is superimposed
on an elevated mean airway pressure that the user speciﬁes.
FRC, functional residual capacity.
circuit with each inspiration and charges the circuit to a
constant, operator-speciﬁed pressure that can range from
0 to 20 cmH2O (Fig. 27-1C). Continuous positive airway
pressure (CPAP) is used to assess the extubation potential
in patients who have been effectively weaned and require
little ventilator support and in patients with intact respira-
tory system function who require an endotracheal tube
for airway
Pressure-Control Ventilation
Pressure-control ventilation (PCV) is time triggered,
time cycled, and pressure limited. During the inspira-
tory phase, a specified pressure is imposed at the air-
way opening throughout inspiration (Fig. 27-2A).
Because inspiratory airway pressure is specified by the
operator, tidal volume and inspiratory flow rate are
dependent rather than independent variables and are not
user specified. PCV is the preferred mode of ventila-
tion for patients in whom it is desirable to regulate
peak airway pressures, such as those with preexisting
barotrauma or postoperative thoracic surgical patients,
in whom the shear forces across a fresh suture line
should be limited.When PCV is used, minute ventila-
tion and tidal volume must be monitored; minute
ventilation is altered through changes in rate or in the
pressure-control value, which changes tidal volume.
PCV with the use of a prolonged inspiratory time has
been applied to patients with severe hypoxemic respira-
tory failure. This approach, called inverse inspiratory-
to-expiratory ratio ventilation (IRV), increases mean
distending pressures without increasing peak airway
pressures. It is thought to work in conjunction with
PEEP to open collapsed alveoli and improve oxygena-
tion, although no conclusive data are available to show
that IRV improves outcomes in clinical trials.
Pressure-Support Ventilation
This form of ventilation is patient triggered, ﬂow cycled,
and pressure limited; it is speciﬁcally designed for use in
the weaning process. During pressure-support ventila-
tion (PSV), the inspiration is terminated when inspira-
tory airﬂow decreases below a certain level; in most
ventilators, this ﬂow rate cannot be adjusted by the
operator. When PSV is used, patients receive ventilator
assist only when the ventilator detects an inspiratory
effort (Fig. 27-2B). PSV can also be used in combination
with SIMV to ensure volume-cycled backup for patients
whose respiratory drive is depressed.
PSV is well tolerated by most patients who are being
weaned; PSV parameters can be set to provide full or
nearly full ventilatory support and can be withdrawn
slowly over a period of days in a systematic fashion to
gradually load the respiratory muscles.
Noninvasive Ventilation
Noninvasive ventilator support through a tight-ﬁtting
face mask or nasal mask, traditionally used for treatment
of sleep apnea, has recently been used as primary venti-
lator support in patients with impending respiratory
failure. Noninvasive ventilation (NIV) is most frequently
used using PSV or bilevel positive airway pressure venti-
lation, inasmuch as both of these modes are well tolerated
by conscious patients and optimize patient–ventilator
synchrony. NIV has met with varying degrees of success
when applied to patients with acute or chronic respiratory
failure. The major limitation to its widespread applica-
tion has been patient intolerance because the tight-ﬁtting
mask required for NIV can cause both physical and
emotional discomfort.
262
General Approach to the Critically Ill Patient
SECTION III
Airway
0
Timer
FRC
Volume
Tidal breath
Time
A
Airway
pressure
0
Pressure-supported
patient-triggered
breath
Pressure-supported
patient-triggered
breath
Pressure-supported
patient-triggered
breath
Flow
Time
B
0
Timer cycled
Pressure
limit
Pressure
limit
End
inspiration
End
inspiration
End
inspiration
Flow
cycle
limit
pressure
triggered
FIGURE 27-2
Pressure-control ventilation (PCV). A. Airway pressure and
lung volume versus time proﬁles during PCV. All breaths are
timer triggered, timer cycled, and pressure limited. Peak air-
way pressure is set by the operator, and tidal volume is a
dependent variable. The proﬁles shown here display the pres-
sure limit as slightly higher than pressure-control level. This
need not be the case, but it is appropriate to set the pressure
limit only slightly above the pressure-control level when using
this mode of ventilation for management of the patient with
barotrauma. B. Airway pressure and airway ﬂow versus time
proﬁles during pressure-support ventilation (PSV). All breaths
are patient triggered and ﬂow cycled. Inspiration is cycled off
when the inspiratory ﬂow decreases below a predetermined
threshold internally set in the ventilator circuit. In the example
shown, the pressure limit is slightly greater than the pressure-
support level. Because each can be set independently, this
need not be the case. FRC, functional residual capacity.
Nonconventional Ventilation Strategies
Several nonconventional ventilator strategies have been
evaluated for their ability to improve oxygenation and
reduce mortality in patients with advanced hypoxemic
respiratory failure. These include high-frequency oscilla-
tory ventilation (HFOV), extracorporeal membrane oxy-
genation (ECMO), and partial liquid ventilation using
perﬂuorocarbons.Although case reports and small uncon-
trolled cohort studies have shown beneﬁt, randomized
controlled trials have failed to demonstrate consistent
improvements in outcome with any of these strategies.
Currently, these approaches should be considered as
“salvage” techniques and considered for patients with
hypoxemia refractory to conventional therapy.
Interventions Used with Ventilator Support
Open Lung Ventilation
Open lung ventilation (OLV) is not a distinct mode of
ventilation but rather a strategy for applying either
volume-cycled or PCV to patients with severe hypox-
emic respiratory failure. In OLV, the primary objectives
of ventilator support are maintenance of adequate oxy-
genation and avoidance of cyclic opening and closing of
alveolar units by selecting a tidal volume and level of
PEEP that allow the majority of units to remain inﬂated
during tidal ventilation. Achievement of eucapnia and
normal blood pH are of lower priority, and permissive
hypercapnia is accepted. Current data suggest that a small
tidal volume (i.e., 6 mL/kg) provides adequate ventila-
tory support with a lower incidence of adverse effects
than more conventional tidal volumes of 10–15 mL/kg.
Hypercapnia and consequent respiratory acidosis tend to
be well tolerated physiologically, except in patients with
signiﬁcant hemodynamic compromise, ventricular dys-
function, cardiac dysrhythmias, or increased ICP. OLV
has been used most extensively in the management of
patients with hypoxemic respiratory failure caused by
acute lung injury (ALI). Several randomized clinical tri-
als of OLV have been performed and suggest that this
strategy reduces mortality and improves gas exchange in
patients with ALI.
Prone Positioning during Mechanical Ventilation
Patients with acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS)
experience hypoxemia as a result of intrapulmonary shunt-
ing caused by regional atelectasis (Chap. 30). Collapse
occurs most extensively in dependent regions of the lung.
Prone positioning increases transdiaphragmatic pressures
in these regions by altering their position relative to the
hydrostatic pressures generated by abdominal contents.
Thus, prone positioning increases distending pressures in
these areas without the need to apply additional airway
pressures that can overdistend less damaged areas of lung
and potentially cause additional lung damage. Although
conceptually appealing and simple to implement, a ran-
domized trial in patients with ALI failed to demonstrate a
survival advantage with prone positioning despite demon-
stration of transient physiologic beneﬁt.
Nitric Oxide Administration
Nitric oxide (NO) gas has bronchodilator and pul-
monary vasodilator effects when delivered through the
airways and has been shown to improve arterial oxygena-
tion in many patients with advanced hypoxemic respira-
tory failure. Although physiologic beneﬁts have been
demonstrated in small cohort studies, randomized con-
trolled trials have failed to confirm that therapeutic
administration of NO reduces mortality in patients with
advanced hypoxemic respiratory failure.
VENTILATOR MANAGEMENT
PRINCIPLES
Most patients who are started on ventilator support
receive ACMV or SIMV because these modes ensure
user-speciﬁed backup minute ventilation.After the intu-
bated patient has been stabilized with respect to oxy-
genation, deﬁnitive therapy for the underlying process
responsible for respiratory failure is initiated. Subsequent
modiﬁcations in ventilator therapy must be provided in
parallel with changes in the patient’s clinical status. As
improvement in respiratory function is noted, the ﬁrst
priorities are to reduce PEEP and supplemental O2.
After a patient can achieve adequate arterial saturation
with an FIO2 ≤0.5 and 5 cmH2O PEEP, attempts should
be made to reduce the level of mechanical ventilatory
support. Patients previously on full ventilator support
should be switched to a mode that allows for weaning,
such as SIMV, PSV, or SIMV combined with PSV.
Ventilator therapy can then be gradually removed, as out-
lined in the section on weaning. Patients whose condi-
tion continues to deteriorate after ventilator support is
initiated may require increased O2, PEEP, and alternative
modes of ventilation such as IRV or OLV.
GENERAL SUPPORT
DURING VENTILATION
Patients started on mechanical ventilation usually require
sedation and analgesia to maintain an acceptable level of
comfort. Often, this consists of a combination of a benzo-
diazepine and opiate administered intravenously. Medica-
tions commonly used for this purpose include lorazepam,
midazolam, diazepam, morphine, and fentanyl.
Immobilized patients in the intensive care unit on
mechanical ventilator support are at increased risk for
deep venous thrombosis and decubitus ulcers.To prevent
venous thrombosis, prophylaxis in the form of subcuta-
neous heparin, pneumatic compression boots, or both is
frequently prescribed. Fractionated low-molecular-weight
heparin appears to be equally effective for this purpose.
Mechanical Ventilatory Support
263
CHAPTER 27
To help prevent decubitus ulcers, frequent changes in
body position and use of soft mattress overlays and air
mattresses are used.
Prophylaxis against diffuse gastrointestinal mucosal
injury is indicated for patients who have had a neurologic
insult or those with severe respiratory failure in association
with ARDS. Histamine receptor antagonists (H2-receptor
antagonists), antacids, and cytoprotective agents such as
carafate have all been used for this purpose and appear to
be effective. Recent data suggest that carafate use may be
associated with a reduction in the incidence of nosoco-
mial pneumonias because it does not affect stomach pH
and is less likely to permit colonization of the gastroin-
testinal tract by pathogenic organisms.
Nutrition support by enteral feeding through either a
nasogastric or an orogastric tube should be maintained
in all intubated patients whenever possible. In patients
with a normal baseline nutritional state, support should
be initiated within 7 days. In malnourished patients, nutri-
tion support should be initiated within 72 h. Delayed gas-
tric emptying is common in critically ill patients on
sedative medications but often responds to promotility
agents such as metoclopramide. Parenteral nutrition is an
alternative to enteral nutrition in patients with severe
gastrointestinal pathology.
COMPLICATIONS OF
MECHANICAL VENTILATION
Endotracheal intubation and positive-pressure mechanical
ventilation have direct and indirect effects on the lung and
upper airways, the cardiovascular system, and the gastroin-
testinal system. Pulmonary complications include baro-
trauma, nosocomial pneumonia, oxygen toxicity, tracheal
stenosis, and deconditioning of respiratory muscles.
Barotrauma, which occurs when high pressures (i.e.,
>50 cmH2O) overdistend and disrupt lung tissue, is
clinically manifest by interstitial emphysema, pneumomedi-
astinum, subcutaneous emphysema, or pneumothorax.
Although the ﬁrst three conditions may resolve sponta-
neously through the reduction of airway pressures,clinically
signiﬁcant pneumothorax requires tube thoracostomy.
Patients intubated for >72 h are at high risk for
ventilator-associated pneumonia (VAP) as a result of
aspiration from the upper airways through small leaks
around the endotracheal tube cuff; the most common
organisms responsible for this condition are Pseudomonas
aeruginosa, enteric gram-negative rods, and Staphylococcus
aureus.The diagnosis of VAP requires “protected brush”
bronchoscopic sampling of airway secretions coupled
with quantitative microbiologic techniques because this
approach avoids sample contamination with bacteria
that colonize the upper airways. Because this condition
is associated with high mortality rate, early initiation of
empirical antibiotics directed against likely pathogens is
recommended.
Hypotension resulting from elevated intrathoracic pres-
sures with decreased venous return is almost always
responsive to intravascular volume repletion. In patients
judged to have hypotension or respiratory failure on the
basis of alveolar edema, hemodynamic monitoring with
a pulmonary arterial catheter may be of value in opti-
mizing O2 delivery via manipulation of intravascular
volume and FIO2 and PEEP levels.
Gastrointestinal effects of positive-pressure ventila-
tion include stress ulceration and mild to moderate cholesta-
sis. It is common practice to provide prophylaxis with
H2-receptor antagonists or sucralfate for stress-related
ulcers. Mild cholestasis [i.e., total bilirubin values
≤68 μmol/L (≤4.0 mg/dL)] attributable to the effects of
increased intrathoracic pressures on portal vein pressures
is common and generally self-limited. Cholestasis of a
more severe degree should not be attributed to a posi-
tive-pressure ventilation response and is more likely
caused by a primary hepatic process.
WEANING FROM MECHANICAL
VENTILATION
Removal of mechanical ventilator support requires that
a number of criteria be met. Upper airway function
must be intact for a patient to remain extubated but is
difﬁcult to assess in the intubated patient.Therefore, if a
patient can breathe on his or her own through an endo-
tracheal tube but develops stridor or recurrent aspiration
when the tube is removed, upper airway dysfunction or
an abnormal swallowing mechanism should be sus-
pected and evaluated. Respiratory drive and chest wall
function are assessed by observation of respiratory rate,
tidal volume, inspiratory pressure, and vital capacity.The
weaning index, deﬁned as the ratio of breathing fre-
quency to tidal volume (breaths per minute per liter), is
both sensitive and speciﬁc for predicting the likelihood
of successful extubation. When this ratio is <105 with
the patient breathing without mechanical assistance
through an endotracheal tube, successful extubation is
likely. Alveolar ventilation is deemed adequate when
elimination of CO2 is sufﬁcient to maintain arterial pH
in the range of 7.35–7.40, and an SaO2 >90% can be
achieved with an FIO2 <0.5 and a PEEP ≤5 cmH2O.
Although many patients may not meet all criteria for
weaning, the likelihood of successful extubation increases
as more criteria are met.
Many approaches to weaning patients from ventilator
support have been advocated.Whereas T-piece and CPAP
weaning are best tolerated by patients who have under-
gone mechanical ventilation for brief periods and require
little respiratory muscle reconditioning, SIMV and PSV
are best for patients intubated for extended periods likely
to require gradual respiratory muscle reconditioning.
T-piece and CPAP weaning involve brief sponta-
neous breathing trials with supplemental O2.These trials
264
General Approach to the Critically Ill Patient
SECTION III
are usually initiated for 5 min/h followed by a 1-h
interval of rest. Trials are increased in 5- to 10-min/h
increments until the patient can remain ventilator inde-
pendent for periods of several hours. Extubation can
then be attempted.
Weaning by means of SIMV involves gradually
tapering the mandatory backup rate in increments of
2–4 breaths/min while blood gas parameters and respi-
ratory rates are monitored. Rates of >25 breaths/min on
withdrawal of mandatory ventilator breaths generally
indicate respiratory muscle fatigue and the need to com-
bine periods of exercise with rest. Exercise periods are
gradually increased until a patient remains stable on
SIMV at ≤4 breaths/min. A CPAP or T-piece trial can
then be attempted before extubation.
PSV, as described in detail above, is used primarily for
weaning from mechanical ventilation. PSV is usually ini-
tiated at a level adequate for full ventilator support
(PSVmax; i.e., PSV is set slightly below the peak inspira-
tory pressures required by the patient during volume-
cycled ventilation).The level of pressure support is then
gradually withdrawn in increments of 3–5 cmH2O until
a level is reached at which the respiratory rate increases
to 25 breaths/min. At this point, intermittent periods of
higher-pressure support are alternated with periods of
lower-pressure support to provide muscle reconditioning
while avoiding diaphragmatic fatigue. Gradual with-
drawal of PSV continues until the level of support is just
adequate to overcome the resistance of the endotracheal
tube (∼5–10 cmH2O). Support can be discontinued and
the patient extubated.
FURTHER READINGS
BOLES JM et al:Weaning from mechanical ventilation. Eur Respir J
29:1033, 2007
BROWER RG et al: Higher versus lower positive end-expiratory pres-
sures in patients with the acute respiratory distress syndrome.
N Engl J Med 351(4):327, 2004
ESTEBAN A et al: Non-invasive ventilation for respiratory failure after
extubation. N Engl J Med 350:2452, 2004
FAN E et al:Ventilatory management of acute lung injury and acute
respiratory distress syndrome. JAMA 294(22):2889, 2005
MACINTYRE NR: Current issues in mechanical ventilation for respi-
ratory failure. Chest 128(Suppl 2):561S, 2005
——— (Ed.) Controversies in mechanical ventilation. Clin Chest
Med 29(2), 2008
MERCAT A, et al: for the Expiratory Pressure Study Group. Positive
and end-expiratory pressure setting in adults with acute lung
injury and acute respiratory distress syndrome: A randomized
controlled trial. JAMA 299: 646, 2008
MICHAEL JR et al: Inhaled nitric oxide versus conventional therapy.
Am J Respir Crit Care Med 157(5):1372, 1998
PARK JE, GRIFFITHS MJ: Recent advances in mechanical ventilation.
Clin Med 5:441, 2005
SCALISE PJ,VOTTO JJ: Weaning from long term mechanical ventila-
tion. Chron Respir Dis 2:99, 2005
THE ACUTE RESPIRATORY DISTRESS SYNDROME NETWORK:Ventila-
tion with lower tidal volumes as compared with traditional tidal
volumes for acute lung injury and the acute respiratory distress
syndrome. N Engl J Med 342:1301, 2000
Mechanical Ventilatory Support
265
CHAPTER 27
Ronald V. Maier
Shock is the clinical syndrome that results from inadequate
tissue perfusion. Irrespective of cause, the hypoperfusion-
induced imbalance between the delivery of and require-
ments for oxygen and substrate leads to cellular dysfunction.
The cellular injury created by the inadequate delivery of
oxygen and substrates also induces the production and
release of inﬂammatory mediators that further compro-
mise perfusion through functional and structural
changes within the microvasculature. This leads to a
vicious circle in which impaired perfusion is responsible
for cellular injury, which causes maldistribution of blood
ﬂow, further compromising cellular perfusion; the latter
causes multiple organ failure and, if the process is not
interrupted, leads to death.The clinical manifestations of
shock are the result, in part, of autonomic neuroen-
docrine responses to hypoperfusion as well as the break-
down in organ function induced by severe cellular
dysfunction (Fig. 28-1).
When very severe or persistent, inadequate oxygen
delivery leads to irreversible cell injury; thus, only rapid
restoration of oxygen delivery can reverse the progres-
sion of the shock state. The fundamental approach to
management, therefore, is to recognize overt and
impending shock in a timely fashion and to intervene
emergently to restore perfusion. This often requires the
APPROACH TO THE PATIENT WITH SHOCK
expansion or reexpansion of intravascular blood volume.
Control of any inciting pathologic process (e.g., contin-
ued hemorrhage, impairment of cardiac function, or
infection) must occur simultaneously.
Clinical shock is usually accompanied by hypotension—
i.e., a mean arterial pressure <60 mmHg in previously
normotensive persons. Multiple classification schemes
have been developed in an attempt to synthesize the
seemingly dissimilar processes leading to shock. Strict
adherence to a classiﬁcation scheme may be difﬁcult from
a clinical standpoint because of the frequent combination
of two or more causes of shock in any individual patient,
but the classiﬁcation shown in Table 28-1 provides a
useful reference point from which to discuss and further
delineate the underlying processes.
PATHOGENESIS AND ORGAN
RESPONSE
MICROCIRCULATION
Normally, when cardiac output decreases, systemic vas-
cular resistance (SVR) increases to maintain a level of
systemic pressure that is adequate for perfusion of the
heart and brain at the expense of other tissues such as
CHAPTER 28
CHAPTER 28
266
I Pathogenesis and Organ Response . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 266
Microcirculation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 266
Cellular Responses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 268
Neuroendocrine Response . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 268
Cardiovascular Response . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 268
Pulmonary Response . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 269
Renal Response . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 269
Metabolic Derangements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 269
Inﬂammatory Responses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 269
I Speciﬁc Forms of Shock . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 271
Hypovolemic Shock . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 271
Traumatic Shock . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 274
Cardiogenic Shock . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 274
Compressive Cardiogenic Shock . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 274
Septic Shock . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 275
Neurogenic Shock . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 275
Hypoadrenal Shock . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 275
I Adjunctive Therapies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 275
Positioning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 275
Pneumatic Antishock Garment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 276
Rewarming . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 276
I Further Readings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 276
muscle, skin, and especially the gastrointestinal tract.
SVR is determined primarily by the luminal diameter
of arterioles.The metabolic rates of the heart and brain
are high, and their stores of energy substrate are low.
These organs are critically dependent on a continuous
supply of oxygen and nutrients, and neither tolerates
severe ischemia for more than brief periods.Autoregula-
tion (i.e., the maintenance of blood ﬂow over a wide
range of perfusion pressures) is critical in sustaining cere-
bral and coronary perfusion despite signiﬁcant hypoten-
sion. However, when mean arterial pressure decreases to
≤60 mmHg, ﬂow to these organs decreases, and their func-
tion deteriorates.
Arteriolar vascular smooth muscle has both α- and
β-adrenergic receptors.The α1 receptors mediate vasocon-
striction, and the β2 receptors mediate vasodilation.
Efferent sympathetic ﬁbers release norepinephrine, which
acts primarily on α1 receptors in one of the most funda-
mental compensatory responses to reduced perfusion
pressure. Other constrictor substances that are increased in
most forms of shock include angiotensin II, vasopressin,
endothelin 1, and thromboxane A2. Both norepinephrine
and epinephrine are released by the adrenal medulla, and
Approach to the Patient with Shock
267
CHAPTER 28
the concentrations of these catecholamines in the blood-
stream increase. Circulating vasodilators in shock include
prostacyclin [prostaglandin (PG) I2]; nitric oxide (NO);
and, importantly, products of local metabolism such as
adenosine that match ﬂow to the tissue’s metabolic needs.
The balance between these various vasoconstrictor and
vasodilator inﬂuences acting on the microcirculation
determines local perfusion.
Transport to cells depends on microcirculatory ﬂow;
capillary permeability; the diffusion of oxygen, carbon
dioxide, nutrients, and products of metabolism through
the interstitium; and the exchange of these products
across cell membranes. Impairment of the microcircula-
tion, which is central to the pathophysiologic responses
in the late stages of all forms of shock, results in the
derangement of cellular metabolism, which is ultimately
responsible for organ failure.
The endogenous response to mild or moderate hypov-
olemia is an attempt at restitution of intravascular volume
through alterations in hydrostatic pressure and osmolarity.
Constriction of arterioles leads to reductions in both the
capillary hydrostatic pressure and the number of capillary
beds perfused, thereby limiting the capillary surface area
across which ﬁltration occurs.When ﬁltration is reduced
while intravascular oncotic pressure remains constant or
increases, there is net reabsorption of ﬂuid into the vascular
bed, in accord with Starling’s law of capillary–interstitial
liquid exchange. Metabolic changes (including hyper-
glycemia and elevations in the products of glycolysis,
lipolysis, and proteolysis) increase extracellular osmolarity,
leading to an osmotic gradient between cells and intersti-
tium that increases interstitial and intravascular volume at
the expense of intracellular volume.
Hypovolemia
Hemorrhage
Capillary leak
Interstitial edema
↓ Cardiac compliance
↓ Cardiac output 
hypoperfusion
Apoptosis/
organ injury
Hypoxia
Dysregulated sympathetic/
neuroendocrine activation
Endothelial cell activation/damage
Diffuse bystander cell injury/ 
multiple organ dysfunction 
syndrome (MODS)
Proinflammatory phenotype/
inflammatory mediators
Innate immune 
activation
Cell damage/damage 
associated molecular 
patterns (DAMPs)
Fibrinolysis/
reperfusion
Consumptive
coagulopathy
Microvascular stasis/
thrombosis
FIGURE 28-1
Shock-induced vicious cycle.
TABLE 28-1
CLASSIFICATION OF SHOCK
Hypovolemic
Septic
Traumatic
Hyperdynamic
Cardiogenic
Hypodynamic
Intrinsic
Neurogenic
Compressive
Hypoadrenal
CELLULAR RESPONSES
Interstitial transport of nutrients is impaired in shock,
leading to a decline of intracellular high-energy phos-
phate stores. Mitochondrial dysfunction and uncoupling
of oxidative phosphorylation are the most likely causes
for decreased amounts of adenosine triphosphate (ATP).
As a consequence, there is an accumulation of hydrogen
ions, lactate, and other products of anaerobic metabo-
lism. As shock progresses, these vasodilator metabolites
override vasomotor tone, causing further hypotension
and hypoperfusion. Dysfunction of cell membranes is
thought to represent a common end-stage pathophysio-
logic pathway in the various forms of shock. Normal
cellular transmembrane potential decreases, and there is
an associated increase in intracellular sodium and water,
leading to cell swelling, which interferes further with
microvascular perfusion. In a preterminal event, home-
ostasis of calcium via membrane channels is lost with
ﬂooding of calcium intracellularly and a concomitant
extracellular hypocalcemia. There is also increasing evi-
dence for a widespread but selective apoptotic loss of
cells, contributing to organ and immune failure.
NEUROENDOCRINE RESPONSE
Hypovolemia, hypotension, and hypoxia are sensed by
baroreceptors and chemoreceptors, which contribute to
an autonomic response that attempts to restore blood
volume, maintain central perfusion, and mobilize meta-
bolic substrates. Hypotension disinhibits the vasomotor
center, resulting in increased adrenergic output and
reduced vagal activity. Release of norepinephrine from
adrenergic neurons induces peripheral and splanchnic
vasoconstriction, a major contributor to the maintenance
of central organ perfusion, and reduced vagal activity
increases the heart rate and cardiac output.Vagal tone is
also recognized to downregulate the innate immunity
inﬂammatory response. The effects of circulating epi-
nephrine released by the adrenal medulla in shock are
largely metabolic, causing increased glycogenolysis and
gluconeogenesis and reduced pancreatic insulin release.
Epinephrine also inhibits production and release of
inﬂammatory mediators through stimulation of β-adrenergic
receptors on innate immune cells.
Severe pain and other severe stress cause the hypothal-
amic release of adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH).
This stimulates cortisol secretion, which contributes to
decreased peripheral uptake of glucose and amino acids,
enhances lipolysis, and increases gluconeogenesis.
Increased pancreatic secretion of glucagon during stress
accelerates hepatic gluconeogenesis and further elevates
blood glucose concentration.These hormonal actions act
synergistically to increase blood glucose in the mainte-
nance of blood volume. Many critically ill patients have
recently been shown to exhibit low plasma cortisol levels
and an impaired response to ACTH stimulation. Low
levels of cortisol in response to stimulation are linked to a
decrease in survival. The importance of the cortisol
response to stress is illustrated by the profound circula-
tory collapse that occurs in patients with adrenal cortical
insufﬁciency.
Renin release is increased in response to adrenergic
discharge and reduced perfusion of the juxtaglomerular
apparatus in the kidney. Renin induces the formation of
angiotensin I, which is then converted to angiotensin II,
an extremely potent vasoconstrictor and stimulator of
aldosterone release by the adrenal cortex and of vaso-
pressin by the posterior pituitary.Aldosterone contributes
to the maintenance of intravascular volume by enhancing
renal tubular reabsorption of sodium, resulting in the
excretion of low-volume, concentrated, sodium-free urine.
Vasopressin has a direct action on vascular smooth muscle,
contributing to vasoconstriction, and acts on the distal renal
tubules to enhance water reabsorption.
CARDIOVASCULAR RESPONSE
Three variables—ventricular ﬁlling (preload), the resis-
tance to ventricular ejection (afterload), and myocardial
contractility—are paramount in controlling stroke vol-
ume. Cardiac output, the major determinant of tissue
perfusion, is the product of stroke volume and heart
rate. Hypovolemia leads to decreased ventricular pre-
load, which in turn reduces the stroke volume. An
increase in heart rate is a useful but limited compen-
satory mechanism to maintain cardiac output. A shock-
induced reduction in myocardial compliance is frequent,
reducing ventricular end-diastolic volume and hence
stroke volume at any given ventricular ﬁlling pressure.
Restoration of intravascular volume may return stroke
volume to normal but only at elevated ﬁlling pressures.
Increased ﬁlling pressures also stimulate release of brain
natriuretic peptide (BNP) to secrete sodium and volume
to relieve the pressure on the heart. Levels of BNP cor-
relate with outcome after severe stress. In addition, sep-
sis, ischemia, myocardial infarction, severe tissue trauma,
hypothermia, general anesthesia, prolonged hypotension,
and acidemia may all impair myocardial contractility and
reduce the stroke volume at any given ventricular end-
diastolic volume.The resistance to ventricular ejection is
signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced by the SVR, which is elevated
in most forms of shock. However, resistance is depressed
in the early hyperdynamic stage of septic shock (Chap. 29),
thereby initially allowing the cardiac output to be main-
tained or elevated.
The venous system contains nearly two-thirds of the
total circulating blood volume, most in the small veins,
and serves as a dynamic reservoir for autoinfusion of
blood. Active venoconstriction as a consequence of
α-adrenergic activity is an important compensatory mecha-
nism for the maintenance of venous return and therefore
268
General Approach to the Critically Ill Patient
SECTION III
of ventricular ﬁlling during shock. On the other hand,
venous dilatation, as occurs in neurogenic shock, reduces
ventricular ﬁlling and hence stroke volume and cardiac
output (see later).
PULMONARY RESPONSE
The response of the pulmonary vascular bed to shock
parallels that of the systemic vascular bed, and the rela-
tive increase in pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR),
particularly in septic shock, may exceed that of the
SVR. Shock-induced tachypnea reduces tidal volume
and increases both dead space and minute ventilation.
Relative hypoxia and the subsequent tachypnea induce a
respiratory alkalosis. Recumbency and involuntary
restriction of ventilation secondary to pain reduce func-
tional residual capacity and may lead to atelectasis.
Shock is recognized as a major cause of acute lung injury
and subsequent acute respiratory distress syndrome
(ARDS; Chap. 30).These disorders are characterized by
noncardiogenic pulmonary edema secondary to diffuse
pulmonary capillary endothelial and alveolar epithelial
injury, hypoxemia, and bilateral diffuse pulmonary inﬁl-
trates. Hypoxemia results from perfusion of underventi-
lated and nonventilated alveoli. Loss of surfactant and
lung volume in combination with increased interstitial
and alveolar edema reduces lung compliance.The work
of breathing and the oxygen requirements of respiratory
muscles increase.
RENAL RESPONSE
Acute renal failure (Chap. 37), a serious complication of
shock and hypoperfusion, occurs less frequently than
heretofore because of early aggressive volume repletion.
Acute tubular necrosis is now more frequently seen as a
result of the interactions of shock, sepsis, the administra-
tion of nephrotoxic agents (e.g., aminoglycosides and
angiographic contrast media), and rhabdomyolysis; the
latter may be particularly severe in skeletal muscle
trauma. The physiologic response of the kidney to
hypoperfusion is to conserve salt and water. In addition
to decreased renal blood ﬂow, increased afferent arterio-
lar resistance accounts for diminished glomerular ﬁltra-
tion rate, which together with increased aldosterone and
vasopressin is responsible for reduced urine formation.
Toxic injury causes necrosis of tubular epithelium and
tubular obstruction by cellular debris with back-leak of
ﬁltrate. The depletion of renal ATP stores that occurs
with prolonged renal hypoperfusion contributes to sub-
sequent impairment of renal function.
METABOLIC DERANGEMENTS
During shock, there is disruption of the normal cycles
of carbohydrate, lipid, and protein metabolism.Through
the citric acid cycle, alanine in conjunction with lactate
(which is converted from pyruvate in the periphery in
the presence of oxygen deprivation) enhances the
hepatic production of glucose.With reduced availability
of oxygen, the breakdown of glucose to pyruvate and
ultimately lactate represents an inefficient cycling of
substrate with minimal net energy production. An ele-
vated plasma lactate/pyruvate ratio is consistent with
anaerobic metabolism and reﬂects inadequate tissue per-
fusion. Decreased clearance of exogenous triglycerides
coupled with increased hepatic lipogenesis causes a sig-
niﬁcant increase in serum triglyceride concentrations.
There is increased protein catabolism; a negative nitro-
gen balance; and, if the process is prolonged, severe mus-
cle wasting.
INFLAMMATORY RESPONSES
Activation of an extensive network of proinﬂammatory
mediator systems plays a signiﬁcant role in the progres-
sion of shock and contributes importantly to the devel-
opment of organ injury and failure (Fig. 28-2). In
patients who survive the acute insult, there is a delayed
endogenous counterregulatory response to “turn off”
the excessive proinflammatory response. If balance is
restored, the patient does well. If the immunosuppressive
response is excessive, the patient is highly susceptible to
secondary nosocomial infections, which can then drive
the inﬂammatory response and lead to delayed multiple
organ failure.
Multiple humoral mediators are activated during shock
and tissue injury. The complement cascade, activated
through both the classic and alternate pathways, generates
the anaphylatoxins C3a and C5a. Direct complement ﬁx-
ation to injured tissues can progress to the C5–C9 attack
complex, causing further cell damage. Activation of the
coagulation cascade (Chap. 41) causes microvascular
thrombosis, with subsequent fibrinolysis leading to
repeated episodes of ischemia and reperfusion. Compo-
nents of the coagulation system, such as thrombin, are
potent proinﬂammatory mediators that cause expression
of adhesion molecules on endothelial cells and activation
of neutrophils, leading to microvascular injury. Coagula-
tion also activates the kallikrein–kininogen cascade, con-
tributing to hypotension.
Eicosanoids are vasoactive and immunomodulatory
products of arachidonic acid metabolism that include
cyclooxygenase-derived PGs and thromboxane A2 as well
as lipoxygenase-derived leukotrienes and lipoxins.
Thromboxane A2 is a potent vasoconstrictor that con-
tributes to the pulmonary hypertension and acute tubular
necrosis of shock. PGI2 and PGE2 are potent vasodilators
that enhance capillary permeability and edema formation.
The cysteinyl leukotrienes LTC4 and LTD4 are pivotal
mediators of the vascular sequelae of anaphylaxis as well
as of shock states resulting from sepsis or tissue injury.
Approach to the Patient with Shock
269
CHAPTER 28
LTB4 is a potent neutrophil chemoattractant and sec-
retagogue that stimulates the formation of reactive
oxygen species. Platelet-activating factor, an ether-linked,
arachidonyl-containing phospholipid mediator, causes pul-
monary vasoconstriction, bronchoconstriction, systemic
vasodilation, increased capillary permeability, and the
priming of macrophages and neutrophils to produce
enhanced levels of inﬂammatory mediators.
Tumor necrosis factor α (TNF α), produced by acti-
vated macrophages, reproduces many components of the
shock state, including hypotension, lactic acidosis, and
respiratory failure. Interleukin 1β (IL-1β), produced by
tissue-ﬁxed macrophages, is critical to the inﬂammatory
response. Both are signiﬁcantly elevated immediately after
trauma and shock. IL-6, also produced predominantly by
the macrophage, has a slightly delayed peak response but
is the best predictor of prolonged recovery and develop-
ment of multiple organ failure after shock. Chemokines
such as IL-8 are potent neutrophil chemoattractants and
activators that upregulate adhesion molecules on the neu-
trophil to enhance aggregation, adherence, and damage to
the vascular endothelium. Although the endothelium
normally produces NO, the inﬂammatory response stim-
ulates the inducible isoform of NO synthase (iNOS),
which is overexpressed and produces toxic nitrosyl- and
oxygen-derived free radicals that contribute to the hyper-
dynamic cardiovascular response in sepsis.
Multiple inflammatory cells, including neutrophils,
macrophages, and platelets, are major contributors to
inﬂammation-induced injury. Margination of activated
neutrophils in the microcirculation is a common patho-
logic ﬁnding in shock, causing secondary injury because
of the release of toxic oxygen radicals, lipases, and pro-
teases. Tissue-ﬁxed macrophages produce virtually all
major components of the inﬂammatory response and
orchestrate the progression and duration of the inﬂam-
matory response. A major source of activation of the
monocyte/macrophage is through the highly conserved
membrane Toll-like receptors (TLRs), which recognize
damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) and
pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) released
after tissue injury and by pathogenic microbial organ-
isms, respectively. TLRs also appear important for the
chronic inﬂammation seen in Crohn’s disease, ulcerative
colitis, and transplant rejection.
270
General Approach to the Critically Ill Patient
SECTION III
Shock
Hypoperfusion/hypoxia
Stasis/coagulopathy/complement activation
Reoxygenation/cell injury
Activation of innate immunity
Monocytes/Macrophage
• Cytokines
 • TNF α, IL-1β, IL-6, IL-12, 
IL-18, PGE2, TGF-β
• Chemokines
 • IL-8
• Activators
 • Platelet activating factor (PAF)
 • Neutrophil activating factor 
(NAF)
 • Monocyte chemoattractant 
protein (MCP-1)
• Antigen presentation
 • ↓HLA-DR
Neutrophils
• ↑Adherence
 • B2 integrins
• Oxidative burst
 • Reactive oxygen 
species (ROS)
• Degranulation
 • Elastase
 • Phospholipase A2 
(PLA2)
• ↓Bactericidal activity
Lymphocytes
• TH1→TH2
 • ↓IL-2, IL-2R, 
IFN-γ, TNF-β
 • ↑IL-4, IL-10, 
IL-5, IL-13
Coagulation/ 
Complement
↑C3a
↑C5a
↑Thrombin
↑D-Dimers
↓Antithrombin III 
(AT III)
↓Activated protein 
C (APC)
Biomarkers/Modifiers
C-reactive protein (CRP)
Procalcitonin (PCT)
Lipopolysaccharide binding 
protein (LBP)
High mobility group band-1 
(HMGB-1)
Brain natriuretic peptide (BNP)
Neopterin (NPT)
IL-1 receptor antagonist 
(IL-1ra)
TNF receptors I/II (TNFR I/II)
FIGURE 28-2
A schematic of the host immunoinﬂammatory response to shock. IL, interleukin; PGE2, prostaglandin E2; TGF-β,
transforming growth factor β; TNF α, tumor necrosis factor α.
Approach to the Patient:
SHOCK
MONITORING
Patients in shock require care in an
intensive care unit (ICU). Careful and continuous
assessment of the physiologic status is necessary.Arte-
rial pressure through an indwelling line, pulse, and
respiratory rate should be monitored continuously; a
Foley catheter should be inserted to follow urine
ﬂow; and mental status should be assessed frequently.
Sedated patients should be allowed to awaken (“drug
holiday”) daily to assess their neurologic status and to
shorten the duration of ventilator support.
There is ongoing debate as to the indications for
using the ﬂow-directed pulmonary artery catheter
(PAC; Swan-Ganz catheter). Most patients in the
ICU can be safely managed without the use of a
PAC. However, in patients with signiﬁcant ongoing
blood loss, ﬂuid shifts, and underlying cardiac dys-
function, a PAC may be useful. The PAC is placed
percutaneously via the subclavian or jugular vein
through the central venous circulation and right
heart into the pulmonary artery.There are ports both
proximal in the right atrium and distal in the pul-
monary artery to provide access for infusions and for
cardiac output measurements. Right atrial and pul-
monary artery pressures are measured, and the pul-
monary capillary wedge pressure (PCWP) serves as
an approximation of the left atrial pressure. Normal
hemodynamic parameters are shown in Table 28-2.
Cardiac output is determined by the thermodilu-
tion technique, and high-resolution thermistors can
also be used to determine right ventricular end-
diastolic volume to monitor further the response of
the right heart to ﬂuid resuscitation.A PAC with an
oximeter port offers the additional advantage of
online monitoring of the mixed venous oxygen sat-
uration, an important index of tissue perfusion. SVR
and PVR are calculated as the ratio of the pressure
decrease across these vascular beds to the cardiac
output. Determinations of oxygen content in arterial
and venous blood, together with cardiac output and
hemoglobin concentration, allow calculation of oxy-
gen delivery, oxygen consumption, and oxygen-
extraction ratio (Table 28-3). The hemodynamic
patterns associated with the various forms of shock
are shown in Table 28-4.
In resuscitation from shock, it is critical to restore
tissue perfusion and optimize oxygen delivery,
hemodynamics, and cardiac function rapidly. A rea-
sonable goal of therapy is to achieve normal mixed
venous oxygen saturation and arteriovenous oxygen-
extraction ratio.To enhance oxygen delivery, red cell
mass, arterial oxygen saturation, and cardiac output
may be augmented singly or simultaneously. An
increase in oxygen delivery not accompanied by an
increase in oxygen consumption implies that oxygen
availability is adequate and that oxygen consumption
is not ﬂow dependent. Conversely, an elevation of
oxygen consumption with increased cardiac output
implies that the oxygen supply was inadequate. A
reduction in SVR accompanying an increase in cardiac
output indicates that compensatory vasoconstriction
is reversing because of improved tissue perfusion.
The determination of stepwise expansion of blood
volume on cardiac performance allows identiﬁcation
of the optimum preload (Starling’s law). An algo-
rithm for the resuscitation of patients in shock is
shown in Fig. 28-3.
Approach to the Patient with Shock
271
CHAPTER 28
TABLE 28-2
NORMAL HEMODYNAMIC PARAMETERS
PARAMETER
CALCULATION
NORMAL VALUES
Cardiac output (CO)
SV × HR
4–8 L/min
Cardiac index (CI)
CO/BSA
2.6–4.2 (L/min)/m2
Stroke volume (SV)
CO/HR
50–100 mL/beat
Systemic vascular resistance (SVR)
[(MAP −RAP)/CO] × 80
700–1600 dynes · s/cm5
Pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR)
[(PAPm −PCWP)/CO] × 80
20–130 dynes · s/cm5
Left ventricular stroke work (LVSW)
SV(MAP −PCWP) × 0.0136
60–80 g-m/beat
Right ventricular stroke work (RVSW)
SV(PAPm −RAP)
10–15 g-m/beat
Note: BSA, body surface area; HR, heart rate; MAP, mean arterial pressure; PAPm, pulmonary artery pressure—mean;
PCWP, pulmonary capillary wedge pressure; RAP, right atrial pressure.
SPECIFIC FORMS OF SHOCK
HYPOVOLEMIC SHOCK
This most common form of shock results either from the
loss of red blood cell mass and plasma from hemorrhage
or from the loss of plasma volume alone arising from
extravascular ﬂuid sequestration or gastrointestinal, uri-
nary, and insensible losses. The signs and symptoms of
nonhemorrhagic hypovolemic shock are the same as
those of hemorrhagic shock, although they may have a
more insidious onset. The normal physiologic response
to hypovolemia is to maintain perfusion of the brain and
heart while restoring an effective circulating blood vol-
ume.There is an increase in sympathetic activity, hyper-
ventilation, collapse of venous capacitance vessels, release
of stress hormones, and an attempt to limit the loss of
intravascular volume through the recruitment of intersti-
tial and intracellular ﬂuid and reduction of urine output.
Mild hypovolemia (≤20% of the blood volume) gen-
erates mild tachycardia but relatively few external signs,
especially in a supine, resting young patient (Table 28-5).
With moderate hypovolemia (∼20–40% of the blood
volume), the patient becomes increasingly anxious and
tachycardic; although normal blood pressure may be
maintained in the supine position, there may be signiﬁ-
cant postural hypotension and tachycardia. If hypov-
olemia is severe (≥40% of the blood volume), the classic
signs of shock appear; the blood pressure declines and
becomes unstable even in the supine position, and the
patient develops marked tachycardia, oliguria, and agita-
tion or confusion. Perfusion of the central nervous sys-
tem is well maintained until shock becomes severe.
Hence, mental obtundation is an ominous clinical sign.
The transition from mild to severe hypovolemic shock
can be insidious or extremely rapid. If severe shock is
not reversed rapidly, especially in elderly patients and
those with comorbid illnesses, death is imminent.A very
narrow time frame separates the derangements found in
severe shock that can be reversed with aggressive resus-
citation from those of progressive decompensation and
irreversible cell injury.
Diagnosis
Hypovolemic shock is readily diagnosed when there are
signs of hemodynamic instability and the source of vol-
ume loss is obvious.The diagnosis is more difﬁcult when
the source of blood loss is occult, as into the gastroin-
testinal tract, or when plasma volume alone is depleted.
After acute hemorrhage, hemoglobin and hematocrit
values do not change until compensatory ﬂuid shifts
have occurred or exogenous ﬂuid is administered.Thus,
an initial normal hematocrit does not disprove the
272
General Approach to the Critically Ill Patient
SECTION III
TABLE 28-3
OXYGEN TRANSPORT CALCULATIONS
PARAMETER
CALCULATION
NORMAL VALUES
Oxygen-carrying capacity of hemoglobin 
1.39 mL/g
Plasma O2 concentration
PO2 × 0.0031
Arterial O2 concentration (CaO2)
1.39 SaO2 + 0.0031 PaO2
20 vol%
Venous O2 concentration (CvO2)
1.39 SvO2 + 0.0031 PvO2
15.5 vol%
Arteriovenous O2 difference (CaO2 −CvO2)
1.39 (SaO2 −SvO2) + 0.0031 (PaO2 −PvO2)
3.5 vol%
Oxygen delivery (DO2)
CaO2 × CO (L/min) × 10 (dL/L)
800–1600 mL/min
1.39 SaO2 × CO × 10
Oxygen uptake (VO2)
(CaO2 −CvO2) × CO × 10
150–400 mL/min
1.39 (SaO2 −SvO2) × CO × 10
Oxygen delivery index (DO2I)
DO2/BSA
520–720 (mL/min)/m2
Oxygen uptake index (VO2I)
VO2/BSA
115–165 (mL/min)/m2
Oxygen extraction ratio (O2ER)
[1 −(
.
VO2/
.
DO2)] × 100 
22–32%
Note: BSA, body surface area; CO, cardiac output; PaO2, partial pressure of O2 in arterial blood; PO2, partial pressure of oxygen;
PvO2, partial pressure of O2 in venous blood; SaO2, saturation of hemoglobin with O2 in arterial blood; SvO2, saturation of hemo-
globin with O2 in venous blood.
TABLE 28-4
PHYSIOLOGIC CHARACTERISTICS OF THE VARIOUS FORMS OF SHOCK
SYSTEMIC
CVP AND 
CARDIAC 
VASCULAR 
VENOUS O2
TYPE OF SHOCK
PCWP
OUTPUT
RESISTANCE
SATURATION
Hypovolemic
↓
↓
↑
↓
Cardiogenic
↑
↓
↑
↓
Septic
Hyperdynamic
↓↑
↑
↓
↑
Hypodynamic
↓↑
↓
↑
↑↓
Traumatic
↓
↓↑
↑↓
↓
Neurogenic
↓
↓
↓
↓
Hypoadrenal
↓↑
↓
=↓
↓
Note: CVP, central venous pressure; PCWP, pulmonary capillary wedge pressure.
presence of signiﬁcant blood loss. Plasma losses cause
hemoconcentration, and free water loss leads to hyper-
natremia.These ﬁndings should suggest the presence of
hypovolemia.
It is essential to distinguish between hypovolemic and
cardiogenic shock (Chap. 31) because deﬁnitive therapy
differs signiﬁcantly. Both forms are associated with a
reduced cardiac output and a compensatory sympathetic
mediated response characterized by tachycardia and ele-
vated SVR. However, the ﬁndings in cardiogenic shock
of jugular venous distention, rales, and an S3 gallop dis-
tinguish it from hypovolemic shock and signify that
ongoing volume expansion is undesirable.
Approach to the Patient with Shock
273
CHAPTER 28
Monitor CI deterioration
Maintain optimal PCWP*
• Crystalloid
• Blood (Hct ≥30)
Hypotension and/or Tachycardia
• Airway control
• Assure ventilation
• Augment circulation
  (crystalloid +/– blood)
Consider cardiac dysfunction
or tamponade
• ECHO
• Treat appropriately
VS Unstable
HR >120 and/or SBP<90
VS Normalized
Definitive W/U
Insert PAC
VS unstable or acidosis worsens
Central monitoring
CVP <15
CVP >15
CI <3.5; 15< PCWP <25
Administer crystalloid +/– blood
   • Hct >30
   • CVP >15
Administer 500 mL crystalloid
boluses until preload     maximal CI
(Starling curve)
CI <3.5; PCWP <15
Administer crystalloid
+/– blood
PCWP >15, Hct >30
*
*
CI <3.5; PCWP >25
• Inotrope as indicated
• Consider ECHO
FIGURE 28-3
An algorithm for the resuscitation of the patient in shock.
*Monitor saturation of hemoglobin with O2 in venous blood
(Svo2), systemic vascular resistance index (SVRI), and right-
ventricular end-diastolic volume index (RVEDVI) as additional
markers of correction for perfusion and hypovolemia. Consider
age-adjusted cardiac index (CI); CI is shown in (L/min) per m2.
CVP, central venous pressure; ECHO, echocardiogram; Hct,
hematocrit; HR, heart rate; PAC, pulmonary artery catheter;
PCWP, pulmonary capillary wedge pressure in mmHg; SBP,
systolic blood pressure; VS, vital signs; W/U, workup.
TABLE 28-5
HYPOVOLEMIC SHOCK
MILD (<20% 
MODERATE (20–40% SEVERE (>40%
BLOOD VOLUME)
BLOOD VOLUME)
BLOOD VOLUME)
Cool extremities
Same, plus:
Same, plus:
Increased
Tachycardia
Hemodynamic
capillary reﬁll
Tachypnea
instability
time
Oliguria
Marked
Diaphoresis
Postural 
tachycardia
Collapsed veins
changes
Hypotension
Anxiety
Mental status
deterioration
(coma)
Treatment:
HYPOVOLEMIC SHOCK
Initial resuscitation requires rapid reexpansion of the cir-
culating intravascular blood volume along with inter-
ventions to control ongoing losses. In accordance with
Starling’s law,stroke volume and cardiac output increase
with the increase in preload.After resuscitation, the com-
pliance of the ventricles may remain reduced because of
increased interstitial ﬂuid in the myocardium. Therefore,
elevated ﬁlling pressures are required to maintain ade-
quate ventricular performance.
Volume resuscitation is initiated with the rapid infu-
sion of isotonic saline (although care must be taken to
avoid hyperchloremic acidosis from loss of bicarbonate
buffering capacity and replacement with excess chlo-
ride) or a balanced salt solution such as Ringer’s lactate
through large-bore IV lines. No distinct beneﬁt from the
use of colloid has been demonstrated, and in trauma
patients, it is associated with a higher mortality, particu-
larly in patients with traumatic brain injury.The infusion
of 2–3 L of salt solution over 20–30 min should restore
normal hemodynamic parameters. Continued hemody-
namic instability implies that shock has not been
reversed or that there are signiﬁcant ongoing blood or
volume losses. Continuing blood loss, with hemoglobin
concentrations declining to ≤100 g/L (10 g/dL), should
initiate blood transfusion, preferably as fully cross-
matched blood. In extreme emergencies, type-speciﬁc
or O-negative packed red cells may be transfused. In the
presence of severe or prolonged hypovolemia, inotropic
support with dopamine, vasopressin, or dobutamine
may be required to maintain adequate ventricular per-
formance after the blood volume has been restored.
Infusion of norepinephrine to increase arterial pressure
by increasing peripheral resistance is inappropriate,
other than as a temporizing measure in severe shock
while blood volume is reexpanded. After hemorrhage
has been controlled and the patient has stabilized,
blood transfusions should not be continued unless the
hemoglobin is <∼7 g/dL. Studies have demonstrated an
increased survival in patients treated with this restric-
tive blood transfusion protocol.
Successful resuscitation also requires support of res-
piratory function. Supplemental oxygen should be pro-
vided,and endotracheal intubation may be necessary to
maintain arterial oxygenation. After resuscitation from
isolated hemorrhagic shock, end-organ damage is fre-
quently less than after septic or traumatic shock. This
may be because of the absence of the massive activa-
tion of inﬂammatory mediator response systems and
the consequent nonspeciﬁc organ injury seen in the lat-
ter conditions.
microcirculatory injury. Recent evidence demonstrates
release of mediators induced by DAMPs from injured
tissue that are recognized by the highly conserved mem-
brane receptors of the TLR family (see Inﬂammatory
Responses earlier in the chapter). These receptors on the
cells of the innate immune system, particularly the circu-
lating monocyte, tissue-ﬁxed macrophage, and dendritic
cell, are potent activators of an excessive proinﬂamma-
tory phenotype in response to cellular injury.This causes
secondary tissue injury and maldistribution of blood
ﬂow, intensifying tissue ischemia and leading to multiple
organ system failure. In addition, direct trauma to the
heart, chest, or head can also contribute to the shock.
For example, pericardial tamponade or tension pneu-
mothorax impairs ventricular ﬁlling, and myocardial
contusion depresses myocardial contractility.
274
General Approach to the Critically Ill Patient
SECTION III
TRAUMATIC SHOCK
Shock after trauma is, in large measure, due to hypov-
olemia. However, even when hemorrhage has been con-
trolled, patients can continue to have a loss of plasma
volume into the interstitium of injured tissues. These
ﬂuid losses are compounded by injury-induced inﬂam-
matory responses, which contribute to the secondary
Treatment:
TRAUMATIC SHOCK
An inability of the patient to maintain a systolic blood
pressure ≥90 mmHg after trauma-induced hypovolemia
is associated with a mortality rate of ∼50%. To prevent
decompensation of homeostatic mechanisms, therapy
must be promptly administered.
The initial management of the seriously injured patient
requires attention to the “ABCs”of resuscitation:assurance
of an airway (A), adequate ventilation (breathing, B),
and establishment of an adequate blood volume to
support the circulation (C). Control of ongoing hemor-
rhage requires immediate attention.Early stabilization of
fractures, debridement of devitalized or contaminated
tissues, and evacuation of hematomata all reduce the
subsequent inﬂammatory response to the initial insult
and minimize subsequent diffuse organ injury. Supple-
mentation of depleted endogenous antioxidants also
reduces subsequent organ failure and mortality.
CARDIOGENIC SHOCK
See Chap. 31.
COMPRESSIVE CARDIOGENIC SHOCK
With compression, the heart and surrounding structures
are less compliant, and thus normal ﬁlling pressures gener-
ate inadequate diastolic ﬁlling. Blood or ﬂuid within the
poorly distensible pericardial sac may cause tamponade.
Any cause of increased intrathoracic pressure, such as
tension pneumothorax, herniation of abdominal viscera
through a diaphragmatic hernia, or excessive positive pres-
sure ventilation to support pulmonary function, can also
cause compressive cardiogenic shock while simultaneously
impeding venous return. Although initially responsive to
increased ﬁlling pressures produced by volume expansion,
as compression increases, cardiogenic shock recurs. The
window of opportunity gained by volume loading may be
very brief until irreversible shock recurs. Diagnosis and
intervention must occur urgently.
The diagnosis of compressive cardiogenic shock is
most frequently based on clinical ﬁndings, the chest radi-
ograph, and an echocardiogram. The diagnosis of com-
pressive cardiac shock may be more difﬁcult to establish
in the setting of trauma when hypovolemia and cardiac
compression are present simultaneously.The classic ﬁnd-
ings of pericardial tamponade include the triad of
hypotension, neck vein distention, and mufﬂed heart
sounds. Pulsus paradoxus (i.e., an inspiratory reduction
in systolic pressure >10 mmHg) may also be noted.The
diagnosis is conﬁrmed by echocardiography, and treat-
ment consists of immediate pericardiocentesis.A tension
pneumothorax produces ipsilateral decreased breath
sounds, tracheal deviation away from the affected thorax,
and jugular venous distention. Radiographic ﬁndings
include increased intrathoracic volume, depression of the
diaphragm of the affected hemithorax, and shifting of
the mediastinum to the contralateral side. Chest decom-
pression must be carried out immediately. Release of air
and restoration of normal cardiovascular dynamics are
both diagnostic and therapeutic.
SEPTIC SHOCK
See Chap. 29.
NEUROGENIC SHOCK
Interruption of sympathetic vasomotor input after a
high cervical spinal cord injury, inadvertent cephalad
migration of spinal anesthesia, or devastating head injury
may result in neurogenic shock. In addition to arteriolar
dilatation, venodilation causes pooling in the venous sys-
tem, which decreases venous return and cardiac output.
The extremities are often warm, in contrast to the usual
vasoconstriction-induced coolness in hypovolemic or
cardiogenic shock. Treatment involves a simultaneous
approach to the relative hypovolemia and to the loss of
vasomotor tone. Excessive volumes of fluid may be
required to restore normal hemodynamics if given alone.
After hemorrhage has been ruled out, norepinephrine
or a pure α-adrenergic agent (phenylephrine) may be
necessary to augment vascular resistance and maintain
an adequate mean arterial pressure.
HYPOADRENAL SHOCK
The normal host response to the stress of illness,operation,
or trauma requires that the adrenal glands hypersecrete
cortisol in excess of that normally required. Hypoadrenal
shock occurs in settings in which unrecognized adrenal
insufﬁciency complicates the host response to the stress
induced by acute illness or major surgery. Adrenocortical
insufﬁciency may occur as a consequence of the chronic
administration of high doses of exogenous glucocorti-
coids. In addition, recent studies have shown that critical
illness, including trauma and sepsis, may also induce a rela-
tive hypoadrenal state. Other, less common causes include
adrenal insufficiency secondary to idiopathic atrophy,
tuberculosis, metastatic disease, bilateral hemorrhage, and
amyloidosis.The shock produced by adrenal insufﬁciency
is characterized by loss of homeostasis with reductions in
SVR, hypovolemia, and reduced cardiac output.The diag-
nosis of adrenal insufﬁciency may be established by means
of an ACTH stimulation test.
Approach to the Patient with Shock
275
CHAPTER 28
Treatment:
HYPOADRENAL SHOCK
In a persistently hemodynamically unstable patient, 4 mg
of dexamethasone sodium phosphate should be given
IV. This agent is preferred if empiric therapy is required
because, unlike hydrocortisone, it does not interfere
with the ACTH stimulation test. If the diagnosis of
absolute or relative adrenal insufﬁciency is established
as shown by nonresponse to corticotropin stimulation
(cortisol ≤9 μg/dL change poststimulation), the patient
has a reduced risk of death if treated with hydrocorti-
sone (100 mg every 6–8 h) and tapered as the patient
achieves hemodynamic stability. Simultaneous volume
resuscitation and pressor support are required.The need
for simultaneous mineralocoid is unclear.
ADJUNCTIVE THERAPIES
The sympathomimetic amines dobutamine, dopamine,
and norepinephrine are widely used in the treatment of
all forms of shock. Dobutamine is inotropic with simulta-
neous afterload reduction, thus minimizing cardiac
oxygen consumption increases as cardiac output increases.
Dopamine is an inotropic and chronotropic agent that
also supports vascular resistance in those whose blood
pressure will not tolerate peripheral vascular dilatation.
Norepinephrine primarily supports blood pressure
through vasoconstriction and increases myocardial oxygen
consumption while placing marginally perfused tissues,
such as the extremities and splanchnic organs, at risk for
necrosis, but it is also inotropic without chronotropy.
Arginine-vasopressin (antidiuretic hormone) is also being
used increasingly and may better protect vital organ blood
ﬂow and prevent pathologic vasodilation.
POSITIONING
Positioning of the patient may be a valuable adjunct in
the initial treatment of hypovolemic shock. Elevating
the foot of the bed (i.e., placing it on “shock blocks”)
and assumption of the Trendelenburg position without
ﬂexion at the knees are effective but may increase work
of breathing and risk for aspiration. Simply elevating
both legs may be the optimal approach.
PNEUMATIC ANTISHOCK GARMENT
The pneumatic antishock garment (PASG) and the mili-
tary antishock trousers (MAST) are inﬂatable external
compression devices that can be wrapped around the legs
and abdomen and have been widely used in the prehos-
pital setting as a means of providing temporary support
of central hemodynamics in shock. However, they cause
a signiﬁcant increase in SVR and blood pressure by arte-
rial compression without causing a signiﬁcant change in
cardiac output or tissue perfusion.The most appropriate
use appears to be as a means to tamponade and to pre-
vent ongoing bleeding and augment hemostasis. Inﬂation
of the suit provides splinting of fractures of the pelvis and
lower extremities and helps to arrest hemorrhage.
REWARMING
Hypothermia is a potential adverse consequence of mas-
sive volume resuscitation.The infusion of large volumes of
refrigerated blood products and room-temperature crystal-
loid solutions can rapidly decrease core temperatures if
ﬂuid is not run through warming devices. Hypothermia
may depress cardiac contractility and thereby further
impair cardiac output and oxygen delivery. Hypothermia,
particularly temperatures <35°C, directly impairs the
coagulation pathway, sometimes causing signiﬁcant coagu-
lopathy. Rapid rewarming to >35°C signiﬁcantly decreases
the requirement for blood products and produces an
improvement in cardiac function. The most effective
method for rewarming is endovascular countercurrent
warmers through femoral vein cannulation.This process
does not require a pump and can rewarm from
30–35°C in <30 min.
FURTHER READINGS
ANNANE D et al: Effect of treatment with low doses of hydrocorti-
sone and ﬂudrocortisone on mortality in patients with septic
shock. JAMA 288:862, 2002
ANZICS CLINICAL TRIALS GROUP: Low-dose dopamine in patients
with early renal dysfunction: A placebo-controlled randomized
trial. Lancet 356:2139, 2000
ARDS CLINICAL TRIALS NETWORK: Pulmonary-artery versus central
venous catheter to guide treatment of acute lung injury. N
Engl J Med 354:2213, 2006
CHEN P: Vasopressin: New uses in critical care. Am J Med Sci
324:146, 2002
EGI M et al: Selecting a vasopressor drug for vasoplegic shock after
adult cardiac surgery; a systematic literature review. Ann Thor
Surg 83:715, 2007
ENGLEHART MS et al: Measurement of acid-base resuscitation end-
points: lactate, base deﬁcit, bicarbonate or what? Curr Opin Crit
Care 12:569, 2006
FINFER S et al:A comparison of albumin and saline for ﬂuid resusci-
tation in the intensive care unit. N Engl J Med 350:2247, 2004
GONZALES EA et al: Fresh frozen plasma should be given earlier to
patients receiving massive transfusion. J Trauma 62:112, 2007
HEBERT PC et al: Clinical consequence of anemia and red cell trans-
fusion in the critically ill. Crit Care Clin 20:225, 2004
JABRE P et al: Etomidate versus ketamine for rapid sequence intuba-
tion in acutely ill patients: A multicentre randomised controlled
trial. Lancet 374:293, 2009
JONES AE et al: Goal-directed hemodynamic optimization in the
post-cardiac arrest syndrome: A systematic review. Resuscitation
77:26, 2008
MATSUDA N et al: Systemic inﬂammatory response syndrom (SIRS):
Molecular pathophysiology and gene therapy. J Pharmacol Sci
101:189, 2006
MOORE FA et al:The next generation in shock resuscitation. Lancet
363:1988, 2004
OSUCHOWSKI MF
et al: Circulating cytokine/inhibitor proﬁles
reshape the understanding of SIRS/CARS continuum in sepsis
and predict mortality. J Immunol 177:1967, 2006
RIVERS EP et al:The inﬂuence of early hemodynamic optimization
on biomarker patterns of severe sepsis and septic shock. Crit
Care Med 35:2016, 2007
ROMICS L Jr et al:The emerging role of toll-like receptor pathways
in surgical diseases.Arch Surg 141:595, 2006
SPRUNG CL et al: Hydrocortisone therapy for patients with septic
shock. N Engl J Med 358:111, 2008
THE SAFE STUDY INVESTIGATORS: Saline or albumin for ﬂuid resusci-
tation in patients with traumatic brain injury. N Engl J Med
537:874, 2007
276
General Approach to the Critically Ill Patient
SECTION III
COMMON CRITICAL
ILLNESSES AND
SYNDROMES
SECTION IV
Robert S. Munford
DEFINITIONS
(Table 29-1) Animals mount both local and systemic
responses to microbes that traverse epithelial barriers and
invade underlying tissues. Fever or hypothermia, leukocy-
tosis or leukopenia, tachypnea, and tachycardia are the car-
dinal signs of the systemic response often called the systemic
inﬂammatory response syndrome (SIRS). SIRS may have an
infectious or a noninfectious etiology. If infection is sus-
pected or proven, a patient with SIRS is said to have sepsis.
When sepsis is associated with dysfunction of organs distant
from the site of infection, the patient has severe sepsis. Severe
sepsis may be accompanied by hypotension or evidence of
hypoperfusion.When hypotension cannot be corrected by
infusing ﬂuids, the diagnosis is septic shock.These deﬁnitions
were proposed by consensus conference committees in
1992 and 2001 and are now widely used; there is evidence
that the different stages form a continuum. As sepsis pro-
gresses to septic shock, the risk of dying increases substan-
tially.Whereas sepsis is usually reversible,patients with septic
shock often succumb despite aggressive therapy.
ETIOLOGY
Severe sepsis can be a response to any class of microor-
ganism. Microbial invasion of the bloodstream is not
SEVERE SEPSIS AND SEPTIC SHOCK
essential for the development of severe sepsis because
local inﬂammation can also elicit distant organ dysfunc-
tion and hypotension. In fact, blood cultures yield bacte-
ria or fungi in only ∼20–40% of cases of severe sepsis
and 40–70% of cases of septic shock. Individual gram-
negative or gram-positive bacteria account for ∼70% of
these isolates; the remainder are fungi or a mixture of
microorganisms (Table 29-2). In patients whose blood
cultures are negative, the etiologic agent is often estab-
lished by culture or microscopic examination of infected
material from a local site. In some case series, a majority
of patients with a clinical picture of severe sepsis or sep-
tic shock have had negative microbiologic data.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
The septic response is a contributing factor in >200,000
deaths per year in the United States. The incidence of
severe sepsis and septic shock has increased over the past
20 years, and the annual number of cases is now
>700,000 (∼three per 1000 population). Approximately
two-thirds of the cases occur in patients with signiﬁcant
underlying illness. Sepsis-related incidence and mortality
rates increase with age and preexisting comorbidity.The
rising incidence of severe sepsis in the United States is
attributable to the aging of the population, the increasing
CHAPTER 29
CHAPTER 29
Deﬁnitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 278
Etiology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 278
Epidemiology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 278
Pathophysiology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 280
Clinical Manifestations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 283
Major Complications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 283
Laboratory Findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 284
Diagnosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 284
Prognosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 288
Prevention . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 289
I Further Readings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 289
278
Severe Sepsis and Septic Shock
279
CHAPTER 29
TABLE 29-1
DEFINITIONS USED TO DESCRIBE THE CONDITION OF PATIENTS WITH SEPSIS
TERM
DEFINITION
Bacteremia
Presence of bacteria in blood, as evidenced by positive blood cultures
Septicemia
Presence of microbes or their toxins in blood
Systemic inﬂammatory
Two or more of the following conditions: (1) fever (oral temperature >38°C)
response syndrome (SIRS)
or hypothermia (<36°C); (2) tachypnea (>24 breaths/min); (3) tachycardia
(heart rate >90 bpm); (4) leukocytosis (>12,000/μL), leukopenia (<4,000/μL) or
>10% bands; may have a noninfectious cause
Sepsis
SIRS that has a proven or suspected microbial etiology
Severe sepsis (similar to
Sepsis with one or more signs of organ dysfunction—for example:
“sepsis syndrome”)
1. Cardiovascular: Arterial systolic blood pressure ≤90 mmHg or mean arterial
pressure ≤70 mmHg that responds to administration of IV ﬂuid
2. Renal: Urine output <0.5 mL/kg per hour for 1 h despite adequate
ﬂuid resuscitation
3. Respiratory: PaO2/FIO2 ≤250 or, if the lung is the only dysfunctional organ, ≤200
4. Hematologic: Platelet count <80,000/μL or 50% decrease in platelet count
from highest value recorded over the previous 3 days
5. Unexplained metabolic acidosis: A pH ≤7.30 or a base deﬁcit ≥5.0 mEq/L
and a plasma lactate level >1.5 times the upper limit of normal for the reporting
laboratory
6. Adequate ﬂuid resuscitation: Pulmonary artery wedge pressure ≥12 mmHg or
central venous pressure ≥8 mmHg
Septic shock
Sepsis with hypotension (arterial blood pressure <90 mmHg systolic or 40 mmHg
less than patient’s normal blood pressure) for at least 1 h despite adequate ﬂuid
resuscitation
or
Need for vasopressors to maintain systolic blood pressure ≥90 mmHg or mean
arterial pressure ≥70 mmHg
Refractory septic shock
Septic shock that lasts for >1 h and does not respond to ﬂuid or pressor
administration
Multiple-organ dysfunction
Dysfunction of more than one organ, requiring intervention to maintain 
syndrome (MODS)
homeostasis
Source: Adapted from the American College of Chest Physicians/Society of Critical Care Medicine Consensus Conference Com-
mittee and Bernard et al. Crit Care Med, with permission.
TABLE 29-2
MICROORGANISMS INVOLVED IN EPISODES OF SEVERE SEPSIS AT EIGHT ACADEMIC
MEDICAL CENTERS
EPISODES WITH
DOCUMENTED
EPISODES WITH 
INFECTION BUT NO 
BLOODSTREAM 
BLOODSTREAM
TOTAL
INFECTION, % 
INFECTION, % 
EPISODES, %
MICROORGANISMS
(n = 436)
(n = 430)
(n = 866)
Gram-negative bacteriaa
35
44
40
Gram-positive bacteriab
40
24
31
Fungi
7
5
6
Polymicrobial
11
21
16
Classic pathogensc
<5
<5
<5
aEnterobacteriaceae, pseudomonads, Haemophilus spp., other gram-negative bacteria.
bStaphylococcus aureus, coagulase-negative staphylococci, enterococci, Streptococcus pneumoniae, other strepto-
cocci, other gram-positive bacteria.
cSuch as Neisseria meningitidis, S. pneumoniae, H. inﬂuenzae, and Streptococcus pyogenes.
Source: Adapted from Sands et al.
longevity of patients with chronic diseases, and the rela-
tively high frequency with which sepsis develops in
patients with AIDS.The widespread use of antimicrobial
agents, immunosuppressive drugs, indwelling catheters
and mechanical devices, and mechanical ventilation also
plays a role.
Invasive bacterial infections are prominent causes
of death around the world, particularly among
young children. In sub-Saharan Africa, for exam-
ple, careful screening for positive blood cultures found
that community-acquired bacteremia accounted for at
least one-fourth of deaths of children >1 year of age.
Nontyphoidal Salmonella spp., Streptococcus pneumoniae,
Haemophilus inﬂuenzae, and Escherichia coli were the most
commonly isolated bacteria. Children with bacteremia
often had HIV infection or were severely malnourished.
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Most cases of severe sepsis are triggered by bacteria or
fungi that do not ordinarily cause systemic disease in
immunocompetent hosts (Table 29-2). These microbes
probably exploit deﬁciencies in innate host defenses
(e.g., phagocytes, complement, and natural antibodies) to
survive within the body. Microbial pathogens, in contrast,
are able to circumvent innate defenses by elaborating
toxins or other virulence factors. In both cases, the body
can fail to kill the invaders despite mounting a vigorous
inﬂammatory reaction that can result in severe sepsis.The
septic response may also be induced by microbial exo-
toxins that act as superantigens (e.g., toxic shock syn-
drome toxin 1).
Host Mechanisms for Sensing Microbes
Animals have exquisitely sensitive mechanisms for recog-
nizing and responding to conserved microbial molecules.
Recognition of the lipid A moiety of lipopolysaccharide
(LPS, also called endotoxin) is the best-studied example.A
host protein (LPS-binding protein, or LBP) binds lipid A
and transfers the LPS to CD14 on the surfaces of mono-
cytes, macrophages, and neutrophils. LPS then is passed
to MD-2, which interacts with Toll-like receptor 4
(TLR-4) to form a molecular complex that transduces
the LPS recognition signal to the interior of the cell.This
signal rapidly triggers the production and release of
mediators, such as tumor necrosis factor (TNF; see later),
that ampliﬁes the LPS signal and transmit it to other cells
and tissues. Bacterial peptidoglycan and lipoteichoic acids
elicit responses in animals that are generally similar to
those induced by LPS; although these molecules also
bind CD14, they interact with different TLRs. Having
numerous TLR-based receptor complexes (10 different
TLRs have been identiﬁed so far in humans) allows ani-
mals to recognize many conserved microbial molecules.
The ability of some of the TLRs to serve as receptors for
host ligands (e.g., hyaluronans, heparan sulfate, saturated
fatty acids) raises the possibility that these molecules
play a role in producing noninfectious sepsis-like states.
Other host pattern-recognition proteins that are impor-
tant for sensing microbial invasion and initiating host
inflammation include the intracellular NOD1 and
NOD2 proteins, which recognize discrete fragments of
bacterial peptidoglycan; complement (principally the
alternative pathway); mannose-binding lectin; and
C-reactive protein.
The ability to recognize certain microbial molecules
may influence both the potency of the host defense
and the pathogenesis of severe sepsis. For example, MD-
2–TLR4 best senses LPS that has a hexaacyl lipid A moiety
(i.e., one with six fatty acyl chains). Most of the commen-
sal aerobic and facultatively anaerobic gram-negative
bacteria that trigger severe sepsis and shock (including
E. coli, Klebsiella spp., and Enterobacter spp.) make this lipid
A structure.When they invade human hosts, often through
breaks in an epithelial barrier, infection is typically local-
ized to the subepithelial tissue. Bacteremia, if it occurs, is
intermittent and low grade because these bacteria are efﬁ-
ciently cleared from the bloodstream by TLR4-expressing
Kupffer cells and splenic macrophages. These mucosal
commensals seem to induce severe sepsis most often by
triggering severe local tissue inﬂammation rather than by
circulating within the bloodstream. In contrast, gram-
negative bacteria that do not make hexaacyl lipid A (Yersinia
pestis, Francisella tularensis, Vibrio vulniﬁcus, Pseudomonas
aeruginosa, and Burkholderia pseudomallei, among others) are
poorly recognized by MD-2–TLR4. These bacteria usu-
ally enter the body via nonmucosal routes (e.g., as a result
of bites, cuts, or inhalation) and initially induce relatively
little inﬂammation.When they do trigger severe sepsis, it is
often in the setting of massive bacterial growth throughout
the body. Engineering a virulent strain of Y. pestis to pro-
duce hexaacyl lipid A has rendered it avirulent in mice;
this result attests to the importance of TLR4-based bacter-
ial recognition in host defense. For most gram-negative
bacteria, the pathogenesis of sepsis thus depends, at least in
part, on whether the bacterium’s LPS is sensed by the host
receptor MD-2–TLR4.
Local and Systemic Host Responses
to Invading Microbes
Recognition of microbial molecules by tissue phagocytes
triggers the production or release of numerous host mol-
ecules (cytokines, chemokines, prostanoids, leukotrienes,
and others) that increase blood ﬂow to the infected tis-
sue, enhance the permeability of local blood vessels,
recruit neutrophils to the site of infection, and elicit pain.
These phenomena are familiar elements of local inﬂam-
mation, the body’s frontline innate immune mechanism
for eliminating microbial invaders. Systemic responses are
activated by neural or humoral communication with the
Common Critical Illnesses and Syndromes
280
SECTION IV
hypothalamus and brainstem; these responses enhance
local defenses by increasing blood flow to the infected
area, augmenting the number of circulating neutrophils
and elevating blood levels of numerous molecules (e.g.,
the microbial recognition proteins discussed above) that
have anti-infective functions.
Cytokines and Other Mediators
Cytokines can exert endocrine, paracrine, and autocrine
effects. TNF α stimulates leukocytes and vascular
endothelial cells to release other cytokines (as well as
additional TNF α), express cell-surface molecules that
enhance neutrophil–endothelial adhesion at sites of
infection, and increase prostaglandin and leukotriene
production.Whereas blood levels of TNF α are not ele-
vated in individuals with localized infections, they
increase in most patients with severe sepsis or septic
shock. Moreover, IV infusion of TNF α can elicit the
characteristic abnormalities of SIRS. In animals, larger
doses of TNF α induce shock, disseminated intravascular
coagulation (DIC), and death.
Although TNF α is a central mediator, it is only one of
many proinﬂammatory molecules that contribute to innate
host defense. Chemokines, most prominently interleukin
(IL) 8, attract circulating neutrophils to the infection site.
IL-1β exhibits many of the same activities as TNF α.TNF
α, IL-1β, interferon (IFN) γ, IL-12, and other cytokines
probably interact synergistically with one another and
with additional mediators. High-mobility group B-1, a
transcription factor, can also be released from cells and
interact with microbial products to induce host responses
late in the course of the septic response.
Coagulation Factors
Intravascular thrombosis, a hallmark of the local inﬂam-
matory response, may help wall off invading microbes
and prevent infection and inﬂammation from spreading
to other tissues. Intravascular ﬁbrin deposition, thrombo-
sis, and DIC can also be important features of the sys-
temic response. IL-6 and other mediators promote
intravascular coagulation initially by inducing blood
monocytes and vascular endothelial cells to express tissue
factor.When tissue factor is expressed on cell surfaces, it
binds to factor VIIa to form an active complex that can
convert factors X and IX to their enzymatically active
forms. The result is activation of both extrinsic and
intrinsic clotting pathways, culminating in the generation
of ﬁbrin. Clotting is also favored by impaired function of
the protein C–protein S inhibitory pathway and deple-
tion of antithrombin and protein C, and ﬁbrinolysis is
prevented by increased plasma levels of plasminogen acti-
vator inhibitor 1.Thus, there may be a striking propen-
sity toward intravascular ﬁbrin deposition, thrombosis,
and bleeding; this propensity has been most apparent in
patients with intravascular endothelial infections such as
meningococcemia. Contact-system activation occurs
during sepsis but contributes more to the development
of hypotension than to DIC.
Control Mechanisms
Elaborate control mechanisms operate within both local
sites of inﬂammation and the systemic circulation.
Local Control Mechanisms
Host recognition of invading microbes within subep-
ithelial tissues typically ignites immune responses that
rapidly kill the invader and then subside to allow tissue
recovery.The anti-inﬂammatory forces that put out the
ﬁre and clean up the battleground include molecules
that neutralize or inactivate microbial signals. Among
these molecules are LPS; intracellular factors (e.g., sup-
pressor of cytokine signaling 3) that diminish the pro-
duction of proinﬂammatory mediators by neutrophils
and macrophages; anti-inﬂammatory cytokines (IL-10,
IL-4); and molecules derived from essential polyunsatu-
rated fatty acids (lipoxins, resolvins, and protectins) that
promote tissue restoration.
Systemic Control Mechanisms
The signaling apparatus that links microbial recognition
to cellular responses in tissues is less active in the blood.
For example, whereas LBP plays a role in recognizing the
presence of LPS, in plasma, it also prevents LPS signaling
by transferring LPS molecules into plasma lipoprotein
particles, which sequester the lipid A moiety so that it
cannot interact with cells. At the high concentrations
found in blood, LBP also inhibits monocyte responses to
LPS, and the soluble (circulating) form of CD14 strips
off LPS that has bound to monocyte surfaces.
Systemic responses to infection also diminish cellular
responses to microbial molecules. Circulating levels of
anti-inﬂammatory cytokines (e.g., IL-6 and IL-10)
increase even in patients with mild infections. Glucocorti-
coids inhibit cytokine synthesis by monocytes in vitro;
the increase in blood cortisol levels early in the systemic
response presumably plays a similarly inhibitory role. Epi-
nephrine inhibits the TNF-α response to endotoxin infu-
sion in humans while augmenting and accelerating the
release of IL-10; prostaglandin E2 has a similar “repro-
gramming” effect on the responses of circulating mono-
cytes to LPS and other bacterial agonists. Cortisol,
epinephrine, IL-10, and C-reactive protein reduce the
ability of neutrophils to attach to vascular endothelium,
favoring their demargination and thus contributing to
leukocytosis while preventing neutrophil–endothelial
adhesion in uninﬂamed organs. The available evidence
thus suggests that the body’s systemic responses to injury
and infection normally prevent inﬂammation within
organs distant from a site of infection.
The acute-phase response increases the blood concen-
trations of numerous molecules that have anti-inﬂammatory
actions. Blood levels of IL-1 receptor antagonist
Severe Sepsis and Septic Shock
281
CHAPTER 29
(IL-1Ra) often greatly exceed those of circulating
IL-1β, for example, and this excess may result in inhibi-
tion of the binding of IL-1β to its receptors. High levels
of soluble TNF receptors neutralize TNF α that enters
the circulation. Other acute-phase proteins are protease
inhibitors; these may neutralize proteases released from
neutrophils and other inﬂammatory cells.
Organ Dysfunction and Shock
As the body’s responses to infection intensify, the mixture
of circulating cytokines and other molecules becomes
very complex: elevated blood levels of more than 50 mol-
ecules have been found in patients with septic shock.
Although high concentrations of both pro- and anti-
inﬂammatory molecules are found, the net mediator
balance in the plasma of these extremely sick patients
may actually be anti-inﬂammatory. For example, blood
leukocytes from patients with severe sepsis are often
hyporesponsive to agonists such as LPS. In patients with
severe sepsis, the persistence of leukocyte hyporespon-
siveness has been associated with an increased risk of
dying. Apoptotic death of B cells, follicular dendritic
cells, and CD4+ T lymphocytes also may contribute sig-
niﬁcantly to the immunosuppressive state.
Endothelial Injury
Most investigators have favored widespread vascular
endothelial injury as the major mechanism for multior-
gan dysfunction. In keeping with this idea, one study
found high numbers of vascular endothelial cells in the
peripheral blood of septic patients. Leukocyte-derived
mediators and platelet-leukocyte-ﬁbrin thrombi may
contribute to vascular injury, but the vascular endothe-
lium also seems to play an active role. Stimuli such as
TNF α induce vascular endothelial cells to produce and
release cytokines, procoagulant molecules, platelet-activating
factor (PAF), nitric oxide, and other mediators. In addi-
tion, regulated cell-adhesion molecules promote the
adherence of neutrophils to endothelial cells. Although
these responses can attract phagocytes to infected sites
and activate their antimicrobial arsenals, endothelial cell
activation can also promote increased vascular perme-
ability, microvascular thrombosis, DIC, and hypotension.
Tissue oxygenation may decrease as the number of
functional capillaries is reduced by luminal obstruction
caused by swollen endothelial cells, decreased deformabil-
ity of circulating erythrocytes, leukocyte–platelet–ﬁbrin
thrombi, or compression by edema ﬂuid. On the other
hand, studies using orthogonal polarization spectral imag-
ing of the microcirculation in the tongue found that
sepsis-associated derangements in capillary ﬂow could be
reversed by applying acetylcholine to the surface of the
tongue or giving IV nitroprusside; these observations sug-
gest a neuroendocrine basis for the loss of capillary ﬁlling.
Oxygen utilization by tissues may also be impaired by a
state of “hibernation” in which adenosine triphosphate
(ATP) production is diminished as oxidative phosphoryla-
tion decreases because of mitochondrial dysfunction; nitric
oxide or its metabolites may be responsible for inducing
this response.
Remarkably, poorly functioning “septic” organs usu-
ally appear normal at autopsy. There is typically very
little necrosis or thrombosis, and apoptosis is largely con-
ﬁned to lymphoid organs and the gastrointestinal tract.
Moreover, organ function usually returns to normal if
patients recover. These points suggest that organ dys-
function during severe sepsis has a basis that is principally
biochemical, not anatomic.
Septic Shock
The hallmark of septic shock is a decrease in peripheral
vascular resistance that occurs despite increased levels of
vasopressor catecholamines. Before this vasodilatory
phase, many patients experience a period during which
oxygen delivery to tissues is compromised by myocardial
depression, hypovolemia, and other factors. During this
“hypodynamic” period, the blood lactate concentration is
elevated, and central venous oxygen saturation is low.
Fluid administration is usually followed by the hyperdy-
namic, vasodilatory phase during which cardiac output is
normal (or even high) and oxygen consumption is inde-
pendent of oxygen delivery. The blood lactate level may
be normal or increased, and normalization of the central
venous oxygen saturation (SvO2) may reflect either
improved oxygen delivery or left-to-right shunting.
Prominent hypotensive molecules include nitric oxide,
β-endorphin, bradykinin, PAF, and prostacyclin. Agents
that inhibit the synthesis or action of each of these medi-
ators can prevent or reverse endotoxic shock in animals.
However, in clinical trials, neither a PAF receptor antago-
nist nor a bradykinin antagonist improved survival rates
among patients with septic shock, and a nitric oxide syn-
thetase inhibitor, L-NG-methylarginine HCl, actually
increased the mortality rate.
Severe Sepsis: A Single Pathogenesis?
In some cases, circulating bacteria and their products
almost certainly elicit multiorgan dysfunction and
hypotension by directly stimulating inﬂammatory responses
within the vasculature. In patients with fulminant
meningococcemia,for example,mortality rates have corre-
lated well with blood endotoxin levels and with the
occurrence of DIC. In most patients with nosocomial
infections,in contrast,circulating bacteria or bacterial mol-
ecules may reﬂect uncontrolled infection at a local tissue
site and have little or no direct impact on distant organs; in
these patients, inﬂammatory mediators or neural signals
arising from the local site seem to be the key triggers for
severe sepsis and septic shock. In a large series of patients
with positive blood cultures, the risk of developing severe
Common Critical Illnesses and Syndromes
282
SECTION IV
sepsis was strongly related to the site of primary infection:
bacteremia arising from a pulmonary or abdominal source
was eightfold more likely to be associated with severe sep-
sis than was bacteremic urinary tract infection, even after
the investigators controlled for age, the kind of bacteria
isolated from the blood, and other factors. A third patho-
genesis may be represented by severe sepsis caused by
superantigen-producing Staphylococcus aureus or Streptococcus
pyogenes, because the T cell activation induced by these
toxins produces a cytokine proﬁle that differs substantially
from that elicited by gram-negative bacterial infection.
In summary, the pathogenesis of severe sepsis may dif-
fer according to the infecting microbe, the ability of the
host’s innate defense mechanisms to sense it, the site of
the primary infection, the presence or absence of immune
defects, and the prior physiologic status of the host.
Genetic factors may also be important. For example, stud-
ies in different ethnic groups have identiﬁed associations
between allelic polymorphisms in TLR4, caspase 12L,
TNF α, and IFN-γ genes and the risk of developing
severe sepsis. Further studies in this area are needed.
CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
The manifestations of the septic response are usually
superimposed on the symptoms and signs of the patient’s
underlying illness and primary infection. The rate at
which signs and symptoms develop may differ from
patient to patient, and there are striking individual varia-
tions in presentation. For example, some patients with
sepsis are normo- or hypothermic; the absence of fever is
most common in neonates, elderly patients, and persons
with uremia or alcoholism.
Hyperventilation is often an early sign of the septic
response. Disorientation, confusion, and other manifesta-
tions of encephalopathy may also develop early on,
particularly in elderly patients and in individuals with
preexisting neurologic impairment. Focal neurologic signs
are uncommon, although preexisting focal deﬁcits may
become more prominent.
Hypotension and DIC predispose to acrocyanosis and
ischemic necrosis of peripheral tissues, most commonly
the digits. Cellulitis, pustules, bullae, or hemorrhagic
lesions may develop when hematogenous bacteria or
fungi seed the skin or underlying soft tissue. Bacterial tox-
ins may also be distributed hematogenously and elicit dif-
fuse cutaneous reactions. On occasion, skin lesions may
suggest speciﬁc pathogens.When sepsis is accompanied by
cutaneous petechiae or purpura, infection with Neisseria
meningitidis (or, less commonly, H. inﬂuenzae) should be
suspected; in a patient who has been bitten by a tick
while in an endemic area, petechial lesions also suggest
Rocky Mountain spotted fever. A cutaneous lesion seen
almost exclusively in neutropenic patients is ecthyma gan-
grenosum, usually caused by P. aeruginosa. It is a bullous
lesion surrounded by edema that undergoes central
hemorrhage and necrosis. Histopathologic examination
shows bacteria in and around the wall of a small vessel,
with little or no neutrophilic response. Hemorrhagic or
bullous lesions in a septic patient who has recently eaten
raw oysters suggest V. vulniﬁcus bacteremia, but such
lesions in a patient who has recently suffered a dog bite
may indicate bloodstream infection caused by Capnocy-
tophaga canimorsus or Capnocytophaga cynodegmi. General-
ized erythroderma in a septic patient suggests the toxic
shock syndrome caused by S. aureus or S. pyogenes.
Gastrointestinal manifestations such as nausea, vomiting,
diarrhea, and ileus may suggest acute gastroenteritis. Stress
ulceration can lead to upper gastrointestinal bleeding.
Cholestatic jaundice, with elevated levels of serum biliru-
bin (mostly conjugated) and alkaline phosphatase, may
precede other signs of sepsis. Hepatocellular or canalicular
dysfunction appears to underlie most cases, and the results
of hepatic function tests return to normal with resolution
of the infection. Prolonged or severe hypotension may
induce acute hepatic injury or ischemic bowel necrosis.
Many tissues may be unable to extract oxygen normally
from the blood, so anaerobic metabolism occurs despite
near-normal mixed venous oxygen saturation. Blood lac-
tate levels increase early because of increased glycolysis as
well as impaired clearance of the resulting lactate and
pyruvate by the liver and kidneys.The blood glucose con-
centration often increases, particularly in patients with dia-
betes, although impaired gluconeogenesis and excessive
insulin release occasionally produce hypoglycemia. The
cytokine-driven acute-phase response inhibits the synthe-
sis of transthyretin while enhancing the production of
C-reactive protein, ﬁbrinogen, and complement compo-
nents. Protein catabolism is often markedly accelerated.
Serum albumin levels decline as a result of decreased hepatic
synthesis and the movement of albumin into interstitial
spaces,which is promoted by arterial vasodilation.
MAJOR COMPLICATIONS
Cardiopulmonary Complications
Ventilation-perfusion mismatching produces a decrease
in arterial PO2 early in the course. Increasing alveolar
capillary permeability results in an increased pulmonary
water content, which decreases pulmonary compliance
and interferes with oxygen exchange. Progressive diffuse
pulmonary inﬁltrates and arterial hypoxemia (PaO2/FIO2,
<200) indicate the development of the acute respiratory
distress syndrome (ARDS). ARDS develops in ∼50% of
patients with severe sepsis or septic shock. Respiratory
muscle fatigue can exacerbate hypoxemia and hypercap-
nia. An elevated pulmonary capillary wedge pressure
(PCWP; >18 mmHg) suggests ﬂuid volume overload or
cardiac failure rather than ARDS. Pneumonia caused by
viruses or by Pneumocystis spp. Infection may be clini-
cally indistinguishable from ARDS.
Severe Sepsis and Septic Shock
283
CHAPTER 29
Sepsis-induced hypotension (see Septic Shock earlier
in the chapter) usually results initially from a generalized
maldistribution of blood ﬂow and blood volume and
from hypovolemia that is caused at least partly by diffuse
capillary leakage of intravascular ﬂuid. Other factors that
may decrease effective intravascular volume include
dehydration from antecedent disease or insensible ﬂuid
losses, vomiting or diarrhea, and polyuria. During early
septic shock, systemic vascular resistance (SVR) is usu-
ally elevated, and cardiac output may be low. After ﬂuid
repletion, in contrast, cardiac output typically increases,
and SVR decreases. Indeed, normal or increased cardiac
output and decreased SVR distinguish septic shock from
cardiogenic, extracardiac obstructive, and hypovolemic
shock; other processes that can produce this combina-
tion include anaphylaxis, beriberi, cirrhosis, and over-
doses of nitroprusside or narcotics.
Depression of myocardial function, manifested as
increased end-diastolic and systolic ventricular volumes with
a decreased ejection fraction, develops within 24 h in most
patients with severe sepsis. Cardiac output is maintained
despite the low ejection fraction because ventricular dilata-
tion permits a normal stroke volume. In survivors, myocar-
dial function returns to normal over several days.
Although myocardial dysfunction may contribute to
hypotension, refractory hypotension is usually caused by a
low SVR, and death results from refractory shock or the
failure of multiple organs rather than from cardiac dysfunc-
tion per se.
Renal Complications
Oliguria, azotemia, proteinuria, and nonspeciﬁc urinary
casts are frequently found. Many patients are inappropri-
ately polyuric; hyperglycemia may exacerbate this ten-
dency. Most renal failure is caused by acute tubular necrosis
induced by hypotension or capillary injury, although
some patients also have glomerulonephritis, renal cortical
necrosis, or interstitial nephritis. Drug-induced renal dam-
age may complicate therapy, particularly when hypoten-
sive patients are given aminoglycoside antibiotics.
Coagulopathy
Although thrombocytopenia occurs in 10–30% of patients,
the underlying mechanisms are not understood. Platelet
counts are usually very low (<50,000/μL) in patients
with DIC; these low counts may reﬂect diffuse endothe-
lial injury or microvascular thrombosis.
Neurologic Complications
When the septic illness lasts for weeks or months,“criti-
cal illness polyneuropathy” may prevent weaning from
ventilatory support and produce distal motor weakness.
Electrophysiologic studies are diagnostic. Guillain-Barré
syndrome, metabolic disturbances, and toxin activity must
be ruled out.
LABORATORY FINDINGS
Abnormalities that occur early in the septic response may
include leukocytosis with a left shift, thrombocytopenia,
hyperbilirubinemia, and proteinuria. Leukopenia may
develop.The neutrophils may contain toxic granulations,
Döhle bodies, or cytoplasmic vacuoles. As the septic
response becomes more severe, thrombocytopenia wors-
ens (often with prolongation of the thrombin time,
decreased ﬁbrinogen, and the presence of D-dimers, sug-
gesting DIC), azotemia and hyperbilirubinemia become
more prominent, and levels of aminotransferases increase.
Active hemolysis suggests clostridial bacteremia, malaria, a
drug reaction, or DIC; in the case of DIC, microangio-
pathic changes may be seen on a blood smear.
During early sepsis, hyperventilation induces respira-
tory alkalosis. With respiratory muscle fatigue and the
accumulation of lactate, metabolic acidosis (with increased
anion gap) typically supervenes. Evaluation of arterial
blood gases reveals hypoxemia, which is initially cor-
rectable with supplemental oxygen but whose later
refractoriness to 100% oxygen inhalation indicates right-
to-left shunting.The chest radiograph may be normal or
may show evidence of underlying pneumonia, volume
overload, or the diffuse inﬁltrates of ARDS.The electro-
cardiogram may show only sinus tachycardia or nonspe-
ciﬁc ST–T-wave abnormalities.
Most diabetic patients with sepsis develop hyper-
glycemia. Severe infection may precipitate diabetic ketoaci-
dosis, which may exacerbate hypotension. Hypoglycemia
occurs rarely. The serum albumin level, which is initially
within the normal range, declines as sepsis continues.
Hypocalcemia is rare.
DIAGNOSIS
There is no specific diagnostic test for the septic
response. Diagnostically sensitive findings in a patient
with suspected or proven infection include fever or
hypothermia, tachypnea, tachycardia, and leukocytosis or
leukopenia (Table 29-1); acutely altered mental status,
thrombocytopenia, an elevated blood lactate level, or
hypotension also should suggest the diagnosis.The septic
response can be quite variable, however. In one study,
36% of patients with severe sepsis had a normal temper-
ature, 40% had a normal respiratory rate, 10% had a nor-
mal pulse rate, and 33% had a normal white blood cell
count. Moreover, the systemic responses of uninfected
patients with other conditions may be similar to those
characteristic of sepsis. Noninfectious causes of SIRS
(see Table 29-1) include pancreatitis, burns, trauma,
adrenal insufﬁciency, pulmonary embolism, dissecting or
ruptured aortic aneurysm, myocardial infarction, occult
Common Critical Illnesses and Syndromes
284
SECTION IV
hemorrhage, cardiac tamponade, post–cardiopulmonary
bypass syndrome, anaphylaxis, and drug overdose.
Deﬁnitive etiologic diagnosis requires isolation of the
microorganism from blood or a local site of infection.At
least two blood samples (10 mL each) should be
obtained (from different venipuncture sites) for culture.
Because gram-negative bacteremia is typically low grade
(<10 organisms/mL of blood), prolonged incubation of
cultures may be necessary; S. aureus grows more readily
and is detectable in blood cultures within 48 h in most
instances. In many cases, blood cultures are negative; this
result can reﬂect prior antibiotic administration, the
presence of slow-growing or fastidious organisms, or the
absence of microbial invasion of the bloodstream. In
these cases, Gram’s staining and culture of material from
the primary site of infection or of infected cutaneous
lesions may help establish the microbial etiology.The skin
and mucosae should be examined carefully and repeat-
edly for lesions that might yield diagnostic information.
With overwhelming bacteremia (e.g., pneumococcal
sepsis in splenectomized individuals, fulminant meningo-
coccemia, or infection with V. vulniﬁcus, B. pseudomallei, or
Y. pestis), microorganisms are sometimes visible on buffy
coat smears of peripheral blood.
Available information about patterns of antimicrobial
susceptibility among bacterial isolates from the com-
munity, the hospital, and the patient should be taken
into account.When culture results become available,the
regimen can often be simplified because a single
antimicrobial agent is usually adequate for the treat-
ment of a known pathogen. Meta-analyses have
concluded that, with one exception, combination
antimicrobial therapy is not superior to monotherapy
for treating gram-negative bacteremia; the exception is
that aminoglycoside monotherapy for P.aeruginosa bac-
teremia is less effective than the combination of an
aminoglycoside with an antipseudomonal β-lactam
agent. Most patients require antimicrobial therapy for at
least 1 week; the duration of treatment is typically inﬂu-
enced by factors such as the site of tissue infection, the
adequacy of surgical drainage, the patient’s underlying
disease, and the antimicrobial susceptibility of the bac-
terial isolate(s).
REMOVAL OF THE SOURCE OF INFECTION
Removal or drainage of a focal source of infection is
essential. Sites of occult infection should be sought
carefully. Indwelling IV catheters should be removed
and the tip rolled over a blood agar plate for quantita-
tive culture; after antibiotic therapy has been initiated, a
new catheter should be inserted at a different site. Foley
and drainage catheters should be replaced.The possibil-
ity of paranasal sinusitis (often caused by gram-negative
bacteria) should be considered if the patient has under-
gone nasal intubation. In patients with abnormalities on
chest radiographs, CT of the chest may identify unsus-
pected parenchymal, mediastinal, or pleural disease. In
neutropenic patients, cutaneous sites of tenderness and
erythema, particularly in the perianal region, must be
carefully sought.In patients with sacral or ischial decubi-
tus ulcers, it is important to exclude pelvic or other soft
tissue pus collections with CT or MRI. In patients with
severe sepsis arising from the urinary tract, sonography
or CT should be used to rule out ureteral obstruction,
perinephric abscess,and renal abscess.
HEMODYNAMIC, RESPIRATORY, AND META-
BOLIC SUPPORT
The primary goals are to restore
adequate oxygen and substrate delivery to the tissues
as quickly as possible and to improve tissue oxygen uti-
lization and cellular metabolism. Adequate organ perfu-
sion is thus essential. The initial management of
hypotension should include the administration of IV ﬂuids,
typically beginning with 1–2 L of normal saline over 1–2 h.
To avoid pulmonary edema, the PCWP should be main-
tained at 12–16 mmHg or the central venous pressure at
8–12 cm H2O. The urine output rate should be kept at
>0.5 mL/kg per hour by continuing ﬂuid administration;
a diuretic such as furosemide may be used if needed. In
about one-third of patients, hypotension and organ
Severe Sepsis and Septic Shock
285
CHAPTER 29
Treatment:
SEVERE SEPSIS AND SEPTIC SHOCK
Patients in whom sepsis is suspected must be managed
expeditiously. This task is best accomplished by person-
nel who are experienced in the care of critically ill
patients. Successful management requires urgent mea-
sures to treat the infection, provide hemodynamic and
respiratory support,and eliminate the offending microor-
ganism. Most emergency centers now aim to initiate
these measures within 1 h of the patient’s presentation
with severe sepsis or shock. Rapid assessment and diag-
nosis are therefore essential.
ANTIMICROBIAL AGENTS
Antimicrobial chemo-
therapy should be initiated as soon as samples of blood
and other relevant sites have been cultured.A large retro-
spective review of patients who developed septic shock
found that the interval between the onset of hypotension
and the administration of appropriate antimicrobial
chemotherapy was the major determinant of outcome; a
delay of as little as 1 h was associated with lower sur-
vival rates.
It is important, pending culture results, to initiate
empirical antimicrobial therapy that is effective against
both gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria
(Table 29-3). Maximal recommended doses of antimi-
crobial drugs should be given intravenously, with
adjustment for impaired renal function when necessary.
hypoperfusion respond to ﬂuid resuscitation; a reason-
able goal is to maintain a mean arterial blood pressure
of >65 mmHg (systolic pressure >90 mmHg) and a car-
diac index of ≥4 L/min per m2. If these guidelines cannot
be met by volume infusion, vasopressor therapy is indi-
cated. Circulatory adequacy is also assessed by clinical
parameters (mentation, urine output, skin perfusion)
and, when possible, by measurements of oxygen deliv-
ery and consumption.
A study of “early goal-directed therapy” (EGDT)
found that prompt resuscitation based on maintenance
of the SvO2 at >70% was associated with significantly
improved survival of patients who were admitted to
an emergency department with severe sepsis. The
treatment algorithm included rapid administration of
fluids, antibiotics, and vasopressor support; erythro-
cyte transfusion (to maintain the hematocrit >30%);
and administration of dobutamine if fluids, erythro-
cytes, and pressors did not result in an SvO2 of >70%.
The extent to which the different components of the
EGDT algorithm contribute to the overall effect has
not been examined in controlled trials. In particular,
neither the use of SvO2 to manage therapy nor the
need for continuous SvO2 monitoring with a pul-
monary artery catheter has been formally confirmed. A
multicenter study sponsored by the National Institutes
of Health of the efficacy of the EGDT approach is in
progress.
In patients with septic shock, plasma vasopressin lev-
els increase transiently but then decrease dramatically.
Studies have found that vasopressin infusion can
reverse septic shock in some patients, reducing or elimi-
nating the need for catecholamine pressors. An ade-
quately powered and randomized trial of vasopressin
infusion has not been performed. Vasopressin is a
potent vasoconstrictor that may be most useful in
patients who have vasodilatory shock and relative resis-
tance to other pressor hormones.
Adrenal insufﬁciency is very likely when the plasma
cortisol level is <15 μg/dL in a patient with severe sep-
sis. Generally accepted criteria for partial adrenal insufﬁ-
ciency have not been devised; major problems have
been the inability to increase cortisol levels in extremely
stressed individuals above high baseline values in
Common Critical Illnesses and Syndromes
286
SECTION IV
TABLE 29-3
INITIAL ANTIMICROBIAL THERAPY FOR SEVERE SEPSIS WITH NO OBVIOUS SOURCE IN ADULTS WITH NORMAL
RENAL FUNCTION
CLINICAL CONDITION
ANTIMICROBIAL REGIMENS (IV THERAPY)
Immunocompetent adult
The many acceptable regimens include (1) ceftriaxone (2 g q24h) or ticarcillin–clavulanate
(3.1 g q4–6h) or piperacillin-tazobactam (3.375 g q4–6h); (2) imipenem–cilastatin (0.5 g q6h)
or meropenem (1 g q8h) or cefepime (2 g q12h). Gentamicin or tobramycin (5–7 mg/kg q24h)
may be added to either regimen. If the patient is allergic to β-lactam agents, use ciproﬂoxacin
(400 mg q12h) or levoﬂoxacin (500–750 mg q12h) plus clindamycin (600 mg q8h). If the
institution or the community has a high prevalence of MRSA isolates, add vancomycin
(15 mg/kg q12h) to each of the above regimens.
Neutropenia
Regimens include (1) imipenem–cilastatin (0.5 g q6h) or meropenem (1 g q8h) or cefepime
(<500 neutrophils/mL)
(2 g q8h); (2) ticarcillin-clavulanate (3.1 g q4h) or piperacillin-tazobactam (3.375 g q4h) plus
tobramycin (5–7 mg/kg q24h). Vancomycin (15 mg/kg q12h) should be added if the patient
has an infected vascular catheter, if staphylococci are suspected, if the patient has received
quinolone prophylaxis, if the patient has received intensive chemotherapy that produces
mucosal damage, if the institution has a high incidence of MRSA infections, or if there is a
high prevalence of MRSA isolates in the community.
Splenectomy
Cefotaxime (2 g q6–8h) or ceftriaxone (2 g q12h) should be used. If the local prevalence of
cephalosporin-resistant pneumococci is high, add vancomycin. If the patient is allergic
to β-lactam drugs, vancomycin (15 mg/kg q12h) plus ciproﬂoxacin (400 mg q12h) or
levoﬂoxacin (750 mg q12h) or aztreonam (2 g q8h) should be used.
IV drug user
Nafcillin or oxacillin (2 g q8h) plus gentamicin (5–7 mg/kg q24h). If the local prevalence of
MRSA is high or if the patient is allergic to β-lactam drugs, vancomycin (15 mg/kg q12h)
with gentamicin should be used.
AIDS
Cefepime (2 g q8h), ticarcillin–clavulanate (3.1 g q4h), or piperacillin–tazobactam
(3.375 g q4h) plus tobramycin (5–7 mg/kg q24h) should be used. If the patient is allergic
to β-lactam drugs, ciproﬂoxacin (400 mg q12h) or levoﬂoxacin (750 mg q12h) plus
vancomycin (15 mg/kg q12h) plus tobramycin should be used.˛
Note: MRSA, methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus.
Source: Adapted in part from Hughes WT et al: Clin Infect Dis 25:551, 1997.
response to cosyntropin (α1–24–ACTH) and the high fre-
quency of hypoalbuminemia, which decreases total but
not free (active) plasma cortisol levels. Adrenal insufﬁ-
ciency should be strongly considered in septic patients
with refractory hypotension; fulminant meningococcal
bacteremia; disseminated tuberculosis; AIDS; or prior
use of glucocorticoids, megestrol, etomidate, or keto-
conazole. Hydrocortisone (50 mg IV every 6 h) may be
given as a trial therapeutic intervention. If clinical
improvement occurs over 24–48 h, most experts would
continue hydrocortisone therapy, tapering and discon-
tinuing it after 5–7 days. Improved recommendations
regarding hydrocortisone therapy may come from the
European CORTICUS trial.
Ventilator therapy is indicated for progressive hypox-
emia, hypercapnia, neurologic deterioration, or respira-
tory muscle failure. Sustained tachypnea (respiratory
rate, >30 breaths/min) is frequently a harbinger of
impending respiratory collapse; mechanical ventilation
is often initiated to ensure adequate oxygenation,divert
blood from the muscles of respiration, prevent aspira-
tion of oropharyngeal contents, and reduce the cardiac
afterload. The results of recent studies favor the use of
low tidal volumes (6 mL/kg of ideal body weight or as
low as 4 mL/kg if the plateau pressure >30 cmH2O).
Patients undergoing mechanical ventilation require
careful sedation with daily interruptions; elevation of
the head of the bed helps to prevent nosocomial
pneumonia. Stress ulcer prophylaxis with a histamine
H2-receptor antagonist may decrease the risk of gas-
trointestinal hemorrhage in ventilated patients.
The use of erythrocyte transfusion continues to be
debated. In the study of EGDT, packed erythrocytes
were given to raise the hematocrit to 30% if the
patient’s SvO2 was <70%.The extent to which this inter-
vention contributed to the improvement reported in
patients who received the EGDT regimen is uncertain.
Bicarbonate is sometimes administered for severe
metabolic acidosis (arterial pH <7.2), but there is little
evidence that it improves either hemodynamics or the
response to vasopressor hormones. DIC, if complicated
by major bleeding,should be treated with transfusion of
fresh-frozen plasma and platelets. Successful treatment
of the underlying infection is essential to reverse both
acidosis and DIC. Patients who are hypercatabolic and
have acute renal failure may beneﬁt greatly from
hemodialysis or hemoﬁltration.
GENERAL SUPPORT
In patients with prolonged
severe sepsis (i.e., that lasting more than 2 or 3 days),
nutritional supplementation may reduce the impact of
protein hypercatabolism; the available evidence, which is
not strong, favors the enteral delivery route. Prophylactic
heparinization to prevent deep venous thrombosis is
indicated for patients who do not have active bleeding or
coagulopathy. Recovery is also assisted by preventing
skin breakdown, nosocomial infections, and stress ulcers.
Investigators in Belgium reported in 2001 that main-
taining blood glucose levels in the normal range
(80–110 mg/dL) greatly improved survival rates among
patients who had just undergone major surgery and had
received IV glucose feeding for the previous 24 h. The
same group then studied intensive glucose control in
critically ill medical patients and found a survival beneﬁt
only for patients who remained in the intensive care unit
(ICU) for ≥3 days. Hypoglycemia was much more com-
mon in the intensive-insulin group. Until more experi-
ence with intensive glucose control is reported, it seems
reasonable to maintain glucose levels of <150 mg/dL during
the ﬁrst 3 days of severe sepsis and then to target the
normoglycemic range if the patient remains in the ICU
for a longer period. Frequent monitoring of blood glu-
cose levels is indicated to avoid hypoglycemia during
intensive insulin therapy.
OTHER MEASURES
Despite aggressive manage-
ment, many patients with severe sepsis or septic shock
die. Numerous interventions have been tested for their
ability to improve survival in patients with severe sepsis.
The list includes endotoxin-neutralizing proteins;
inhibitors of cyclooxygenase or nitric oxide synthase;
anticoagulants; polyclonal immunoglobulins; glucocor-
ticoids; and antagonists to TNF α,IL-1,PAF,and bradykinin.
Unfortunately, none of these agents has improved rates
of survival among patients with severe sepsis or septic
shock in more than one large, randomized, placebo-
controlled clinical trial. This lack of reproducibility has
had many contributing factors, including (1) hetero-
geneity in the patient populations studied and the incit-
ing microbes and (2) the nature of the “standard”therapy
also used. A dramatic example of this problem was seen
in a trial of tissue factor pathway inhibitor (Fig. 29-1).
Whereas the drug appeared to improve survival rates
after 722 patients had been studied (p = .006), it did not
do so in the next 1032 patients, and the overall result
was negative. This inconsistency, even within a carefully
selected patient population, argues strongly that a sep-
sis intervention should show signiﬁcant survival beneﬁt
in more than one placebo-controlled clinical trial before
it is accepted as part of routine clinical practice.
Recombinant activated protein C (aPC) was the ﬁrst
drug to be approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Admin-
istration (FDA) for the treatment of patients with severe
sepsis or septic shock. In a single randomized controlled
trial in which drug or placebo was given within 24 h of
the patient’s first sepsis-related organ dysfunction,
28-day mortality was signiﬁcantly lower among recipi-
ents of aPC than among patients who received placebo
Severe Sepsis and Septic Shock
287
CHAPTER 29
(24.7% versus 30.8%; p <.005).In addition, aPC recipients
were more likely than placebo recipients to have severe
bleeding (3.5% versus 2%). Survival improved only for
patients who had an APACHE (Acute Physiology and
Chronic Health Evaluation) II score of ≥25 during the
24 hours before initiation of aPC infusion. Midtrial
changes in the protocol and drug were followed by
improvement in the apparent efﬁcacy of aPC. The FDA
approved aPC for use in adults (>18 years of age) who
meet the APACHE II criterion and have a low risk of hem-
orrhage-related side effects.
aPC is administered as a constant IV infusion of
24 μg/kg per hour for 96 h. Each patient’s clotting
parameters must be monitored carefully. aPC should
not be given to patients who have platelet counts of
<30,000/μL or to patients who have dysfunction of
one organ system and have had surgery during the
previous 30 days. Treatment with aPC should not be
started >24 h after the onset of severe sepsis, nor
should it be used in the patient subsets (e.g., patients
with pancreatitis or AIDS) that were excluded from
the clinical trial.
Although the theoretical rationale for treating septic
patients with anticoagulants is strong and studies have
found that aPC may have antiinﬂammatory and anti-
apoptotic properties in vitro, two additional random-
ized, placebo-controlled trials of aPC were stopped
when interim analyses showed lack of efﬁcacy. One trial
was in children, and the other was in adults with
APACHE II scores of ≤25. aPC has not been tested again
in the patient population for which it was approved by
the FDA (i.e.,adults with high APACHE II scores).
Some experts have advocated “bundling” of multiple
therapeutic maneuvers into a unified, algorithmic
approach to management that would become the stan-
dard of care for patients with severe sepsis. The pro-
posed resuscitation (6-h) bundle incorporates most of
the elements discussed above for acute (EGDT) resusci-
tation. The management (24-h) bundle includes three
measures of uncertain or marginal beneﬁt: tight control
of blood glucose, administration of low-dose hydrocor-
tisone, and treatment with aPC. Bundling of therapies
obscures the efﬁcacy and toxicity of the individual inter-
ventions and allows little room for individualizing ther-
apy. The use of bundling in an industry-sponsored
marketing program for aPC (the Surviving Sepsis Cam-
paign) has also been criticized.
A careful retrospective analysis found that the appar-
ent efﬁcacy of all sepsis therapeutics studied to date has
been greatest among the patients at greatest risk of
dying before treatment; conversely, use of many of
these drugs has been associated with increased mortal-
ity rates among patients who are less ill. The authors
proposed that whereas neutralizing one of many differ-
ent mediators may help patients who are very sick, dis-
rupting the mediator balance may be harmful to those
whose adaptive defense mechanisms are still working.
This analysis suggests that if more aggressive early
resuscitation improves survival rates among sicker
patients, it should become more difﬁcult to show addi-
tional beneﬁt from other therapies; that is, if early resus-
citation improves patients’ status, moving them into a
“less severe illness” category, the addition of another
agent is less likely to be beneﬁcial.
Common Critical Illnesses and Syndromes
288
SECTION IV
Jun
Aug
Oct
Dec
Feb
Apr
Jun
2000
2001
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
TFPI
Placebo
Mortality, %
FIGURE 29-1
Mortality rates among patients who received tissue fac-
tor pathway inhibitor (TFPI) or placebo, shown as the run-
ning average over the course of the clinical trial. The drug
seemed highly efﬁcacious at the interim analysis in December
2000, but this trend reversed later in the trial. Demonstrating
that therapeutic agents for sepsis have consistent, repro-
ducible efﬁcacy has been extremely difﬁcult, even within
well-deﬁned patient populations. (Reprinted with permission
from Abraham et al.)
PROGNOSIS
Approximately 20–35% of patients with severe sepsis and
40–60% of patients with septic shock die within 30 days.
Others die within the ensuing 6 months. Late deaths
often result from poorly controlled infection, immuno-
suppression, complications of intensive care, failure of
multiple organs, or the patient’s underlying disease.
Prognostic stratiﬁcation systems such as APACHE II
indicate that factoring in the patient’s age, underlying
condition, and various physiologic variables can yield esti-
mates of the risk of dying of severe sepsis. Of the individ-
ual covariates, the severity of underlying disease most
strongly inﬂuences the risk of dying. Septic shock is also a
strong predictor of short- and long-term mortality. Case-
fatality rates are similar for culture-positive and culture-
negative severe sepsis.
PREVENTION
Prevention offers the best opportunity to reduce mor-
bidity and mortality. In developed countries, most
episodes of severe sepsis and septic shock are complica-
tions of nosocomial infections.These cases might be pre-
vented by reducing the number of invasive procedures
undertaken, limiting the use (and duration of use) of
indwelling vascular and bladder catheters, reducing the
incidence and duration of profound neutropenia (<500
neutrophils/μL), and more aggressively treating localized
nosocomial infections. Indiscriminate use of antimi-
crobial agents and glucocorticoids should be avoided,
and optimal infection-control measures should be used.
Several studies point to associations between allelic poly-
morphisms in speciﬁc genes and risk of severe sepsis; if
these associations prove to be broadly applicable, such
polymorphisms can be used prospectively to identify
high-risk patients and to target preventive or therapeutic
measures to them. Studies indicate that 50–70% of
patients who develop nosocomial severe sepsis or septic
shock have experienced a less severe stage of the septic
response (e.g., SIRS, sepsis) on at least one previous day
in the hospital. Research is needed to develop adjunc-
tive agents that can damp the septic response before
organ dysfunction or hypotension occurs.
FURTHER READINGS
ABRAHAM E et al: Efﬁcacy and safety of tifacogin (recombinant tissue
factor pathway inhibitor) in severe sepsis: A randomized con-
trolled trial. JAMA 290:238, 2003
ARAFAH BM: Hypothalamic pituitary adrenal function during criti-
cal illness: Limitations of current assessment methods. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab 91:3725, 2006
BERKLEY JA et al: Bacteremia among children admitted to a rural
hospital in Kenya. N Engl J Med 352:39, 2005
EICHACKER P et al: Risk and the efﬁcacy of anti-inﬂammatory
agents: Retrospective and conﬁrmatory studies of sepsis. Am J
Respir Crit Care Med 166:1197, 2002
HARBATH S et al: Does antibiotic selection impact patient outcome?
Clin Infect Dis 44:87, 2007
HOTCHKISS RS, NICHOLSON DW: Apoptosis and caspases regulate
death and inﬂammation in sepsis. Nat Rev Immunol 6:813, 2006
KUMAR A et al: Duration of hypotension before initiation of effective
antimicrobial therapy is the critical determinant of survival in
human septic shock. Crit Care Med 34:1589, 2006
MUNFORD RS: Severe sepsis and septic shock: The role of gram-
negative bacteremia. Annu Rev Pathol Mech Dis 1:467, 2006
OTERO RM et al: Early goal-directed therapy in severe sepsis and
septic shock revisited: Concepts, controversies, and contempo-
rary ﬁndings. Chest 130:1579, 2006
RUSSELL JA: Management of sepsis. N Engl J Med 355:1699, 2006
SANDS KE et al: Epidemiology of sepsis syndrome in 8 academic
medical centers. JAMA 278:234, 1997
TURGEON AF et al: Meta-analysis: Intravenous immunoglobulin in crit-
ically ill adult patients with sepsis.Ann Intern Med 146:193, 2007
Severe Sepsis and Septic Shock
289
CHAPTER 29
Bruce D. Levy
I
Steven D. Shapiro
Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) is a clinical
syndrome of severe dyspnea of rapid onset, hypoxemia,
and diffuse pulmonary inﬁltrates leading to respiratory
failure. ARDS is caused by diffuse lung injury from
many underlying medical and surgical disorders. The
lung injury may be direct, as occurs in toxic inhalation,
or indirect, as occurs in sepsis (Table 30-1).The clinical
features of ARDS are listed in Table 30-2. Acute lung
injury (ALI) is a less severe disorder but has the potential
to evolve into ARDS (Table 30-2).The arterial (a) PO2
(in mmHg)/FIO2 (inspiratory O2 fraction) <200 mmHg
is characteristic of ARDS, and a PAO2/FIO2 between 200
and 300 identiﬁes patients with ALI who are likely to
beneﬁt from aggressive therapy.
The annual incidences of ALI and ARDS are esti-
mated to be up to 80 in 100,000 and 60 in 100,000,
respectively.Approximately 10% of all intensive care unit
(ICU) admissions experience acute respiratory failure,
with ∼20% of these patients meeting criteria for ALI
or ARDS.
ETIOLOGY
Although many medical and surgical illnesses have been
associated with the development of ALI and ARDS, most
cases (>80%) are caused by a relatively small number of
clinical disorders, namely, severe sepsis syndrome or bacte-
rial pneumonia (∼40–50%), trauma, multiple transfusions,
aspiration of gastric contents, and drug overdose. Among
patients with trauma, pulmonary contusion, multiple
bone fractures, and chest wall trauma or ﬂail chest are the
ACUTE RESPIRATORY DISTRESS SYNDROME
most frequently reported surgical conditions in ARDS;
head trauma, near-drowning, toxic inhalation, and burns
are rare causes.The risks of developing ARDS are increased
in patients who have more than one predisposing medical
or surgical condition; e.g., the risk for ARDS increases
from 25% in patients with severe trauma to 56% in patients
with trauma and sepsis.
Several other clinical variables have been associated
with the development of ARDS. These include older
age, chronic alcohol abuse, metabolic acidosis, and sever-
ity of critical illness.Trauma patients with an acute phys-
iology and chronic health evaluation [Acute Physiology
and Chronic Health Evaluation (APACHE)] II scores
≥16 (Chap. 26) have a 2.5-fold increase in the risk of
developing ARDS, and those with scores >20 have an
incidence of ARDS that is more than threefold greater
than those with APACHE II scores ≤9.
CLINICAL COURSE AND
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
The natural history of ARDS is marked by three
phases—exudative, proliferative, and ﬁbrotic—each with
characteristic clinical and pathologic features (Fig. 30-1).
Exudative Phase
(Fig. 30-2) In this phase, alveolar capillary endothelial
cells and type I pneumocytes (alveolar epithelial cells) are
injured, leading to the loss of the normally tight alveolar
barrier to ﬂuid and macromolecules. Edema ﬂuid that is
CHAPTER 30
CHAPTER 30
290
Etiology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 290
Clinical Course and Pathophysiology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 290
Prognosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 295
I Further Readings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 296
rich in protein accumulates in the interstitial and alveolar
spaces. Significant concentrations of cytokines (e.g.,
interleukin 1, interleukin 8, and tumor necrosis factor α)
and lipid mediators (e.g., leukotriene B4) are present in
the lung in this acute phase. In response to proinﬂamma-
tory mediators, leukocytes (especially neutrophils) trafﬁc
into the pulmonary interstitium and alveoli. In addition,
condensed plasma proteins aggregate in the air spaces
with cellular debris and dysfunctional pulmonary surfac-
tant to form hyaline membrane whorls. Pulmonary vas-
cular injury also occurs early in ARDS, with vascular
obliteration by microthrombi and ﬁbrocellular prolifera-
tion (Fig. 30-3).
Alveolar edema predominantly involves dependent
portions of the lung, leading to diminished aeration and
atelectasis. Collapse of large sections of dependent lung
markedly decreases lung compliance. Consequently,
intrapulmonary shunting and hypoxemia develop, and
the work of breathing increases, leading to dyspnea.
The pathophysiologic alterations in alveolar spaces are
Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome
291
CHAPTER 30
exacerbated by microvascular occlusion, which leads to
reductions in pulmonary arterial blood ﬂow to venti-
lated portions of the lung, increasing the dead space, and
pulmonary hypertension. Thus, in addition to severe
hypoxemia, hypercapnia secondary to an increase in pul-
monary dead space is also prominent in early ARDS.
The exudative phase encompasses the ﬁrst 7 days of
illness after exposure to a precipitating ARDS risk fac-
tor, with the patient experiencing the onset of respira-
tory symptoms.Although usually present within 12–36 h
after the initial insult, symptoms can be delayed by
5–7 days. Dyspnea develops with a sensation of rapid
TABLE 30-1
CLINICAL DISORDERS COMMONLY ASSOCIATED
WITH ACUTE RESPIRATORY DISTRESS SYNDROME
DIRECT LUNG INJURY
INDIRECT LUNG INJURY
Pneumonia
Sepsis
Aspiration of
Severe trauma
gastric contents
Pulmonary contusion
Multiple bone fractures
Near-drowning
Flail chest
Toxic inhalation injury
Head trauma
Burns
Multiple transfusions
Drug overdose
Pancreatitis
Post–cardiopulmonary bypass
TABLE 30-2
DIAGNOSTIC CRITERIA FOR ACUTE LUNG INJURY
AND ACUTE RESPIRATORY DISTRESS SYNDROME
ABSENCE
CHEST
OF LEFT ATRIAL
OXYGENATION
ONSET
RADIOGRAPH
HYPERTENSION
ALI: Pao2/FIo2
Acute
Bilateral
PCWP ≤
≤ 300 mmHg
alveolar 
18 mmHg
ARDS: Pao2/FIo2
or interstitial
or no clinical 
≤ 200 mmHg
inﬁltrates
evidence of
increased left 
atrial pressure
Note: ALI, acute lung injury; ARDS, acute respiratory distress syn-
drome; FIO2, inspired O2 percentage; PaO2, arterial partial pressure of
O2; PCWP, pulmonary capillary wedge pressure.
Exudative
Hyaline
membranes
Edema
Day:
0
2
7
14
21 . . .
Interstitial inflammation
Fibrosis
Proliferative
Fibrotic
FIGURE 30-1
Diagram illustrating the time course for the development
and resolution of acute respiratory distress syndrome.
The exudative phase is notable for early alveolar edema and
neutrophil-rich leukocytic inﬁltration of the lungs with subse-
quent formation of hyaline membranes from diffuse alveolar
damage. Within 7 days, a proliferative phase ensues with
prominent interstitial inﬂammation and early ﬁbrotic changes.
Approximately 3 weeks after the initial pulmonary injury, most
patients recover. However, some patients enter the ﬁbrotic
phase, with substantial ﬁbrosis and bullae formation.
FIGURE 30-2
A representative anteroposterior (AP) chest x-ray in the
exudative phase of acute respiratory distress syndrome
that shows diffuse interstitial and alveolar inﬁltrates, which
can be difﬁcult to distinguish from left ventricular failure.
shallow breathing and an inability to get enough air.
Tachypnea and increased work of breathing frequently
result in respiratory fatigue and ultimately in respiratory
failure. Laboratory values are generally nonspeciﬁc and
primarily indicative of underlying clinical disorders.The
chest radiograph usually reveals alveolar and interstitial
opacities involving at least three-quarters of the lung
ﬁelds (Fig. 30-2). Although characteristic of ARDS or
ALI, these radiographic ﬁndings are not speciﬁc and can
be indistinguishable from cardiogenic pulmonary edema
292
Common Critical Illnesses and Syndromes
SECTION IV
Normal alveolus
Injured alveolus during the acute phase
Alveolar air space
Type I cell
Type II cell
Epithelial
basement
membrane
Interstitium
Alveolar
macrophage
Surfactant layer
Endothelial
cell
Endothelial
basement
membrane
Red cell
Fibroblast
Fibroblast
Gap
formation
Procollagen
IL-8
TNF-α,
IL-8
TNF α,
IL-1
IL-6,
IL-8
Fibrin
Cellular
debris
Alveolar
macrophage
IL-8
Neutrophil
Neutrophil
Migrating neutrophil
Hyaline membrane
Denuded
basement membrane
Intact type II cell
Proteases
Widened,
edematous
interstitium
Platelets
Swollen, injured
endothelial cells
Capillary
MIF
Red cell
Necrotic or apoptotic type I cell
Proteases
PAF
Oxidants
Leukotrienes
Activated
neutrophil
Inactivated surfactant
Sloughing of bronchial epithelium
Protein-rich edema fluid
FIGURE 30-3
The normal alveolus (left-hand side) and the injured alveo-
lus in the acute phase of acute lung injury and acute respi-
ratory distress syndrome (right-hand side). In the acute
phase of the syndrome (right-hand side), there is sloughing of
both the bronchial and alveolar epithelial cells, with the forma-
tion of protein-rich hyaline membranes on the denuded base-
ment membrane. Neutrophils are shown adhering to the injured
capillary endothelium and marginating through the interstitium
into the air space, which is ﬁlled with protein-rich edema ﬂuid.
In the air space, an alveolar macrophage is secreting cytokines,
interleukin 1, 6, 8, and 10 (IL-1, IL-6, IL-8, and IL-10) and tumor
necrosis factor α (TNF α), which act locally to stimulate
chemotaxis and activate neutrophils. Macrophages also secrete
other cytokines, including IL-1, IL-6, and IL-10. IL-1 can also
stimulate the production of extracellular matrix by ﬁbroblasts.
Neutrophils can release oxidants, proteases, leukotrienes, and
other proinﬂammatory molecules, such as platelet-activating
factor (PAF). A number of anti-inﬂammatory mediators are also
present in the alveolar milieu, including IL-1–receptor antagonist,
soluble TNF receptor, autoantibodies against IL-8, and cytokines
such as IL-10 and IL-11 (not shown). The inﬂux of protein-rich
edema ﬂuid into the alveolus has led to the inactivation of sur-
factant. MIF, macrophage inhibitory factor. (From Ware and
Matthay, with permission.)
(Chap. 31). Unlike the latter, however, the chest x-ray in
ARDS rarely shows cardiomegaly, pleural effusions, or
pulmonary vascular redistribution. Chest CT scanning
in patients with ARDS reveals extensive heterogeneity
of lung involvement (Fig. 30-4).
Because the early features of ARDS and ALI are non-
speciﬁc, alternative diagnoses must be considered. In the
differential diagnosis of ARDS, the most common disor-
ders are cardiogenic pulmonary edema, diffuse pneumo-
nia, and alveolar hemorrhage. Less frequent diagnoses to
Treatment:
ACUTE RESPIRATORY DISTRESS
GENERAL PRINCIPLES
Recent reductions in
ARDS and ALI mortality are largely the result of general
advances in the care of critically ill patients (Chap. 26).
Thus, caring for these patients requires close attention
to (1) the recognition and treatment of the underlying
medical and surgical disorders (e.g., sepsis, aspiration,
trauma); (2) minimizing procedures and their complica-
tions; (3) prophylaxis against venous thromboembolism,
gastrointestinal bleeding, and central venous catheter
infections; (4) the prompt recognition of nosocomial
infections; and (5) provision of adequate nutrition.
MANAGEMENT OF MECHANICAL VENTILA-
TION
(See also Chap. 27) Patients meeting clinical crite-
ria for ARDS frequently fatigue from increased work of
breathing and progressive hypoxemia,requiring mechani-
cal ventilation for support.
Ventilator-Induced Lung Injury
Despite its life-
saving potential, mechanical ventilation can aggravate
lung injury. Experimental models have demonstrated
that ventilator-induced lung injury appears to require
two processes: repeated alveolar overdistention and
recurrent alveolar collapse. Clearly evident by chest CT
(Fig. 30-4), ARDS is a heterogeneous disorder, principally
involving dependent portions of the lung with relative
sparing of other regions. Because of their differing com-
pliance, attempts to fully inﬂate the consolidated lung
may lead to overdistention and injury to the more
“normal” areas of lung. Ventilator-induced injury can be
demonstrated in experimental models of ALI, with high
tidal volume ventilation resulting in additional, synergis-
tic alveolar damage. These ﬁndings led to the hypothe-
sis that ventilating patients who have ALI or ARDS with
lower tidal volumes would protect against ventilator-
induced lung injury and improve clinical outcomes.
A large-scale, randomized controlled trial sponsored
by the National Institutes of Health and conducted by
the ARDS Network compared low tidal volume (6 mL/kg
predicted body weight) ventilation with conventional
Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome
293
CHAPTER 30
FIGURE 30-4
A representative computed tomographic scan of the
chest during the exudative phase of acute respiratory dis-
tress syndrome in which dependent alveolar edema and
atelectasis predominate.
consider include acute interstitial lung diseases [e.g., acute
interstitial pneumonitis (Chap. 19)], acute immunologic
injury [e.g., hypersensitivity pneumonitis (Chap. 9)], toxin
injury (e.g., radiation pneumonitis), and neurogenic pul-
monary edema.
Proliferative Phase
This phase of ARDS usually lasts from day 7 to day 21.
Most patients recover rapidly and are liberated from
mechanical ventilation during this phase. Despite this
improvement, many still experience dyspnea, tachypnea,
and hypoxemia. Some patients develop progressive lung
injury and early changes of pulmonary ﬁbrosis during
the proliferative phase. Histologically, the ﬁrst signs of
resolution are often evident in this phase with the initia-
tion of lung repair, organization of alveolar exudates, and
a shift from a neutrophil to a lymphocyte-predominant
pulmonary inﬁltrate. As part of the reparative process,
there is a proliferation of type II pneumocytes along
alveolar basement membranes.These specialized epithe-
lial cells synthesize new pulmonary surfactant and differ-
entiate into type I pneumocytes.The presence of alveolar
type III procollagen peptide,a marker of pulmonary ﬁbrosis,
is associated with a protracted clinical course and
increased mortality from ARDS.
Fibrotic Phase
Although many patients with ARDS recover lung func-
tion 3–4 weeks after the initial pulmonary injury, some
enter a ﬁbrotic phase that may require long-term sup-
port on mechanical ventilators, supplemental oxygen, or
both. Histologically, the alveolar edema and inﬂamma-
tory exudates of the earlier phases are now converted to
extensive alveolar duct and interstitial ﬁbrosis. Acinar
architecture is markedly disrupted, leading to emphysema-
like changes with large bullae. Intimal ﬁbroproliferation
in the pulmonary microcirculation leads to progressive
vascular occlusion and pulmonary hypertension. The
physiologic consequences include an increased risk of
pneumothorax, reductions in lung compliance, and
increased pulmonary dead space. Patients in this late
phase experience a substantial burden of excess morbid-
ity. Lung biopsy evidence for pulmonary ﬁbrosis in any
phase of ARDS is associated with increased mortality.
tidal volume (12 mL/kg predicted body weight) ventila-
tion. Mortality was signiﬁcantly lower in the low tidal
volume patients (31%) compared with the conventional
tidal volume patients (40%). This improvement in sur-
vival represents the most substantial beneﬁt in ARDS
mortality demonstrated for any therapeutic interven-
tion in ARDS to date.
Prevention of Alveolar Collapse
In patients
with ARDS, the presence of alveolar and interstitial
fluid and the loss of surfactant can lead to a marked
reduction of lung compliance. Without an increase in
end-expiratory pressure, signiﬁcant alveolar collapse
can occur at end-expiration, impairing oxygenation. In
most clinical settings, positive end-expiratory pressure
(PEEP) is empirically set to minimize FIO2 and maximize
PaO2. On most modern mechanical ventilators, it is possi-
ble to construct a static pressure–volume curve for the
respiratory system. The lower inﬂection point on the
curve represents alveolar opening (or “recruitment”).
The pressure at this point,usually 12–15 mmHg in ARDS,
is a theoretical “optimal PEEP” for alveolar recruitment.
Titration of the PEEP to the lower inﬂection point on the
static pressure–volume curve has been hypothesized to
keep the lung open, improving oxygenation and pro-
tecting against lung injury. ARDS Network investigators
compared low-to-high PEEP (8.3–13.2 cmH2O) in more
than 500 patients with ARDS ventilated at low tidal vol-
umes [6 mL/kg patient body weight (PBW)]. No signiﬁ-
cant differences in mortality, ventilator-free days, or ICU
stay were observed. Until more data become available
on the clinical utility of high PEEP, it is advisable to set
PEEP to minimize FIO2 and optimize PaO2(Chap.27).
Oxygenation can also be improved by increasing
mean airway pressure with “inverse ratio ventilation.” In
this technique, the inspiratory (I) time is lengthened so
that it is longer than the expiratory (E) time (I:E >1:1).
With diminished time to exhale, dynamic hyperinﬂation
leads to increased end-expiratory pressure, similar to
ventilator-prescribed PEEP. This mode of ventilation has
the advantage of improving oxygenation with lower
peak pressures than conventional ventilation. Although
inverse ratio ventilation can improve oxygenation and
help reduce FIO2 to ≤0.60 to avoid possible oxygen toxi-
city,no mortality beneﬁt in patients with ARDS has been
demonstrated.
In several randomized trials, mechanical ventilation
in the prone position improved arterial oxygena-
tion, but its effect on survival and other important
clinical outcomes remains uncertain. Moreover, unless
the critical care team is experienced in “proning,”
repositioning critically ill patients can be hazardous,
leading to accidental endotracheal extubation, loss of
central venous catheters, and orthopedic injury. Until
validation of its efﬁcacy, prone-position ventilation
should be reserved for only the most critically ill ARDS
patients.
Other Strategies in Mechanical Ventilation
Several additional mechanical ventilation strategies
that use specialized equipment have been tested in
ARDS patients, most with mixed or disappointing
results in adults. These include high-frequency ventila-
tion [HFV, i.e., ventilating at extremely high respira-
tory rates (5–20 cycles/sec) and low tidal volumes
(1–2 mL/kg)]. Also, lung-replacement therapy with
extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO), which
provides a clear survival beneﬁt in neonatal respiratory
distress syndrome, has yet to have proven survival ben-
eﬁt in adults with ARDS. Ongoing research on partial
liquid ventilation (PLV) with perﬂuorocarbon, an inert,
high-density liquid that easily solubilizes oxygen and
carbon dioxide, has revealed promising preliminary
data on pulmonary function in patients with ARDS but
without survival beneﬁt.
Data in support of the efﬁcacy of “adjunctive”ventila-
tor therapies (e.g., high PEEP, inverse ratio ventilation,
prone positioning, HFV, ECMO, and PLV) remain incom-
plete,so these modalities are not routinely used.
FLUID 
MANAGEMENT
(See also Chap.
26)
Increased pulmonary vascular permeability leading to
interstitial and alveolar edema rich in protein is a central
feature of ARDS. In addition, impaired vascular integrity
augments the normal increase in extravascular lung
water that occurs with increasing left atrial pressure.
Maintaining a normal or low left atrial ﬁlling pressure
minimizes pulmonary edema and prevents further decre-
ments in arterial oxygenation and lung compliance,
improves pulmonary mechanics, shortens ICU stay and
the duration of mechanical ventilation, and is associated
with a lower mortality. Thus, aggressive attempts to
reduce left atrial ﬁlling pressures with ﬂuid restriction and
diuretics should be an important aspect of ARDS man-
agement,limited only by hypotension and hypoperfusion
of critical organs,such as the kidneys.
GLUCOCORTICOIDS
Inflammatory mediators
and leukocytes are abundant in the lungs of patients
with ARDS. Many attempts have been made to treat
patients with both early and late ARDS with gluco-
corticoids to reduce this potentially deleterious
pulmonary inflammation. Few studies have shown
any benefit. Current evidence does not support the
use of glucocorticoids in the care of ARDS patients.
However, the ARDS Network is currently conducting
a large-scale study of glucocorticoids in the late
phase of ARDS.
OTHER THERAPIES
Clinical trials of surfactant
replacement therapy have proved disappointing.
294
Common Critical Illnesses and Syndromes
SECTION IV
Similarly, although several randomized clinical trials of
inhaled nitric oxide (NO) in ARDS have demonstrated
improved oxygenation, no signiﬁcant improvement in
survival or decrements in time on mechanical ventila-
tion has been observed. Therefore, the use of NO is not
currently recommended for patients with ARDS.
RECOMMENDATIONS
Many clinical trials have
been undertaken to improve the outcome of patients
with ARDS; most have been unsuccessful in modifying
the natural history.The large number and uncertain clin-
ical efﬁcacy of ARDS therapies can make it difﬁcult for
clinicians to select a rational treatment plan, and these
patients’ critical illness can tempt physicians to try
unproven and potentially harmful therapies. Although
results of large clinical trials must be judiciously admin-
istered to individual patients, evidence-based recommen-
dations are summarized in Table 30-3, and an algorithm
for the initial therapeutic goals and limits in ARDS man-
agement is provided in Figure 30-5.
interest, mortality in those with ARDS is largely attribut-
able to nonpulmonary causes, with sepsis and nonpul-
monary organ failure accounting for >80% of deaths.
Thus, improvement in survival is likely secondary to
advances in the care of patients with sepsis or infection
and those with multiple organ failure (Chap. 26).
Several risk factors for mortality to help estimate prog-
nosis have been identiﬁed. Similar to the risk factors for
developing ARDS, the major risk factors for ARDS mor-
tality are also nonpulmonary.Advanced age is an important
risk factor. Patients >75 years have a substantially increased
mortality (∼60%) compared with those <45 years of age
(∼20%). Also, patients >60 years of age who have ARDS
and sepsis have a threefold higher mortality compared with
those <60 years of age. Preexisting organ dysfunction from
chronic medical illness is an important additional risk factor
for increased mortality. In particular, chronic liver disease,
cirrhosis, chronic alcohol abuse, chronic immunosuppres-
sion, sepsis, chronic renal disease, any nonpulmonary organ
failure, and increased APACHE II scores (Chap. 26) have
also been linked to increased ARDS mortality. Several
factors related to the presenting clinical disorders also
increase risk for ARDS mortality. Patients with ARDS
from direct lung injury (including pneumonia, pulmonary
contusion, and aspiration;Table 30-1) have nearly twice the
mortality of those with indirect causes of lung injury, while
surgical and trauma patients with ARDS, especially those
Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome
295
CHAPTER 30
TABLE 30-3
EVIDENCE-BASED RECOMMENDATIONS FOR ACUTE
RESPIRATORY DISTRESS SYNDROME THERAPIES
TREATMENT
RECOMMENDATIONa
Mechanical ventilation:
Low tidal volume
A
High-PEEP or “open-lung”
C
Prone position
C
Recruitment maneuvers
C
High-frequency ventilation 
D
and ECMO
Minimize left atrial ﬁlling pressures
B
Glucocorticoids
C
Surfactant replacement, inhaled
D
nitric oxide, and other
anti-inﬂammatory therapy
(e.g., ketoconazole, PGE1, NSAIDs)
aA, recommended therapy based on strong clinical evidence from
randomized clinical trials; B, recommended therapy based on sup-
portive but limited clinical data; C, indeterminate evidence: recom-
mended only as alternative therapy; D, not recommended based on
clinical evidence against efﬁcacy of therapy.
Note: ECMO, extracorporeal membrane oxygenation; NSAID, nons-
teroidal anti-inﬂammatory drug; PEEP, positive end-expiratory pres-
sure; PGE1, prostaglandin E1.
INITIAL MANAGEMENT OF ARDS
Initiate
volume/pressure-limited 
ventilation
Oxygenate
Minimize acidosis
Diuresis
Goals and Limits:
Tidal volume ≤6 mL/kg PBW 
Plateau pressure ≤30 cmH2O
RR ≤35 bpm
FiO2 ≤0.6
PEEP ≤10 cmH2O
SpO2 88–95%
MAP ≥65 mmHg
Avoid hypoperfusion
pH ≥7.30
RR ≤135 bpm
FIGURE 30-5
Algorithm for the initial management of acute respiratory
distress syndrome (ARDS). Clinical trials have provided
evidence-based therapeutic goals for a stepwise approach
to the early mechanical ventilation, oxygenation, correction
of acidosis, and diuresis of critically ill patients with ARDS.
FIO2, inspiratory O2 fraction; MAP, mean arterial pressure;
PBW,  patient body weight; PEEP, positive end-expiratory
pressure; RR, respiratory rate.
PROGNOSIS
Mortality
Recent mortality estimates for patients with ARDS range
from 41–65%. There is substantial variability, but a trend
toward improved ARDS outcomes appears evident. Of
without direct lung injury, have a better survival rate than
other ARDS patients.
Surprisingly, there is little value in predicting ARDS
mortality from the extent of hypoxemia and any of the
following measures of the severity of lung injury: the
level of PEEP used in mechanical ventilation, the respi-
ratory compliance, the extent of alveolar inﬁltrates on
chest radiography, and the lung injury score (a compos-
ite of all these variables). However, recent data indicate
that an early (within 24 h of presentation) elevation in
dead space may predict increased mortality from ARDS.
Functional Recovery in Acute Respiratory
Distress Syndrome Survivors
Although it is common for patients with ARDS to expe-
rience prolonged respiratory failure and remain dependent
on mechanical ventilation for survival, it is a testament to
the resolving powers of the lung that the majority of
patients recover nearly normal lung function. Patients usu-
ally recover their maximum lung function within 6 months.
One year after endotracheal extubation, more than one-
third of ARDS survivors have normal spirometry values
and diffusion capacity. Most of the remaining patients
have only mild abnormalities in their pulmonary func-
tion. Unlike the risk for mortality, recovery of lung
function is strongly associated with the extent of lung
injury in early ARDS. Low static respiratory compliance,
high levels of required PEEP,longer durations of mechanical
ventilation, and high lung injury scores are all associated
with worse recovery of pulmonary function. When car-
ing for ARDS survivors, it is important to be aware of
the potential for a substantial burden of emotional and res-
piratory symptoms.There are signiﬁcant rates of depres-
sion and posttraumatic stress disorder in ARDS survivors.
FURTHER READINGS
ARDS FOUNDATION:Available at http://www.ardsusa.org
ARDS NETWORK
CLINICAL
TRIALS
INFORMATION: Available at
http://www .ardsnet.org
ARDS SUPPORT CENTER
FOR PATIENT-ORIENTED EDUCATION:
Available at http://www.ards.org
BROWER RG et al: Higher versus lower positive end-expiratory pres-
sures in patients with the acute respiratory distress syndrome.
N Engl J Med 351:327, 2004
FAN EDM et al: Ventilatory management of acute lung injury and
acute respiratory distress syndrome. JAMA 294:2889, 2005
GUERIN CS et al: Effects of systemic prone positioning in hypoxemic
acute respiratory failure: A randomized controlled trial. JAMA
292:2379, 2004
RUBENFIELD GD et al: Incidence and outcomes of acute lung injury.
N Engl J Med 353:1685, 2005
TOMASHEFSKI JF JR.: Pulmonary pathology of acute respiratory distress
syndrome. Clin Chest Med 21:435, 2000
WARE LB, MATTHAY MA: The acute respiratory distress syndrome.
N Engl J Med 342:1334, 2000
WHEELER AP, BERNARD GR:Acute lung injury and the acute respira-
tory distress syndrome: A clinical review. Lancet 369:1553, 2007
296
Common Critical Illnesses and Syndromes
SECTION IV
Judith S. Hochman
I
David H. Ingbar
Cardiogenic shock (CS) and pulmonary edema are life-
threatening conditions that should be treated as medical
emergencies.The most common etiology for both is severe
left ventricular (LV) dysfunction, leading to pulmonary
congestion,systemic hypoperfusion,or both (Fig. 31-1).
The pathophysiology of pulmonary edema and shock
are discussed in Chaps. 2 and 28, respectively.
CARDIOGENIC SHOCK
CS is characterized by systemic hypoperfusion caused by
severe depression of the cardiac index [<2.2 (L/min)/m2)]
and sustained systolic arterial hypotension (<90 mmHg)
despite an elevated ﬁlling pressure [pulmonary capillary
wedge pressure (PCWP) >18 mmHg]. It is associated
with in-hospital mortality rates >50%. The major causes
of CS are listed in Table 31-1. Circulatory failure based
on cardiac dysfunction may be caused by primary
myocardial failure, most commonly secondary to acute
myocardial infarction (MI) (Chap. 34) and less frequently
by cardiomyopathy or myocarditis or cardiac tamponade.
Incidence
CS is the leading cause of death of patients hospitalized
with MI. Early reperfusion therapy for acute MI decreases
the incidence of CS. The rate of CS complicating acute
CARDIOGENIC SHOCK AND
PULMONARY EDEMA
MI decreased from 20% in the 1960s but has plateaued at
∼8% for >20 years. Shock is typically associated with ST
elevation MI (STEMI) and is less common with non–ST
elevation MI (Chap. 34).
LV failure accounts for ∼80% of the cases of CS com-
plicating acute MI. Acute severe mitral regurgitation
(MR), ventricular septal rupture (VSR), predominant
right ventricular (RV) failure, and free wall rupture or
tamponade account for the remainder.
Pathophysiology
CS is characterized by a vicious circle in which depression
of myocardial contractility, usually caused by ischemia,
results in reduced cardiac output and arterial pressure
(BP), which result in hypoperfusion of the myocardium
and further ischemia and depression of the cardiac output
(Fig. 31-1). Systolic myocardial dysfunction reduces stroke
volume and, together with diastolic dysfunction, leads to
elevated LV end-diastolic pressure and PCWP as well as to
pulmonary congestion. Reduced coronary perfusion leads
to worsening ischemia and progressive myocardial dys-
function and a rapid downward spiral, which, if uninter-
rupted, is often fatal. A systemic inﬂammatory response
syndrome may accompany large infarctions and shock.
Inﬂammatory cytokines, inducible nitric oxide synthase,
and excess nitric oxide and peroxynitrite may contribute
CHAPTER 31
CHAPTER 31
297
I Cardiogenic Shock . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 297
Shock Secondary to Right Ventricular Infarction . . . . . . . . . . 302
Mitral Regurgitation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 302
Ventricular Septal Rupture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 302
Free Wall Rupture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 302
Acute Fulminant Myocarditis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 303
I Pulmonary Edema . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 303
I Further Readings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 305
Common Critical Illnesses and Syndromes
298
SECTION IV
to the genesis of CS as they do to other forms of shock
(Chap. 28). Lactic acidosis from poor tissue perfusion and
hypoxemia from pulmonary edema may result from pump
failure and then contribute to the vicious circle by wors-
ening myocardial ischemia and hypotension. Severe acido-
sis (pH <7.25) reduces the efﬁcacy of endogenous and
exogenously administered catecholamines. Refractory sus-
tained ventricular or atrial tachyarrhythmias can cause or
exacerbate CS.
Autopsy specimens often reﬂect the stuttering course
and piecemeal necrosis of the LV, showing varying stages
of infarction. Reinfarction is apparent as new areas of
necrosis contiguous with or remote from a slightly older
infarct. Infarctions that extend through the full myocardial
thickness and result in rupture of the interventricular sep-
tum, papillary muscle, or ventricular free wall may result
in shock (Chap. 34).
Patient Proﬁle
In patients with acute MI, older age, female gender, prior
MI, diabetes, and anterior MI location are all associated
with increased risk of CS. Shock associated with a ﬁrst
inferior MI should prompt a search for a mechanical
cause. Reinfarction soon after MI increases the risk of CS.
Two-thirds of patients with CS have ﬂow-limiting
stenoses in all three major coronary arteries, and 20% have
left main coronary artery stenosis. CS may rarely occur in
the absence of signiﬁcant stenosis, as seen in LV apical bal-
looning or Takotsubo cardiomyopathy, often in response to
sudden severe emotional stress.
Myocardial infarction
Myocardial dysfunction
Systolic
Diastolic
↓Cardiac output
↓Stroke volume
↓Systemic
  perfusion
↓Coronary
perfusion pressure
↑LVEDP
Pulmonary congestion
Hypotension
Compensatory
vasoconstriction*
Hypoxemia
Ischemia
Progressive
myocardial
dysfunction
Death
FIGURE 31-1
Pathophysiology of cardiogenic shock. Systolic and diastolic
myocardial dysfunction result in a reduction in cardiac output
and often pulmonary congestion. Systemic and coronary
hypoperfusion occur, resulting in progressive ischemia.
Although a number of compensatory mechanisms are activated
in an attempt to support the circulation, these compensatory
mechanisms may become maladaptive and produce a worsen-
ing of hemodynamics. *Release of inﬂammatory cytokines after
myocardial infarction may lead to inducible nitrous oxide
expression, excess NO, and inappropriate vasodilation. This
causes further reduction in systemic and coronary perfusion. A
vicious spiral of progressive myocardial dysfunction occurs that
ultimately results in death if it is not interrupted. LVEDP, left ven-
tricular end-diastolic pressure. (From Hollenberg SM et al: Car-
diogenic shock. Ann Intern Med 131:47, 1999.)
TABLE 31-1
CAUSES OF CARDIOGENIC SHOCK (CS)a AND
CARDIOGENIC PULMONARY EDEMA
Causes of Cardiogenic Shock or Pulmonary Edema
Acute myocardial infarction or ischemia
LV failure
VSR
Papillary muscle or chordal rupture—severe MR
Ventricular free wall rupture with subacute tamponade
Other conditions complicating large MIs
Hemorrhage
Infection
Excess negative inotropic or vasodilator medications
Prior valvular heart disease
Hyperglycemia or ketoacidosis
Post–cardiac arrest
Post-cardiotomy
Refractory sustained tachyarrhythmias
Acute fulminant myocarditis
End-stage cardiomyopathy
Left ventricular apical ballooning
Takotsubo cardiomyopathy
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy with severe outﬂow
obstruction
Aortic dissection with aortic insufﬁciency or tamponade
Pulmonary embolus
Severe valvular heart disease
Critical aortic or mitral stenosis
Acute severe aortic or MR
Toxic-metabolic
β-Blocker or calcium channel antagonist overdose
Other Etiologies of Cardiogenic Shockb
RV failure caused by:
Acute MI
Acute coronary pulmonale
Refractory sustained bradyarrhythmias
Pericardial tamponade
Toxic or metabolic
Severe acidosis, severe hypoxemia
aThe etiologies of cardiogenic shock are listed. Most of these can cause
pulmonary edema instead of shock or pulmonary edema with CS.
bThese cause CS but not pulmonary edema.
Note: LV, left ventricular; MR, mitral regurgitation; RV, right ventricular;
VSR, ventricular septal rupture.
Timing
Shock is present on admission in only 25% of patients
who develop CS complicating MI; 25% develop it rapidly
thereafter within 6 h of MI onset. Another 25% develop
shock later on the ﬁrst day. Subsequent onset of CS may
be caused by reinfarction, marked infarct expansion, or a
mechanical complication.
Diagnosis
Because of the unstable condition of these patients,
supportive therapy must be initiated simultaneously
with diagnostic evaluation (Fig. 31-2).A focused history
and physical examination should be performed, blood
specimens sent to the laboratory, and an electrocardio-
gram (ECG) and chest x-ray obtained. Echocardiogra-
phy is an invaluable diagnostic tool in patients sus-
pected of having CS.
Clinical Findings
Most patients have continuing chest pain and dyspnea
and appear pale, apprehensive, and diaphoretic. Menta-
tion may be altered, with somnolence, confusion, and
agitation.The pulse is typically weak and rapid, often in
the range of 90–110 bpm, or severe bradycardia caused
by high-grade heart block may be present. Systolic BP is
reduced (<90 mmHg) with a narrow pulse pressure
Cardiogenic Shock and Pulmonary Edema
299
CHAPTER 31
Clinical signs: Shock, hypoperfusion, congestive heart failure, acute pulmonary edema
Most likely problem?
Volume problem
Pump problem
Rate problem
Bradycardia
Acute pulmonary edema
Systolic BP
<70 mmHg
Signs/symptoms
of shock
Norepinephrine
0.5–30 μg/min IV
Dopamine
2–20 μg/kg
per min IV
Systolic BP
70–100 mmHg
Signs/symptoms
of shock
Systolic BP
70–100 mmHg
No signs/symptoms
of shock
Blood pressure?
Systolic BP:
>100 mmHg
Dobutamine
2–20 μg/kg
per min IV
Nitroglycerin
10–20 μg/min IV
• Identify and treat reversible causes
• Pulmonary artery catheterization
• Intraaortic balloon pump
• Angiography and PCI
• Additional diagnostic studies
• Surgical interventions
• Additional drug therapy
ACUTE PULMONARY EDEMA, HYPOTENSION, SHOCK ALGORITHM
Further diagnostic/therapeutic considerations
First-line actions
• Oxygen and intubation as needed
• Nitroglycerin SL
• Furosemide IV 0.5–1.0 mg/kga
• Morphine IV 2–4 mg
Administer
• Fluids
• Blood transfusions
• Cause-specific
   interventions
Consider vasopressors
Systolic BP
defines second 
line of action
• Nitroglycerin if SBP >100 mmHg
• Dopamine if SBP = 70–100 mmHg,
   signs/symptoms of shock
• Dobutamine if SBP >100 mmHg,
   no signs/symptoms of shock
Second-Line Actions —
Acute pulmonary edema
Tachycardia
FIGURE 31-2
Emergency management of patients with cardiogenic
shock, acute pulmonary edema, or both is outlined.
aFurosemide: <0.5 mg/kg for new-onset acute pulmonary
edema without hypervolemia; 1 mg/kg for acute on chronic
volume overload, renal insufﬁciency. ACE, angiotensin-converting
enzyme; BP, blood pressure; MI, myocardial infarction; PCI, 
percutaneous coronary intervention; SBP, systolic blood pres-
sure; SL, sublingual. [From Fields J et al (eds): Handbook of
Emergency Cardiovascular Care for Healthcare Providers.
vbvbv 2006, American Heart Association, Inc. Reprinted
with permission.]
(<30 mmHg), but occasionally, BP may be maintained by
very high systemic vascular resistance.Tachypnea, Cheyne-
Stokes respirations, and jugular venous distention may be
present. The precordium is typically quiet, with a weak
apical pulse. S1 is usually soft, and an S3 gallop may be
audible.Acute, severe MR and VSR are usually associated
with characteristic systolic murmurs (Chap. 34). Rales
are audible in most patients with LV failure causing CS.
Oliguria (urine output <30 mL/h) is common.
Laboratory Findings
The white blood cell count is typically elevated with a
left shift. In the absence of prior renal insufﬁciency, renal
function is initially normal, but blood urea nitrogen and
creatinine increase progressively. Hepatic transaminases
may be markedly elevated because of liver hypoperfu-
sion. Poor tissue perfusion may result in an anion gap
acidosis and elevation of lactic acid level. Before support
with supplemental O2, arterial blood gases usually
demonstrate hypoxemia and metabolic acidosis, which
may be compensated by respiratory alkalosis. Cardiac
markers, creatine phosphokinase and its MB fraction, are
markedly elevated, as are troponins I and T.
Electrocardiography
In CS caused by acute MI with LV failure, Q waves or
>2-mm ST elevation in multiple leads or left bundle
branch block are usually present. More than 50% of all
infarcts associated with shock are anterior. Global
ischemia caused by severe left main stenosis is usually
accompanied by severe (e.g., >3 mm) ST depressions in
multiple leads.
Chest Radiography
The chest x-ray typically shows pulmonary vascular
congestion and often pulmonary edema, but these ﬁnd-
ings may be absent in up to one-third of patients. The
heart size is usually normal when CS results from a ﬁrst
MI but is enlarged when it occurs in a patient with a
previous MI.
Echocardiography
A two-dimensional echocardiogram with color-ﬂow
Doppler should be obtained promptly in patients with
suspected CS to help deﬁne its etiology. Doppler map-
ping demonstrates a left-to-right shunt in patients with
VSR and the severity of MR when the latter is present.
Proximal aortic dissection with aortic regurgitation or
tamponade may be visualized or evidence for pulmonary
embolism obtained (Chap. 20).
Pulmonary Artery Catheterization
There is controversy regarding the use of pulmonary
artery (Swan-Ganz) catheters in patients with established
or suspected CS (Chap 26). However, their use is gener-
ally recommended for measurement of ﬁlling pressures
and cardiac output to conﬁrm the diagnosis and opti-
mize use of IV ﬂuids, inotropic agents, and vasopressors
(Table 31-2). Blood samples for O2 saturation measure-
ment should be obtained from the right atrium, right
ventricle, and pulmonary artery to rule out a left-to-
right shunt. Mixed venous O2 saturations are low and
arterial–venous O2 differences are elevated, reﬂecting low
cardiac index and high fractional O2 extraction. The
PCWP is elevated. However, use of sympathomimetic
amines may return these measurements and the systemic
BP toward normal. Systemic vascular resistance may be
low, normal, or elevated in patients with CS. Equalization
of right- and left-sided ﬁlling pressures (right atrial and
PCWP) suggests cardiac tamponade as the cause of CS.
Left Heart Catheterization and Coronary
Angiography
Measurement of LV pressure, the deﬁnition of the coro-
nary anatomy, and left ventriculography provide useful
information and are indicated in most patients with CS
complicating MI. Because of the procedural risk in this
critically ill population, cardiac catheterization should be
performed when there is a plan and capability for imme-
diate coronary intervention (see later) or when a deﬁni-
tive diagnosis has not been made by other tests.
Common Critical Illnesses and Syndromes
300
SECTION IV
Treatment:
ACUTE MYOCARDIAL INFARCTION
GENERAL MEASURES
(Fig. 31-2) In addition to
the usual treatment of acute MI (Chap. 34), initial ther-
apy is aimed at maintaining adequate systemic and
coronary perfusion by increasing the systemic BP with
vasopressors and adjusting the volume status to a level
that ensures optimum LV ﬁlling pressure. There is inter-
patient variability, but the values that are generally asso-
ciated with adequate perfusion are systolic BP of ∼90
mmHg or mean BP >60 mmHg and PCWP of ∼20 mmHg.
Hypoxemia and acidosis must be corrected; most
patients require ventilatory support with either endotra-
cheal intubation or bilevel positive airway pressure (Bi-
PAP) to correct these abnormalities and reduce the work
of breathing (see Pulmonary Edema later). Negative
inotropic agents should be discontinued and the doses
of renally cleared medications adjusted. Hyperglycemia
should be corrected with continuous infusion of insulin.
Bradyarrhythmias may require transvenous pacing.
Recurrent ventricular tachycardia or rapid atrial ﬁbrilla-
tion may require immediate treatment.
VASOPRESSORS
Various IV drugs may be used to
augment BP and cardiac output in patients with CS. All
have important disadvantages, and none has been
shown to change the outcome in patients with estab-
lished shock. Norepinephrine is a potent vasoconstrictor
and inotropic stimulant that increases myocardial O2 con-
sumption; it should be reserved for patients with CS and
refractory hypotension, particularly those without ele-
vated systemic vascular resistance. It should be started at
a dose of 2–4 μg/min and titrated upward as necessary.If
systemic perfusion or systolic pressure cannot be main-
tained at >90 mmHg with a dose of 15 μg/min, it is
unlikely that a further increase will be beneﬁcial.
Dopamine is useful in many patients; at low doses
(≤2 μg/kg per min), it dilates the renal vascular bed; at
moderate doses (2–10 μg/kg per min), it has positive
chronotropic and inotropic effects as a consequence of
β-adrenergic receptor stimulation. At higher doses, a
vasoconstrictor effect results from α-receptor stimula-
tion. It is started at an infusion rate of 2–5 μg/kg per
min, and the dose is increased every 2–5 min to a maxi-
mum of 20–50 μg/kg per min. Dobutamine is a synthetic
sympathomimetic amine with positive inotropic action
and minimal positive chronotropic activity at low doses
(2.5 μg/kg per min) but moderate chronotropic activity
at higher doses. Although the usual dose is up to 10
μg/kg per min, its vasodilating activity precludes its use
when a vasoconstrictor effect is required.
AORTIC COUNTERPULSATION
In CS, mechani-
cal assistance with an intraaortic balloon pump (IABP)
system capable of augmenting both arterial diastolic
pressure and cardiac output is helpful in rapidly stabiliz-
ing patients. A sausage-shaped balloon is introduced
percutaneously into the aorta via the femoral artery; the
balloon is automatically inﬂated during early diastole,
augmenting coronary blood ﬂow. The balloon collapses
in early systole, reducing the afterload against which the
LV ejects. IABP improves hemodynamic status temporar-
ily in most patients. In contrast to vasopressors and
inotropic agents, myocardial O2 consumption is reduced,
ameliorating ischemia.IABP is useful as a stabilizing mea-
sure in patients with CS before and during cardiac
catheterization and percutaneous coronary intervention
(PCI) or before urgent surgery. IABP is contraindicated if
aortic regurgitation is present or aortic dissection is sus-
pected. Ventricular assist devices may be considered for
eligible young patients with refractory shock as a bridge
to cardiac transplantation.
REPERFUSION-REVASCULARIZATION
The
rapid establishment of blood ﬂow in the infarct-related
artery is essential in the management of patients with
CS and forms the centerpiece of management. The ran-
domized SHOCK (SHould we emergently revascularize
Occluded coronaries for Cardiogenic shocK?) trial
demonstrated 132 lives saved per 1000 patients treated
with early revascularization with PCI or coronary artery
bypass graft (CABG) surgery compared with initial
Cardiogenic Shock and Pulmonary Edema
301
CHAPTER 31
TABLE 31-2
HEMODYNAMIC PATTERNSa
RA, 
RVS,
RVD,
PAS, 
PAD,
PCW,
CI, 
SVR,
mmHg
mmHg
mmHg
mmHg
mmHg
mmHg
(L/min)/m2
(dyn · s)/cm5
Normal values
<6
<25
0–12
<25
0–12
<6–12
2.5
(800–1600)
MI without 
—
—
—
—
—
13 (5–18)
2.7 (2.2–4.3)
—
pulmonary edemab
Pulmonary edema
↔↑
↔↑
↔↑
↑
↑
↑
↔↓
↑
Cardiogenic shock
LV failure
↔↑
↔↑
↔↑
↔↑
↑
↑
↓
↔↑
RV failurec
↑
↓↔↑d
↑
↓↔↑d
↔↓↑d
↓↔↑d
↓
↑
Cardiac tamponade
↑
↔↑
↑
↔↑
↔↑
↔↑
↓
↑
Acute mitral 
↔↑
↑
↔↑
↑
↑
↑
↔↓
↔↑
regurgitation
Ventricular 
↑
↔↑
↑
↔↑
↔↑
↔↑
↑PBF
↔↑
septal rupture
↓SBF
Hypovolemic shock
↓
↔↓
↔↓
↓
↓
↓
↓
↑
Septic shock
↓
↔↓
↔↓
↓
↓
↓
↑
↓
aThere is signiﬁcant patient-to-patient variation. Pressure may be normalized if cardiac output is low.
bForrester et al. classiﬁed nonreperfused MI patients into four hemodynamic subsets. (From Forrester JS et al: N Engl J Med 295:1356, 1976.)
Pulmonary capillary wedge (PCWP) and cardiac index (CI) in clinically stable subset 1 patients are shown. Values in parentheses represent
range.
c“Isolated” or predominant right ventricular (RV) failure.
dPCW and PA pressures may rise in RV failure after volume loading due to RV dilatation, right-to-left shift of the interventricular septum, resulting
in impaired left ventricular (LV) ﬁlling. When biventricular failure is present, the patterns are similar to those shown for LV failure.
Note: MI, myocardial infarction; PAS/D, pulmonary artery systolic/diastolic; P/SBF, pulmonary/systemic blood ﬂow; RA, right atrium; RVS/D,
right ventricular systolic/diastolic; SVR, systemic vascular resistance.
Source: Table prepared with the assistance of Krishnan Ramanathan, MD.
medical therapy, including IABP with ﬁbrinolytics fol-
lowed by delayed revascularization (Fig. 31-3).The ben-
eﬁt is seen across the risk strata and is sustained up to
11 years post-MI. Early revascularization with PCI or
CABG is a class I recommendation for patients age
<75 years of age with ST elevation or left bundle branch
block MI who develop CS within 36 h of MI and who can
be revascularized within 18 h of development of CS.
When mechanical revascularization is not possible, IABP
and ﬁbrinolytic therapy are recommended.Older patients
who are suitable candidates for aggressive care should
also be offered early revascularization.
CS caused by RV failure accounts for only 3% of CS
complicating MI. The salient features of RV shock are
absence of pulmonary congestion, high right atrial pres-
sure (which may be seen only after volume loading), RV
dilatation and dysfunction, only mildly or moderately
depressed LV function, and predominance of single-
vessel proximal right coronary artery occlusion. Manage-
ment includes IV ﬂuid administration to optimize right
atrial pressure (10–15 mmHg); avoidance of excess ﬂuids,
which cause a shift of the interventricular septum into
the LV; sympathomimetic amines; IABP; and the early
reestablishment of infarct–artery ﬂow.
MITRAL REGURGITATION
(See also Chap. 34) Acute severe MR caused by papillary
muscle dysfunction or rupture may complicate MI and
result in CS, pulmonary edema, or both.This complica-
tion most often occurs on the ﬁrst day, with a second
peak several days later. The diagnosis is conﬁrmed by
echo-Doppler. Rapid stabilization with IABP is recom-
mended, with administration of dobutamine as needed to
increase cardiac output. Reducing the load against which
the LV pumps (afterload) reduces the volume of regurgi-
tant ﬂow of blood into the left atrium. Mitral valve
surgery is the deﬁnitive therapy and should be per-
formed early in the course in suitable candidates.
VENTRICULAR SEPTAL RUPTURE
(See also Chap. 34) Echo-Doppler demonstrates shunting
of blood from the left to the right ventricle and may visu-
alize the opening in the interventricular septum.Timing
and management are similar to that for MR with IABP
support and surgical correction for suitable candidates.
FREE WALL RUPTURE
Myocardial rupture is a dramatic complication of STEMI
that is most likely to occur during the ﬁrst week after the
onset of symptoms; its frequency increases with the age of
the patient. First infarction, a history of hypertension, no
history of angina pectoris, and a relatively large Q-wave
infarct are associated with a higher incidence of cardiac
rupture.The clinical presentation typically is a sudden loss
of pulse, blood pressure, and consciousness but sinus
rhythm on ECG (pulseless electrical activity). The
myocardium continues to contract, but forward ﬂow is not
maintained as blood escapes into the pericardium. Cardiac
tamponade ensues, and closed-chest massage is ineffective.
This condition is almost universally fatal, although dra-
matic cases of urgent pericardiotensis followed by success-
ful surgical repair have been reported. Free wall rupture
may also result in subacute tamponade when the peri-
cardium temporarily seals the rupture sites. Deﬁnitive sur-
gical repair is required.
Common Critical Illnesses and Syndromes
302
SECTION IV
0
2
4
6
8
10
Early revascularization
Initial medical stabilization
Proportion alive
Years since randomization
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
FIGURE 31-3
Early revascularization (percutaneous coronary intervention
or coronary artery bypass graft) for cardiogenic shock compli-
cating acute myocardial infarction resulted in substantially
improved 1-year and long-term survival compared with initial
mechanical stabilization, including intraaortic balloon pump
and ﬁbrinolytic agents followed by selective delayed revascu-
larization in the SHOCK (SHould we emergently revascularize
Occluded coronaries for Cardiogenic shocK?) trial. (From
Hochman JS et al: Early revascularization and long-term sur-
vival in cardiogenic shock complicating acute myocardial
infarction. JAMA 295:2511–2515, 2006; reprinted with permis-
sion from JAMA.)
Prognosis
Within this high-risk condition, there is a wide range of
expected death rates based on age, the severity of hemo-
dynamic abnormalities, the severity of the clinical mani-
festations of hypoperfusion, and the performance of
early revascularization. Independent risk factors are
advanced age; depressed cardiac index, ejection fraction,
and BP; more extensive coronary artery disease; and
renal insufﬁciency.
SHOCK SECONDARY TO RIGHT
VENTRICULAR INFARCTION
Although transient hypotension is common in patients
with RV infarction and inferior MI (Chap. 34), persistent
ACUTE FULMINANT MYOCARDITIS
Myocarditis can mimic acute MI with ST deviation or
bundle branch block on the ECG and marked elevation
of cardiac markers.Acute myocarditis causes CS in ∼15%
of cases. These patients are typically younger than those
with CS caused by acute MI and often do not have typi-
cal ischemic chest pain. Echocardiography usually shows
global LV dysfunction. Initial management is the same as
for CS complicating acute MI (see Fig. 31-2) but of
course does not involve coronary revascularization.
PULMONARY EDEMA
The etiologies and pathophysiology of pulmonary edema
are discussed in Chap. 2.
Diagnosis
Acute pulmonary edema usually presents with the rapid
onset of dyspnea at rest, tachypnea, tachycardia, and
severe hypoxemia. Rales and wheezing caused by airway
compression from peribronchial cufﬁng may be audible.
Hypertension is usually present because of release of
endogenous catecholamines.
It is often difﬁcult to distinguish between cardiogenic
and noncardiogenic causes of acute pulmonary edema.
Echocardiography may identify systolic and diastolic ven-
tricular dysfunction and valvular lesions. Pulmonary
edema associated with electrocardiographic ST elevation
and evolving Q waves is usually diagnostic of acute MI
and should prompt immediate institution of MI proto-
cols and coronary artery reperfusion therapy (Chap. 34).
Brain natriuretic peptide levels, when substantially ele-
vated, support heart failure as the cause of acute dyspnea
with pulmonary edema.
The use of a Swan-Ganz catheter permits measurement
of PCWP and helps differentiate between high pressure
(cardiogenic) and normal pressure (noncardiogenic) causes
of pulmonary edema. Pulmonary artery catheterization is
indicated when the cause of the pulmonary edema is uncer-
tain, when it is refractory to therapy, or when it is accom-
panied by hypotension. Data derived from use of a catheter
often alter the treatment plan, but an impact on mortality
has not been demonstrated.
conditions that frequently complicate pulmonary edema,
such as infection, acidemia, anemia, and renal failure,
must be corrected.
SUPPORT OF OXYGENATION AND VENTI-
LATION
Patients with acute cardiogenic pulmonary
edema generally have an identiﬁable cause of acute LV
failure such as arrhythmia, ischemia or infarction, or
myocardial decompensation that can be rapidly treated,
with improvement in gas exchange. In contrast, noncar-
diogenic edema usually resolves much less quickly, and
most patients require mechanical ventilation.
Oxygen Therapy
Support of oxygenation is essen-
tial to ensure adequate O2 delivery to peripheral tissues,
including the heart.
Positive-Pressure Ventilation
Pulmonary edema
increases the work of breathing and the O2 requirements
of this work and may pose a signiﬁcant physiologic stress
on the heart. For patients with inadequate oxygenation or
ventilation despite supplemental O2,assisted ventilation by
face or nasal mask or by endotracheal intubation should
be initiated. Continuous or Bi-PAP (Chap. 27) can rest the
respiratory muscles, improve oxygenation and cardiac
function, and reduce the need for intubation. In refractory
cases, mechanical ventilation can relieve the work of
breathing more completely than noninvasive ventilation.
Mechanical ventilation with positive end-expiratory pres-
sure can have multiple beneﬁcial effects on pulmonary
edema: (1) it can decrease both preload and afterload,
thereby improving cardiac function; (2) it can redistribute
lung water from the intraalveolar to the extraalveolar
space,where the ﬂuid does not interfere as much with gas
exchange; and (3) it can increase lung volume to avoid
atelectasis.
REDUCTION OF PRELOAD
In most forms of
pulmonary edema, the quantity of extravascular lung
water is related to both the PCWP and the intravascular
volume status.
Diuretics
The “loop diuretics”furosemide,bumetanide,
and torsemide are effective in most forms of pulmonary
edema, even in the presence of hypoalbuminemia,
hyponatremia,or hypochloremia.Furosemide is also a ven-
odilator that can reduce preload rapidly before any diuresis
and is the diuretic of choice.The initial dose of furosemide
should be ≤0.5 mg/kg, but a higher dose (1 mg/kg) is
required in patients with renal insufﬁciency,chronic diuretic
use,or hypervolemia or after failure of a lower dose.
Nitrates
Nitroglycerin and isosorbide dinitrate act
predominantly as venodilators, with coronary vasodilat-
ing properties as well. They are rapid in onset and effec-
tive when administered by a variety of routes. Sublingual
nitroglycerin (0.4 mg × 3 every 5 min) is ﬁrst-line therapy
for patients with acute cardiogenic pulmonary edema.
Cardiogenic Shock and Pulmonary Edema
303
CHAPTER 31
Treatment:
PULMONARY EDEMA
The treatment of patients with pulmonary edema
depends on the speciﬁc cause. Given the acute, life-
threatening nature of the condition, a number of mea-
sures must be applied immediately to support the circula-
tion, gas exchange, and lung mechanics. In addition,
If pulmonary edema persists in the absence of hypoten-
sion, sublingual may be followed by IV nitroglycerin,
commencing at 5–10 μg/min. IV nitroprusside (0.1–5
μg/kg/per min) is a potent venous and arterial vasodila-
tor. It is useful for patients with pulmonary edema and
hypertension but is not recommended in states of reduced
coronary artery perfusion. It requires close monitoring
and titration, including the use of an arterial catheter for
continuous BP measurement in the intensive care unit.
Morphine
Given in 2- to 4-mg IV boluses, morphine
is a transient venodilator that reduces preload while
relieving dyspnea and anxiety. These effects can dimin-
ish stress, catecholamine levels, tachycardia, and ventric-
ular afterload in patients with pulmonary edema and
systemic hypertension.
Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme Inhibitors
Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors reduce
both afterload and preload and are recommended in
patients with hypertension. A low dose of a short-acting
agent may be initiated and followed by increasing oral
doses. In acute MI with heart failure, ACE inhibitors
reduce short- and long-term mortality.
Other Preload-Reducing Agents
IV recombi-
nant brain natriuretic peptide (nesiritide) is a potent
vasodilator with diuretic properties and is effective in
the treatment of patients with cardiogenic pulmonary
edema. It should be reserved for refractory patients and
is not recommended in the setting of ischemia or MI.
Physical Methods
Reduction of venous return
reduces preload. Patients without hypotension should
be maintained in the sitting position with the legs dan-
gling along the side of the bed.
Inotropic and Inodilator Drugs
The sympath-
omimetic amines dopamine and dobutamine (see
earlier) are potent inotropic agents. The bipyridine
phosphodiesterase-3 inhibitors (inodilators), such as
milrinone (50 μg/kg followed by 0.25–0.75 μg/kg per
min), stimulate myocardial contractility while promoting
peripheral and pulmonary vasodilation. Such agents are
indicated in patients with cardiogenic pulmonary edema
and severe LV dysfunction.
Digitalis Glycosides
Once a mainstay of treat-
ment because of their positive inotropic action, digitalis
glycosides are rarely used at present. However, they may
be useful for control of the ventricular rate in patients
with rapid atrial ﬁbrillation or ﬂutter and LV dysfunction
because they do not have the negative inotropic effects
of other drugs that inhibit atrioventricular (AV) nodal
conduction.
Intraaortic Counterpulsation
IABP may help to
relieve cardiogenic pulmonary edema. It is indicated as
a stabilizing measure when acute severe MR or VSR
causes refractory pulmonary edema, especially in prepa-
ration for surgical repair. IABP or LV-assist devices are
useful as bridging therapy to cardiac transplantation in
patients with refractory pulmonary edema secondary to
myocarditis or cardiomyopathy.
Treatment of Tachyarrhythmias and Atrial–
Ventricular Resynchronization
Sinus tachycar-
dia or atrial ﬁbrillation can result from elevated left atrial
pressure and sympathetic stimulation. Tachycardia itself
can also limit LV ﬁlling time and further increase left atrial
pressure. Although relief of pulmonary congestion slows
the sinus rate or ventricular response in atrial ﬁbrillation,a
primary tachyarrhythmia may require cardioversion. In
patients with reduced LV function and without atrial con-
traction or with lack of synchronized AV contraction,
placement of an AV sequential pacemaker should be
considered.
Stimulation of Alveolar Fluid Clearance
Recent mechanistic studies on alveolar epithelial ion
transport have deﬁned a variety of ways to upregulate
the clearance of solute and water from the alveolar
space. In patients with acute lung injury (noncardio-
genic pulmonary edema) IV β-adrenergic agonist treat-
ment decreases extravascular lung water.
SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS
The Risk of Iatrogenic Cardiogenic Shock
In the treatment of patients with pulmonary edema,
vasodilators lower BP, and, particularly when used in com-
bination, their use may lead to hypotension, coronary
artery hypoperfusion, and shock (see Fig. 31-1). In general,
patients with a hypertensive response to pulmonary
edema tolerate and beneﬁt from these medications. In
normotensive patients, low doses of single agents should
be instituted sequentially as needed.
Acute Coronary Syndromes
(See also Chap.34)
Acute STEMI complicated by pulmonary edema is asso-
ciated with in-hospital mortality rates of 20–40%. After
immediate stabilization, coronary artery blood ﬂow
must be reestablished rapidly. When available, primary
PCI is preferable; alternatively,a ﬁbrinolytic agent should
be administered. Early coronary angiography and revas-
cularization by PCI or CABG are also indicated for
patients with non–ST elevation acute coronary syn-
drome.IABP use may be required to stabilize patients for
coronary angiography if hypotension develops or for
refractory pulmonary edema in patients with LV failure
who are candidates for revascularization.
Unusual Types of Edema
Patients with speciﬁc
causes of pulmonary edema may require particular ther-
apy. Reexpansion pulmonary edema can develop after
removal of air or ﬂuid that has been in the pleural space
for some time.These patients may develop hypotension
or oliguria resulting from rapid ﬂuid shifts into the lung.
Common Critical Illnesses and Syndromes
304
SECTION IV
In contrast to cardiogenic edema, diuretics and preload
reduction are contraindicated, and intravascular volume
repletion is often needed while oxygenation and gas
exchange are supported.
High-altitude pulmonary edema can often be pre-
vented with the use of dexamethasone, calcium chan-
nel–blocking drugs, or long-acting inhaled β2-adrener-
gic agonists. Treatment includes descent from altitude;
bed rest; oxygen; and, if feasible, inhaled nitric oxide;
nifedipine may also be effective.
For pulmonary edema resulting from upper airway
obstruction, recognition of the obstructing cause is key
because treatment then is to relieve or bypass the
obstruction.
guidelines (Committee on Management of Acute Myocardial
Infarction).J Am Coll Cardiol 44:671,2004
BABAEV A et al for the NRMI Investigators: National guidelines and
trends in management of patients with acute myocardial infarction
complicated by cardiogenic shock: Observations from the National
Registry of Myocardial Infarction. J Am Med Assoc 294:448, 2005
GOLDBERG RJ et al:Thirty-year trends (1975 to 2005) in the magni-
tude of, management of, and hospital death rates associated with
cardiogenic shock in patients with acute myocardial infarction:
A population-based perspective. Circulation 119:1211, 2009
HOCHMAN JS: Cardiogenic shock complicating acute myocardial
infarction: Expanding the paradigm. Circulation 107:2998, 2003
———, Ohman EM: Cardiogenic Shock, American Heart Association
Clinical Series, E.Antman (ed). New York,Wiley–Blackwell, 2008
——— et al: Early revascularization and long-term survival in car-
diogenic shock complicating acute myocardial infarction. JAMA
295:2511, 2006
MATTHAY MA, INGBAR DH (eds): Pulmonary Edema. Lung Biology in
Health and Disease, vol 116. New York, Marcel Dekker, 1998
OKUDA M:A multidisciplinary overview of cardiogenic shock. Shock
25:557, 2006
REYNOLDS HR, HOCHMAN JS: Cardiogenic shock: Current concepts
and improving outcomes. Circulation 117:686, 2008
WARE LB, MATTHAY MA: Clinical practice: Acute pulmonary
edema. N Engl J Med 353(26):2788, 2005
Cardiogenic Shock and Pulmonary Edema
305
CHAPTER 31
FURTHER READINGS
ANTMAN EM: Treatment of ST elevation myocardial infarction, in
Braunwald’s Heart Disease, 8th ed, P Libby et al (eds). Philadel-
phia, Saunders, 2008
——— et al: ACC/AHA Guidelines for the management of patients
with acute myocardial infarction. A report of the American College
of Cardiology/American Heart Association task force on practice
Robert J. Myerburg
I
Agustin Castellanos
OVERVIEW AND DEFINITIONS
The vast majority of naturally occurring sudden deaths are
caused by cardiac disorders.The magnitude of sudden car-
diac death (SCD) as a public health problem is highlighted
by the estimate that ∼50% of all cardiac deaths are sudden
and unexpected, at least two-thirds of which are ﬁrst car-
diac events or occur among population subsets with previ-
ously known heart disease considered to be relatively low
risk. The total SCD burden is estimated to range from
<200,000 to >450,000 deaths each year in the United
States. SCD is a direct consequence of cardiac arrest,
which may be reversible if responded to promptly. Because
resuscitation techniques and emergency rescue systems are
available to respond to victims of out-of-hospital cardiac
arrest,which was uniformly fatal in the past,understanding
the SCD problem has practical importance.
SCD must be deﬁned carefully. In the context of time,
“sudden” is deﬁned, for most clinical and epidemiologic
purposes, as 1 h or less between a change in clinical status
heralding the onset of the terminal clinical event and the
cardiac arrest itself.An exception is unwitnessed deaths in
which pathologists may expand the deﬁnition of time to
24 h after the victim was last seen to be alive and stable.
CARDIOVASCULAR COLLAPSE, CARDIAC
ARREST, AND SUDDEN CARDIAC DEATH
Because of community-based interventions, victims
may remain biologically alive for days or even weeks after
a cardiac arrest that has resulted in irreversible central ner-
vous system (CNS) damage. Confusion in terms can be
avoided by adhering strictly to deﬁnitions of cardiovascu-
lar collapse, cardiac arrest, and death (Table 32-1). Death
is biologically, legally, and literally an absolute and irre-
versible event. Death may be delayed in a survivor of car-
diac arrest, but “survival after sudden death” is an irra-
tional term. A generally accepted deﬁnition of SCD is
natural death due to cardiac causes heralded by abrupt loss of
consciousness within 1 hour of the onset of acute symp-
toms in an individual who may have known preexisting
heart disease but in whom the time and mode of death are
unexpected.When biologic death of the cardiac arrest vic-
tim is delayed because of interventions, the relevant
pathophysiologic event remains the sudden and unex-
pected cardiac arrest that leads ultimately to death even
though it is delayed by artiﬁcial methods. The language
used should reﬂect the fact that the index event was a car-
diac arrest and that death was due to its delayed conse-
quences. Accordingly, for statistical purposes, deaths that
occur during hospitalization or within 30 days after resus-
citated cardiac arrest are counted as sudden deaths.
CHAPTER 32
CHAPTER 32
306
I Overview and Deﬁnitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 306
Clinical Deﬁnition of Forms of Cardiovascular Collapse . . . . . 307
I Etiology, Initiating Events, and Clinical Epidemiology . . . . . . . 307
Pathology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 308
I Prediction and Prevention of Cardiac Arrest
and Sudden Cardiac Death . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 308
I Clinical Characteristics of Cardiac Arrest . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 311
Prodrome, Onset, Arrest, and Death . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 311
I Prevention of Sudden Cardiac Death in High-Risk
Individuals without Prior Cardiac Arrest . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 315
I Further Readings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 315
CLINICAL DEFINITION OF FORMS
OF CARDIOVASCULAR COLLAPSE
Cardiovascular collapse is a general term connoting loss of
effective blood ﬂow caused by acute dysfunction of the
heart, peripheral vasculature, or both. Cardiovascular col-
lapse may be caused by vasodepressor syncope (vasovagal
syncope, postural hypotension with syncope, neurocardio-
genic syncope), a transient severe bradycardia, or cardiac
arrest.The latter is distinguished from the transient forms
of cardiovascular collapse in that it usually requires an
intervention to achieve resuscitation. In contrast, vasode-
pressor syncope and other primary bradyarrhythmic syn-
copal events are transient and non-life-threatening events
with a spontaneous return of consciousness.
The most common electrical mechanism for cardiac
arrest is ventricular ﬁbrillation (VF), which is responsible
for 50–80% of cardiac arrests. Severe persistent brad-
yarrhythmias, asystole, and pulseless electrical activity
(PEA; an organized electrical activity without mechanical
response, formerly called electromechanical dissociation) cause
another 20–30% of cardiac arrests. Pulseless sustained ven-
tricular tachycardia (VT) is a less common mechanism.
Acute low cardiac output states, having precipitous onset,
may also present clinically as a cardiac arrest.These hemo-
dynamic causes include massive acute pulmonary emboli,
internal blood loss from ruptured aortic aneurysm, intense
anaphylaxis, and cardiac rupture with tamponade after
myocardial infarction (MI).
ETIOLOGY, INITIATING EVENTS,
AND CLINICAL EPIDEMIOLOGY
Clinical and epidemiologic studies have identiﬁed pop-
ulation subgroups at high risk for SCD. In addition, a
large body of pathologic data provides information on
the underlying structural abnormalities in victims of SCD,
and studies of clinical physiology have begun to identify
a group of transient functional factors that may convert a
Cardiovascular Collapse, Cardiac Arrest, and Sudden Cardiac Death
307
CHAPTER 32
long-standing underlying structural abnormality from a
stable to an unstable state (Table 32-2).
Cardiac disorders constitute the most common causes
of sudden natural death.After an initial peak incidence of
sudden death between birth and 6 months of age (sudden
infant death syndrome), the incidence of sudden death
declines sharply and remains low through childhood and
adolescence. Among adolescents and young adults, the
incidence of SCD is ∼1 per 100,000 population per
year.The incidence begins to increase in adults older than
30 years of age, reaching a second peak in the age range
of 45–75 years, when the incidence approximates one to
two per 1000 per year among the unselected adult popu-
lation. Increasing age within this range is associated with
increasing risk for sudden cardiac death (Fig. 32-1A).
From 1 to 13 years of age, only one of ﬁve sudden natural
deaths is attributable to cardiac causes. Between 14 and 21
years of age, the proportion increases to 30% and then to
88% in middle-aged and elderly individuals.
Young and middle-aged men and women have differ-
ent susceptibilities to SCD, but the gender differences
decrease with advancing age. The difference in risk for
SCD parallels the differences in age-related risks for other
manifestations of coronary heart disease (CHD) between
men and women.As the gender gap for manifestations of
CHD closes in the sixth to eighth decades of life, the
excess risk of SCD in men progressively narrows. Despite
the lower incidence among younger women, coronary
risk factors such as cigarette smoking, diabetes, hyperlipi-
demia, and hypertension are highly inﬂuential, and SCD
remains an important clinical and epidemiologic problem.
The incidence of SCD among the African-American
population appears to be higher than among the white
population; the reasons remain uncertain.
Genetic factors contribute to the risk of SCD. In one
sense, they contribute to familial predisposition to CHD
and its expression as acute coronary syndromes.In addition,
however, data suggest a familial predisposition to SCD as a
speciﬁc form of expression of CHD. A strong parental
TABLE 32-1
DISTINCTION BETWEEN CARDIOVASCULAR COLLAPSE, CARDIAC ARREST, AND DEATH
TERM
DEFINITION
QUALIFIERS OR EXCEPTIONS
Cardiovascular
A sudden loss of effective blood ﬂow because of 
Nonspeciﬁc term that includes cardiac
collapse
cardiac or peripheral vascular factors that may
arrest and its consequences as well as 
reverse spontaneously (e.g., neurocardiogenic
events that characteristically revert
syncope; vasovagal syncope) or only with
spontaneously
interventions (e.g., cardiac arrest)
Cardiac arrest
Abrupt cessation of cardiac pump function that
Rare spontaneous reversions; the
may be reversible by a prompt intervention but will
likelihood of successful interventions
lead to death in its absence
relates to mechanism of arrest, clinical
setting, and prompt return of circulation
Death
Irreversible cessation of all biologic functions
None
history of SCD as an initial coronary event increases the
probability of a similar expression in the offspring. In a few
syndromes, such as hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, congeni-
tal long QT interval syndromes, right ventricular dysplasia,
and the syndrome of right bundle branch block and
nonischemic ST-segment elevations (Brugada syndrome),
there is a speciﬁc inherited risk of SCD.
The structural causes of and functional factors con-
tributing to the SCD syndrome are listed in Table 32-2.
Worldwide, and especially in Western cultures, coronary
atherosclerotic heart disease is the most common struc-
tural abnormality associated with SCD in middle-aged
and older adults. Up to 80% of all SCDs in the United
States are due to the consequences of coronary athero-
sclerosis. The cardiomyopathies (dilated and hyper-
trophic, collectively) account for another 10–15% of
SCDs, and all the remaining diverse etiologies cause
only 5–10% of all SCDs.The inherited arrhythmia syn-
dromes (see earlier and Table 32-2) are more common
causes in adolescents and young adults. For some of
these syndromes, such as hypertrophic cardiomyopathy,
the risk of SCD begins to increase after puberty.
Transient ischemia in a previously scarred or hypertro-
phied heart, hemodynamic and ﬂuid and electrolyte dis-
turbances, ﬂuctuations in autonomic nervous system
activity, and transient electrophysiologic changes caused
by drugs or other chemicals (e.g., proarrhythmia) have all
been implicated as mechanisms responsible for the transi-
tion from electrophysiologic stability to instability. In
addition, reperfusion of ischemic myocardium may cause
transient electrophysiologic instability and arrhythmias.
PATHOLOGY
Data from postmortem examinations of SCD victims par-
allel the clinical observations on the prevalence of CHD
as the major structural etiologic factor. More than 80% of
SCD victims have pathologic ﬁndings of CHD. The
pathologic description often includes a combination of
long-standing, extensive atherosclerosis of the epicardial
coronary arteries and unstable coronary artery lesions,
which include various permutations of ﬁssured or rup-
tured plaques, platelet aggregates, hemorrhage, or throm-
bosis.As many as 70–75% of men who die suddenly have
preexisting healed MIs, but only 20–30% have recent
acute MIs despite the prevalence of unstable plaques and
thrombi. The latter suggests transient ischemia as the
mechanism of onset. Regional or global left ventricular
(LV) hypertrophy often coexists with prior MIs.
PREDICTION AND PREVENTION OF
CARDIAC ARREST AND SUDDEN
CARDIAC DEATH
SCD accounts for ∼50% the total cardiovascular mortality
rate. As shown in Fig. 32-1B, the very-high-risk sub-
groups provide more focused populations (“percent per
year”) for predicting cardiac arrest or SCD; but the
impact of such subgroups on the overall problem of SCD,
indicated by the absolute number of events (“events per
308
Common Critical Illnesses and Syndromes
SECTION IV
TABLE 32-2
CAUSES OF CARDIAC ARREST AND SUDDEN
CARDIAC DEATH
Structural Causes
I. Coronary heart disease
A. Coronary artery abnormalities
1. Chronic atherosclerotic lesions
2. Acute (active) lesions (plaque ﬁssuring, platelet
aggregation, acute thrombosis)
3. Anomalous coronary artery anatomy
B. Myocardial infarction
1. Healed
2. Acute
II. Myocardial hypertrophy
A. Secondary
B. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
1. Obstructive
2. Nonobstructive
III. Dilated cardiomyopathy—primary muscle disease
IV. Inﬂammatory and inﬁltrative disorders
A. Myocarditis
B. Noninfectious inﬂammatory diseases
C. Inﬁltrative diseases
D. Right ventricular dysplasia
V. Valvular heart disease
VI. Electrophysiologic abnormalities, structural
A. Anomalous pathways in Wolff-Parkinson-White
syndrome
B. Conducting system disease
VII. Inherited disorders of molecular structure associated
with electrophysiologic abnormalities (e.g., congenital
long QT syndromes, Brugada syndrome)
Functional Contributing Factors
I. Alterations of coronary blood ﬂow
A. Transient ischemia
B. Reperfusion after ischemia
II. Low cardiac output states
A. Heart failure
1. Chronic
2. Acute decompensation
B. Shock
III. Systemic metabolic abnormalities
A. Electrolyte imbalance (e.g., hypokalemia)
B. Hypoxemia, acidosis
IV. Neurophysiologic disturbances
A. Autonomic ﬂuctuations: central, neural, humoral
B. Receptor function
V. Toxic responses
A. Proarrhythmic drug effects
B. Cardiac toxins (e.g., cocaine, digitalis intoxication)
C. Drug interactions
year”), is relatively small.The requirements for achieving
a major population impact are effective prevention of
underlying diseases or new epidemiologic probes that will
allow better resolution of subgroups at speciﬁc risk within
the large general populations.
Strategies for predicting and preventing SCD are cate-
gorized as primary and secondary, in addition to responses
intended to abort cardiac arrests. Primary prevention, as
deﬁned in various implantable deﬁbrillator trials, refers to
the attempt to identify individual patients at speciﬁc risk
for SCD and institute preventive strategies. Secondary pre-
vention refers to measures taken to prevent recurrent car-
diac arrest or death in individuals who have survived a
previous cardiac arrest.The primary prevention strategies
currently used depend on the magnitude of risk among
the various population subgroups. Because the annual
incidence of SCD among the unselected adult population
is limited to 1–2 per 1000 population per year (Fig. 32-1)
and more than 30% of all SCDs attributable to coronary
artery disease occur as the ﬁrst clinical manifestation of
the disease (Fig. 32-2A), the only practical strategies are
proﬁling for risk of developing CHD and risk factor con-
trol (Fig. 32-2B).The most powerful long-term risk fac-
tors include age, cigarette smoking, elevated serum cho-
lesterol, diabetes mellitus, elevated blood pressure, LV
hypertrophy, and nonspeciﬁc electrocardiographic (ECG)
abnormalities. Markers of inﬂammation (e.g., C-reactive
protein levels) that may predict plaque destabilization
have been added to risk classiﬁcations. The presence of
multiple risk factors progressively increases incidence but
not sufﬁciently or speciﬁcally enough to warrant thera-
pies targeted to potentially fatal arrhythmias (Fig. 32-1A).
However, recent studies offer the hope that genetic mark-
ers for speciﬁc risk may become available. These studies
suggest that a family history of SCD associated with acute
coronary syndromes predicts a higher likelihood of car-
diac arrest as the initial manifestation of coronary artery
disease in ﬁrst-degree family members.
Cardiovascular Collapse, Cardiac Arrest, and Sudden Cardiac Death
309
CHAPTER 32
0.001%/Year
0.1%/Year
10–25%/Year
Increasing risk
Age, years
20
30
50
60
40
Adolescents/
young adults 
(1 per 
100,000)
Advanced heart disease
(1 in 4–10)
General population
>35 years of age
(1 per 500–1000)
A
General
population
High coronary
risk profile
Prior coronary
event
Cardiac arrest
survivor
Post-MI
low EF, VT
EF<35%; CHF
Patient
Group
SCDs:
Annual Incidence
SCDs:
Annual Number
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
0
100,000
300,000
200,000
Percent
Patients, n
B
FIGURE 32-1
Panel A demonstrates age-related risk for sudden cardiac
death (SCD). For the general population age 35 years and
older, the risk of SCD is 0.1–0.2% per year (one per 500–1000
population). Among the general population of adolescents and
adults younger than the age of 30 years, the overall risk of
SCD is one per 100,000 population, or 0.001% per year. The
risk of SCD increases dramatically after age 35 years. The
greatest rate of increase is between 40 and 65 years of age
(vertical axis is discontinuous). Among patients older than 30
years of age with advanced structural heart disease and mark-
ers of high risk for cardiac arrest, the event rate may exceed
25% per year, and age-related risk attenuates.
Panel B demonstrates the incidence of SCD in popula-
tion subgroups and the relation of total number of events
per year to incidence ﬁgures. Approximations of subgroup
incidence ﬁgures and the related population pool from which
they are derived are presented. Approximately 50% of all
cardiac deaths are sudden and unexpected. The incidence
triangle on the left (“percent/year”) indicates the approximate
percentage of sudden and nonsudden deaths in each of the
population subgroups indicated, ranging from the lowest
percentage in unselected adult populations (0.1–2% per
year) to the highest percentage in patients with ventricular
tachycardia (VT) or ventricular ﬁbrillation (VF) during conva-
lescence after a myocardial infarction (MI), ∼50% per year.
The triangle on the right indicates the total number of events
per year in each of these groups, to reﬂect incidence in con-
text with the size of the population subgroups. The highest
risk categories identify the smallest number of total annual
events, and the lowest incidence category accounts for the
largest number of events per year. CHF, congestive heart fail-
ure; EF, ejection fraction. [Adapted from RJ Myerburg et al,
Circulation 85(Suppl 1):2, 1992. Reproduced with permission
of the American Heart Association.]
After coronary artery disease has been identiﬁed in a
patient, additional strategies for risk proﬁling become
available (Fig. 32-2B), but the majority of SCDs occur
among the large unselected groups rather than in the
speciﬁc high-risk subgroups that become evident among
populations with established disease (compare events per
year with percent per year in Fig. 32-1B). Under most
conditions of higher level of risk, particularly those
indexed to a major recent cardiovascular event (e.g., MI,
recent onset of heart failure, survival after out-of-hospital
cardiac arrest), the highest risk of death occurs during
the initial 6–18 months and then plateaus toward the
baseline risk of the underlying disease. However, many of
the early deaths are nonsudden, diluting the potential
beneﬁt of strategies targeted speciﬁcally to SCD. Thus,
even though post-MI β-blocker therapy has an identiﬁ-
able beneﬁt for both early SCD and nonsudden mortal-
ity risk, a total mortality beneﬁt for ICD therapy early
after MI has not been observed.
Among patients in the acute, convalescent, and chronic
phases of MI (Chap. 34), subgroups at high absolute risk of
SCD can be identiﬁed. During the acute phase, the poten-
tial risk of cardiac arrest from onset through the first
48 h may be as high as 15%, emphasizing the importance
for patients to respond promptly to the onset of symp-
toms.Those who survive acute-phase VF, however, are not
at continuing risk for recurrent cardiac arrest indexed to
that event.During the convalescent phase after MI (3 days to
∼6 weeks), an episode of sustained VT or VF, associated
with a large infarct, predicts a natural history mortality risk
310
Common Critical Illnesses and Syndromes
SECTION IV
100
40
50
30
20
10
0
Proportion of sudden deaths, %
A
B
5–10%
Arrhythmic
risk markers
7–15%
Hemodynamic
risk markers
 20%
Acute MI;
unstable AP
 30%
First clinical
event
~33%
Known disease;
low power or
nonspecific markers
Target
Examples
• ASHD risk factors
• Anatomic screening
• Clinical markers
• Framingham risk index
Goal
• Predict evolution
  of disease
Sensitivity
• Very low
• Electron beam tomography
• Identify CAD
• Very low
• EF; angiography
• Define extent of
  disease
• Identify arrhythmia
  markers
• Variable; extent of
   disease; low
   specificity
• EPS
• Low to intermediate
   for screening
• EPS combined with EF
• Define high-risk groups
• High for specific groups
• T-wave alternans;
  QT dispersions
• Transient risk
   predictors
• Individual risk
   predictors
• ECG markers of risk
• Primary predictive
  value unknown
• Pathophysiologic
   controls (e.g., HRV)
• Quantify autonomic
  regulation
• Uncertain; some
  measures useful
• Inflammatory markers
• Predict unstable plaques
• Unknown; potentially
  high
• Familial or genetic
  profiles
• Predict specific SCD risk
  before disease expression
• High potential
  for future profiling
FIGURE 32-2
Population subsets, risk predictors, and distribution of
sudden cardiac deaths (SCDs) according to clinical cir-
cumstances. A. The population subset with high-risk arrhyth-
mia markers in conjunction with low ejection fraction (EF) is a
group at high risk of SCD but accounts for <10% of the total
SCD burden attributable to coronary artery disease. In con-
trast, nearly two-thirds of all SCD victims present with SCD as
the ﬁrst and only manifestation of underlying disease or have
known disease but are considered at relatively low risk
because of the absence of high-risk markers. B. Risk proﬁle
for prediction and prevention of SCD is difﬁcult. The highest
absolute numbers of events occur among the general popula-
tion who may have risk factors for coronary heart disease or
expressions of disease that do not predict high risk. This
results in a low sensitivity for predicting and preventing SCD.
New approaches that include epidemiologic modeling of tran-
sient risk factors and methods of predicting individual patient
risk offer hope for greater sensitivity in the future. AP, angina
pectoris; ASHD, arteriosclerotic heart disease; CAD, coronary
artery disease; ECG, electrocardiographic; EPS, electrophysi-
ologic study; HRV, heart rate variability. (From Myerburg,
reproduced with permission of the publisher.)
of up to 50% at 12 months.At least 50% of the deaths are
sudden. Aggressive intervention techniques may reduce
this incidence.
After passage into the chronic phase of MI, the
longer-term risk for total and SCD mortality is pre-
dicted by a number of factors (Fig. 32-2B). The most
important for both SCD and nonsudden death is the
extent of myocardial damage sustained as a result of the
acute MI.This is measured by the magnitude of reduc-
tion of the ejection fraction (EF), functional capacity, or
the occurrence of heart failure. Various studies have
demonstrated that ventricular arrhythmias identiﬁed by
ambulatory monitoring contribute signiﬁcantly to this
risk, especially in patients with an EF <40%. In addition,
inducibility of VT or VF during electrophysiologic test-
ing of patients who have ambient ventricular arrhyth-
mias [premature ventricular contractions (PVCs) and
nonsustained VT] and an EF <35 or 40% is a strong pre-
dictor of SCD risk. Patients in this subgroup are now
considered candidates for implantable cardioverter
deﬁbrillators (ICDs) (see later). Risk falls off sharply
with EFs >40% after MI and the absence of ambient
arrhythmias and conversely is high with EFs <30% even
without the ambient arrhythmia markers.
The cardiomyopathies (dilated and hypertrophic) are
the second most common category of diseases associated
with risk of SCD after CHD (Table 32-2). Some risk
factors have been identiﬁed, largely related to extent of
disease, documented ventricular arrhythmias, and symp-
toms of arrhythmias (e.g., unexplained syncope). The
less common causes of SCD include valvular heart dis-
ease (primarily aortic) and inﬂammatory and inﬁltrative
disorders of the myocardium. The latter include viral
myocarditis, sarcoidosis, and amyloidosis.
Among adolescents and young adults, rare inherited
disorders, such as hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, the long
QT interval syndromes, right ventricular dysplasia, and
the Brugada syndrome, have received attention as impor-
tant causes of SCD because of advances in genetics and
the ability to identify some individuals at risk before a
fatal event. The subgroup of young competitive athletes
has received special attention. The incidence of SCD
among athletes appears to be higher than the general
adolescent and young adult population, perhaps up to one
in 75,000. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is the most
common cause in the United States compared with Italy,
where more comprehensive screening programs remove
potential victims from the population of athletes.
Secondary prevention strategies should be applied to
surviving victims of a cardiac arrest that was not asso-
ciated with an acute MI or a transient risk of SCD
(e.g., drug exposures, correctable electrolyte imbal-
ances). Multivessel coronary artery disease or dilated
cardiomyopathy with left ventricular EF <40% or the
presences of life-threatening arrhythmias with long
QT syndromes or right ventricular dysplasia predict a
1- to 2-year risk of recurrence of a SCD or cardiac
arrest of up to 30% in the absence of specific interven-
tions (see below).
CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS
OF CARDIAC ARREST
PRODROME, ONSET, ARREST, AND DEATH
SCD may be presaged by days, weeks, or months of
increasing angina, dyspnea, palpitations, easy fatigability,
and other nonspeciﬁc complaints. However, these prodro-
mal complaints are generally predictive of any major car-
diac event; they are not speciﬁc for predicting SCD.
The onset of the clinical transition, leading to cardiac
arrest, is deﬁned as an acute change in cardiovascular sta-
tus preceding cardiac arrest by up to 1 h.When the onset
is instantaneous or abrupt, the probability that the arrest is
cardiac in origin is >95%. Continuous ECG recordings,
fortuitously obtained at the onset of a cardiac arrest, com-
monly demonstrate changes in cardiac electrical activity
during the minutes or hours before the event.There is a
tendency for the heart rate to increase and for advanced
grades of PVCs to evolve. Most cardiac arrests that are
caused by VF begin with a run of sustained or nonsus-
tained VT, which then degenerates into VF.
The probability of achieving successful resuscitation
from cardiac arrest is related to the interval from onset to
institution of resuscitative efforts, the setting in which the
event occurs, the mechanism (VF,VT, pulseless electrical
activity, asystole), and the clinical status of the patient
before the cardiac arrest.Return of circulation and survival
rates as a result of deﬁbrillation decrease linearly from the
ﬁrst minute to 10 min. By 5 min, survival rates are no bet-
ter than 25–30% in out-of-hospital settings. Settings in
which it is possible to institute prompt cardiopulmonary
resuscitation (CPR) with rapid deﬁbrillation of  VF provide
a better chance of a successful outcome.However,the out-
come in intensive care units (ICUs) and other in-hospital
environments is heavily inﬂuenced by the patient’s preced-
ing clinical status.The immediate outcome is good for car-
diac arrest occurring in the ICU in the presence of an
acute cardiac event or transient metabolic disturbance, but
survival among patients with far-advanced chronic cardiac
disease or advanced noncardiac diseases (e.g., renal failure,
pneumonia, sepsis, diabetes, cancer) is low and not much
more successful in the in-hospital than in the out-of-
hospital setting.
The success rate for initial resuscitation and survival
to hospital discharge after an out-of-hospital cardiac
arrest depends heavily on the mechanism of the event.
When the mechanism is VT, the outcome is best;VF is
the next most successful; and asystole and pulseless elec-
trical activity (PEA) generate dismal outcome statistics.
Advanced age also adversely inﬂuences the chances of
successful resuscitation.
Cardiovascular Collapse, Cardiac Arrest, and Sudden Cardiac Death
311
CHAPTER 32
Progression to biologic death is a function of the mecha-
nism of cardiac arrest and the length of the delay before
interventions. VF or asystole without CPR within the
ﬁrst 4–6 min has a poor outcome even if deﬁbrillation is
successful because of superimposed brain damage; there
are few survivors among patients who had no life sup-
port activities for the ﬁrst 8 min after onset. Outcome
statistics are improved by lay bystander intervention
(basic life support; see below) before deﬁnitive interven-
tions (advanced life support), and even more by early
deﬁbrillation. In regard to the latter, evaluations of
deployment of automatic external deﬁbrillators (AEDs)
in communities (e.g., police vehicles, large buildings, air-
ports, and stadiums) are beginning to generate encour-
aging data. Increased deployment is to be encouraged.
Death during the hospitalization after a successfully
resuscitated cardiac arrest relates closely to the severity of
CNS injury.Anoxic encephalopathy and infections subse-
quent to prolonged respirator dependence account for
60% of the deaths. Another 30% occur as a consequence
of low cardiac output states that fail to respond to inter-
ventions. Recurrent arrhythmias are the least common
cause of death, accounting for only 10% of in-hospital
deaths.
In the setting of acute MI (Chap. 34), it is important to
distinguish between primary and secondary cardiac arrests.
Primary cardiac arrests refer to those that occur in the
absence of hemodynamic instability, and secondary cardiac
arrests are those that occur in patients in whom abnormal
hemodynamics dominate the clinical picture before car-
diac arrest.The success rate for immediate resuscitation in
primary cardiac arrest during acute MI in a monitored
setting should approach 100%. In contrast, as many as
70% of patients with secondary cardiac arrest succumb
immediately or during the same hospitalization.
movements, skin color, and the presence or absence of
pulses in the carotid or femoral arteries can promptly
determine whether a life-threatening cardiac arrest has
occurred. For lay responders, the pulse check is no
longer recommended. As soon as a cardiac arrest is sus-
pected, conﬁrmed, or even considered to be impending,
calling an emergency rescue system (e.g., 911) is the
immediate priority. With the development of AEDs that
are easily used by nonconventional emergency respon-
ders, an additional layer for response has evolved (see
below).
Agonal respiratory movements may persist for a
short time after the onset of cardiac arrest, but it is
important to observe for severe stridor with a persistent
pulse as a clue to aspiration of a foreign body or food. If
this is suspected, the Heimlich maneuver (see below)
may dislodge the obstructing body. A precordial blow,
or “thump,” delivered ﬁrmly by the clenched ﬁst to the
junction of the middle and lower third of the sternum
may occasionally revert VT or VF, but there is concern
about converting VT to VF.Therefore, it is recommended
to use precordial thumps as an advanced life support
technique when monitoring and deﬁbrillation are avail-
able. This conservative application of the technique
remains controversial.
The third action during the initial response is to clear
the airway.The head is tilted back and the chin lifted so
that the oropharynx can be explored to clear the airway.
Dentures or foreign bodies are removed, and the Heim-
lich maneuver is performed if there is reason to suspect
that a foreign body is lodged in the oropharynx. If respi-
ratory arrest precipitating cardiac arrest is suspected, a
second precordial thump is delivered after the airway
has been cleared.
Basic life support, more popularly known as CPR, is
intended to maintain organ perfusion until deﬁnitive
interventions can be instituted.The elements of CPR are
the maintenance of ventilation of the lungs and com-
pression of the chest. Mouth-to-mouth respiration may
be used if no speciﬁc rescue equipment is immediately
available (e.g.,plastic oropharyngeal airways,esophageal
obturators, masked Ambu bag). Conventional ventilation
techniques during single-responder CPR require the
lungs to be inﬂated twice in succession every 30 chest
compressions.
Chest compression is based on the assumption that
cardiac compression allows the heart to maintain a
pump function by sequential ﬁlling and emptying of its
chambers, with competent valves maintaining forward
direction of ﬂow. The palm of one hand is placed over
the lower sternum, with the heel of the other resting on
the dorsum of the lower hand.The sternum is depressed,
with the arms remaining straight, at a rate of ∼100 per
minute. Sufﬁcient force is applied to depress the ster-
num 4–5 cm,and relaxation is abrupt.
312
Common Critical Illnesses and Syndromes
SECTION IV
Treatment:
CARDIAC ARREST
An individual who collapses suddenly is managed in ﬁve
stages: (1) the initial response and basic life support,
(2) public access deﬁbrillation (if available), (3) advanced
life support, (4) postresuscitation care, and (5) long-term
management. The initial response, including basic life
support and public access deﬁbrillation, can be carried
out by physicians, nurses, paramedical personnel, or
trained laypersons. There is a requirement for increas-
ingly specialized skills as the patient moves through the
stages of advanced life support, postresuscitation care,
and long-term management.
INITIAL RESPONSE AND BASIC LIFE SUP-
PORT
The initial evaluation will conﬁrm whether a
sudden collapse is indeed attributable to a cardiac arrest.
Observations of the state of consciousness, respiratory
AUTOMATED EXTERNAL DEFIBRILLATION
AEDs that are easily used by nonconventional respon-
ders, such as nonparamedic ﬁreﬁghters, police, ambu-
lance drivers, trained security guards, and minimally
trained or untrained laypersons, have been developed.
This advance has inserted another level of response into
the cardiac arrest paradigm. A number of studies have
demonstrated that AED use by nonconventional and lay
responders in strategic response systems can improve
cardiac arrest survival rates. This strategy is based on
shortening the time to ﬁrst deﬁbrillation attempt while
awaiting arrival of advanced life support.
ADVANCED LIFE SUPPORT
Advanced life sup-
port is intended to achieve adequate ventilation, control
cardiac arrhythmias,stabilize blood pressure and cardiac
output, and restore organ perfusion. The activities car-
ried out to achieve these goals include (1) deﬁbrillation/
cardioversion, pacing, or both; (2) intubation with an
endotracheal tube; and (3) insertion of an IV line. The
speed with which deﬁbrillation/cardioversion is carried
out is an important element for successful resuscitation,
both for restoration of spontaneous circulation and pro-
tection of the CNS. Immediate deﬁbrillation should pre-
cede intubation and insertion of an IV line; CPR should
be carried out while the deﬁbrillator is being charged.
As soon as a diagnosis of VF or VT is established, a shock
of at least 300 J should be delivered. Additional shocks,
up to a maximum of 360 J, are tried if the initial shock
does not successfully abolish VT or VF, but it is now rec-
ommended that 60–90 s of CPR be carried out before
repeated shocks if the ﬁrst shock fails to restore an orga-
nized rhythm, or before the ﬁrst shock if 5 min has
elapsed between the onset of cardiac arrest and ability
to deliver a shock. Epinephrine, 1 mg IV, is given after
failed deﬁbrillation, and attempts to deﬁbrillate are
repeated. The dose of epinephrine may be repeated
after intervals of 3–5 min (Fig. 32-3A). Vasopressin
(a single 40-U dose given IV) has been suggested as an
alternative to epinephrine.
If the patient is less than fully conscious upon rever-
sion or if two or three attempts fail, prompt intubation,
ventilation, and arterial blood gas analysis should be
carried out. Ventilation with O2 (room air if O2 is not
immediately available) may promptly reverse hypox-
emia and acidosis. A patient who is persistently acidotic
after successful deﬁbrillation and intubation should be
given 1 meq/kg NaHCO3 initially and an additional 50%
of the dose repeated every 10–15 min. However, it
should not be used routinely.
After initial unsuccessful deﬁbrillation attempts or
with persistent or recurrent electrical instability, antiar-
rhythmic therapy should be instituted. IV amiodarone
has emerged as the initial treatment of choice (150 mg
over 10 min followed by 1 mg/min for up to 6 h and
0.5 mg/min thereafter; Fig. 32-3A). For cardiac arrest
Cardiovascular Collapse, Cardiac Arrest, and Sudden Cardiac Death
313
CHAPTER 32
• Immediate defibrillation within 5 min of onset
• Brief CPR before defibrillation for delay ≥5 min
ALGORITHM FOR CARDIAC ARREST MANAGEMENT
VENTRICULAR FIBRILLATION OR PULSELESS
VENTRICULAR TACHYCARDIA
FAIL
FAIL
FAIL
FAIL
Continue CPR, intubate, IV access
Defibrillate, 360 J within 30–60 s
Epinephrine, 1 mg IV; or vasopressin, 40 U IV once
Repeat epinephrine q3–5 min
Epinephrine, ↑ dose
NaHCO3, 1 meq/kg (↑ K+)
Antiarrhythmics
Amiodarone: 150 mg over 10 min, 1 mg/min
Lidocaine: 1.5 mg/kg; repeat in 3–5 min
Magnesium sulfate: 1–2 g IV (polymorphic VT)
Procainamide: 30 mg/min to 17 mg/kg (monomorphic VT)
Defibrillate, 360 J: Drug – Shock – Drug – Shock 
A
Bradyarrhythmia/asystole
Pulseless electrical activity
CPR, intubate, IV access
Confirm asystole
Assess blood flow
Identify and treat causes
• Hypoxia
• Hyper-/hypokalemia
• Severe acidosis
• Drug overdose
• Hypothermia
• Hypovolemia
• Hypoxia
• Tamponade
• Pneumothorax
• Hypothermia
• Pulmonary embolus
• Drug overdose
• Hyperkalemia
• Severe acidosis
• Massive acute MI
Epinephrine
1 mg IV (repeat)
Atropine
1 mg IV (repeat)
Sodium bicarbonate
1 meq/kg IV
—
—
Pacing—External or pacing wire
B
FIGURE 32-3
A. The algorithm of ventricular ﬁbrillation or pulseless ven-
tricular tachycardia (VT) begins with deﬁbrillation attempts. If
that fails, it is followed by administration of epinephrine and
then antiarrhythmic drugs. See text for details. B. The algo-
rithms for bradyarrhythmia/asystole (left) or pulseless
electrical activity (right) is dominated ﬁrst by continued life
support and a search for reversible causes. Subsequent ther-
apy is nonspeciﬁc and accompanied by a low success rate.
See text for details. CPR, cardiopulmonary resuscitation; MI,
myocardial infarction.
caused by VF in the early phase of an acute coronary
syndrome, a bolus of 1 mg/kg of lidocaine may be
given IV as an alternative, and the dose may be
repeated in 2 min. It may also be tried in those
patients in whom amiodarone is unsuccessful. IV pro-
cainamide (loading infusion of 100 mg/5 min to a total
dose of 500–800 mg followed by continuous infusion at
2–5 mg/min) is now rarely used in this setting but may
be tried for patients with persisting, hemodynamically
stable arrhythmias. IV calcium gluconate is no longer
considered safe or necessary for routine administration.
It is used only in patients in whom acute hyperkalemia
is known to be the triggering event for resistant VF, in
the presence of known hypocalcemia, and in patients
who have received toxic doses of calcium channel
antagonists.
Patients with cardiac arrest secondary to brad-
yarrhythmias or asystole are managed differently
(Fig. 32-3B). The patient is promptly intubated, CPR is
continued, and an attempt is made to control hypox-
emia and acidosis. Epinephrine, atropine, or both are
given IV or by an intracardiac route. External pacing
devices are now available to attempt to establish a reg-
ular rhythm, but the prognosis is generally very poor in
this form of cardiac arrest, even with successful electri-
cal pacing. Patients with PEA are treated similarly to
those with bradyarrhythmias, but the outcome is also
dismal. The one exception is bradyarrhythmic or asys-
tolic cardiac arrest secondary to airway obstruction.
Patients with this form of cardiac arrest may respond
promptly to removal of foreign bodies by the Heimlich
maneuver or in hospitalized patients by intubation and
suctioning of obstructing secretions in the airway.
POSTRESUSCITATION 
CARE
This phase of
management is determined by the clinical setting of the
cardiac arrest. Primary VF in patients with acute MI
(Chap. 34) are generally very responsive to life support
techniques and are easily controlled after the initial
event. In the in-hospital setting, respirator support is
usually not necessary or is needed for only a short time,
and hemodynamics stabilize promptly after deﬁbrilla-
tion or cardioversion. In secondary VF in acute MI
(events in which hemodynamic abnormalities predis-
pose to the potentially fatal arrhythmia), resuscitative
efforts are less often successful, and in patients who are
successfully resuscitated, the recurrence rate is high.The
clinical picture and outcome are dominated by hemody-
namic instability and the ability to control hemody-
namic dysfunction. Bradyarrhythmias, asystole, and PEA
are commonly secondary events in hemodynamically
unstable patients. The in-hospital phase of care of the
out-of-hospital cardiac arrest survivor is dictated by spe-
ciﬁc clinical circumstances.The most difﬁcult is the pres-
ence of anoxic encephalopathy, which is a strong pre-
dictor of in-hospital death. A recent addition to the
management of this condition is induced hypothermia
to reduce metabolic demands and cerebral edema.
The outcome after in-hospital cardiac arrest associ-
ated with noncardiac diseases is poor,and in the few suc-
cessfully resuscitated patients, the postresuscitation
course is dominated by the nature of the underlying dis-
ease. Patients with end-stage cancer, renal failure, acute
CNS disease,and uncontrolled infections,as a group,have
a survival rate of <10% after in-hospital cardiac arrest.
Some major exceptions are patients with transient airway
obstruction,electrolyte disturbances,proarrhythmic effects
of drugs, and severe metabolic abnormalities, most of
whom may have an excellent chance of survival if they
can be resuscitated promptly and maintained while the
transient abnormalities are being corrected.
LONG-TERM MANAGEMENT AFTER SUR-
VIVAL 
OF 
OUT-OF-HOSPITAL 
CARDIAC
ARREST
Patients who survive cardiac arrest without
irreversible damage to the CNS and who achieve hemo-
dynamic stability should have extensive diagnostic test-
ing and appropriate therapeutic interventions for their
long-term management.This aggressive approach is dri-
ven by the fact that survival after out-of-hospital cardiac
arrest was followed by a 25–30% mortality rate during
the ﬁrst 2 years after the event, and data suggest that
signiﬁcant reductions in risk can be achieved by implan-
tation of an internal cardiac deﬁbrillator (ICD).
Among patients in whom an acute transmural MI is
identiﬁed as the speciﬁc mechanism triggering an out-
of-hospital cardiac arrest, the management is dictated
partly by the transient nature of life-threatening
arrhythmia risk in the acute phase of MI and partly by
the extent of permanent myocardial damage that
results. Several clinical trials have now documented an
improved survival rate among cardiac arrest survivors
who have EFs <40% and receive ICDs.
For patients with cardiac arrest that is thought to be
caused by a transient ischemic mechanism, particularly
with higher EFs, anti-ischemic therapy by pharmacologic
or interventional methods is generally accepted as
appropriate management.However,despite the absence
of supportive clinical trial evidence, some adopt a more
aggressive attitude about the use of ICDs in this group
of cardiac arrest survivors as well, given the unpre-
dictability of recurrent ischemia.
The principles guiding therapy for patients with
coronary artery disease who survive a cardiac arrest
generally apply to the other cardiac disorders as well,
with the exception that there is less focus on the extent
of disease in certain disorders. Generally, cardiac arrest
survivors from other categories of disease, such as the
hypertrophic or dilated cardiomyopathies and various
rare inherited disorders (e.g., RV dysplasia, long QT syn-
drome, Brugada syndrome, arrhythmic VF) are all con-
sidered ICD candidates.
314
Common Critical Illnesses and Syndromes
SECTION IV
PREVENTION OF SUDDEN CARDIAC
DEATH IN HIGH-RISK INDIVIDUALS
WITHOUT PRIOR CARDIAC ARREST
Post-MI patients have been the subject of clinical trials
for ICD beneﬁt. It is now established that for post-MI
patients with EFs <40%, ambient ventricular arrhyth-
mias, and inducible ventricular tachyarrhythmias in the
electrophysiology laboratory, ICDs provide a signiﬁcant
reduction in relative risk of SCD and total mortality.
Total mortality beneﬁts in the range of a 20–30% reduc-
tion over 2–3 years have been observed, and ICD has
emerged as preferred therapy for such patients. One
study suggests that when the EF <30%, electrophysio-
logic testing is not necessary to identify ICD beneﬁt,
and another demonstrates beneﬁt for patients with func-
tional class 2 or 3 heart failure and EFs ≤35%, regardless
of the cause (ischemic or nonischemic) or ambient or
induced arrhythmias.
Decision making for primary prevention in disorders
other than coronary artery disease and dilated cardiomy-
opathy is generally driven by observational data and
judgment based on clinical observations. Controlled
clinical trials providing evidence-based indicators for
ICDs are lacking for these smaller population sub-
groups. In general, for the rare disorders listed above,
indicators of arrhythmic risk, such as syncope, docu-
mented ventricular tachyarrhythmias, aborted cardiac
arrest or perhaps a family history of premature SCD, and
a number of other clinical or ECG markers, may be
used as indicators for ICDs.
FURTHER READINGS
GOLDBERGER Z, LAMPERT R: Implantable cardioverter-deﬁbrillators:
Expanding indications and technologies. JAMA 295:809, 2006
HUIKURI H et al: Sudden death due to cardiac arrhythmias. N Engl J
Med 345:1473, 2001
INTERNATIONAL LIAISON COMMITTEE
ON RESUSCITATION: 2005
International Consensus on Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation and
Emergency Cardiovascular Care Science with Treatment Rec-
ommendations. Circulation 112(Suppl III):III-1–III-136, 2005
KOKOLIS S et al:Ventricular arrhythmias and sudden cardiac death.
Prog Cardiovasc Dis 48:426, 2006
MARENCO JP et al: Improving survival from sudden cardiac arrest:The
role of the automated external deﬁbrillator. JAMA 285:1193, 2001
MARON BJ, PELLICCIA A: The heart of trained athletes: Cardiac
remodeling and the risks of sports, including sudden death. Cir-
culation 114:1633, 2006
MYERBURG RJ, CASTELLANOS A: Cardiac arrest and sudden cardiac
death, in Braunwald’s Heart Disease, 8th ed, P Libby et al (eds).
Philadelphia, Saunders, 2008
———, et al: Indications for implantable cardioverter-deﬁbrillators
based on evidence and judgment. J Am Coll Cardiol 54:747,
2009
NOSEWORTHY PA, NEWTON-CHEH C: Genetic determinants of sud-
den cardiac death. Circulation 18:854, 2008
ROBERTS R: Genomics and cardiac arrhythmias. J Am Coll Cardiol
47:9, 2006
WIK L et al: Delaying deﬁbrillation to give basic cardiopulmonary
resuscitation to patients with out-of-hospital ventricular ﬁbrilla-
tion:A randomized trial. JAMA 289:1389, 2003
Cardiovascular Collapse, Cardiac Arrest, and Sudden Cardiac Death
315
CHAPTER 32
Christopher P. Cannon
I
Eugene Braunwald
Patients with ischemic heart disease fall into two large
groups: patients with chronic coronary artery disease
(CAD) who most commonly present with stable angina
and patients with acute coronary syndromes (ACS).The
latter group, in turn, is composed of patients with acute
myocardial infarction (MI) with ST-segment elevation on
their presenting electrocardiogram (STEMI; Chap. 34)
and those with unstable angina and non–ST-segment
elevation MI (UA/NSTEMI; see Fig. 34-1). Every year
in the United States, ∼1.3 million patients are admitted
to hospitals with UA/NSTEMI compared with ∼300,000
patients with acute STEMI. The relative incidence of
UA/NSTEMI compared with STEMI appears to be
increasing. Almost 50% of patients with UA/NSTEMI
are women, and more than 75% of patients with STEMI
are men.
DEFINITION
The diagnosis of UA is based largely on the clinical pre-
sentation. Stable angina pectoris is characterized by chest
or arm discomfort that may not be described as pain but
is reproducibly associated with physical exertion or stress
and is relieved within 5–10 min by rest, sublingual
nitroglycerin, or both. UA is deﬁned as angina pectoris or
equivalent ischemic discomfort with at least one of three
UNSTABLE ANGINA AND NON–ST-ELEVATION
MYOCARDIAL INFARCTION
features: (1) it occurs at rest (or with minimal exertion),
usually lasting >10 min; (2) it is severe and of new onset
(i.e., within the prior 4–6 weeks); or (3) it occurs with a
crescendo pattern (i.e., distinctly more severe, prolonged,
or frequent than previously).The diagnosis of NSTEMI is
established if a patient with the clinical features of UA
develops evidence of myocardial necrosis, as reﬂected in
elevated cardiac biomarkers.
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
UA/NSTEMI is most commonly caused by a reduction
in oxygen supply or by an increase in myocardial oxygen
demand superimposed on an atherosclerotic coronary
plaque, with varying degrees of obstruction. Four patho-
physiologic processes that may contribute to the develop-
ment of UA/NSTEMI have been identiﬁed: (1) plaque
rupture or erosion with superimposed nonocclusive
thrombus, believed to be the most common cause—
NSTEMI may occur with downstream embolization of
platelet aggregates or atherosclerotic debris; (2) dynamic
obstruction (e.g., coronary spasm, as in Prinzmetal’s vari-
ant angina); (3) progressive mechanical obstruction [e.g.,
rapidly advancing coronary atherosclerosis or restenosis
after percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI)]; and (4)
secondary UA related to increased myocardial oxygen
CHAPTER 33
CHAPTER 33
316
Deﬁnition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 316
Pathophysiology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 316
Clinical Presentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 317
Diagnostic Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 317
Risk Stratiﬁcation and Prognosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 318
Long-Term Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 321
Prinzmetal’s Variant Angina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 322
I Further Readings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 323
demand or decreased supply (e.g., tachycardia, anemia).
More than one of these processes may be involved.
Among patients with UA/NSTEMI studied at angiog-
raphy, approximately 5% have left main stenosis, 15% have
three-vessel CAD, 30% have two-vessel disease, 40% have
single-vessel disease, and 10% have no critical coronary
stenosis; some of the latter have Prinzmetal’s variant
angina (see later). The “culprit lesion” on angiography
may show an eccentric stenosis with scalloped or over-
hanging edges and a narrow neck.Angioscopy may reveal
“white” (platelet-rich) thrombi, as opposed to “red”
thrombi, more often seen in patients with acute STEMI.
Patients with UA/NSTEMI often have multiple plaques
that are vulnerable to disruption.
CLINICAL PRESENTATION
History and Physical Examination
The clinical hallmark of UA/NSTEMI is chest pain, typ-
ically located in the substernal region or sometimes in
the epigastrium, that radiates to the neck, left shoulder,
and left arm.This discomfort is usually severe enough to
be considered painful.Anginal “equivalents” such as dys-
pnea and epigastric discomfort may also occur, and these
appear to occur more often in women.The examination
resembles that in patients with stable angina and may be
unremarkable. If the patient has a large area of myocardial
ischemia or a large NSTEMI, the physical ﬁndings can
include diaphoresis, pale cool skin, sinus tachycardia, a
third or fourth heart sound, basilar rales, and sometimes
hypotension, resembling the ﬁndings of large STEMI.
Electrocardiography
In UA, ST-segment depression, transient ST-segment ele-
vation, or T-wave inversion occurs in 30–50% of patients,
depending on the severity of the clinical presentation. In
patients with the clinical features of UA, the presence of
new ST-segment deviation, even of only 0.05 mV, is an
important predictor of adverse outcome.T-wave changes
are sensitive for ischemia but less speciﬁc, unless they are
new, deep T-wave inversions (≥0.3 mV).
Cardiac Biomarkers
Patients with UA who have elevated biomarkers of
necrosis, such as CK-MB and troponin (a much more
speciﬁc and sensitive marker of myocardial necrosis), are at
increased risk for death or recurrent MI. Elevated levels of
these markers distinguish patients with NSTEMI from
those with UA.There is a direct relationship between the
degree of troponin elevation and mortality. However, in
patients without a clear clinical history of myocardial
ischemia, minor troponin elevations have been reported
and can be caused by congestive heart failure, myocarditis,
or pulmonary embolism, or they may be false-positive
Unstable Angina and Non–ST-Elevation Myocardial Infarction
317
CHAPTER 33
readings. Thus, in patients with an unclear history, small
troponin elevations may not be diagnostic of an ACS.
DIAGNOSTIC EVALUATION
Approximately 6–7 million persons per year in the
United States present to hospital emergency departments
(EDs) with a complaint of chest pain or other symptoms
suggestive of ACS.A diagnosis of an ACS is established in
20–25% of such patients. The ﬁrst step in evaluating
patients with possible UA/NSTEMI is to determine the
likelihood that CAD is the cause of the presenting symp-
toms. The American College of Cardiology/American
Heart Association (ACC/AHA) Guidelines include,among
the factors associated with a high likelihood of ACS, a
clinical history typical of ischemic discomfort, a history of
established CAD by angiography, prior MI, congestive
heart failure, new electrocardiographic (ECG) changes, or
elevated cardiac biomarkers. Factors associated with an
intermediate likelihood of ACS in patients with the clinical
features of this condition but without the above high-risk
factors are age older than 70 years, male gender, diabetes
mellitus, known peripheral arterial or cerebrovascular dis-
ease, and old ECG abnormalities.
Diagnostic Pathways
Four major diagnostic tools are used in the diagnosis of
UA/NSTEMI in the ED: the clinical history, the ECG,
cardiac markers, and stress testing. The goals are to
(1) recognize or exclude MI (using cardiac markers),
(2) evaluate for rest ischemia (chest pain at rest, serial or
continuous ECGs), and (3) evaluate for signiﬁcant CAD
(using provocative stress testing).Typical pathways begin
with assessment of the likelihood that the presenting
symptoms are attributable to ischemia. Patients with a
low likelihood of ischemia are usually managed with an
ED-based critical pathway (which is carried out in a
“chest pain unit” in some institutions (Fig. 33-1). Eval-
uation of such patients includes clinical monitoring for
recurrent ischemic discomfort, serial ECGs, and cardiac
markers, typically performed at baseline and at 4–6 h
and 12 h after presentation. If new elevations in cardiac
markers (CK-MB, troponin, or both) or ECG changes
are noted, the patient is admitted to the hospital. If the
patient remains pain free and the markers are negative,
the patient may go on to stress testing.This may be per-
formed as early as 6 h after presentation in the ED or
chest pain center or on an outpatient basis within 72 h.
For most patients, standard treadmill ECG stress testing
is used, but for patients with ﬁxed abnormalities on the
ECG (e.g., left bundle branch block), perfusion or
echocardiographic imaging is used. For patients who
cannot walk, pharmacologic stress is used. By demon-
strating normal myocardial perfusion, sestamibi or thal-
lium imaging can reduce unnecessary hospitalizations by
excluding acute ischemia. CT angiography is used with
increasing frequency to exclude obstructive CAD.
RISK STRATIFICATION AND PROGNOSIS
Patients with documented UA/NSTEMI exhibit a wide
spectrum of early (30 days) risk of death, ranging from
1–10%, and of new or recurrent infarction of 3–10%.
Assessment of “global risk” can be accomplished by clini-
cal risk scoring systems such as that developed from in the
Thrombolysis in Myocardial Infarction (TIMI) Trials,
which includes seven independent risk factors: age ≥65
years, three or more risk factors for CAD, documented
CAD at catheterization, development of UA/NSTEMI
while taking aspirin, more than two episodes of angina
within the preceding 24 h, ST deviation ≥0.5 mm, and an
elevated cardiac marker (Fig. 33-2). Other risk factors
include diabetes mellitus; left ventricular dysfunction; and
elevated levels of creatinine, atrial natriuretic peptides, and
C-reactive protein (CRP). Early risk assessment (espe-
cially using troponin, ST-segment changes, or a global risk
scoring system) is useful both in predicting the risk of
recurrent cardiac events and in identifying patients who
would derive the greatest beneﬁt from antithrombotic
therapies more potent than unfractionated heparin (UFH),
such as low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH) and gly-
coprotein (GP) IIb/IIIa inhibitors, and from an early
invasive strategy. For example, in the TACTICS-TIMI 18
Trial, whereas an early invasive strategy conferred a 40%
reduction in recurrent cardiac events in patients with pos-
itive troponin levels, no beneﬁt was observed in those
with negative troponin levels.
CRP, a marker of vascular inﬂammation, and B-type
natriuretic peptide, a marker of increased myocardial wall
tension, correlate independently with increased mortality
(and, in some studies, recurrent cardiac events) in patients
presenting with UA/NSTEMI. Multimarker strategies are
now gaining favor both to deﬁne the pathophysiologic
mechanisms underlying a given patient’s presentation
more fully and to stratify the patient’s risk further.
318
Common Critical Illnesses and Syndromes
SECTION IV
High/
intermediate
likelihood
Admit to
UA/NSTEMI
Rx pathway
Discharge
home
Follow-up
to MD
Atypical
pain
Chest pain, low
likelihood ischemia
No
recurrent
pain
—ECG/
markers
Recurrent
pain
+ ECG/
marker
Observe
markers
0, 6 h
ECG for pain
ETT
(+/– Imaging)
Critical Pathway for ED Evaluation of Chest Pain/
“Rule Out MI”
+ ETT
– ETT
Goals:
Assess
likelihood
CAD
Monitor
rest
ischemia
Rule out
CAD
Rule out
MI
Rapid
discharge
ED
ED/
Obs.
Unit
FIGURE 33-1
Diagnostic evaluation of patients presenting with sus-
pected unstable angina and non–ST-segment elevation MI
(UA/NSTEMI). The ﬁrst step is to assess the likelihood of
coronary artery disease (CAD). Patients at high or intermedi-
ate likelihood are admitted to the hospital. Those with clearly
atypical chest pain are sent home. Patients with a low likeli-
hood of ischemia enter the pathway and are observed in a
monitored bed in the emergency department (ED) or observa-
tion unit over a period of 6 h, and 12-lead electrocardiograms
(ECGs) are performed if the patient has recurrent chest dis-
comfort. A panel of cardiac markers (e.g., troponin and CK-
MB) is drawn at baseline and 6 h later. If the patient develops
recurrent pain, has ST-segment or T-wave changes, or has
positive cardiac markers, he or she is admitted to the hospital
and treated for UA/NSTEMI. If the patient has negative mark-
ers and no recurrence of pain, he or she is sent for exercise
treadmill testing, with imaging reserved for patients with
abnormal baseline ECGs (e.g., left bundle branch block or left
ventricular hypertrophy). If the results are positive, the patient
is admitted; if the results are negative, the patient is dis-
charged with follow-up to his or her primary care physician
(PCP). ETT, exercise tolerance test; MI, myocardial infarction;
Rx, treatment. [Adapted from Cannon CP, Braunwald E, in
Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine, 6th ed,
E Braunwald et al (eds). Philadelphia, Saunders, 2001.]
Age ≥ 65 years
≥ 3 CAD risk factors
Prior stenosis > 50%
ST deviation
≥ 2 anginal events ≤ 24 h
ASA in past 7 days
Elev cardiac markers
50
40
0/1
2
3
4
5
6/7
4.7
8.3
13.2
19.9
26.2
40.9
30
20
10
0
D/MI/urg revasc, %
Number of risk factors
4.3
% Population:
17.3
32.0
29.3
13.0
3.4
FIGURE 33-2
The Thrombolysis in Myocardial Infarction (TIMI) Risk
Score for unstable angina and non–ST-segment elevation
MI (UA/NSTEMI), a simple but comprehensive clinical risk
stratiﬁcation score used to identify increasing risk of death,
myocardial infarction, or urgent revascularization (urg revasc)
to day 14. ASA, aspirin; CAD, coronary artery disease.
(Adapted from Antman et al.)
Treatment:
UNSTABLE ANGINA AND NON–ST-
SEGMENT ELEVATION MYOCARDIAL
INFARCTION
MEDICAL TREATMENT
Patients with UA/NSTEMI
should be placed on bed rest with continuous ECG mon-
itoring for ST-segment deviation and cardiac rhythm.
Ambulation is permitted if the patient shows no recur-
rence of ischemia (discomfort or ECG changes) and does
not develop a biomarker of necrosis for 12–24 h. Med-
ical therapy involves simultaneous anti-ischemic treat-
ment and antithrombotic treatment.
ANTI-ISCHEMIC TREATMENT
(Table 33-1) To
provide relief and prevention of recurrence of chest
pain, initial treatment should include bed rest, nitrates,
and β-blockers.
Nitrates
Nitrates should ﬁrst be given sublingually
or by buccal spray (0.3–0.6 mg) if the patient is experi-
encing ischemic pain. If pain persists after three doses
given 5 min apart, IV nitroglycerin (5–10 μg/min using
nonabsorbing tubing) is recommended. The rate of the
infusion may be increased by 10 μg/min every 3–5 min
until symptoms are relieved or systolic arterial pressure
decreases to <100 mmHg.Topical or oral nitrates can be
used after the pain has resolved, or they may replace IV
nitroglycerin when the patient has been pain free
for 12–24 h. The only absolute contraindications to the
use of nitrates are hypotension or the use of sildenaﬁl
(Viagra) or other drugs in that class within the previ-
ous 24 h.
β-Adrenergic Blockade
These agents are the
other mainstay of anti-ischemic treatment. IV β block-
ade followed by oral β blockade targeted to a heart rate
of 50–60 bpm is recommended. Heart rate–slowing cal-
cium channel blockers (e.g., verapamil or diltiazem) are
recommended in patients who have persistent or recur-
rent symptoms after treatment with full-dose nitrates
and β-blockers and in patients with contraindications
to β blockade. Additional medical therapy includes
angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibition and
HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors (statins) for long-term
secondary prevention.
If pain persists despite IV nitroglycerin and β block-
ade, morphine sulfate (1–5 mg IV) can be administered
every 5–30 min as needed.
ANTITHROMBOTIC 
THERAPY
(Table 33-2)
Antithrombotic therapy is the other main component of
treatment of patients with UA/NSTEMI. Initial treatment
should begin with the platelet cyclooxygenase inhibitor
aspirin (Fig. 33-3). The typical initial dose is 325 mg/d
with lower doses (75–162 mg/d) recommended for
long-term therapy. “Aspirin resistance” has been noted
in research studies in 5–10% of patients and more
frequently in patients treated with lower doses of
aspirin. No clear guidelines are available regarding eval-
uation or treatment, but the use of higher doses of
aspirin, a thienopyridine (clopidogrel), or both appears
to be logical in this situation.
The thienopyridine clopidogrel, which blocks the
platelet P2Y12 (adenosine) receptor (in combination
with aspirin), was shown in the CURE trial to confer a
20% relative reduction in cardiovascular death, MI, or
stroke compared with aspirin alone in both low- and
high-risk patients with UA/NSTEMI but to be associated
with a moderate (absolute 1%) increase in major bleed-
ing, which is more common in patients who undergo
coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG). Pretreatment
with clopidogrel (a 300- or 600-mg loading dose fol-
lowed by 75 mg qd) has also been shown in three
studies to reduce adverse outcomes associated with
and following PCI and has a class I, grade A evidence
recommendation in the PCI Guidelines. Continued ben-
eﬁt of long-term (∼1 year) treatment with the combina-
tion of clopidogrel and aspirin has been observed both
in patients treated conservatively and in those who
underwent PCI. This combination is recommended for
all patients with UA/NSTEMI who are not at excessive
risk for bleeding.
Four options are available for anticoagulation ther-
apy to be added to aspirin and clopidogrel. UFH is the
mainstay of therapy. The LMWH enoxaparin has been
shown in several studies to be superior to UFH in reduc-
ing recurrent cardiac events, especially in conservatively
managed patients. The factor Xa inhibitor fondaparinux
is equivalent for early efﬁcacy compared with enoxa-
parin but appears to have a lower risk of major bleeding
and thus may have the best risk: beneﬁt ratio. However,
UFH, LMWH, or a direct thrombin inhibitor such as
bivalirudin should be used during cardiac catheteriza-
tion or PCI. Preliminary data indicate that bivalirudin is
equivalent (for both efﬁcacy and safety) to either UFH or
enoxaparin among patients treated with a GP IIb/IIIa
inhibitor, but use of bivalirudin alone had less bleeding
than the combination of a heparin and GP IIb/IIIa
inhibitor in patients with UA/NSTEMI undergoing PCI.
IV GP IIb/IIIa inhibitors have also been shown to be
beneﬁcial in treating patients with UA/NSTEMI. For
“upstream” management of high-risk patients in whom
an invasive management is intended (i.e., initiating ther-
apy when the patient ﬁrst presents to the hospital), the
small molecule inhibitors eptiﬁbatide and tiroﬁban
show beneﬁt, but the monoclonal antibody abciximab
appears not to be effective in patients treated conserva-
tively (i.e., in those not undergoing coronary angiogra-
phy or PCI). However, abciximab has been shown to be
beneﬁcial in patients with UA/NSTEMI undergoing PCI,
even among troponin-positive patients pretreated with
clopidogrel. The ACC/AHA Guidelines note that these
Unstable Angina and Non–ST-Elevation Myocardial Infarction
319
CHAPTER 33
320
Common Critical Illnesses and Syndromes
SECTION IV
TABLE 33-1
DRUGS COMMONLY USED IN INTENSIVE MEDICAL MANAGEMENT OF PATIENTS WITH UNSTABLE ANGINA AND
NON–ST-SEGMENT ELEVATION MYOCARDIAL INFARCTION
DRUG CATEGORY
CLINICAL CONDITION
WHEN TO AVOIDa
DOSAGE
Nitrates
Administer IV when symptoms
Hypotension
5–10 μg/min by continuous infusion
are not fully relieved with three
Patient receiving 
Titrated up to 75–100 μg/min until relief 
SL nitroglycerin tablets and
sildenaﬁl or 
of symptoms or limiting side effects
initiation of β-blocker therapy
other PDE-5
(headache or hypotension with a SBP
inhibitor
<90 mmHg or >30% below starting 
mean arterial pressure levels if signiﬁcant
hypertension is present)
Topical, oral, or buccal nitrates are
acceptable alternatives for patients
without ongoing or refractory symptoms
β-blockersb
Unstable angina
PR interval (ECG)
Metoprololc
>0.24 s
5-mg increments by slow (over 1–2 min
Second- or third
IV administration)
degree AV block
Repeated every 5 min for a total initial 
Heart rate <60 bpm
dose of 15 mg
BP <90 mmHg
Followed in 1–2 h by 25–50 mg by
Shock
mouth every 6 h
LV failure with
If a very conservative regimen is desired,
congestive
initial doses can be reduced to 1–2 mg
heart failure
Esmololc
Severe reactive
Starting maintenance dose of 0.1 mg/kg
airway disease
per min IV
Titration in increments of 0.05 mg/kg per
min every 10–15 min as tolerated by BP
until the desired therapeutic response
has been obtained, limiting symptoms
develop, or a dose of 0.20 mg/kg per
min is reached
Optional loading dose of 0.5 mg/kg may
be given by slow IV administration
(2–5 min) for more rapid onset of action
Calcium
Patients whose symptoms are
Pulmonary edema
Dependent on speciﬁc agent
channel
not relieved by adequate 
Evidence of LV 
blockers
doses of nitrates and β-blockers,
dysfunction (for 
in patients unable to tolerate
diltiazem or 
adequate doses of one or both
verapamil)
of these agents, or in patients
with variant angina
Morphine
Patients whose symptoms are
Hypotension
2–5 mg IV dose
sulfate
not relieved after three serial
Respiratory 
May be repeated every 5–30 min as 
SL nitroglycerin tablets or
depression
needed to relieve symptoms and
whose symptoms recur with
Confusion
maintain patient comfort
adequate anti-ischemic therapy
Obtundation
aAllergy or prior intolerance is a contraindication for all categories of drugs listed in this chart.
bThe choice of the speciﬁc agent is not as important as ensuring that appropriate candidates receive this therapy. If there are concerns about
patient intolerance owing to existing pulmonary disease, especially asthma, left ventricular (LV) dysfunction, risk of hypotension or severe brady-
cardia, initial selection should favor a short-acting agent, such as propranolol or metoprolol or the ultra-short-acting agent esmolol. Mild wheez-
ing or a history of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease should prompt a trial of a short-acting agent at a reduced dose (e.g., 2.5 mg IV meto-
prolol, 12.5 mg oral metoprolol, or 25 g/kg per min esmolol as the initial doses) rather than complete avoidance of β-blocker therapy.
cMetoprolol and esmolol are two of several β-blockers that may be used.
Note: Some of the recommendations in this guide suggest the use of agents for purposes or in doses other than those speciﬁed by the U.S.
Food and Drug Administration. Such recommendations are made after consideration of concerns regarding nonapproved indications. Where
made, such recommendations are based on more recent clinical trials or expert consensus.
AV, atrioventricular; BP, blood pressure; ECG, electrocardiogram; LV, left ventricular; PDE, phosphodiesterase; SBP, systolic blood pressure; SL,
sublingual.
Source: Modiﬁed from E Braunwald et al: Circulation 1994;90:613–622.
agents can be started either in the ED or during PCI. As
with all antithrombotic agents, bleeding is the most
important adverse effect of antiplatelet drugs, espe-
cially their combination. Thus, patients with a history of
bleeding must be screened carefully and given fewer
antithrombotic agents.
INVASIVE VERSUS CONSERVATIVE STRAT-
EGY
Multiple clinical trials have shown the beneﬁt of an
early invasive strategy in high-risk patients—i.e., patients
with multiple clinical risk factors, ST-segment deviation, or
positive biomarkers (Table 33-3). In this strategy, after
treatment with anti-ischemic and antithrombotic agents,
coronary arteriography is carried out within ∼48 h of
admission followed by coronary revascularization (PCI or
CABG),depending on the coronary anatomy.
In low-risk patients, the outcomes from an invasive
strategy are similar to those obtained from a conserva-
tive strategy, which consists of anti-ischemic and
antithrombotic therapy followed by “watchful waiting,”
in which coronary arteriography is carried out only if
rest pain or ST-segment changes recur or there is evi-
dence of ischemia on a stress test.
review and optimize the medical regimen. Risk factor
modiﬁcation is key, and the physician should discuss with
the patient the importance of smoking cessation, achieving
optimal weight, daily exercise following an appropriate
diet, blood pressure control, tight control of hyperglycemia
(for diabetic patients), and lipid management, as recom-
mended for patients with chronic stable angina.
There is evidence of beneﬁt with long-term therapy
with ﬁve classes of drugs that are directed at different
components of the atherothrombotic process. B-blockers
are appropriate anti-ischemic therapy and may help
decrease triggers for MI. Statins (at a high dose, e.g., ator-
vastatin 80 mg/d) and ACE inhibitors are recommended
for long-term plaque stabilization. Antiplatelet therapy,
now recommended to be the combination of aspirin and
clopidogrel for at least 9–12 months with aspirin contin-
ued thereafter, prevents or reduces the severity of any
thrombosis that would occur if a plaque does rupture.
Thus, a multifactorial approach to long-term medical
therapy is directed at preventing the various components
of atherothrombosis.This therapy should be begun early
(i.e. within 1 week of the event) whenever possible.
Observational registries have shown that patients with
UA/NSTEMI at high risk, including women and elderly
individuals as well as racial minorities, are less likely to
receive evidence-based pharmacologic and interventional
therapies with resultant poorer clinical outcomes and
quality of life.
Unstable Angina and Non–ST-Elevation Myocardial Infarction
321
CHAPTER 33
TABLE 33-2
CLINICAL USE OF ANTITHROMBOTIC THERAPY
Oral Antiplatelet Therapy
Aspirin
Initial dose of 162–325 mg nonenteric formulation followed by
75–162 mg/d of an enteric or a nonenteric formulation
Clopidogrel (Plavix)
Loading dose of 300 mg followed by 75 mg/d
Intravenous Antiplatelet Therapy
Abciximab (ReoPro)
0.25 mg/kg bolus followed by infusion of 0.125 μg/kg per min
(maximum, 10 μg/min) for 12–24 h
Eptiﬁbatide (Integrilin)
180 μg/kg bolus followed by infusion of 2.0 μg/kg per min for 72–96 h
Tiroﬁban (Aggrastat)
0.4 μg/kg per min for 30 min followed by infusion of  0.1 μg/kg per min
for 48–96 h
Heparinsa
Heparin (UFH)
Bolus 60–70 U/kg (maximum 5000 U) IV followed by infusion
of 12–15 U/kg per h (initial maximum 1000 U/h) titrated to a PTT 50–70 s
Enoxaparin (Lovenox)
1 mg/kg SC every 12 h; the ﬁrst dose may be preceded by a 30-mg IV
bolus; renal adjustment to 1 mg/kg once daily if creatine Cl <30 cc/min
Fondaparinux
2.5 mg SC qd
Bivalirudin
Initial bolus IV bolus of 0.1 mg/kg and an infusion of 0.25 mg/kg
per hour. Before PCI, an additional IV bolus of 0.5 mg/kg was
administered, and the infusion was increased to 1.75 mg/kg per h.
aOther low-molecular-weight heparins exist beyond those listed.
Note: IV, intravenous; PCI, percutaneous coronary intervention; SC, subcutaneous; UFH, unfractionated heparin.
Source: Modiﬁed from Braunwald E et al: J Am Coll Cardiol 36:970–1056, 2000. 
LONG-TERM MANAGEMENT
The time of hospital discharge is a “teachable moment”for
the patient with UA/NST1EMI, when the physician can
PRINZMETAL’S VARIANT ANGINA
In 1959, Prinzmetal et al. described a syndrome of
ischemic pain that occurs at rest but not usually with
exertion and is associated with transient ST-segment
elevation.This syndrome is caused by focal spasm of an
epicardial coronary artery, leading to severe myocardial
ischemia. The exact cause of the spasm is not well
deﬁned, but it may be related to hypercontractility of
vascular smooth muscle caused by vasoconstrictor mito-
gens, leukotrienes, or serotonin. In some patients, it is a
manifestation of a vasospastic disorder and is associated
with migraine, Raynaud’s phenomenon, or aspirin-induced
asthma.
Clinical and Angiographic Manifestations
Patients with variant angina are generally younger and
have fewer coronary risk factors (with the exception of
cigarette smoking) than patients with UA secondary to
coronary atherosclerosis.The anginal discomfort is often
extremely severe and has usually not progressed from a
period of chronic stable angina. Cardiac examination is
usually normal in the absence of ischemia.
The clinical diagnosis of variant angina is made with
the detection of transient ST-segment elevation with rest
pain. Many patients also exhibit multiple episodes of
asymptomatic ST-segment elevation (silent ischemia).
Small elevations of CK-MB and troponin may occur in
patients with prolonged attacks of variant angina. Exer-
cise testing in patients with variant angina is of limited
value because the patients can demonstrate ST eleva-
tion, depression, or no ST changes.
Coronary angiography demonstrates transient coronary
spasm as the diagnostic hallmark of Prinzmetal’s angina.
Atherosclerotic plaques, which do not usually cause crit-
ical obstruction, in at least one proximal coronary artery
occur in the majority of patients, and in them, spasm
usually occurs within 1 cm of the plaque. Focal spasm is
322
Common Critical Illnesses and Syndromes
SECTION IV
FIGURE 33-3
Platelets initiate thrombosis at the site of a ruptured
plaque with denuded endothelium: platelet adhesion occurs
via (1) the glycoprotein (GP) 1b receptor in conjunction with
von Willebrand factor. This is followed by platelet activation
(2), which leads to a shape change in the platelet, degranula-
tion of the α and dense granules, and expression of GP IIb/IIIa
receptors on the platelet surface with activation of the recep-
tor, such that it can bind ﬁbrinogen. The ﬁnal step is platelet
aggregation (3), in which ﬁbrinogen (or von Willebrand factor)
binds to the activated GP IIb/IIIa receptors. Whereas aspirin
(ASA) and clopidogrel act to decrease platelet activation, the
GP IIb/IIIa inhibitors inhibit the ﬁnal step of platelet aggrega-
tion. [Modiﬁed from Cannon CP, Braunwald E, in Heart Dis-
ease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine, 8th ed, P Libby
et al (eds). Philadelphia, Saunders, 2008.]
TABLE 33-3
CLASS I RECOMMENDATIONS FOR USE OF
AN EARLY INVASIVE STRATEGYa
Class I (level of evidence: A) indications
Recurrent angina at rest and low-level activity
despite treatment
Elevated TnT or TnI
New ST-segment depression
Recurrent angina or ischemia with CHF symptoms,
rales, MR
Positive stress test
EF <0.40
Decreased BP
Sustained VT
PCI <6 months, prior CABG
aAny one of the high-risk indicators.
Note: BP, blood pressure; CABG, coronary artery bypass grafting;
CHF, congestive heart failure; EF, ejection fraction; MR, mitral regur-
gitation; PCI, percutaneous coronary intervention; TnI, troponin I;
TnT, troponin T; VT, ventricular tachycardia.
Source: Adapted from Braunwald E et al: Circulation 106:1893, 2002.
most common in the right coronary artery, and it may
occur at one or more sites in one artery or in multiple
arteries simultaneously. Ergonovine, acetylcholine, other
vasoconstrictor medications, and hyperventilation have
been used to provoke and demonstrate focal coronary
stenosis to establish the diagnosis. Hyperventilation has
also been used to provoke rest angina, ST-segment ele-
vation, and spasm on coronary arteriography.
FURTHER READINGS
ALEXANDER KP et al: Excess dosing of antiplatelet and antithrombin
agents in the treatment of non-ST-segment elevation acute coro-
nary syndromes. JAMA 294: 3108, 2005
ANDERSON JL et al:ACC/AHA 2007 guidelines for the management of
patients with unstable angina/non-ST-elevation myocardial infarc-
tion: A report of the American College of Cardiology/American
Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines. Circulation
116:e148,2007
ANTMAN EM et al:The TIMI risk score for unstable angina/non-ST
elevation MI: A method for prognostication and therapeutic
decision making. JAMA 284:835, 2000
BRAUNWALD E et al:ACC/AHA 2002 guideline update for the man-
agement of patients with unstable angina and non-ST segment
elevation myocardial infarction: A report of the American Col-
lege of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on
Practice Guidelines (Committee on the Management of Unstable
Angina). Available at http://www.acc.org/qualityandscience/clinical/
guidelines/unstable/update_index.htm
CANNON CP, BRAUNWALD E: Unstable angina, in Braunwald’s Heart
Disease, 8th ed, P Libby et al (eds). Philadelphia, Saunders, 2008
———: Unstable angina, in Braunwald’s Heart Disease, 9th ed, R Bonow
et al (eds).Philadelphia,Saunders,2010
——— et al: Intensive versus moderate lipid lowering with statins
after acute coronary syndromes. N Engl J Med 350:1495, 2004
CLOPIDOGREL
IN UNSTABLE ANGINA TO PREVENT RECURRENT
EVENTS TRIAL INVESTIGATORS: Effects of clopidogrel in addition
to aspirin in patients with acute coronary syndromes without
ST-segment elevation. N Engl J Med 345:494, 2001
GIUGLIANO RP et al: Early versus delayed, provisional eptiﬁbatide in
acute coronary syndromes. N Engl J Med 360:2176, 2009
GIUGLIANO RP, BRAUNWALD E:The year in non-ST segment eleva-
tion acute coronary syndromes. J Am Coll Cardiol (in press)
KASTRATI A et al: Abciximab in patients with acute coronary syn-
dromes undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention after
clopidogrel pretreatment: The ISAR-REACT 2 randomized
trial. JAMA 295:1531, 2006
MEHTA SR et al: Routine vs selective invasive strategies in patients
with acute coronary syndromes: A collaborative meta-analysis of
randomized trials. JAMA 293:2908, 2005
O’DONOGHUE M et al: Early invasive vs. conservative treatment
strategies in women and men with unstable angina and non-ST-
segment elevation myocardial infarction: A meta-analysis. JAMA
300:71, 2008
WALLENTIN LT et al: Ticagrelor versus clopidogrel in patients with
acute coronary syndromes. N Engl J Med 361:1045, 2009
WIVIOTT SD et al: Prasugrel versus clopidogrel in patients with acute
coronary syndromes. N Engl J Med 357:2001, 2007
YUSUF S et al. Comparison of fondaparinux and enoxaparin in acute
coronary syndromes. N Engl J Med 354:1464, 2006
Unstable Angina and Non–ST-Elevation Myocardial Infarction
323
CHAPTER 33
Treatment:
PRINZMETAL’S VARIANT ANGINA
Nitrates and calcium channel blockers are the main
treatments for patients with variant angina. Sublingual
or IV nitroglycerin often abolishes episodes of variant
angina promptly, and long-acting nitrates are useful in
preventing 
recurrences.
Calcium 
antagonists 
are
extremely effective in preventing the coronary artery
spasm of variant angina, and they should be prescribed
in maximally tolerated doses. Similar efﬁcacy rates have
been noted among the various types of calcium antago-
nists. Prazosin, a selective α-adrenoreceptor blocker, has
also been found to be of value in some patients, but
aspirin may actually increase the severity of ischemic
episodes. The response to β-blockers is variable. Coro-
nary revascularization may be helpful in patients with
variant angina who also have discrete, proximal ﬁxed
obstructive lesions.
Prognosis
Many patients with Prinzmetal’s angina pass through an
acute, active phase, with frequent episodes of angina and
cardiac events during the ﬁrst 6 months after presentation.
Long-term survival at 5 years is excellent (∼90–95%).
Patients with no or mild ﬁxed coronary obstruction tend
to experience a more benign course than do patients with
associated severe obstructive lesions. Nonfatal MI occurs
in up to 20% of patients by 5 years. Patients with variant
angina who develop serious arrhythmias during sponta-
neous episodes of pain are at a higher risk for sudden
death. In most patients who survive an infarction or the
initial 3–6-month period of frequent episodes, the
condition stabilizes, and there is a tendency for symptoms
and cardiac events to diminish with time.
Elliott M. Antman
I
Eugene Braunwald
Acute myocardial infarction (AMI) is one of the most
common diagnoses in hospitalized patients in industrial-
ized countries. In the United States, approximately
650,000 patients experience a new AMI and 450,000
experience a recurrent AMI each year.The early (30-day)
mortality rate from AMI is ∼30%, with more than half
of these deaths occurring before the individual reaches
the hospital. Although the mortality rate after admission
for AMI has declined by ∼30% over the past two
decades, approximately one of every 25 patients who
survives the initial hospitalization dies in the ﬁrst year
after AMI. Mortality is approximately fourfold higher in
elderly patients (older than age 75 years) compared with
younger patients.
When patients with prolonged ischemic discomfort at
rest are ﬁrst seen, the working clinical diagnosis is that they
have an acute coronary syndrome (ACS) (Fig. 34-1).The
12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG) is a pivotal diagnostic
and triage tool since it is at the center of the decision
pathway for management. It permits distinction of those
ST-SEGMENT ELEVATION
MYOCARDIAL INFARCTION
patients presenting with ST-segment elevation from those
presenting without ST-segment elevation. Serum cardiac
biomarkers are obtained to distinguish unstable angina
(UA) from non–ST-segment MI (NSTEMI) and to assess
the magnitude of an ST-segment elevation MI (STEMI).
This chapter focuses on the evaluation and management of
patients with STEMI;Chap.33 discusses UA/NSTEMI.
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY: ROLE OF
ACUTE PLAQUE RUPTURE
STEMI usually occurs when coronary blood ﬂow
decreases abruptly after a thrombotic occlusion of a coro-
nary artery previously affected by atherosclerosis. Slowly
developing, high-grade coronary artery stenoses do not
typically precipitate STEMI because of the development
of a rich collateral network over time. Instead, STEMI
occurs when a coronary artery thrombus develops rapidly
at a site of vascular injury. This injury is produced or
CHAPTER 34
CHAPTER 34
324
I Pathophysiology: Role of Acute Plaque Rupture . . . . . . . . . . 324
I Clinical Presentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 325
Physical Findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 326
I Laboratory Findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 326
Electrocardiography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 326
Serum Cardiac Biomarkers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 327
Cardiac Imaging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 328
I Initial Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 328
Prehospital Care . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 328
Management in the Emergency Department . . . . . . . . . . . . . 328
Control of Discomfort . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 329
Management Strategies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 330
Limitation of Infarct Size . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 330
I Hospital Phase Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 333
Coronary Care Units . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 333
I Pharmacotherapy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 334
Antithrombotic Agents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 334
β-Adrenoceptor Blockers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 335
Inhibition of the Renin–Angiotensin–
Aldosterone System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 336
Other Agents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 336
I Complications and Their Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 336
Ventricular Dysfunction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 336
Hemodynamic Assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 336
Cardiogenic Shock . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 337
Right Ventricular Infarction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 337
Arrhythmias . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 338
Other Complications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 340
I Postinfarction Risk Stratiﬁcation and Management . . . . . . . . 341
I Secondary Prevention . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 341
I Further Readings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 342
facilitated by factors such as cigarette smoking, hyperten-
sion, and lipid accumulation. In most cases, STEMI
occurs when the surface of an atherosclerotic plaque
becomes disrupted (exposing its contents to the blood)
and conditions (local or systemic) favor thrombogenesis.A
mural thrombus forms at the site of plaque disruption,
and the involved coronary artery becomes occluded. His-
tologic studies indicate that the coronary plaques prone to
disruption are those with a rich lipid core and a thin
ﬁbrous cap.After an initial platelet monolayer forms at the
site of the disrupted plaque, various agonists (collagen,
ADP, epinephrine, serotonin) promote platelet activation.
After agonist stimulation of platelets, thromboxane A2
(a potent local vasoconstrictor) is released, further platelet
ST-Segment Elevation Myocardial Infarction
325
CHAPTER 34
activation occurs, and potential resistance to ﬁbrinolysis
develops.
In addition to the generation of thromboxane A2, acti-
vation of platelets by agonists promotes a conformational
change in the glycoprotein (GP) IIb/IIIa receptor.After it
has been converted to its functional state, this receptor
develops a high afﬁnity for amino acid sequences on solu-
ble adhesive proteins (i.e., integrins) such as ﬁbrinogen.
Because ﬁbrinogen is a multivalent molecule, it can bind
to two different platelets simultaneously,resulting in platelet
cross-linking and aggregation.
The coagulation cascade is activated on exposure of
tissue factor in damaged endothelial cells at the site of
the disrupted plaque. Factors VII and X are activated,
ultimately leading to the conversion of prothrombin to
thrombin, which then converts ﬁbrinogen to ﬁbrin
(Chap. 41). Fluid-phase and clot-bound thrombin partic-
ipate in an autoampliﬁcation reaction, leading to further
activation of the coagulation cascade. The culprit coro-
nary artery eventually becomes occluded by a thrombus
containing platelet aggregates and ﬁbrin strands.
In rare cases, STEMI may be due to coronary artery
occlusion caused by coronary emboli, congenital abnor-
malities, coronary spasm, and a wide variety of systemic—
particularly inflammatory—diseases. The amount of
myocardial damage caused by coronary occlusion depends
on (1) the territory supplied by the affected vessel,
(2) whether or not the vessel becomes totally occluded,
(3) the duration of coronary occlusion, (4) the quantity of
blood supplied by collateral vessels to the affected tissue,
(5) the demand for oxygen of the myocardium whose
blood supply has been suddenly limited, (6) native factors
that can produce early spontaneous lysis of the occlusive
thrombus, and (7) the adequacy of myocardial perfusion
in the infarct zone when ﬂow is restored in the occluded
epicardial coronary artery.
Patients at increased risk of developing STEMI include
those with multiple coronary risk factors and those with
UA (Chap. 33). Less common underlying medical condi-
tions predisposing patients to STEMI include hypercoag-
ulability, collagen vascular disease, cocaine abuse, and
intracardiac thrombi or masses that can produce coronary
emboli.
CLINICAL PRESENTATION
In up to 50% of cases, a precipitating factor, such as vig-
orous physical exercise, emotional stress, or a medical or
surgical illness, appears to be present before STEMI.
Although STEMI may commence at any time of the day
or night, circadian variations have been reported such
that clusters are seen in the morning within a few hours
of awakening.
Pain is the most common presenting complaint in
patients with STEMI. The pain is deep and visceral;
Acute coronary syndrome
Presentation
Working Dx
ECG
Biochem.
marker
Final Dx
Myocardial infarction
Unstable angina
NQMI
Qw MI
No ST elevation
NSTEMI
ST elevation
Ischemic Discomfort
FIGURE 34-1
Acute coronary syndromes. After disruption of a vulnerable
plaque, patients experience ischemic discomfort resulting
from a reduction of ﬂow through the affected epicardial coro-
nary artery. The ﬂow reduction may be caused by a com-
pletely occlusive thrombus (right) or subtotally occlusive
thrombus (left). Patients with ischemic discomfort may pre-
sent with or without ST-segment elevation. Of patients with
ST-segment elevation, the majority (wide red arrow) ulti-
mately develop a Q-wave on the ECG (QwMI), but a minority
(thin red arrow) do not develop Q-wave and in older literature
were said to have sustained a non–Q-wave MI (NQMI).
Patients who present without ST-segment elevation have
either unstable angina or a non–ST-segment elevation MI
(NSTEMI) (wide green arrows), a distinction that is ultimately
made on the presence or absence of a serum cardiac marker
such as the MB isoenzyme of creatine phosphokinase
(CKMB) or a cardiac troponin detected in the blood. The
majority of patients presenting with NSTEMI do not develop
a Q-wave on the ECG; a minority develop a QwMI (thin green
arrow). Dx, diagnosis. (Adapted from Hamm CW et al: Acute
coronary syndrome without ST elevation: implementation of
new guidelines. Lancet 358:1533, 2001, and Davies MJ: The
pathophysiology of acute coronary syndromes. Heart 83:361,
2000; with permission from the BMJ Publishing Group.)
adjectives commonly used to describe it are heavy,squeezing,
and crushing, although occasionally it is described as
stabbing or burning. It is similar in character to the dis-
comfort of angina pectoris but commonly occurs at rest, is
usually more severe, and lasts longer. Typically, the pain
involves the central portion of the chest or the epigas-
trium, and it occasionally radiates to the arms. Less com-
mon sites of radiation include the abdomen, back, lower
jaw, and neck.The frequent location of the pain beneath
the xiphoid and epigastrium and the patient’s denial that
he or she may be suffering a heart attack are chieﬂy
responsible for the common mistaken impression of indi-
gestion. The pain of STEMI may radiate as high as the
occipital area but not below the umbilicus. It is often
accompanied by weakness, sweating, nausea, vomiting,
anxiety, and a sense of impending doom. The pain may
commence when the patient is at rest, but when it begins
during a period of exertion, it does not usually subside
with cessation of activity,in contrast to angina pectoris.
The pain of STEMI can simulate pain from acute
pericarditis, pulmonary embolism (Chap. 20), acute aor-
tic dissection, costochondritis, and gastrointestinal disor-
ders.These conditions should therefore be considered in
the differential diagnosis. Radiation of discomfort to the
trapezius is not seen in patients with STEMI and may
be a useful distinguishing feature that suggests pericardi-
tis is the correct diagnosis. However, pain is not uniformly
present in patients with STEMI.The proportion of painless
STEMIs is greater in patients with diabetes mellitus, and
it increases with age. In elderly individuals, STEMI may
present as sudden-onset breathlessness, which may progress
to pulmonary edema. Other less common presentations,
with or without pain, include sudden loss of conscious-
ness, a confusional state, a sensation of profound weakness,
the appearance of an arrhythmia, evidence of periph-
eral embolism, or merely an unexplained decrease in
arterial pressure.
PHYSICAL FINDINGS
Most patients are anxious and restless, attempting unsuc-
cessfully to relieve the pain by moving about in bed, alter-
ing their position, and stretching. Pallor associated with
perspiration and coolness of the extremities occurs com-
monly.The combination of substernal chest pain persist-
ing for >30 min and diaphoresis strongly suggests STEMI.
Although many patients have a normal pulse rate and
blood pressure within the ﬁrst hour of STEMI, about
one-fourth of patients with anterior infarction have man-
ifestations of sympathetic nervous system hyperactivity
(tachycardia, hypertension, or both), and up to one-half
with inferior infarction show evidence of parasympathetic
hyperactivity (bradycardia, hypotension, or both).
The precordium is usually quiet, and the apical impulse
may be difﬁcult to palpate. In patients with anterior
wall infarction, an abnormal systolic pulsation caused by
dyskinetic bulging of infarcted myocardium may develop
in the periapical area within the ﬁrst days of the illness
and may then resolve. Other physical signs of ventricular
dysfunction include fourth and third heart sounds,
decreased intensity of the ﬁrst heart sound, and paradoxi-
cal splitting of the second heart sound. A transient
midsystolic or late systolic apical systolic murmur caused
by dysfunction of the mitral valve apparatus may be pre-
sent. A pericardial friction rub is heard in many patients
with transmural STEMI at some time in the course of the
disease if they are examined frequently.The carotid pulse
is often decreased in volume, reﬂecting reduced stroke vol-
ume.Temperature elevations up to 38°C may be observed
during the ﬁrst week after STEMI.The arterial pressure is
variable; in most patients with transmural infarction, sys-
tolic pressure declines by approximately 10–15 mmHg from
the preinfarction state.
LABORATORY FINDINGS
Myocardial infarction (MI) progresses through the fol-
lowing temporal stages: (1) acute (ﬁrst few hours–7 days),
(2) healing (7–28 days), and (3) healed (≥29 days).When
evaluating the results of diagnostic tests for STEMI, the
temporal phase of the infarction must be considered.The
laboratory tests of value in conﬁrming the diagnosis may
be divided into four groups: (1) ECG, (2) serum cardiac
biomarkers, (3) cardiac imaging, and (4) nonspeciﬁc indices
of tissue necrosis and inﬂammation.
ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY
During the initial stage, total occlusion of an epicardial
coronary artery produces ST-segment elevation. Most
patients initially presenting with ST-segment elevation
ultimately evolve Q waves on the ECG (Fig. 34-1). How-
ever, Q waves in the leads overlying the infarct zone may
vary in magnitude and even appear only transiently,
depending on the reperfusion status of the ischemic
myocardium and restoration of transmembrane potentials
over time.A small proportion of patients initially present-
ing with ST-segment elevation will not develop Q waves
when the obstructing thrombus is not totally occlusive,
obstruction is transient, or if a rich collateral network is
present.Among patients presenting with ischemic discom-
fort but without ST-segment elevation, if a serum cardiac
biomarker of necrosis (see later) is detected, the diagnosis
of NSTEMI is ultimately made (Fig. 34-1).A minority of
patients who present initially without ST-segment eleva-
tion may develop a Q-wave MI. Previously, it was believed
that transmural MI is present if the ECG demonstrates
Q waves or loss of R waves, and nontransmural MI may
be present if the ECG shows only transient ST-segment
and T-wave changes. However, ECG–pathologic correla-
tions are far from perfect, and terms such as Q-wave MI,
non–Q-wave MI, transmural MI, and nontransmural MI,
have been replaced by STEMI and NSTEMI (Fig. 34-1).
326
Common Critical Illnesses and Syndromes
SECTION IV
SERUM CARDIAC BIOMARKERS
Certain proteins, called serum cardiac biomarkers, are
released from necrotic heart muscle after STEMI. The
rate of liberation of speciﬁc proteins differs depending
on their intracellular location, their molecular weight,
and the local blood and lymphatic ﬂow. Cardiac bio-
markers become detectable in the peripheral blood after
the capacity of the cardiac lymphatics to clear the inter-
stitium of the infarct zone is exceeded and spillover into
the venous circulation occurs. The temporal pattern of
protein release is of diagnostic importance, but contem-
porary urgent reperfusion strategies necessitate making a
decision (based largely on a combination of clinical and
ECG ﬁndings) before the results of blood tests have
returned from the laboratory. Rapid whole-blood bed-
side assays for serum cardiac markers are now available
and may facilitate management decisions, particularly in
patients with nondiagnostic ECGs.
Cardiac-speciﬁc troponin T (cTnT) and cardiac-speciﬁc tro-
ponin I (cTnI) have amino acid sequences different from
those of the skeletal muscle forms of these proteins.These
differences permitted the development of quantitative
assays for cTnT and cTnI with highly speciﬁc mono-
clonal antibodies. Because cTnT and cTnI are not nor-
mally detectable in the blood of healthy individuals but
may increase after STEMI to levels >20 times higher than
the upper reference limit (the highest value seen in 99%
of a reference population without MI), the measurement
of cTnT or cTnI is of considerable diagnostic usefulness,
and they are now the preferred biochemical markers for
MI (Fig. 34-2). The cardiac troponins are particularly
valuable when there is clinical suspicion of either skeletal
muscle injury or a small MI that may be below the detec-
tion limit for creatine phosphokinase (CK) and CKMB
measurements, and they are therefore of particular value
in distinguishing UA from NSTEMI. Levels of cTnI and
cTnT may remain elevated for 7–10 days after STEMI.
CK increases within 4–8 h and generally returns to
normal by 48–72 h (see Fig. 34-2). An important draw-
back of total CK measurement is its lack of speciﬁcity for
STEMI because CK may be elevated with skeletal muscle
disease or trauma, including intramuscular injection. The
MB isoenzyme of CK has the advantage over total CK
that it is not present in signiﬁcant concentrations in
extracardiac tissue and therefore is considerably more spe-
ciﬁc. However, cardiac surgery, myocarditis, and electrical
cardioversion often result in elevated serum levels of the
MB isoenzyme. A ratio (relative index) of CKMB
mass:CK activity ≥2.5 suggests but is not diagnostic of a
myocardial rather than a skeletal muscle source for the
CKMB elevation.
Many hospitals use cTnT or cTnI rather than CKMB as
the routine serum cardiac marker for diagnosis of STEMI,
although any of these analytes remains clinically acceptable.
It is not cost effective to measure both a cardiac-speciﬁc
troponin and CKMB at all time points in every patient.
Although it has long been recognized that the total
quantity of protein released correlates with the size of the
infarct, the peak protein concentration correlates only
weakly with infarct size.Recanalization of a coronary artery
occlusion (either spontaneously or by mechanical or phar-
macologic means) in the early hours of STEMI causes ear-
lier and higher peaking (at about 8–12 h after reperfusion)
of serum cardiac biomarkers (see Fig. 34-2) because of a
rapid washout from the interstitium of the infarct zone,
quickly overwhelming lymphatic clearance of the proteins.
The nonspeciﬁc reaction to myocardial injury is associated
with polymorphonuclear leukocytosis, which appears
within a few hours after the onset of pain and persists for
3–7 days; the white blood cell count often reaches levels of
12,000–15,000/μL. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate
increases more slowly than the white blood cell count,
peaking during the ﬁrst week and sometimes remaining
elevated for 1 or 2 weeks.
ST-Segment Elevation Myocardial Infarction
327
CHAPTER 34
Days after onset of AMI
Cardiac troponin—no reperfusion
Upper reference limit
URL = 99th %tile of
reference control group
Multiples of the URL
50
100
7
8
20
10
5
2
1
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Cardiac troponin—reperfusion
CKMB—no reperfusion
CKMB—reperfusion
FIGURE 34-2
Typical cardiac biomarkers that are used to evaluate
patients with ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction
include the MB isoenzyme of creatine phosphokinase
(CKMB) and cardiac-speciﬁc troponins. The black horizon-
tal line depicts the upper reference limit (URL) for the cardiac
biomarker in the clinical chemistry laboratory. The kinetics of
release of CKMB and cardiac troponin in patients who do not
undergo reperfusion are shown in the solid green and red
curves as multiples of the URL. When patients with STEMI
undergo reperfusion, as depicted in the dashed green and red
curves, the cardiac biomarkers are detected sooner, rise to a
higher peak value, but decline more rapidly, resulting in a
smaller area under the curve and limitation of infarct size. AMI,
acute myocardial infarction. (Adapted from Alpert JS et al:
Myocardial infarction redeﬁned: A consensus document of the
Joint European Society of Cardiology/American College of
Cardiology Committee for the redeﬁnition of myocardial infarc-
tion. J Am Coll Cardiol 36:959, 2000, and Wu AH et al: National
Academy of Clinical Biochemistry Standards of Laboratory
Practice: recommendations for the use of cardiac markers in
coronary artery diseases. Clin Chem 45:1104, 1999.)
CARDIAC IMAGING
Abnormalities of wall motion on two-dimensional echocar-
diography are almost universally present. Although acute
STEMI cannot be distinguished from an old myocardial
scar or from acute severe ischemia by echocardiography,
the ease and safety of the procedure make its use appeal-
ing as a screening tool in the emergency department
(ED) setting.When the ECG is not diagnostic of STEMI,
early detection of the presence or absence of wall motion
abnormalities by echocardiography can aid in manage-
ment decisions, such as whether the patient should receive
reperfusion therapy [e.g., ﬁbrinolysis or a percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI)]. Echocardiographic esti-
mation of left ventricular (LV) function is useful prog-
nostically; detection of reduced function serves as an
indication for therapy with an inhibitor of the renin–
angiotensin–aldosterone system. Echocardiography may
also identify the presence of right ventricular (RV)
infarction, ventricular aneurysm, pericardial effusion, and
LV thrombus. In addition, Doppler echocardiography is
useful in the detection and quantitation of a ventricular
septal defect and mitral regurgitation, two serious com-
plications of STEMI.
Several radionuclide imaging techniques are available for
evaluating patients with suspected STEMI. However,
these imaging modalities are used less often than echocar-
diography because they are more cumbersome and lack
sensitivity and speciﬁcity in many clinical circumstances.
Myocardial perfusion imaging with 201Tl or 99mTc-sestamibi,
which are distributed in proportion to myocardial blood
ﬂow and concentrated by viable myocardium, reveal a
defect (“cold spot”) in most patients during the ﬁrst few
hours after development of a transmural infarct.Although
perfusion scanning is extremely sensitive, it cannot distin-
guish acute infarcts from chronic scars and thus is not
speciﬁc for the diagnosis of acute MI. Radionuclide ven-
triculography, carried out with 99mTc-labeled red blood
cells, frequently demonstrates wall motion disorders and
reduction in the ventricular ejection fraction in patients
with STEMI.Although of value in assessing the hemody-
namic consequences of infarction and in aiding in the
diagnosis of RV infarction when the RV ejection fraction
is depressed, this technique is nonspeciﬁc because many
cardiac abnormalities other than MI alter the radionuclide
ventriculogram.
Myocardial infarction can be detected accurately with
high-resolution cardiac MRI using a technique referred
to as late enhancement.A standard imaging agent (gadolin-
ium) is administered, and images are obtained after a 10-
min delay. Because little gadolinium enters normal
myocardium where there are tightly packed myocytes but
does percolate into the expanded intercellular region
of the infarct zone, a bright signal in areas of infarction
appears in stark contrast to the dark areas of normal
myocardium.
INITIAL MANAGEMENT
PREHOSPITAL CARE
The prognosis for patients with STEMI is largely related
to the occurrence of two general classes of complica-
tions: (1) electrical complications (arrhythmias) and
(2) mechanical complications (“pump failure”). Most
out-of-hospital deaths from STEMI are caused by the
sudden development of ventricular ﬁbrillation.The vast
majority of deaths caused by ventricular ﬁbrillation
occur within the ﬁrst 24 h of the onset of symptoms,
and of these, more than half occur in the ﬁrst hour.
Therefore, the major elements of prehospital care of
patients with suspected STEMI include (1) recognition
of symptoms by the patient and prompt seeking of med-
ical attention; (2) rapid deployment of an emergency
medical team capable of performing resuscitative maneu-
vers, including deﬁbrillation; (3) expeditious transporta-
tion of the patient to a hospital facility that is continuously
staffed by physicians and nurses skilled in managing
arrhythmias and providing advanced cardiac life support;
and (4) expeditious implementation of reperfusion ther-
apy (Fig. 34-3). The biggest delay usually occurs not
during transportation to the hospital but rather between
the onset of pain and the patient’s decision to call for
help.This delay can best be reduced by health care pro-
fessionals educating the public concerning the signiﬁ-
cance of chest discomfort and the importance of seeking
early medical attention. Regular ofﬁce visits with patients
having a history of or who are at risk for ischemic heart
disease are important “teachable moments” for clinicians
to review the symptoms of STEMI and the appropriate
action plan.
Increasingly, monitoring and treatment are carried
out by trained personnel in the ambulance, further
shortening the time between the onset of the infarction
and appropriate treatment. General guidelines for initia-
tion of ﬁbrinolysis in the prehospital setting include the
ability to transmit 12-lead ECGs to conﬁrm the diagno-
sis, the presence of paramedics in the ambulance, train-
ing of paramedics in the interpretation of ECGs and
management of STEMI, and online medical command
and control that can authorize the initiation of treat-
ment in the ﬁeld.
MANAGEMENT IN THE
EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT
In the ED, the goals for the management of patients with
suspected STEMI include control of cardiac discomfort,
rapid identiﬁcation of patients who are candidates for
urgent reperfusion therapy, triage of lower-risk patients to
the appropriate location in the hospital, and avoidance of
inappropriate discharge of patients with STEMI. Many
aspects of the treatment of patients with STEMI are
328
Common Critical Illnesses and Syndromes
SECTION IV
initiated in the ED and then continued during the in-
hospital phase of management.
Aspirin is essential in the management of patients
with suspected STEMI and is effective across the entire
spectrum of ACS (Fig. 34-1). Rapid inhibition of
cyclooxygenase-1 in platelets followed by a reduction of
thromboxane A2 levels is achieved by buccal absorption
of a chewed 160–325-mg tablet in the ED.This measure
should be followed by daily oral administration of aspirin
in a dose of 75–162 mg.
In patients whose arterial O2 saturation is normal, sup-
plemental O2 is of limited, if any, clinical beneﬁt and
therefore is not cost effective. However, when hypoxemia
is present, O2 should be administered by nasal prongs or a
face mask (2–4 L/min) for the ﬁrst 6–12 h after infarc-
tion; the patient should then be reassessed to determine if
there is a continued need for such treatment.
CONTROL OF DISCOMFORT
Sublingual nitroglycerin can be given safely to most patients
with STEMI. Up to three doses of 0.4 mg should be
administered at about 5-min intervals. In addition to
diminishing or abolishing chest discomfort, nitroglycerin
may be capable of both decreasing myocardial oxygen
demand (by lowering preload) and increasing myocardial
oxygen supply (by dilating infarct-related coronary vessels
or collateral vessels). In patients whose initially favorable
response to sublingual nitroglycerin is followed by the
return of chest discomfort, particularly if accompanied
by other evidence of ongoing ischemia such as further
ST-segment or T-wave shifts, the use of IV nitroglycerin
should be considered. Therapy with nitrates should be
avoided in patients who present with low systolic arterial
pressure (<90 mmHg) or in whom there is clinical
suspicion of RV infarction (inferior infarction on ECG,
elevated jugular venous pressure, clear lungs, and hypoten-
sion). Nitrates should not be administered to patients who
have taken the phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitor sildenaﬁl for
erectile dysfunction within the preceding 24 h because it
may potentiate the hypotensive effects of nitrates. An
idiosyncratic reaction to nitrates consisting of sudden
marked hypotension sometimes occurs but can usually
be reversed promptly with the rapid administration of
IV atropine.
Morphine is a very effective analgesic for the pain asso-
ciated with STEMI. However, it may reduce sympatheti-
cally mediated arteriolar and venous constriction, and the
resulting venous pooling may reduce cardiac output and
arterial pressure.These hemodynamic disturbances usually
ST-Segment Elevation Myocardial Infarction
329
CHAPTER 34
Current
Goal
Fibrinolysis
Onset
of MI
Patient
response
Patient
Door
Data
Decision
Methods of
speeding
time to
reperfusion
Drug
started
Flow
restored
Cath PCI
Primary PCI
Media campaign
Patient education
Greater use of 911
Prehospital Rx
Bolus lytics
Dedicated PCI team
Pre-
hospital
ECG
MI protocol
Critical Pathway
Quality
Improvement
Program
Transport
In hospital
Reperfusion
5 min 30 min
D-N  30 min
D-B  90 min
FIGURE 34-3
Major components of time delay between the onset of
symptoms from ST-segment elevation myocardial infarc-
tion (STEMI) and restoration of ﬂow in the infarct-related
artery. Plotted sequentially from left to right are the times for
patients to recognize symptoms and seek medical attention,
transportation to the hospital, in-hospital decision making,
implementation of reperfusion strategy, and restoration of ﬂow
after the reperfusion strategy has been initiated. The time to
initiate ﬁbrinolytic therapy is the “door-to-needle” (D-N) time;
this is followed by the period of time required for pharmaco-
logic restoration of ﬂow. More time is required to move the
patient to the catheterization laboratory for a percutaneous
coronary interventional (PCI) procedure, referred to as the
“door-to-balloon” (D-B) time, but restoration of ﬂow in the epi-
cardial infarct-related artery occurs promptly after PCI. At the
bottom are shown a variety of methods for speeding the time
to reperfusion along with the goals for the time intervals for the
various components of the time delay. ECG, electrocardiog-
raphy; Rx, treatment. (Adapted from Cannon CP et al: Time as
an adjunctive agent to thrombolytic therapy. J Thromb Throm-
bolysis1:27, 1994.)
respond promptly to elevation of the legs, but in some
patients, volume expansion with IV saline is required.The
patient may experience diaphoresis and nausea, but these
events usually pass and are replaced by a feeling of well-
being associated with the relief of pain. Morphine also has
a vagotonic effect and may cause bradycardia or advanced
degrees of heart block, particularly in patients with pos-
teroinferior infarction. These side effects usually respond
to atropine (0.5 mg IV). Morphine is routinely adminis-
tered by repetitive (every 5 min) IV injection of small
doses (2–4 mg) rather than by the subcutaneous adminis-
tration of a larger quantity because absorption may be
unpredictable by the latter route.
IV β-blockers are also useful in the control of the pain
of STEMI. These drugs control pain effectively in some
patients, presumably by diminishing myocardial O2 demand
and hence ischemia. More important, evidence suggests
that IV β-blockers reduce the risks of reinfarction and
ventricular fibrillation (see β-Adrenoceptor Blockers
later). A commonly used regimen is metoprolol, 5 mg
every 2–5 min for a total of three doses, provided the
patient has a heart rate >60 bpm, systolic pressure >100
mmHg, a PR interval <0.24 s, and rales that are no higher
than 10 cm up from the diaphragm. Fifteen minutes after
the last IV dose, an oral regimen is initiated of 50 mg
every 6 h for 48 h followed by 100 mg every 12 h.
Unlike β-blockers, calcium antagonists are of little
value in the acute setting, and evidence suggests that
short-acting dihydropyridines may be associated with an
increased mortality risk.
MANAGEMENT STRATEGIES
The primary tool for screening patients and making
triage decisions is the initial 12-lead ECG. When ST-
segment elevation of at least 2 mm in two contiguous
precordial leads and 1 mm in two adjacent limb leads is
present, a patient should be considered a candidate for
reperfusion therapy (Fig. 34-4). The process of selecting
patients for ﬁbrinolysis versus primary PCI (angioplasty,
or stenting) is discussed below. In the absence of ST-
segment elevation, ﬁbrinolysis is not helpful, and evidence
suggests that it may be harmful.
LIMITATION OF INFARCT SIZE
The quantity of myocardium that becomes necrotic as a
consequence of a coronary artery occlusion is determined
by factors other than just the site of occlusion. Although
the central zone of the infarct contains necrotic tissue that
is irretrievably lost, the fate of the surrounding ischemic
myocardium may be improved by timely restoration of
coronary perfusion, reduction of myocardial O2 demands,
prevention of the accumulation of noxious metabolites,
and blunting of the impact of mediators of reperfusion
injury (e.g., calcium overload and oxygen-derived free
radicals). Up to one-third of patients with STEMI may
achieve spontaneous reperfusion of the infarct-related
coronary artery within 24 h and experience improved
healing of infarcted tissue. Reperfusion, either pharmaco-
logically (by ﬁbrinolysis) or by PCI,accelerates the opening
of infarct-related arteries in patients in whom sponta-
neous ﬁbrinolysis ultimately would have occurred and
greatly increases the number of patients in whom restora-
tion of ﬂow in the infarct-related artery is accomplished.
Timely restoration of ﬂow in the epicardial infarct–related
artery combined with improved perfusion of the down-
stream zone of infarcted myocardium results in a limita-
tion of infarct size.Protection of the ischemic myocardium
by the maintenance of an optimal balance between
myocardial O2 supply and demand through pain control,
treatment of congestive heart failure (CHF), and minimiza-
tion of tachycardia and hypertension extends the “window”
of time for the salvage of myocardium by reperfusion
strategies.
Glucocorticoids and nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory
agents, with the exception of aspirin, should be avoided
in patients with STEMI.They can impair infarct healing
and increase the risk of myocardial rupture, and their use
may result in a larger infarct scar. In addition, they can
increase coronary vascular resistance, thereby potentially
reducing ﬂow to ischemic myocardium.
Primary Percutaneous Coronary Intervention
PCI, usually angioplasty or stenting without preceding
ﬁbrinolysis, referred to as primary PCI, is effective in
restoring perfusion in STEMI when carried out on an
emergency basis in the ﬁrst few hours of MI. It has the
advantage of being applicable to patients who have con-
traindications to ﬁbrinolytic therapy (see below) but other-
wise are considered appropriate candidates for reperfusion.
It appears to be more effective than ﬁbrinolysis in open-
ing occluded coronary arteries and, when performed by
experienced operators [≥75 PCI cases (not necessarily primary)
per year] in dedicated medical centers (≥36 primary PCI cases
per year), is associated with better short- and long-term
clinical outcomes. Compared with ﬁbrinolysis, primary
PCI is generally preferred when the diagnosis is in doubt,
cardiogenic shock is present, bleeding risk is increased,
or symptoms have been present for at least 2–3 h when
the clot is more mature and less easily lysed by ﬁbri-
nolytic drugs. However, PCI is expensive in terms of
personnel and facilities, and its applicability is limited by
its availability, around the clock, in only a minority of
hospitals.
Fibrinolysis
If no contraindications are present (see later), ﬁbri-
nolytic therapy should ideally be initiated within 30 min-
utes of presentation (i.e., door-to-needle time ≤30 min).
The principal goal of ﬁbrinolysis is prompt restoration
of full coronary arterial patency.The ﬁbrinolytic agents
330
Common Critical Illnesses and Syndromes
SECTION IV
tissue plasminogen activator (tPA),streptokinase,tenecteplase
(TNK), and reteplase (rPA) have been approved by the
U.S. Food and Drug Administration for IV use in patients
with STEMI.These drugs all act by promoting the con-
version of plasminogen to plasmin, which subsequently
lyses ﬁbrin thrombi. Although considerable emphasis was
ﬁrst placed on a distinction between more ﬁbrin-speciﬁc
agents, such as tPA, and non–ﬁbrin-speciﬁc agents, such as
streptokinase,it is now recognized that these differences are
only relative because some degree of systemic ﬁbrinolysis
occurs with the former agents. TNK and rPA are
referred to as bolus fibrinolytics because their administra-
tion does not require a prolonged IV infusion.
When assessed angiographically, ﬂow in the culprit
coronary artery is described by a simple qualitative scale
called the Thrombolysis in Myocardial Infarction (TIMI)
grading system: grade 0 indicates complete occlusion of
the infarct-related artery; grade 1 indicates some pene-
tration of the contrast material beyond the point of
obstruction but without perfusion of the distal coronary
ST-Segment Elevation Myocardial Infarction
331
CHAPTER 34
Call 9-1-1
Call fast
Golden hour = first 60 min
Total ischemic time: within 120 min
Onset of
symptoms of
STEMI
9-1-1
EMS
dispatch
8
min
EMS
Dispatch
1 min
5
min
Patient
EMS transport
EMS on scene
• Encourage 12-lead ECGs.
• Consider prehospital fibrinolytic if
capable and EMS-to-needle within
30 min
EMS transport
EMS-to-balloon within 90 min
Patient self-transport
Hospital door-to-balloon
within 90 min
Prehospital fibrinolysis
EMS-to-needle
within 30 min
GOALS
EMS
triage
plan
PCI
capable
Inter-
hospital
transfer
Not PCI
capable
Hospital fibrinolysis:
Door-to-needle
within 30 min
FIGURE 34-4
Options for transportation of patients with ST-segment
elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) and initial reper-
fusion treatment. Patient transported by Emergency Med-
ical Services (EMS) after calling 911: Reperfusion in patients
with STEMI can be accomplished by the pharmacologic
(fibrinolysis) or catheter-based (primary percutaneous coro-
nary intervention [PCI]) approaches. Implementation of these
strategies varies based on the mode of transportation of the
patient and capabilities at the receiving hospital. Transport
time to the hospital is variable from case to case, but the
goal is to keep total ischemic time within 120 min. There are
three possibilities: (1) If EMS has ﬁbrinolytic capability and
the patient qualiﬁes for therapy, prehospital ﬁbrinolysis
should be started within 30 min of EMS arrival on scene. (2) If
EMS is not capable of administering prehospital ﬁbrinolysis
and the patient is transported to a non–PCI-capable hospital,
the hospital door-to-needle (D-N) time should be within 30 min
for patients in whom ﬁbrinolysis is indicated. (3) If EMS is not
capable of administering prehospital ﬁbrinolysis and the
patient is transported to a PCI-capable hospital, the hospital
door-to-balloon (D-B) time should be within 90 min.
Interhospital transfer: It is also appropriate to consider emer-
gency interhospital transfer of the patient to a PCI-capable
hospital for mechanical revascularization if (1) there is a
contraindication to ﬁbrinolysis; (2) PCI can be initiated promptly
(within 90 min after the patient presented to the initial receiving
hospital or within 60 min compared with when ﬁbrinolysis with
a ﬁbrin-speciﬁc agent could be initiated at the initial receiving
hospital); (3) ﬁbrinolysis is administered and is unsuccessful
(i.e., “rescue PCI”). Secondary nonemergency interhospital
transfer can be considered for recurrent ischemia.
Patient self-transport: Patient self-transportation is dis-
couraged. If the patient arrives at a non-PCI–capable hospi-
tal, the D-N time should be within 30 min. If the patient
arrives at a PCI-capable hospital, the D-B  time should be
within 90 min. The treatment options and time recommended
after ﬁrst hospital arrival are the same. ECG, electrocardiog-
raphy. [Reproduced with permission from Antman et al:
ACC/AHA guidelines for the management of patients with
ST-elevation myocardial infarction: A report of the American
College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force
on Practice Guidelines (Committee to Revise the 1999 Guide-
lines for the Management of Patients with Acute Myocardial
Infarction). Available at http://www.acc.org/clinical/guidelines/
stemi/index.pdf.]
bed; grade 2 indicates perfusion of the entire infarct ves-
sel into the distal bed but with ﬂow that is delayed com-
pared with that of a normal artery; and grade 3 indicates
full perfusion of the infarct vessel with normal ﬂow.The
latter is the goal of reperfusion therapy because full per-
fusion of the infarct-related coronary artery yields far
better results in terms of limiting infarct size, mainte-
nance of LV function, and reduction of both short- and
long-term mortality rates.Additional methods of angio-
graphic assessment of the efﬁcacy of ﬁbrinolysis include
counting the number of frames on the cine ﬁlm
required for dye to ﬂow from the origin of the infarct-
related artery to a landmark in the distal vascular bed
(TIMI frame count) and determining the rate of entry and
exit of contrast dye from the microvasculature in the
myocardial infarct zone (TIMI myocardial perfusion grade).
These methods have an even tighter correlation with
outcomes after STEMI than the more commonly used
TIMI ﬂow grade.
Fibrinolytic therapy can reduce the relative risk of
in-hospital death by up to 50% when administered within
the ﬁrst hour of the onset of symptoms of STEMI, and
much of this beneﬁt is maintained for at least 10 years.
When appropriately used, ﬁbrinolytic therapy appears to
reduce infarct size, limit LV dysfunction, and reduce the
incidence of serious complications such as septal rupture,
cardiogenic shock, and malignant ventricular arrhythmias.
Because myocardium can be salvaged only before it has
been irreversibly injured, the timing of reperfusion ther-
apy, by ﬁbrinolysis or a catheter-based approach, is of
extreme importance in achieving maximum beneﬁt.
Although the upper time limit depends on speciﬁc factors
in individual patients, it is clear that “every minute
counts” and that patients treated within 1–3 h of the
onset of symptoms generally beneﬁt most. Although
reduction of the mortality rate is more modest,the therapy
remains of beneﬁt for many patients seen 3–6 h after the
onset of infarction, and some beneﬁt appears to be possi-
ble up to 12 h, especially if chest discomfort is still present
and ST segments remain elevated. Compared with PCI
for STEMI (primary PCI), ﬁbrinolysis is generally the
preferred reperfusion strategy for patients presenting in
the ﬁrst hour of symptoms, if there are logistical concerns
about transportation of the patient to a suitable PCI cen-
ter (experienced operator and team with a track record
for a “door-to-balloon” time of <2 h), or there is an
anticipated delay of at least 1 h between the time that ﬁb-
rinolysis could be started versus implementation of PCI.
Although patients <75 years achieve a greater relative
reduction in the mortality rate with ﬁbrinolytic therapy
than do older patients, the higher absolute mortality rate
(15–25%) in the latter results in similar absolute reduc-
tions in the mortality rates for both age groups.
tPA and the other relatively ﬁbrin-speciﬁc plasmino-
gen activators, rPA and TNK, are more effective than
streptokinase at restoring full perfusion (i.e., TIMI
grade 3 coronary flow) and have a small edge in
improving survival as well. The current recommended
regimen of tPA consists of a 15-mg bolus followed by
50 mg IV over the first 30 min, followed by 35 mg
over the next 60 min. Streptokinase is administered as
1.5 million units (MU) IV over 1 h. rPA is administered
in a double-bolus regimen consisting of a 10-MU bolus
given over 2–3 min followed by a second 10-MU bolus
30 min later.TNK is given as a single weight-based IV
bolus of 0.53 mg/kg over 10 s. In addition to the ﬁbri-
nolytic agents discussed above, pharmacologic reperfusion
typically involves adjunctive antiplatelet and antithrom-
botic drugs, as discussed subsequently.
Alternative pharmacologic regimens for reperfusion
combine an IV GP IIb/IIIa inhibitor with a reduced
dose of a ﬁbrinolytic agent. Compared with ﬁbrinolytic
agents that involve a prolonged infusion (e.g., tPA), such
combination reperfusion regimens facilitate the rate and
extent of ﬁbrinolysis by inhibiting platelet aggregation,
weakening the clot structure, and allowing penetration
of the ﬁbrinolytic agent deeper into the clot. However,
combination reperfusion regimens have similar efﬁcacy
compared with bolus ﬁbrinolytics and are associated
with an increased risk of bleeding, especially in patients
>75 years of age. Therefore, combination reperfusion
regimens are not recommended for routine use. In an
experimental strategy called facilitated PCI, GP IIb/IIIa
inhibitors given alone (i.e., without any ﬁbrinolytic
agent) are being investigated as a preparatory pharmaco-
logic regimen in STEMI patients who are referred
promptly for PCI. Another experimental strategy that
has been proposed but not yet rigorously evaluated is a
pharmacoinvasive approach in which STEMI patients are
ﬁrst treated with a pharmacologic reperfusion regimen
followed by routine angiography and PCI after a delay
of 12–24 h to minimize the risks of performing PCI
while the effects of the lytic agent are still present.
Contraindications and Complications
Clear contraindications to the use of ﬁbrinolytic agents
include a history of cerebrovascular hemorrhage at any
time, a nonhemorrhagic stroke or other cerebrovascular
event within the past year, marked hypertension (a reli-
ably determined systolic arterial pressure >180 mmHg
or a diastolic pressure >110 mmHg) at any time during
the acute presentation, suspicion of aortic dissection, and
active internal bleeding (excluding menses). Although
advanced age is associated with an increase in hemor-
rhagic complications, the beneﬁt of ﬁbrinolytic therapy in
elderly patients appears to justify its use if no other con-
traindications are present and the amount of myocardium
in jeopardy appears to be substantial.
Relative contraindications to ﬁbrinolytic therapy, which
require assessment of the risk:benefit ratio, include
current use of anticoagulants (International Normalized
332
Common Critical Illnesses and Syndromes
SECTION IV
Ratio ≥2), a recent (<2 weeks) invasive or surgical proce-
dure or prolonged (>10 min) cardiopulmonary resuscita-
tion, known bleeding diathesis, pregnancy, a hemorrhagic
ophthalmic condition (e.g.,hemorrhagic diabetic retinopa-
thy), active peptic ulcer disease, and a history of severe
hypertension that is currently adequately controlled.
Because of the risk of an allergic reaction, patients should
not receive streptokinase if that agent had been received
within the preceding 5 days to 2 years.
Allergic reactions to streptokinase occur in ∼2% of
patients who receive it. Although a minor degree of
hypotension occurs in 4–10% of patients given this
agent, marked hypotension occurs, although rarely, in
association with severe allergic reactions.
Hemorrhage is the most frequent and potentially the
most serious complication. Because bleeding episodes that
require transfusion are more common when patients
require invasive procedures, unnecessary venous or arterial
interventions should be avoided in patients receiving ﬁb-
rinolytic agents. Hemorrhagic stroke is the most serious
complication and occurs in ∼0.5–0.9% of patients being
treated with these agents.This rate increases with advanc-
ing age, with patients >70 years of age experiencing
roughly twice the rate of intracranial hemorrhage as those
<65 years. Large-scale trials have suggested that the rate of
intracranial hemorrhage with tPA or rPA is slightly higher
than with streptokinase.
Cardiac catheterization and coronary angiography
should be carried out after ﬁbrinolytic therapy if there is
evidence of either (1) failure of reperfusion (persistent
chest pain and ST-segment elevation >90 min), in which
case a rescue PCI should be considered, or (2) coronary
artery reocclusion (re-elevation of ST segments or recur-
rent chest pain) or the development of recurrent
ischemia (e.g.,recurrent angina in the early hospital course
or a positive exercise stress test result before discharge), in
which case an urgent PCI should be considered. The
potential beneﬁts of routine angiography and elective PCI
even in asymptomatic patients after administration of ﬁb-
rinolytic therapy are controversial, but such an approach
may have merit given the numerous technological
advances that have occurred in the catheterization labo-
ratory and the increasing number of skilled intervention-
alists. Coronary artery bypass surgery should be reserved
for patients whose coronary anatomy is unsuited to PCI
but in whom revascularization appears to be advisable
because of extensive jeopardized myocardium or recur-
rent ischemia.
HOSPITAL PHASE MANAGEMENT
CORONARY CARE UNITS
These units are routinely equipped with a system that
permits continuous monitoring of the cardiac rhythm of
each patient and hemodynamic monitoring in selected
patients. Deﬁbrillators, respirators, noninvasive transtho-
racic pacemakers, and facilities for introducing pacing
catheters and ﬂow-directed balloon-tipped catheters are
also usually available. Equally important is the organiza-
tion of a highly trained team of nurses who can recog-
nize arrhythmias; adjust the dosage of antiarrhythmic,
vasoactive, and anticoagulant drugs; and perform cardiac
resuscitation, including electroshock, when necessary.
Patients should be admitted to a coronary care unit
early in their illness when it is expected that they will
derive beneﬁt from the sophisticated and expensive care
provided.The availability of ECG monitoring and trained
personnel outside the coronary care unit has made it
possible to admit lower-risk patients (e.g., those not hemo-
dynamically compromised and without active arrhyth-
mias) to “intermediate care units.”
The duration of stay in the coronary care unit is dic-
tated by the ongoing need for intensive care. If symp-
toms are controlled with oral therapy, the patient may be
transferred out of the coronary care unit. Also, patients
who have a conﬁrmed STEMI but who are considered
to be at low risk (no prior infarction and no persistent
chest discomfort, CHF, hypotension, or cardiac arrhyth-
mias) may be safely transferred out of the coronary care
unit within 24 h.
Activity
Factors that increase the work of the heart during the ini-
tial hours of infarction may increase the size of the infarct.
Therefore, patients with STEMI should be kept on bed
rest for the ﬁrst 12 h. However, in the absence of compli-
cations, patients should be encouraged, under supervision,
to resume an upright posture by dangling their feet over
the side of the bed and sitting in a chair within the ﬁrst
24 h.This practice is psychologically beneﬁcial and usu-
ally results in a reduction in the pulmonary capillary wedge
pressure. In the absence of hypotension and other compli-
cations, by the second or third day, patients typically are
ambulating in their room with increasing duration and
frequency, and they may shower or stand at the sink to
bathe.By day 3 after infarction,patients should be increasing
their ambulation progressively to a goal of 185 m (600 ft)
at least three times a day.
Diet
Because of the risk of emesis and aspiration soon after
STEMI, patients should receive either nothing or only
clear liquids by mouth for the ﬁrst 4–12 h.The typical
coronary care unit diet should provide ≤30% of total calo-
ries as fat and have a cholesterol content of ≤300 mg/d.
Complex carbohydrates should make up 50–55% of
total calories. Portions should not be unusually large,
and the menu should be enriched with foods that are
ST-Segment Elevation Myocardial Infarction
333
CHAPTER 34
high in potassium, magnesium, and fiber but low in
sodium. Patients with diabetes mellitus and hypertriglyc-
eridemia are managed by restriction of concentrated
sweets in the diet.
Bowels
Bed rest and the effect of the narcotics used for the
relief of pain often lead to constipation.A bedside com-
mode rather than a bedpan, a diet rich in bulk, and the
routine use of a stool softener such as dioctyl sodium
sulfosuccinate (200 mg/d) are recommended. If the
patient remains constipated despite these measures, a
laxative can be prescribed. Contrary to prior belief, it is
safe to perform a gentle rectal examination on patients
with STEMI.
Sedation
Many patients require sedation during hospitalization to
withstand the period of enforced inactivity with tran-
quility. Diazepam (5 mg), oxazepam (15–30 mg), or
lorazepam (0.5–2 mg), given three or four times daily, is
usually effective. An additional dose of any of the above
medications may be given at night to ensure adequate
sleep. Attention to this problem is especially important
during the ﬁrst few days in the coronary care unit,
where the atmosphere of 24-h vigilance may interfere
with the patient’s sleep. However, sedation is no substi-
tute for reassuring, quiet surroundings. Many drugs used
in the coronary care unit, such as atropine, H2 blockers,
and narcotics, can produce delirium, particularly in
elderly patients.This effect should not be confused with
agitation, and it is wise to conduct a thorough review of
the patient’s medications before arbitrarily prescribing
additional doses of anxiolytics.
PHARMACOTHERAPY
ANTITHROMBOTIC AGENTS
The use of antiplatelet and antithrombin therapy during
the initial phase of STEMI is based on extensive labora-
tory and clinical evidence that thrombosis plays an
important role in the pathogenesis of this condition.The
primary goal of treatment with antiplatelet and antithrom-
bin agents is to establish and maintain patency of the
infarct-related artery in conjunction with reperfusion
strategies. A secondary goal is to reduce the patient’s
tendency to thrombosis and thus the likelihood of mural
thrombus formation or deep venous thrombosis, either
of which could result in pulmonary embolization. The
degree to which antiplatelet and antithrombin therapy
achieves these goals partly determines how effectively it
reduces the risk of mortality from STEMI.
As noted previously (see Management in the Emer-
gency Department earlier in this chapter), aspirin is the
standard antiplatelet agent for patients with STEMI.The
most compelling evidence for the beneﬁts of antiplatelet
therapy (mainly with aspirin) in STEMI is found in the
comprehensive overview by the Antiplatelet Trialists’
Collaboration. Data from nearly 20,000 patients with
MI enrolled in 15 randomized trials were pooled and
revealed a relative reduction of 27% in the mortality
rate, from 14.2% in control patients to 10.4% in patients
receiving antiplatelet agents.
Inhibitors of the P2Y12 ADP receptor prevent activa-
tion and aggregation of platelets. The addition of the
P2Y12 inhibitor clopidogrel to background treatment
with aspirin to STEMI patients reduces the risk of clini-
cal events (death, reinfarction, stroke), and in patients
receiving ﬁbrinolytic therapy, it has been shown to pre-
vent reocclusion of a successfully reperfused infarct
artery (Fig. 34-5). GP IIb/IIIa receptor inhibitors appear
useful for preventing thrombotic complications in patients
with STEMI undergoing PCI.
The standard antithrombin agent used in clinical
practice is unfractionated heparin (UFH). The available
data suggest that when UFH is added to a regimen of
aspirin and a non–ﬁbrin-speciﬁc thrombolytic agent
such as streptokinase, additional mortality beneﬁt occurs
(∼5 lives saved per 1000 patients treated). It appears that
the immediate administration of IV UFH, in addition to
a regimen of aspirin and relatively ﬁbrin-speciﬁc ﬁbri-
nolytic agents (tPA, rPA, or TNK), helps to maintain the
patency of the infarct-related artery. This effect is
achieved at the cost of a small increased risk of bleeding.
The recommended dose of UFH is an initial bolus of
60 U/kg (maximum, 4000 U) followed by an initial
infusion of 12 U/kg/h (maximum, 1000 U/h).The acti-
vated partial thromboplastin time during maintenance
therapy should be 1.5–2 times the control value.
An alternative to UFH for anticoagulation of patients
with STEMI are the low-molecular-weight heparin
(LMWH) preparations, which are formed by enzymatic
or chemical depolymerization to produce saccharide
chains of varying length but with a mean molecular
weight of about 5000 Da. Advantages of LMWHs
include high bioavailability permitting administration
subcutaneously, reliable anticoagulation without moni-
toring, and greater antiXa:IIa activity. Enoxaparin has
been shown to signiﬁcantly reduce the composite end-
points of death/nonfatal reinfarction (Fig. 34-6) and
death/nonfatal reinfarction, and urgent revascularization
compared with UFH in STEMI patients who receive
ﬁbrinolysis.Although treatment with enoxaparin is asso-
ciated with higher rates of serious bleeding, net clinical
beneﬁt—a composite endpoint that combines efﬁcacy
and safety—strongly favors enoxaparin over UFH.
Patients with an anterior location of the infarction,
severe LV dysfunction, heart failure, a history of embolism,
two-dimensional echocardiographic evidence of mural
thrombus, or atrial ﬁbrillation are at increased risk of
334
Common Critical Illnesses and Syndromes
SECTION IV
ST-Segment Elevation Myocardial Infarction
335
CHAPTER 34
0
7
14
21
28
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Placebo:
1845 deaths (8.1%)
Clopidogrel:
1726 deaths (7.5%)
7% (SE 3) proportional risk
reduction (p =.03)
Time since randomization, days
0–6
1403
1487
Days
Number of events
Clopidogrel
Placebo
7–13
223
246
14–20
69
89
21–28
31
23
Proportion dead before first discharge, %
A
15.0
21.7
0
5
10
15
20
25
Occluded artery or death/MI, %
36%
Odds reduction
n = 1752
Clopidogrel
n = 1739
Placebo
B
FIGURE 34-5
A. Effect of the addition of clopidogrel on in-hospital mortality
after ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI).
These time-to-event curves show a 0.6% reduction in mortal-
ity in the group receiving clopidogrel plus aspirin (n = 22,961)
compared with placebo plus aspirin (n = 22,891) in the COMMIT
trial. B. Effects of the addition of clopidogrel in patients receiv-
ing ﬁbrinolysis for STEMI. Patients in the clopidogrel group
(n = 1752) had a 36% reduction in the odds of dying, sustain-
ing a recurrent infarction, or having an occluded infarct artery
compared with the placebo group (n = 1739) in the CLARITY-
TIMI 28 trial (p <.001). MI, myocardial infarction; SE, standard
error. (Part A reproduced with permission from Chen ZM et al:
Addition of clopidogrel to aspirin in 45,852 patients with acute
myocardial infarction: randomised placebo-controlled trial.
Lancet 366:1607, 2005; part B adapted from Sabatine MS
et al: Addition of clopidogrel to aspirin and ﬁbrinolytic therapy
for myocardial infarction with ST-segment elevation. N Engl J Med
352:1179, 2005.)
systemic or pulmonary thromboembolism. Such indi-
viduals should receive full therapeutic levels of
antithrombin therapy (LMWH or UFH) while hospital-
ized followed by at least 3 months of warfarin therapy.
β-ADRENOCEPTOR BLOCKERS
The beneﬁts of β-blockers in patients with STEMI can
be divided into those that occur immediately when the
drug is given acutely and those that accrue over the long
term when the drug is given for secondary prevention
after an infarction. Acute IV β blockade improves the
myocardial O2 supply–demand relationship, decreases pain,
reduces infarct size, and decreases the incidence of seri-
ous ventricular arrhythmias. In patients who undergo
ﬁbrinolysis soon after the onset of chest pain, no incre-
mental reduction in mortality rate is seen with β block-
ers, but recurrent ischemia and reinfarction are reduced.
Thus, β-blocker therapy after STEMI is useful for
most patients [including those treated with an
angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor] except
those in whom it is speciﬁcally contraindicated (patients
with heart failure or severely compromised LV function,
heart block, orthostatic hypotension, or a history of
asthma) and perhaps those whose excellent long-term
prognosis (deﬁned as an expected mortality rate of <1% per
year, patients younger than age 55 years, no previous
MI, with normal ventricular function, no complex ven-
tricular ectopy, and no angina) markedly diminishes any
potential beneﬁt.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
15
12
9
6
3
0
Primary end point (%)
UFH
12.0%
9.9%
17% RRR
ENOX
Days
p < 0.0001
FIGURE 34-6
Enoxaparin (ENOX) is superior to unfractionated heparin
(UFH) in ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction
(STEMI) patients receiving ﬁbrinolysis. In the ExTRACT-
TIMI 25 trial, patients receiving the low-molecular-weight
heparin enoxaparin in addition to a ﬁbrinolytic agent plus
aspirin (n = 10,256) had a signiﬁcantly lower rate of the com-
posite endpoint of death or nonfatal reinfarction compared to
patients receiving UFH in combination with a ﬁbrinolytic plus
aspirin (n = 10,223). RRR, relative risk reduction. (Repro-
duced with permission from Antman EM et al: Enaxoparin
versus unfractionated heparin with ﬁbrinolysis for ST-elevation
myocardial infarction. N Engl J Med 354:1477, 2006.)
INHIBITION OF THE RENIN–
ANGIOTENSIN–ALDOSTERONE SYSTEM
ACE inhibitors reduce the mortality rate after STEMI,
and the mortality beneﬁts are additive to those achieved
with aspirin and β-blockers. The maximum beneﬁt is
seen in high-risk patients (those who are elderly or who
have an anterior infarction, a prior infarction, or globally
depressed LV function), but evidence suggests that a
short-term beneﬁt occurs when ACE inhibitors are pre-
scribed unselectively to all hemodynamically stable
patients with STEMI (i.e., those with a systolic pressure
>100 mmHg). The mechanism involves a reduction in
ventricular remodeling after infarction (see Ventricular
Dysfunction later in the chapter) with a subsequent
reduction in the risk of CHF. The rate of recurrent
infarction may also be lower in patients treated chroni-
cally with ACE inhibitors after infarction.
Before hospital discharge, LV function should be
assessed with an imaging study.ACE inhibitors should be
continued indeﬁnitely in patients who have clinically evi-
dent CHF, in patients in whom an imaging study shows a
reduction in global LV function or a large regional wall
motion abnormality, or in those who have hypertension.
Angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs) should be
administered to STEMI patients who are intolerant of
ACE inhibitors and who have either clinical or radiologic
signs of heart failure. Long-term aldosterone blockade
should be prescribed for STEMI patients without signiﬁ-
cant renal dysfunction (creatinine ≥2.5 mg/dL in men
and ≥2.0 mg/dL in women) or hyperkalemia (potassium
≥5.0 mEq/L) who are already receiving therapeutic doses
of an ACE inhibitor, an LV ejection fraction (LVEF)
≤40%, and either symptomatic heart failure or diabetes
mellitus. A multidrug regimen for inhibiting the
renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system has been shown to
reduce both heart failure–related and sudden cardiac
death–related cardiovascular mortality after STEMI but
has not been as thoroughly explored as ACE inhibitors in
STEMI patients.
OTHER AGENTS
Favorable effects on the ischemic process and ventricular
remodeling (see later) previously led many physicians to
routinely use IV nitroglycerin (5–10 μg/min for the initial
dose and ≤200 μg/min as long as hemodynamic stability
is maintained) for the ﬁrst 24–48 h after the onset of
infarction. However, the beneﬁts of routine use of IV
nitroglycerin are less in the contemporary era because
β-adrenoceptor blockers and ACE inhibitors are rou-
tinely prescribed for patients with STEMI.
Results of multiple trials of different calcium antago-
nists have failed to establish a role for these agents in the
treatment of most patients with STEMI. Therefore, the
routine use of calcium antagonists cannot be recom-
mended. Strict control of blood glucose in diabetic
patients with STEMI has been shown to reduce the
mortality rate. Serum magnesium should be measured in
all patients on admission, and any demonstrated deﬁcits
should be corrected to minimize the risk of arrhythmias.
COMPLICATIONS AND THEIR 
MANAGEMENT
VENTRICULAR DYSFUNCTION
After STEMI, the LV undergoes a series of changes in
shape, size, and thickness in both the infarcted and nonin-
farcted segments. This process is referred to as ventricular
remodeling and generally precedes the development of clin-
ically evident CHF in the months to years after infarction.
Soon after STEMI, the LV begins to dilate. Acutely, this
results from expansion of the infarct—i.e., slippage of
muscle bundles, disruption of normal myocardial cells,
and tissue loss within the necrotic zone—resulting in dis-
proportionate thinning and elongation of the infarct zone.
Later, lengthening of the noninfarcted segments occurs as
well. The overall chamber enlargement that occurs is
related to the size and location of the infarct, with greater
dilation after infarction of the anterior wall and apex of
the LV and causing more marked hemodynamic impair-
ment, more frequent heart failure, and a poorer prognosis.
Progressive dilatation and its clinical consequences may be
ameliorated by therapy with ACE inhibitors and other
vasodilators (e.g., nitrates). In patients with an ejection
fraction <40%, regardless of whether or not heart failure is
present,ACE inhibitors or ARBs should be prescribed (see
Inhibition of the Renin–Angiotensin–Aldosterone System
earlier in the chapter).
HEMODYNAMIC ASSESSMENT
Pump failure is now the primary cause of in-hospital
death from STEMI. The extent of infarction correlates
well with the degree of pump failure and with mortal-
ity, both early (within 10 days of infarction) and later.
The most common clinical signs are pulmonary rales
and S3 and S4 gallop sounds. Pulmonary congestion is
also frequently seen on the chest radiogram. Elevated LV
ﬁlling pressure and elevated pulmonary artery pressure
are the characteristic hemodynamic ﬁndings, but these
ﬁndings may result from a reduction of ventricular com-
pliance (diastolic failure) or a reduction of stroke vol-
ume with secondary cardiac dilation (systolic failure).
A classiﬁcation originally proposed by Killip divides
patients into four groups: class I, no signs of pulmonary
or venous congestion; class II, moderate heart failure as
evidenced by rales at the lung bases, S3 gallop, tachyp-
nea, or signs of failure of the right side of the heart,
including venous and hepatic congestion; class III, severe
heart failure, pulmonary edema; and class IV, shock with
systolic pressure <90 mmHg and evidence of peripheral
vasoconstriction, peripheral cyanosis, mental confusion,
336
Common Critical Illnesses and Syndromes
SECTION IV
and oliguria. When this classiﬁcation was established in
1967, the expected hospital mortality rate of patients in
these classes was as follows: class I, 0–5%; class II,
10–20%; class III, 35–45%; and class IV, 85–95%. With
advances in management, the mortality rate in each class
has fallen, perhaps by as much as one-third to one-half.
Hemodynamic evidence of abnormal global LV func-
tion appears when contraction is seriously impaired in
20–25% of the LV. Infarction of ≥40% of the LV usually
results in cardiogenic shock (Chap. 31). Positioning of a
balloon ﬂotation (Swan-Ganz) catheter in the pul-
monary artery permits monitoring of LV ﬁlling pres-
sure; this technique is useful in patients who exhibit
hypotension or clinical evidence of CHF. Cardiac out-
put can also be determined with a pulmonary artery
catheter.With the addition of intraarterial pressure mon-
itoring, systemic vascular resistance can be calculated as
a guide to adjusting vasopressor and vasodilator therapy.
Some patients with STEMI have markedly elevated LV
ﬁlling pressures (>22 mmHg) and normal cardiac indices
[2.6–3.6 L/(min/m2)], but others have relatively low LV
ﬁlling pressures (<15 mmHg) and reduced cardiac indices.
The former patients usually beneﬁt from diuresis, and
the latter may respond to volume expansion.
Hypovolemia
Hypovolemia is an easily corrected condition that may
contribute to the hypotension and vascular collapse asso-
ciated with STEMI in some patients. It may be secondary
to previous diuretic use, reduced ﬂuid intake during the
early stages of the illness, to vomiting associated with
pain or medications. Consequently, hypovolemia should
be identiﬁed and corrected in patients with STEMI and
hypotension before more vigorous forms of therapy are
begun. Central venous pressure reﬂects RV rather than LV
ﬁlling pressure and is an inadequate guide for adjustment
of blood volume because LV function is almost always
affected much more adversely than RV function in
patients with STEMI.The optimal LV ﬁlling or pulmonary
artery wedge pressure may vary considerably among
patients. Each patient’s ideal level (generally ∼20 mmHg)
is reached by cautious ﬂuid administration during careful
monitoring of oxygenation and cardiac output. Eventu-
ally, the cardiac output level plateaus, and further increases
in LV filling pressure only increase congestive symp-
toms and decrease systemic oxygenation without increasing
arterial pressure.
support) except that the beneﬁts of digitalis administra-
tion to patients with STEMI are unimpressive. By contrast,
diuretic agents are extremely effective because they
diminish pulmonary congestion in the presence of sys-
tolic or diastolic heart failure.LV ﬁlling pressure decreases,
and orthopnea and dyspnea improve after the IV admin-
istration of furosemide or other loop diuretics. These
drugs should be used with caution, however, because
their use can result in a massive diuresis with associated
decreases in plasma volume, cardiac output, systemic
blood pressure, and hence coronary perfusion. Nitrates in
various forms may be used to decrease preload and
congestive symptoms. Oral isosorbide dinitrate, topical
nitroglycerin ointment, and IV nitroglycerin all have the
advantage over a diuretic of lowering preload through
venodilation without decreasing the total plasma vol-
ume.In addition,nitrates may improve ventricular compli-
ance if ischemia is present because ischemia causes an
elevation of LV ﬁlling pressure.Vasodilators must be used
with caution to prevent serious hypotension. As noted
earlier, ACE inhibitors are an ideal class of drugs manag-
ing patients with ventricular dysfunction after STEMI,
especially for the long term (see Inhibition of the Renin–
Angiotensin–Aldosterone System earlier in the chapter).
ST-Segment Elevation Myocardial Infarction
337
CHAPTER 34
Treatment:
CONGESTIVE HEART FAILURE
The management of patients with CHF in association
with STEMI is similar to that for patients with acute heart
failure secondary to other forms of heart disease (avoid-
ance of hypoxemia,diuresis,afterload reduction,inotropic
CARDIOGENIC SHOCK
Prompt reperfusion, efforts to reduce the infarct size,
and treatment of ongoing ischemia and other complica-
tions of MI appear to have reduced the incidence of
cardiogenic shock from 20% to about 7%. Only 10% of
patients with this condition present with it on admis-
sion; 90% develop it during hospitalization. Typically,
patients who develop cardiogenic shock have severe
multivessel coronary artery disease with evidence of
“piecemeal” necrosis extending outward from the origi-
nal infarct zone. The evaluation and management of
patients with cardiogenic shock and severe power failure
after STEMI are discussed in detail in Chap. 31.
RIGHT VENTRICULAR INFARCTION
Approximately one-third of patients with inferior infarc-
tion demonstrate at least a minor degree of RV necrosis.
An occasional patient with inferoposterior LV infarction
also has extensive RV infarction, and rare patients present
with infarction limited primarily to the RV. Clinically
signiﬁcant RV infarction causes signs of severe RV failure
(jugular venous distention, Kussmaul’s sign, hepatomegaly)
with or without hypotension. ST-segment elevations of
right-sided precordial ECG leads, particularly lead V4R,
are frequently present in the ﬁrst 24 h in patients with
RV infarction. Two-dimensional echocardiography is
helpful in determining the degree of RV dysfunction.
Catheterization of the right side of the heart often
reveals a distinctive hemodynamic pattern resembling
constrictive pericarditis (steep right atrial “y” descent and
an early diastolic dip and plateau in RV waveforms).
Therapy consists of volume expansion to maintain ade-
quate RV preload and efforts to improve LV perfor-
mance with attendant reduction in pulmonary capillary
wedge and pulmonary arterial pressures.
ARRHYTHMIAS
The incidence of arrhythmias after STEMI is higher in
patients seen early after the onset of symptoms. The
mechanisms responsible for infarction-related arrhyth-
mias include autonomic nervous system imbalance, elec-
trolyte disturbances, ischemia, and slowed conduction in
zones of ischemic myocardium. An arrhythmia can usu-
ally be managed successfully if trained personnel and
appropriate equipment are available when it develops.
Because most deaths from arrhythmia occur during the
ﬁrst few hours after infarction, the effectiveness of treat-
ment relates directly to the speed with which patients
come under medical observation. The prompt manage-
ment of arrhythmias constitutes a signiﬁcant advance in
the treatment of patients with STEMI.
Ventricular Premature Beats
Infrequent, sporadic ventricular premature depolariza-
tions occur in almost all patients with STEMI and do
not require therapy. Whereas in the past, patients with
frequent, multifocal, or early diastolic ventricular
extrasystoles (so-called warning arrhythmias) were rou-
tinely treated with antiarrhythmic drugs to reduce the
risk of development of ventricular tachycardia and ven-
tricular ﬁbrillation, pharmacologic therapy is now
reserved for patients with sustained ventricular arrhyth-
mias. Prophylactic antiarrhythmic therapy (either IV
lidocaine early or oral agents later) is contraindicated
for ventricular premature beats in the absence of clini-
cally important ventricular tachyarrhythmias because
such therapy may actually increase the mortality rate.
β-adrenoceptor blocking agents are effective in abolish-
ing ventricular ectopic activity in patients with STEMI
and in the prevention of ventricular ﬁbrillation. As
described above (see β-Adrenoceptor Blockers, earlier),
they should be used routinely in patients without con-
traindications. In addition, hypokalemia and hypomag-
nesemia are risk factors for ventricular ﬁbrillation in
patients with STEMI; the serum potassium concentra-
tion should be adjusted to approximately 4.5 mmol/L
and magnesium to about 2.0 mmol/L.
Ventricular Tachycardia and Fibrillation
Within the ﬁrst 24 h of STEMI, ventricular tachycardia
and ﬁbrillation can occur without prior warning
arrhythmias. The occurrence of ventricular ﬁbrillation
can be reduced by prophylactic administration of IV lido-
caine. However, prophylactic use of lidocaine has not
been shown to reduce overall mortality from STEMI. In
fact, in addition to causing possible noncardiac compli-
cations, use of lidocaine may predispose patients to an
excess risk of bradycardia and asystole. For these reasons
and with earlier treatment of patients with active
ischemia, more frequent use of β-blocking agents, and
the nearly universal success of electrical cardioversion or
deﬁbrillation, routine prophylactic antiarrhythmic drug
therapy is no longer recommended.
Patients with sustained ventricular tachycardia that is
well tolerated hemodynamically should be treated with
an IV regimen of amiodarone (bolus of 150 mg over
10 min followed by infusion of 1.0 mg/min for 6 h and
then 0.5 mg/min) or procainamide (bolus of 15 mg/kg
over 20–30 min; infusion of 1–4 mg/min); if it does not
stop promptly, electroversion should be used. An unsyn-
chronized discharge of 200–300 J (monophasic wave
form; ∼50% of these energies with biphasic wave forms)
is used immediately in patients with ventricular ﬁbrillation
or when ventricular tachycardia causes hemodynamic
deterioration.Ventricular tachycardia or ﬁbrillation that
is refractory to electroshock may be more responsive
after the patient is treated with epinephrine (1 mg IV or
10 mL of a 1:10,000 solution via the intracardiac route)
or amiodarone (a 75–150-mg bolus).
Ventricular arrhythmias, including the unusual form
of ventricular tachycardia known as torsades des pointes,
may occur in patients with STEMI as a consequence of
other concurrent problems (e.g., hypoxia, hypokalemia,
or other electrolyte disturbances) or of the toxic effects
of an agent being administered to the patient (e.g., digoxin
or quinidine).A search for such secondary causes should
always be undertaken.
Although the in-hospital mortality rate is increased,
the long-term survival is excellent in patients who sur-
vive to hospital discharge after primary ventricular ﬁbril-
lation (i.e., ventricular ﬁbrillation that is a primary
response to acute ischemia that occurs during the ﬁrst
48 h and is not associated with predisposing factors such
as CHF, shock, bundle branch block, or ventricular
aneurysm). This result is in sharp contrast to the poor
prognosis for patients who develop ventricular ﬁbrilla-
tion secondary to severe pump failure. For patients who
develop ventricular tachycardia or ventricular ﬁbrillation
late in their hospital course (i.e., after the ﬁrst 48 h), the
mortality rate is increased both in-hospital and during
long-term follow-up. Such patients should be consid-
ered for electrophysiologic study and implantation of a
cardioverter/deﬁbrillator (ICD).A more challenging issue
is the prevention of sudden cardiac death from ventricu-
lar ﬁbrillation late after STEMI in patients who have
not exhibited sustained ventricular tachyarrhythmias
during their index hospitalization. An algorithm for
338
Common Critical Illnesses and Syndromes
SECTION IV
selection of patients who warrant prophylactic implanta-
tion of an ICD is shown in Fig. 34-7.
Accelerated Idioventricular Rhythm
Accelerated idioventricular rhythm (AIVR; “slow ven-
tricular tachycardia”), a ventricular rhythm with a rate
of 60–100 bpm, occurs in 25% of patients with
STEMI. It often occurs transiently during ﬁbrinolytic
therapy at the time of reperfusion. For the most part,
AIVR is benign and does not presage the development
of classic ventricular tachycardia. Most episodes of AIVR
do not require treatment if the patient is monitored
carefully because degeneration into a more serious arrhyth-
mia is rare.
Supraventricular Arrhythmias
Sinus tachycardia is the most common supraventricular
arrhythmia. If it occurs secondary to another cause (e.g.,
anemia, fever, heart failure, or a metabolic derangement),
the primary problem should be treated ﬁrst. However, if
it appears to be caused by sympathetic overstimulation
(e.g., as part of a hyperdynamic state), then treatment
with a β-blocker is indicated. Other common arrhyth-
mias in this group are atrial ﬂutter and atrial ﬁbrillation,
which are often secondary to LV failure. Digoxin is usu-
ally the treatment of choice for patients with supraven-
tricular arrhythmias if heart failure is present. If heart
failure is absent, β-blockers, verapamil, or diltiazem are
suitable alternatives for controlling the ventricular rate
because they may also help to control ischemia. If the
abnormal rhythm persists for >2 h with a ventricular
rate >120 bpm or if tachycardia induces heart failure,
shock, or ischemia (as manifested by recurrent pain or
ECG changes), a synchronized electroshock (100–200 J
monophasic wave form) should be used.
Accelerated junctional rhythms have diverse causes
but may occur in patients with inferoposterior infarction.
Digitalis excess must be ruled out. In some patients with
severely compromised LV function, the loss of appropri-
ately timed atrial systole results in a marked reduction of
cardiac output. Right atrial or coronary sinus pacing is
indicated in such instances.
Sinus Bradycardia
Treatment of sinus bradycardia is indicated if hemody-
namic compromise results from the slow heart rate.
Atropine is the most useful drug for increasing the heart
rate and should be given IV in doses of 0.5 mg initially.
If the rate remains <50–60 bpm, additional doses of
0.2 mg, up to a total of 2.0 mg, may be given. Persistent
bradycardia (<40 bpm) despite atropine may be treated
with electrical pacing. Isoproterenol should be avoided.
Atrioventricular and Intraventricular
Conduction Disturbances
Both the in-hospital mortality rate and the postdis-
charge mortality rate of patients who have complete
atrioventricular (AV) block in association with anterior
infarction are markedly higher than those of patients
who develop AV block with inferior infarction.This dif-
ference is related to the fact that heart block in inferior
infarction is commonly a result of increased vagal tone
or the release of adenosine and therefore is transient. In
anterior wall infarction, however, heart block is usually
related to ischemic malfunction of the conduction sys-
tem,which is commonly associated with extensive myocar-
dial necrosis.
Temporary electrical pacing provides an effective
means of increasing the heart rate of patients with brady-
cardia caused by AV block. However, acceleration of the
heart rate may have only a limited impact on prognosis
in patients with anterior wall infarction and complete
ST-Segment Elevation Myocardial Infarction
339
CHAPTER 34
ALGORITHM FOR CARDIOVERTER/
DEFIBRILLATOR IMPLANTATION
ICD implantation after STEMI
At least 40 days after STEMI; 
No spontaneous VT or VF 48 h post-STEMI
LVEF <30–40%
NHYA class II–III
LVEF <30–35%
NHYA class I
LVEF >40%
ICD
No ICD
Assess LVEF and NYHA functional status
FIGURE 34-7
Algorithm for assessment of need for implantation of a
cardioverter/deﬁbrillator (ICD). The appropriate management
is selected based on measurement of left ventricular ejection
fraction (LVEF) and assessment of the New York Heart Associ-
ation (NYHA) functional class. Patients with depressed LV func-
tion at least 40 days after ST-segment elevation myocardial
infarction (STEMI) are referred for insertion of an ICD if the
LVEF is <30–40% and they are in NYHA class II to III or if the
LVEF is <30–35% and they are in NYHA class I functional sta-
tus. Patients with preserved LV function (LVEF >40%) do not
receive an ICD regardless of NYHA functional class. All
patients are treated with medical therapy after STEMI. VF,
ventricular ﬁbrillation; VT, ventricular tachycardia. [Adapted
from data contained in Zipes DP et al: ACC/AHA/ESC 2006
guidelines for management of patients with ventricular arrhyth-
mias and the prevention of sudden cardiac death; a report of
the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Associa-
tion Task Force and the European Society of Cardiology Com-
mittee for Practice Guidelines (Writing Committee to Develop
Guidelines for Management of Patients with Ventricular Arrhyth-
mias and the Prevention of Sudden Cardiac Death). J Am Coll
Cardiol 48:1064, 2006.]
heart block in whom the large size of the infarct is the
major factor determining outcome. It should be carried
out if it improves hemodynamics. Pacing does appear to
be beneﬁcial in patients with inferoposterior infarction
who have complete heart block associated with heart
failure, hypotension, marked bradycardia, or signiﬁcant
ventricular ectopic activity.A subgroup of these patients,
those with RV infarction, often respond poorly to ven-
tricular pacing because of the loss of the atrial contribu-
tion to ventricular ﬁlling. In such patients, dual-chamber
AV sequential pacing may be required.
External noninvasive pacing electrodes should be
positioned in a “demand” mode for patients with sinus
bradycardia (rate <50 bpm) that is unresponsive to drug
therapy, Mobitz II second-degree AV block, third-degree
heart block, or bilateral bundle branch block (e.g., right
bundle branch block plus left anterior fascicular block).
Retrospective studies suggest that permanent pacing
may reduce the long-term risk of sudden death caused
by bradyarrhythmias in rare patients who develop com-
bined persistent bifascicular and transient third-degree
heart block during the acute phase of MI.
OTHER COMPLICATIONS
Recurrent Chest Discomfort
Recurrent angina develops in ∼25% of patients hospital-
ized for STEMI. This percentage is even higher in
patients who undergo successful ﬁbrinolysis. Because
recurrent or persistent ischemia often heralds extension
of the original infarct or reinfarction in a new myocar-
dial zone and is associated with a near tripling of mor-
tality after STEMI, patients with these symptoms should
be referred for prompt coronary arteriography and
mechanical revascularization. Repeat administration of a
ﬁbrinolytic agent is an alternative to early mechanical
revascularization.
Pericarditis
Pericardial friction rubs and pericardial pain are fre-
quently encountered in patients with STEMI involving
the epicardium. This complication can usually be man-
aged with aspirin (650 mg four times daily). It is impor-
tant to diagnose the chest pain of pericarditis accurately
because failure to recognize it may lead to the erroneous
diagnosis of recurrent ischemic pain or infarct extension,
with resulting inappropriate use of anticoagulants,
nitrates, β-blockers, or coronary arteriography. When it
occurs, complaints of pain radiating to either trapezius
muscle is helpful because such a pattern of discomfort is
typical of pericarditis but rarely occurs with ischemic dis-
comfort.Anticoagulants potentially could cause tampon-
ade in the presence of acute pericarditis (as manifested by
either pain or persistent rub) and therefore should not be
used unless there is a compelling indication.
Thromboembolism
Clinically apparent thromboembolism complicates STEMI
in ∼10% of cases, but embolic lesions are found in 20%
of patients in necropsy series, suggesting that throm-
boembolism is often clinically silent.Thromboembolism
is considered to be an important contributing cause of
death in 25% of patients with STEMI who die after
admission to the hospital.Whereas arterial emboli origi-
nate from LV mural thrombi, most pulmonary emboli
arise in the leg veins.
Thromboembolism typically occurs in association
with large infarcts (especially anterior), CHF, and an LV
thrombus detected by echocardiography. The incidence
of arterial embolism from a clot originating in the ven-
tricle at the site of an infarction is small but real. Two-
dimensional echocardiography reveals LV thrombi in
about one-third of patients with anterior wall infarction
but in few patients with inferior or posterior infarction.
Arterial embolism often presents as a major complica-
tion, such as hemiparesis, when the cerebral circulation is
involved or hypertension if the renal circulation is com-
promised. When a thrombus has been clearly demon-
strated by echocardiographic or other techniques or
when a large area of regional wall motion abnormality is
seen even in the absence of a detectable mural thrombus,
systemic anticoagulation should be undertaken (in the
absence of contraindications) because the incidence of
embolic complications appears to be markedly lowered
by such therapy. The appropriate duration of therapy is
unknown, but 3–6 months is probably prudent.
Left Ventricular Aneurysm
The term ventricular aneurysm is usually used to describe
dyskinesis or local expansile paradoxical wall motion. Nor-
mally functioning myocardial ﬁbers must shorten more if
stroke volume and cardiac output are to be maintained in
patients with ventricular aneurysm; if they cannot, overall
ventricular function is impaired.True aneurysms are com-
posed of scar tissue and neither predispose to nor are asso-
ciated with cardiac rupture.
The complications of LV aneurysm do not usually
occur for weeks to months after STEMI; they include
CHF, arterial embolism, and ventricular arrhythmias.
Apical aneurysms are the most common and the most
easily detected by clinical examination.The physical ﬁnd-
ing of greatest value is a double, diffuse, or displaced apical
impulse. Ventricular aneurysms are readily detected by
two-dimensional echocardiography, which may also reveal
a mural thrombus in an aneurysm.
Rarely, myocardial rupture may be contained by a
local area of pericardium, along with organizing throm-
bus and hematoma. Over time, this pseudoaneurysm
enlarges, maintaining communication with the LV cavity
through a narrow neck. Because a pseudoaneurysm often
340
Common Critical Illnesses and Syndromes
SECTION IV
ruptures spontaneously, it should be surgically repaired if
recognized.
POSTINFARCTION RISK
STRATIFICATION AND MANAGEMENT
Many clinical and laboratory factors have been identi-
ﬁed that are associated with an increase in cardiovascular
risk after initial recovery from STEMI. Some of the most
important factors include persistent ischemia (sponta-
neous or provoked), depressed LVEF (<40%), rales above
the lung bases on physical examination or congestion on
chest radiograph, and symptomatic ventricular arrhyth-
mias. Other features associated with increased risk
include a history of MI, age >75, diabetes mellitus, pro-
longed sinus tachycardia, hypotension, ST-segment changes
at rest without angina (“silent ischemia”), an abnormal
signal-averaged ECG, nonpatency of the infarct-related
coronary artery (if angiography is undertaken), and per-
sistent advanced heart block or a new intraventricular
conduction abnormality on the ECG.Therapy must be
individualized on the basis of the relative importance of
the risk(s) present.
The goal of preventing reinfarction and death after
recovery from STEMI has led to strategies to evaluate
risk after infarction. In stable patients, submaximal exer-
cise stress testing may be carried out before hospital dis-
charge to detect residual ischemia and ventricular ectopy
and to provide the patient with a guideline for exercise
in the early recovery period.Alternatively, or in addition,
a maximal (symptom-limited) exercise stress test may be
carried out 4–6 weeks after infarction. Evaluation of LV
function is usually warranted as well. Recognition of a
depressed LVEF by echocardiography or radionuclide
ventriculography identiﬁes patients who should receive
medications to inhibit the renin–angiotensin–aldosterone
system. Patients in whom angina is induced at relatively
low workloads, those who have a large reversible defect
on perfusion imaging or a depressed ejection fraction,
those with demonstrable ischemia, and those in whom
exercise provokes symptomatic ventricular arrhythmias
should be considered at high risk for recurrent MI or
death from arrhythmia (Fig. 34-7). Cardiac catheteriza-
tion with coronary angiography, invasive electrophysio-
logic evaluation, or both is advised.
Exercise tests also aid in formulating an individualized
exercise prescription, which can be much more vigorous
in patients who tolerate exercise without any of the
above-mentioned adverse signs.Additionally, predischarge
stress testing may provide an important psychological
beneﬁt, building the patient’s conﬁdence by demonstrat-
ing a reasonable exercise tolerance.
In many hospitals, a cardiac rehabilitation program
with progressive exercise is initiated in the hospital and
continued after discharge. Ideally, such programs should
include an educational component that informs patients
about their disease and its risk factors.
The usual duration of hospitalization for an uncompli-
cated STEMI is about 5 days.The remainder of the con-
valescent phase may be accomplished at home. During
the ﬁrst 1–2 weeks, the patient should be encouraged to
increase activity by walking around the house and out-
doors in good weather. Normal sexual activity may be
resumed during this period. After 2 weeks, the physician
must regulate the patient’s activity on the basis of exercise
tolerance. Most patients will be able to return to work
within 2–4 weeks.
SECONDARY PREVENTION
Various secondary preventive measures are at least partly
responsible for the improvement in the long-term mor-
tality and morbidity rates after STEMI. Long-term treat-
ment with an antiplatelet agent (usually aspirin) after
STEMI is associated with a 25% reduction in the risk of
recurrent infarction, stroke, or cardiovascular mortality
(36 fewer events for every 1000 patients treated).An alter-
native antiplatelet agent that may be used for secondary
prevention in patients intolerant of aspirin is clopidogrel
(75 mg/d orally).ACE inhibitors or ARBs and, in appro-
priate patients, aldosterone antagonists should be used
indeﬁnitely by patients with clinically evident heart fail-
ure, a moderate decrease in global ejection fraction, or a
large regional wall motion abnormality to prevent late
ventricular remodeling and recurrent ischemic events.
The chronic routine use of oral β-adrenoceptor
blockers for at least 2 years after STEMI is supported by
well-conducted placebo-controlled trials.
Evidence suggests that warfarin lowers the risk of late
mortality and the incidence of reinfarction after STEMI.
Most physicians prescribe aspirin routinely for all
patients without contraindications and add warfarin for
patients at increased risk of embolism (see Thromboem-
bolism earlier in the chapter). Several studies suggest that
in patients younger than 75 years of age, a low dose of
aspirin (75–81 mg/d) in combination with warfarin
administered to achieve an INR >2.0 is more effective
than aspirin alone for preventing recurrent MIs and
embolic cerebrovascular accidents. However, there is an
increased risk of bleeding and a high rate of discontinu-
ation of warfarin that has limited clinical acceptance of
combination antithrombotic therapy. There is increased
risk of bleeding when warfarin is added to dual antiplatelet
therapy (aspirin and clopidogrel). However, patients who
have had a stent implanted and have an indication for
anticoagulation should receive dual antiplatelet therapies
in combination with warfarin. Such patients should
also receive a proton pump inhibitor to minimize the
risk of gastrointestinal bleeding and should have regular
ST-Segment Elevation Myocardial Infarction
341
CHAPTER 34
monitoring of their hemoglobin levels and stool Hematest
while on combination antithrombotic therapy.
Finally, risk factors for atherosclerosis should be dis-
cussed with the patient and, when possible, favorably
modiﬁed.
FURTHER READINGS
AMERICAN HEART ASSOCIATION: Heart and Stroke Facts: 2005 Statistical
Supplement. Dallas,American Heart Association, 2006
ANTMAN EM: ST-elevation myocardial infarction: Management, in
Braunwald’s Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine,
8th ed, P Libby et al (eds). Philadelphia, Saunders Elsevier, 2008,
pp 1233–1299
———:Time is muscle:Translation into practice. J Am Coll Cardiol
52:1216, 2008
———, BRAUNWALD E: Acute myocardial infarction, in Braunwald’s
Heart Disease, 8th ed, P Libby et al (eds). Philadelphia, Saunders,
2008
——— et al: 2007 Focused Update of the ACC/AHA 2004 Guide-
lines for the Management of Patients With ST-Elevation
Myocardial Infarction: A report of the American College of
Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice
Guidelines: developed in collaboration with the Canadian
Cardiovascular Society endorsed by the American Academy of
Family Physicians: 2007 Writing Group to Review New Evi-
dence and Update the ACC/AHA 2004 Guidelines for the
Management of Patients With ST-Elevation Myocardial Infarc-
tion, writing on behalf of the 2004 Writing Committee. Circula-
tion 117(2):296, 2008
BOERSMA E et al: Acute myocardial infarction. Lancet 361:847,
2003
BRAUNWALD E, ANTMAN EM: ST-elevation myocardial infarction:
Pathology, pathophysiology, and clinical features, in Braunwald’s
Heart Disease:A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine, 8th ed, P Libby
et al (eds). Philadelphia, Saunders Elsevier, 2008, pp 1207–1232
FALK E et al: Coronary plaque disruption. Circulation 92:657,
1995
JACOBS AK et al: Development of systems of care for ST-elevation
myocardial infarction patients: executive summary. Circulation
116:217, 2007
LLOYD-JONES D et al: Heart disease and stroke statistics—2009
update: A report from the American Heart Association Statistics
Committee and Stroke Statistics Subcommittee. Circulation
119:e21, 2009
MEHRAN R et al: Bivalirudin in patients undergoing primary
angioplasty for acute myocardial infarction (HORIZONS-
AMI): 1-year results of a randomised controlled trial. Lancet
374:1149, 2009
MICHAELS AD, GOLDSCHLAGER N: Risk stratiﬁcation after acute
myocardial infarction in the reperfusion era. Prog Cardiovasc Dis
42:273, 2000
MONTALESCOT G et al: Platelet glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibition with
coronary stenting for acute myocardial infarction. N Engl J Med
344:1895, 2001
WHITE HD, CHEW DP:Acute myocardial infarction. Lancet 372:570,
2008
WIVIOTT SD et al. Prasugrel versus clopidogrel in patients with acute
coronary syndromes. N Engl J Med 357:2001, 2007
342
Common Critical Illnesses and Syndromes
SECTION IV
Allan H. Ropper
Coma is among the most common and striking prob-
lems in general medicine. It accounts for a substantial
portion of admissions to emergency wards and occurs on
all hospital services. Because coma demands immediate
attention, the physician must use an organized approach.
There is a continuum of states of reduced alertness,
the severest form being coma, a deep sleeplike state from
which the patient cannot be aroused. Stupor refers to a
higher degree of arousability in which the patient can
be awakened only by vigorous stimuli, accompanied by
motor behavior that leads to avoidance of uncomfort-
able or aggravating stimuli. Drowsiness, which is familiar
to all persons, simulates light sleep and is characterized
by easy arousal and the persistence of alertness for brief
periods. Drowsiness and stupor are usually attended by
some degree of confusion.A narrative description of the
level of arousal and of the type of responses evoked by
various stimuli, precisely as observed at the bedside, is
preferable to ambiguous terms such as lethargy, semicoma,
or obtundation.
Several other neurologic conditions render patients
apparently unresponsive and thereby simulate coma, and
certain subsyndromes of coma must be considered sepa-
rately because of their special signiﬁcance.Among the lat-
ter, the vegetative state signiﬁes an awake but nonresponsive
state. These patients have emerged from coma after a
period of days or weeks to a state in which the eyelids are
open, giving the appearance of wakefulness. Yawning,
coughing, swallowing, as well as limb and head movements
persist, but there are few, if any, meaningful responses to
COMA
the external and internal environment—in essence, an
“awake coma.” Respiratory and autonomic functions are
retained.The term “vegetative” is unfortunate because it is
subject to misinterpretation by laypersons.The possibility
of incorrectly attributing meaningful behavior to these
patients has created inordinate problems.There are always
accompanying signs that indicate extensive damage in
both cerebral hemispheres (e.g., decerebrate or decorticate
limb posturing and absent responses to visual stimuli; see
later).
In the closely related but less severe minimally conscious
state, the patient may make intermittent rudimentary
vocal or motor responses. Cardiac arrest with cerebral
hypoperfusion and head injuries are the most common
causes of the vegetative and minimally conscious states
(Chaps. 32 and 36).The prognosis for regaining mental
faculties after the vegetative state has supervened for
several months is very poor, and after 1 year, almost nil,
hence the term persistent vegetative state. Most reports of
dramatic recovery, when investigated carefully, are found
to yield to the usual rules for prognosis, but there have
been rare instances in which recovery has occurred to a
demented condition and, in rare childhood cases, to an
even better state.
Quite apart from the above conditions, certain syn-
dromes that affect alertness are prone to be misinterpreted
as stupor or coma. Akinetic mutism refers to a partially or
fully awake state in which the patient is able to form
impressions and think but remains virtually immobile and
mute.The condition results from damage in the regions of
CHAPTER 35
CHAPTER 35
343
The Anatomy and Physiology of Coma . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 344
Laboratory Studies and Imaging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 349
Differential Diagnosis of Coma . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 350
Brain Death . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 351
Prognosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 352
I Further Readings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 352
Common Critical Illnesses and Syndromes
344
SECTION IV
the medial thalamic nuclei or the frontal lobes (particularly
lesions situated deeply or on the orbitofrontal surfaces) or
from hydrocephalus.The term abulia is in essence a milder
form of akinetic mutism used to describe mental and
physical slowness and diminished ability to initiate activ-
ity. It is also generally the result of damage to the frontal
lobe network. Catatonia is a curious hypomobile and mute
syndrome that arises as part of a major psychosis, usually
schizophrenia or major depression. Catatonic patients
make few voluntary or responsive movements, although
they blink, swallow, and may not appear distressed.There
are nonetheless signs that the patient is responsive, although
it may take some ingenuity on the part of the examiner
to demonstrate them. For example, eyelid elevation is
actively resisted, blinking occurs in response to a visual
threat, and the eyes move concomitantly with head rota-
tion, all of which are inconsistent with the presence of a
brain lesion. It is characteristic but not invariable in cata-
tonia for the limbs to retain the postures in which they
have been placed by the examiner (“waxy ﬂexibility,” or
catalepsy). Upon recovery, such patients have some mem-
ory of events that occurred during their catatonic stupor.
The appearance is superﬁcially similar to akinetic mutism,
but clinical evidence of cerebral damage such as Babinski
signs and hypertonicity of the limbs is lacking.The singu-
lar problem of brain death is discussed later.
The locked-in state describes yet another type of
pseudocoma in which an awake patient has no means of
producing speech or volitional movement but retains
voluntary vertical eye movements and eyelid elevation,
thus allowing the patient to signal with a clear mind.
The pupils are normally reactive. Such individuals have
written entire treatises using Morse code. The usual
cause is an infarction or hemorrhage of the ventral pons,
which transects all descending corticospinal and corti-
cobulbar pathways. A similar awake but de-efferented
state occurs as a result of total paralysis of the muscula-
ture in severe cases of Guillain-Barré syndrome, critical
illness neuropathy (Chap. 36), and pharmacologic neu-
romuscular blockade.
THE ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
OF COMA
Almost all instances of diminished alertness can be traced
to widespread abnormalities of the cerebral hemispheres or
to reduced activity of a special thalamocortical alerting
system termed the reticular activating system (RAS). The
proper functioning of this system, its ascending projections
to the cortex, and the cortex itself are required to maintain
alertness and coherence of thought.It follows that the prin-
cipal causes of coma are (1) lesions that damage the RAS
or its projections; (2) destruction of large portions of both
cerebral hemispheres;and (3) suppression of reticulo-cerebral
function by drugs, toxins, or metabolic derangements such
as hypoglycemia,anoxia,uremia,and hepatic failure.
The proximity of the RAS to structures that control
pupillary function and eye movements permits clinical
localization of the cause of coma in many cases. Pupillary
enlargement with loss of light reaction and loss of verti-
cal and adduction movements of the eyes suggests that
the likely location of the lesion is in the upper brainstem.
Conversely, preservation of pupillary reactivity and eye
movements absolves the upper brainstem and indicates
that widespread structural lesions or metabolic suppres-
sion of the cerebral hemispheres is responsible.
Coma Caused by Cerebral Mass
Lesions and Herniations
The cranial cavity is separated into compartments by
infoldings of the dura.The two cerebral hemispheres are
separated by the falx and the anterior and posterior fos-
sae by the tentorium. Herniation refers to displacement of
brain tissue into a compartment that it normally does
not occupy. Many of the signs associated with coma, and
indeed coma itself, can be attributed to these tissue shifts,
and certain clinical conﬁgurations are characteristic of
speciﬁc herniations (Fig. 35-1). They are in essence
“false localizing” signs because they derive from com-
pression of brain structures at a distance from the mass.
The most common herniations are from the supra-
tentorial to the infratentorial compartments through the
tentorial opening, hence transtentorial. Uncal transtentorial
herniation refers to impaction of the anterior medial
temporal gyrus (the uncus) into the tentorial opening
A
B
D
C
FIGURE 35-1
Types of cerebral herniation. A. Uncal. B. Central. C. Trans-
falcial. D. Foraminal.
just anterior to and adjacent to the midbrain (Fig. 35-1A).
The displaced brain tissue compresses the third nerve as
it traverses the subarachnoid space and results in
enlargement of the ipsilateral pupil (putatively because
the ﬁbers subserving parasympathetic pupillary function
are located peripherally in the nerve). The coma that
follows is caused by compression of the midbrain against
the opposite tentorial edge by the displaced parahip-
pocampal gyrus (Fig. 35-2). In some cases, the lateral
displacement of the midbrain causes compression of the
opposite cerebral peduncle, producing a Babinski sign
and hemiparesis contralateral to the original hemiparesis
(the Kernohan-Woltman sign). In addition to compress-
ing the upper brainstem, tissue shifts, including hernia-
tions, may compress major blood vessels, particularly the
anterior and posterior cerebral arteries as they pass over
the tentorial reﬂections, thus producing brain infarc-
tions. The distortions may also entrap portions of the
ventricular system, resulting in regional hydrocephalus.
Central transtentorial herniation denotes a symmetric
downward movement of the thalamic medial structures
through the tentorial opening with compression of the
upper midbrain (Fig. 35-1B). Miotic pupils and drowsi-
ness are the heralding signs. Both temporal and central
herniations have classically been considered to cause a
progressive compression of the brainstem from above in
an orderly manner: ﬁrst the midbrain, then the pons, and
ﬁnally the medulla. The result is a sequence of neuro-
logic signs that corresponds to each affected level. Other
forms of herniation are transfalcial herniation (displacement
of the cingulate gyrus under the falx and across the mid-
line; Fig. 35-1C), and foraminal herniation (downward
forcing of the cerebellar tonsils into the foramen magnum;
Fig. 35-1D), which causes compression of the medulla
and respiratory arrest.
A direct relationship between the various conﬁgura-
tions of transtentorial herniations and coma is not always
found. Drowsiness and stupor typically occur with mod-
erate horizontal shifts at the level of the diencephalon
(thalami) well before transtentorial or other herniations
are evident. Lateral shift may be quantiﬁed on axial
images of CT and MRI scans (see Fig. 35-2). In cases of
acutely appearing masses, horizontal displacement of the
pineal calciﬁcation of 3–5 mm is generally associated
with drowsiness, 6–8 mm with stupor, and >9 mm with
coma. Intrusion of the medial temporal lobe into the
tentorial opening may be apparent on MRI and CT
scans by an obliteration of the cisterns that surround the
upper brainstem.
Coma Caused by Metabolic Disorders
Many systemic metabolic abnormalities cause coma by
interrupting the delivery of energy substrates (hypoxia,
ischemia, hypoglycemia) or by altering neuronal excitabil-
ity (drug and alcohol intoxication, anesthesia, and
epilepsy).The same metabolic abnormalities that produce
coma may in milder form induce widespread cortical
dysfunction and an acute confusional state.Thus, in meta-
bolic encephalopathies, clouded consciousness and coma
are in a continuum.
Cerebral neurons are fully dependent on cerebral blood
ﬂow (CBF) and the related delivery of oxygen and glu-
cose. CBF is ∼75 mL per 100 g/min in gray matter and
30 mL per 100 g/min in white matter (mean, 55 mL per
100 g/min);oxygen consumption is 3.5 mL per 100 g/min,
and glucose utilization is 5 mg per 100 g/min. Brain stores
of glucose provide energy for ∼2 min after blood ﬂow is
interrupted, and oxygen stores last 8–10 s after the cessa-
tion of blood ﬂow. Simultaneous hypoxia and ischemia
exhaust glucose more rapidly. The electroencephalogram
(EEG) rhythm in these circumstances becomes diffusely
slowed, typical of metabolic encephalopathies, and as con-
ditions of substrate delivery worsen, eventually all record-
able brain electrical activity ceases. In almost all instances
of metabolic encephalopathy, the global metabolic activity
of the brain is reduced in proportion to the degree of
diminished consciousness.
Conditions such as hypoglycemia, hyponatremia,
hyperosmolarity, hypercapnia, hypercalcemia, and hepatic
and renal failure are associated with a variety of alterations
in neurons and astrocytes. Unlike hypoxia-ischemia,
which causes neuronal destruction, metabolic disorders
generally cause only minor neuropathologic changes.The
reversible effects of these conditions on the brain are not
Coma
345
CHAPTER 35
A
B
FIGURE 35-2
Coronal (A) and axial (B) MRIs from a stuporous patient
with a left third nerve palsy as a result of a large left-sided
subdural hematoma (seen as a gray-white rim). The upper
midbrain and lower thalamic regions are compressed and
displaced horizontally away from the mass, and there is
transtentorial herniation of the medial temporal lobe struc-
tures, including the uncus anteriorly. The lateral ventricle
opposite to the hematoma has become enlarged as a result
of compression of the third ventricle.
understood but may result from impaired energy supplies,
changes in ion ﬂuxes across neuronal membranes, and
neurotransmitter abnormalities. For example, the high
brain ammonia concentration of hepatic coma interferes
with cerebral energy metabolism and with the Na+, K+-
ATPase pump, increases the number and size of astrocytes,
alters nerve cell function, and causes increased concentra-
tions of potentially toxic products of ammonia metabo-
lism; it may also result in abnormalities of neurotransmitters,
including putative “false” neurotransmitters that are active
at receptor sites. Apart from hyperammonemia, which of
these mechanisms is of critical importance is not clear.
The mechanism of the encephalopathy of renal failure is
also not known. Unlike ammonia, urea itself does not
produce central nervous system (CNS) toxicity. A multi-
factorial causation has been proposed, including increased
permeability of the blood–brain barrier to toxic substances
such as organic acids and an increase in brain calcium or
cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF) phosphate content.
Coma and seizures are a common accompaniment of
any large shifts in sodium and water balance in the brain.
These changes in osmolarity arise from systemic medical
disorders, including diabetic ketoacidosis, the nonketotic
hyperosmolar state, and hyponatremia from any cause
(e.g., water intoxication, excessive secretion of antidiuretic
hormone or atrial natriuretic peptides). Sodium levels
<125 mmol/L induce confusion, and <115 mmol/L are
associated with coma and convulsions. In hyperosmolar
coma, the serum osmolarity is generally >350 mosmol/L.
Hypercapnia depresses the level of consciousness in pro-
portion to the increase in the CO2 tension in the blood.
In all of these metabolic encephalopathies, the degree of neurologic
change depends to a large extent on the rapidity with which the
serum changes occur. The pathophysiology of other meta-
bolic encephalopathies, such as hypercalcemia, hypothy-
roidism, vitamin B12 deﬁciency, and hypothermia, are
incompletely understood but must also reﬂect derange-
ments of CNS biochemistry and membrane function.
Epileptic Coma
Continuous, generalized electrical discharges of the cor-
tex (seizures) are associated with coma even in the absence
of epileptic motor activity (convulsions). The self-limited
coma that follows seizures, termed the postictal state, may
be caused by exhaustion of energy reserves or effects of
locally toxic molecules that are the byproduct of seizures.
The postictal state produces a pattern of continuous, gen-
eralized slowing of the background EEG activity similar
to that of other metabolic encephalopathies.
Toxic Drug–Induced Coma
This common class of encephalopathy is in large mea-
sure reversible and leaves no residual damage providing
hypoxia does not supervene. Many drugs and toxins are
capable of depressing nervous system function. Some
produce coma by affecting both the brainstem nuclei,
including the RAS, and the cerebral cortex.The combi-
nation of cortical and brainstem signs, which occurs in
certain drug overdoses, may lead to an incorrect diagnosis
of structural brainstem disease. Overdose of medications
that have atropinic actions produces physical signs such
as dilated pupils, tachycardia, and dry skin.
Coma Caused by Widespread Damage
to the Cerebral Hemispheres
This special category, comprising a number of unrelated
disorders, results from widespread structural cerebral
damage, thereby simulating a metabolic disorder of the
cortex.The effect of prolonged hypoxia-ischemia is per-
haps the best known and one in which it is not possible
to distinguish the acute effects of hypoperfusion of the
brain from the further effects of generalized neuronal
damage. Similar bihemispheral damage is produced by
disorders that occlude small blood vessels throughout
the brain; examples include cerebral malaria, thrombotic
thrombocytopenic purpura, and hyperviscosity.The pres-
ence of seizures and the bihemispheral damage is some-
times an indication of this class of disorder.
Common Critical Illnesses and Syndromes
346
SECTION IV
Approach to the Patient:
COMA
Acute respiratory and cardiovascular problems should
be attended to before neurologic assessment. In most
instances, a complete medical evaluation, except for
vital signs, funduscopy, and examination for nuchal
rigidity, may be deferred until the neurologic evalua-
tion has established the severity and nature of coma.
HISTORY
In many cases, the cause of coma is
immediately evident (e.g., trauma, cardiac arrest, or
known drug ingestion). In the remainder, certain
points are especially useful: (1) the circumstances and
rapidity with which neurologic symptoms developed;
(2) the antecedent symptoms (confusion, weakness,
headache, fever, seizures, dizziness, double vision, or
vomiting);(3) the use of medications,illicit drugs,or alco-
hol; and (4) chronic liver, kidney, lung, heart, or other
medical disease. Direct interrogation of family mem-
bers and observers on the scene, in person or by tele-
phone, is an important part of the initial evaluation.
Ambulance technicians often provide the most useful
information.
GENERAL 
PHYSICAL 
EXAMINATION The
temperature, pulse, respiratory rate and pattern, and
blood pressure should be measured quickly. Fever
suggests a systemic infection, bacterial meningitis,
or encephalitis; only rarely is it attributable to a brain
lesion that has disturbed hypothalamic temperature-
regulating centers (“central fever”). A slight elevation in
temperature may occur after vigorous convulsions.
High body temperature (42°–44°C) associated with dry
skin should arouse the suspicion of heat stroke or anti-
cholinergic drug intoxication. Hypothermia is observed
with alcoholic, barbiturate, sedative, or phenothiazine
intoxication; hypoglycemia; peripheral circulatory fail-
ure; and hypothyroidism. Hypothermia itself causes
coma only when the temperature is <31°C.Tachypnea
may indicate systemic acidosis or pneumonia.Aberrant
respiratory patterns that reﬂect brainstem disorders are
discussed later. Marked hypertension either indicates
hypertensive encephalopathy or is the result of a rapid
increase in intracranial pressure (ICP; the Cushing
response), most often after cerebral hemorrhage or head
injury. Hypotension is characteristic of coma from
alcohol or barbiturate intoxication, internal hemor-
rhage, myocardial infarction, sepsis, profound hypothy-
roidism,or Addisonian crisis.
The funduscopic examination can detect subarach-
noid hemorrhage (subhyaloid hemorrhages), hyper-
tensive encephalopathy (exudates, hemorrhages,
vessel-crossing changes, papilledema), and increased
ICP (papilledema). Cutaneous petechiae suggest throm-
botic thrombocytopenic purpura, meningococcemia,
or a bleeding diathesis from which an intracerebral
hemorrhage has arisen.
NEUROLOGIC EXAMINATION
First, the patient
should be observed without intervention by the
examiner. Tossing about in the bed, reaching up
toward the face, crossing the legs, yawning, swallow-
ing, coughing, and moaning denote a state close to
normal awakeness. Lack of restless movements on one
side or an outturned leg suggests a hemiplegia. Inter-
mittent twitching movements of a foot, ﬁnger, or
facial muscle may be the only sign of seizures. Multi-
focal myoclonus almost always indicates a metabolic
disorder, particularly uremia, anoxia, or drug intoxica-
tion (lithium and haloperidol are particularly likely to
cause this sign), or the rare conditions of a prion dis-
ease or “Hashimoto encephalopathy.” In a drowsy and
confused patient, bilateral asterixis is a certain sign of
metabolic encephalopathy or drug intoxication.
The terms decorticate rigidity and decerebrate rigidity,
or “posturing,” describe stereotyped arm and leg
movements that occur spontaneously or elicited by
sensory stimulation. Flexion of the elbows and wrists
and supination of the arm (decortication) suggests
bilateral damage rostral to the midbrain, and exten-
sion of the elbows and wrists with pronation (decere-
bration) indicates damage to motor tracts in the
midbrain or caudal diencephalon. The less frequent
combination of arm extension with leg ﬂexion or ﬂac-
cid legs is associated with lesions in the pons. These
concepts have been adapted from animal work and
cannot be applied with the same precision to coma in
humans. In fact, acute and widespread disorders of
any type, regardless of their location, frequently cause
limb extension, and almost all such extensor posturing
becomes predominantly ﬂexor as time passes. Postur-
ing may also be unilateral and may coexist with pur-
poseful limb movements, usually reﬂecting incomplete
damage to the motor system.
LEVEL OF AROUSAL
A sequence of increasingly
intense stimuli is used to determine the threshold for
arousal and the optimal motor response of each side
of the body. The results of testing may vary from
minute to minute and serial examinations are most
useful. Tickling the nostrils with a cotton wisp is a
moderate stimulus to arousal—all but deeply stu-
porous and comatose patients will move the head
away and rouse to some degree. Using the hand to
remove the offending stimulus represents an even
greater degree of responsiveness. Stereotyped postur-
ing in response to noxious stimuli indicates severe
dysfunction of the corticospinal system. Abduction-
avoidance movement of a limb is usually purposeful
and denotes an intact corticospinal system. Pressure
on the knuckles or bony prominences and pinprick
stimulation are humane forms of noxious stimuli;
pinching the skin causes unsightly ecchymoses and is
generally not necessary but may be useful in eliciting
abduction withdrawal movements of the limbs.
BRAINSTEM REFLEXES
Assessment of brain-
stem function is essential to localization of the lesion
in coma (Fig. 35-3). The brainstem reﬂexes that are
conveniently examined are pupillary responses to
light, spontaneous and elicited eye movements,
corneal responses, and the respiratory pattern. As a
rule, when these brainstem activities are preserved,
particularly the pupil reactions and eye movements,
coma must be ascribed to bilateral hemispheral dis-
ease. The converse, however, is not always true
because a mass in the hemispheres may be the under-
lying cause of coma but nonetheless produce brain-
stem signs by inducing transtentorial herniation.
Pupillary Signs
Pupillary reactions are examined
with a bright, diffuse light (not an ophthalmoscope);
if the response is absent, this should be conﬁrmed by
observation through a magnifying lens. Normally
reactive and round pupils of midsize (2.5–5 mm)
essentially exclude midbrain damage, either primary
or secondary to compression. Reaction to light is often
difﬁcult to appreciate in pupils <2 mm in diameter,
and bright room lighting mutes pupillary reactivity.
Coma
347
CHAPTER 35
One unreactive and enlarged pupil (>6 mm) or one
that is poorly reactive signiﬁes compression of the third
nerve from the effects of a mass above. Enlargement of
the pupil contralateral to a mass may occur ﬁrst but is
infrequent. An oval and slightly eccentric pupil is a
transitional sign that accompanies early midbrain–third
nerve compression. The most extreme pupillary sign,
bilaterally dilated and unreactive pupils, indicates severe
midbrain damage, usually from compression by a
supratentorial mass. Ingestion of drugs with anticholin-
ergic activity, the use of mydriatic eye drops, and direct
ocular trauma are among the causes of misleading
pupillary enlargement.
Unilateral miosis in coma has been attributed to
dysfunction of sympathetic efferents originating in
the posterior hypothalamus and descending in the
tegmentum of the brainstem to the cervical cord. It is
an occasional ﬁnding with a large cerebral hemor-
rhage that affects the thalamus. Reactive and bilater-
ally small (1–2.5 mm) but not pinpoint pupils are
seen in metabolic encephalopathies and in deep bilat-
eral hemispheral lesions such as hydrocephalus and
thalamic hemorrhage. Very small but reactive pupils
(<1 mm) characterize narcotic and barbiturate over-
doses but also occur with extensive pontine hemor-
rhage.The response to naloxone and the presence of
reﬂex eye movements (see below) distinguish these.
Ocular Movements
The eyes are ﬁrst observed
by elevating the eyelids and noting the resting posi-
tion and spontaneous movements of the globes. Eye-
lid tone, which is tested by lifting the eyelids and
noting their resistance to opening and the speed of
closure, is reduced progressively as coma deepens.
Horizontal divergence of the eyes at rest is normal in
drowsiness. As coma deepens, the ocular axes may
become parallel again.
Spontaneous eye movements in coma often take
the form of conjugate horizontal roving.This ﬁnding
alone exonerates the midbrain and pons and has the
same signiﬁcance as normal reﬂex eye movements
(see below). Conjugate horizontal ocular deviation to
one side indicates damage to the pons on the oppo-
site side or, alternatively, to the frontal lobe on the
same side. This phenomenon is summarized by the
following maxim: The eyes look toward a hemispheral
lesion and away from a brainstem lesion. Seizures also
drive the eyes to one side. On rare occasions, the eyes
may turn paradoxically away from the side of a deep
hemispheral lesion (“wrong-way eyes”). The eyes
turn down and inward as a result of thalamic and
upper midbrain lesions, typically with thalamic hem-
orrhage.“Ocular bobbing” describes brisk downward
and slow upward movements of the eyes associated
with loss of horizontal eye movements and is diag-
nostic of bilateral pontine damage, usually from
thrombosis of the basilar artery.“Ocular dipping” is a
slower, arrhythmic downward movement followed by
a faster upward movement in patients with normal
reﬂex horizontal gaze; it indicates diffuse cortical
anoxic damage. Many other complex eye movements
are known but do not have the same clinical impor-
tance as those mentioned earlier.
The oculocephalic reﬂexes depend on the integrity
of the ocular motor nuclei and their interconnecting
tracts that extend from the midbrain to the pons and
medulla. These reﬂexes are elicited by moving the
head from side to side or vertically and observing
evoked eye movements in the direction opposite to
the head movement (Fig. 35-3). The movements,
Common Critical Illnesses and Syndromes
348
SECTION IV
Pupillary light reflex
Reflex conjugate
eye movements
Medulla
Medulla
Pons
Pons
M
L
F
III
V
Vll
Vl
Vlll
III
Respiratory
neurons
Corneal-blink
reflex
FIGURE 35-3
Examination of brainstem reﬂexes in coma. Midbrain and
third nerve function are tested by pupillary reaction to light,
pontine function by spontaneous and reﬂex eye movements
and corneal responses, and medullary function by respiratory
and pharyngeal responses. Reﬂex conjugate, horizontal eye
movements are dependent on the medial longitudinal fasci-
culus (MLF) interconnecting the sixth and contralateral third
nerve nuclei. Head rotation (oculocephalic reﬂex) or caloric
stimulation of the labyrinths (oculovestibular reﬂex) elicits
contraversive eye movements (for details, see text).
called somewhat inappropriately “doll’s eyes” (which
refers more accurately to the reﬂex elevation of the
eyelids with ﬂexion of the neck), are normally sup-
pressed in awake patients. The ability to elicit them
therefore indicates a reduced cortical inﬂuence on
the brainstem. Furthermore, preservation of evoked
reflex eye movements signifies the integrity of the
brainstem and implies that the origin of unconscious-
ness lies in the cerebral hemispheres.The opposite, an
absence of reflex eye movements, usually signifies
damage within the brainstem but can be produced
infrequently by profound overdoses of certain drugs.
Normal pupillary size and light reaction distinguishes
most drug-induced comas from structural brainstem
damage.
Thermal, or “caloric,” stimulation of the vestibular
apparatus (oculovestibular response) provides a more
intense stimulus for the oculocephalic reﬂex but gives
fundamentally the same information.The test is per-
formed by irrigating the external auditory canal with
cool water to induce convection currents in the
labyrinths. After a brief latency period, the result is
tonic deviation of both eyes to the side of cool-water
irrigation and nystagmus in the opposite direction.
(The acronym “COWS” has been used to remind
generations of medical students of the direction of
nystagmus—“cold water opposite,
warm water
same.”) The loss of conjugate ocular movements indi-
cates brainstem damage. The absence of nystagmus
despite conjugate deviation of the globes indicates
that the cerebral hemispheres are damaged or meta-
bolically suppressed.
By touching the cornea with a wisp of cotton, a
response consisting of brief bilateral eyelid closure is
normally observed. The corneal reﬂexes depend on
the integrity of pontine pathways between the ﬁfth
(afferent) and both seventh (efferent) cranial nerves;
although rarely useful alone, in conjunction with
reﬂex eye movements, they are important clinical tests
of pontine function. CNS depressant drugs diminish
or eliminate the corneal responses soon after reﬂex
eye movements are paralyzed but before the pupils
become unreactive to light.The corneal (and pharyn-
geal) response may be lost for a time on the side of an
acute hemiplegia.
Respiratory Patterns
Respiratory patterns are
of less localizing value compared with other brainstem
signs. Shallow, slow, but regular breathing suggests
metabolic or drug depression. Cheyne-Stokes respira-
tion in its classic cyclic form, ending with a brief
apneic period, signiﬁes bihemispheral damage or meta-
bolic suppression and commonly accompanies light
coma. Rapid, deep (Kussmaul) breathing usually
implies metabolic acidosis but may also occur with
pontomesencephalic lesions. Agonal gasps are the
result of lower brainstem (medullary) damage and are
well known as the terminal respiratory pattern of
severe brain damage.A number of other cyclic breath-
ing variations have been described but are of lesser
signiﬁcance.
Coma
349
CHAPTER 35
LABORATORY STUDIES AND IMAGING
The studies that are most useful in the diagnosis of
coma are chemical-toxicologic analysis of blood and
urine, cranial CT or MRI, EEG, and CSF examination.
Arterial blood gas analysis is helpful in patients with
lung disease and acid–base disorders. The metabolic
aberrations commonly encountered in clinical practice
require measurements of electrolytes, glucose, calcium,
osmolarity, and renal (blood urea nitrogen) and hepatic
(NH3) function.Toxicologic analysis is necessary in any
case of coma where the diagnosis is not immediately
clear. However, the presence of exogenous drugs or tox-
ins, especially alcohol, does not exclude the possibility
that other factors, particularly head trauma, are also
contributing to the clinical state. An ethanol level of
43 mmol/L (0.2 g/dL) in nonhabituated patients gener-
ally causes impaired mental activity and of >65 mmol/L
(0.3 g/dL) is associated with stupor.The development of
tolerance may allow a chronic alcoholic to remain
awake at levels >87 mmol/L (0.4 g/dL).
The availability of CT and MRI has focused atten-
tion on causes of coma that are radiologically detectable
(e.g., hemorrhages, tumors, or hydrocephalus). Resort-
ing primarily to this approach, although at times expe-
dient, is imprudent because most cases of coma (and
confusion) are metabolic or toxic in origin.The notion
that a normal CT scan excludes anatomic lesions as the
cause of coma is also erroneous. Bilateral hemisphere
infarction, acute brainstem infarction, encephalitis, menin-
gitis, mechanical shearing of axons as a result of closed
head trauma, sagittal sinus thrombosis, and subdural
hematomas that are isodense to adjacent brain are some
of the disorders that may not be detected. Nevertheless,
if the source of coma remains unknown, a scan should
be obtained.
The EEG is useful in metabolic or drug-induced states
but is rarely diagnostic, except when coma is caused by
clinically unrecognized seizures, to herpesvirus encephali-
tis, or to prion (Creutzfeldt-Jakob) disease.The amount of
background slowing of the EEG is a reﬂection of the
severity of any diffuse encephalopathy. Predominant high-
voltage slowing (δ or triphasic waves) in the frontal
regions is typical of metabolic coma, as from hepatic fail-
ure, and widespread fast (β) activity implicates sedative
drugs (e.g., diazepines, barbiturates). A special pattern of
“α coma,” deﬁned by widespread, variable 8- to 12-Hz
activity, superﬁcially resembles the normal α rhythm of
waking but is unresponsive to environmental stimuli. It
results from pontine or diffuse cortical damage and is
associated with a poor prognosis. Most importantly, EEG
recordings may reveal clinically inapparent epileptic dis-
charges in a patient with coma. Normal α activity on the
EEG, which is suppressed by stimulating the patient, also
alerts the clinician to the locked-in syndrome or to hyste-
ria or catatonia.
Lumbar puncture is performed less frequently than in
the past for coma diagnosis because neuroimaging effec-
tively excludes intracerebral and extensive subarachnoid
hemorrhage. However, examination of the CSF remains
indispensable in the diagnosis of meningitis and encephali-
tis. Lumbar puncture should therefore not be deferred if
meningitis is a possibility.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS OF COMA
(Table 35-1) The causes of coma can be divided into
three broad categories: those without focal neurologic
signs (e.g., metabolic encephalopathies); meningitis syn-
dromes, characterized by fever or stiff neck and an
excess of cells in the spinal ﬂuid (e.g., bacterial meningi-
tis, subarachnoid hemorrhage); and conditions associated
with prominent focal signs (e.g., stroke, cerebral hemor-
rhage). In most instances, coma is part of an obvious
medical problem such as drug ingestion, hypoxia, stroke,
trauma, or liver or kidney failure. Conditions that cause
sudden coma include drug ingestion, cerebral hemor-
rhage, trauma, cardiac arrest, epilepsy, or basilar artery
embolism. Coma that appears subacutely is usually
related to a preceding medical or neurologic problem,
Common Critical Illnesses and Syndromes
350
SECTION IV
TABLE 35-1
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS OF COMA
1. Diseases that cause no focal or lateralizing neurologic signs, usually with normal brainstem
functions; the CT scan and cellular content of the CSF are normal
a. Intoxications: alcohol, sedative drugs, opiates, and so on
b. Metabolic disturbances: anoxia, hyponatremia, hypernatremia, hypercalcemia, diabetic
acidosis, nonketotic hyperosmolar hyperglycemia, hypoglycemia, uremia, hepatic coma,
hypercarbia, addisonian crisis, hypo- and hyperthyroid states, profound nutritional deﬁciency
c. Severe systemic infections: pneumonia, septicemia, typhoid fever, malaria, Waterhouse-
Friderichsen syndrome
d. Shock from any cause
e. Postseizure states, status epilepticus, subclinical epilepsy
f. Hypertensive encephalopathy, eclampsia
g. Severe hyperthermia, hypothermia
h. Concussion
i. Acute hydrocephalus
2. Diseases that cause meningeal irritation with or without fever and with an excess of WBCs or
RBCs in the CSF, usually without focal or lateralizing cerebral or brainstem signs; CT or MRI
shows no mass lesion
a. Subarachnoid hemorrhage from ruptured aneurysm, arteriovenous malformation, trauma
b. Acute bacterial meningitis
c. Viral encephalitis
d. Miscellaneous: fat embolism, cholesterol embolism, carcinomatous and lymphomatous
meningitis, and so on
3. Diseases that cause focal brainstem or lateralizing cerebral signs with or without changes in the
CSF; CT and MRI are abnormal
a. Hemispheral hemorrhage (basal ganglionic, thalamic) or infarction (large middle cerebral artery
territory) with secondary brainstem compression
b. Brainstem infarction caused by basilar artery thrombosis or embolism
c. Brain abscess, subdural empyema
d. Epidural and subdural hemorrhage, brain contusion
e. Brain tumor with surrounding edema
f. Cerebellar and pontine hemorrhage and infarction
g. Widespread traumatic brain injury
h. Metabolic coma (see earlier) with preexisting focal damage
i. Miscellaneous: cortical vein thrombosis, herpes simplex encephalitis, multiple cerebral emboli
caused by bacterial endocarditis, acute hemorrhagic leukoencephalitis, acute disseminated
(postinfectious) encephalomyelitis, thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura, cerebral vasculitis,
gliomatosis cerebri, pituitary apoplexy, intravascular lymphoma, and so on
Note: CSF, cerebrospinal ﬂuid; RBC, red blood cell; WBC, white blood cell.
including the secondary brain swelling of a mass lesion
such as a tumor or cerebral infarction.
Cerebrovascular diseases cause the greatest difﬁculty
in coma diagnosis. The most common categories are
(1) basal ganglia and thalamic hemorrhage (acute but
not instantaneous onset, vomiting, headache, hemiplegia,
and characteristic eye signs), (2) pontine hemorrhage
(sudden onset, pinpoint pupils, loss of reﬂex eye move-
ments and corneal responses, ocular bobbing, posturing,
hyperventilation, and excessive sweating), (3) cerebellar
hemorrhage (occipital headache, vomiting, gaze paresis,
and inability to stand), (4) basilar artery thrombosis (neu-
rologic prodrome or warning spells, diplopia, dysarthria,
vomiting, eye movement and corneal response abnor-
malities, and asymmetric limb paresis), and (5) subarach-
noid hemorrhage (precipitous coma after headache and
vomiting). The most common stroke, infarction in the
territory of the middle cerebral artery, does not gener-
ally cause coma, but edema surrounding large infarcts
may expand during the ﬁrst few days and act as a mass.
The syndrome of acute hydrocephalus accompanies many
intracranial diseases, particularly subarachnoid hemor-
rhage. It is characterized by headache and sometimes
vomiting that may progress quickly to coma, with exten-
sor posturing of the limbs, bilateral Babinski signs, small
unreactive pupils, and impaired oculocephalic move-
ments in the vertical direction.
If the history and examination do not indicate the
cause of coma, then information obtained from CT or
MRI may be needed.The majority of medical causes of
coma can be established without a neuroimaging study.
BRAIN DEATH
Brain death is a state of cessation of cerebral function
while somatic function is maintained by artiﬁcial means
and the heart continues to pump. It is the only type of
brain damage that is recognized as equivalent to death.
Several similar criteria have been advanced for the diag-
nosis of brain death, and it is essential to adhere to the
standards endorsed by the local medical community.
Ideal criteria are simple, can be assessed at the bedside,
and allow no chance of diagnostic error. They contain
three essential elements of clinical evidence: (1) wide-
spread cortical destruction that is reﬂected by deep
coma and unresponsiveness to all forms of stimulation,
(2) global brainstem damage demonstrated by absent
pupillary light reaction and by the loss of oculovestibular
and corneal reﬂexes, and (3) destruction of the medulla
manifested by complete apnea.The pulse rate is invari-
ant and unresponsive to atropine. Diabetes insipidus is
often present but may develop hours or days after the
other clinical signs of brain death. The pupils are often
enlarged but may be midsized; they should not, how-
ever, be constricted.The absence of deep tendon reﬂexes
is not required because the spinal cord remains func-
tional.There may or may not be Babinski signs.
Demonstration that apnea is caused by irreversible
medullary damage requires that the PCO2 be high enough
to stimulate respiration during a test of spontaneous
breathing. Apnea testing can be done safely by the use of
diffusion oxygenation before removing the ventilator.
This is accomplished by preoxygenation with 100% oxygen,
which is then sustained during the test by oxygen admin-
istered through a tracheal cannula. CO2 tension increases
∼0.3–0.4 kPa/min (2–3 mmHg/min) during apnea. At
the end of the period of observation, typically several
minutes, arterial PCO2 should be at least >6.6–8.0 kPa
(50–60 mmHg) for the test to be valid. Apnea is con-
ﬁrmed if no respiratory effort is observed in the pres-
ence of a sufﬁciently elevated PCO2.
The possibility of profound drug-induced or
hypothermic depression of the nervous system should be
excluded, and some period of observation, usually 6–24 h,
is desirable during which the signs of brain death are sus-
tained. It is advisable to delay clinical testing for at least
24 h if a cardiac arrest has caused brain death or if the
inciting disease is not known.An isoelectric EEG may be
used as a conﬁrmatory test for total cerebral damage.
Radionuclide brain scanning, cerebral angiography, or
transcranial Doppler measurements may also be used to
demonstrate the absence of CBF, but they have not
been extensively correlated with pathologic changes.
Although it is largely accepted in Western society that
the respirator can be disconnected from a brain-dead
patient, problems frequently arise because of poor com-
munication and inadequate preparation of the family by
the physician. Reasonable medical practice allows the
removal of support or transfer out of an intensive care
unit of patients who are not brain dead but whose con-
dition is nonetheless hopeless and are likely to live for
only a brief time.
Coma
351
CHAPTER 35
Treatment:
COMA
The immediate goal in a comatose patient is prevention
of further nervous system damage. Hypotension, hypo-
glycemia, hypercalcemia, hypoxia, hypercapnia, and
hyperthermia should be corrected rapidly. An oropha-
ryngeal airway is adequate to keep the pharynx open in
drowsy patients who are breathing normally. Tracheal
intubation is indicated if the patient has apnea, upper
airway obstruction, hypoventilation, or emesis, or if the
patient is liable to aspirate because of coma. Mechanical
ventilation is required if there is hypoventilation or a
need to induce hypocapnia to lower ICP, as described
later. IV access is established, and naloxone and
dextrose are administered if narcotic overdose and
hypoglycemia are even remote possibilities; thiamine is
given along with glucose to avoid provoking Wernicke
disease in malnourished patients. In cases of suspected
basilar thrombosis with brainstem ischemia, IV heparin
or a thrombolytic agent is often used after cerebral
hemorrhage has been excluded by a neuroimaging study.
Physostigmine may awaken patients with anticholin-
ergic-type drug overdoses but should be used only by
experienced physicians and with careful monitoring;
many physicians believe that it should only be used to
treat anticholinergic overdose–associated cardiac arrhyth-
mias.The use of benzodiazepine antagonists offers some
prospect of improvement after overdoses of soporiﬁc
drugs and has transient beneﬁt in patients with hepatic
encephalopathy. IV administration of hypotonic solu-
tions should be monitored carefully in patients with
serious acute brain illness because of the potential for
exacerbating brain swelling. Cervical spine injuries must
not be overlooked, particularly before attempting intu-
bation or evaluating of oculocephalic responses. Fever
and meningismus indicate an urgent need for examina-
tion of the CSF to diagnose meningitis. If the lumbar
puncture in a case of suspected meningitis is delayed
for any reason, an antibiotic such as a third-generation
cephalosporin should be administered as soon as possi-
ble, preferably after obtaining blood cultures. The man-
agement of patients with increased ICP is discussed in
Chapter 36.
vegetative state has already been mentioned. Children and
young adults may have ominous early clinical ﬁndings
such as abnormal brainstem reﬂexes and yet recover, so
temporization in offering a prognosis in this group of
patients is wise. Patients in metabolic comas have a far
better prognosis than those in traumatic ones.All systems
for estimating prognosis in adults should be taken as
approximations, and medical judgments must be tempered
by factors such as age, underlying systemic disease, and gen-
eral medical condition. In an attempt to collect prognostic
information from large numbers of patients with head
injury, the Glasgow Coma Scale was devised; empirically, it
has predictive value in cases of brain trauma. For anoxic
and metabolic coma, clinical signs such as the pupillary
and motor responses after 1 day, 3 days, and 1 week
have been shown to have predictive value (Fig. 36-4).
The absence of the cortical waves of the somatosensory
evoked potentials has also proved a strong indicator of
poor outcome in coma from any cause.
FURTHER READINGS
LAUREYS S et al: Brain function in coma, vegetative state, and related
disorders. Lancet Neurol 3:537, 2004
PARVIZI J AR: Neuroanatomical correlates of brainstem coma. Brain
126:1524, 2003
POSNER JB et al: Plum and Posner’s Diagnosis of Stupor and Coma, 4th ed.
New York and London, Oxford University Press, 2007
ROPPER AH: Neurological and Neurosurgical Intensive Care, 4th ed.
New York, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2004
WIJDICKS EFM: Current concepts: The diagnosis of brain death.
N Engl J Med 344:1215, 2001
Common Critical Illnesses and Syndromes
352
SECTION IV
PROGNOSIS
One hopes to avoid the emotionally painful, hopeless
outcome of a patient who is left severely disabled or veg-
etative. The uniformly poor outcome of the persistent
J. Claude Hemphill, III
I
Wade S. Smith
Life-threatening neurologic illness may be caused by a
primary disorder affecting any region of the neuraxis or
may occur as a consequence of a systemic disorder such
as hepatic failure, multisystem organ failure, or cardiac
arrest (Table 36-1). Neurologic critical care focuses on
preservation of neurologic tissue and prevention of sec-
ondary brain injury caused by ischemia, edema, and ele-
vated intracranial pressure (ICP).
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Brain Edema
Swelling, or edema, of brain tissue occurs with many
types of brain injury. The two principal types of edema
are vasogenic and cytotoxic. Vasogenic edema refers to the
inﬂux of ﬂuid and solutes into the brain through an
incompetent blood–brain barrier (BBB). In the normal
cerebral vasculature, endothelial tight junctions associated
with astrocytes create an impermeable barrier (the BBB),
through which access into the brain interstitium is
dependent on speciﬁc transport mechanisms. The BBB
may be compromised in patients with ischemia, trauma,
infection, and metabolic derangements. Typically, vaso-
genic edema develops rapidly after injury. Cytotoxic edema
NEUROLOGIC CRITICAL CARE, INCLUDING
HYPOXIC-ISCHEMIC ENCEPHALOPATHY
AND SUBARACHNOID HEMORRHAGE
refers to cellular swelling and occurs in a variety of set-
tings, including brain ischemia and trauma. Early astro-
cytic swelling is a hallmark of ischemia. Brain edema that
is clinically signiﬁcant usually represents a combination
of vasogenic and cellular components. Edema can lead to
increased ICP as well as tissue shifts and brain displace-
ment from focal processes (Chap. 35).These tissue shifts
can cause injury by mechanical distraction and compres-
sion in addition to the ischemia of impaired perfusion
consequent to the elevated ICP.
Ischemic Cascade and Cellular Injury
When delivery of substrates, principally oxygen and glu-
cose, is inadequate to sustain cellular function, a series of
interrelated biochemical reactions known as the ischemic
cascade is initiated.The release of excitatory amino acids,
especially glutamate, leads to inﬂux of calcium and sodium
ions, which disrupt cellular homeostasis. An increased
intracellular calcium concentration may activate pro-
teases and lipases, which then lead to lipid peroxidation
and free radical–mediated cell membrane injury. Cyto-
toxic edema ensues, and ultimately necrotic cell death
and tissue infarction occur. This pathway to irreversible
cell death is common to ischemic stroke, global cerebral
CHAPTER 36
CHAPTER 36
353
Pathophysiology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 353
I Critical Care Disorders of the Central Nervous System . . . . . 358
Hypoxic-Ischemic Encephalopathy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 358
Delayed Postanoxic Encephalopathy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 360
Metabolic Encephalopathies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 360
Septic Encephalopathy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 360
Central Pontine Myelinolysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 361
Wernicke’s Disease . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 361
I Critical Care Disorders of the Peripheral Nervous System . . . 362
Neuropathy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 362
Disorders of Neuromuscular Transmission . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 363
Myopathy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 363
I Subarachnoid Hemorrhage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 363
I Further Readings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 368
Common Critical Illnesses and Syndromes
354
SECTION IV
ischemia, and traumatic brain injury (TBI). Penumbra
refers to ischemic brain tissue that has not yet under-
gone irreversible infarction, implying that the region is
potentially salvageable if ischemia can be reversed.
Factors that may exacerbate ischemic brain injury
include systemic hypotension and hypoxia, which fur-
ther reduce substrate delivery to vulnerable brain tissue,
and fever, seizures, and hyperglycemia, which can
increase cellular metabolism outstripping compensatory
processes. Clinically, these events are known as secondary
brain insults because they lead to exacerbation of the pri-
mary brain injury. Prevention, identiﬁcation, and treat-
ment of secondary brain insults are fundamental goals of
management.
An alternative pathway of cellular injury is apoptosis.
This process implies programmed cell death, which may
occur in the setting of ischemic stroke, global cerebral
ischemia, TBI, and possibly intracerebral hemorrhage.
Apoptotic cell death can be distinguished histologically
from the necrotic cell death of ischemia and is mediated
through a different set of biochemical pathways. At
present, interventions for prevention and treatment of
apoptotic cell death remain less well deﬁned than those
for ischemia.
Cerebral Perfusion and Autoregulation
Brain tissue requires constant perfusion to ensure ade-
quate delivery of substrate. The hemodynamic response
of the brain has the capacity to preserve perfusion across
a wide range of systemic blood pressures. Cerebral per-
fusion pressure (CPP), deﬁned as the mean systemic
arterial pressure (MAP) minus the ICP, provides the dri-
ving force for circulation across the capillary beds of the
brain. Autoregulation refers to the physiologic response
whereby cerebral blood ﬂow (CBF) remains relatively
constant over a wide range of blood pressures as a con-
sequence of alterations of cerebrovascular resistance
(Fig. 36-1). If systemic blood pressure decreases, cere-
bral perfusion is preserved through vasodilatation of
arterioles in the brain; likewise, arteriolar vasoconstric-
tion occurs at high systemic pressures to prevent hyper-
perfusion. At the extreme limits of MAP or CPP (high
or low), ﬂow becomes directly related to perfusion
pressure. These autoregulatory changes occur in the
microcirculation and are mediated by vessels below the
resolution of those seen on angiography. CBF is also
strongly inﬂuenced by pH and PCO2. CBF increases
with hypercapnia and acidosis and decreases with
hypocapnia and alkalosis.This forms the basis for the use
of hyperventilation to lower ICP, and this effect on ICP
is mediated through a decrease in intracranial blood vol-
ume. Cerebral autoregulation is critical to the normal
homeostatic functioning of the brain, and this process
may be disordered focally and unpredictably in disease
states such as TBI and severe focal cerebral ischemia.
TABLE 36-1
NEUROLOGIC DISORDERS IN CRITICAL ILLNESS
LOCALIZATION 
ALONG
NEUROAXIS
SYNDROME
Central Nervous System
Brain: cerebral
Global encephalopathy
hemispheres
Sepsis
Organ failure: hepatic, renal
Medication related
Sedatives, hypnotics, analgesics
H2 blockers, antihypertensives
Drug overdose
Electrolyte disturbance:
hyponatremia, hypoglycemia
Hypotension or hypoperfusion
Hypoxia
Meningitis
Subarachnoid hemorrhage
Wernicke’s disease
Seizure: postictal or
nonconvulsive status
Hypertensive encephalopathy
Hypothyroidism: myxedema
Focal deﬁcits
Ischemic stroke
Tumor
Abscess, subdural empyema
Subdural or epidural hematoma
Brainstem
Mass effect and compression
Ischemic stroke, intraparenchymal
hemorrhage
Hypoxia
Spinal cord
Mass effect and compression
Disc herniation
Epidural hematoma
Ischemia: hypotension or embolic
Subdural empyema
Trauma, central cord syndrome
Peripheral Nervous System
Peripheral nerve
Axonal
Critical illness polyneuropathy
Possible neuromuscular blocking
agent complication
Metabolic disturbances, uremia,
hyperglycemia
Medication effects: chemotherapeutic, 
antiretroviral
Demyelinating
Guillain-Barré syndrome
Chronic inﬂammatory demyelinating
polyneuropathy
Neuromuscular
Prolonged effect of 
junction
neuromuscular blockade
Medication effects: aminoglycosides
Myasthenia-gravis, Lambert-Eaton
syndrome
Muscle
Critical illness myopathy
Septic myopathy
Cachectic myopathy with or without
disuse atrophy
Electrolyte disturbances: hypokalemia
or hyperkalemia, hypophosphatemia
Acute quadriplegic myopathy
Cerebrospinal Fluid and Intracranial Pressure
The cranial contents consist essentially of brain, cere-
brospinal ﬂuid (CSF), and blood. CSF is produced prin-
cipally in the choroid plexus of each lateral ventricle,
exits the brain via the foramina of Luschka and
Magendi, and ﬂows over the cortex to be absorbed into
the venous system along the superior sagittal sinus.
Approximately 150 mL of CSF is contained within the
ventricles and surrounding the brain and spinal cord; the
cerebral blood volume is also ∼150 mL.The bony skull
offers excellent protection for the brain but allows little
tolerance for additional volume. Signiﬁcant increases in
volume eventually result in increased ICP. Obstruction
of CSF outﬂow, edema of cerebral tissue, or increases in
volume from tumor or hematoma may increase ICP.
Elevated ICP diminishes cerebral perfusion and can lead
to tissue ischemia. Ischemia in turn may lead to vasodi-
latation via autoregulatory mechanisms designed to restore
cerebral perfusion. However, vasodilatation also increases
cerebral blood volume, which in turn then increases
ICP, lowers CPP, and provokes further ischemia
(Fig. 36-2). This vicious cycle is commonly seen in
TBI, massive intracerebral hemorrhage, and large hemi-
spheric infarcts with signiﬁcant tissue shifts.
to limit primary and secondary brain injury.The ini-
tial neurologic evaluation should be performed con-
current with stabilization of basic respiratory, cardiac,
and hemodynamic parameters. Signiﬁcant barriers
may exist to neurologic assessment in the critical
care unit, including endotracheal intubation and
the use of sedative or paralytic agents to facilitate
procedures.
An impaired level of consciousness is common in
critically ill patients. The essential ﬁrst task in assess-
ment is to determine whether the cause of dysfunc-
tion is related to a diffuse, usually metabolic, process
or whether a focal, usually structural, process is impli-
cated. Examples of diffuse processes include metabolic
encephalopathies related to organ failure, drug over-
dose, or hypoxia-ischemia. Focal processes include
ischemic and hemorrhagic stroke and TBI, especially
with intracranial hematomas. Because these two cate-
gories of disorders have fundamentally different
causes, treatments, and prognoses, the initial focus is
on making this distinction rapidly and accurately.
The approach to comatose patients is discussed in
Chap. 35; etiologies are listed in Table 35-1.
Minor focal deficits may be present on the neu-
rologic examination in patients with metabolic
encephalopathies. However, the ﬁnding of prominent
focal signs such as pupillary asymmetry, hemiparesis,
gaze palsy, or paraplegia should suggest the possibility
of a structural lesion. All patients with a decreased
level of consciousness associated with focal ﬁndings
should undergo an urgent neuroimaging procedure,
Neurologic Critical Care
355
CHAPTER 36
BP, mmHg
CBF, mL/100g per min
25
25
75
125
PaO2
PaCO2
75
125
175
FIGURE 36-1
Autoregulation of cerebral blood ﬂow (solid line). Cerebral
perfusion is constant over a wide range of systemic blood
pressure. Perfusion is increased in the setting of hypoxia or
hypercarbia. BP, blood pressure; CBF, cerebral blood ﬂow;
PaCO2, arterial partial pressure of carbon dioxide. (Reprinted
with permission from Anesthesiology 43:447, 1975. vbvbv
1975, Lippincott Company.)
Spontaneous
Dehydration
Pharmacologic
Mechanical
↓Metabolism
↓SABP
Hypercapnia
Pharmacologic
↑CMR-O2/Metabolism
↑Vasodilatation
↑Viscosity
↓O2 delivery
↑Edema
↑ICP
↓CPP
↑CBV
↑CSF
FIGURE 36-2
Ischemia and vasodilatation. Reduced cerebral perfusion
pressure (CPP) leads to increased ischemia, vasodilatation,
increased intracranial pressure (ICP), and further reductions in
CPP, a cycle leading to further neurologic injury. CBV, cerebral
blood volume; CMR, cerebral metabolic rate; CSF, cere-
brospinal ﬂuid; SABP, systolic arterial blood pressure.
(Adapted from Rosner MJ et al: Cerebral perfusion pressure:
Management protocol and clinical results. J Neurosurg 83:949,
1995, with permission.)
Approach to the Patient:
SEVERE CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM DYSFUNCTION
Critically ill patients with severe central nervous system
dysfunction require rapid evaluation and intervention
as should all patients with coma of unknown etiology.
CT scanning is usually the most appropriate initial
study because it can be performed quickly in critically
ill patients and demonstrates hemorrhage, hydro-
cephalus, and intracranial tissue shifts well. MRI may
provide more speciﬁc information in some situations,
such as acute ischemic stroke [diffusion-weighted
imaging (DWI)] and cerebral venous sinus thrombosis
[magnetic resonance venography (MRV)]. Any sug-
gestion of trauma from the history or examination
should alert the examiner to the possibility of cervical
spine injury and prompt an imaging evaluation using
plain x-rays, MRI, or CT.
Other diagnostic studies are best used in speciﬁc cir-
cumstances, usually when neuroimaging studies fail to
reveal a structural lesion and the cause of the altered
mental state remains uncertain. Electroencephalogra-
phy (EEG) can be important in the evaluation of criti-
cally ill patients with severe brain dysfunction. The
EEG of metabolic encephalopathy typically reveals
generalized slowing. One of the most important uses
of EEG is to help exclude inapparent seizures, espe-
cially nonconvulsive status epilepticus. Untreated con-
tinuous or frequently recurrent seizures may cause
neuronal injury, making the diagnosis and treatment of
seizures crucial in this patient group. Lumbar puncture
(LP) may be necessary to exclude infectious processes,
and an elevated opening pressure may be an important
clue to cerebral venous sinus thrombosis. In patients
with coma or profound encephalopathy, it is preferable
to perform a neuroimaging study before LP. If bacterial
meningitis is suspected, an LP may be performed ﬁrst
or antibiotics may be empirically administered before
the diagnostic studies are completed. Standard labora-
tory evaluation of critically ill patients should include
assessment of serum electrolytes (especially sodium and
calcium), glucose, renal and hepatic function, complete
blood count, and coagulation. Serum or urine toxicol-
ogy screens should be performed in patients with
encephalopathy of unknown cause. EEG, LP, and other
speciﬁc laboratory tests are most useful when the
mechanism of the altered level of consciousness is
uncertain; they are not routinely performed in clear-
cut cases of stroke or TBI.
Monitoring of ICP can be an important tool in
selected patients. In general, patients who should be
considered for ICP monitoring are those with pri-
mary neurologic disorders, such as stroke or TBI, who
are at signiﬁcant risk for secondary brain injury
because of elevated ICP and decreased CPP. Included
are patients with severe TBI [Glasgow Coma Scale
(GCS) score ≤8; Table 36-2]; large tissue shifts from
supratentorial ischemic or hemorrhagic stroke; or
hydrocephalus from subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH),
intraventricular hemorrhage, or posterior fossa stroke.
An additional disorder in which ICP monitoring
can add important information is fulminant hepatic
failure, in which elevated ICP may be treated with
barbiturates or, eventually, liver transplantation. In gen-
eral, ventriculostomy is preferable to ICP monitoring
devices that are placed in the brain parenchyma
because ventriculostomy allows CSF drainage as a
method of treating elevated ICP. However, parenchy-
mal ICP monitoring is most appropriate for patients
with diffuse edema and small ventricles (which may
make ventriculostomy placement more difﬁcult) or
any degree of coagulopathy (in which ventricu-
lostomy carries a higher risk of hemorrhagic compli-
cations) (Fig 36-3).
TREATMENT OF ELEVATED INTRACRANIAL
PRESSURE Elevated ICP may occur in a wide
range of disorders, including head trauma, intracerebral
hemorrhage, SAH with hydrocephalus, and fulminant
hepatic failure. Because CSF and blood volume can be
redistributed initially, by the time elevated ICP occurs,
intracranial compliance is severely impaired. At this
point, any small increase in the volume of CSF, intravas-
cular blood, edema, or a mass lesion may result in a
signiﬁcant increase in ICP and a decrease in cerebral
perfusion. This is a fundamental mechanism of sec-
ondary ischemic brain injury and constitutes an emer-
gency that requires immediate attention. In general,
Common Critical Illnesses and Syndromes
356
SECTION IV
TABLE 36-2
GLASGOW COMA SCALE FOR HEAD INJURY
Eye Opening (E)
Verbal Response (V)
Spontaneous
4
Oriented
5
To loud voice
3
Confused,
4
To pain
2
disoriented
Nil
1
Inappropriate 
3
Best motor 
words
response (M)
Incomprehensible
2
Obeys
6
sounds
Localizes
5
Nil
1
Withdraws
4
(ﬂexion)
Abnormal ﬂexion
3
posturing
Extension
2
posturing
Nil
1
Note: Coma score = E + M + V. Patients scoring 3 or 4 have an 85%
chance of dying or remaining vegetative; scores >11 indicate only a
5–10% likelihood of death or vegetative state and 85% chance of
moderate disability or good recovery. Intermediate scores correlate
with proportional chances of recovery.
Source: From Ropper AH: Concussion and other head injuries in
Fauci AS, Braunwald E, Kasper L, et al (eds). Harrison’s Principles of
Internal Medicine, 17th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2008, p. 2601.
ICP should be maintained at <20 mmHg, and CPP
should be maintained at ≥60 mmHg.
Interventions to lower ICP are ideally based on the
underlying mechanism responsible for the elevated
ICP (Table 36-3). For example, in hydrocephalus
from SAH, the principal cause of elevated ICP is
impairment of CSF drainage. In this setting, ventricu-
lar drainage of CSF is likely to be sufﬁcient and most
appropriate. In head trauma and stroke, cytotoxic
edema may be most responsible, and the use of
osmotic diuretics such as mannitol becomes an appro-
priate early step.As described above, elevated ICP may
cause tissue ischemia, and, if cerebral autoregulation is
intact, the resulting vasodilatation can lead to a cycle
of worsening ischemia. Paradoxically, administration of
vasopressor agents to increase mean arterial pressure
(MAP) may actually lower ICP by improving perfu-
sion, thereby allowing autoregulatory vasoconstriction
as ischemia is relieved and ultimately decreasing
intracranial blood volume.
Early signs of elevated ICP include drowsiness and a
diminished level of consciousness. Neuroimaging stud-
ies may reveal evidence of edema and mass effect.
Hypotonic IV ﬂuids should be avoided, and elevation
of the head of the bed is recommended. Patients must
be carefully observed for risk of aspiration and com-
promise of the airway as the level of alertness declines.
Coma and unilateral pupillary changes are late signs
and require immediate intervention. Emergent treat-
ment of patients with elevated ICP is most quickly
achieved by intubation and hyperventilation, which
causes vasoconstriction and reduces cerebral blood
volume. To avoid provoking or worsening cerebral
ischemia, hyperventilation is best used for short periods
of time until a more deﬁnitive treatment can be insti-
tuted. Furthermore, the effects of hyperventilation on
ICP are short lived, often lasting only for several hours
because of the buffering capacity of the cerebral inter-
stitium, and rebound elevations of ICP may accom-
pany abrupt discontinuation of hyperventilation.As the
level of consciousness declines to coma, the ability to
follow the neurologic status of the patient by examina-
tion deteriorates, and measurement of ICP assumes
greater importance. If a ventriculostomy device is in
place, direct drainage of CSF to reduce ICP is possible.
Finally, high-dose barbiturates, decompressive hemi-
craniectomy, or hypothermia is sometimes used for
refractory elevations of ICP,although these interventions
Neurologic Critical Care
357
CHAPTER 36
Ventriculostomy
Fiberoptic
intraparenchymal
ICP monitor
Brain tissue
oxygen probe
Lateral ventricle
FIGURE 36-3
Intracranial pressure (ICP) and brain tissue oxygen
monitoring. A ventriculostomy allows for drainage of cere-
brospinal ﬂuid to treat elevated ICP. Fiberoptic ICP and brain
tissue oxygen monitors are usually secured using a screwlike
skull bolt. Cerebral blood ﬂow and microdialysis probes (not
shown) may be placed in a manner similar to the brain tissue
oxygen probe.
TABLE 36-3
STEPWISE APPROACH TO TREATMENT
OF ELEVATED INTRACRANIAL PRESSUREa
Insert ICP monitor (ventriculostomy versus parenchymal
device)
General goals: maintain ICP <20 mmHg and 
CPP ≥60 mmHg
For ICP >20–25 mmHg for >5 min:
1. Drain CSF via ventriculostomy (if in place)
2. Elevate head of the bed; midline head position
3. Osmotherapy: mannitol 25–100 g q4h as needed
(maintain serum osmolality <320 mosmol) or
hypertonic saline (30 mL, 23.4% NaCl bolus)
4. Glucocorticoids: dexamethasone 4 mg q6h for
vasogenic edema from tumor, abscess (avoid
glucocorticoids in head trauma, ischemic and
hemorrhagic stroke)
5. Sedation: morphine, propofol, or midazolam; add
neuromuscular paralysis if necessary (patient will
require endotracheal intubation and mechanical
ventilation at this point, if not before)
6. Hyperventilation: to PaCO2 30–35 mmHg
7. Pressor therapy: phenylephrine, dopamine, or
norepinephrine to maintain adequate MAP to ensure
CPP ≥60 mmHg (maintain euvolemia to minimize
deleterious systemic effects of pressors)
8. Consider second-tier therapies for refractory
elevated ICP
a. High-dose barbiturate therapy (“pentobarb coma”)
b. Aggressive hyperventilation to PaCO2 <30 mmHg
c. Hypothermia
d. Hemicraniectomy
aThroughout the intracranial pressure (ICP) treatment algorithm, con-
sider repeat head CT to identify mass lesions amenable to surgical
evacuation.
Note: CPP, cerebral perfusion pressure; CSF, cerebrospinal ﬂuid;
MAP, mean arterial pressure; PaCO2, arterial partial pressure of car-
bon dioxide.
have signiﬁcant side effects and have not been proven
to improve outcome.
SECONDARY BRAIN INSULTS Patients with
primary brain injuries, whether caused by trauma or
stroke, are at risk for ongoing secondary ischemic brain
injury. Because secondary brain injury can be a major
determinant of a poor outcome, strategies for minimiz-
ing secondary brain insults are an integral part of the
critical care of all patients. Although elevated ICP may
lead to secondary ischemia, most secondary brain injury
is mediated through other clinical events that exacer-
bate the ischemic cascade already initiated by the pri-
mary brain injury. Episodes of secondary brain insults
are usually not associated with apparent neurologic
worsening. Rather, they lead to cumulative injury,
which manifests as higher mortality or worsened long-
term functional outcome. Thus, close monitoring of
vital signs is important, as is early intervention to pre-
vent secondary ischemia. Avoiding hypotension and
hypoxia is critical because signiﬁcant hypotensive events
(systolic blood pressure <90 mmHg) as short as 10 min
in duration have been shown to adversely inﬂuence
outcome after TBI. Even in patients with stroke or head
trauma who do not require ICP monitoring, close
attention to adequate cerebral perfusion is warranted.
Hypoxia (pulse oximetry saturation <90%), particularly
in combination with hypotension, also leads to sec-
ondary brain injury. Likewise, fever and hyperglycemia
both worsen experimental ischemia and have been
associated with a worsened clinical outcome after stroke
and head trauma.Aggressive control of fever with a goal
of normothermia is warranted but may be difﬁcult to
achieve with antipyretic medications and cooling
blankets. The value of newer surface or intravascular
temperature control devices for the management of
refractory fever is under investigation. The use of IV
insulin infusion is encouraged for control of hyper-
glycemia because this allows better regulation of
serum glucose levels than subcutaneous insulin. A rea-
sonable goal is to maintain the serum glucose level
at <7.8 mmol/L (<140 mg/dL), although some have
suggested that even tighter control is warranted. New
cerebral monitoring tools that allow continuous eval-
uation of brain tissue oxygen tension, CBF, and
metabolism (via microdialysis) may further improve
the management of secondary brain injury.
include myocardial infarction, cardiac arrest, shock,
asphyxiation, paralysis of respiration, and carbon monox-
ide or cyanide poisoning. In some circumstances, hypoxia
may predominate. Carbon monoxide and cyanide poi-
soning are termed histotoxic hypoxia because they cause a
direct impairment of the respiratory chain.
Clinical Manifestations
Mild degrees of pure hypoxia, such as occur at high alti-
tudes, cause impaired judgment, inattentiveness, motor
incoordination, and sometimes euphoria. However, with
hypoxia-ischemia, such as occurs with circulatory arrest,
consciousness is lost within seconds. If circulation is
restored within 3–5 min, full recovery may occur, but if
hypoxia-ischemia lasts beyond 3–5 min, some degree of
permanent cerebral damage is the rule. Except in
extreme cases, it may be difﬁcult to judge the precise
degree of hypoxia-ischemia, and some patients make a
relatively full recovery after even 8–10 min of global
cerebral ischemia.The distinction between pure hypoxia
and hypoxia-ischemia is important because a PaO2 as
low as 20 mmHg (2.7 kPa) can be well tolerated if it
develops gradually and normal blood pressure is main-
tained, but short durations of very low or absent cerebral
circulation may result in permanent impairment.
Clinical examination at different time points after a
hypoxic-ischemic insult (especially cardiac arrest) is use-
ful in assessing prognosis for long-term neurologic out-
come. The prognosis is better for patients with intact
brainstem function, as indicated by normal pupillary
light responses and intact oculocephalic (“doll’s eyes”),
oculovestibular (caloric), and corneal reﬂexes (Fig. 36-4).
Absence of these reﬂexes and the presence of persistently
dilated pupils that do not react to light are grave prog-
nostic signs.A uniformly dismal prognosis from hypoxic-
ischemic coma is conveyed by an absent pupillary light
reﬂex or extensor or absent motor response to pain on
day 3 after the injury. Electrophysiologically, the bilateral
absence of the N20 component of the somatosensory
evoked potentials (SSEPs) in the ﬁrst several days also
conveys a poor prognosis. A very elevated serum level
(>33 μg/L) of the biochemical marker neuron-speciﬁc
enolase (NSE) is indicative of brain damage after resusci-
tation from cardiac arrest and predicts a poor outcome.
However, at present, SSEPs and NSE levels may be difﬁ-
cult to obtain in a timely fashion, with SSEP testing
requiring substantial expertise in interpretation and
NSE measurements not yet standardized. Whether
administration of mild hypothermia after cardiac arrest
(see Treatment) will alter the usefulness of these clinical
and electrophysiologic predictors is unknown. Long-
term consequences of hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy
include persistent coma or a vegetative state (Chap. 35),
dementia, visual agnosia, parkinsonism, choreoathetosis,
cerebellar ataxia, myoclonus, seizures, and an amnestic
Common Critical Illnesses and Syndromes
358
SECTION IV
CRITICAL CARE DISORDERS OF
THE CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM
HYPOXIC-ISCHEMIC ENCEPHALOPATHY
This occurs from lack of delivery of oxygen to the brain
because of hypotension or respiratory failure. Causes
state, which may be a consequence of selective damage
to the hippocampus.
Pathology
Principal histologic ﬁndings are extensive multifocal or
diffuse laminar cortical necrosis (Fig. 36-5), with almost
invariable involvement of the hippocampus. The hip-
pocampal CA1 neurons are vulnerable to even brief
episodes of hypoxia-ischemia, perhaps explaining why
selective persistent memory deﬁcits may occur after
brief cardiac arrest. Scattered small areas of infarction or
neuronal loss may be present in the basal ganglia, hypo-
thalamus, or brainstem. In some cases, extensive bilateral
thalamic scarring may affect the pathways that mediate
arousal, and this pathology may be responsible for the
persistent vegetative state. A speciﬁc form of hypoxic-
ischemic encephalopathy—so-called watershed infarcts—
occurs at the distal territories between the major cerebral
arteries and can cause cognitive deﬁcits, including visual
agnosia, and weakness that is greater in proximal than in
distal muscle groups.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is based on the history of a hypoxic-ischemic
event such as cardiac arrest. Blood pressure <70 mmHg
systolic or PaO2 <40 mmHg is usually necessary, although
both absolute levels as well as the duration of exposure
are important determinants of cellular injury. Carbon
monoxide intoxication can be conﬁrmed by measure-
ment of carboxyhemoglobin and is suggested by a cherry
red color of the skin, although the latter is an inconsis-
tent clinical ﬁnding.
Neurologic Critical Care
359
CHAPTER 36
Coma
Brain death
testing
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Day 1–3
Serum NSE > 33 μg/L∗
Day 3
Absent pupil or corneal
reflexes; extensor or absent
motor response
Indeterminate outcome
FPR
0%
(0–8.8)
FPR
0.7%
(0–3.7)
FPR
0%
(0–3)
FPR
0%
(0–3)
Poor
outcome
Poor
outcome
Poor
outcome
Poor
outcome
or
or
or
or
no
Day 1–3
SSEP
absent N20 responses∗
Day 1
Myoclonus, status epilepticus
No brainstem reflexes at
 any time (pupil, cornea, 
oculocephalic, cough)
Exclude major confounders
PROGNOSTICATION ALGORITHM OF OUTCOME
FIGURE 36-4
Prognostication of outcome in comatose survivors of car-
diopulmonary resuscitation. Numbers in parentheses are 95%
conﬁdence intervals. Confounders could include use of seda-
tives or neuromuscular blocking agents, hypothermia therapy,
organ failure, or shock. Tests denoted with an ∗may not be avail-
able in a timely and standardized manner. FPR, false-positive
rate; NSE, neuron-speciﬁc enolase; SSEP, somatosensory
evoked potentials. (From Wijdicks et al, with permission.)
FIGURE 36-5
Cortical laminar necrosis in hypoxic-ischemic encephalopa-
thy. T1-weighted postcontrast MRI shows cortical enhancement
in a watershed distribution consistent with laminar necrosis.
Treatment:
HYPOXIC-ISCHEMIC ENCEPHALOPATHY
Treatment should be directed at restoration of normal
cardiorespiratory function.This includes securing a clear
airway, ensuring adequate oxygenation and ventilation,
and restoring cerebral perfusion, whether by cardiopul-
monary resuscitation, ﬂuid, pressors, or cardiac pacing.
Hypothermia may target the neuronal cell injury cas-
cade and has substantial neuroprotective properties in
experimental models of brain injury. In two trials, mild
hypothermia (33°C) improved functional outcome in
patients who remained comatose after resuscitation
from a cardiac arrest. Treatment was initiated within
minutes of cardiac resuscitation and continued for 12 h
in one study and 24 h in the other. Potential complica-
tions of hypothermia include coagulopathy and an
increased risk of infection. Based on these studies, the
International Liaison Committee on Resuscitation issued
the following advisory statement in 2003:“Unconscious
adult patients with spontaneous circulation after out-of-
hospital cardiac arrest should be cooled to 32°–34°C
for 12–24 h when the initial rhythm was ventricular
ﬁbrillation.”
Severe carbon monoxide intoxication may be treated
with hyperbaric oxygen.Anticonvulsants may be needed
to control seizures, although they are not usually given
prophylactically. Patients with posthypoxic myoclonus
may respond to oral administration of clonazepam at
doses of 1.5–10 mg daily or valproate at doses of
300–1200 mg/day in divided doses. Myoclonic status
epilepticus within 24 h after a primary circulatory arrest
portends a universally poor prognosis, even if seizures
are controlled.
can be useful. Ultimately, the psychosis resolves with
improvement in the underlying illness and a return to
familiar surroundings.
In the ICU setting, several metabolic causes of an
altered level of consciousness predominate. Hypercarbic
encephalopathy can present with headache, confusion,
stupor, or coma. Hypoventilation syndrome occurs most
frequently in patients with a history of chronic CO2
retention who are receiving oxygen therapy for emphy-
sema or chronic pulmonary disease (Chap. 22).The ele-
vated PaCO2 leading to CO2 narcosis may have a direct
anesthetic effect, and cerebral vasodilatation from
increased PaCO2 can lead to increased ICP. Hepatic
encephalopathy is suggested by asterixis and may occur
in patients with chronic liver failure or acute fulminant
hepatic failure. Both hyperglycemia and hypoglycemia
can cause encephalopathy, as can hypernatremia and
hyponatremia. Confusion, impairment of eye move-
ments, and gait ataxia are the hallmarks of acute Wernicke’s
disease (see later).
SEPTIC ENCEPHALOPATHY
Pathogenesis
In patients with sepsis, the systemic response to infectious
agents leads to the release of circulating inﬂammatory
mediators that appear to contribute to encephalopathy.
Critical illness, in association with the systemic inﬂamma-
tory response syndrome (SIRS), can lead to multisystem
organ failure. This syndrome can occur in the setting of
apparent sepsis, severe burns, or trauma, even without
clear identiﬁcation of an infectious agent. Many patients
with critical illness, sepsis, or SIRS develop encephalopa-
thy without obvious explanation. This condition is
broadly termed septic encephalopathy.Although the speciﬁc
mediators leading to neurologic dysfunction remain
uncertain, it is clear that the encephalopathy is not simply
the result of metabolic derangements of multiorgan fail-
ure.The cytokines tumor necrosis factor and interleukin
(IL) 1, IL-2, and IL-6 are thought to play a role in this
syndrome.
Diagnosis
Septic encephalopathy presents clinically as a diffuse dys-
function of the brain without prominent focal ﬁndings.
Confusion, disorientation, agitation, and ﬂuctuations in the
level of alertness are typical. In more profound cases, espe-
cially with hemodynamic compromise, the decrease in
level of alertness can be more prominent, at times resulting
in coma. Hyperreﬂexia and frontal release signs such as a
grasp or snout reﬂex can be seen. Abnormal movements
such as myoclonus, tremor, or asterixis can occur. Septic
encephalopathy is quite common,occurring in the majority
of patients with sepsis and multisystem organ failure. Diag-
nosis is often difﬁcult because of the multiple potential
Common Critical Illnesses and Syndromes
360
SECTION IV
DELAYED POSTANOXIC ENCEPHALOPATHY
Delayed postanoxic encephalopathy is an uncommon
phenomenon in which patients appear to make an ini-
tial recovery from hypoxic-ischemic insult but then
develop a relapse characterized by apathy, confusion, and
agitation. Progressive neurologic deﬁcits may include a
shufﬂing gait; diffuse rigidity and spasticity; persistent
parkinsonism or myoclonus; and, on occasion, coma and
death after 1–2 weeks. Widespread cerebral demyelina-
tion may be present.
Carbon monoxide and cyanide intoxication can also
cause a delayed encephalopathy.Little clinical impairment is
evident when the patient ﬁrst regains consciousness, but a
parkinsonian syndrome characterized by akinesia and rigid-
ity without tremor may develop. Symptoms can worsen
over months, accompanied by increasing evidence of dam-
age in the basal ganglia as seen on both CT and MRI.
METABOLIC ENCEPHALOPATHIES
Altered mental states, variously described as confusion,
delirium, disorientation, and encephalopathy, are present
in many patients with severe illness in an intensive care
unit (ICU). Older patients are particularly vulnerable to
delirium, a confusional state characterized by disordered
perception, frequent hallucinations, delusions, and sleep
disturbance. This is often attributed to medication
effects, sleep deprivation, pain, and anxiety. The term
ICU psychosis has been used to describe a mental state
with profound agitation occurring in this setting. The
presence of family members in the ICU may help to
calm and orient agitated patients, and in severe cases,
low doses of neuroleptics (e.g., haloperidol 0.5–1.0 mg)
causes of neurologic dysfunction in critically ill patients
and requires exclusion of structural, metabolic, toxic, and
infectious (e.g., meningitis or encephalitis) causes. The
mortality of patients with septic encephalopathy severe
enough to produce coma approaches 50%, although
this principally reﬂects the severity of the underlying
critical illness and is not a singular result of the septic
encephalopathy. Patients dying from severe sepsis or septic
shock may have elevated levels of the serum brain injury
biomarker S-100β and neuropathologic ﬁndings of neu-
ronal apoptosis and cerebral ischemic injury.However,suc-
cessful treatment of the underlying critical illness almost
always results in complete resolution of the encephalopa-
thy, with profound long-term cognitive disability being
uncommon.
CENTRAL PONTINE MYELINOLYSIS
This disorder typically presents in a devastating fashion
as quadriplegia and pseudobulbar palsy. Predisposing fac-
tors include severe underlying medical illness or nutri-
tional deﬁciency; most cases are associated with rapid
correction of hyponatremia or with hyperosmolar states.
The pathology consists of demyelination without
inﬂammation in the base of the pons, with relative sparing
of axons and nerve cells. MRI is useful in establishing
the diagnosis (Fig. 36-6) and may also identify partial
forms that present as confusion, dysarthria, or disturbances
of conjugate gaze without quadriplegia. Occasional
patients present with lesions outside of the brainstem.
Therapeutic guidelines for the restoration of severe
hyponatremia should aim for gradual correction—i.e.,
by ≥10 mmol/L (10 meq/L) within 24 h and 20 mmol/L
(20 meq/L) within 48 h.
WERNICKE’S DISEASE
Wernicke’s disease is a common and preventable disor-
der caused by a deﬁciency of thiamine. In the United
States, alcoholics account for most cases, but patients
with malnutrition caused by a hyperemesis, starvation,
renal dialysis, cancer,AIDS, or (rarely) gastric surgery are
also at risk. The characteristic clinical triad is ophthal-
moplegia, ataxia, and global confusion. However, only
one-third of patients with acute Wernicke’s disease pre-
sent with the classic clinical triad. Most patients are
profoundly disoriented, indifferent, and inattentive,
although rarely they have an agitated delirium related to
ethanol withdrawal. If the disease is not treated, stupor,
coma, and death may ensue. Ocular motor abnormalities
include horizontal nystagmus on lateral gaze, lateral rec-
tus palsy (usually bilateral), conjugate gaze palsies, and
(rarely) ptosis. Gait ataxia probably results from a combi-
nation of polyneuropathy, cerebellar involvement, and
vestibular paresis.The pupils are usually spared, but they
may become miotic with advanced disease.
Wernicke’s disease is usually associated with other
manifestations of nutritional disease, such as polyneu-
ropathy. Rarely, amblyopia or myelopathy occurs.Tachy-
cardia and postural hypotension may be related to
impaired function of the autonomic nervous system or
to the coexistence of cardiovascular beriberi. Patients
who recover show improvement in ocular palsies within
hours after the administration of thiamine, but horizon-
tal nystagmus may persist. Ataxia improves more slowly
than the ocular motor abnormalities. Approximately
50% of patients recover incompletely and are left with a
slow, shufﬂing, wide-based gait and an inability to tan-
dem walk. Apathy, drowsiness, and confusion improve
more gradually. As these symptoms recede, an amnestic
state with impairment in recent memory and learning
may become more apparent (Korsakoff’s psychosis).
Korsakoff’s psychosis is frequently persistent; the residual
mental state is characterized by gaps in memory, confab-
ulation, and disordered temporal sequencing.
Pathology
Periventricular lesions surround the third ventricle, aque-
duct, and fourth ventricle, with petechial hemorrhages in
occasional acute cases and atrophy of the mamillary bod-
ies in most chronic cases.There is frequently endothelial
proliferation,demyelination,and some neuronal loss.These
changes may be detected by MRI scanning (Fig. 36-7).
Neurologic Critical Care
361
CHAPTER 36
FIGURE 36-6
Central pontine myelinolysis. Axial T2-weighted MR scan
through the pons reveals a symmetric area of abnormal high
signal intensity within the basis pontis (arrows).
The amnestic defect is related to lesions in the dorsal
medial nuclei of the thalamus.
Pathogenesis
Thiamine is a cofactor of several enzymes, including
transketolase, pyruvate dehydrogenase, and α-ketoglutarate
dehydrogenase.Thiamine deficiency produces a diffuse
decrease in cerebral glucose utilization and results in
mitochondrial damage. Glutamate accumulates owing
to impairment of α-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase activity
and, in combination with the energy deficiency, may
result in excitotoxic cell damage.
such as intubation and mechanical ventilation, and (2)
secondary PNS manifestations of systemic critical illness,
often involving multisystem organ failure. The former
include acute polyneuropathies such as Guillain-Barré
syndrome; neuromuscular junction disorders, including
myasthenia gravis and botulism; and primary muscle
disorders such as polymyositis. The latter results either
from the systemic disease itself or as a consequence of
interventions.
General principles of respiratory evaluation in patients
with PNS involvement, regardless of cause, include
assessment of pulmonary mechanics, such as maximal
inspiratory force (MIF) and vital capacity (VC), and eval-
uation of strength of bulbar muscles. Regardless of the
cause of weakness, endotracheal intubation should be
considered when the MIF decreases to <–25 cmH2O or
the VC is <1 L.Also, patients with severe palatal weakness
may require endotracheal intubation to prevent acute
upper airway obstruction or recurrent aspiration.Arterial
blood gases and oxygen saturation from pulse oximetry
are used to follow patients with potential respiratory
compromise from PNS dysfunction. However, intubation
and mechanical ventilation should be undertaken based
on clinical assessment rather than waiting until oxygen
saturation decreases or CO2 retention develops from
hypoventilation. Noninvasive mechanical ventilation may
be considered initially in lieu of endotracheal intubation
but is generally insufﬁcient in patients with severe bulbar
weakness or ventilatory failure with hypercarbia. Princi-
ples of mechanical ventilation are discussed in Chap. 27.
NEUROPATHY
Although encephalopathy may be the most obvious neu-
rologic dysfunction in critically ill patients, dysfunction of
the PNS is also quite common. It is typically present in
patients with prolonged critical illnesses lasting several
weeks and involving sepsis; clinical suspicion is aroused
when there is failure to wean from mechanical ventilation
despite improvement of the underlying sepsis and critical
illness. Critical illness polyneuropathy refers to the most
common PNS complication related to critical illness; it is
seen in the setting of prolonged critical illness, sepsis, and
multisystem organ failure. Neurologic ﬁndings include
diffuse weakness, decreased reﬂexes, and distal sensory
loss. Electrophysiologic studies demonstrate a diffuse,
symmetric, distal axonal sensorimotor neuropathy, and
pathologic studies have conﬁrmed axonal degeneration.
The precise mechanism of critical illness polyneuropathy
remains unclear, but circulating factors such as cytokines,
which are associated with sepsis and SIRS, are thought to
play a role. It has been reported that up to 70% of patients
with the sepsis syndrome have some degree of neuropa-
thy, although far fewer have a clinical syndrome profound
enough to cause severe respiratory muscle weakness
requiring prolonged mechanical ventilation or resulting in
Common Critical Illnesses and Syndromes
362
SECTION IV
FIGURE 36-7
Wernicke’s disease. Coronal T1-weighted postcontrast MRI
reveals abnormal enhancement of the mammillary bodies
(arrows), typical of acute Wernicke’s encephalopathy.
Treatment:
WERNICKE’S DISEASE
Wernicke’s disease is a medical emergency and requires
immediate administration of thiamine in a dose of 100 mg
either IV or IM. The dose should be given daily until the
patient resumes a normal diet and should be begun
before treatment with IV glucose solutions. Glucose infu-
sions may precipitate Wernicke’s disease in a previously
unaffected patient or cause a rapid worsening of an early
form of the disease. For this reason, thiamine should be
administered to all alcoholic patients requiring parenteral
glucose.
CRITICAL CARE DISORDERS OF THE
PERIPHERAL NERVOUS SYSTEM
Critical illness with disorders of the peripheral nervous
system (PNS) arises in two contexts: (1) primary neuro-
logic diseases that require critical care interventions,
failure to wean. Recent studies suggest that aggressive
glycemic control with insulin infusions decreases the risk
of critical illness polyneuropathy.Treatment is supportive,
with speciﬁc intervention directed at treating the under-
lying illness. Although spontaneous recovery is usually
seen, the time course may extend over weeks to months
and necessitate long-term ventilatory support and care
even after the underlying critical illness has resolved.
DISORDERS OF NEUROMUSCULAR
TRANSMISSION
A defect in neuromuscular transmission may be a source
of weakness in critically ill patients. Myasthenia gravis
may be a consideration; however, persistent weakness
secondary to impaired neuromuscular junction transmis-
sion is almost always caused by administration of drugs.
A number of medications, including antibiotics, espe-
cially aminoglycosides, and β-blocking agents, impair
neuromuscular transmission. In the ICU, the nondepo-
larizing neuromuscular blocking agents (nd-NMBAs),
also known as muscle relaxants, are most commonly
responsible. Included in this group of drugs are pancuro-
nium, vecuronium, rocuronium, and atracurium. They
are often used to facilitate mechanical ventilation or
other critical care procedures, but with prolonged use,
persistent neuromuscular blockade may result in weak-
ness even after discontinuation of these agents hours or
days earlier. Risk factors for this prolonged action of
neuromuscular blocking agents include female gender,
metabolic acidosis, and renal failure.
Prolonged neuromuscular blockade does not appear
to produce permanent damage to the PNS. After the
offending medications are discontinued, full strength is
restored, although this may take days. In general, the low-
est dose of neuromuscular blocking agent should be used
to achieve the desired result, and when these agents are
used in the ICU, a peripheral nerve stimulator should be
used to monitor neuromuscular junction function.
MYOPATHY
Critically ill patients, especially those with sepsis, fre-
quently develop muscle wasting, often in the face of
seemingly adequate nutritional support.The assumption
has been that this represents a catabolic myopathy
brought about as a result of multiple factors, including
elevated cortisol and catecholamine release and other
circulating factors induced by the SIRS. In this syn-
drome, known as cachectic myopathy, serum creatine
kinase levels and electromyography (EMG) results are
normal. Muscle biopsy shows type II ﬁber atrophy. Pan-
fascicular muscle ﬁber necrosis may also occur in the
setting of profound sepsis. This so-called septic myopathy
is characterized clinically by weakness progressing to a
profound level over just a few days.There may be associated
elevations in serum creatine kinase and urine myoglobin.
Both EMG and muscle biopsy may be normal initially
but eventually show abnormal spontaneous activity and
panfascicular necrosis with an accompanying inﬂamma-
tory reaction. Both of these myopathic syndromes may
be considered under the broader heading of critical illness
myopathy.
Acute quadriplegic myopathy describes a clinical syn-
drome of severe weakness seen in the setting of glucocor-
ticoid and nd-NMBA use.The most frequent scenario in
which this is encountered is an asthmatic patient who
requires high-dose glucocorticoids and nd-NMBA to
facilitate mechanical ventilation. This muscle disorder is
not caused by prolonged action of nd-NMBAs at the
neuromuscular junction but, rather, is an actual myopathy
with muscle damage; it has occasionally been described
with high-dose glucocorticoid use alone. Clinically, this
syndrome is most often recognized when a patient fails to
wean from mechanical ventilation despite resolution of
the primary pulmonary process. Pathologically, there may
be vacuolar changes in both type I and type II muscle
ﬁbers with evidence of regeneration. Patients with acute
quadriplegic myopathy have a good prognosis. If patients
survive their underlying critical illness, the myopathy
invariably improves, and most patients return to normal.
However, because this syndrome is a result of true muscle
damage, not just prolonged blockade at the neuromuscu-
lar junction, this process may take weeks or months, and
tracheostomy with prolonged ventilatory support may be
necessary. Some patients do have residual long-term
weakness, with atrophy and fatigue limiting ambulation.
At present, it is unclear how to prevent this myopathic
complication except by avoiding use of nd-NMBAs, a
strategy that is not always possible. Monitoring with a
peripheral nerve stimulator can help to avoid the overuse
of these agents. However, this is more likely to prevent
the complication of prolonged neuromuscular junction
blockade than it is to prevent this myopathy.
SUBARACHNOID HEMORRHAGE
SAH renders the brain critically ill from both primary
and secondary brain insults. Excluding head trauma, the
most common cause of SAH is rupture of a saccular
aneurysm. Other causes include bleeding from a vascu-
lar malformation (arteriovenous malformation or dural
arterial–venous ﬁstula) and extension into the subarach-
noid space from a primary intracerebral hemorrhage.
Some idiopathic SAHs are localized to the perimesen-
cephalic cisterns and are benign; they probably have a
venous or capillary source, and angiography is unrevealing.
Saccular (“Berry”) Aneurysm
Autopsy and angiography studies have found that about 2%
of adults harbor intracranial aneurysms, for a prevalence of
Neurologic Critical Care
363
CHAPTER 36
4 million persons in the United States; the aneurysm will
rupture, producing SAH, in 25,000–30,000 people per
year. For patients who arrive alive at hospital, the mortality
rate over the next month is about 45%. Of those who sur-
vive, more than half are left with major neurologic deﬁcits
as a result of the initial hemorrhage, cerebral vasospasm
with infarction,or hydrocephalus.If the patient survives but
the aneurysm is not obliterated, the rate of rebleeding is
about 20% in the ﬁrst 2 weeks, 30% in the ﬁrst month, and
about 3% per year afterward. Given these alarming ﬁgures,
the major therapeutic emphasis is on preventing the pre-
dictable early complications of the SAH.
Unruptured, asymptomatic aneurysms are much less
dangerous than a recently ruptured aneurysm. The
annual risk of rupture for aneurysms <10 mm in size is
∼0.1%, and for aneurysms ≥10 mm in size, it is ∼0.5–1%;
the surgical morbidity far exceeds these percentages.
Because of the longer length of exposure to risk of rup-
ture, younger patients with aneurysms >10 mm in size
may beneﬁt from prophylactic treatment. As with the
treatment of patients with asymptomatic carotid stenosis,
the risk:beneﬁt analysis strongly depends on the compli-
cation rate of treatment.
Giant aneurysms (those >2.5 cm in diameter) occur
at the same sites (see below) as small aneurysms and
account for 5% of cases.The three most common loca-
tions are the terminal internal carotid artery, middle
cerebral artery (MCA) bifurcation, and top of the basilar
artery.Their risk of rupture is ∼6% in the ﬁrst year after
identiﬁcation and may remain high indeﬁnitely. They
often cause symptoms by compressing the adjacent brain
or cranial nerves.
Mycotic aneurysms are usually located distal to the
ﬁrst bifurcation of major arteries of the circle of Willis.
Most result from infected emboli caused by bacterial
endocarditis causing septic degeneration of arteries and
subsequent dilatation and rupture.Whether these lesions
should be sought and repaired before rupture or left to
heal spontaneously is controversial.
Pathophysiology
Saccular aneurysms occur at the bifurcations of the large-
to medium-sized intracranial arteries; rupture is into the
subarachnoid space in the basal cisterns and often into
the parenchyma of the adjacent brain. Approximately
85% of aneurysms occur in the anterior circulation,
mostly on the circle of Willis. About 20% of patients
have multiple aneurysms, many at mirror sites bilaterally.
As an aneurysm develops, it typically forms a neck with a
dome.The length of the neck and the size of the dome
vary greatly and are important in planning neurosurgical
obliteration or endovascular embolization. The arterial
internal elastic lamina disappears at the base of the neck.
The media thins, and connective tissue replaces smooth
muscle cells. At the site of rupture (most often the
dome), the wall thins, and the tear that allows bleeding is
often ≤0.5 mm long.The size and site of the aneurysm
are important in predicting the risk of rupture.Aneurysms
>7 mm in diameter and those at the top of the basilar
artery and at the origin of the posterior communicating
artery are at greater risk of rupture.
Clinical Manifestations
Most unruptured intracranial aneurysms are completely
asymptomatic. Symptoms are usually caused by rupture
and resultant SAH, although some present with mass
effect on cranial nerves or brain parenchyma. At the
moment of aneurysmal rupture with major SAH, the ICP
suddenly increases.This may account for the sudden tran-
sient loss of consciousness that occurs in nearly half of
patients. Sudden loss of consciousness may be preceded
by a brief moment of excruciating headache, but most
patients ﬁrst complain of headache upon regaining con-
sciousness. In 10% of cases, aneurysmal bleeding is severe
enough to cause loss of consciousness for several days. In
∼45% of cases, severe headache associated with exertion is
the presenting complaint. The patient often calls the
headache “the worst headache of my life”; however, the
most important characteristic is its sudden onset. Occa-
sionally, these ruptures may present as headache of only
moderate intensity or as a change in the patient’s usual
headache pattern. The headache is usually generalized,
often with neck stiffness, and vomiting is common.
Although sudden headache in the absence of focal
neurologic symptoms is the hallmark of aneurysmal
rupture, focal neurologic deﬁcits may occur. Anterior
communicating artery or MCA bifurcation aneurysms
may rupture into the adjacent brain or subdural space
and form a hematoma large enough to produce mass
effect. The common deﬁcits that result include hemi-
paresis, aphasia, and abulia.
Occasionally, prodromal symptoms suggest the location
of a progressively enlarging unruptured aneurysm.A third
cranial nerve palsy, particularly when associated with
pupillary dilatation, loss of ipsilateral (but retained con-
tralateral) light reﬂex, and focal pain above or behind the
eye, may occur with an expanding aneurysm at the junc-
tion of the posterior communicating artery and the inter-
nal carotid artery. A sixth nerve palsy may indicate an
aneurysm in the cavernous sinus, and visual ﬁeld defects
can occur with an expanding supraclinoid carotid or
anterior cerebral artery aneurysm. Occipital and posterior
cervical pain may signal a posterior inferior cerebellar
artery or anterior inferior cerebellar artery aneurysm.
Pain in or behind the eye and in the low temple can
occur with an expanding MCA aneurysm. Thunderclap
headache is a variant of migraine that simulates a SAH.
Before concluding that a patient with sudden, severe
headache has thunderclap migraine, a deﬁnitive workup
for aneurysm or other intracranial pathology is required.
Aneurysms can undergo small ruptures and leaks of
blood into the subarachnoid space, so-called sentinel
Common Critical Illnesses and Syndromes
364
SECTION IV
bleeds. Sudden unexplained headache at any location
should raise suspicion of SAH and be investigated because
a major hemorrhage may be imminent.
The initial clinical manifestations of SAH can be
graded using the Hunt-Hess or World Federation of Neu-
rosurgical Societies classiﬁcation schemes (Table 36-4).
For ruptured aneurysms, the prognosis for good outcomes
decreases as the grade increases. For example it is unusual
for a patient with a Hunt-Hess grade 1 SAH to die if the
aneurysm is treated, but the mortality for patients with
grade 4 and 5 SAHs may be as high as 80%.
Delayed Neurologic Deﬁcits
The four major causes of delayed neurologic deﬁcits are
rerupture, hydrocephalus, vasospasm, and hyponatremia.
1. Rerupture.The incidence of rerupture of an untreated
aneurysm in the ﬁrst month after SAH is ∼30%, with
the peak in the ﬁrst 7 days. Rerupture is associated
with a 60% mortality and a poor outcome. Early
treatment eliminates this risk.
2. Hydrocephalus. Acute hydrocephalus can cause stupor
and coma and can be mitigated by placement of an
external ventricular drain. More often, subacute
hydrocephalus may develop over a few days or weeks
and causes progressive drowsiness or slowed mentation
(abulia) with incontinence. Hydrocephalus is differen-
tiated from cerebral vasospasm with a CT scan, CT
angiography, transcranial Doppler (TCD) ultrasound,
or conventional x-ray angiography. Hydrocephalus
may clear spontaneously or require temporary ventric-
ular drainage. Chronic hydrocephalus may develop
weeks to months after SAH and manifest as gait difﬁ-
culty, incontinence, or impaired mentation. Subtle
signs may be a lack of initiative in conversation or a
failure to recover independence.
3. Vasospasm. Narrowing of the arteries at the base of the
brain after SAH causes symptomatic ischemia and
infarction in ∼30% of patients and is the major cause
of delayed morbidity and death. Signs of ischemia
appear 4–14 days after the hemorrhage, most often at
7 days. The severity and distribution of vasospasm
determine whether infarction will occur.
Delayed vasospasm is believed to result from direct
effects of clotted blood and its breakdown products
on the arteries within the subarachnoid space. In
general, the more blood that surrounds the arteries,
the greater is the chance of symptomatic vasospasm.
Spasm of major arteries produces symptoms referable
to the appropriate vascular territory.All of these focal
symptoms may present abruptly, ﬂuctuate, or develop
over a few days. In most cases, focal spasm is preceded
by a decline in mental status.
Vasospasm can be detected reliably with conven-
tional x-ray angiography, but this invasive procedure is
expensive and carries the risk of stroke and other
complications.TCD ultrasound is based on the princi-
ple that the velocity of blood ﬂow within an artery
will increase as the lumen diameter is narrowed. By
directing the probe along the MCA and proximal
anterior cerebral artery (ACA), carotid terminus, and
vertebral and basilar arteries on a daily or every-other-
day basis, vasospasm can be reliably detected and treat-
ments initiated to prevent cerebral ischemia (see
below). CT angiography is another method that can
detect vasospasm.
Severe cerebral edema in patients with infarction
from vasospasm may increase the ICP enough to
reduce CCP.Treatment may include mannitol, hyper-
ventilation, and hemicraniectomy; moderate hypother-
mia may have a role as well.
4. Hyponatremia. Hyponatremia may be profound and can
develop quickly in the ﬁrst 2 weeks after SAH.There
is both natriuresis and volume depletion with SAH, so
patients become both hyponatremic and hypovolemic.
Both atrial natriuretic peptide and brain natriuretic
Neurologic Critical Care
365
CHAPTER 36
TABLE 36-4
GRADING SCALES FOR SUBARACHNOID HEMORRHAGE
WORLD FEDERATION OF NEUROSURGICAL
GRADE
HUNT-HESS SCALE
SOCIETIES (WFNS) SCALE
1
Mild headache, normal mental status,
GCSa score 15, no motor deﬁcits
no cranial nerve or motor ﬁndings
2
Severe headache, normal mental status,
GCS 13–14, no motor deﬁcits
may have cranial nerve deﬁcit
3
Somnolent, confused, may have cranial
GCS 13–14, with motor deﬁcits
nerve or mild motor deﬁcit
4
Stupor, moderate to severe motor deﬁcit,
GCS 7–12, with or without motor deﬁcits
may have intermittent reﬂex posturing
5
Coma, reﬂex posturing or ﬂaccid
GCS 3–6, with or without motor deﬁcits
aGlasgow Coma Scale (GSC): See Table 36-2.
peptide have a role in producing this “cerebral salt-
wasting syndrome.”Typically, it clears over the course
of 1–2 weeks and, in the setting of SAH, should not be
treated with free-water restriction because this may
increase the risk of stroke (see below).
Laboratory Evaluation and Imaging
(Fig. 36-8) The hallmark of aneurysmal rupture is
blood in the CSF. More than 95% of cases have enough
blood to be visualized on a high-quality noncontrast
CT scan obtained within 72 h. If the scan fails to estab-
lish the diagnosis of SAH and no mass lesion or obstruc-
tive hydrocephalus is found, an LP should be performed
to establish the presence of subarachnoid blood. Lysis of
the red blood cells and subsequent conversion of hemo-
globin to bilirubin stains the spinal ﬂuid yellow within
6–12 h.This xanthochromic spinal ﬂuid peaks in inten-
sity at 48 h and lasts for 1–4 weeks, depending on the
amount of subarachnoid blood.
The extent and location of subarachnoid blood
on noncontrast CT scan help locate the underlying
aneurysm, identify the cause of any neurologic deﬁcit,
and predict delayed vasospasm. A high incidence of
symptomatic vasospasm in the MCA and ACA has been
found when early CT scans show subarachnoid clots
>5 × 3 mm in the basal cisterns or layers of blood >1
mm thick in the cerebral ﬁssures. CT scans less reliably
predict vasospasm in the vertebral, basilar, or posterior
cerebral arteries.
LP before an imaging procedure is indicated only if
a CT scan is not available at the time of the suspected
SAH. After the diagnosis of hemorrhage from a rup-
tured saccular aneurysm is suspected, four-vessel con-
ventional x-ray angiography (of both carotid and both
vertebral arteries) is generally performed to localize
and define the anatomic details of the aneurysm and
to determine if other unruptured aneurysms exist
(Fig. 36-8C). At some centers, the ruptured aneurysm
can be treated using endovascular techniques at the
time of the initial angiography as a way to expedite
treatment and minimize the number of invasive proce-
dures. CT angiography is an alternative method for
locating the aneurysm and may be sufficient to plan
definitive therapy.
Common Critical Illnesses and Syndromes
366
SECTION IV
A
C
D
B
FIGURE 36-8
Subarachnoid hemorrhage. A. CT angiography revealing an
aneurysm of the left superior cerebellar artery. B. Noncon-
trast CT scan at the level of the third ventricle revealing
subarachnoid blood (bright) in the left sylvian ﬁssure and
within the left lateral ventricle. C. Conventional anteroposterior
x-ray angiogram of the right vertebral and basilar artery
showing the large aneurysm. D. Conventional angiogram
after coil embolization of the aneurysm, whereby the aneurysm
body is ﬁlled with platinum coils delivered through a micro-
catheter navigated from the femoral artery into the aneurysm
neck.
Close monitoring (daily or twice daily) of electrolytes is
important because hyponatremia can occur precipitously
during the ﬁrst 2 weeks after SAH (see earlier).
The electrocardiogram (ECG) frequently shows ST-
segment and T-wave changes similar to those associated
with cardiac ischemia. Prolonged QRS complex, increased
QT interval, and prominent “peaked” or deeply inverted
symmetric T waves are usually secondary to the intracra-
nial hemorrhage. Evidence suggests that structural myocar-
dial lesions produced by circulating catecholamines and
excessive discharge of sympathetic neurons may occur
after SAH, causing these ECG changes and a reversible
cardiomyopathy sufﬁcient to cause shock or congestive
heart failure. Echocardiography reveals a pattern of
regional wall motion abnormalities that follow the dis-
tribution of sympathetic nerves rather than the major
coronary arteries, with relative sparing of the ventricular
wall apex.The sympathetic nerves themselves appear to
be injured by direct toxicity from the excessive cate-
cholamine release. An asymptomatic troponin elevation
is common. Serious ventricular dysrhythmias are unusual.
The medical management of patients with SAH
focuses on protecting the airway, managing blood pres-
sure before and after aneurysm treatment, preventing
rebleeding before treatment, managing vasospasm,
treating hydrocephalus,treating hyponatremia,and pre-
venting pulmonary embolus.
Intracranial hypertension after aneurysmal rupture
occurs secondary to subarachnoid blood, parenchymal
hematoma, acute hydrocephalus, or loss of vascular
autoregulation. Patients who are stuporous should
undergo emergent ventriculostomy to measure ICP and
to treat high ICP in order to prevent cerebral ischemia.
Medical therapies designed to combat increased ICP
(e.g., mild hyperventilation, mannitol, and sedation) can
also be used as needed. High ICP refractory to treat-
ment is a poor prognostic sign.
Before deﬁnitive treatment of the ruptured aneurysm,
care is required to maintain adequate CCP while
avoiding excessive elevation of arterial pressure. If the
patient is alert, it is reasonable to lower the blood pres-
sure to normal using nicardipine, labetalol, or esmolol. If
the patient has a depressed level of consciousness,
ICP should be measured and the CCP targeted to
60–70 mmHg.
Because rebleeding is common, all patients who are
not candidates for early aneurysm repair are put on bed
rest in a quiet room and are given stool softeners to pre-
vent straining. If headache or neck pain is severe, mild
sedation and analgesia are prescribed. Extreme seda-
tion is avoided because it can obscure changes in neu-
rologic status. Adequate hydration is necessary to avoid
a decrease in blood volume predisposing patients to
brain ischemia.
Seizures are uncommon at the onset of aneurysmal
rupture. The quivering, jerking, and extensor posturing
that often accompany loss of consciousness with SAH
are probably related to the sharp increase in ICP or, per-
haps, acute generalized vasospasm rather than seizure.
However, phenytoin is often given as prophylactic ther-
apy because a seizure may promote rebleeding.
Glucocorticoids may help reduce the head and neck
ache caused by the irritative effect of the subarachnoid
blood. There is no good evidence that they reduce cere-
bral edema,are neuroprotective,or reduce vascular injury,
and their routine use therefore is not recommended.
Antiﬁbrinolytic agents are not routinely prescribed
but may be considered in patients in whom aneurysm
treatment cannot proceed immediately.They are associ-
ated with a reduced incidence of aneurysmal rerupture
but may also increase the risk of delayed cerebral infarc-
tion and deep vein thrombosis (DVT).
Vasospasm remains the leading cause of morbidity
and mortality after aneurysmal SAH. Treatment with the
calcium channel antagonist nimodipine (60 mg PO every
4 h) improves outcome, perhaps by preventing ischemic
Neurologic Critical Care
367
CHAPTER 36
Treatment:
SUBARACHNOID HEMORRHAGE
Early aneurysm repair prevents rerupture and allows the
safe application of techniques to improve blood ﬂow
(e.g., induced hypertension and hypervolemia) if symp-
tomatic vasospasm develops. An aneurysm can be
“clipped”by a neurosurgeon or “coiled”by an endovascu-
lar surgeon. Surgical repair involves placing a metal clip
across the aneurysm neck,thereby immediately eliminat-
ing the risk of rebleeding. This approach requires cran-
iotomy and brain retraction, which is associated with
neurologic morbidity. Endovascular techniques involve
placing platinum coils or other embolic material within
the aneurysm via a catheter that is passed from the
femoral artery. The aneurysm is packed tightly to
enhance thrombosis and over time is walled off from the
circulation (Fig. 36-8D).The only prospective randomized
trial of surgery versus endovascular treatment for rup-
tured 
aneurysm,
the 
International 
Subarachnoid
Aneurysm Trial (ISAT), was terminated early when 24% of
patients treated with endovascular therapy were dead or
dependent at 1 year compared with 31% treated with
surgery, a signiﬁcant 23% relative reduction. Follow-up
for these patients, which is now complete, reveals that
the beneﬁt of endovascular therapy is durable. However,
some aneurysms have a morphology that is not amenable
to endovascular treatment. Thus, surgery remains an
important treatment option. Centers that combine both
endovascular and neurosurgical expertise likely offer the
best outcomes for patients, and good data show that
centers that specialize in aneurysm treatment have
improved mortality rates.
injury rather than reducing the risk of vasospasm.
Nimodipine can cause signiﬁcant hypotension in some
patients, which may worsen cerebral ischemia in patients
with vasospasm. Symptomatic cerebral vasospasm can
also be treated by increasing the CCP by increasing MAP
through plasma volume expansion and the judicious use
of IV vasopressor agents,usually phenylephrine or norep-
inephrine. Increased perfusion pressure has been associ-
ated with clinical improvement in many patients, but
high arterial pressure may promote rebleeding in unpro-
tected aneurysms.Treatment with induced hypertension
and hypervolemia generally requires monitoring of
arterial and central venous pressures; it is best to infuse
pressors through a central venous line as well. Volume
expansion helps prevent hypotension, augments cardiac
output, and reduces blood viscosity by reducing the
hematocrit.This method is called “triple-H”(hypertension,
hemodilution,and hypervolemic) therapy.
If symptomatic vasospasm persists despite optimal
medical therapy, intraarterial vasodilators and percuta-
neous transluminal angioplasty are considered. Vasodi-
latation by direct angioplasty appears to be permanent,
allowing triple-H therapy to be tapered sooner. The
pharmacologic vasodilators (verapamil and nicardipine)
do not last more than 8–24 h therefore, multiple treat-
ments may be required until the subarachnoid blood is
reabsorbed. Although intraarterial papaverine is an
effective vasodilator, evidence suggests that papaverine
may be neurotoxic, so its use should be reserved for
refractory cases.
Acute hydrocephalus can cause stupor or coma. It
may clear spontaneously or require temporary ventricu-
lar drainage. When chronic hydrocephalus develops,
ventricular shunting is the treatment of choice.
Free-water restriction is contraindicated in patients
with SAH at risk for vasospasm because hypovolemia
and hypotension may occur and precipitate cerebral
ischemia.Many patients continue to experience a decline
in serum sodium despite receiving parenteral ﬂuids con-
taining normal saline. Frequently, supplemental oral salt
coupled with normal saline will mitigate hyponatremia,
but patients often also require hypertonic saline. Care
must be taken not to correct serum sodium too quickly in
patients with marked hyponatremia of several days’dura-
tion because central pontine myelinolysis may occur.
All patients should have pneumatic compression
stockings applied to prevent pulmonary embolism.
Unfractionated heparin administered subcutaneously
for DVT prophylaxis can be initiated immediately after
endovascular treatment and within days after cran-
iotomy and surgical clipping and is a useful adjunct to
pneumatic compression stockings. Treatment of pul-
monary embolus depends on whether the aneurysm
has been treated and whether or not the patient has
had a craniotomy.Systemic anticoagulation with heparin
is contraindicated in patients with ruptured and untreated
aneurysms. It is a relative contraindication after cran-
iotomy for several days or perhaps weeks, and it may
delay thrombosis of a coiled aneurysm. After cran-
iotomy, use of inferior vena cava ﬁlters is preferred to
prevent further pulmonary emboli; systemic anticoagu-
lation with heparin is preferred after successful endovas-
cular treatment.
Common Critical Illnesses and Syndromes
368
SECTION IV
FURTHER READINGS
LATRONICO N et al: Neuromuscular sequelae of critical illness. Curr
Opin Crit Care 11:381, 2005
LIOU AK et al: To die or not to die for neurons in ischemia, trau-
matic brain injury and epilepsy: A review on the stress-activated
signaling pathways and apoptotic pathways. Prog Neurobiol
69:103, 2003
MOLYNEUX A et al: International Subarachnoid Aneurysm Trial
(ISAT) of neurosurgical clipping versus endovascular coiling in
2143 patients with ruptured intracranial aneurysms: A random-
ized trial. Lancet 360:1267, 2002
NOLAN JP et al: Therapeutic Hypothermia After Cardiac Arrest: An
Advisory Statement by the Advanced Life Support Task Force of
the International Liaison Committee on Resuscitation. Circula-
tion 108:118, 2003
POSNER JB et al: Plum and Posner’s Diagnosis of Stupor and Coma,
4th ed. New York, Oxford University Press, 2007
SAFE STUDY INVESTIGATORS et al: Saline or albumin for ﬂuid resusci-
tation in patients with traumatic brain injury. N Engl J Med
357:874, 2007
VAN DEN BERGHE G et al: Insulin therapy protects the central and
peripheral nervous system of intensive care patients. Neurology
64:1348, 2005
WIJDICKS EFM et al: Practice parameter: Prediction of outcome in
comatose survivors after cardiopulmonary resuscitation (an evidence-
based review).Neurology 67:203,2006
DISORDERS
COMPLICATING
CRITICAL ILLNESSES
AND THEIR
MANAGEMENT
SECTION V
Kathleen D. Liu
I
Glenn M. Chertow
Acute renal failure (ARF) is characterized by a rapid
decline in glomerular ﬁltration rate (GFR) over hours
to days. Depending on the exact deﬁnition used, ARF
complicates approximately 5–7% of hospital admissions
and up to 30% of admissions to intensive care units.
Retention of nitrogenous waste products, oliguria (urine
output <400 mL/d contributing to extracellular ﬂuid
overload), and electrolyte and acid–base abnormalities
are frequent clinical features. ARF is usually asympto-
matic and diagnosed when biochemical monitoring of
hospitalized patients reveals a new increase in blood urea
and serum creatinine concentrations. For purposes of
diagnosis and management, causes of ARF are generally
divided into three major categories: (1) diseases that
cause renal hypoperfusion, resulting in decreased func-
tion without frank parenchymal damage (prerenal ARF,
or azotemia; ∼55%); (2) diseases that directly involve the
renal parenchyma (intrinsic ARF; ∼40%); and (3) diseases
associated with urinary tract obstruction (postrenal ARF;
∼5%).ARF is often considered to be reversible, although
a return to baseline serum creatinine concentrations
after injury might not be sufﬁciently sensitive to detect
clinically signiﬁcant irreversible damage that may ulti-
mately contribute to chronic kidney disease. ARF is
associated with signiﬁcant in-hospital morbidity and
mortality rates, the latter in the range of 30–60%,
depending on the clinical setting and the presence or
absence of nonrenal organ system failure.
ACUTE RENAL FAILURE
ETIOLOGY AND PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
PRERENAL AZOTEMIA
The most common form of ARF is prerenal ARF,
which occurs in the setting of renal hypoperfusion. Pre-
renal ARF is generally reversible when renal perfusion
pressure is restored. By deﬁnition, renal parenchymal tis-
sue is not damaged. More severe or prolonged hypoper-
fusion may lead to ischemic injury, often termed acute
tubular necrosis (ATN).Thus, prerenal ARF and ischemic
ATN fall along a spectrum of manifestations of renal
hypoperfusion. As shown in Table 37-1, prerenal ARF
can complicate any disease that induces hypovolemia,
low cardiac output, systemic vasodilatation, or selective
intrarenal vasoconstriction.
Hypovolemia leads to a decrease in mean systemic
arterial pressure, which is detected as reduced stretch by
arterial (e.g., carotid sinus) and cardiac baroreceptors. In
turn, this triggers a coordinated series of neurohormonal
responses that aim to restore blood volume and arterial
pressure. These include activation of the sympathetic
nervous system and renin–angiotensin–aldosterone sys-
tem, as well as release of arginine vasopressin. Relatively
“nonessential” vascular beds (e.g., the musculocutaneous
and splanchnic circulations) undergo vasoconstriction in
an attempt to preserve cardiac and cerebral perfusion
pressure. In addition, salt loss through sweat glands is
CHAPTER 37
CHAPTER 37
I Etiology and Pathophysiology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 370
Prerenal Azotemia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 370
Intrinsic ARF . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 372
Postrenal ARF . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 374
I Clinical Features and Differential Diagnosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 375
Clinical Assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 375
Urinalysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 375
Renal Failure Indices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 379
Laboratory Findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 379
Radiologic Findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 380
Renal Biopsy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 380
I Complications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 380
I Outcome and Long-Term Prognosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 385
I Further Readings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 385
370
Acute Renal Failure
371
CHAPTER 37
inhibited, and thirst and salt appetite are stimulated.
Renal salt and water retention also occur.
In states of mild hypoperfusion, glomerular perfusion
and the ﬁltration fraction are preserved through several
compensatory mechanisms. In response to the reduction
in perfusion pressure, stretch receptors in afferent arteri-
oles trigger afferent arteriolar vasodilatation through a
local myogenic reﬂex (autoregulation). Angiotensin II
increases biosynthesis of vasodilator prostaglandins (e.g.,
prostaglandin E2 and prostacyclin), also resulting in affer-
ent arteriolar vasodilation. In addition, angiotensin II
induces preferential constriction of efferent arterioles.As a
result, the fraction of plasma ﬂowing through glomerular
capillaries that is ﬁltered is increased (ﬁltration fraction),
intraglomerular pressure is maintained, and GFR is
preserved. With more severe hypoperfusion, these
TABLE 37-1
CLASSIFICATION AND MAJOR CAUSES OF ACUTE RENAL FAILURE
Prerenal Acute Renal Failure
I. Hypovolemia
A. Increased extracellular ﬂuid losses: hemorrhage
B. Gastrointestinal ﬂuid loss: vomiting, diarrhea, enterocutaneous ﬁstula
C. Renal ﬂuid loss: diuretics, osmotic diuresis, hypoadrenalism, nephrogenic diabetes insipidus
D. Extravascular sequestration: burns, pancreatitis, severe hypoalbuminemia (hypoproteinemia)
E. Decreased intake: dehydration, altered mental status
II. Altered renal hemodynamics resulting in hypoperfusion
A. Low cardiac output state: diseases of the myocardium, valves, and pericardium (including tamponade); pulmonary
hypertension or massive pulmonary embolism leading to right and left heart failure; impaired venous return (e.g.,
abdominal compartment syndrome or positive pressure ventilation)
B. Systemic vasodilation: sepsis, antihypertensives, afterload reducers, anaphylaxis 
C. Renal vasoconstriction: hypercalcemia, catecholamines, calcineurin inhibitors, amphotericin B
D. Impairment of renal autoregulatory responses: cyclooxygenase inhibitors (e.g.,NSAIDs), ACE inhibitors, or ARBs
E. Hepatorenal syndrome
Intrinsic Acute Renal Failure
I. Renovascular obstruction (bilateral, or unilateral in the setting of one kidney)
A. Renal artery obstruction: atherosclerotic plaque, thrombosis, embolism, dissection aneurysm, large vessel vasculitis
B. Renal vein obstruction: thrombosis or compression
II. Diseases of the glomeruli or vasculature
A. Glomerulonephritis or vasculitis
B. Other: thrombotic microangiopathy, malignant hypertension, collagen vascular diseases (SLE, scleroderma), DIC,
preeclampsia
III. Acute tubular necrosis
A. Ischemia: causes are the same as for prerenal ARF, but generally the insult is more severe or more prolonged
B. Infection with or without sepsis syndrome
C. Toxins
1. Exogenous: radiocontrast, calcineurin inhibitors, antibiotics (e.g., aminoglycosides), chemotherapy (e.g., cisplatin),
antifungals (e.g., amphotericin B), ethylene glycol
2. Endogenous: rhabdomyolysis, hemolysis
IV. Interstitial nephritis
A. Allergic: antibiotics (β-lactams, sulfonamides, quinolones, rifampin), NSAIDs, diuretics, other drugs
B. Infection: pyelonephritis (if bilateral)
C. Inﬁltration: lymphoma, leukemia, sarcoidosis
D. Inﬂammatory, nonvascular: Sjögren’s syndrome, tubulointerstitial nephritis with uveitis
V. Intratubular obstruction
A. Endogenous: myeloma proteins, uric acid (tumor lysis syndrome), systemic oxalalosis
B. Exogenous: acyclovir, ganciclovir, methotrexate, indinavir
Postrenal Acute Renal Failure (Obstruction)
I. Ureteric (bilateral, or unilateral in the case of one kidney): calculi, blood clots, sloughed papillae, cancer, external com-
pression (e.g., retroperitoneal ﬁbrosis)
II. Bladder neck: neurogenic bladder, prostatic hypertrophy, calculi, blood clots, cancer
III. Urethra: stricture or congenital valves
Note: ACE, angiotensin-converting enzyme; ARB, angiotensin II receptor blocker; ARF, acute renal failure; DIC, disseminated intravascular coag-
ulation; NSAID, nonsteroidal antiinﬂammatory drug; SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus.
compensatory responses are overwhelmed, and GFR
decreases, leading to prerenal ARF.
Autoregulatory dilatation of afferent arterioles allows
for maintenance of GFR despite systemic hypotension;
however, when hypotension is severe or prolonged, these
autoregulatory mechanisms fail, resulting in a precipitous
decline in GFR. Lesser degrees of hypotension may pro-
voke prerenal ARF in those at risk, including elderly indi-
viduals and patients with diseases that affect the integrity
of afferent arterioles (e.g., hypertensive nephrosclerosis,
diabetic vasculopathy and other forms of occlusive
[including atherosclerotic] renovascular disease). In addi-
tion, drugs that interfere with adaptive responses to
hypoperfusion may convert compensated renal hypoper-
fusion into overt prerenal ARF or ATN. Pharmacologic
inhibitors of renal prostaglandin biosynthesis [nonsteroidal
antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)] or angiotensin-
converting enzyme (ACE) activity (ACE inhibitors) and
angiotensin II receptor blockers (ARBs) are major cul-
prits. Although NSAIDs do not compromise GFR in
healthy individuals, these medications may precipitate
prerenal ARF in patients with volume depletion and in
those with chronic kidney disease (in whom GFR is
maintained, in part, through prostaglandin-mediated
hyperﬁltration by the remaining functional nephrons).
ACE inhibitors should be used with special care in patients
with bilateral renal artery stenosis or unilateral stenosis in
a solitary functioning kidney. In these settings, glomerular
perfusion and ﬁltration may be exquisitely dependent on
the actions of angiotensin II. Angiotensin II preserves
GFR in these circumstances by increasing systemic arter-
ial pressure and triggering selective constriction of effer-
ent arterioles. ACE inhibitors and ARBs blunt these
responses and can precipitate ARF.
Hepatorenal Syndrome
Hepatorenal syndrome (HRS) is a unique form of prere-
nal ARF that frequently complicates advanced cirrhosis as
well as acute liver failure. In HRS, the kidneys are struc-
turally normal but fail because of splanchnic vasodilation
and arteriovenous shunting, resulting in profound renal
vasoconstriction. Correction of the underlying liver dis-
ease (e.g., by liver transplantation) results in resolution of
the ARF. There are two forms of HRS, type I and type II,
that differ in their clinical course. In type I HRS, the
more aggressive form of the disease,ARF progresses even
after optimization of systemic hemodynamics and carries
a mortality rate of >90%.
INTRINSIC ARF
Intrinsic causes of ARF can be conceptually divided
based on the predominant compartment of the kidney
that is affected: (1) ischemic or nephrotoxic tubular injury,
(2) tubulointerstitial diseases, (3) diseases of the renal
microcirculation and glomeruli, and (4) diseases of larger
renal vessels (Table 37-1). Ischemia and nephrotoxins clas-
sically induce acute tubular injury. Although many
patients with ischemic or nephrotoxic ARF do not have
morphologic evidence of cellular necrosis, this disease is
often referred to as ATN. More recently, because of the
important role of sublethal injury to tubular epithelial and
other renal cells (e.g., endothelial cells) in the pathogene-
sis of this syndrome, the term acute kidney injury (AKI) has
been proposed.
Etiology and Pathophysiology of
Ischemic Acute Tubular Necrosis
Prerenal ARF and ischemic ATN are part of a spectrum
of manifestations of renal hypoperfusion. In its most
extreme form, ischemia leads to bilateral renal cortical
necrosis and irreversible renal failure. ATN differs from
prerenal ARF in that the renal tubular epithelial cells are
injured in the latter. ATN occurs most frequently in
patients undergoing major cardiovascular surgery or
who have severe trauma, hemorrhage, sepsis, or volume
depletion (Table 37-1). Patients with other risk factors
for ARF (e.g., exposure to nephrotoxins or preexisting
chronic kidney disease) are at increased risk for ATN.
Recovery typically takes 1–2 weeks after normalization
of renal perfusion because it requires repair and regener-
ation of renal cells.
The course of ischemic ATN is typically characterized
by four phases: initiation, extension, maintenance, and
recovery (Fig. 37-1).These phases are often preceded by
a period of prerenal azotemia. During the initiation phase
(lasting hours to days), GFR declines because (1)
glomerular ultrafiltration pressure is reduced as renal
blood flow decreases, (2) the flow of filtrate within
tubules is obstructed by casts composed of shed epithelial
cells and necrotic debris, and (3) there is backleak of
glomerular ﬁltrate through injured tubular epithelium.
Ischemic injury is most prominent in the S3 segment of
the proximal tubule and the medullary portion of the
thick ascending limb of the loop of Henle. These seg-
ments of the tubule are particularly sensitive to ischemia
because of high rates of active [adenosine triphosphate
(ATP)–dependent] solute transport and location in the
outer medulla, where the partial pressure of oxygen is
low even under basal conditions. Cellular ischemia results
in ATP depletion, inhibition of active sodium transport,
cytoskeletal disruption, loss of cell polarity, cell–cell and
cell–matrix attachment, and oxygen free radical forma-
tion. Renal injury may be limited by restoration of renal
blood ﬂow during this period. If severe, cell injury results
in apoptosis or necrosis.
The extension phase occurs after the initiation phase
and is characterized by continued ischemic injury and
inﬂammation. It has been proposed that endothelial
damage (resulting in vascular congestion) contributes to
Disorders Complicating Critical Illnesses and Their Management
372
SECTION V
both of these processes. During the maintenance phase
(typically 1–2 weeks), GFR stabilizes at its nadir (typically
5–10 mL/min), urine output is lowest, and uremic com-
plications may arise (see later). It is not clear why the
GFR remains low during this phase despite correction of
systemic hemodynamics. Proposed mechanisms include
persistent intrarenal vasoconstriction and medullary ischemia
triggered by dysregulated release of vasoactive mediators
from injured endothelial cells, congestion of medullary
blood vessels, and reperfusion injury induced by reactive
oxygen species and inﬂammatory mediators released by
leukocytes or renal parenchymal cells. In addition, epithe-
lial cell injury may contribute to persistent intrarenal
vasoconstriction through tubuloglomerular feedback. Special-
ized epithelial cells in the macula densa region of distal
tubules detect increases in distal salt delivery that occur as
a consequence of impaired reabsorption by more proxi-
mal nephron segments. Macula densa cells, in turn, stimu-
late constriction of adjacent afferent arterioles by a poorly
deﬁned mechanism and further compromise glomerular
perfusion and ﬁltration, thereby contributing to a vicious
circle.
The recovery phase is characterized by tubular epithe-
lial cell repair and regeneration as well as a gradual
return of GFR toward premorbid levels. The recovery
phase may be complicated by a marked diuretic phase
because of delayed recovery of epithelial cell function
(solute and water reabsorption) relative to glomerular
ﬁltration (see below).
Etiology and Pathophysiology of
Nephrotoxic Acute Renal Failure
Nephrotoxic ATN may complicate exposure to many
structurally diverse pharmacologic agents (Table 37-1).
With most nephrotoxins, the incidence of ARF is
increased in elderly individuals and in patients with pre-
existing chronic kidney disease, true or “effective” hypo-
volemia, or concomitant exposure to other toxins.
Radiocontrast agents, cyclosporine, and tacrolimus
(FK506) cause kidney injury through intrarenal vaso-
constriction. Consequently, ATN in association with
these medications is characterized by an acute decrease
in renal blood ﬂow and GFR, a relatively benign urine
sediment, and a low fractional excretion of sodium (see
later). Severe cases may show clinical or pathologic evi-
dence of tubular cell necrosis. Contrast nephropathy is
also thought to result from the generation of reactive
oxygen species that are directly toxic to renal tubular
epithelial cells. Contrast nephropathy classically presents
Acute Renal Failure
373
CHAPTER 37
Initiation
GFR falling
Extension
GFR low/falling
Maintenance
GFR stable/low
Recovery
GFR rising
prolonged prerenal state
hemorrhage
sepsis
vascular disruption (e.g.: trauma, coronary artery 
bypass grafting, aortic crossclamp)
certain nephrotoxins, e.g. radiocontrast
ischemia
depolarized cell
cellular apoptosis/necrosis
disruption of normal epithelial integrity
abnormal tubular function (filtration/clearance)
cellular sloughing
luminal obstruction
inflammation
capillary sludging and worsening ischemia
cellular dedifferentiation
proliferation
reestablishment of tubular epithelium
cellular repolarization
reestablishment of normal tubular function
(filtration/clearance) 
dedifferentiated cell
Systemic events
Renal events
polarized cell
polarized cell
basolateral protein
FIGURE 37-1
Four phases of acute tubular necrosis.
as an acute (onset within 24–48 h) but reversible (peak,
3–5 days; resolution within 1 week) increase in blood
urea nitrogen (BUN) and serum creatinine. Contrast
nephropathy is most common in individuals with preex-
isting chronic kidney disease, diabetes mellitus, conges-
tive heart failure, hypovolemia, or multiple myeloma.
The type (low versus iso-osmolar contrast) and dose of
contrast also inﬂuence the likelihood of injury associated
with its administration.
Antibiotics and anticancer drugs typically cause ATN
through direct toxicity to the tubular epithelial cells or
intratubular obstruction. ARF complicates 10–30% of
courses of aminoglycoside antibiotics. Aminoglycosides
accumulate in renal tubular epithelial cells, where they
cause oxidative stress and cell injury; thus, ARF usually
occurs after several days of aminoglycoside therapy.
Damage may occur in both the proximal and distal
tubule; defects in the distal tubule may result in
decreased concentrating ability. Amphotericin B causes
dose-related ARF through intrarenal vasoconstriction
and direct toxicity to proximal tubule epithelium.
Newer (liposomal) formulations of amphotericin B may
be associated with less nephrotoxicity. Acyclovir may
precipitate in the renal tubules and cause ARF. Foscarnet
and pentamidine are less commonly prescribed antimi-
crobials also frequently associated with ARF. Cisplatin
and carboplatin, similar to the aminoglycosides, are
accumulated by proximal tubule cells and typically
provoke ARF after 7–10 days of exposure, typically in
association with potassium and magnesium wasting. Ifos-
famide administration may lead to hemorrhagic cystitis,
manifested by hematuria, as well as acute and chronic
renal failure.Type II renal tubular acidosis (Fanconi syn-
drome) often accompanies ifosfamide-associated ARF.
Endogenous nephrotoxins include calcium, myoglobin,
hemoglobin, urate, oxalate, and myeloma light chains.
Hypercalcemia can compromise GFR, predominantly by
inducing intrarenal vasoconstriction as well as volume
depletion from obligate water loss. Both rhabdomyolysis
and hemolysis can induce ARF. Common causes of rhab-
domyolysis include traumatic crush injury, acute muscle
ischemia, prolonged seizure activity, excessive exercise,
heat stroke or malignant hyperthermia, and infectious or
metabolic disorders (e.g., hypophosphatemia, severe
hypothyroidism). ARF caused by hemolysis is relatively
rare and is observed after blood transfusion reactions. It
has been postulated that myoglobin and hemoglobin pro-
mote intrarenal oxidative stress, resulting in injury to
tubular epithelial cells and inducing intratubular cast for-
mation. In addition, cell-free hemoglobin and myoglobin
are potent inhibitors of nitric oxide bioactivity and may
trigger intrarenal vasoconstriction and ischemia. Hypov-
olemia or acidosis may further promote intratubular cast
formation.
Intratubular casts containing filtered
immunoglobulin light chains and other proteins (includ-
ing Tamm-Horsfall protein produced by thick ascending
limb cells) cause ARF in patients with multiple myeloma
(myeloma cast nephropathy). Light chains are also directly
toxic to tubule epithelial cells. Intratubular obstruction is
an important cause of ARF in patients with severe hyper-
uricosuria or hyperoxaluria.Acute uric acid nephropathy can
complicate the treatment of patients with selected lym-
phoproliferative or myeloproliferative disorders (e.g.,
Burkitt’s lymphoma, acute myelogenous leukemia), espe-
cially after the administration of chemotherapy, resulting
in increased cell lysis (“tumor lysis syndrome”).
Pathology of Ischemic and Nephrotoxic
Acute Tubular Necrosis
The classic pathologic features of ischemic ATN are
patchy and focal necrosis of the tubular epithelium, with
detachment of cells from the basement membrane, and
occlusion of tubule lumens with casts composed of
intact or degenerating epithelial cells, Tamm-Horsfall
protein, and pigments. Leukocyte accumulation is fre-
quently observed in vasa recta; however, the morphology
of the glomeruli and renal vasculature is characteristi-
cally normal. Necrosis is most severe in the S3 segment
of proximal tubules but may also affect the medullary
thick ascending limb of the loop of Henle.
With exposure to nephrotoxins, morphologic changes
tend to be most prominent in both the convoluted and
straight portions of proximal tubules. Cellular necrosis is
less pronounced than in ischemic ATN.
Other Causes of Intrinsic ARF
Virtually any pharmacologic agent may trigger allergic
interstitial nephritis, which is characterized by inﬁltration
of the tubulointerstitium by granulocytes (typically but
not invariably eosinophils), macrophages, or lymphocytes
and by interstitial edema. The most common offenders
are antibiotics (e.g., penicillins, cephalosporins, quinolones,
sulfonamides,rifampin) and NSAIDs (Table 37-1).
Patients with advanced atherosclerosis can develop
ARF after manipulation of the aorta or renal arteries
during surgery or angiography; after trauma; or rarely,
spontaneously (atheroembolic ARF). Cholesterol crystals
embolize to the renal vasculature, lodge in small- and
medium-sized arteries, and incite a giant cell and
ﬁbrotic reaction in the vessel wall with narrowing or
obstruction of the vessel lumen. Atheroembolic ARF
is often associated with hypocomplementemia and
eosinophiluria, and it is frequently irreversible.The acute
glomerulonephritides are immune-mediated diseases
characterized by proliferative or crescentic glomerular
inﬂammation (glomerulonephritis).
POSTRENAL ARF
Urinary tract obstruction accounts for fewer than 5% of
cases of hospital-acquired ARF. Because one kidney has
Disorders Complicating Critical Illnesses and Their Management
374
SECTION V
sufﬁcient reserve to handle generated nitrogenous waste
products, ARF from obstruction requires obstruction to
urine ﬂow between the external urethral meatus and
bladder neck, bilateral ureteric obstruction, or unilateral
ureteric obstruction in a patient with one functioning
kidney or with signiﬁcant preexisting chronic kidney
disease. Bladder neck obstruction is the most common
cause of postrenal ARF and is usually caused by prostatic
disease (e.g., hypertrophy, neoplasia, or infection), neuro-
genic bladder, or therapy with anticholinergic drugs.
Less common causes of acute lower urinary tract
obstruction include blood clots, calculi, and urethritis
with spasm. Ureteric obstruction may result from intra-
luminal obstruction (e.g., calculi, blood clots, sloughed
renal papillae), inﬁltration of the ureteric wall (e.g., neo-
plasia), or external compression (e.g., retroperitoneal
ﬁbrosis, neoplasia or abscess, inadvertent surgical liga-
ture). During the early stages of obstruction (hours to
days), continued glomerular ﬁltration leads to increased
intraluminal pressure upstream to the site of obstruction.
As a result, there is gradual distention of the proximal
ureter, renal pelvis, and calyces and a decrease in GFR.
CLINICAL FEATURES AND
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
The ﬁrst step in evaluating a patient with renal failure is
to determine if the disease is acute or chronic. If a review
of laboratory records demonstrates that the increase in
BUN and creatinine is recent, this suggests that the
process is acute. However, previous measurements are not
always available. Findings that suggest chronic kidney dis-
ease include anemia; evidence of renal osteodystrophy
(radiologic or laboratory); and small, scarred kidneys.
However, anemia may also complicate ARF (see later),
and renal size may be normal or increased in several
chronic renal diseases (e.g., diabetic nephropathy, amyloi-
dosis, polycystic kidney disease, HIV-associated nephropa-
thy). After a diagnosis of ARF has been established, the
cause of ARF needs to be determined. Depending on
the cause, speciﬁc therapies may need to be instituted. If
the cause is believed to be an exogenous nephrotoxin
(often a medication), the nephrotoxin should be elimi-
nated or discontinued. Last, the prevention and manage-
ment of complications should be instituted.
CLINICAL ASSESSMENT
Symptoms of prerenal ARF include thirst and orthostatic
dizziness. Physical signs of orthostatic hypotension, tachy-
cardia, reduced jugular venous pressure, decreased skin tur-
gor, and dry mucous membranes suggest prerenal ARF.
Careful clinical examination may reveal stigmata of
chronic liver disease and portal hypertension, advanced
cardiac failure, sepsis, or other causes of reduced “effective”
arterial blood volume (Table 37-1). Case records should
be reviewed for documentation of a progressive decrease
in urine output and body weight and recent initiation
of treatment with diuretics, NSAIDs, ACE inhibitors, or
ARBs.
Hypovolemia, septic shock, and major surgery are
important risk factors for ischemic ATN. The risk of
ischemic ATN is increased further if ARF persists despite
normalization of systemic hemodynamics. Diagnosis of
nephrotoxic ATN requires careful review of the clinical
data and records for evidence of recent exposure to
nephrotoxic medications, radiocontrast agents, or endoge-
nous toxins.
Although ischemic and nephrotoxic ATN account for
>90% of cases of intrinsic ARF, other renal parenchymal
diseases must be considered (Table 37-2). Fever, arthral-
gias, and a pruritic erythematous rash after exposure to a
new drug suggest allergic interstitial nephritis, although
systemic features of hypersensitivity are frequently absent.
Flank pain may be a prominent symptom after occlusion
of a renal artery or vein and with other parenchymal dis-
eases distending the renal capsule (e.g., severe glomeru-
lonephritis or pyelonephritis). Subcutaneous nodules,
livedo reticularis, bright orange retinal arteriolar plaques,
and digital ischemia (“purple toes”) despite palpable pedal
pulses suggest atheroembolization. ARF in association
with oliguria, edema, and hypertension, with an “active”
urine sediment (nephritic syndrome), suggests acute
glomerulonephritis or vasculitis. Malignant hypertension
may result in ARF, often in association with hypertensive
injury to other organs (e.g., papilledema, neurologic dys-
function, left ventricular hypertrophy) and may mimic
glomerulonephritis in its other clinical manifestations.
Patients with postrenal ARF may present with supra-
pubic and ﬂank pain because of distention of the blad-
der and of the renal collecting system and capsule,
respectively. Colicky ﬂank pain radiating to the groin
suggests acute ureteric obstruction. Prostatic disease is
likely if the patient has a history of nocturia, frequency,
and hesitancy and enlargement of the prostate on rectal
examination. Neurogenic bladder should be suspected in
patients receiving anticholinergic medications or with
physical evidence of autonomic dysfunction. Deﬁnitive
diagnosis of postrenal ARF hinges on judicious use of
radiologic investigations and rapid improvement in renal
function after relief of obstruction.
URINALYSIS
Anuria suggests complete urinary tract obstruction but
may complicate severe cases of prerenal or intrinsic renal
ARF. Whereas wide ﬂuctuations in urine output raise
the possibility of intermittent obstruction, patients with
partial urinary tract obstruction may present with
polyuria because of impairment of urine concentrating
mechanisms.
Acute Renal Failure
375
CHAPTER 37
Disorders Complicating Critical Illnesses and Their Management
376
SECTION V
TABLE 37-2
EPIDEMIOLOGY, CLINICAL FEATURES, AND DIAGNOSTIC STUDIES FOR MAJOR CAUSES OF ACUTE RENAL FAILURE
ETIOLOGY
EPIDEMIOLOGY
CLINICAL FEATURES
SERUM STUDIES
URINE STUDIES
OTHER TESTING
Prerenal ARF
Most common cause of 
Volume depletion (absolute or 
High BUN/CR ratio
Hyaline casts
community-acquired ARF;  
postural hypotension, low jugular 
(≥20) is suggestive 
FENa <1%
history of poor ﬂuid intake; 
venous pressure, dry mucous
but not diagnostic
UNa <10 mmol/L
treatment with NSAIDs, ACE   
membranes) or decreased 
SG >1.018
inhibitors, or ARBs; worsening 
effective  circulatory volume 
heart failure
(e.g., heart failure or liver disease)
Intrinsic ARF
Diseases of large 
renal vessels
Renal artery
More common in those with 
Flank or abdominal pain
Elevated LDH
Mild proteinuria
Renal angiography
thrombosis
atrial ﬁbrillation or arterial
Occasional 
or MR angiography
thrombosis
hematuria
is diagnostic
Atheroembolic
Vascular disease; classically 
Retinal plaques, palpable purpura, 
Eosinophilia
Eosinophiluria
Skin or renal 
disease
occurs within days to weeks
livedo reticularis
Hypocomplementemia
biopsy
of manipulation of the aorta 
or other large vessels, often in
the setting of anticoagulation
Renal vein
History of nephrotic syndrome 
Flank pain
Mild proteinuria
Renal venography
thrombosis
or pulmonary embolism
Occasional 
or MR venography
hematuria
is diagnostic
Diseases of small
vessels and
glomeruli
Glomerulonephritis
Associated with recent 
New cardiac murmur 
ANA, ANCA, anti-GBM
Hematuria with
Renal biopsy
or vasculitis
infection (postinfectious or
(postinfectious)
antibody, hepatitis 
RBC casts or
endocarditis), SLE, liver
Skin rash or ulcers, 
serologies, cryoglobulins,
dysmorphic 
disease (hepatitis B or C)
arthralgias (lupus)
blood cultures, ASO,
RBCs
Anti-GBM disease: typically
Sinusitis (anti-GBM disease)
complements (positive
Granular casts
men in their 20s to 40s
Lung hemorrhage (anti-GBM,
test results depend 
Proteinuria 
ANCA disease: two peaks:
ANCA, lupus)
on the cause)
(usually <1 g/d)
20s to 30s and 50s to 60s
HUS or thrombotic
Recent GI infection 
Fever, neurologic abnormalities
Schistocytes on peripheral 
Hematuria
Renal biopsy
thrombocytopenic
(Escherichia coli ) or use of
blood smear, elevated 
Mild proteinuria
calcineurin inhibitors (FK506
LDH, anemia,
RBCs (rare)
and cyclosporine)
thrombocytopenia
Acute Renal Failure
377
CHAPTER 37
Malignant
Severe or uncontrolled 
Evidence of damage to other 
Hematuria with
hypertension
hypertension
organs: headache, papilledema,
RBC casts or 
heart failure with LVH by
proteinuria
echocardiography or ECG
Typically resolves with blood
pressure control
Acute tubular necrosis
Ischemia
Recent hemorrhage or 
Muddy brown 
severe hypotension
granular or
tubular
epithelial cell
casts
FENa >1%
UNa >20 mmol/L
SG <1.015
Exogenous toxins
Recent exposure to nephrotoxic
Muddy brown 
antibiotics or chemotherapy,
granular or 
often in association with
tubular epithelial 
sepsis, or volume depletion
cell casts
FENa >1%
UNa >20 mmol/L
SG <1.015
Recent exposure to
Muddy brown 
radiocontrast, often in
granular or 
association with volume
tubular
depletion, diabetes, or CKD
epithelial cell
casts
Urinalysis may
be normal
FENa often <1%
UNa often
<20 mmol/L
(Continued)
Disorders Complicating Critical Illnesses and Their Management
378
SECTION V
TABLE 37-2 (CONTINUED)
EPIDEMIOLOGY, CLINICAL FEATURES, AND DIAGNOSTIC STUDIES FOR MAJOR CAUSES OF ACUTE RENAL FAILURE
ETIOLOGY
EPIDEMIOLOGY
CLINICAL FEATURES
SERUM STUDIES
URINE STUDIES
OTHER TESTING
Endogenous 
Rhabdomyolysis
Postictal state (seizures),
Increased myoglobin, CK
U/A positive for 
toxins
evidence of trauma or prolonged
heme but no
immobilization
hematuria
Hemolysis: recent blood
Fever, other evidence of 
Pink plasma, increased 
Pink, heme-
Transfusion reaction 
transfusion
transfusion reaction
LDH
positive urine
workup
without
hematuria
Tumor lysis: recent
Hyperuricemia,
Urate crystals
chemotherapy
increased LDH
Multiple myeloma
Individuals >60 years of age,
Circulating monoclonal 
Dipstick-negative 
Bone marrow or 
ongoing constitutional symptoms
spike, anemia
proteinuria, 
renal biopsy
(fatigue, malaise)
monoclonal spike
on electrophoresis
Ethylene glycol ingestion
History of alcohol abuse, altered
Metabolic gap acidosis 
Oxalate crystals
mental status
with osmolal gap, positive
toxicology results
Diseases of the
tubulointerstitium
Allergic interstitial
Recent medication exposure
Fever, rash, arthralgias
Eosinophilia
WBC casts, 
Renal biopsy
nephritis
eosinophiluria
Acute bilateral
Fever, ﬂank pain and tenderness
Positive blood 
Leukocytes, 
pyelonephritis
culture results
proteinuria,
positive urine
culture result
Postrenal ARF
History of renal stones or
Palpable bladder, ﬂank or 
Usually normal;
Imaging to 
prostatic disease
abdominal pain
hematuria if
assess obstruction: 
caused by
CT scan and/or 
stones
ultrasound
Note: ACE, angiotensin-converting enzyme; ANA, antinuclear antibody; ANCA, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody; ARBs, angiotensin II receptor blockers; ARF, acute renal failure; ASO, antistrep-
tolysin O; BUN, blood urea nitrogen; CK, creatine kinase; CKD, chronic kidney disease; CR, creatinine; CT, computed tomography; ECG, electrocardiogram; FENa, fractional excretion of sodium;
GBM, glomerular basement membrane; GI, gastrointestinal; HUS, hemolytic-uremic syndrome; LDH, lactate dehydrogenase; LVH, left ventricular hypertrophy; MR, magnetic resonance; NSAIDs,
nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs; RBC, red blood cell; SG, speciﬁc gravity; SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus; U/A, urinalysis; UNa, urine sodium concentration; WBC, white blood cell.
In prerenal ARF, the sediment is characteristically
acellular and contains transparent hyaline casts (“bland,”
“benign,” “inactive” urine sediment). Hyaline casts are
formed in concentrated urine from normal constituents
of urine, principally Tamm-Horsfall protein, which is
secreted by epithelial cells of the loop of Henle. Patients
with postrenal ARF may also present with an inactive
sediment, although hematuria and pyuria are common
in patients with intraluminal obstruction or prostatic
disease. Pigmented “muddy brown” granular casts and
casts containing tubule epithelial cells are characteristic
of ATN and suggest an ischemic or nephrotoxic etiol-
ogy. These casts are usually found in association with
mild “tubular” proteinuria (<1 g/d), reﬂecting impaired
reabsorption and processing of ﬁltered proteins by
injured proximal tubules. Casts may be absent in
20–30% of patients with ATN and are not required for
diagnosis. In general, red blood cell casts indicate
glomerular injury or, less often, acute tubulointerstitial
nephritis. Whereas white blood cell casts and nonpig-
mented granular casts suggest interstitial nephritis, broad
granular casts are characteristic of chronic kidney disease
and probably reﬂect interstitial ﬁbrosis and dilatation of
tubules. Eosinophiluria (>5% of urine leukocytes) is a
common ﬁnding (∼90%) in patients with antibiotic-
induced allergic interstitial nephritis and can be detected
with Hansel’s stain; however, lymphocytes may predomi-
nate in allergic interstitial nephritis induced by NSAIDs
and some other drugs (i.e., ampicillin, rifampicin, and
interferon α). Occasional uric acid crystals (pleomorphic
in shape) are common in the concentrated urine of
patients with prerenal ARF but suggest acute urate
nephropathy if seen in abundance. Oxalate (envelope-
shaped) and hippurate (needle-shaped) crystals raise the
possibility of ethylene glycol ingestion and toxicity.
Proteinuria of >1 g/d suggests injury to the glomeru-
lar ultraﬁltration barrier (“glomerular proteinuria”) or
excretion of myeloma light chains.The latter may not be
detected by conventional dipstick analysis, and other
tests may be needed (e.g., sulfosalicylic acid precipita-
tion, immunoelectrophoresis). Hemoglobinuria or myoglo-
binuria should be suspected if urine is strongly positive
for heme by dipstick but contains few red blood cells
and if the supernatant of centrifuged urine is positive for
free heme. Bilirubinuria may provide a clue to the pres-
ence of HRS.
RENAL FAILURE INDICES
Analysis of urine and blood biochemistry may be useful
for distinguishing prerenal ARF from ischemic or
nephrotoxic intrinsic renal ARF.The fractional excretion
of sodium (FENa) is most useful in this regard.The FENa
relates sodium clearance to creatinine clearance. Sodium
is reabsorbed avidly from glomerular ﬁltrate in patients
with prerenal ARF in an attempt to restore intravascular
volume. The FENa tends to be high in patients with
ischemic ATN but is often low in patients with sepsis-
induced, pigment-induced, and some forms of nephrotoxic
ATN (e.g., contrast associated). In contrast, creatinine is
not reabsorbed in either setting. Consequently, patients
with prerenal ARF typically have a FENa of <1.0% (fre-
quently <0.1%). In patients with metabolic alkalosis, in
which there may be obligate losses of sodium in the
urine to maintain electroneutrality, the fractional excre-
tion of chloride (FECl) may be more sensitive than the
FENa in detecting prerenal azotemia. The urine sodium
concentration is a less sensitive index for distinguishing pre-
renal ARF from ischemic and nephrotoxic ARF because
values overlap between groups. Similarly, indices of uri-
nary concentrating ability, such as urine speciﬁc gravity,
urine osmolality, urine-to-plasma urea ratio, and blood
urea-to-creatinine ratio, are of limited value in the differ-
ential diagnosis.
Many caveats apply when interpreting biochemical
renal failure indices.The FENa may be >1.0% in prerenal
ARF if patients are receiving diuretics or with preexist-
ing chronic kidney disease, certain salt-wasting syn-
dromes, or adrenal insufﬁciency.
LABORATORY FINDINGS
Serial serum creatinine measurements can provide useful
insights to the cause of ARF. Prerenal ARF is typiﬁed by
ﬂuctuating serum creatinine levels that parallel changes in
hemodynamic status. Creatinine increases rapidly (within
24–48 h) in patients with ARF after renal ischemia,
atheroembolization, and radiocontrast exposure. Peak serum
creatinine concentrations are observed after 3–5 days
with contrast nephropathy and return to baseline after
5–7 days. In contrast, serum creatinine concentrations
typically peak later (7–10 days) in patients with ATN and
atheroembolic disease.The initial increase in serum crea-
tinine is characteristically delayed until the second week
of therapy with many tubular epithelial cell toxins (e.g.,
aminoglycosides, cisplatin) and is thought to reﬂect the
need for accumulation of these agents within tubular
epithelial cells to cause injury.
Hyperkalemia, hyperphosphatemia, hypocalcemia, and
elevations in serum uric acid and creatine kinase (MM
isoenzyme) levels at presentation suggest a diagnosis of
rhabdomyolysis. Hyperuricemia [>890 μmol/L or
(>15 mg/dL)] in association with hyperkalemia, hyper-
phosphatemia, and increased circulating levels of intracel-
lular enzymes such as lactate dehydrogenase may indicate
acute urate nephropathy and tumor lysis syndrome after
cancer chemotherapy.A wide anion and osmolal gap [the
latter calculated as the difference between the observed
(measured) serum osmolality minus the expected osmolal-
ity calculated from serum sodium, glucose, and urea con-
centrations) indicate the presence of an unusual anion or
osmole in the circulation (e.g., ingestion of ethylene glycol
Acute Renal Failure
379
CHAPTER 37
or methanol). Severe anemia in the absence of hemor-
rhage raises the possibility of hemolysis, multiple myeloma,
or thrombotic microangiopathy. Systemic eosinophilia
suggests allergic interstitial nephritis but is also a feature of
atheroembolic disease and polyarteritis nodosa.
RADIOLOGIC FINDINGS
Imaging of the urinary tract by ultrasonography is useful
to exclude postrenal ARF. CT and MRI are alternative
imaging modalities. Whereas pelvicalyceal dilatation is
usual with urinary tract obstruction (98% sensitivity),
dilatation may be absent immediately after obstruction
or in patients with ureteric encasement (e.g., retroperi-
toneal ﬁbrosis, neoplasia). Retrograde and anterograde
pyelography are more deﬁnitive investigations in com-
plex cases and provide precise localization of the site of
obstruction.A plain ﬁlm of the abdomen or unenhanced
helical CT scan is a valuable initial screening technique
in patients with suspected nephrolithiasis. Magnetic res-
onance angiography (MRA) is often used to assess the
patency of the renal arteries and veins in patients with
suspected vascular obstruction. Alternative methods
include Doppler ultrasound (which is much more oper-
ator dependent than MRA) and CT-based angiography.
Catheter-based angiography may be required for deﬁni-
tive diagnosis and treatment.
RENAL BIOPSY
Biopsy is reserved for patients in whom prerenal and
postrenal ARF have been excluded and the cause of
intrinsic ARF is unclear. Renal biopsy is particularly
useful when clinical assessment and laboratory investiga-
tions suggest diagnoses other than ischemic or nephro-
toxic injury that may respond to disease-speciﬁc therapy.
Examples include glomerulonephritis, vasculitis, and
allergic interstitial nephritis.
COMPLICATIONS
ARF impairs renal excretion of sodium, potassium, and
water and perturbs divalent cation homeostasis and
urinary acidiﬁcation mechanisms.As a result,ARF is fre-
quently complicated by intravascular volume over-
load, hyponatremia, hyperkalemia, hyperphosphatemia,
hypocalcemia, hypermagnesemia, and metabolic acidosis.
In addition, patients are unable to excrete nitrogenous
waste products and are prone to developing the uremic
syndrome.The speed of development and the severity of
these complications reflect the degree of renal impair-
ment and the catabolic state of the patient.
Expansion of extracellular fluid volume is an inevitable
consequence of diminished salt and water excretion in
oliguric or anuric individuals.Whereas milder forms are
characterized by weight gain, bibasilar lung rales, increased
jugular venous pressure, and dependent edema, continued
volume expansion may precipitate life-threatening pul-
monary edema. Excessive administration of free water,
either through ingestion and nasogastric administration or
as hypotonic saline or isotonic dextrose solutions, can
induce hypo-osmolality and hyponatremia, which, if severe,
lead to neurologic abnormalities,including seizures.
Hyperkalemia is a frequent complication of ARF. Coex-
istent metabolic acidosis may exacerbate hyperkalemia
by promoting potassium efﬂux from cells. Hyperkalemia
may be particularly severe, even at the time of diagno-
sis, in patients with rhabdomyolysis, hemolysis, and
tumor lysis syndrome. Patients with mild hyperkalemia
(<6.0 mmol/L) are usually asymptomatic. Higher lev-
els may trigger electrocardiographic abnormalities or
arrhythmias.
ARF is typically complicated by metabolic acidosis,
often with an increased anion gap (Chap. 40). Acidosis
can be particularly severe when endogenous production
of hydrogen ions is increased by other mechanisms (e.g.,
diabetic or fasting ketoacidosis; lactic acidosis complicat-
ing generalized tissue hypoperfusion, liver disease, or
sepsis; metabolism of ethylene glycol or methanol).
Hyperphosphatemia is an almost invariable complica-
tion of ARF. Severe hyperphosphatemia may develop in
highly catabolic patients or after rhabdomyolysis,
hemolysis, or tissue ischemia. Metastatic deposition of
calcium phosphate can lead to hypocalcemia, particularly
with elevation of serum calcium (mg/dL) and phos-
phate (mg/dL) concentrations. Other factors that
contribute to hypocalcemia include tissue resistance to
the actions of parathyroid hormone and reduced levels
of 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D. Hypocalcemia is often
asymptomatic but can cause perioral paresthesia, muscle
cramps, seizures, altered mental status, prolongation of
the QT interval, and other nonspeciﬁc T-wave changes
on electrocardiography.
Anemia develops rapidly in patients with ARF and is
usually multifactorial in origin. Contributing factors
include impaired erythropoiesis, hemolysis, bleeding,
hemodilution, and reduced red blood cell survival time.
Prolongation of the bleeding time is also common. Com-
mon contributors to the bleeding diathesis include mild
thrombocytopenia, platelet dysfunction, or clotting fac-
tor abnormalities (e.g., factor VIII dysfunction). Infection
is a common and serious complication of ARF. It is
unclear whether patients with ARF have a clinically sig-
niﬁcant defect in host immune responses or whether the
high incidence of infection reﬂects repeated breaches of
mucocutaneous barriers (e.g., IV cannulae, mechanical
ventilation, bladder catheterization). Cardiopulmonary com-
plications of ARF include arrhythmias, pericarditis and
pericardial effusion, and pulmonary edema.
Protracted periods of severe ARF are invariably asso-
ciated with the development of the uremic syndrome.
Disorders Complicating Critical Illnesses and Their Management
380
SECTION V
A vigorous diuresis can occur during the recovery
phase of ARF (see earlier), which may be inappropriate
on occasion and lead to intravascular volume depletion.
Hypernatremia can also complicate recovery if water
losses via hypotonic urine are not replaced or if losses
are inappropriately replaced by relatively hypertonic
saline solutions. Hypokalemia, hypomagnesemia, hypophos-
phatemia, and hypocalcemia are less common metabolic
complications during this period but may develop in
response to injury associated with selected drugs (e.g., use
of ifosfamide may lead to Fanconi syndrome or type II
renal tubular acidosis associated with hypokalemia, aci-
dosis, hypophosphatemia, and glycosuria).
prevent or attenuate ARF in patients receiving high-
dose methotrexate and in those with rhabdomyolysis.
N-acetylcysteine limits acetaminophen-induced renal
injury if given within 24 h of ingestion.
A number of preventive measures have been pro-
posed for contrast nephropathy. It is clear that hydration
is an effective preventive measure. Other proposed mea-
sures include loop diuretics and mannitol, dopamine,
fenoldopam, N-acetylcysteine, theophylline, and sodium
bicarbonate. Despite favorable experimental data, there
is insufﬁcient evidence to support the use of loop diuret-
ics or mannitol to prevent radiocontrast nephropathy or
any other cause of ARF. Likewise, despite its widespread
use, dopamine has proven ineffective as a prophylactic
agent. Fenoldopam, a dopamine a-1–speciﬁc agonist
approved for use as a parenteral antihypertensive agent,
has been tested in several clinical trials and does not
appear to reduce the incidence of contrast nephropathy.
Moreover, fenoldopam is associated with signiﬁcant side
effects, including systemic hypotension, and its use as an
agent to prevent radiocontrast nephropathy should be
discouraged. In contrast, several (relatively small) ran-
domized clinical trials (RCTs) have suggested a clinical
beneﬁt to the use of N-acetylcysteine, although meta-
analyses have been inconclusive.However,aside from the
potential hazards associated with a delay in radiographic
imaging, N-acetylcysteine appears to be safe, and its use
in patients at high risk for radiocontrast nephropathy is
reasonable based on its low side effect proﬁle. Larger
RCTs will be required to show deﬁnitive beneﬁt.
Theophylline and aminophylline (adenosine antago-
nists) offer the potential advantage of use immediately
preceding radiocontrast administration, although the
beneﬁt, if present, appears marginal in most studies.
Last, volume expansion with bicarbonate-containing IV
ﬂuids has been suggested to be superior to sodium
chloride (saline) administration and showed a signiﬁcant
beneﬁt in a single-center RCT. Unlike N-acetylcysteine,
the use of sodium bicarbonate does not obligate a
delay in imaging (the published protocol began IV ﬂuids
1 h before the imaging study was begun). Whether a
combination of strategies (e.g., N-acetylcysteine plus
sodium bicarbonate) offers additive beneﬁt and that
patients require treatment remain unclear and warrant
further study.
SPECIFIC THERAPIES
By deﬁnition, prerenal ARF
is rapidly reversible upon correction of the primary
hemodynamic abnormality, and postrenal ARF resolves
upon relief of obstruction. To date, there are no speciﬁc
therapies for patients with established AKI. Management
of these disorders should focus on elimination of the
causative hemodynamic abnormality or toxin, avoidance
of additional insults, and prevention and treatment of
complications. Speciﬁc treatment of other causes of
intrinsic renal ARF depends on the underlying pathology.
Acute Renal Failure
381
CHAPTER 37
Treatment:
ACUTE RENAL FAILURE
PREVENTION
Because there are no speciﬁc thera-
pies for ischemic or nephrotoxic ARF, prevention is of
paramount importance. Many cases of ischemic ARF can
be avoided by close attention to cardiovascular function
and intravascular volume in high-risk patients, such as
elderly individuals and patients with preexisting chronic
kidney disease.
Indeed,
aggressive restoration of
intravascular volume has been shown to dramatically
reduce the incidence of ischemic ARF after major
surgery and trauma, burns, or cholera. The incidence of
nephrotoxic ARF can be reduced by tailoring the admin-
istration (dose and frequency) of nephrotoxic drugs to
the patient’s body size and GFR. In this regard, it should
be noted that serum creatinine is a relatively insensitive
index of GFR and may overestimate GFR considerably in
small and elderly patients. For purposes of drug dosing,
it is advisable to estimate the GFR using the Cockcroft-
Gault formula (which factors in age, gender, and weight)
or the simpliﬁed Modiﬁcation of Diet in Renal Disease
(MDRD) equation (which factors in age, gender, weight,
and race). Of note, these equations cannot be used to
estimate GFR when creatinine is not at steady state (e.g.,
during evolving ARF). Adjusting the drug dosage
according to circulating drug levels also appears to limit
renal injury in patients receiving aminoglycoside antibi-
otics, cyclosporine, or tacrolimus. Diuretics, NSAIDs, ACE
inhibitors, ARBs, and vasodilators should be used with
caution in patients with suspected true or “effective”
hypovolemia or renovascular disease because these
drugs may precipitate prerenal ARF or convert the latter
to ischemic ARF. Allopurinol and forced alkaline diuresis
are useful prophylactic measures in patients at high risk
for acute urate nephropathy (e.g., cancer chemotherapy
in hematologic malignancies) to limit uric acid genera-
tion and prevent precipitation of urate crystals in renal
tubules.Rasburicase,a recombinant urate-oxidase enzyme,
catalyzes enzymatic oxidation of uric acid into a soluble
metabolite, allantoin. Forced alkaline diuresis may also
Prerenal Acute Renal Failure
The composi-
tion of replacement ﬂuids for treatment of prerenal ARF
caused by hypovolemia should be tailored according to
the composition of the lost ﬂuid.Whereas severe hypov-
olemia caused by hemorrhage should be corrected with
packed red blood cells, isotonic saline is usually appro-
priate replacement for mild to moderate hemorrhage or
plasma loss (e.g., burns, pancreatitis). Urinary and gas-
trointestinal ﬂuids can vary greatly in composition but
are usually hypotonic. Hypotonic solutions (e.g., 0.45%
saline) are usually recommended as initial replacement
in patients with prerenal ARF caused by increased uri-
nary or gastrointestinal ﬂuid losses, although isotonic
saline may be more appropriate in severe cases. Subse-
quent therapy should be based on measurements of the
volume and ionic content of excreted or drained ﬂuids.
Serum potassium and acid–base status should be moni-
tored carefully and potassium and bicarbonate supple-
mented as appropriate. Cardiac failure may require
aggressive management with inotropic agents, preload-
and afterload-reducing agents, antiarrhythmic drugs,
and mechanical aids such as intraaortic balloon pumps.
Invasive hemodynamic monitoring may be required in
selected cases to guide therapy for complications in
patients in whom clinical assessment of cardiovascular
function and intravascular volume is difﬁcult.
Fluid management may be particularly challenging
in patients with cirrhosis complicated by ascites. In this
setting, it is important to distinguish between full-
blown HRS, which carries a grave prognosis, and
reversible ARF caused by true or “effective”hypovolemia
induced by overzealous use of diuretics or sepsis (e.g.,
spontaneous bacterial peritonitis). The contribution of
hypovolemia to ARF can be deﬁnitively assessed only by
administration of a ﬂuid challenge. Fluids should be
administered slowly and titrated to jugular venous pres-
sure and, if necessary, central venous and pulmonary
capillary wedge pressure. Whereas patients with a
reversible prerenal component typically have an
increase in urine output and decrease in serum creati-
nine with ﬂuid challenge, patients with HRS do not.
Patients with HRS may have increased ascites formation
and pulmonary compromise if they are not monitored
closely during ﬂuid challenge. Large volumes of ascitic
ﬂuid can usually be drained by paracentesis without
deterioration in renal function if IV albumin is adminis-
tered simultaneously. Indeed, “large-volume paracente-
sis” may afford an increase in GFR, likely by lowering
intraabdominal pressure and improving ﬂow in renal
veins. Alternatively, for patients with refractory ascites,
transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunting is an
alternative. Older peritoneal-venous shunts (LaVeen or
Denver shunts) have largely fallen out of favor. Tran-
sjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunts may improve
renal function through increased central blood volume
and suppression of aldosterone and norepinephrine
secretion.
Intrinsic Acute Renal Failure
Many different
approaches to attenuate injury or hasten recovery have
been tested in ischemic and nephrotoxic AKI.These include
atrial natriuretic peptide, low-dose dopamine, endothelin
antagonists,loop-blocking diuretics,calcium channel block-
ers, α-adrenoreceptor blockers, prostaglandin analogues,
antioxidants, antibodies against leukocyte adhesion mole-
cules, and insulin-like growth factor type I. Although many
of these are beneﬁcial in experimental models of ischemic
or nephrotoxic ATN,they have either failed to confer consis-
tent beneﬁt or proved ineffective in humans.
Patients with ARF caused by other intrinsic renal dis-
eases such as acute glomerulonephritis or vasculitis may
respond to immunosuppressive agents (glucocorticoids,
alkylating agents, or plasmapheresis, depending on the
primary pathology). Glucocorticoids may also hasten
remission in allergic interstitial nephritis, although data
are limited to small-case series.Aggressive control of sys-
temic arterial pressure is of paramount importance in
limiting renal injury in patients with malignant hyper-
tensive nephrosclerosis. Patients with hypertension and
ARF caused by scleroderma may be exquisitely sensitive
to treatment with ACE inhibitors.
Postrenal Acute Renal Failure
Management
of postrenal ARF requires close collaboration between a
nephrologist, urologist, and radiologist. Obstruction of
the urethra or bladder neck is usually managed initially
by transurethral or suprapubic placement of a bladder
catheter, which provides temporary relief while the
obstructing lesion is identiﬁed and treated deﬁnitively.
Similarly, ureteric obstruction may be treated initially by
percutaneous catheterization of the dilated renal pelvis
or ureter. Indeed, obstructing lesions can often be
removed percutaneously (e.g., calculus, sloughed papilla)
or bypassed by insertion of a ureteric stent (e.g., carci-
noma). Most patients experience an appropriate diuresis
for several days after relief of obstruction. Approximately
5% of patients develop a transient salt-wasting syn-
drome that may require administration of IV saline to
maintain blood pressure.
SUPPORTIVE MEASURES
(Table 37-3) After cor-
rection of hypovolemia, salt and water intake are tailored
to match losses.Hypervolemia can usually be managed by
restriction of salt and water intake and diuretics. Indeed,
there is, as yet, no proven rationale for administration of
diuretics in ARF except to treat this complication. Even
though subpressor doses of dopamine may transiently
promote salt and water excretion by increasing renal
blood ﬂow and GFR and by inhibiting tubule sodium reab-
sorption, subpressor (“low-dose,” ”renal-dose”) dopamine
has proven ineffective in clinical trials, may trigger
Disorders Complicating Critical Illnesses and Their Management
382
SECTION V
arrhythmias, and should not be used as a renoprotective
agent in this setting. Ultraﬁltration or dialysis is used to
treat severe hypervolemia when conservative measures
fail. Hyponatremia and hypo-osmolality can usually be
controlled by restriction of free water intake. Conversely,
hypernatremia is treated by administration of water or IV
hypotonic saline or isotonic dextrose-containing solu-
tions. The management of hyperkalemia is described in
Chap.39.
Metabolic acidosis is not usually treated unless serum
bicarbonate concentration decreases below 15 mmol/L
or arterial pH decreases below 7.2. More severe acidosis
is corrected by oral or IV sodium bicarbonate.Initial rates
of replacement are guided by estimates of bicarbonate
deﬁcit and adjusted thereafter according to serum levels
(Chap. 40). Patients should be monitored for complica-
tions of sodium bicarbonate administration such as
hypervolemia, metabolic alkalosis, hypocalcemia, and
hypokalemia. From a practical point of view, most
patients who require supplemental sodium bicarbonate
administration will need emergency dialysis within days.
Hyperphosphatemia is usually controlled by restriction
of dietary phosphate and by oral phosphate binders
(calcium carbonate, calcium acetate, sevelamer, and
Acute Renal Failure
383
CHAPTER 37
TABLE 37-3
MANAGEMENT OF ISCHEMIC AND NEPHROTOXIC ACUTE RENAL FAILUREa
MANAGEMENT ISSUE
THERAPY
Reversal of Renal Insult
Ischemic ATN
Restore systemic hemodynamics and renal perfusion through volume resuscitation and
use of vasopressors
Nephrotoxic ATN
Eliminate nephrotoxic agents
Consider toxin-speciﬁc measures forced alkaline diuresis for rhabdomyolysis,
allopurinol or rasburicase for tumor lysis syndrome
Prevention and Treatment of Complications
Intravascular 
Salt and water restriction
volume overload
Diuretics
Ultraﬁltration
Hyponatremia
Restriction of enteral free water intake
Avoidance of hypotonic IV solutions, including dextrose-containing solutions
Hyperkalemia
Restriction of dietary K+ intake
Elimination of K+ supplements and K+-sparing diuretics
Loop diuretics to promote K+ excretion
Potassium binding ion-exchange resins (e.g., sodium polystyrene sulfonate or Kayexelate)
Insulin (10 units regular) and glucose (50 mL of 50% dextrose) to promote
intracellular mobilization
Inhaled β-agonist therapy to promote intracellular mobilization
Calcium gluconate or calcium chloride (1 g) to stabilize the myocardium
Dialysis
Metabolic acidosis
Sodium bicarbonate (maintain serum bicarbonate >15 mmol/L or arterial pH >7.2)
Administration of other bases (e.g., THAM)
Dialysis
Hyperphosphatemia
Restriction of dietary phosphate intake
Phosphate binding agents (calcium carbonate, calcium acetate, sevelamer 
hydrochloride, aluminum hydroxide)
Hypocalcemia
Calcium carbonate or gluconate (if symptomatic)
Hypermagnesemia
Discontinue Mg++-containing antacids
Hyperuricemia
Treatment is usually not necessary if <890 μmol/L or <15 mg/dL
Allopurinol, forced alkaline diuresis, rasburicase
Nutrition
Protein and calorie intake to avoid net negative nitrogen balance
Dialysis
To prevent complications of acute renal failure
Choice of agents
Avoid other nephrotoxins: ACE inhibitors, ARBs, aminoglycosides, NSAIDs, radiocontrast
unless absolutely necessary and no alternative
Drug dosing
Adjust doses and frequency of administration for degree of renal impairment
aNote that these are general recommendations and need to be tailored to the individual patient.
Note: ATN, acute tubular necrosis; ACE, angiotensin-converting enzyme; ARB, angiotensin II receptor blocker; NSAID, nonsteroidal anti-inﬂam-
matory drug; THAM, tris(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane.
aluminum hydroxide) to reduce gastrointestinal absorp-
tion of phosphate.Hypocalcemia does not usually require
treatment unless it is severe, as may occur with rhab-
domyolysis or pancreatitis or after administration of bicar-
bonate. Hyperuricemia is typically mild [<890 μmol/L or
(<15 mg/dL)] and does not require intervention.
The objective of nutritional management during the
maintenance phase of ARF is to provide sufﬁcient calo-
ries and protein to minimize catabolism. Nutritional
requirements vary based on the underlying disease
process; for example, those with sepsis-associated AKI
are likely to be hypercatabolic. The presence of oliguria
complicates nutritional management, and if the patient
is not on dialysis, minimizing production of nitrogenous
waste is a consideration. Often, the institution of dialysis
facilitates the provision of adequate nutritional support.
There is no clear beneﬁt of parenteral nutrition com-
pared with enteral nutrition; indeed, those supported
with parenteral nutrition are at increased risk of compli-
cations,including infection.
Anemia may necessitate blood transfusion if severe.
Recombinant human erythropoietin is rarely used in
ARF because bone marrow resistance to erythropoietin
is common, and more immediate treatment of anemia
(if any) is required. Patients with uremic bleeding may
respond to administration of desmopressin or estro-
gens. Often dialysis is instituted to control bleeding that
appears to be related to uremia. Gastrointestinal pro-
phylaxis with histamine receptor (H2) antagonists or
proton pump inhibitors should be prescribed, especially
in the setting of critical illness. Meticulous care of IV and
bladder catheters and other invasive devices is manda-
tory to avoid infections.
Indications and Modalities of Dialysis
(See
also Chap. 38) During ARF, dialysis is often used to sup-
port renal function until renal repair or recovery occurs.
Absolute indications for dialysis include symptoms or
signs of the uremic syndrome and management of
refractory hypervolemia, hyperkalemia, or acidosis. Many
nephrologists also initiate dialysis empirically for blood
urea levels of >100 mg/dL; however, this approach has
yet to be validated in controlled clinical trials. Although
direct clinical comparisons are limited, hemodialysis
appears to be somewhat more effective than peritoneal
dialysis for the management of ARF. Peritoneal dialysis
may be useful when hemodialysis is unavailable or if it is
impossible to obtain vascular access.However,peritoneal
dialysis is associated with increased protein losses and is
contraindicated in patients who have undergone recent
abdominal surgery and those with ongoing infection.
Peritoneal dialysis access requires insertion of a cuffed
catheter into the peritoneal cavity.
Vascular access for hemodialysis requires insertion of
a temporary double-lumen hemodialysis catheter into
the internal jugular or femoral vein. Insertion into the
subclavian vein is generally avoided owing to the risk of
subclavian stenosis. Hemodialysis may be provided in
the form of intermittent hemodialysis (typically per-
formed for 3–4 h/d three or four times per week), slow
low-efficiency dialysis (performed for 6–12 h/d three
to six times per week), or continuous renal replacement
therapy (CRRT). CCRTs are particular valuable tech-
niques in patients in whom intermittent therapy fails to
control hypervolemia, uremia, or acidosis and in those
who do not tolerate intermittent hemodialysis because
of hemodynamic instability. In patients in whom hemo-
dynamic instability is a primary consideration, slow
low-efﬁciency hemodialysis (SLED), a relatively new
hybrid mode of dialysis, is an excellent alternative to
CRRT.
Continuous arteriovenous modalities—continuous
arteriovenous hemofiltration (CAVH), hemodialysis
(CAVHD), and hemodiafiltration (CAVHDF)—require
both arterial and venous access. The patient’s own
blood pressure generates an ultraﬁltrate of plasma
across a porous biocompatible dialysis membrane.With
the advent of peristaltic pumps, the arteriovenous
modalities have fallen out of favor, partly because of the
complications associated with cannulation of a large
artery with a large-bore catheter. In continuous venove-
nous hemodialysis (CVVHD), a blood pump generates
ultraﬁltration pressure across the dialysis membrane. In
continuous venovenous hemofiltration (CVVH), the
hemodialysis (diffusive clearance) component is elimi-
nated, and an ultraﬁltrate of plasma is removed across
the dialysis membrane and replaced by a physiologic
crystalloid solution (convective clearance). In continu-
ous venovenous hemodiaﬁltration (CVVHDF), these two
methods of clearance are combined. The bulk of
evidence to date suggests that intermittent and contin-
uous dialytic therapies are equally effective for the
treatment of patients with ARF.The choice of technique
is currently tailored to the speciﬁc needs of the patient,
the resources of the institution, and the expertise of the
physician. Potential disadvantages of continuous tech-
niques include the need for prolonged immobilization,
systemic anticoagulation, and prolonged exposure of
blood to synthetic (albeit biocompatible) dialysis
membranes.
The optimal dose of dialysis for ARF remains unclear
at present. Recent evidence (from a single-center, non-
randomized trial) suggests that more intensive
hemodialysis (e.g., daily rather than alternate-day inter-
mittent dialysis) may be clinically superior and confers
improved survival in ARF after dialysis is required. This
conclusion may not be as intuitive as it ﬁrst appears
because dialysis itself has been postulated to prolong
ARF by inducing hypotension and other adverse effects
related to the blood–dialyzer contact (e.g., complement
Disorders Complicating Critical Illnesses and Their Management
384
SECTION V
activation and inﬂammation). Similarly, data suggest
that increased doses of continuous renal replacement
therapy may be of beneﬁt for patients with ARF,
although these results need to be conﬁrmed in a larger,
multicenter study.
community-acquired ARF is prerenal azotemia. How-
ever, in countries with less well-developed health care
systems, infective causes for ARF predominate. In
developed countries, postoperative and ischemic or
nephrotoxic causes of ARF are more common.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We are grateful to Dr. Hugh Brady and Dr. Barry Brenner, authors
of this chapter in the 16th edition of Harrison’s Principles of Internal
Medicine, for contributions to this edition.
FURTHER READINGS
BRADY HR et al: Acute renal failure, in BM Brenner (ed), Brenner
and Rector’s The Kidney, 7th ed. Philadelphia, Saunders, 2004
LAMEIRE N: The pathophysiology of acute renal failure. Crit Care
Clin 21:197, 2005
——— et al:Acute renal failure. Lancet 365:417, 2005
PANNU N et al: Prophylaxis strategies for contrast-induced nephropathy.
JAMA 295:2765, 2006
STAR RA:Treatment of acute renal failure. Kidney Int 54:1817, 1998
WEISBORD SD, PALEVSKY P: Radiocontrast-induced acute renal fail-
ure. J Intens Care Med 20:63, 2005
Acute Renal Failure
385
CHAPTER 37
OUTCOME AND LONG-TERM
PROGNOSIS
The in-hospital mortality rate among patients with ARF
ranges from 20–50% or more, depending on underlying
conditions, and has declined only marginally over the
past 15 years. Most patients who survive an episode of
ARF recover sufﬁcient renal function to remain dialysis
independent, although a fraction (∼10–20%) go on to
require maintenance dialysis.
Common causes of ARF vary depending on
the availability of health care in a given coun-
try. In general, the most common cause of
Kathleen D. Liu
I
Glenn M. Chertow
Dialysis may be required for the treatment of patients
with either acute or chronic kidney disease.The use of
continuous renal replacement therapies (CRRTs) and
slow, low-efﬁciency dialysis (SLED) is speciﬁc to the
management of acute renal failure (ARF) and is discussed
in Chap. 37.These modalities are performed continuously
(CRRT) or over 6–12 h per session (SLED) in contrast
to the 3–4 h of an intermittent hemodialysis session.The
advantages and disadvantages of CRRT and SLED are
discussed in Chap. 37.
Peritoneal dialysis is rarely used in developed coun-
tries for the treatment of patients with ARF because of
the increased risk of infection and (as will be discussed
in more detail later) less efﬁcient clearance per unit of
time.The focus of the majority of this chapter is on the
use of dialysis for end-stage renal disease (ESRD).
With the widespread availability of dialysis, the lives
of hundreds of thousands of patients with ESRD have
been prolonged. In the United States alone, there are now
approximately 450,000 patients with ESRD, the vast
majority of whom require dialysis. The incidence rate
for ESRD is 330 cases per million population per year.
DIALYSIS IN THE TREATMENT 
OF RENAL FAILURE
The incidence of ESRD is disproportionately higher in
African Americans (~1000 per million population per year)
compared with white Americans (259 per million popu-
lation per year). In the United States, the leading cause
of ESRD is diabetes mellitus, currently accounting for
nearly 45% of newly diagnosed cases of ESRD.Twenty-
seven percent of patients have ESRD that has been
attributed to hypertension, although it is unclear whether
hypertension is the cause or a consequence of vascular
disease or other unknown causes of kidney failure in these
cases. Other important causes of ESRD include glomeru-
lonephritis, polycystic kidney disease, and obstructive
uropathy.
Globally, mortality rates for patients with ESRD
are the lowest in Europe and Japan but are very
high in the developing world because of the lim-
ited availability of dialysis. In the United States, the mor-
tality rate of patients on dialysis is approximately 18–20%
per year, with a 5-year survival rate of approximately
30–35%. Deaths are  mainly caused by cardiovascular dis-
eases and infections (~50 and 15% of deaths, respectively).
Older age, male gender, nonblack race, diabetes mellitus,
CHAPTER 38
CHAPTER 38
386
I Treatment Options for Patients
with End-stage Renal Disease . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .387
I Hemodialysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .387
The Dialyzer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .387
Dialysate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .387
Blood Delivery System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .388
Goals of Dialysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .389
Complications during Hemodialysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .389
I Peritoneal Dialysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .390
Forms of Peritoneal Dialysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .390
Access to the Peritoneal Cavity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .391
Complications during Peritoneal Dialysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .391
I Global Perspective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .392
I Further Readings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 392
malnutrition, and underlying heart disease are important
predictors of death.
TREATMENT OPTIONS FOR PATIENTS 
WITH END-STAGE RENAL DISEASE
The commonly accepted criteria for initiating patients
on maintenance dialysis include the presence of uremic
symptoms, the presence of hyperkalemia unresponsive to
conservative measures, persistent extracellular volume
expansion despite diuretic therapy, acidosis refractory to
medical therapy, a bleeding diathesis, and a creatinine
clearance or estimated glomerular ﬁltration rate (GFR)
<10 mL/min per 1.73 m2.Timely referral to a nephrol-
ogist for advanced planning and creation of a dialysis
access; education about ESRD treatment options; and
management of the complications of advanced chronic
kidney disease, including hypertension, anemia, acidosis,
and secondary hyperparathyroidism, is advisable.
In ESRD, treatment options include hemodialysis (in
center or at home); peritoneal dialysis, as either continuous
ambulatory peritoneal dialysis (CAPD) or continuous
cyclic peritoneal dialysis (CCPD); or transplantation.
Although there are geographic variations, hemodialysis
remains the most common therapeutic modality for
ESRD (>90% of patients) in the United States. In con-
trast to hemodialysis, peritoneal dialysis is continuous, but
much less efﬁcient, in terms of solute clearance.Although
no large-scale clinical trials have been completed com-
paring outcomes among patients randomized to either
hemodialysis or peritoneal dialysis, outcomes associated
with both therapies are similar in most reports, and the
decision of which modality to select is often based on
personal preferences and quality-of-life considerations.
HEMODIALYSIS
Hemodialysis relies on the principles of solute diffusion
across a semipermeable membrane. Movement of meta-
bolic waste products takes place down a concentration
gradient from the circulation into the dialysate.The rate
of diffusive transport increases in response to several fac-
tors, including the magnitude of the concentration gra-
dient, the membrane surface area, and the mass transfer
coefﬁcient of the membrane.The latter is a function of
the porosity and thickness of the membrane, the size of
the solute molecule, and the conditions of ﬂow on the
two sides of the membrane. According to the laws of
diffusion, the larger the molecule, the slower its rate of
transfer across the membrane. A small molecule, such as
urea (60 Da), undergoes substantial clearance; a larger
molecule, such as creatinine (113 Da), is cleared less efﬁ-
ciently. In addition to diffusive clearance, movement of
waste products from the circulation into the dialysate
may occur as a result of ultraﬁltration. Convective clear-
ance occurs because of solvent drag, with solutes being
swept along with water across the semipermeable dialysis
membrane.
THE DIALYZER
There are three essential components to hemodialysis:
the dialyzer, the composition and delivery of the dialysate,
and the blood delivery system (Fig. 38-1).The dialyzer
consists of a plastic device with the facility to perfuse
blood and dialysate compartments at very high ﬂow
rates.The surface area of modern dialysis membranes in
adult patients is usually in the range of 1.5–2.0 m2.The
hollow-ﬁber dialyzer is the most common in use in the
United States. These dialyzers are composed of bundles
of capillary tubes through which blood circulates while
dialysate travels on the outside of the ﬁber bundle.
Recent advances have led to the development of many
different types of membrane material. Broadly, there are
four categories of dialysis membranes: cellulose, substi-
tuted cellulose, cellulosynthetic, and synthetic. Over the
past three decades, there has been a gradual switch from
cellulose-derived to synthetic membranes because the
latter are more “biocompatible.” Bioincompatibility is gen-
erally deﬁned as the ability of the membrane to activate
the complement cascade. Cellulosic membranes are bioin-
compatible because of the presence of free hydroxyl
groups on the membrane surface. In contrast, with the
substituted cellulose membranes (e.g., cellulose acetate)
or the cellulosynthetic membranes, the hydroxyl groups
are chemically bound to either acetate or tertiary amino
groups, resulting in limited complement activation.
Synthetic membranes, such as polysulfone, polymethyl-
methacrylate, and polyacrylonitrile membranes, are even
more biocompatible because of the absence of these
hydroxyl groups. Polysulfone membranes are now used
in >60% of the dialysis treatments in the United States.
Reprocessing and reuse of hemodialyzers are often used
for patients on maintenance hemodialysis in the United
States. However, as the manufacturing costs for dispos-
able dialyzers have declined, increasingly more outpatient
dialysis facilities are no longer reprocessing dialyzers. In
most centers employing reuse, only the dialyzer unit is
reprocessed and reused, but in the developing world,
blood lines are also frequently reused. The reprocessing
procedure can be either manual or automated. It consists
of the sequential rinsing of the blood and dialysate
compartments with water; a chemical cleansing step with
reverse ultraﬁltration from the dialysate to the blood
compartment; the testing of the patency of the dialyzer;
and, ﬁnally, disinfection of the dialyzer. Formaldehyde,
peracetic acid–hydrogen peroxide, glutaraldehyde, and
bleach have all been used as reprocessing agents.
DIALYSATE
The potassium concentration of dialysate may be varied
from 0 to 4 mmol/L depending on the predialysis plasma
Dialysis in the Treatment of Renal Failure
387
CHAPTER 38
potassium concentration. The usual dialysate calcium
concentration in U.S.hemodialysis centers is 1.25 mmol/L
(2.5 meq/L), although modification may be required
in selected settings (e.g., higher dialysate calcium con-
centrations may be used in patients with hypocalcemia
associated with secondary hyperparathyroidism or after
parathyroidectomy). The usual dialysate sodium con-
centration is 140 mmol/L. Lower dialysate sodium con-
centrations are associated with a higher frequency of
hypotension, cramping, nausea, vomiting, fatigue, and
dizziness. In patients who frequently develop hypoten-
sion during their dialysis run, “sodium modeling” to
counterbalance urea-related osmolar gradients is often
used. When sodium modeling, the dialysate sodium
concentration is gradually lowered from the range of
145–155 meq/L to isotonic concentrations (140 meq/L)
near the end of the dialysis treatment, typically declining
either in steps or in a linear or exponential fashion.
Because patients are exposed to approximately 120 L of
water during each dialysis treatment, water used for the
dialysate is subjected to ﬁltration; softening; deioniza-
tion; and, ultimately, reverse osmosis. During the reverse
osmosis process, water is forced through a semiperme-
able membrane at very high pressure to remove micro-
biologic contaminants and >90% of dissolved ions.
BLOOD DELIVERY SYSTEM
The blood delivery system is composed of the extracor-
poreal circuit in the dialysis machine and the dialysis
access. The dialysis machine consists of a blood pump,
dialysis solution delivery system, and various safety moni-
tors.The blood pump moves blood from the access site,
through the dialyzer, and back to the patient.The blood
ﬂow rate may range from 250–500 mL/min, depending
largely on the type and integrity of the vascular access.
Negative hydrostatic pressure on the dialysate side can
be manipulated to achieve desirable ﬂuid removal or
ultraﬁltration. Dialysis membranes have different ultraﬁl-
tration coefﬁcients (i.e., mL removed/min per mmHg) so
that along with hydrostatic changes, ﬂuid removal can be
varied. The dialysis solution delivery system dilutes the
concentrated dialysate with water and monitors the
temperature, conductivity, and ﬂow of dialysate.
Dialysis Access
The ﬁstula, graft, or catheter through which blood is
obtained for hemodialysis is often referred to as a dialysis
access. A native ﬁstula created by the anastomosis of an
artery to a vein (e.g., the Brescia-Cimino ﬁstula, in which
the cephalic vein is anastomosed end to side to the radial
artery) results in arterialization of the vein. This facili-
tates its subsequent use in the placement of large needles
(typically 15 gauge) to access the circulation. Although
ﬁstulas have the highest long-term patency rate of all
dialysis access options, ﬁstulas are created in a minority
of patients in the United States. Many patients undergo
placement of an arteriovenous graft (i.e., the interposition
of prosthetic material, usually polytetraﬂuoroethylene,
388
Disorders Complicating Critical Illnesses and Their Management
SECTION V
Venous
Arterial
Dialysate
Dialysate
"Delivery" system
Dialysate drain
Hollow fiber
dialyzer
Arterial line
Venous line
V
Arteriovenous
fistula
Na+
Cl–
K+
Acetate–
Ca2+ Mg2+
Water treatment
(deionization
and reverse
osmosis)
Acid
concentrate
NaBicarb
NaCl
Arterial pressure
Venous pressure
Blood flow rate
Air (leak) detection
Dialysate
flow rate
Dialysate
pressure
Dialysate
conductivity
Blood (leak)
detection
A
FIGURE 38-1
Schema for hemodialysis.
between an artery and a vein) or a tunneled dialysis
catheter. In recent years, nephrologists, vascular surgeons,
and health care policy makers in the United States have
encouraged creation of arteriovenous ﬁstulas in a larger
fraction of patients (the “ﬁstula ﬁrst” initiative). Unfortu-
nately, even when created, arteriovenous ﬁstulas may not
mature sufﬁciently to provide reliable access to the circu-
lation, or they may thrombose early in their development.
Novel surgical approaches (e.g., brachiobasilic ﬁstula cre-
ation with transposition of the basilic vein ﬁstula to the
arm surface) have increased options for “native” vascular
access.
Grafts and catheters tend to be used among persons
with smaller-caliber veins, persons whose veins have been
damaged by repeated venipuncture, or after prolonged
hospitalization. The most important complication of
arteriovenous grafts is thrombosis of the graft and graft
failure principally because of intimal hyperplasia at the
anastomosis between the graft and recipient vein.When
grafts (or ﬁstulas) fail, catheter-guided angioplasty can be
used to dilate stenoses; monitoring of venous pressures
on dialysis and of access ﬂow, although not routinely per-
formed, may assist in the early recognition of impending
vascular access failure. In addition to an increased rate of
access failure, grafts and (in particular) catheters are asso-
ciated with much higher rates of infection than ﬁstulas.
IV large-bore catheters are often used in patients with
acute and chronic kidney disease. For persons on mainte-
nance hemodialysis, tunneled catheters (either two separate
catheters or a single catheter with two lumens) are often
used when arteriovenous ﬁstulas and grafts have failed or
are not feasible because of anatomical considerations.
These catheters are tunneled under the skin; the tunnel
reduces bacterial translocation from the skin, resulting in a
lower infection rate than with nontunneled temporary
catheters. Most tunneled catheters are placed in the inter-
nal jugular veins; the external jugular, femoral, and subcla-
vian veins may also be used. Nephrologists, interventional
radiologists, and vascular surgeons generally prefer to avoid
placement of catheters into the subclavian veins because
although ﬂow rates are usually excellent, subclavian steno-
sis is a frequent complication and, if present, will likely
prohibit permanent vascular access (i.e., a ﬁstula or graft)
in the ipsilateral extremity. Infection rates may be higher
with femoral catheters. For patients with multiple vascular
access complications and no other options for permanent
vascular access, tunneled catheters may be the last “lifeline”
for hemodialysis. Translumbar or transhepatic approaches
into the inferior vena cava may be required if the superior
vena cava or other central veins draining the upper
extremities are stenosed or thrombosed.
GOALS OF DIALYSIS
The hemodialysis procedure is targeted at removing both
low- and high-molecular-weight solutes.The procedure
consists of pumping heparinized blood through the
dialyzer at a ﬂow rate of 300–500 mL/min while
dialysate ﬂows in an opposite counter-current direction at
500–800 mL/min. The efﬁciency of dialysis is deter-
mined by blood and dialysate ﬂow through the dialyzer
as well as dialyzer characteristics (i.e., its efﬁciency in
removing solute).The dose of dialysis, which is currently
deﬁned as a derivation of the fractional urea clearance
during a single dialysis treatment, is further governed by
patient size, residual kidney function, dietary protein
intake, the degree of anabolism or catabolism, and the
presence of comorbid conditions.
Since the landmark studies of Sargent and Gotch
relating the measurement of the dose of dialysis using
urea concentrations with morbidity in the National
Cooperative Dialysis Study, the delivered dose of dialysis
has been measured and considered as a quality assurance
and improvement tool. Although the fractional removal
of urea nitrogen and derivations thereof are considered
to be the standard methods by which “adequacy of dial-
ysis” is measured, a large, multicenter, randomized clini-
cal trial (the HEMO Study) failed to show a difference
in mortality associated with a large difference in urea
clearance. Still, multiple observational studies and wide-
spread expert opinion have suggested that a higher dial-
ysis dose is warranted; current targets include a urea
reduction ratio (the fractional reduction in blood urea
nitrogen per hemodialysis session) of >65–70% and a body
water–indexed clearance × time product (KT/V) above
1.30 or 1.05, depending on whether urea concentrations
are “equilibrated.”
For the majority of patients with ESRD, between 
9 and 12 h of dialysis are required each week, usually
divided into three equal sessions. Several studies have
suggested that longer hemodialysis session lengths may
be beneﬁcial, although these studies are confounded by
a variety of patient characteristics, including body size and
nutritional status. The hemodialysis “dose” should be
individualized, and factors other than the urea nitrogen
should be considered, including the adequacy of ultraﬁl-
tration or ﬂuid removal. Several authors have high-
lighted improved intermediate outcomes associated with
more frequent hemodialysis (i.e., >three times a week),
although these studies are also confounded by multiple
factors.A randomized clinical trial is currently underway
to test whether more frequent dialysis results in differ-
ences in a variety of physiologic and functional markers.
COMPLICATIONS DURING HEMODIALYSIS
Hypotension is the most common acute complication
of hemodialysis, particularly among patients with dia-
betes. Numerous factors appear to increase the risk of
hypotension, including excessive ultraﬁltration with inad-
equate compensatory vascular ﬁlling, impaired vasoactive
or autonomic responses, osmolar shifts, overzealous use
Dialysis in the Treatment of Renal Failure
389
CHAPTER 38
of antihypertensive agents, and reduced cardiac reserve.
Patients with arteriovenous ﬁstulas and grafts may develop
high-output cardiac failure because of shunting of blood
through the dialysis access;on rare occasions,this may neces-
sitate ligation of the ﬁstula or graft.Because of the vasodila-
tory and cardiodepressive effects of acetate, its use as the
buffer in dialysate was once a common cause of hypoten-
sion. However, since the introduction of bicarbonate-
containing dialysate, dialysis-associated hypotension has
become less common. The management of hypotension
during dialysis consists of discontinuing ultraﬁltration,
administration of 100–250 mL of isotonic saline or 10 mL
of 23% saturated hypertonic saline, and administration of
salt-poor albumin. Hypotension during dialysis can fre-
quently be prevented by careful evaluation of the dry
weight and by ultraﬁltration modeling, such that more
ﬂuid is removed at the beginning rather than the end of
the dialysis procedure. Additional maneuvers include the
performance of sequential ultraﬁltration followed by dialy-
sis; the use of midodrine, a selective α1-adrenergic pressor
agent; cooling of the dialysate during dialysis treatment;
and avoiding heavy meals during dialysis.
Muscle cramps during dialysis are also a common com-
plication of the procedure.The cause of dialysis-associated
cramps remains obscure. Changes in muscle perfusion
because of excessively aggressive volume removal, particu-
larly below the estimated dry weight, and the use of
low-sodium–containing dialysate, have been proposed as
precipitants of dialysis-associated cramps. Strategies that
may be used to prevent cramps include reducing volume
removal during dialysis, ultraﬁltration proﬁling, and using
higher concentrations of sodium in the dialysate or
sodium modeling (see earlier).
Anaphylactoid reactions to the dialyzer, particularly
on its ﬁrst use, have been reported most frequently with
the bioincompatible cellulosic-containing membranes.
With the gradual phasing out of cuprophane mem-
branes in the United States, dialyzer reactions have
become relatively uncommon. Dialyzer reactions can be
divided into two types, A and B. Type A reactions are
attributed to an IgE-mediated intermediate hypersensi-
tivity reaction to ethylene oxide used in the sterilization
of new dialyzers. This reaction typically occurs soon
after the initiation of a treatment (within the ﬁrst few
minutes) and can progress to full-blown anaphylaxis if
the therapy is not promptly discontinued.Treatment with
steroids or epinephrine may be needed if symptoms are
severe.The type B reaction consists of a symptom com-
plex of nonspeciﬁc chest and back pain, which appears
to result from complement activation and cytokine
release. These symptoms typically occur several minutes
into the dialysis run and typically resolve over time with
continued dialysis.
Cardiovascular diseases constitute the major causes of
death in patients with ESRD. Cardiovascular mortality
and event rates are higher in dialysis patients than in
patients posttransplantation, although rates are extraordi-
narily high in both populations.The underlying cause of
cardiovascular disease is unclear but may be related to
shared risk factors (e.g., diabetes mellitus), chronic
inﬂammation, massive changes in extracellular volume
(especially with high interdialytic weight gains), inade-
quate treatment of hypertension, dyslipidemia, anemia,
dystrophic vascular calciﬁcation, hyperhomocysteinemia,
and perhaps alterations in cardiovascular dynamics during
the dialysis treatment. Few studies have targeted cardio-
vascular risk reduction in ESRD patients; none have
demonstrated consistent beneﬁt.Nevertheless,most experts
recommend conventional cardioprotective strategies (e.g.,
lipid-lowering agents, aspirin, β-adrenergic antagonists)
in dialysis patients based on the individual patient’s car-
diovascular risk proﬁle, which appears to be increased by
more than an order of magnitude relative to persons
unaffected by kidney disease.
PERITONEAL DIALYSIS
In peritoneal dialysis, 1.5–3.0 L of a dextrose-containing
solution is infused into the peritoneal cavity and allowed
to dwell for a set period of time, usually 2–4 h. As with
hemodialysis, toxic materials are removed through a
combination of convective clearance generated through
ultraﬁltration and diffusive clearance down a concentra-
tion gradient.The clearance of solutes and water during
a peritoneal dialysis exchange depends on the balance
between the movement of solute and water into the
peritoneal cavity versus absorption from the peritoneal
cavity. The rate of diffusion diminishes with time and
eventually stops when equilibration between plasma and
dialysate is reached. Absorption of solutes and water
from the peritoneal cavity occurs across the peritoneal
membrane into the peritoneal capillary circulation and
via peritoneal lymphatics into the lymphatic circulation.
The rate of peritoneal solute transport varies from
patient to patient and may be altered by the presence of
infection (peritonitis), drugs, and physical factors such as
position and exercise.
FORMS OF PERITONEAL DIALYSIS
Peritoneal dialysis may be carried out as continuous
ambulatory peritoneal dialysis (CAPD), continuous
cyclic peritoneal dialysis (CCPD), or a combination of
both. In CAPD, dialysis solution is manually infused into
the peritoneal cavity during the day and exchanged
three to ﬁve times daily. A nighttime dwell is frequently
instilled at bedtime and remains in the peritoneal cavity
through the night.The drainage of spent dialysate is per-
formed manually with the assistance of gravity to move
ﬂuid out of the abdomen. In CCPD, exchanges are per-
formed in an automated fashion, usually at night; the
patient is connected to an automated cycler that performs
390
Disorders Complicating Critical Illnesses and Their Management
SECTION V
a series of exchange cycles while the patient sleeps.The
number of exchange cycles required to optimize peri-
toneal solute clearance varies by the peritoneal membrane
characteristics; as with hemodialysis, experts suggest careful
tracking of solute clearances to ensure dialysis “adequacy.”
Peritoneal dialysis solutions are available in volumes
typically ranging from 1.5 to 3.0 L. Lactate is the pre-
ferred buffer in peritoneal dialysis solutions. The most
common additives to peritoneal dialysis solutions are
heparin to prevent obstruction of the dialysis catheter
lumen with ﬁbrin and antibiotics during an episode of
acute peritonitis. Insulin may also be added in patients
with diabetes mellitus.
ACCESS TO THE PERITONEAL CAVITY
Access to the peritoneal cavity is obtained through a
peritoneal catheter. Catheters used for maintenance
peritoneal dialysis are ﬂexible, being made of silicon
rubber with numerous side holes at the distal end.These
catheters usually have two Dacron cuffs to promote
ﬁbroblast proliferation, granulation, and invasion of the
cuff. The scarring that occurs around the cuffs anchors
the catheter and seals it from bacteria tracking from the
skin surface into the peritoneal cavity; it also prevents
the external leakage of ﬂuid from the peritoneal cavity.
The cuffs are placed in the preperitoneal plane and ~2 cm
from the skin surface.
The peritoneal equilibrium test is a formal evaluation of
peritoneal membrane characteristics that measures the
transfer rates of creatinine and glucose across the peritoneal
membrane. Patients are classiﬁed as low, low-average, high-
average, and high “transporters.” Patients with rapid
equilibration (i.e., high transporters) tend to absorb more
glucose and lose efﬁciency of ultraﬁltration with long
daytime dwells. High transporters also tend to lose larger
quantities of albumin and other proteins across the peri-
toneal membrane. In general, patients with rapid trans-
porting characteristics require more frequent, shorter dwell
time exchanges, nearly always obligating use of a cycler
for feasibility. Slower (low and low-average) transporters
tend to do well with fewer exchanges.The efﬁciency of
solute clearance also depends on the volume of dialysate
infused. Larger volumes allow for greater solute clear-
ance, particularly with CAPD in patients with low and
low-average transport characteristics. Interestingly, solute
clearance also increases with physical activity, presumably
related to more efﬁcient ﬂow dynamics within the peri-
toneal cavity.
As with hemodialysis, the optimal dose of peritoneal
dialysis is unknown. Several observational studies have
suggested that higher rates of urea and creatinine clearance
(the latter generally measured in L/week) are associated
with lower mortality rates and fewer uremic complica-
tions. However, a randomized clinical trial (ADEMEX)
failed to show a signiﬁcant reduction in mortality or
complications with a relatively large increment in urea
clearance. In general, patients on peritoneal dialysis do
well when they retain residual kidney function. The
rates of technique failure increase with years on dialysis
and have been correlated with loss of residual function
to a greater extent than loss of peritoneal membrane
capacity. Recently, a nonabsorbable carbohydrate (icodex-
trin) has been introduced as an alternative osmotic
agent. Studies have demonstrated more efﬁcient ultraﬁl-
tration with icodextrin than with dextrose-containing
solutions. Icodextrin is typically used as the “last ﬁll” for
patients on CCPD or for the longest dwell in patients
on CAPD. For some patients in whom CCPD does not
provide sufﬁcient solute clearance, a hybrid approach can
be adopted in which one or more daytime exchanges are
added to the CCPD regimen. Although this approach
can enhance solute clearance and prolong a patient’s
capacity to remain on peritoneal dialysis, the burden of
the hybrid approach can be overwhelming to some.
COMPLICATIONS DURING 
PERITONEAL DIALYSIS
The major complications of peritoneal dialysis are peri-
tonitis,
catheter-associated nonperitonitis infections,
weight gain and other metabolic disturbances, and resid-
ual uremia (especially among patients with no residual
kidney function).
Peritonitis typically develops when there has been a
break in sterile technique during one or more of the
exchange procedures. Peritonitis is usually deﬁned by an
elevated peritoneal ﬂuid leukocyte count (100/mm3, of
which at least 50% are polymorphonuclear neutrophils).
The clinical presentation typically consists of pain and
cloudy dialysate, often with fever and other constitutional
symptoms. The most common culprit organisms are
gram-positive cocci, including Staphylococcus, reﬂecting
the origin from the skin. Gram-negative rod infections
are less common; fungal and mycobacterial infections
are seen in selected patients, particularly after antibacter-
ial therapy. Most cases of peritonitis can be managed
either with intraperitoneal or oral antibiotics, depending
on the organism; many patients with peritonitis do not
require hospitalization. When peritonitis is caused by
hydrophilic gram-negative rods (e.g., Pseudomonas spp.)
or yeast, antimicrobial therapy is usually not sufﬁcient, and
catheter removal is required to ensure complete eradica-
tion of infection. Nonperitonitis catheter-associated
infections (often termed tunnel infections) vary widely in
severity. Some cases can be managed with local antibi-
otic or silver nitrate administration, but others are severe
enough to require parenteral antibiotic therapy and
catheter removal.
Peritoneal dialysis is associated with a variety of
metabolic complications. As noted above, albumin and
other proteins can be lost across the peritoneal membrane
Dialysis in the Treatment of Renal Failure
391
CHAPTER 38
in concert with the loss of metabolic wastes.The hypopro-
teinemia induced by peritoneal dialysis obligates a higher
dietary protein intake to maintain nitrogen balance.
Hyperglycemia and weight gain are also common
complications of peritoneal dialysis. Several hundred
calories in the form of dextrose are absorbed each day,
depending on the concentration used. Peritoneal dialysis
patients, particularly those with type II diabetes mellitus,
are then prone to other complications of insulin resistance,
including hypertriglyceridemia. On the positive side, the
continuous nature of peritoneal dialysis usually allows
for a more liberal diet because of continuous removal of
potassium and phosphorus, two major dietary compo-
nents whose accumulation can be hazardous in patients
with ESRD.
GLOBAL PERSPECTIVE
The incidence of ESRD is increasing worldwide
with longer life expectancies and improved care
of infectious and cardiovascular diseases. The
management of patients with ESRD varies widely by
country and within country by region, and it is inﬂu-
enced by economic and other major factors. In general,
peritoneal dialysis is more commonly performed in
poorer countries owing to its lower expense and the
high cost of establishing in-center hemodialysis units.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We are grateful to Dr. Ajay Singh and Dr. Barry Brenner,
authors of “Dialysis in the Treatment of Renal Failure” in the
16th edition of Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, for
contributions to this chapter.
FURTHER READINGS
BURKART JM et al: Peritoneal dialysis, in BM Brenner (ed), Brenner
and Rector’s The Kidney, 7th ed. Philadelphia, Saunders, 2004
EKNOYAN G et al: Effect of dialysis dose and membrane ﬂux in
maintenance hemodialysis. N Engl J Med 346:2010, 2002
FORNI LG, HILTON PJ: Current concepts: Continuous hemoﬁltration in
the treatment of acute renal failure. N Engl J Med 336:1303, 1997
HIMMELFARB J, KLIGER AS: End-stage renal disease measures of qual-
ity.Annu Rev Med 58:387, 2007
NATIONAL KIDNEY FOUNDATION: Kidney Disease Quality Initiative
Clinical Practice Guidelines: Hemodialysis and Peritoneal Dialysis
Adequacy, 2001.Available at http://www.kidney.org/professionals/
kdoqi/guidelines.cfm
PANIAGUA R et al: Effects of increased peritoneal clearances on mor-
tality rates in peritoneal dialysis: ADEMEX, a prospective, ran-
domized, controlled trial. J Am Soc Nephrol 13:1307, 2002
RAYNER HC et al:Vascular access results from the Dialysis Outcomes
and Practice Patterns Study (DOPPS): Performance against Kidney
Disease Outcomes Quality Initiative (K/DOQI) Clinical Practice
Guidelines.Am J Kidney Dis. 44(Suppl):S22, 2004
U.S. RENAL DATA SYSTEM: USRDS 2005 Annual Data Report:Atlas of
End-Stage Renal Disease in the United States. Bethesda, MD,
National Institutes of Health, National Institute of Diabetes and
Digestive and Kidney Disease, 2005
392
Disorders Complicating Critical Illnesses and Their Management
SECTION V
Gary G. Singer
I
Barry M. Brenner
SODIUM AND WATER
Composition of Body Fluids
Water is the most abundant constituent in the body,
comprising approximately 50% of body weight in
women and 60% in men. This difference is attributable
to differences in the relative proportions of adipose tis-
sue in men and women.Total body water is distributed
in two major compartments: 55–75% is intracellular
[intracellular ﬂuid (ICF)], and 25–45% is extracellular
[extracellular ﬂuid (ECF)]. The ECF is further subdi-
vided into intravascular (plasma water) and extravascular
(interstitial) spaces in a ratio of 1:3.
The solute or particle concentration of a ﬂuid is
known as its osmolality and is expressed as milliosmoles
per kilogram of water (mosmol/kg). Water crosses cell
membranes to achieve osmotic equilibrium (ECF osmo-
lality = ICF osmolality).The extracellular and intracellu-
lar solutes or osmoles are markedly different because of
disparities in permeability and the presence of trans-
porters and active pumps. The major ECF particles are
Na+ and its accompanying anions Cl−and HCO3
−, and
K+ and organic phosphate esters [adenosine triphosphate
(ATP), creatine phosphate, and phospholipids] are the
predominant ICF osmoles. Solutes that are restricted
to the ECF or the ICF determine the effective osmolality
FLUID AND ELECTROLYTE
DISTURBANCES
(or tonicity) of that compartment. Because Na+ is largely
restricted to the extracellular compartment, total body
Na+ content is a reﬂection of ECF volume. Likewise, K+
and its attendant anions are predominantly limited to
the ICF and are necessary for normal cell function.
Therefore, the number of intracellular particles is rela-
tively constant, and a change in ICF osmolality is usually
attributable to a change in ICF water content. However,
in certain situations, brain cells can vary the number of
intracellular solutes to defend against large water shifts.
This process of osmotic adaptation is important in the
defense of cell volume and occurs in chronic hypona-
tremia and hypernatremia.This response is mediated ini-
tially by transcellular shifts of K+ and Na+, followed by
synthesis, import, or export of organic solutes (so-called
osmolytes) such as inositol, betaine, and glutamine. Dur-
ing chronic hyponatremia, brain cells lose solutes,
thereby defending cell volume and diminishing neurologic
symptoms. The converse occurs during chronic hyper-
natremia. Certain solutes, such as urea, do not contribute
to water shift across cell membranes and are known as
ineffective osmoles.
Fluid movement between the intravascular and inter-
stitial spaces occurs across the capillary wall and is
determined by the Starling forces—capillary hydraulic
pressure and colloid osmotic pressure.The transcapillary
CHAPTER 39
CHAPTER 39
393
I Sodium and Water . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .393
Hypovolemia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .395
Hyponatremia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .397
Hypernatremia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .400
I Potassium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .402
Hypokalemia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .403
Hyperkalemia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .406
I Further Readings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .409
Disorders Complicating Critical Illnesses and Their Management
394
SECTION V
hydraulic pressure gradient exceeds the corresponding
oncotic pressure gradient, thereby favoring the move-
ment of plasma ultraﬁltrate into the extravascular space.
The return of ﬂuid into the intravascular compartment
occurs via lymphatic ﬂow.
Water Balance
The normal plasma osmolality is 275–290 mosmol/kg
and is kept within a narrow range by mechanisms capable
of sensing a 1–2% change in tonicity.To maintain a steady
state, water intake must equal water excretion. Disorders
of water homeostasis result in hypo- or hypernatremia.
Normal individuals have an obligate water loss consisting
of urine, stool, and evaporation from the skin and respira-
tory tract. Gastrointestinal excretion is usually a minor
component of total water output except in patients with
vomiting, diarrhea, or high enterostomy output states.
Evaporative or insensitive water losses are important in
the regulation of core body temperature. Obligatory renal
water loss is mandated by the minimum solute excretion
required to maintain a steady state. Normally, about 600
mosmol must be excreted per day, and because the maxi-
mal urine osmolality is 1200 mosmol/kg, a minimum
urine output of 500 mL/d is required for neutral solute
balance.
Water Intake
The primary stimulus for water ingestion is thirst,mediated
either by an increase in effective osmolality or a decrease
in ECF volume or blood pressure. Osmoreceptors, located in
the anterolateral hypothalamus, are stimulated by an
increase in tonicity. Ineffective osmoles, such as urea and
glucose, do not play a role in stimulating thirst.The aver-
age osmotic threshold for thirst is ∼295 mosmol/kg and
varies among individuals. Under normal circumstances,
daily water intake exceeds physiologic requirements.
Water Excretion
In contrast to the ingestion of water, its excretion is
tightly regulated by physiologic factors. The principal
determinant of renal water excretion is arginine vaso-
pressin (AVP; formerly antidiuretic hormone), a polypep-
tide synthesized in the supraoptic and paraventricular
nuclei of the hypothalamus and secreted by the poste-
rior pituitary gland.The binding of AVP to V2 receptors
on the basolateral membrane of principal cells in the
collecting duct activates adenylyl cyclase and initiates a
sequence of events that leads to the insertion of water
channels into the luminal membrane.These water chan-
nels that are speciﬁcally activated by AVP are encoded
by the aquaporin-2 gene. The net effect is passive water
reabsorption along an osmotic gradient from the lumen
of the collecting duct to the hypertonic medullary
interstitium. The major stimulus for AVP secretion is
hypertonicity. Because the major ECF solutes are Na+
salts, effective osmolality is primarily determined by the
plasma Na+ concentration. An increase or decrease in
tonicity is sensed by hypothalamic osmoreceptors as a
decrease or increase in cell volume, respectively, leading
to enhancement or suppression of AVP secretion. The
osmotic threshold for AVP release is 280–290 mosmol/kg,
and the system is sufﬁciently sensitive that plasma osmolal-
ity varies by no more than 1–2%.
Nonosmotic factors that regulate AVP secretion
include effective circulating (arterial) volume, nausea, pain,
stress, hypoglycemia, pregnancy, and numerous drugs.
The hemodynamic response is mediated by barorecep-
tors in the carotid sinus.The sensitivity of these receptors
is signiﬁcantly lower than that of the osmoreceptors. In
fact, depletion of blood volume sufﬁcient to result in a
decreased mean arterial pressure is necessary to stimulate
AVP release, but small changes in effective circulating
volume have little effect.
To maintain homeostasis and a normal plasma Na+
concentration, the ingestion of solute-free water must
eventually lead to the loss of the same volume of 
electrolyte-free water. Three steps are required for the
kidney to excrete a water load: (1) filtration and deliv-
ery of water (and electrolytes) to the diluting sites of
the nephron; (2) active reabsorption of Na+ and Cl−
without water in the thick ascending limb of the loop
of Henle (TALH) and, to a lesser extent, in the distal
nephron; and (3) maintenance of a dilute urine because
of impermeability of the collecting duct to water in
the absence of AVP.Abnormalities of any of these steps
can result in impaired free-water excretion and eventual
hyponatremia.
Sodium Balance
Sodium is actively pumped out of cells by the Na+, K+-
ATPase pump.As a result, 85–90% of all Na+ is extracellu-
lar, and the ECF volume is a reﬂection of total body Na+
content. Normal volume regulatory mechanisms ensure
that Na+ loss balances Na+ gain. If this does not occur,
conditions of Na+ excess or deﬁcit ensue and are manifest
as edematous or hypovolemic states, respectively. It is
important to distinguish between disorders of osmoregula-
tion and disorders of volume regulation because water and
Na+ balance are regulated independently.Whereas changes
in Na+ concentration generally reﬂect disturbed water
homeostasis, alterations in Na+ content are manifest as
ECF volume contraction or expansion and imply abnor-
mal Na+ balance.
Sodium Intake
Individuals eating a typical Western diet consume
approximately 150 mmol of NaCl daily. This normally
exceeds basal requirements. As noted above, sodium is
the principal extracellular cation. Therefore, dietary
intake of Na+ results in ECF volume expansion, which
in turn promotes enhanced renal Na+ excretion to
maintain steady-state Na+ balance.
Sodium Excretion
The regulation of Na+ excretion is multifactorial and is the
major determinant of Na+ balance.A Na+ deﬁcit or excess
is manifest as a decreased or increased effective circulating
volume, respectively. Changes in effective circulating vol-
ume tend to lead to parallel changes in glomerular ﬁltra-
tion rate (GFR). However, tubule Na+ reabsorption, not
GFR, is the major regulatory mechanism controlling Na+
excretion. Almost two-thirds of ﬁltered Na+ is reabsorbed
in the proximal convoluted tubule; this process is elec-
troneutral and isoosmotic. Further reabsorption (25–30%)
occurs in the TALH via the apical Na+-K+-2Cl−co-
transporter;this is an active process and is also electroneutral.
Distal convoluted tubule reabsorption of Na+ (5%) is medi-
ated by the thiazide-sensitive Na+-Cl−co-transporter.Final Na+
reabsorption occurs in the cortical and medullary collect-
ing ducts, with the amount excreted being reasonably
equivalent to the amount ingested per day.
HYPOVOLEMIA
Etiology
True volume depletion, or hypovolemia, generally refers
to a state of combined salt and water loss exceeding
intake, leading to ECF volume contraction. The loss of
Na+ may be renal or extrarenal (Table 39-1).
Renal
Many conditions are associated with excessive urinary
NaCl and water losses, including use of diuretics.
Pharmacologic diuretics inhibit specific pathways of
Na+ reabsorption along the nephron with a conse-
quent increase in urinary Na+ excretion. Enhanced fil-
tration of non-reabsorbed solutes, such as glucose or
urea, can also impair tubular reabsorption of Na+ and
water, leading to an osmotic or solute diuresis. This
often occurs in poorly controlled diabetes mellitus and
in patients receiving high-protein hyperalimentation.
Mannitol is a diuretic that produces an osmotic diure-
sis because the renal tubule is impermeable to manni-
tol. Many tubule and interstitial renal disorders are
associated with Na+ wasting. Excessive renal losses of
Na+ and water may also occur during the diuretic
phase of acute tubular necrosis (Chap. 37) and after
the relief of bilateral urinary tract obstruction. Finally,
mineralocorticoid 
deficiency 
(hypoaldosteronism)
causes salt wasting in the presence of normal intrinsic
renal function.
Massive renal water excretion can also lead to hypov-
olemia. The ECF volume contraction is usually less
severe since two-thirds of the volume lost is intracellular.
Conditions associated with excessive urinary water loss
include central diabetes insipidus (CDI) and nephrogenic dia-
betes insipidus (NDI). These two disorders are caused by
impaired secretion of and renal unresponsiveness to AVP,
respectively, and are discussed later.
Extrarenal
Nonrenal causes of hypovolemia include ﬂuid loss from
the gastrointestinal tract, skin, and respiratory system and
third-space accumulations (burns, pancreatitis, peritonitis).
Approximately 9 L of ﬂuid enters the gastrointestinal tract
daily, 2 L by ingestion and 7 L by secretion. Almost 98%
of this volume is reabsorbed so that fecal ﬂuid loss is only
100–200 mL/d. Impaired gastrointestinal reabsorption or
enhanced secretion leads to volume depletion. Because
gastric secretions have a low pH (high H+ concentration)
and biliary, pancreatic, and intestinal secretions are alkaline
(high HCO3
−concentration), vomiting and diarrhea are
often accompanied by metabolic alkalosis and acidosis,
respectively.
Water evaporation from the skin and respiratory tract
contributes to thermoregulation. These insensible losses
amount to 500 mL/d. During febrile illnesses, prolonged
heat exposure, exercise, or increased salt and water loss
from skin in the form of sweat can be signiﬁcant and lead
to volume depletion. The Na+ concentration of sweat is
normally 20–50 mmol/L and decreases with profuse
sweating because of the action of aldosterone. Because
sweat is hypotonic, the loss of water exceeds that of Na+.
The water deﬁcit is minimized by enhanced thirst. Nev-
ertheless, ongoing Na+ loss is manifest as hypovolemia.
Enhanced evaporative water loss from the respiratory tract
Fluid and Electrolyte Disturbances
395
CHAPTER 39
TABLE 39-1
CAUSES OF HYPOVOLEMIA
I. ECF volume contracted
A. Extrarenal Na+ loss
1. Gastrointestinal: vomiting, nasogastric suction,
drainage, ﬁstula, diarrhea
2. Skin or respiratory: insensible losses, sweat, burns
3. Hemorrhage
B. Renal Na+ and water loss
1. Diuretics
2. Osmotic diuresis
3. Hypoaldosteronism
4. Salt-wasting nephropathies
C. Renal water loss
1. Diabetes insipidus: central or nephrogenic
II. ECF volume normal or expanded
A. Decreased cardiac output
1. Myocardial, valvular, or pericardial disease
B. Redistribution
1. Hypoalbuminemia (hepatic cirrhosis, nephrotic
syndrome)
2. Capillary leak (acute pancreatitis, ischemic bowel,
rhabdomyolysis)
C. Increased venous capacitance
1. Sepsis
Note: ECF, extracellular ﬂuid.
may be associated with hyperventilation, especially in
mechanically ventilated, febrile patients.
Certain conditions lead to ﬂuid sequestration in a
third space.This compartment is extracellular but is not in
equilibrium with either the ECF or the ICF.The ﬂuid is
effectively lost from the ECF and can result in hypov-
olemia. Examples include the bowel lumen in gastroin-
testinal obstruction, subcutaneous tissues in severe burns,
retroperitoneal space in acute pancreatitis, and peri-
toneal cavity in peritonitis. Finally, severe hemorrhage
from any source can result in volume depletion.
Pathophysiology
ECF volume contraction is manifest as a decreased plasma
volume and hypotension. Hypotension is caused by
decreased venous return (preload) and diminished cardiac
output; it triggers baroreceptors in the carotid sinus and
aortic arch and leads to activation of the sympathetic ner-
vous system and the renin–angiotensin system. The net
effect is to maintain mean arterial pressure and cerebral
and coronary perfusion. In contrast to the cardiovascular
response, the renal response is aimed at restoring the ECF
volume by decreasing the GFR and ﬁltered load of Na+
and, most importantly, by promoting tubular reabsorption
of Na+. Increased sympathetic tone increases proximal
tubular Na+ reabsorption and decreases GFR by causing
preferential afferent arteriolar vasoconstriction. Sodium is
also reabsorbed in the proximal convoluted tubule in
response to increased angiotensin II and altered peritubu-
lar capillary hemodynamics (decreased hydraulic and
increased oncotic pressure). Enhanced reabsorption of
Na+ by the collecting duct is an important component of
the renal adaptation to ECF volume contraction. This
occurs in response to increased aldosterone and AVP secre-
tion and suppressed atrial natriuretic peptide secretion.
Clinical Features
A careful history is often helpful in determining the cause
of ECF volume contraction (e.g., vomiting, diarrhea,
polyuria, diaphoresis). Most symptoms are nonspeciﬁc
and secondary to electrolyte imbalances and tissue hypop-
erfusion and include fatigue, weakness, muscle cramps,
thirst, and postural dizziness. More severe degrees of vol-
ume contraction can lead to end-organ ischemia manifest
as oliguria, cyanosis, abdominal and chest pain, and confu-
sion or obtundation. Diminished skin turgor and dry oral
mucous membranes are poor markers of decreased inter-
stitial ﬂuid. Signs of intravascular volume contraction
include decreased jugular venous pressure, postural
hypotension, and postural tachycardia. Larger and more
acute ﬂuid losses lead to hypovolemic shock and manifest
as hypotension, tachycardia, peripheral vasoconstriction,
and hypoperfusion—cyanosis, cold and clammy extremi-
ties, oliguria, and altered mental status.
Diagnosis
A thorough history and physical examination are generally
sufﬁcient to diagnose the cause of hypovolemia. Labora-
tory data usually conﬁrm and support the clinical diagno-
sis.The blood urea nitrogen (BUN) and plasma creatinine
concentrations tend to be elevated, reﬂecting a decreased
GFR. Normally, the BUN:creatinine ratio is about 10:1.
However, in prerenal azotemia, hypovolemia leads to
increased urea reabsorption, a proportionately greater ele-
vation in BUN than plasma creatinine, and a BUN:creati-
nine ratio of 20:1 or higher.An increased BUN (relative to
creatinine) may also be caused by increased urea produc-
tion that occurs with hyperalimentation (high-protein),
glucocorticoid therapy,and gastrointestinal bleeding.
The appropriate response to hypovolemia is enhanced
renal Na+ and water reabsorption, which is reﬂected in the
urine composition.Therefore,the urine Na+ concentration
should usually be <20 mmol/L except in conditions asso-
ciated with impaired Na+ reabsorption, as in acute tubular
necrosis (Chap. 37). Another exception is hypovolemia
caused by vomiting because the associated metabolic 
alkalosis and increased ﬁltered HCO3
−impair proximal
Na+ reabsorption. In this case, the urine Cl−is low 
(<20 mmol/L).The urine osmolality and speciﬁc gravity
in hypovolemic subjects are generally >450 mosmol/kg
and 1.015, respectively, reﬂecting the presence of enhanced
AVP secretion. However, in hypovolemia, caused by dia-
betes insipidus, urine osmolality and speciﬁc gravity indi-
cate inappropriately dilute urine.
Disorders Complicating Critical Illnesses and Their Management
396
SECTION V
Treatment:
HYPOVOLEMIA
The therapeutic goals are to restore normovolemia with
ﬂuid similar in composition to that lost and to replace
ongoing losses. Symptoms and signs, including weight
loss, can help estimate the degree of volume contraction
and should also be monitored to assess response to
treatment. Mild volume contraction can usually be cor-
rected via the oral route. More severe hypovolemia
requires IV therapy. Isotonic or normal saline (0.9% NaCl
or 154 mmol/L Na+) is the solution of choice in normona-
tremic and most hyponatremic individuals and should
be administered initially in patients with hypotension or
shock. Hypernatremia reﬂects a proportionally greater
deﬁcit of water than Na+, and its correction therefore
requires a hypotonic solution such as half-normal saline
(0.45% NaCl or 77 mmol/L Na+) or 5% dextrose in
water. Patients with signiﬁcant hemorrhage, anemia, or
intravascular volume depletion may require blood trans-
fusion or colloid-containing solutions (albumin, dextran).
Hypokalemia may be present initially or may ensue as a
result of increased urinary K+ excretion; it should be 
corrected by adding appropriate amounts of KCl to
replacement solutions.
HYPONATREMIA
Etiology
A plasma Na+ concentration <135 mmol/L usually reﬂects
a hypotonic state. However, plasma osmolality may be
normal or increased in some cases of hyponatremia. Iso-
tonic or slightly hypotonic hyponatremia may complicate
transurethral resection of the prostate or bladder because
large volumes of isoosmotic (mannitol) or hypo-osmotic
(sorbitol or glycine) bladder irrigation solution can be
absorbed and result in a dilutional hyponatremia. The
metabolism of sorbitol and glycine to CO2 and water may
lead to hypotonicity if the accumulated ﬂuid and solutes
are not rapidly excreted. Hypertonic hyponatremia is usu-
ally caused by hyperglycemia or, occasionally, IV adminis-
tration of mannitol. Relative insulin deﬁciency causes
myocytes to become impermeable to glucose. Therefore,
during poorly controlled diabetes mellitus, glucose is an
effective osmole and draws water from muscle cells, result-
ing in hyponatremia. Plasma Na+ concentration decreases
by 1.4 mmol/L for every 100 mg/dL increase in the
plasma glucose concentration.
Most causes of hyponatremia are associated with a
low plasma osmolality (Table 39-2). In general, hypo-
tonic hyponatremia is caused by either a primary water
gain (and secondary Na+ loss) or a primary Na+ loss
(and secondary water gain). In the absence of water
intake or hypotonic ﬂuid replacement, hyponatremia is
usually associated with hypovolemic shock caused by a
profound sodium deﬁcit and transcellular water shift.
Contraction of the ECF volume stimulates thirst and
AVP secretion. The increased water ingestion and
impaired renal excretion result in hyponatremia. It is
important to note that diuretic-induced hyponatremia is
almost always caused by thiazide diuretics. Loop diuretics
decrease the tonicity of the medullary interstitium and
impair maximal urinary concentrating capacity. This
limits the ability of AVP to promote water retention. In
contrast, thiazide diuretics lead to Na+ and K+ depletion
and AVP-mediated water retention. Hyponatremia can
also occur by a process of desalination.This occurs when
the urine tonicity (the sum of the concentrations of Na+
and K+) exceeds that of administered IV ﬂuids (including
isotonic saline). This accounts for some cases of acute
postoperative hyponatremia and cerebral salt wasting
after neurosurgery.
Hyponatremia in the setting of ECF volume expan-
sion is usually associated with edematous states, such as
congestive heart failure, hepatic cirrhosis, and nephrotic
syndrome. These disorders all have in common a
decreased effective circulating arterial volume, leading to
increased thirst and increased AVP levels.Additional fac-
tors impairing the excretion of solute-free water include
a reduced GFR, decreased delivery of ultraﬁltrate to the
diluting site (because of increased proximal fractional
reabsorption of Na+ and water), and diuretic therapy.
The degree of hyponatremia often correlates with the
severity of the underlying condition and is an important
prognostic factor. Oliguric acute and chronic renal fail-
ure may be associated with hyponatremia if water intake
exceeds the ability to excrete equivalent volumes.
Hyponatremia in the absence of ECF volume con-
traction, decreased effective circulating arterial volume,
or renal insufﬁciency is usually caused by increased AVP
secretion, resulting in impaired water excretion. Inges-
tion or administration of water is also required because
high levels of AVP alone are usually insufﬁcient to pro-
duce hyponatremia. This disorder, commonly termed
the syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion
(SIADH), is the most common cause of normovolemic
hyponatremia and is caused by the nonphysiologic
release of AVP from the posterior pituitary or an ectopic
source. Renal free-water excretion is impaired, but the
regulation of Na+ balance is unaffected.The most com-
mon causes of SIADH include neuropsychiatric and
pulmonary diseases, malignant tumors, major surgery
(postoperative pain), and pharmacologic agents. Severe
pain and nausea are physiologic stimuli of AVP secre-
tion; these stimuli are inappropriate in the absence of
Fluid and Electrolyte Disturbances
397
CHAPTER 39
TABLE 39-2
CAUSES OF HYPONATREMIA
I. Pseudohyponatremia
A. Normal plasma osmolality
1. Hyperlipidemia
2. Hyperproteinemia
3. Posttransurethral resection of a prostate or 
bladder tumor
B. Increased plasma osmolality
1. Hyperglycemia
2. Mannitol
II. Hypo-osmolal hyponatremia
A. Primary Na+ loss (secondary water gain)
1. Integumentary loss: sweating, burns
2. Gastrointestinal loss: vomiting, tube drainage, 
ﬁstula, obstruction, diarrhea
3. Renal loss: diuretics, osmotic diuresis, hypoaldos-
teronism, salt-wasting nephropathy, postobstruc-
tive diuresis, nonoliguric acute tubular necrosis
B. Primary water gain (secondary Na+ loss)
1. Primary polydipsia
2. Decreased solute intake (e.g., beer potomania)
3. AVP release because of pain, nausea, drugs
4. Syndrome of inappropriate AVP secretion
5. Glucocorticoid deﬁciency
6. Hypothyroidism
7. Chronic renal insufﬁciency
C. Primary Na+ gain (exceeded by secondary water
gain)
1. Heart failure
2. Hepatic cirrhosis
3. Nephrotic syndrome
Note: AVP, arginine vasopressin.
hypovolemia or hyperosmolality. The pattern of AVP
secretion can be used to classify SIADH into four sub-
types: (1) erratic autonomous AVP secretion (ectopic
production), (2) normal regulation of AVP release around
a lower osmolality set point or reset osmostat (cachexia,
malnutrition), (3) normal AVP response to hypertonicity
with failure to suppress completely at low osmolality
(incomplete pituitary stalk section), and (4) normal AVP
secretion with increased sensitivity to its actions or secre-
tion of some other antidiuretic factor (rare). Patients with
the nephrogenic syndrome of inappropriate antidiuresis
have clinical and laboratory features consistent with
SIADH but undetectable levels of AVP. It is hypothesized
that this disorder is caused by gain of function mutations
in the V2 receptor.
Hormonal excess or deﬁciency may cause hypona-
tremia. Adrenal insufﬁciency and hypothyroidism may
present with hyponatremia and should not be confused
with SIADH.Although decreased mineralocorticoids may
contribute to the hyponatremia of adrenal insufﬁciency, it
is the cortisol deﬁciency that leads to hypersecretion of
AVP both indirectly (secondary to volume depletion) and
directly (cosecreted with corticotropin-releasing factor).
The mechanisms by which hypothyroidism leads to
hyponatremia include decreased cardiac output and GFR
and increased AVP secretion in response to hemodynamic
stimuli.
Finally, hyponatremia may occur in the absence of AVP
or renal failure if the kidney is unable to excrete the dietary
water load. In psychogenic or primary polydipsia, compul-
sive water consumption may overwhelm the normally large
renal excretory capacity of 12 L/d. These patients often
have psychiatric illnesses and may be taking medications,
such as phenothiazines, that enhance the sensation of thirst
by causing a dry mouth. The maximal urine output is a
function of the minimum urine osmolality achievable and
the mandatory solute excretion. Metabolism of a normal
diet generates about 600 mosmol/d, and the minimum
urine osmolality in humans is 50 mosmol/kg.Therefore,the
maximum daily urine output is about 12 L (600 ÷ 50 = 12).
A solute excretion rate of greater than ∼750 mosmol/d is,
by deﬁnition, an osmotic diuresis. A low-protein diet may
yield as little as 250 mosmol/d,which translates into a max-
imal urine output of 5 L/d at a minimum urine tonicity of
50 mosmol/kg. Beer drinkers typically have a poor dietary
intake of protein and electrolytes and consume large vol-
umes (of beer), which may exceed the renal excretory
capacity and result in hyponatremia.This phenomenon is
referred to as beer potomania.
Clinical Features
The clinical manifestations of hyponatremia are related
to osmotic water shift leading to increased ICF volume,
speciﬁcally brain cell swelling or cerebral edema.There-
fore, the symptoms are primarily neurologic, and their
severity depends on the rapidity of onset and absolute
decrease in plasma Na+ concentration. Patients may be
asymptomatic or complain of nausea and malaise. As the
plasma Na+
concentration decreases, the symptoms
progress to include headache, lethargy, confusion, and
obtundation. Stupor, seizures, and coma do not usually
occur unless the plasma Na+ concentration decreases
acutely below 120 mmol/L or decreases rapidly. As
described above, adaptive mechanisms designed to protect
cell volume occur in chronic hyponatremia. Loss of Na+
and K+, followed by organic osmolytes, from brain cells
decreases brain swelling because of secondary transcellular
water shifts (from ICF to ECF).The net effect is to mini-
mize cerebral edema and its symptoms.
Diagnosis
(Fig. 39-1) Hyponatremia is not a disease but rather a
manifestation of a variety of disorders. The underlying
cause can often be ascertained from an accurate history
and physical examination, including an assessment of ECF
volume status and effective circulating arterial volume.
The differential diagnosis of hyponatremia, an expanded
ECF volume, and decreased effective circulating volume
Disorders Complicating Critical Illnesses and Their Management
398
SECTION V
Urine Na+
concentration
SIADH
Exclude hypothyroidism
Exclude adrenal
   insufficiency
Heart failure
Hepatic cirrhosis
Nephrotic syndrome
Renal insufficiency
Normal
Plasma Osmolality
Hyperglycemia
Mannitol
Hyperproteinemia
Hyperlipidemia
Bladder irrigation
Maximal volume of
maximally dilute urine
(<100 mosmol/kg)
ECF volume
Primary polydipsia
Reset osmostat
Increased
Decreased
<10 mmol/L
>20 mmol/L
Extrarenal Na+ loss
Remote diuretic use
Remote vomiting
Na+-wasting
   nephropathy
Hypoaldosteronism
Diuretic
Vomiting
Yes
No
Normal
High
Low
CLINICAL APPROACH TO HYPONATREMIA
FIGURE 39-1
Algorithm depicting the clinical approach to hyponatremia.
ECF, extracellular ﬂuid; SIADH, syndrome of inappropriate
antidiuretic hormone secretion.
includes congestive heart failure, hepatic cirrhosis, and
the nephrotic syndrome. Patients with hypothyroidism
and adrenal insufﬁciency tend to present with a near-
normal ECF volume and decreased effective circulating
arterial volume. All of these diseases have characteristic
signs and symptoms. Patients with SIADH are usually
euvolemic.
Four laboratory ﬁndings often provide useful informa-
tion and can narrow the differential diagnosis of hypona-
tremia: (1) the plasma osmolality, (2) the urine osmolality,
(3) the urine Na+ concentration, and (4) the urine K+
concentration. Because ECF tonicity is determined pri-
marily by the Na+ concentration, most patients with
hyponatremia have a decreased plasma osmolality. The
appropriate renal response to hypo-osmolality is to
excrete the maximum volume of dilute urine (i.e., urine
osmolality and speciﬁc gravity of <100 mosmol/kg and
1.003, respectively).This occurs in patients with primary
polydipsia. If this is not present, it suggests impaired free-
water excretion due to the action of AVP on the kidney.
The secretion of AVP may be a physiologic response to
hemodynamic stimuli or it may be inappropriate in the
presence of hyponatremia and euvolemia. Because Na+ is
the major ECF cation and is largely restricted to this com-
partment, ECF volume contraction represents a deﬁcit in
total body Na+ content. Therefore, volume depletion in
patients with normal underlying renal function results 
in enhanced tubule Na+ reabsorption and a urine Na+
concentration <20 mmol/L. The ﬁnding of a urine Na+
concentration >20 mmol/L in a patient with hypovolemic
hyponatremia implies a salt-wasting nephropathy, diuretic
therapy, hypoaldosteronism, or occasionally vomiting. Both
the urine osmolality and the urine Na+ concentration can
be followed serially when assessing the patient’s response
to therapy.
SIADH is characterized by hypo-osmotic hypona-
tremia in the setting of an inappropriately concentrated
urine (urine osmolality >100 mosmol/kg). Patients are
typically normovolemic and have a normal Na+ balance.
They tend to be mildly volume expanded secondary to
water retention and have a urine Na+ excretion rate equal
to intake (urine Na+ concentration usually >40 mmol/L).
By deﬁnition, they have normal renal, adrenal, and thy-
roid function and usually have normal K+ and acid–base
balance. SIADH is often associated with hypouricemia
caused by the uricosuric state induced by volume expan-
sion. In contrast, patients with hypovolemia tend to be
hyperuricemic secondary to increased proximal urate
reabsorption.
Fluid and Electrolyte Disturbances
399
CHAPTER 39
Treatment:
HYPONATREMIA
The goals of therapy are twofold: (1) to increase the
plasma Na+ concentration by restricting water intake and
promoting water loss and (2) to correct the underlying
disorder. Mild asymptomatic hyponatremia is generally
of little clinical signiﬁcance and requires no treatment.
However, the management of asymptomatic hypona-
tremia associated with ECF volume contraction should
include Na+ repletion, generally in the form of isotonic
saline. The direct effect of the administered NaCl on the
plasma Na+ concentration is trivial. However, restoration
of euvolemia removes the hemodynamic stimulus for
AVP release, allowing the excess free water to be
excreted. The hyponatremia associated with edematous
states tends to reﬂect the severity of the underlying dis-
ease and is usually asymptomatic. These patients have
increased total body water that exceeds the increase in
total body Na+ content.Treatment should include restric-
tion of Na+ and water intake, correction of hypokalemia,
and promotion of water loss in excess of Na+. The latter
may require the use of loop diuretics with replacement
of a proportion of the urinary Na+ loss to ensure net free-
water excretion. Dietary water restriction should be less
than the urine output. Correction of the K+ deﬁcit may
increase the plasma Na+ concentration by favoring a shift
of Na+ out of cells as K+ moves in.Water restriction is also
a component of the therapeutic approach to hypona-
tremia associated with primary polydipsia, renal failure,
and SIADH.The recent development of nonpeptide vaso-
pressin antagonists has introduced a new selective treat-
ment for euvolemic and hypervolemic hyponatremia.
The rate of correction of hyponatremia depends on
the absence or presence of neurologic dysfunction.This,
in turn, is related to the rapidity of onset and magnitude
of the decrease in plasma Na+ concentration. In asymp-
tomatic patients, the plasma Na+ concentration should
be increased by no more than 0.5–1.0 mmol/L per h and
by less than 10–12 mmol/L over the ﬁrst 24 h. Patients
with acute or severe hyponatremia (plasma Na+ concen-
tration <110–115 mmol/L) tend to present with altered
mental status, seizures, or both and require more rapid
correction. Patients with severe symptomatic hypona-
tremia should be treated with hypertonic saline, and
the plasma Na+ concentration should be increased by
1–2 mmol/L per hour for the ﬁrst 3–4 h or until the
seizures subside. Again, the plasma Na+ concentration
should probably be increased by no more than 12 mmol/L
during the ﬁrst 24 h. The quantity of Na+ required to
increase the plasma Na+ concentration by a given amount
can be estimated by multiplying the deﬁcit in plasma Na+
concentration by the total body water.
Under normal conditions, total body water is 50 or
60% of lean body weight in women and men, respec-
tively. Therefore, increasing the plasma Na+ concentra-
tion from 105 to 115 mmol/L in a 70-kg man requires
420 mmol [(115 – 105) × 70 × 0.6] of Na+.The risk of cor-
recting hyponatremia too rapidly is the development of
the osmotic demyelination syndrome (ODS). This is a
neurologic disorder characterized by ﬂaccid paralysis,
limited.The latter occurs in infants, people with physical
disabilities, and patients with impaired mental status; in
the postoperative state; and in intubated patients in the
intensive care unit. On rare occasions, impaired thirst
may be caused by primary hypodipsia.This usually occurs
as a result of damage to the hypothalamic osmoreceptors
that control thirst and tends to be associated with abnor-
mal osmotic regulation of AVP secretion. Primary
hypodipsia may be caused by a variety of pathologic
changes, including granulomatous disease, vascular occlu-
sion, and tumors. A subset of patients with hypodipsic
hypernatremia, referred to as essential hypernatremia, do
not respond to forced water intake. This appears to be
because of a speciﬁc osmoreceptor defect resulting in
nonosmotic regulation of AVP release. Thus, the hemo-
dynamic effects of water loading lead to AVP suppression
and excretion of dilute urine.
The source of free water loss is either renal or
extrarenal. Nonrenal loss of water may be caused by
evaporation from the skin and respiratory tract (insensi-
ble losses) or loss from the gastrointestinal tract. Insensible
losses are increased with fever, exercise, heat exposure,
and severe burns and in mechanically ventilated patients.
Furthermore, the Na+ concentration of sweat decreases
with profuse perspiration, thereby increasing solute-free
water loss. Diarrhea is the most common gastrointestinal
cause of hypernatremia. Speciﬁcally, osmotic diarrheas
(induced by lactulose, sorbitol, or malabsorption of car-
bohydrate) and viral gastroenteritides result in water loss
exceeding that of Na+ and K+. In contrast, secretory
diarrheas (e.g., cholera, carcinoid,VIPoma) have a fecal
osmolality (twice the sum of the concentrations of Na+
and K+) similar to that of plasma and present with ECF
volume contraction and a normal plasma Na+ concen-
tration or hyponatremia.
Renal water loss is the most common cause of hyper-
natremia and is caused by drug-induced or osmotic
diuresis or diabetes insipidus. Loop diuretics interfere
with the countercurrent mechanism and produce an
isoosmotic solute diuresis. This results in a decreased
medullary interstitial tonicity and impaired renal con-
centrating ability. The presence of non-reabsorbed
organic solutes in the tubule lumen impairs the osmotic
reabsorption of water.This leads to water loss in excess
of Na+ and K+, known as an osmotic diuresis. The most
frequent cause of osmotic diuresis is hyperglycemia and
glucosuria in a patient with poorly controlled diabetes
mellitus. IV administration of mannitol and increased
endogenous production of urea (high-protein diet) can
also result in an osmotic diuresis.
Hypernatremia secondary to nonosmotic urinary
water loss is usually caused by (1) CDI characterized
by impaired AVP secretion or (2) NDI resulting from
end-organ (renal) resistance to the actions of AVP.
The most common cause of CDI is destruction of the
neurohypophysis.This may occur as a result of trauma,
HYPERNATREMIA
Etiology
Hypernatremia is deﬁned as a plasma Na+ concentration
>145 mmol/L. Because Na+ and its accompanying anions
are the major effective ECF osmoles, hypernatremia is a
state of hyperosmolality. As a result of the ﬁxed number
of ICF particles, maintenance of osmotic equilibrium in
hypernatremia results in ICF volume contraction. Hyper-
natremia may be caused by primary Na+ gain or water
deﬁcit. The two components of an appropriate response
to hypernatremia are increased water intake stimulated by
thirst and the excretion of the minimum volume of max-
imally concentrated urine reﬂecting AVP secretion in
response to an osmotic stimulus.
In practice, the majority of cases of hypernatremia
result from the loss of water. Because water is distributed
between the ICF and the ECF in a 2:1 ratio, a given
amount of solute-free water loss will result in a twofold
greater reduction in the ICF compartment than the ECF
compartment. For example, consider three scenarios: the
loss of 1 L of water, isotonic NaCl, or half-isotonic NaCl.
If 1 L of water is lost, the ICF volume will decrease by
667 mL, but the ECF volume will decrease by only
333 mL. Because Na+ is largely restricted to the ECF, this
compartment will decrease by 1 L if the ﬂuid lost is isoos-
motic. One liter of half-isotonic NaCl is equivalent to
500 mL of water (one-third ECF, two-thirds ICF) plus
500 mL of isotonic saline (all ECF).Therefore, the loss of
1 L of half-isotonic saline decreases the ECF and ICF
volumes by 667 mL and 333 mL, respectively.
The degree of hyperosmolality is typically mild unless
the thirst mechanism is abnormal or access to water is
Disorders Complicating Critical Illnesses and Their Management
400
SECTION V
dysarthria, and dysphagia. The diagnosis is usually sus-
pected clinically and can be conﬁrmed by appropriate
neuroimaging studies.There is no speciﬁc treatment for
the disorder, which is associated with signiﬁcant mor-
bidity and mortality. Patients with chronic hypona-
tremia are most susceptible to the development of ODS
because their brain cell volume has returned to near
normal as a result of the osmotic adaptive mechanisms
described earlier. Therefore, administration of hyper-
tonic saline to these individuals can cause sudden
osmotic shrinkage of brain cells. In addition to rapid or
overcorrection of hyponatremia, risk factors for ODS
include prior cerebral anoxic injury; hypokalemia; and
malnutrition, especially secondary to alcoholism. Water
restriction in primary polydipsia and IV saline therapy in
ECF volume–contracted patients may also lead to overly
rapid correction of hyponatremia as a result of AVP
suppression and a brisk water diuresis. This can be pre-
vented by administration of water or use of an AVP ana-
logue to slow down the rate of free-water excretion.
neurosurgery, granulomatous disease, neoplasms, vascular
accidents, or infection. In many cases, CDI is idiopathic
and may occasionally be hereditary.The familial form of
the disease is inherited in an autosomal dominant fash-
ion and has been attributed to mutations in the propres-
sophysin (AVP precursor) gene. NDI may be either
inherited or acquired. Congenital NDI is an X-linked
recessive trait caused by mutations in the V2 receptor
gene. Mutations in the autosomal aquaporin-2 gene may
also result in NDI. The aquaporin-2 gene encodes the
water channel protein whose membrane insertion is
stimulated by AVP. The causes of sporadic NDI are
numerous and include drugs (especially lithium), hyper-
calcemia, hypokalemia, and conditions that impair
medullary hypertonicity (e.g., papillary necrosis or
osmotic diuresis). In the second or third trimester, preg-
nant women may develop NDI as a result of excessive
elaboration of vasopressinase by the placenta.
Finally, although infrequent, a primary Na+ gain may
cause hypernatremia. For example, inadvertent adminis-
tration of hypertonic NaCl or NaHCO3 or replacing
sugar with salt in infant formula can produce this com-
plication.
Clinical Features
As a consequence of hypertonicity, water shifts out of
cells, leading to a contracted ICF volume. A decreased
brain cell volume is associated with an increased risk of
subarachnoid or intracerebral hemorrhage. Hence, the
major symptoms of hypernatremia are neurologic and
include altered mental status, weakness, neuromuscular
irritability, focal neurologic deﬁcits, and occasionally
coma or seizures. Patients may also complain of polyuria
or thirst. For unknown reasons, patients with polydipsia
from CDI tend to prefer ice-cold water. The signs and
symptoms of volume depletion are often present in
patients with a history of excessive sweating, diarrhea, or
osmotic diuresis. As with hyponatremia, the severity of
the clinical manifestations is related to the acuity and
magnitude of the increase in plasma Na+ concentration.
Chronic hypernatremia is generally less symptomatic as
a result of adaptive mechanisms designed to defend cell
volume. Brain cells initially take up Na+ and K+ salts,
later followed by accumulation of organic osmolytes
such as inositol.This serves to restore the brain ICF vol-
ume toward normal.
Diagnosis
(Fig. 39-2) A complete history and physical examination
often provide clues as to the underlying cause of hyperna-
tremia. Relevant symptoms and signs include the absence
or presence of thirst, diaphoresis, diarrhea, polyuria, and
the features of ECF volume contraction. The history
should include a list of current and recent medications,
and the physical examination is incomplete without a
thorough mental status and neurologic assessment. Mea-
surement of urine volume and osmolality are essential in
the evaluation of hyperosmolality. The appropriate renal
response to hypernatremia is the excretion of the mini-
mum volume (500 mL/d) of maximally concentrated
urine (urine osmolality >800 mosmol/kg).These ﬁndings
suggest extrarenal or remote renal water loss or adminis-
tration of hypertonic Na+ salt solutions.The presence of a
primary Na+ excess can be conﬁrmed by the presence of
ECF volume expansion and natriuresis (urine Na+ con-
centration usually >100 mmol/L).
Many causes of hypernatremia are associated with
polyuria and a submaximal urine osmolality.The product
of the urine volume and osmolality (i.e., the solute excre-
tion rate) is helpful in determining the basis of the
polyuria (see earlier).To maintain a steady state, total solute
excretion must equal solute production. As stated above,
individuals eating a normal diet generate ∼600 mosmol/d.
Therefore, daily solute excretion >750 mosmol deﬁnes an
osmotic diuresis.This can be conﬁrmed by measuring the
urine glucose and urea. In general, patients with both
CDI and NDI present with polyuria and hypotonic urine
(urine osmolality <250 mosmol/kg). The degree of
hypernatremia is usually mild unless there is an associated
thirst abnormality.The clinical history, physical examina-
tion, and pertinent laboratory data can often rule out
causes of acquired NDI. CDI and NDI can generally be
distinguished by administering the AVP analogue desmo-
pressin (10 μg intranasally) after careful water restriction.
Fluid and Electrolyte Disturbances
401
CHAPTER 39
Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus
Central diabetes insipidus
Diuretic
Osmotic diureses
No
Insensible water loss
Gastrointestinal water loss
Remote renal water loss
Renal response
  to desmopressin
Urine osmole
   excretion rate
   > 750 mosmol/d
ECF Volume
Increased
Not increased
Administration of
   hypertonic NaCl
   or NaHCO3
Minimum volume of
   maximally concentrated urine
Yes
No
Yes
Urine osmolality unchanged
Urine osmolality increased
CLINICAL APPROACH TO HYPERNATREMIA
FIGURE 39-2
Algorithm depicting the clinical approach to hyperna-
tremia. ECF, extracellular ﬂuid.
The urine osmolality should increase by at least 50% in
patients with CDI and will not change in those with
NDI. Unfortunately, the diagnosis may sometimes be dif-
ﬁcult because of partial defects in AVP secretion and
action.
POTASSIUM
Potassium Balance
Potassium is the major intracellular cation. The normal
plasma K+ concentration is 3.5–5.0 mmol/L; the con-
centration inside cells is about 150 mmol/L.Therefore,
the amount of K+ in the ECF (30–70 mmol) constitutes
<2% of the total body K+ content (2500–4500 mmol).
The ratio of ICF to ECF K+ concentration (normally
38:1) is the principal result of the resting membrane
potential and is crucial for normal neuromuscular func-
tion. The basolateral Na+, K+-ATPase pump actively
transports K+ in and Na+ out of the cell in a 2:3 ratio,
and the passive outward diffusion of K+ is quantitatively
the most important factor that generates the resting
membrane potential. The activity of the electrogenic
Na+, K+-ATPase pump may be stimulated as a result of
an increased intracellular Na+ concentration and inhib-
ited in the setting of digoxin toxicity or chronic illness
such as heart failure or renal failure.
The K+ intake of individuals on an average Western
diet is 40–120 mmol/d, or approximately 1 mmol/kg per
day, 90% of which is absorbed by the gastrointestinal tract.
Maintenance of the steady state necessitates matching K+
ingestion with excretion. Initially, extrarenal adaptive
mechanisms, followed later by urinary excretion, prevent
a doubling of the plasma K+ concentration that would
occur if the dietary K+ load remained in the ECF com-
partment. Immediately after a meal, most of the absorbed
K+ enters cells as a result of the initial elevation in the
plasma K+ concentration and facilitated by insulin release
and basal catecholamine levels. Eventually, however, the
excess K+ is excreted in the urine (see below).The regula-
tion of gastrointestinal K+ handling is not well under-
stood. The amount of K+ lost in the stool can increase
from 10 to 50 or 60% (of dietary intake) in people with
chronic renal insufﬁciency. In addition, colonic secretion
of K+ is stimulated in patients with large volumes of diar-
rhea, resulting in potentially severe K+ depletion.
Potassium Excretion
Renal excretion is the major route of elimination of
dietary and other sources of excess K+.The ﬁltered load
of K+ (GFR × plasma K+ concentration = 180 L/d ×
4 mmol/L = 720 mmol/d) is 10- to 20-fold greater than the
ECF K+ content. About 90% of ﬁltered K+ is reabsorbed
Disorders Complicating Critical Illnesses and Their Management
402
SECTION V
Treatment:
HYPERNATREMIA
The therapeutic goals are to stop ongoing water loss by
treating the underlying cause and to correct the water
deﬁcit. The ECF volume should be restored in hypov-
olemic patients. The quantity of water required to cor-
rect the deﬁcit can be calculated from the following
equation:
Water deﬁcit = Plasma Na+ concentration −140 × Total body water
140
In hypernatremia caused by water loss, total body
water is approximately 50% and 40% of lean body
weight in men and women, respectively. For example,
a 50-kg woman with a plasma Na+ concentration of
160 mmol/L has an estimated free-water deﬁcit of 2.9 L
{[(160 −140) ÷ 140] × (0.4 × 50)}. As in hyponatremia,
rapid correction of hypernatremia is potentially danger-
ous. In this case, a sudden decrease in osmolality could
potentially cause a rapid shift of water into cells that
have undergone osmotic adaptation. This would result
in swollen brain cells and increase the risk of seizures or
permanent neurologic damage. Therefore, the water
deﬁcit should be corrected slowly over at least 48–72 h.
When calculating the rate of water replacement, ongo-
ing losses should be taken into account, and the plasma
Na+ concentration should be lowered by 0.5 mmol/L per h
and by no more than 12 mmol/L over the ﬁrst 24 h.
The safest route of administration of water is by
mouth or via a nasogastric tube (or other feeding tube).
Alternatively, 5% dextrose in water or half-isotonic
saline can be given IV.The appropriate treatment of CDI
consists of administering desmopressin intranasally.
Other options for decreasing urine output include a
low-salt diet in combination with low-dose thiazide
diuretic therapy.In some patients with partial CDI, drugs
that either stimulate AVP secretion or enhance its action
on the kidney have been useful. These include chlor-
propamide, cloﬁbrate, carbamazepine, and nonsteroidal
antiinﬂammatory drugs (NSAIDs). The concentrating
defect in NDI may be reversible by treating the underly-
ing disorder or eliminating the offending drug. Sympto-
matic polyuria caused by NDI can be treated with a low-
Na+ diet and thiazide diuretics, as described above.
This induces mild volume depletion, which leads to
enhanced proximal reabsorption of salt and water and
decreased delivery to the site of action of AVP, the col-
lecting duct. By impairing renal prostaglandin synthesis,
NSAIDs potentiate AVP action and thereby increase
urine osmolality and decrease urine volume. Amiloride
may be useful in patients with NDI who need to take
lithium. The nephrotoxicity of lithium requires the drug
to be taken up into collecting duct cells via the
amiloride-sensitive Na+ channel.
by the proximal convoluted tubule and loop of Henle.
Proximally, K+ is reabsorbed passively with Na+ and water;
the luminal Na+-K+-2Cl−co-transporter mediates K+
uptake in the TALH. Therefore, K+ delivery to the distal
nephron [distal convoluted tubule and cortical collecting
duct (CCD)] approximates dietary intake. Net distal K+
secretion or reabsorption occurs in the setting of K+ excess
or depletion, respectively.The cell responsible for K+ secre-
tion in the late distal convoluted tubule (or connecting
tubule) and CCD is the principal cell.Virtually all regula-
tion of renal K+ excretion and total body K+ balance
occurs in the distal nephron. Potassium secretion is regu-
lated by two physiologic stimuli—aldosterone and hyper-
kalemia. Aldosterone is secreted by the zona glomerulosa
cells of the adrenal cortex in response to high renin and
angiotensin II or hyperkalemia.The plasma K+ concentra-
tion, independent of aldosterone, can directly affect K+
secretion. In addition to the K+ concentration in the
lumen of the CCD, renal K+ loss depends on the urine
ﬂow rate, a function of daily solute excretion (see above).
Because excretion is equal to the product of concentration
and volume, increased distal ﬂow rate can signiﬁcantly
enhance urinary K+ output. Finally, in severe K+ depletion,
secretion of K+ is reduced and reabsorption in the cortical
and medullary collecting ducts is upregulated.
HYPOKALEMIA
Etiology
(Table 39-3) Hypokalemia, deﬁned as a plasma K+ con-
centration <3.5 mmol/L, may result from one (or more)
of the following: decreased net intake, shift into cells, or
increased net loss. Diminished intake is seldom the sole
cause of K+ depletion because urinary excretion can be
effectively decreased to <15 mmol/d as a result of net
K+ reabsorption in the distal nephron.With the excep-
tion of the urban poor and certain cultural groups, the
amount of K+ in the diet almost always exceeds that
excreted in the urine. However, dietary K+ restriction
may exacerbate hypokalemia secondary to increased gas-
trointestinal or renal loss. An unusual cause of decreased
K+ intake is ingestion of clay (geophagia), which binds
dietary K+ and iron. This custom was previously com-
mon among African Americans in the American South.
Redistribution into Cells
Movement of K+ into cells may transiently decrease the
plasma K+ concentration without altering total body K+
content. For any given cause, the magnitude of the
change is relatively small, often <1 mmol/L. However, a
combination of factors may lead to a signiﬁcant decrease
in the plasma K+ concentration and may amplify the
hypokalemia caused by K+ wasting. Metabolic alkalosis is
often associated with hypokalemia. This occurs as a
result of K+ redistribution as well as excessive renal K+
loss. Treatment of patients with diabetic ketoacidosis
with insulin may lead to hypokalemia because of stimula-
tion of the Na+-H+ antiporter and (secondarily) the Na+,
K+-ATPase pump. Furthermore, uncontrolled hyper-
glycemia often leads to K+ depletion from an osmotic
diuresis (see below). Stress-induced catecholamine release
and administration of β2-adrenergic agonists directly
induce cellular uptake of K+ and promote insulin secre-
tion by pancreatic islet β cells. Hypokalemic periodic paralysis
is a rare condition characterized by recurrent episodic
weakness or paralysis. Because K+ is the major ICF cation,
anabolic states can potentially result in hypokalemia
caused by a K+ shift into cells.This may occur after rapid
cell growth seen in patients with pernicious anemia
Fluid and Electrolyte Disturbances
403
CHAPTER 39
TABLE 39-3
CAUSES OF HYPOKALEMIA
I. Decreased intake
A. Starvation
B. Clay ingestion
II. Redistribution into cells
A. Acid–base
1. Metabolic alkalosis
B. Hormonal
1. Insulin
2. β2-Adrenergic agonists (endogenous or exogenous)
3. α-Adrenergic antagonists
C. Anabolic state
1. Vitamin B12 or folic acid (red blood cell production)
2. Granulocyte-macrophage colony stimulating fac-
tor (white blood cell production)
3. Total parenteral nutrition
D. Other
1. Pseudohypokalemia
2. Hypothermia
3. Hypokalemic periodic paralysis
4. Barium toxicity
III. Increased loss
A. Nonrenal
1. Gastrointestinal loss (diarrhea)
2. Integumentary loss (sweat)
B. Renal
1. Increased distal ﬂow: diuretics, osmotic diuresis,
salt-wasting nephropathies
2. Increased secretion of potassium
a. Mineralocorticoid excess: primary hyperaldos-
teronism, secondary hyperaldosteronism 
(malignant hypertension, renin-secreting tumors,
renal artery stenosis, hypovolemia), apparent
mineralocorticoid excess (licorice, chewing
tobacco, carbenoxolone), congenital adrenal
hyperplasia, Cushing’s syndrome, Bartter’s 
syndrome
b. Distal delivery of non-reabsorbed anions: 
vomiting, nasogastric suction, proximal (type 2)
renal tubular acidosis, diabetic ketoacidosis,
glue-snifﬁng (toluene abuse), penicillin 
derivatives
c. Other: amphotericin B, Liddle’s syndrome, 
hypomagnesemia
treated with vitamin B12 or with neutropenia after
treatment with granulocyte-macrophage colony stimu-
lating factor. Massive transfusion with thawed washed
red blood cells (RBCs) could cause hypokalemia
because frozen RBCs lose up to half of their K+ during
storage.
Nonrenal Loss of Potassium
Excessive sweating may result in K+ depletion from
increased integumentary and renal K+ loss. Hyperaldos-
teronism secondary to ECF volume contraction
enhances K+ excretion in the urine. Normally, K+ lost
in the stool amounts to 5–10 mmol/d in a volume of
100–200 mL. Hypokalemia subsequent to increased gas-
trointestinal loss can occur in patients with profuse diar-
rhea (usually secretory), villous adenomas, VIPomas, or
laxative abuse. However, the loss of gastric secretions
does not account for the moderate to severe K+ deple-
tion often associated with vomiting or nasogastric suc-
tion. Because the K+ concentration of gastric ﬂuid is
5–10 mmol/L, it would take 30–80 L of vomitus to
achieve a K+ deﬁcit of 300–400 mmol typically seen in
these patients. In fact, the hypokalemia is primarily
caused by increased renal K+ excretion. Loss of gastric
contents results in volume depletion and metabolic alka-
losis, both of which promote kaliuresis. Hypovolemia
stimulates aldosterone release, which augments K+ secre-
tion by the principal cells. In addition, the ﬁltered load
of HCO3
−exceeds the reabsorptive capacity of the
proximal convoluted tubule, thereby increasing distal
delivery of NaHCO3, which enhances the electrochem-
ical gradient favoring K+ loss in the urine.
Renal Loss of Potassium
In general, most cases of chronic hypokalemia are due to
renal K+ wasting. This may be caused by factors that
increase the K+ concentration in the lumen of the CCD
or augment distal ﬂow rate. Mineralocorticoid excess
commonly results in hypokalemia. Primary hyperaldostero-
nism is caused by dysregulated aldosterone secretion by
an adrenal adenoma (Conn’s syndrome) or carcinoma or
by adrenocortical hyperplasia. In a rare subset of
patients, the disorder is familial (autosomal dominant),
and aldosterone levels can be suppressed by administer-
ing low doses of exogenous glucocorticoid. The
molecular defect responsible for glucocorticoid-remediable
hyperaldosteronism is a rearranged gene (caused by a chro-
mosomal crossover), containing the 5'-regulatory region
of the 11β-hydroxylase gene and the coding sequence
of the aldosterone synthase gene. Consequently, miner-
alocorticoid is synthesized in the zona fasciculata and
regulated by corticotropin. A number of conditions
associated with hyperreninemia result in secondary
hyperaldosteronism and renal K+ wasting. High renin
levels are commonly seen in both renovascular and
malignant hypertension. Renin-secreting tumors of the
juxtaglomerular apparatus are a rare cause of hypokalemia.
Other tumors that have been reported to produce renin
include renal cell carcinoma, ovarian carcinoma, and
Wilms’ tumor. Hyperreninemia may also occur sec-
ondary to decreased effective circulating arterial volume.
In the absence of elevated renin or aldosterone lev-
els, enhanced distal nephron secretion of K+ may result
from increased production of non-aldosterone miner-
alocorticoids in congenital adrenal hyperplasia. Glucocorti-
coid-stimulated kaliuresis does not normally occur
because of the conversion of cortisol to cortisone by 11β-
hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (11β-HSDH). Therefore,
11β-HSDH deﬁciency or suppression allows cortisol to
bind to the aldosterone receptor and leads to the syn-
drome of apparent mineralocorticoid excess. Drugs that inhibit
the activity of 11β-HSDH include glycyrrhetinic acid,
which is present in licorice, chewing tobacco, and car-
benoxolone. The presentation of Cushing’s syndrome
may include hypokalemia if the capacity of 11β-HSDH
to inactivate cortisol is overwhelmed by persistently ele-
vated glucocorticoid levels.
Liddle’s syndrome is a rare familial (autosomal dominant)
disease characterized by hypertension, hypokalemic
metabolic alkalosis, renal K+ wasting, and suppressed
renin and aldosterone secretion. Increased distal delivery
of Na+ with a nonreabsorbable anion (not Cl−) enhances
K+ secretion. Classically, this is seen with proximal (type 2)
renal tubular acidosis (RTA) and vomiting, associated with
bicarbonaturia. Diabetic ketoacidosis and toluene abuse
(glue snifﬁng) can lead to increased delivery of β-
hydroxybutyrate and hippurate, respectively, to the CCD
and to renal K+ loss. High doses of penicillin derivatives
administered to volume-depleted patients may likewise
promote renal K+ secretion as well as an osmotic
diuresis. Classic distal (type 1) RTA is associated with
hypokalemia caused by increased renal K+ loss, the
mechanism of which is uncertain. Amphotericin B
causes hypokalemia because of increased distal nephron
permeability to Na+ and K+ and to renal K+ wasting.
Bartter’s syndrome
is a disorder characterized by
hypokalemia, metabolic alkalosis, hyperreninemic hyper-
aldosteronism secondary to ECF volume contraction, and
juxtaglomerular apparatus hyperplasia. Finally, diuretic use
and abuse are common causes of K+ depletion. Carbonic
anhydrase inhibitors, loop diuretics, and thiazides are all
kaliuretic.The degree of hypokalemia tends to be greater
with long-acting agents and is dose dependent. Increased
renal K+ excretion is primarily attributable to increased
distal solute delivery and secondary hyperaldosteronism
(caused by volume depletion).
Clinical Features
The clinical manifestations of K+ depletion vary greatly
between individual patients, and their severity depends
on the degree of hypokalemia. Symptoms seldom occur
Disorders Complicating Critical Illnesses and Their Management
404
SECTION V
unless the plasma K+ concentration is <3 mmol/L.
Fatigue, myalgia, and muscular weakness of the lower
extremities are common complaints and are caused by a
lower (more negative) resting membrane potential. More
severe hypokalemia may lead to progressive weakness,
hypoventilation (caused by respiratory muscle involve-
ment), and eventually complete paralysis. Impaired mus-
cle metabolism and the blunted hyperemic response to
exercise associated with profound K+ depletion increase
the risk of rhabdomyolysis. Smooth muscle function may
also be affected and manifest as paralytic ileus.
The electrocardiographic changes of hypokalemia are
due to delayed ventricular repolarization and do not cor-
relate well with the plasma K+ concentration. Early
changes include ﬂattening or inversion of the T wave, a
prominent U wave, ST-segment depression, and a pro-
longed QU interval. Severe K+ depletion may result in a
prolonged PR interval, decreased voltage and widening of
the QRS complex, and an increased risk of ventricular
arrhythmias,
especially in patients with myocardial
ischemia or left ventricular hypertrophy. Hypokalemia
may also predispose patients to digitalis toxicity.
Hypokalemia is often associated with acid–base distur-
bances related to the underlying disorder. In addition, K+
depletion results in intracellular acidiﬁcation and an
increase in net acid excretion or new HCO3
−production.
This is a consequence of enhanced proximal HCO3
−reab-
sorption, increased renal ammoniagenesis, and increased
distal H+ secretion. This contributes to the generation of
metabolic alkalosis frequently present in hypokalemic
patients. NDI (see earlier) is not uncommonly seen in K+
depletion and is manifest as polydipsia and polyuria. Glu-
cose intolerance may also occur with hypokalemia and has
been attributed to either impaired insulin secretion or
peripheral insulin resistance.
Diagnosis
(Fig. 39-3) In most cases, the cause of K+ depletion
can be determined by a careful history. Diuretic and
laxative abuse as well as surreptitious vomiting may be
difficult to identify but should be excluded. Rarely,
patients with marked leukocytosis (e.g., acute myeloid
leukemia) and normokalemia may have a low mea-
sured plasma K+ concentration because of white blood
cell uptake of K+ at room temperature. This pseudohy-
pokalemia can be avoided by storing the blood sample
on ice or rapidly separating the plasma (or serum) from
the cells.
After eliminating decreased intake and intracellular
shift as potential causes of hypokalemia, examination of
the renal response can help to clarify the source of K+
loss. The appropriate response to K+ depletion is to
excrete <15 mmol/d of K+ in the urine because of
increased reabsorption and decreased distal secretion.
Hypokalemia with minimal renal K+ excretion suggests
that K+ was lost via the skin or gastrointestinal tract or
that there is a remote history of vomiting or diuretic
use.As described above, renal K+ wasting may be caused
by factors that either increase the K+ concentration in
the CCD or increase the distal ﬂow rate (or both).The
ECF volume status, blood pressure, and associated
acid–base disorder may help to differentiate the causes
of excessive renal K+ loss. A rapid and simple test
designed to evaluate the driving force for net K+ secre-
tion is the transtubular K+ concentration gradient (TTKG).
The TTKG is the ratio of the K+ concentration in the
lumen of the CCD ([K+]CCD) to that in peritubular cap-
illaries or plasma ([K+]P). The validity of this measure-
ment depends on three assumptions: (1) few solutes are
reabsorbed in the medullary collecting duct (MCD),
(2) K+ is neither secreted nor reabsorbed in the MCD,
and (3) the osmolality of the ﬂuid in the terminal CCD
is known. Signiﬁcant reabsorption or secretion of K+ in
the MCD seldom occurs, except in profound K+ deple-
tion or excess, respectively. When AVP is acting
(OSMU ≥OSMP), the osmolality in the terminal CCD
is the same as that of plasma, and the K+ concentration
in the lumen of the distal nephron can be estimated by
Fluid and Electrolyte Disturbances
405
CHAPTER 39
Yes
No
Assess K+ secretion
Urinary K+ Excretion
<15 mmol/d
>15 mmol/d
Metabolic
acidosis
Metabolic
alkalosis
Lower
  gastrointestinal
  K+ loss
Remote diuretic use
Remote vomiting
K+ loss via sweat
Na+-wasting
   nephropathy
Osmotic diuresis
Diuretic
Acid-base status
Metabolic acidosis
Metabolic alkalosis
Diabetic ketoacidosis
Proximal (type 2) RTA
Distal (type 1) RTA
Amphotericin B
Hypertension?
Mineralocorticoid
   excess
Liddle's syndrome
Vomiting
Bartter's syndrome
Exclude diuretic abuse
Hypomagnesemia
TTKG > 4
TTKG < 2
Assess acid-base status
CLINICAL APPROACH TO HYPOKALEMIA
FIGURE 39-3
Algorithm depicting the clinical approach to hypokalemia.
RTA, renal tubular acidosis; TTKG, transtubular K+ concentra-
tion gradient.
dividing the urine K+ concentration ([K+]U) by the ratio
of the urine to plasma osmolality (OSMU/OSMP):
[K+]CCD = [K+]U ÷ (OSMU/OSMP)TTKG
= [K+]CCD/[K+]P = [K+]U ÷ (OSMU/OSMP)/[K+]P
Hypokalemia with a TTKG greater than 4 suggests
renal K+ loss caused by increased distal K+ secretion.
Plasma renin and aldosterone levels are often helpful in
differentiating among the various causes of hyperaldos-
teronism. Bicarbonaturia and the presence of other non-
reabsorbed anions also increase the TTKG and lead to
renal K+ wasting.
HYPERKALEMIA
Etiology
Hyperkalemia, deﬁned as a plasma K+ concentration
>5.0 mmol/L, occurs as a result of either K+ release
from cells or decreased renal loss. Increased K+ intake is
rarely the sole cause of hyperkalemia because the phe-
nomenon of potassium adaptation ensures rapid K+ excre-
tion in response to increases in dietary consumption.
Iatrogenic hyperkalemia may result from overzealous
parenteral K+ replacement or in patients with renal
insufﬁciency. Pseudohyperkalemia represents an artiﬁcially
elevated plasma K+ concentration caused by K+ move-
ment out of cells immediately before or after venipunc-
ture. Contributing factors include prolonged use of a
tourniquet with or without repeated ﬁst clenching,
hemolysis, and marked leukocytosis or thrombocytosis.
The latter two result in an elevated serum K+ concentra-
tion because of release of intracellular K+ after clot for-
mation. Pseudohyperkalemia should be suspected in an
otherwise asymptomatic patient with no obvious under-
lying cause. If proper venipuncture technique is used
and a plasma (not serum) K+ concentration is measured,
it should be normal. Intravascular hemolysis, tumor lysis
syndrome, and rhabdomyolysis all lead to K+ release
from cells as a result of tissue breakdown.
Metabolic acidoses, with the exception of those
caused by the accumulation of organic anions, can be
associated with mild hyperkalemia resulting from intra-
cellular buffering of H+ (see earlier). Insulin deﬁciency
and hypertonicity (e.g., hyperglycemia) promote K+ shift
from the ICF to the ECF. The severity of exercise-
induced hyperkalemia is related to the degree of exer-
tion. It is caused by release of K+ from muscles and is
usually rapidly reversible, often associated with rebound
hypokalemia. Treatment with β-blockers rarely causes
hyperkalemia but may contribute to the elevation in
plasma K+ concentration seen with other conditions.
Hyperkalemic periodic paralysis is a rare autosomal domi-
nant disorder characterized by episodic weakness or
paralysis, precipitated by stimuli that normally lead to
mild hyperkalemia (e.g., exercise). The genetic defect
appears to be a single amino acid substitution caused by
a mutation in the gene for the skeletal muscle Na+
channel. Hyperkalemia may occur with severe digitalis
toxicity because of inhibition of the Na+, K+-ATPase
pump. Depolarizing muscle relaxants such as succinyl-
choline can increase the plasma K+ concentration, espe-
cially in patients with massive trauma, burns, or neuro-
muscular disease.
Chronic hyperkalemia is virtually always associated
with decreased renal K+ excretion caused by either
impaired secretion or diminished distal solute delivery
(Table 39-4). The latter is seldom the only cause of
impaired K+ excretion but may signiﬁcantly contribute
to hyperkalemia in protein-malnourished (low urea
Disorders Complicating Critical Illnesses and Their Management
406
SECTION V
Treatment:
HYPOKALEMIA
The therapeutic goals are to correct the K+ deficit and
to minimize ongoing losses. With the exception of
periodic paralysis, hypokalemia resulting from tran-
scellular shifts rarely requires IV K+ supplementation,
which can lead to rebound hyperkalemia. It is gener-
ally safer to correct hypokalemia via the oral route.
The degree of K+ depletion does not correlate well
with the plasma K+ concentration. A decrement of 
1 mmol/L in the plasma K+ concentration (from 4.0 to
3.0 mmol/L) may represent a total body K+ deficit of
200–400 mmol, and patients with plasma levels under
3.0 mmol/L often require in excess of 600 mmol of K+
to correct the deficit. Furthermore, factors promoting
K+ shift out of cells (e.g., insulin deficiency in diabetic
ketoacidosis) may result in underestimation of the K+
deficit. Therefore, the plasma K+ concentration should
be monitored frequently when assessing the response
to treatment. Potassium chloride is usually the prepa-
ration of choice and promotes more rapid correction
of hypokalemia and metabolic alkalosis. Potassium
bicarbonate and citrate (metabolized to HCO3
−) tend
to alkalinize the patient and would be more appropri-
ate for hypokalemia associated with chronic diarrhea
or RTA.
Patients with severe hypokalemia or those unable to
take anything by mouth require IV replacement therapy
with KCl. The maximum concentration of administered
K+ should be no more than 40 mmol/L via a peripheral
vein or 60 mmol/L via a central vein.The rate of infusion
should not exceed 20 mmol/h unless paralysis or malig-
nant ventricular arrhythmias are present. Ideally, KCl
should be mixed in normal saline because dextrose
solutions may initially exacerbate hypokalemia because
of insulin-mediated movement of K+ into cells. Rapid IV
administration of K+ should be used judiciously and
requires close observation of the clinical manifestations
of hypokalemia (electrocardiogram and neuromuscular
examination).
excretion) and ECF volume–contracted (decreased distal
NaCl delivery) patients. Decreased K+ secretion by the
principal cells results from either impaired Na+ reab-
sorption or increased Cl– reabsorption.
Hyporeninemic hypoaldosteronism is a syndrome charac-
terized by euvolemia or ECF volume expansion and
suppressed renin and aldosterone levels. This disorder is
commonly seen in patients with mild renal insufﬁciency,
diabetic nephropathy, and chronic tubulointerstitial dis-
ease. Patients frequently have an impaired kaliuretic
response to exogenous mineralocorticoid administra-
tion, suggesting that enhanced distal Cl−reabsorption
(electroneutral Na+ reabsorption) may account for many
of the ﬁndings of hyporeninemic hypoaldosteronism.
NSAIDs inhibit renin secretion and the synthesis of
vasodilatory renal prostaglandins. The resultant decrease
in GFR and K+ secretion is often manifest as hyper-
kalemia.As a rule, the degree of hyperkalemia caused by
hypoaldosteronism is mild in the absence of increased
K+ intake or renal dysfunction.
Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors
block the conversion of angiotensin I to angiotensin II.
Angiotensin receptor antagonists directly inhibit the
actions of angiotensin II on AT1 angiotensin II receptors.
The actions of both of these classes of drugs result in
impaired aldosterone release. Patients at increased risk of
ACE inhibitor or angiotensin receptor antagonist–induced
hyperkalemia include those with diabetes mellitus, renal
insufﬁciency, decreased effective circulating arterial vol-
ume, bilateral renal artery stenosis, or concurrent use of
K+-sparing diuretics or NSAIDs.
Decreased aldosterone synthesis may be caused by
primary adrenal insufﬁciency (Addison’s disease) or con-
genital adrenal enzyme deﬁciency. Heparin (including
low-molecular-weight heparin) inhibits production of
aldosterone by the cells of the zona glomerulosa and
can lead to severe hyperkalemia in a subset of patients
with underlying renal disease or diabetes mellitus or
those receiving K+-sparing diuretics, ACE inhibitors, or
NSAIDs. Pseudohypoaldosteronism is a rare familial disor-
der characterized by hyperkalemia, metabolic acidosis,
renal Na+ wasting, hypotension, high renin and aldos-
terone levels, and end-organ resistance to aldosterone.
The gene encoding the mineralocorticoid receptor is
normal in these patients, and the electrolyte abnormalities
can be reversed with suprapharmacologic doses of an
exogenous mineralocorticoid (e.g., 9α-ﬂudrocortisone) or
an inhibitor of 11β-HSDH (e.g., carbenoxolone). The
kaliuretic response to aldosterone is impaired by K+-sparing
diuretics.Whereas spironolactone is a competitive miner-
alocorticoid antagonist, amiloride and triamterene block
the apical Na+ channel of the principal cell. Two other
drugs that impair K+ secretion by blocking distal
nephron Na+ reabsorption are trimethoprim and pen-
tamidine.These antimicrobial agents may contribute to
the hyperkalemia often seen in patients infected with
HIV who are being treated for Pneumocystis carinii
pneumonia.
Hyperkalemia frequently complicates acute oliguric
renal failure because of increased K+ release from cells
(acidosis, catabolism) and decreased excretion. Increased
distal ﬂow rate and K+ secretion per nephron compen-
sate for decreased renal mass in chronic renal insufﬁ-
ciency. However, these adaptive mechanisms eventually
fail to maintain the K+ balance when the GFR decreases
below 10–15 mL/min or oliguria ensues. Otherwise
asymptomatic urinary tract obstruction is an often over-
looked cause of hyperkalemia. Other nephropathies
associated with impaired K+ excretion include drug-
induced interstitial nephritis, lupus nephritis, sickle cell
disease, and diabetic nephropathy.
Gordon’s syndrome is a rare condition characterized by
hyperkalemia, metabolic acidosis, and a normal GFR.
These patients are usually volume expanded with sup-
pressed renin and aldosterone levels as well as refractory to
the kaliuretic effect of exogenous mineralocorticoids. It
has been suggested that these ﬁndings could all be
accounted for by increased distal Cl−reabsorption (elec-
troneutral Na+ reabsorption), also referred to as a Cl−
shunt.A similar mechanism may be partially responsible for
the hyperkalemia associated with cyclosporine nephrotox-
icity. Hyperkalemic distal (type 4) RTA may be caused by
either hypoaldosteronism or a Cl−shunt (aldosterone-
resistant).
Clinical Features
Because the resting membrane potential is related to
the ratio of the ICF to ECF K+ concentration, hyper-
kalemia partially depolarizes the cell membrane.Prolonged
Fluid and Electrolyte Disturbances
407
CHAPTER 39
TABLE 39-4
CAUSES OF HYPERKALEMIA
I. Renal failure
II. Decreased distal ﬂow (i.e., decreased effective 
circulating arterial volume)
III. Decreased K+ secretion
A. Impaired Na+ reabsorption
1. Primary hypoaldosteronism: adrenal insufﬁciency,
adrenal enzyme deﬁciency (21-hydroxylase, 
3β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase, corticos-
terone methyl oxidase)
2. Secondary hypoaldosteronism: hyporeninemia,
drugs (ACE inhibitors, NSAIDs, heparin)
3. Resistance to aldosterone: pseudohypoaldos-
teronism, tubulointerstitial disease, drugs (K+-
sparing diuretics, trimethoprim, pentamidine)
B. Enhanced Cl−reabsorption (chloride shunt)
1. Gordon’s syndrome
2. Cyclosporine
Note: ACE, angiotensin-converting enzyme; NSAID, nonsteroidal
antiinﬂammatory drug.
depolarization impairs membrane excitability and is
manifest as weakness, which may progress to ﬂaccid
paralysis and hypoventilation if the respiratory muscles
are involved. Hyperkalemia also inhibits renal ammonia-
genesis and reabsorption of NH4
+ in the TALH. Thus,
net acid excretion is impaired and results in metabolic
acidosis, which may further exacerbate the hyperkalemia
because of K+ movement out of cells.
The most serious effect of hyperkalemia is cardiac
toxicity, which does not correlate well with the plasma
K+ concentration.The earliest electrocardiographic changes
include increased T-wave amplitude, or peaked T waves.
More severe degrees of hyperkalemia result in a pro-
longed PR interval and QRS duration, atrioventricular
conduction delay, and loss of P waves. Progressive
widening of the QRS complex and merging with the
T wave produces a sine wave pattern.The terminal event
is usually ventricular ﬁbrillation or asystole.
Diagnosis
(Fig. 39-4) With rare exceptions, chronic hyperkalemia
is always because of impaired K+ excretion. If the cause
is not readily apparent and the patient is asymptomatic,
pseudohyperkalemia should be excluded, as described
above. Oliguric acute renal failure and severe chronic
renal insufﬁciency should also be ruled out.The history
should focus on medications that impair K+ handling
and potential sources of K+ intake. Evaluation of the
ECF compartment, effective circulating volume, and
urine output are essential components of the physical
examination. The severity of hyperkalemia is deter-
mined by the symptoms, plasma K+ concentration, and
electrocardiographic abnormalities.
The appropriate renal response to hyperkalemia is to
excrete at least 200 mmol of K+ daily. In most cases,
diminished renal K+ loss is caused by impaired K+ secre-
tion, which can be assessed by measuring the transtubular
K+ concentration gradient (TTKG).A TTKG <10 implies
a decreased driving force for K+ secretion caused by
either hypoaldosteronism or resistance to the renal effects
of mineralocorticoid.This can be determined by evaluat-
ing the kaliuretic response to administration of mineralo-
corticoid (e.g., 9α-fludrocortisone). Primary adrenal
insufﬁciency can be differentiated from hyporeninemic
hypoaldosteronism by examining the renin–aldosterone
axis. Renin and aldosterone levels should be measured in
the supine and upright positions after 3 days of Na+
restriction (Na+ intake <10 mmol/d) in combination
with a loop diuretic to induce mild volume contraction.
Aldosterone-resistant hyperkalemia can result from the
various causes of impaired distal Na+ reabsorption or from
a Cl−shunt.The former leads to salt wasting, ECF volume
contraction, and high renin and aldosterone levels. In
contrast, enhanced distal Cl−reabsorption is associated
with volume expansion and suppressed renin and aldos-
terone secretion. As mentioned above, hypoaldosteronism
seldom causes severe hyperkalemia in the absence of
increased dietary K+ intake, renal insufﬁciency, transcellular
K+ shifts, or antikaliuretic drugs.
Disorders Complicating Critical Illnesses and Their Management
408
SECTION V
 TTKG < 10
 TTKG <5
Measure renin
   and aldosterone
   levels
Primary or
  secondary
  hypoaldosteronism
Pseudohypoaldosteronism
K+ -sparing diuretics
Trimethoprim, pentamidine
Gordon's syndrome
  (Cl– shunt)
Cyclosporine
Distal (type 4) RTA
Exclude pseudohyperkalemia
Exclude transcellular K+ shift
Exclude oliguric renal failure
Stop NSAIDs and ACE inhibitors
Assess K+ secretion
 TTKG ≥10
TTKG ≥10
   (increased distal flow)
Hypotension
High renin and
  aldosterone
Hypertension
Low renin and
   aldosterone
Decreased effective
  circulating volume
Low-protein diet
  (decreased urea)
Response to
   9α-fludrocortisone
CLINICAL APPROACH TO HYPERKALEMIA
FIGURE 39-4
Algorithm depicting the clinical approach to hyperkalemia.
ACE, angiotensin-converting enzyme; NSAID, nonsteroidal
anti-inﬂammatory drug; RTA, renal tubular acidosis; TTKG,
transtubular K+ concentration gradient.
Treatment:
HYPERKALEMIA
The approach to therapy depends on the degree of
hyperkalemia as determined by the plasma K+ concen-
tration, associated muscular weakness, and changes on
the electrocardiogram. Potentially fatal hyperkalemia
rarely occurs unless the plasma K+ concentration
exceeds 7.5 mmol/L and is usually associated with pro-
found weakness and absent P waves, QRS widening, or
ventricular arrhythmias on the electrocardiogram.
Severe hyperkalemia requires emergent treatment
directed at minimizing membrane depolarization, shift-
ing K+ into cells, and promoting K+ loss. In addition,
exogenous K+ intake and antikaliuretic drugs should be
discontinued. Administration of calcium gluconate
decreases membrane excitability.The usual dose is 10 mL
of a 10% solution infused over 2–3 min. The effect
Fluid and Electrolyte Disturbances
409
CHAPTER 39
begins within minutes but is short lived (30–60 min),
and the dose can be repeated if no change in the elec-
trocardiogram is seen after 5–10 min. Insulin causes K+
to shift into cells by mechanisms described previously
and temporarily lowers the plasma K+ concentration.
Although glucose alone stimulates insulin release from
normal pancreatic β cells, a more rapid response gener-
ally occurs when exogenous insulin is administered
(with glucose to prevent hypoglycemia). A commonly
recommended combination is 10–20 units of regular
insulin and 25–50 g of glucose. Obviously, hyper-
glycemic patients should not be given glucose. If effec-
tive, the plasma K+ concentration will decrease by
0.5–1.5 mmol/L in 15–30 min, and the effect will last for
several hours. Alkali therapy with IV NaHCO3 can also
shift K+ into cells.This is safest when administered as an
isotonic solution of 3 ampules per liter (134 mmol/L
NaHCO3) and ideally should be reserved for patients
with severe hyperkalemia associated with metabolic
acidosis. Patients with end-stage renal disease seldom
respond to this intervention and may not tolerate the
Na+ load and resultant volume expansion. When
administered parenterally or in nebulized form, β2-
adrenergic agonists promote cellular uptake of K+ (see
earlier). The onset of action is 30 min, lowering the
plasma K+ concentration by 0.5 to 1.5 mmol/L, and the
effect lasts 2–4 h.
Removal of K+ can be achieved using diuretics,
cation-exchange resin, or dialysis. Loop and thiazide
diuretics, often in combination, may enhance K+ excre-
tion if renal function is adequate. Sodium polystyrene
sulfonate is a cation-exchange resin that promotes the
exchange of Na+ for K+ in the gastrointestinal tract. Each
gram binds 1 mmol of K+ and releases 2–3 mmol of Na+.
When given by mouth, the usual dose is 25–50 g mixed
with 100 mL of 20% sorbitol to prevent constipation.
This generally lowers the plasma K+ concentration by
0.5–1.0 mmol/L within 1–2 h and lasts for 4–6 h. Sodium
polystyrene sulfonate can also be administered as a
retention enema consisting of 50 g of resin and 50 mL
FURTHER READINGS
ADROGUE HJ, MADIAS NE: Hypernatremia. N Engl J Med 342:1493,
2000
———: Hyponatremia. N Engl J Med 342:1581, 2000
BERL T,VERBALIS J: Pathophysiology of water metabolism, in Brenner
& Rector’s The Kidney, 7th ed, BM Brenner (ed). Philadelphia,
Saunders, 2004
COHN JN et al: New guidelines for potassium replacement in clinical
practice: A contemporary review by the National Council on
Potassium in Clinical Practice. Arch Intern Med 160:2429, 2000
GOLDSZMIDT MA, ILIESCU EA: DDAVP to prevent rapid correction
in hyponatremia. Clin Nephrol 53:226, 2000
GREENBERGA,VERBALIS JG:Vasopressin receptor antagonists. Kidney
Int 69:2124, 2006
GROSS P: Treatment of severe hyponatremia. Kidney Int 60:2417,
2001
HARRIGAN MR: Cerebral salt wasting syndrome. Crit Care Clin
17:125, 2001
MOUNT DB: Disorders of potassium balance, in Brenner & Rector’s
The Kidney, 7th ed, BM Brenner (ed). Philadelphia, Saunders,
2004
NIELSEN S et al:Aquaporins in the kidney: From molecules to medi-
cine. Physiol Rev 82:205, 2002
WARNOCK DG: Genetic forms of renal potassium and magnesium
wasting.Am J Med 112:235, 2002
of 70% sorbitol mixed in 150 mL of tap water. The sor-
bitol should be omitted from the enema in postopera-
tive patients because of the increased incidence of
sorbitol-induced colonic necrosis, especially after renal
transplantation. The most rapid and effective way of
lowering the plasma K+ concentration is hemodialysis.
This should be reserved for patients with renal failure
and those with severe life-threatening hyperkalemia
unresponsive to more conservative measures. Peri-
toneal dialysis also removes K+ but is only 15–20% as
effective as hemodialysis. Finally, the underlying cause
of the hyperkalemia should be treated.This may involve
dietary modiﬁcation, correction of metabolic acidosis,
cautious volume expansion, and administration of
exogenous mineralocorticoid.
Thomas D. DuBose, Jr.
NORMAL ACID–BASE HOMEOSTASIS
Systemic arterial pH is maintained between 7.35 and
7.45 by extracellular and intracellular chemical buffering
together with respiratory and renal regulatory mecha-
nisms. The control of arterial CO2 tension (PaCO2) by
the central nervous system (CNS) and respiratory sys-
tem and the control of the plasma bicarbonate by the
kidneys stabilize the arterial pH by excretion or reten-
tion of acid or alkali. The metabolic and respiratory
components that regulate systemic pH are described by
the Henderson-Hasselbalch equation:
pH = 6.1 + log
Under most circumstances, CO2 production and excre-
tion are matched, and the usual steady-state PaCO2 is main-
tained at 40 mmHg. Underexcretion of CO2 produces
hypercapnia, and overexcretion causes hypocapnia. Never-
theless, production and excretion are again matched at a
new steady-state PaCO2. Therefore, the PaCO2 is regulated
primarily by neural respiratory factors (Chap. 22) and is
not subject to regulation by the rate of CO2 production.
Hypercapnia is usually the result of hypoventilation rather
than of increased CO2 production. Increases or decreases
in PaCO2 represent derangements of neural respiratory
control or are caused by compensatory changes in
response to a primary alteration in the plasma [HCO3
–].
ACIDOSIS AND ALKALOSIS
The kidneys regulate plasma HCO3
−through three
main processes: (1) “reabsorption” of ﬁltered HCO3
–,
(2) formation of titratable acid, and (3) excretion of
NH4
+ in the urine. The kidney ﬁlters ~4000 mmol of
HCO3
– per day.To reabsorb the ﬁltered load of HCO3
−,
the renal tubules must therefore secrete 4000 mmol of
hydrogen ions. Between 80 and 90% of HCO3
−is reab-
sorbed in the proximal tubule.The distal nephron reab-
sorbs the remainder and secretes protons, as generated
from metabolism, to defend systemic pH. Although this
quantity of protons, 40–60 mmol/d, is small, it must be
secreted to prevent chronic positive H+ balance and
metabolic acidosis. This quantity of secreted protons is
represented in the urine as titratable acid and NH4
+.
Metabolic acidosis in the face of normal renal function
increases NH4
+ production and excretion. NH4
+ pro-
duction and excretion are impaired in chronic renal fail-
ure, hyperkalemia, and renal tubular acidosis.
In sum, these regulatory responses, including chemical
buffering,the regulation of PaCO2 by the respiratory system,
and the regulation of HCO3
−by the kidneys,act in concert
to maintain a systemic arterial pH between 7.35 and 7.45.
DIAGNOSIS OF GENERAL TYPES 
OF DISTURBANCES
The most common clinical disturbances are simple
acid–base disorders (i.e., metabolic acidosis or alkalosis
CHAPTER 40
CHAPTER 40
410
I Normal Acid–Base Homeostasis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .410
I Diagnosis of General Types of Disturbances . . . . . . . . . . . . .410
Simple Acid–Base Disorders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .411
Mixed Acid–Base Disorders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .412
I Metabolic Acidosis  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .413
High-Anion-Gap Acidoses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .414
Hyperchloremic (Nongap) Metabolic Acidoses . . . . . . . . . . . .417
I Metabolic Alkalosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .418
Pathogenesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .418
Differential Diagnosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .418
Metabolic Alkalosis Associated with Extracellular 
Fluid Volume Contraction, K+ Depletion, and Secondary 
Hyperreninemic Hyperaldosteronism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .419
Metabolic Alkalosis Associated with Extracellular Fluid Volume 
Expansion, Hypertension, and Hyperaldosteronism . . . . . . .420
I Respiratory Acidosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .421
I Respiratory Alkalosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .422
I Further Readings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .423
HCO3
–
PaCO2 × 0.0301
or respiratory acidosis or alkalosis). Because compensation
is not complete, the pH is abnormal in simple distur-
bances. More complicated clinical situations can give
rise to mixed acid–base disturbances.
SIMPLE ACID–BASE DISORDERS
Primary respiratory disturbances (primary changes in
PaCO2) invoke compensatory metabolic responses (sec-
ondary changes in HCO3
−), and primary metabolic dis-
turbances elicit predictable compensatory respiratory
responses. Physiologic compensation can be predicted
from the relationships displayed in Table 40-1. Meta-
bolic acidosis caused by an increase in endogenous acids
(e.g., ketoacidosis) lowers extracellular ﬂuid (ECF)
HCO3
−and decreases extracellular pH. This stimulates
the medullary chemoreceptors to increase ventilation
and to return the ratio of HCO3
−to PaCO2, and thus pH,
toward normal, although not to normal. The degree of
Acidosis and Alkalosis
411
CHAPTER 40
respiratory compensation expected in a simple form of
metabolic acidosis can be predicted from the relationship:
PaCO2 = (1.5 × HCO3
−) + 8 ± 2, i.e., the PaCO2 is expected
to decrease 1.25 mmHg for each mmol per liter decrease
in HCO3
−. Thus, a patient with metabolic acidosis and
HCO3
−of 12 mmol/L would be expected to have a PaCO2
between 24 and 28 mmHg.Values for PaCO2 <24 or >28
mmHg deﬁne a mixed disturbance (metabolic acidosis and
respiratory alkalosis or metabolic alkalosis and respiratory
acidosis, respectively).Another way to judge the appropri-
ateness of the response in HCO3
−or PaCO2 is to use an
acid–base nomogram (Fig. 40-1). Although the shaded
areas of the nomogram show the 95% conﬁdence limits
for normal compensation in simple disturbances, ﬁnding
acid–base values within the shaded area does not neces-
sarily rule out a mixed disturbance. Imposition of one
disorder over another may result in values lying within
the area of a third.Thus, the nomogram, although conve-
nient, is not a substitute for the equations in Table 40-1.
TABLE 40-1
PREDICTION OF COMPENSATORY RESPONSES ON SIMPLE ACID–BASE
DISTURBANCES AND PATTERN OF CHANGES
RANGE OF VALUES
DISORDER
PREDICTION OF COMPENSATION
pH
HCO3
–
PaCO2
Metabolic 
PaCO2 = (1.5 × HCO3
−) + 8 ± 2
Low
Low
Low
acidosis
or
PaCO2 will ↓1.25 mmHg per 
mmol/L ↓in HCO3
−
or
PaCO2 = HCO3
−+ 15
Metabolic 
PaCO2 will ↑0.75 mmHg per 
High
High
High
alkalosis
mmol/L ↑in HCO3
−
or
PaCO2 will ↑ 6 mmHg per 
10 mmol/L ↑in HCO3
−
or
PaCO2 = HCO3
−+ 15
Respiratory 
High
Low
Low
alkalosis
Acute
HCO3
−will ↓0.2 mmol/L 
per mmHg ↓in PaCO2
Chronic
HCO3
−will ↓0.4 mmol/L 
per mmHg ↓in PaCO2
Respiratory 
Low
High
High
acidosis
Acute
HCO3
−will ↑0.1 mmol/L 
per mmHg ↑in PaCO2
Chronic
HCO3
−will ↑0.4 mmol/L 
per mmHg ↑in PaCO2
MIXED ACID–BASE DISORDERS
Mixed acid–base disorders—deﬁned as independently
coexisting disorders,not merely compensatory responses—
are often seen in patients in critical care units and can lead
to dangerous extremes of pH (Table 40-2). A patient
with diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA; metabolic acidosis)
may develop an independent respiratory problem lead-
ing to respiratory acidosis or alkalosis. Patients with
underlying pulmonary disease may not respond to meta-
bolic acidosis with an appropriate ventilatory response
because of insufﬁcient respiratory reserve. Such imposi-
tion of respiratory acidosis on metabolic acidosis can
lead to severe acidemia and a poor outcome. When
metabolic acidosis and metabolic alkalosis coexist in the
same patient, the pH may be normal or near normal.
When the pH is normal, an elevated anion gap (AG; see
below) denotes the presence of a metabolic acidosis. A
discrepancy in the ΔAG (prevailing minus normal AG)
and the ΔHCO3
−(normal minus prevailing HCO3
−)
indicates the presence of a mixed high-gap acidosis—
metabolic alkalosis (see example below). A diabetic
patient with ketoacidosis may have renal dysfunction
resulting in simultaneous metabolic acidosis. Patients
who have ingested an overdose of drug combinations
such as sedatives and salicylates may have mixed distur-
bances as a result of the acid–base response to the indi-
vidual drugs (metabolic acidosis mixed with respiratory
acidosis or respiratory alkalosis, respectively). Even more
complex are triple acid–base disturbances. For example,
412
Disorders Complicating Critical Illnesses and Their Management
SECTION V
patients with metabolic acidosis caused by alcoholic
ketoacidosis (AKA) may develop metabolic alkalosis
from vomiting and superimposed respiratory alkalosis
because of the hyperventilation of hepatic dysfunction
or alcohol withdrawal.
FIGURE 40-1
Acid–base nomogram. Shown are the 90% conﬁdence lim-
its (range of values) of the normal respiratory and metabolic
compensations for primary acid–base disturbances. (From
DuBose, used with permission.)
Arterial blood [H+] (nmol/L)
100 90 80 70 60
50
40
30
20
60
56
52
48
44
40
36
32
28
24
20
16
12
8
4
0
7.0
7.1
7.2
7.3
7.4
7.5
7.6
7.7
7.8
Arterial blood, pH
120
100 90 80
70
60
50
40
110
35
30
25
20
15
10
Normal
PCO2(mmHg)
Acute
respiratory
alkalosis
Acute
respiratory
acidosis
Chronic
respiratory
alkalosis
Chronic
respiratory
acidosis
Metabolic
acidosis
Metabolic
alkalosis
Arterial plasma [HCO3] (mmol/L)
–
TABLE 40-2 
EXAMPLES OF MIXED ACID–BASE DISORDERS
Mixed Metabolic and Respiratory
Metabolic acidosis—respiratory alkalosis
Key: High- or normal-AG metabolic acidosis; prevailing
PaCO2 below predicted value (Table 40-1)
Example: Na+, 140; K+, 4.0; Cl−, 106; HCO3
−, 14; AG, 20;
PaCO2, 24; pH, 7.39 (lactic acidosis, sepsis in the ICU)
Metabolic acidosis—respiratory acidosis
Key: High- or normal-AG metabolic acidosis; prevailing 
PaCO2 above predicted value (Table 40-1)
Example: Na+, 140; K+, 4.0; Cl−, 102; HCO3
−, 18; AG, 20; 
PaCO2, 38; pH, 7.30 (severe pneumonia, pulmonary edema)
Metabolic alkalosis—respiratory alkalosis
Key: PaCO2 does not increase as predicted; pH higher 
than expected
Example: Na+, 140; K+, 4.0; Cl−, 91; HCO3
−, 33; AG, 16; 
PaCO2, 38; pH, 7.55 (liver disease and diuretics)
Metabolic alkalosis—respiratory acidosis
Key: PaCO2 higher than predicted; pH normal
Example: Na+, 140; K+, 3.5; Cl−, 88; HCO3
−, 42; AG, 10; 
PaCO2, 67; pH, 7.42 (COPD on diuretics)
Mixed Metabolic Disorders
Metabolic acidosis—metabolic alkalosis
Key: Only detectable with high-AG acidosis; 
ΔAG >>ΔHCO3
–
Example: Na+, 140; K+, 3.0; Cl−, 95; HCO3
−, 25; AG, 20; 
PaCO2, 40; pH, 7.42 (uremia with vomiting)
Metabolic acidosis—metabolic acidosis
Key: Mixed high-AG–normal-AG acidosis; ΔHCO3
−
accounted for by combined change in ΔAG and ΔCl−
Example: Na+, 135; K+, 3.0; Cl−, 110; HCO3
−, 10; AG, 15; 
PaCO2, 25; pH, 7.20 (diarrhea and lactic acidosis, 
toluene toxicity, treatment of diabetic ketoacidosis)
Note: AG, anion gap; COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease;
ICU, intensive care unit.
Approach to the Patient:
ACID–BASE DISORDERS
A stepwise approach to the diagnosis of acid–base
disorders follows (Table 40-3). Care should be taken
when measuring blood gases to obtain the arterial
blood sample without using excessive heparin. Blood
for electrolytes and arterial blood gases should be
Acidosis and Alkalosis
413
CHAPTER 40
drawn simultaneously before therapy because an
increase in HCO3
−occurs with metabolic alkalosis
and respiratory acidosis. Conversely, a decrease in
HCO3
−occurs in metabolic acidosis and respiratory
alkalosis. In the determination of arterial blood gases
by the clinical laboratory, both pH and PaCO2 are
measured, and the HCO3
−is calculated from the
Henderson-Hasselbalch equation. This calculated
value should be compared with the measured HCO3
−
(total CO2) on the electrolyte panel.These two values
should agree within 2 mmol/L. If they do not, the
values may not have been drawn simultaneously, a
laboratory error may be present, or an error could
have been made in calculating the HCO3
−.After veri-
fying the blood acid–base values, one can then iden-
tify the precise acid–base disorder.
CALCULATE THE ANION GAP All evaluations
of acid–base disorders should include a simple calcu-
lation of the AG; it represents those unmeasured
anions in plasma (normally 10–12 mmol/L) and is
calculated as follows: AG = Na+ −(Cl−+ HCO3
−).
The unmeasured anions include anionic proteins,
phosphate, sulfate, and organic anions. When acid
anions, such as acetoacetate and lactate, accumulate in
ECF, the AG increases, causing a high-AG acidosis.An
increase in the AG is most often caused by an increase
in unmeasured anions and less commonly is caused by
a decrease in unmeasured cations (calcium, magnesium,
potassium). In addition, the AG may increase with an
increase in anionic albumin because of either increased
albumin concentration or alkalosis, which alters albu-
min charge.A decrease in the AG can be caused by (1)
an increase in unmeasured cations; (2) the addition to
the blood of abnormal cations, such as lithium (lithium
intoxication) or cationic immunoglobulins (plasma cell
dyscrasias); (3) a reduction in the major plasma anion
albumin concentration (nephrotic syndrome); (4) a
decrease in the effective anionic charge on albumin
by acidosis; or (5) hyperviscosity and severe hyperlipi-
TABLE 40-3 
STEPS IN ACID–BASE DIAGNOSIS
1. Obtain arterial blood gas (ABG) and electrolytes 
simultaneously.
2. Compare HCO3
−on ABG and electrolytes to verify
accuracy.
3. Calculate anion gap (AG).
4. Know four causes of high-AG acidosis (ketoacidosis,
lactic acid acidosis, renal failure, and toxins).
5. Know two causes of hyperchloremic or nongap acidosis 
(bicarbonate loss from GI tract, renal tubular acidosis).
6. Estimate compensatory response (Table 40-1).
7. Compare ΔAG and ΔHCO3
−.
8. Compare change in Cl−with change in Na+.
demia, which can lead to an underestimation of
sodium and chloride concentrations. A decrease in
serum albumin by 1 g/dL from the normal value
(4.5 g/dL) decreases the AG by 2.5 meq/L. It is
important to know the common causes of high-AG
acidosis (Table 40-3).
In the face of a normal serum albumin, a high AG
is usually caused by non–chloride-containing acids
that contain inorganic (phosphate, sulfate), organic
(ketoacids, lactate, uremic organic anions), exogenous
(salicylate or ingested toxins with organic acid pro-
duction), or unidentiﬁed anions.The high AG is sig-
niﬁcant even if an additional acid–base disorder is
superimposed to modify the HCO3
−independently.
Simultaneous metabolic acidosis of the high-AG vari-
ety plus either chronic respiratory acidosis or meta-
bolic alkalosis represents such a situation in which
HCO3
−may be normal or even high (Table 40-2).
Compare the change in HCO3
−(ΔHCO3
−) and the
change in the AG (ΔAG).
Similarly, normal values for HCO3
−, PaCO2, and pH
do not ensure the absence of an acid–base disturbance.
For instance, an alcoholic who has been vomiting may
develop a metabolic alkalosis with a pH of 7.55, PaCO2
of 48 mmHg, HCO3
−of 40 mmol/L, Na+ of 135, Cl−
of 80, and K+ of 2.8. If such a patient were then to
develop a superimposed AKA with a β-hydroxybu-
tyrate concentration of 15 mM, arterial pH would
decrease to 7.40, HCO3
−to 25 mmol/L, and PaCO2 to
40 mmHg.Although these blood gas levels are normal,
the AG is elevated at 30 mmol/L, indicating a mixed
metabolic alkalosis and metabolic acidosis. A mixture
of high-gap acidosis and metabolic alkalosis is recog-
nized easily by comparing the differences (Δ values) in
the normal to prevailing patient values. In this exam-
ple, the ΔHCO3
– is 0 (25 −25 mmol/L) but the ΔAG
is 20 (30 −10 mmol/L). Therefore, 20 mmol/L is
unaccounted for in the Δ/Δ value (ΔAG to ΔHCO3
−).
METABOLIC ACIDOSIS
Metabolic acidosis can occur because of an increase in
endogenous acid production (e.g., lactate and ketoacids),
loss of bicarbonate (as in diarrhea), or accumulation of
endogenous acids (as in renal failure). Metabolic acidosis
has profound effects on the respiratory, cardiac, and ner-
vous systems.The decrease in blood pH is accompanied
by a characteristic increase in ventilation, especially the
tidal volume (Kussmaul respiration). Intrinsic cardiac con-
tractility may be depressed, but inotropic function can be
normal because of catecholamine release. Both peripheral
arterial vasodilation and central venoconstriction can be
present; the decrease in central and pulmonary vascular
414
Disorders Complicating Critical Illnesses and Their Management
SECTION V
compliance predisposes to pulmonary edema with even
minimal volume overload. CNS function is depressed,
with headache, lethargy, stupor, and, in some cases, even
coma. Glucose intolerance may also occur.
The two major categories of clinical metabolic acido-
sis are high-AG and normal-AG, or hyperchloremic aci-
dosis (Table 40-3 and Table 40-4).
HIGH-ANION-GAP ACIDOSES
TABLE 40-4 
CAUSES OF HIGH-ANION-GAP METABOLIC
ACIDOSIS
Lactic acidosis
Toxins
Ketoacidosis
Ethylene glycol
Diabetic
Methanol
Alcoholic
Salicylates
Starvation
Propylene glycol
Pyroglutamic acid
Renal failure (acute and chronic)
Treatment:
METABOLIC ACIDOSIS
Treatment of metabolic acidosis with alkali should be
reserved for severe acidemia except when the patient
has no “potential HCO3
−” in plasma. Potential HCO3
−can
be estimated from the increment (Δ) in the AG (ΔAG =
patient’s AG −10). It must be determined if the acid
anion in plasma is metabolizable (i.e., β-hydroxybu-
tyrate, acetoacetate, and lactate) or nonmetabolizable
(anions that accumulate in chronic renal failure and
after toxin ingestion). The latter requires return of renal
function to replenish the HCO3
−deﬁcit, a slow and often
unpredictable process. Consequently, patients with a
normal AG acidosis (hyperchloremic acidosis), a slightly
elevated AG (mixed hyperchloremic and AG acidosis), or
an AG attributable to a nonmetabolizable anion in the
face of renal failure should receive alkali therapy, either
PO (NaHCO3 or Shohl’s solution) or IV (NaHCO3), in an
amount necessary to slowly increase the plasma HCO3
−
into the 20–22 mmol/L range.
Controversy exists, however, regarding the use of
alkali in patients with a pure AG acidosis owing to
accumulation of a metabolizable organic acid anion
(ketoacidosis or lactic acidosis). In general, severe
acidosis (pH < 7.20) warrants the IV administration of
50–100 meq of NaHCO3 over 30–45 min, during the ini-
tial 1–2 h of therapy. Provision of such modest quanti-
ties of alkali in this situation seems to provide an added
measure of safety, but it is essential to monitor plasma
electrolytes during the course of therapy because the K+
may decline as pH increases. The goal is to increase the
HCO3
−to 10 meq/L and the pH to 7.15, not to increase
these values to normal.
Approach to the Patient:
HIGH-ANION-GAP ACIDOSES
The four principal causes of a high-AG acidosis are lac-
tic acidosis, ketoacidosis, ingested toxins, and acute and
chronic renal failure (see Table 40-4).The initial screen-
ing to differentiate the high-AG acidoses should
include (1) a probe of the history for evidence of drug
and toxin ingestion and measurement of arterial blood
gas to detect coexistent respiratory alkalosis (salicylates);
(2) determination of whether diabetes mellitus is pre-
sent (DKA); (3) a search for evidence of alcoholism or
increased levels of β-hydroxybutyrate (AKA); (4) obser-
vation for clinical signs of uremia and determination of
the blood urea nitrogen (BUN) and creatinine (uremic
acidosis); (5) inspection of the urine for oxalate crystals
(ethylene glycol); and (6) recognition of the numerous
clinical settings in which lactate levels may be increased
(hypotension, shock, cardiac failure, leukemia, cancer,
drug or toxin ingestion).
Lactic Acidosis
An increase in plasma L-lactate may be secondary to poor
tissue perfusion (type A)—circulatory insufﬁciency (shock,
cardiac failure), severe anemia, mitochondrial enzyme
defects, and inhibitors (carbon monoxide, cyanide)—or to
aerobic disorders (type B)—malignancies, nucleoside ana-
logue reverse transcriptase inhibitors in HIV, diabetes mel-
litus, renal or hepatic failure, thiamine deﬁciency, severe
infections (cholera, malaria), seizures, or drugs or toxins
(biguanides, ethanol, methanol, propylene glycol, isoniazid,
and fructose). Propylene glycol may be used as a vehicle
for IV medications, including lorazepam, and toxicity has
been reported in several settings. Unrecognized bowel
ischemia or infarction in a patient with severe atheroscle-
rosis or cardiac decompensation receiving vasopressors is a
common cause of lactic acidosis. Pyroglutamic acidemia
has been reported in critically ill patients receiving aceta-
minophen, which is associated with depletion of glu-
tathione. D-Lactic acid acidosis, which may be associated
with jejunoileal bypass, short bowel syndrome, or intestinal
obstruction, is caused by formation of D-lactate by gut
bacteria.
Approach to the Patient:
LACTIC ACID ACIDOSIS
The underlying condition that disrupts lactate metabo-
lism must ﬁrst be corrected, and tissue perfusion must
be restored when inadequate. Vasoconstrictors should
be avoided, if possible, because they may worsen tissue
perfusion. Alkali therapy is generally advocated for
Ketoacidosis
Diabetic Ketoacidosis
This condition is caused by increased fatty acid metabo-
lism and the accumulation of ketoacids (acetoacetate
and β-hydroxybutyrate). DKA usually occurs in patients
with insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus in association
with cessation of insulin or an intercurrent illness, such
as an infection, gastroenteritis, pancreatitis, or myocardial
infarction, which increases insulin requirements tem-
porarily and acutely. The accumulation of ketoacids
accounts for the increment in the AG and is accompa-
nied most often by hyperglycemia [glucose >17 mmol/L
or (>300 mg/dL)]. The relationship between the ΔAG
and ΔHCO3
−is ~1:1 in DKA but may decrease in well-
hydrated patients with preservation of renal function.
Ketoacid excretion in the urine reduces the AG in this
situation. It should be noted that because insulin pre-
vents production of ketones, bicarbonate therapy is
rarely needed except with extreme acidemia (pH <7.1)
and then in only limited amounts. Patients with DKA
are typically volume depleted and require ﬂuid resuscita-
tion with isotonic saline.Volume overexpansion is com-
mon, however, after IV ﬂuid administration, and con-
tributes to the development of hyperchloremic acidosis
during treatment of DKA because volume expansion
increases urinary ketoacid anion excretion (loss of poten-
tial bicarbonate).
Alcoholic Ketoacidosis
Chronic alcoholics can develop ketoacidosis when alco-
hol consumption is abruptly curtailed and nutrition is
poor. AKA is usually associated with binge drinking,
vomiting, abdominal pain, starvation, and volume deple-
tion.The glucose concentration is variable, and acidosis
may be severe because of elevated ketones, predomi-
nantly β-hydroxybutyrate. Hypoperfusion may enhance
lactic acid production, chronic respiratory alkalosis may
accompany liver disease, and metabolic alkalosis can
result from vomiting (refer to the relationship between
ΔAG and ΔHCO3
−).Thus, mixed acid–base disorders are
common in patients with AKA. As the circulation is
restored by administration of isotonic saline, the prefer-
ential accumulation of β-hydroxybutyrate is then shifted
to acetoacetate. This explains the common clinical
observation of an increasingly positive nitroprusside
reaction as the patient improves.The nitroprusside ketone
reaction (Acetest) can detect acetoacetic acid but not β-
hydroxybutyrate, so the degree of ketosis and ketonuria
can not only change with therapy but can also be underes-
timated initially. Patients with AKA usually present with
relatively normal renal function, as opposed to those with
DKA, in whom renal function is often compromised
because of volume depletion (osmotic diuresis) or diabetic
nephropathy. AKA patients with normal renal function
may excrete relatively large quantities of ketoacids in the
urine, therefore, and may have a relatively normal AG and
a discrepancy in the ΔAG/ΔHCO3
−relationship.Typically,
insulin levels are low, and concentrations of triglyceride,
cortisol,glucagon,and growth hormone are increased.
Acidosis and Alkalosis
415
CHAPTER 40
acute, severe acidemia (pH <7.15) to improve cardiac
function and lactate utilization. However, NaHCO3
therapy may paradoxically depress cardiac performance
and exacerbate acidosis by enhancing lactate production
(HCO3
−stimulates phosphofructokinase).Although the
use of alkali in moderate lactic acidosis is controversial,
it is generally agreed that attempts to return the pH or
HCO3
−to normal by administration of exogenous
NaHCO3 are deleterious. A reasonable approach is to
infuse sufﬁcient NaHCO3 to increase the arterial pH to
no more than 7.2 over 30–40 min.
NaHCO3 therapy can cause ﬂuid overload and
hypertension because the amount required can be
massive when accumulation of lactic acid is relentless.
Fluid administration is poorly tolerated because of
central venoconstriction, especially in patients with
oliguria.When the underlying cause of the lactic aci-
dosis can be remedied, blood lactate will be converted
to HCO3
−and may result in an overshoot alkalosis.
Treatment:
ALCOHOLIC KETOACIDOSIS
ECF deﬁcits almost always accompany AKA and should
be repleted by IV administration of saline and glucose
(5% dextrose in 0.9% NaCl).
Hypophosphatemia,
hypokalemia, and hypomagnesemia may coexist and
should be corrected.Hypophosphatemia usually emerges
12–24 h after admission; may be exacerbated by glucose
infusion; and, if severe, may induce rhabdomyolysis.
Upper gastrointestinal hemorrhage, pancreatitis, and
pneumonia may accompany this disorder.
Drug- and Toxin-Induced Acidosis
Salicylates
Salicylate intoxication in adults usually causes respiratory
alkalosis or a mixture of high-AG metabolic acidosis and
respiratory alkalosis. Only a portion of the AG is caused by
salicylates.Lactic acid production is also often increased.
Treatment:
SALICYLATE-INDUCED ACIDOSIS
Vigorous gastric lavage with isotonic saline (not NaHCO3)
should be initiated immediately followed by administra-
tion of activated charcoal per nasogastric tube. In aci-
dotic patients,to facilitate removal of salicylate,IV NaHCO3
is administered in amounts adequate to alkalinize the
Alcohols
Under most physiologic conditions, sodium, urea, and
glucose generate the osmotic pressure of blood. Plasma
osmolality is calculated according to the following expres-
sion: Posm = 2Na+ + Glu + BUN (all in mmol/L), or using
conventional laboratory values in which glucose and
BUN are expressed in milligrams per deciliter: Posm =
2Na+ + Glu/18 + BUN/2.8. The calculated and deter-
mined osmolality should agree within 10–15 mmol/kg
H2O. When the measured osmolality exceeds the calcu-
lated osmolality by >15–20 mmol/kg H2O, one of two
circumstances prevails. Either the serum sodium is spuri-
ously low, as with hyperlipidemia or hyperproteinemia
(pseudohyponatremia), or osmolytes other than sodium
salts, glucose, or urea have accumulated in plasma. Exam-
ples include mannitol, radiocontrast media, isopropyl
alcohol, ethylene glycol, propylene glycol, ethanol,
methanol, and acetone. In this situation, the difference
between the calculated osmolality and the measured
osmolality (osmolar gap) is proportional to the concentra-
tion of the unmeasured solute.With an appropriate clini-
cal history and index of suspicion, identiﬁcation of an
osmolar gap is helpful in identifying the presence of
poison-associated AG acidosis. Three alcohols may cause
fatal intoxications: ethylene glycol, methanol, and iso-
propyl alcohol.All cause an elevated osmolal gap, but only
the ﬁrst two cause high-AG acidosis.
Ethylene Glycol
Ingestion of ethylene glycol (commonly used in
antifreeze) leads to a metabolic acidosis and severe damage
to the CNS, heart, lungs, and kidneys.The increased AG
and osmolar gap are attributable to ethylene glycol and its
metabolites, oxalic acid, glycolic acid, and other organic
acids. Lactic acid production increases secondary to inhibi-
tion of the tricarboxylic acid cycle and altered intracellular
redox state. Diagnosis is facilitated by recognizing oxalate
crystals in the urine, the presence of an osmolar gap in
serum, and a high-AG acidosis. If antifreeze containing a
ﬂuorescent dye is ingested, a Wood’s lamp applied to the
urine may be revealing.Treatment should not be delayed
while awaiting measurement of ethylene glycol levels in
this setting.
416
Disorders Complicating Critical Illnesses and Their Management
SECTION V
urine and to maintain urine output (urine pH >7.5).
Although this form of therapy is straightforward in aci-
dotic patients, a coexisting respiratory alkalosis may
make this approach hazardous. Alkalemic patients
should not receive NaHCO3
−. Acetazolamide may be
administered in the face of alkalemia, when an alkaline
diuresis cannot be achieved, or to ameliorate volume
overload associated with NaHCO3
−administration, but
this drug can cause systemic metabolic acidosis if HCO3
−
is not replaced. Hypokalemia should be anticipated with
an alkaline diuresis and should be treated promptly and
aggressively. Glucose-containing ﬂuids should be admin-
istered because of the danger of hypoglycemia. Exces-
sive insensible ﬂuid losses may cause severe volume
depletion and hypernatremia. If renal failure prevents
rapid clearance of salicylate, hemodialysis can be per-
formed against a bicarbonate dialysate.
Treatment:
ETHYLENE GLYCOL–INDUCED 
ACIDOSIS
Treatment should include prompt institution of a saline or
osmotic diuresis, thiamine and pyridoxine supplements,
fomepizole or ethanol,and hemodialysis.IV administration
of the alcohol dehydrogenase inhibitor fomepizole 
(4-methylpyrazole; 7 mg/kg as a loading dose) or ethanol
IV to achieve a level of 22 mmol/L (100 mg/dL) serves to
lessen toxicity because they compete with ethylene glycol
for metabolism by alcohol dehydrogenase. Fomepizole,
although expensive,offers the advantages of a predictable
decline in ethylene glycol levels without excessive obtun-
dation during ethyl alcohol infusion.
Methanol
The ingestion of methanol (wood alcohol) causes meta-
bolic acidosis, and its metabolites formaldehyde and
formic acid cause severe optic nerve and CNS damage.
Lactic acid, ketoacids, and other unidentiﬁed organic acids
may contribute to the acidosis. Because of its low molec-
ular weight (32 Da), an osmolar gap is usually present.
Treatment:
METHANOL-INDUCED ACIDOSIS
This is similar to that for ethylene glycol intoxication,
including general supportive measures, fomepizole or
ethanol administration,and hemodialysis.
Isopropyl Alcohol
Ingested isopropanol is absorbed rapidly and may be fatal
when as little as 150 mL of rubbing alcohol, solvent, or
de-icer is consumed. A plasma level >400 mg/dL is life
threatening. Isopropyl alcohol differs from ethylene glycol
and methanol in that the parent compound, not the
metabolites, causes toxicity, and acidosis is not present
because acetone is rapidly excreted.
Treatment:
ISOPROPYL ALCOHOL TOXICITY
Isopropanol alcohol toxicity is treated by watchful wait-
ing and supportive therapy; IV ﬂuids, pressors, ventila-
tory support if needed, and occasionally hemodialysis
for prolonged coma or levels >400 mg/dL.
Renal Failure
(See also Chap. 37) The hyperchloremic acidosis of
moderate renal insufﬁciency is eventually converted to
the high-AG acidosis of advanced renal failure. Poor ﬁl-
tration and reabsorption of organic anions contribute
to the pathogenesis. As renal disease progresses, the
number of functioning nephrons eventually becomes
insufﬁcient to keep pace with net acid production.
Uremic acidosis is characterized, therefore, by a reduced
rate of NH4
+ production and excretion, primarily
because of decreased renal mass. HCO3
−rarely decreases
to <15 mmol/L, and the AG is rarely >20 mmol/L.The
acid retained in chronic renal disease is buffered by
alkaline salts from bone. Despite signiﬁcant retention of
acid (20 mmol/d), the serum HCO3
−does not
decrease further, indicating participation of buffers out-
side the extracellular compartment. Chronic metabolic
acidosis results in signiﬁcant loss of bone mass because
of reduction in bone calcium carbonate. Chronic acido-
sis also increases urinary calcium excretion proportional
to cumulative acid retention.
Acidosis and Alkalosis
417
CHAPTER 40
Treatment:
RENAL FAILURE
Because of the association of renal failure acidosis
with muscle catabolism and bone disease, both ure-
mic acidosis and the hyperchloremic acidosis of renal
failure require oral alkali replacement to maintain the
HCO3
−between 20 and 24 mmol/L.This can be accom-
plished with relatively modest amounts of alkali
(1.0–1.5 mmol/kg body weight per day). Sodium cit-
rate (Shohl’s solution) or NaHCO3 tablets (650-mg
tablets contain 7.8 meq) are equally effective alkaliniz-
ing salts. Citrate enhances the absorption of alu-
minum from the gastrointestinal tract and should
never be given together with aluminum-containing
antacids because of the risk of aluminum intoxication.
When hyperkalemia is present,furosemide (60–80 mg/d)
should be added.
HYPERCHLOREMIC (NONGAP) 
METABOLIC ACIDOSES
Alkali can be lost from the gastrointestinal tract in
diarrhea or from the kidneys [renal tubular acidosis
(RTA)]. In these disorders (Table 40-5), reciprocal
changes in Cl−and HCO3
−result in a normal AG. In
pure hyperchloremic acidosis, therefore, the increase in
Cl−above the normal value approximates the decrease
in HCO3
−.The absence of such a relationship suggests
a mixed disturbance.
TABLE 40-5
CAUSES OF NON–ANION-GAP ACIDOSIS
I. Gastrointestinal bicarbonate loss
A. Diarrhea
B. External pancreatic or small bowel drainage
C. Ureterosigmoidostomy, jejunal loop, ileal loop
D. Drugs
1. Calcium chloride (acidifying agent)
2. Magnesium sulfate (diarrhea)
3. Cholestyramine (bile acid diarrhea)
II. Renal acidosis
A. Hypokalemia
1. Proximal RTA (type 2)
2. Distal (classic) RTA (type 1)
B. Hyperkalemia
1. Generalized distal nephron dysfunction 
(type 4 RTA)
a. Mineralocorticoid deﬁciency
b. Mineralocorticoid resistance (autosomal
dominant PHA I)
c. Voltage defect (autosomal dominant 
PHA I and PHA II)
d. Tubulointerstitial disease
III. Drug-induced hyperkalemia (with renal insufﬁciency)
A. Potassium-sparing diuretics (amiloride, 
triamterene, spironolactone)
B. Trimethoprim
C. Pentamidine
D. ACE inhibitors and ARBs
E. NSAIDs
F. Cyclosporine and tacrolimus
IV. Other
A. Acid loads (ammonium chloride, hyperalimentation)
B. Loss of potential bicarbonate: ketosis with ketone 
excretion
C. Expansion acidosis (rapid saline administration)
D. Hippurate
E. Cation exchange resins
Note: ACE, angiotensin-converting enzyme; ARB, angiotensin receptor
blocker; NSAID, nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory drug; PHA, pseudohy-
poaldosteronism; RTA, renal tubular acidosis.
Approach to the Patient:
HYPERCHLOREMIC METABOLIC ACIDOSES
In diarrhea, stools contain a higher HCO3
−and
decomposed HCO3
−than plasma so that metabolic
acidosis develops along with volume depletion.
Instead of an acid urine pH (as anticipated with sys-
temic acidosis), urine pH is usually ∼6 because meta-
bolic acidosis and hypokalemia increase renal synthesis
and excretion of NH4
+, thus providing a urinary
buffer that increases urine pH. Metabolic acidosis
caused by gastrointestinal losses with a high urine pH
can be differentiated from RTA because urinary
NH4
+ excretion is typically low in RTA and high
with diarrhea. Urinary NH4
+ levels can be estimated
METABOLIC ALKALOSIS
Metabolic alkalosis is manifested by an elevated arterial
pH, an increase in the serum HCO3
−, and an increase in
PaCO2 as a result of compensatory alveolar hypoventilation
(Table 40-1). It is often accompanied by hypochloremia
and hypokalemia.The arterial pH establishes the diagnosis
because it is increased in metabolic alkalosis and decreased
or normal in respiratory acidosis. Metabolic alkalosis fre-
quently occurs in association with other disorders such as
respiratory acidosis or alkalosis or metabolic acidosis.
PATHOGENESIS
Metabolic alkalosis occurs as a result of net gain of
HCO3
−or loss of nonvolatile acid (usually HCl by vom-
iting) from the ECF. Because it is unusual for alkali to be
added to the body, the disorder involves a generative
stage, in which the loss of acid usually causes alkalosis,
and a maintenance stage, in which the kidneys fail to
compensate by excreting HCO3
−.
Under normal circumstances, the kidneys have an
impressive capacity to excrete HCO3
−. Continuation of
metabolic alkalosis represents a failure of the kidneys to
eliminate HCO3
−in the usual manner. For HCO3
−to
be added to the ECF, it must be administered exoge-
nously or synthesized endogenously, partly or entirely by
the kidneys.The kidneys will retain, rather than excrete,
the excess alkali and maintain the alkalosis if (1) volume
deﬁciency, chloride deﬁciency, and K+ deﬁciency exist
in combination with a reduced GFR, which augments
distal tubule H+ secretion, or (2) hypokalemia exists
because of autonomous hyperaldosteronism. In the ﬁrst
example, alkalosis is corrected by administration of
NaCl and KCl; in the latter, it is necessary to repair the
alkalosis by pharmacologic or surgical intervention, not
with saline administration.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
To establish the cause of metabolic alkalosis (Table 40-6),
it is necessary to assess the status of the ECF volume
(ECFV), the recumbent and upright blood pressure,
the serum K+, and the renin–aldosterone system. For
example, the presence of chronic hypertension and
chronic hypokalemia in an alkalotic patient suggests
418
Disorders Complicating Critical Illnesses and Their Management
SECTION V
by calculating the urine AG (UAG): UAG = [Na+ +
K+]u −[Cl−]u.When [Cl−]u >[Na+ + K+], the urine gap
is negative by deﬁnition.This indicates that the urine
ammonium level is appropriately increased, suggesting
an extrarenal cause of the acidosis. Conversely, when
the urine UAG is positive, the urine ammonium level
is low, suggesting a renal cause of the acidosis.
Loss of functioning renal parenchyma by progressive
renal disease leads to hyperchloremic acidosis when
the glomerular ﬁltration rate (GFR) is between 20 and
50 mL/min and to uremic acidosis with a high AG
when the GFR decreases to <20 mL/min. Such a pro-
gression occurs commonly with tubulointerstitial
forms of renal disease, but hyperchloremic metabolic
acidosis can persist with advanced glomerular disease.
In advanced renal failure, ammoniagenesis is reduced
in proportion to the loss of functional renal mass, and
ammonium accumulation and trapping in the outer
medullary collecting tubule may also be impaired.
Because of adaptive increases in K+ secretion by the
collecting duct and colon, the acidosis of chronic renal
insufﬁciency is typically normokalemic.
Proximal RTA (type 2 RTA) is most often caused
by generalized proximal tubular dysfunction mani-
fested by glycosuria, generalized aminoaciduria, and
phosphaturia (Fanconi syndrome). With a low
plasma HCO3
−, the urine pH is acidic (pH <5.5).
The fractional excretion of HCO3
−may exceed
10–15% when the serum HCO3
−>20 mmol/L.
Because HCO3
−is not reabsorbed normally in the
proximal tubule,
therapy with NaHCO3
will
enhance renal potassium wasting and hypokalemia.
The typical ﬁndings in acquired or inherited
forms of classic distal RTA (type 1 RTA) include
hypokalemia, hyperchloremic acidosis, low urinary
NH4
+ excretion (positive UAG, low urine [NH4
+]),
and inappropriately high urine pH (pH >5.5). Such
patients are unable to acidify the urine below a pH
of 5.5. Most patients have hypocitraturia and hyper-
calciuria, so nephrolithiasis, nephrocalcinosis, and
bone disease are common. In generalized distal
nephron dysfunction (type 4 RTA), hyperkalemia is
disproportionate to the reduction in GFR because
of coexisting dysfunction of potassium and acid
secretion. Urinary ammonium excretion is invariably
depressed, and renal function may be compromised,
for example, because of diabetic nephropathy, amy-
loidosis, or tubulointerstitial disease.
Hyporeninemic hypoaldosteronism typically causes
hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis, most commonly
in older adults with diabetes mellitus or tubulointer-
stitial disease and renal insufﬁciency. Patients usually
have mild to moderate renal insufﬁciency (GRF,
20–50 mL/min) and acidosis, with elevation in serum
K+ (5.2−6.0 mmol/L), concurrent hypertension, and
congestive heart failure. Both the metabolic acidosis
and the hyperkalemia are out of proportion to
impairment in GFR. Nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory
drugs, trimethoprim, pentamidine, and angiotensin-
converting enzyme inhibitors can also cause hyper-
kalemia with hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis in
patients with renal insufﬁciency (Table 40-5).
either mineralocorticoid excess or that the hypertensive
patient is receiving diuretics. Low plasma renin activity
and normal urine Na+ and Cl– in a patient who is not
taking diuretics indicate a primary mineralocorticoid
excess syndrome. The combination of hypokalemia and
alkalosis in a normotensive, nonedematous patient may
be attributable to Bartter’s or Gitelman’s syndrome,
magnesium deﬁciency, vomiting, exogenous alkali, or
diuretic ingestion. Determination of urine electrolytes
(especially the urine Cl−) and screening of the urine for
diuretics may be helpful. If the urine is alkaline, with an
elevated Na+ and K+ but low Cl−, the diagnosis is usually
either vomiting (overt or surreptitious) or alkali inges-
tion. If the urine is relatively acid and has low concen-
trations of Na+, K+, and Cl−, the most likely possibilities
are prior vomiting, the posthypercapnic state, or prior
diuretic ingestion. If, on the other hand, the urine sodium,
potassium, and chloride concentrations are not depressed,
magnesium deﬁciency, Bartter’s or Gitelman’s syndrome,
or current diuretic ingestion should be considered. Bart-
ter’s syndrome is distinguished from Gitelman’s syndrome
because of hypocalciuria and hypomagnesemia in the lat-
ter disorder.The genetic and molecular basis of these two
disorders has been elucidated recently.
Alkali Administration
Chronic administration of alkali to individuals with nor-
mal renal function rarely, if ever, causes alkalosis. However,
in patients with coexistent hemodynamic disturbances,
alkalosis can develop because the normal capacity to
excrete HCO3
−may be exceeded or there may be
enhanced reabsorption of HCO3
−. Such patients include
those who receive HCO3
−(PO or IV), acetate loads (par-
enteral hyperalimentation solutions), citrate loads (transfu-
sions), or antacids plus cation-exchange resins (aluminum
hydroxide and sodium polystyrene sulfonate).
METABOLIC ALKALOSIS ASSOCIATED 
WITH EXTRACELLULAR FLUID VOLUME
CONTRACTION, K+ DEPLETION,
AND SECONDARY HYPERRENINEMIC
HYPERALDOSTERONISM
Gastrointestinal Origin
Gastrointestinal loss of H+ from vomiting or gastric aspi-
ration results in retention of HCO3
−. The loss of ﬂuid
and NaCl in vomitus or nasogastric suction results in
contraction of the ECFV and an increase in the secre-
tion of renin and aldosterone. Volume contraction
through a reduction in GFR results in an enhanced
capacity of the renal tubule to reabsorb HCO3
−. During
active vomiting, however, the ﬁltered load of bicarbon-
ate is acutely increased to the point that the reabsorptive
capacity of the proximal tubule for HCO3
−is exceeded.
The excess NaHCO3 issuing out of the proximal tubule
reaches the distal tubule, where H+ secretion is enhanced
by an aldosterone and the delivery of the poorly reab-
sorbed anion, HCO3
−. Correction of the contracted
ECFV with NaCl and repair of K+ deﬁcits corrects the
acid–base disorder, and chloride deﬁciency.
Acidosis and Alkalosis
419
CHAPTER 40
TABLE 40-6
CAUSES OF METABOLIC ALKALOSIS
I. Exogenous HCO3
−loads
A. Acute alkali administration
B. Milk-alkali syndrome
II. Effective ECFV contraction, normotension, 
K+ deﬁciency, and secondary hyperreninemic 
hyperaldosteronism
A. Gastrointestinal origin
1. Vomiting
2. Gastric aspiration
3. Congenital chloridorrhea
4. Villous adenoma
B. Renal origin
1. Diuretics
2. Posthypercapnic state
3. Hypercalcemia or hypoparathyroidism
4. Recovery from lactic acidosis or ketoacidosis
5. Nonreabsorbable anions, including penicillin, 
carbenicillin
6. Mg2+ deﬁciency
7. K+ depletion
8. Bartter’s syndrome (loss of function mutations 
in TALH)
9. Gitelman’s syndrome (loss of function mutation
in Na+-Cl−cotransporter in DCT)
III. ECFV expansion, hypertension, K+ deﬁciency, and
mineralocorticoid excess
A. High renin
1. Renal artery stenosis
2. Accelerated hypertension
3. Renin-secreting tumor
4. Estrogen therapy
B. Low renin
1. Primary aldosteronism
a. Adenoma
b. Hyperplasia
c. Carcinoma
2. Adrenal enzyme defects
a. 11 β-Hydroxylase deﬁciency
b. 17 α-Hydroxylase deﬁciency
3. Cushing’s syndrome or disease
4. Other
a. Licorice
b. Carbenoxolone
c. Chewer’s tobacco
IV. Gain-of-function mutation of renal sodium channel
with ECFV expansion, hypertension, K+ deﬁciency, and
hyporeninemic-hypoaldosteronism
A. Liddle’s syndrome
Note: DCT, distal convoluted tubule; ECFV, extracellular ﬂuid vol-
ume; TALH, thick ascending limb of the loop of Henle.
Renal Origin
Diuretics
Drugs that induce chloruresis, such as thiazides and loop
diuretics 
(furosemide,
bumetanide,
torsemide,
and
ethacrynic acid), acutely diminish the ECFV without
altering the total body bicarbonate content. The serum
HCO3
−increases because the reduced ECFV “contracts”
the HCO3
−in the plasma (contraction alkalosis). The
chronic administration of diuretics tends to generate an
alkalosis by increasing distal salt delivery, so that K+ and
H+ secretion are stimulated.The alkalosis is maintained by
persistence of the contraction of the ECFV, secondary
hyperaldosteronism, K+ deﬁciency, and the direct effect of
the diuretic (as long as diuretic administration continues).
Repair of the alkalosis is achieved by providing isotonic
saline to correct the ECFV deﬁcit.
Nonreabsorbable Anions and Magnesium
Deficiency
Administration of large quantities of nonreabsorbable
anions, such as penicillin or carbenicillin, can enhance dis-
tal acidiﬁcation and K+ secretion by increasing the
transepithelial potential difference (lumen negative). Mg2+
deﬁciency results in hypokalemic alkalosis by enhancing
distal acidiﬁcation through stimulation of renin and hence
aldosterone secretion.
Potassium Depletion
Chronic K+ depletion may cause metabolic alkalosis by
increasing urinary acid excretion. Both NH4
+ production
and absorption are enhanced and HCO3
−reabsorption is
stimulated. Chronic K+ deﬁciency upregulates the renal
H+, K+-ATPase to increase K+ absorption at the expense
of enhanced H+ secretion.Alkalosis associated with severe
K+ depletion is resistant to salt administration, but repair
of the K+ deﬁciency corrects the alkalosis.
After Treatment of Lactic Acidosis or 
Ketoacidosis
When an underlying stimulus for the generation of lactic
acid or ketoacid is removed rapidly, as with repair of circu-
latory insufﬁciency or with insulin therapy, the lactate or
ketones are metabolized to yield an equivalent amount of
HCO3
−. Other sources of new HCO3
−are additive with
the original amount generated by organic anion metabo-
lism to create a surfeit of HCO3
–. Such sources include
(1) new HCO3
−added to the blood by the kidneys as a
result of enhanced acid excretion during the preexisting
period of acidosis and (2) alkali therapy during the treat-
ment phase of the acidosis. Acidosis-induced contraction
of the ECFV and K+ deﬁciency act to sustain the alkalosis.
Posthypercapnia
Prolonged CO2 retention with chronic respiratory acido-
sis enhances renal HCO3
−absorption and the generation
of new HCO3
−(increased net acid excretion). If the
PaCO2 is returned to normal, metabolic alkalosis results
from the persistently elevated HCO3
−. Alkalosis develops
if the elevated PaCO2 is abruptly returned toward normal
by a change in mechanically controlled ventilation.Asso-
ciated ECFV contraction does not allow complete repair
of the alkalosis by correction of the PaCO2 alone, and alka-
losis persists until Cl−supplementation is provided.
METABOLIC ALKALOSIS ASSOCIATED 
WITH EXTRACELLULAR FLUID VOLUME
EXPANSION, HYPERTENSION, 
AND HYPERALDOSTERONISM
Increased aldosterone levels may be the result of
autonomous primary adrenal overproduction or of sec-
ondary aldosterone release caused by renal overproduc-
tion of renin. Mineralocorticoid excess increases net acid
excretion and may result in metabolic alkalosis, which
may be worsened by associated K+ deﬁciency. ECFV
expansion from salt retention causes hypertension. The
kaliuresis persists because of mineralocorticoid excess
and distal Na+ absorption, causing enhanced K+ excre-
tion, continued K+ depletion with polydipsia, inability
to concentrate the urine, and polyuria.
Liddle’s syndrome results from increased activity of
the collecting duct Na+ channel (ENaC) and is a rare
inherited disorder associated with hypertension caused
by volume expansion manifested as hypokalemic alkalo-
sis and normal aldosterone levels.
Symptoms
With metabolic alkalosis, changes in central and periph-
eral nervous system function are similar to those of
hypocalcemia; symptoms include mental confusion,
obtundation, and a predisposition to seizures, paresthesia,
muscular cramping, tetany, aggravation of arrhythmias,
and hypoxemia in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
Related electrolyte abnormalities include hypokalemia
and hypophosphatemia.
420
Disorders Complicating Critical Illnesses and Their Management
SECTION V
Treatment:
METABOLIC ALKALOSIS
Treatment is primarily directed at correcting the under-
lying stimulus for HCO3
– generation. If primary aldos-
teronism, renal artery stenosis, or Cushing’s syndrome is
present, correction of the underlying cause will reverse
the alkalosis. H+ loss by the stomach or kidneys can be
mitigated by the use of proton pump inhibitors or the
discontinuation of diuretics. The second aspect of treat-
ment is to remove the factors that sustain the inappro-
priate increase in HCO3
−reabsorption, such as ECFV con-
traction or K+ deﬁciency. Although K+ deﬁcits should be
repaired, NaCl therapy is usually sufﬁcient to reverse the
RESPIRATORY ACIDOSIS
Respiratory acidosis can be caused by severe pulmonary
disease, respiratory muscle fatigue, or abnormalities in
ventilatory control and is recognized by an increase in
PaCO2 and decrease in pH (Table 40-7). In acute respi-
ratory acidosis, there is an immediate compensatory ele-
vation (because of cellular buffering mechanisms) in
HCO3
−, which increases 1 mmol/L for every 10-mmHg
increase in PaCO2. In chronic respiratory acidosis (>24 h),
renal adaptation increases the HCO3
−by 4 mmol/L for
every 10-mmHg increase in PaCO2. The serum HCO3
−
usually does not increase above 38 mmol/L.
The clinical features vary according to the severity
and duration of the respiratory acidosis, the underlying
disease, and whether accompanying hypoxemia is pre-
sent. A rapid increase in PaCO2 may cause anxiety, dysp-
nea, confusion, psychosis, and hallucinations and may
progress to coma. Lesser degrees of dysfunction in
chronic hypercapnia include sleep disturbances; loss of
memory; daytime somnolence; personality changes;
impairment of coordination; and motor disturbances
such as tremor, myoclonic jerks, and asterixis. Headaches
and other signs that mimic increased intracranial pres-
sure, such as papilledema, abnormal reﬂexes, and focal
muscle weakness, are caused by vasoconstriction sec-
ondary to loss of the vasodilator effects of CO2.
Depression of the respiratory center by a variety of
drugs, injury, or disease can produce respiratory acidosis.
This may occur acutely with general anesthetics, sedatives,
and head trauma or chronically with sedatives, alcohol,
intracranial tumors, and the syndromes of sleep-disordered
breathing, including the primary alveolar and obesity-
hypoventilation syndromes (Chaps. 22 and 23).Abnormal-
ities or disease in the motor neurons, neuromuscular junc-
tion, and skeletal muscle can cause hypoventilation via
Acidosis and Alkalosis
421
CHAPTER 40
alkalosis if ECFV contraction is present, as indicated by a
low urine Cl−.
If associated conditions preclude infusion of saline,
renal HCO3
– loss can be accelerated by administration of
acetazolamide, a carbonic anhydrase inhibitor, which is
usually effective in patients with adequate renal func-
tion but can worsen K+ losses. Dilute hydrochloric acid
(0.1 N HCl) is also effective but can cause hemolysis and
must be delivered centrally and slowly. Hemodialysis
against a dialysate low in HCO3
−and high in Cl−can be
effective when renal function is impaired.
TABLE 40-7
RESPIRATORY ACID–BASE DISORDERS
I. Alkalosis
A. Central nervous system stimulation
1. Pain
2. Anxiety, psychosis
3. Fever
4. Cerebrovascular accident
5. Meningitis, encephalitis
6. Tumor
7. Trauma
B. Hypoxemia or tissue hypoxia
1. High altitude, ↓PaCO2
2. Pneumonia, pulmonary edema
3. Aspiration
4. Severe anemia
C. Drugs or hormones
1. Pregnancy, progesterone
2. Salicylates
3. Cardiac failure
D. Stimulation of chest receptors
1. Hemothorax
2. Flail chest
3. Cardiac failure
4. Pulmonary embolism
E. Miscellaneous
1. Septicemia
2. Hepatic failure
3. Mechanical hyperventilation
4. Heat exposure
5. Recovery from metabolic acidosis
II. Acidosis
A. Central
1. Drugs (anesthetics, 
morphine, sedatives)
2. Stroke
3. Infection
B. Airway
1. Obstruction
2. Asthma
C. Parenchyma
1. Emphysema
2. Pneumoconiosis
3. Bronchitis
4. Adult respiratory 
distress syndrome
5. Barotrauma
D. Neuromuscular
1. Poliomyelitis
2. Kyphoscoliosis
3. Myasthenia
4. Muscular dystrophies
E. Miscellaneous
1. Obesity
2. Hypoventilation
3. Permissive hypercapnia
respiratory muscle fatigue. Mechanical ventilation, when
not properly adjusted and supervised, may result in respira-
tory acidosis, particularly if CO2 production suddenly
increases (because of fever, agitation, sepsis, or overfeeding)
or alveolar ventilation decreases because of worsening pul-
monary function. High levels of positive end-expiratory
pressure in the presence of reduced cardiac output may
cause hypercapnia as a result of large increases in alveolar
dead space (Chap. 5). Permissive hypercapnia is being used
with increasing frequency because of studies suggesting
lower mortality rates than with conventional mechanical
ventilation, especially with severe CNS or heart disease.
The potential beneﬁcial effects of permissive hypercapnia
may be mitigated by correction of the acidemia by admin-
istration of NaHCO3.
Acute hypercapnia occurs after sudden occlusion of
the upper airway or generalized bronchospasm as in
severe asthma, anaphylaxis, inhalational burn, or toxin
injury. Chronic hypercapnia and respiratory acidosis occur
in end-stage obstructive lung disease. Restrictive disorders
involving both the chest wall and the lungs can cause res-
piratory acidosis because the high metabolic cost of respi-
ration causes ventilatory muscle fatigue. Advanced stages
of intrapulmonary and extrapulmonary restrictive defects
present as chronic respiratory acidosis.
The diagnosis of respiratory acidosis requires, by
definition, the measurement of PaCO2 and arterial pH.
A detailed history and physical examination often
indicate the cause. Pulmonary function studies (Chap. 5),
including spirometry, diffusion capacity for carbon
monoxide, lung volumes, and arterial PaCO2 and O2
saturation, usually make it possible to determine if res-
piratory acidosis is secondary to lung disease. The
workup for nonpulmonary causes should include a
detailed drug history; measurement of hematocrit; and
assessment of upper airway, chest wall, pleura, and
neuromuscular function.
RESPIRATORY ALKALOSIS
Alveolar hyperventilation decreases PaCO2 and increases the
HCO3
−/PaCO2 ratio, thus increasing pH (see Table 40-7).
Nonbicarbonate cellular buffers respond by consuming
HCO3
−. Hypocapnia develops when a sufﬁciently strong
ventilatory stimulus causes CO2 output in the lungs to
exceed its metabolic production by tissues. Plasma pH and
HCO3
−appear to vary proportionately with PaCO2 over a
range from 40–15 mmHg.The relationship between arter-
ial H+ concentration and PaCO2 is ∼0.7 mmol/L per
mmHg (or 0.01 pH unit/mmHg), and that for plasma
HCO3
−is 0.2 mmol/L per mmHg. Hypocapnia sustained
for >2–6 h is further compensated by a decrease in renal
ammonium and titratable acid excretion and a reduction
in ﬁltered HCO3
−reabsorption. Full renal adaptation to
respiratory alkalosis may take several days and requires nor-
mal volume status and renal function.The kidneys appear
to respond directly to the lowered PaCO2 rather than to
alkalosis per se. In chronic respiratory alkalosis, a 1-mmHg
decrease in PaCO2 causes a 0.4- to 0.5-mmol/L decrease in
HCO3
−and a 0.3-mmol/L decrease (or 0.003-mmol/L
increase in pH) in H+.
The effects of respiratory alkalosis vary according to
duration and severity but are primarily those of the under-
lying disease. Reduced cerebral blood ﬂow as a conse-
quence of a rapid decline in PaCO2 may cause dizziness,
mental confusion, and seizures, even in the absence of
hypoxemia.The cardiovascular effects of acute hypocapnia
in conscious humans are generally minimal, but in anes-
thetized or mechanically ventilated patients, cardiac output
and blood pressure may decrease because of the depressant
effects of anesthesia and positive-pressure ventilation on
heart rate, systemic resistance, and venous return. Cardiac
arrhythmias may occur in patients with heart disease as a
result of changes in oxygen unloading by blood from a
left shift in the hemoglobin-oxygen dissociation curve
(Bohr effect). Acute respiratory alkalosis causes intracel-
lular shifts of Na+, K+, and PO4
−and reduces free Ca2+
by increasing the protein-bound fraction. Hypocapnia-
induced hypokalemia is usually minor.
422
Disorders Complicating Critical Illnesses and Their Management
SECTION V
Treatment:
RESPIRATORY ACIDOSIS
The management of respiratory acidosis depends on its
severity and rate of onset. Acute respiratory acidosis
can be life threatening, and measures to reverse the
underlying cause should be undertaken simultaneously
with restoration of adequate alveolar ventilation. This
may necessitate tracheal intubation and assisted
mechanical ventilation. Oxygen administration should
be titrated carefully in patients with severe obstructive
pulmonary disease and chronic CO2 retention who are
breathing spontaneously (Chap. 18). When oxygen is
used injudiciously, these patients may experience pro-
gression of the respiratory acidosis. Aggressive and
rapid correction of hypercapnia should be avoided
because the decreasing PaCO2 may provoke the same
complications noted with acute respiratory alkalosis
(i.e., cardiac arrhythmias, reduced cerebral perfusion,
and seizures). The PaCO2 should be lowered gradually in
chronic respiratory acidosis, aiming to restore the PaCO2
to baseline levels and to provide sufﬁcient Cl−and K+ to
enhance the renal excretion of HCO3
−.
Chronic respiratory acidosis is frequently difﬁcult to
correct, but measures aimed at improving lung function
(Chap. 18) can help some patients and forestall further
deterioration in most.
Chronic respiratory alkalosis is the most common
acid–base disturbance in critically ill patients and, when
severe, portends a poor prognosis. Many cardiopul-
monary disorders manifest respiratory alkalosis in their
early to intermediate stages, and the ﬁnding of normo-
capnia and hypoxemia in a patient with hyperventilation
may herald the onset of rapid respiratory failure and
should prompt an assessment to determine if the patient
is becoming fatigued. Respiratory alkalosis is common
during mechanical ventilation.
The hyperventilation syndrome may be disabling.
Paresthesia, circumoral numbness, chest wall tightness or
pain, dizziness, inability to take an adequate breath, and
(rarely) tetany may themselves be sufﬁciently stressful to
perpetuate the disorder. Arterial blood gas analysis
demonstrates an acute or chronic respiratory alkalosis,
often with hypocapnia in the range of 15–30 mmHg
and no hypoxemia. CNS diseases or injury can pro-
duce several patterns of hyperventilation and sustained
PaCO2 levels of 20–30 mmHg. Hyperthyroidism, high
caloric loads, and exercise raise the basal metabolic
rate, but ventilation usually increases in proportion so
that arterial blood gases are unchanged and respiratory
alkalosis does not develop. Salicylates are the most
common cause of drug-induced respiratory alkalosis as
a result of direct stimulation of the medullary chemore-
ceptor. The methylxanthines, theophylline, and amino-
phylline stimulate ventilation and increase the ventilatory
response to CO2. Progesterone increases ventilation and
lowers arterial PaCO2 by as much as 5–10 mmHg.There-
fore, chronic respiratory alkalosis is a common feature of
pregnancy. Respiratory alkalosis is also prominent in indi-
viduals with liver failure, and the severity correlates with
the degree of hepatic insufﬁciency. Respiratory alkalosis is
often an early ﬁnding in gram-negative septicemia before
fever,hypoxemia,or hypotension develops.
The diagnosis of respiratory alkalosis depends on
measurement of arterial pH and PaCO2.The plasma K+ is
often reduced and the Cl−increased. In the acute phase,
respiratory alkalosis is not associated with increased renal
HCO3
−excretion, but within hours, net acid excretion
is reduced. In general, the HCO3
–
concentration
decreases by 2.0 mmol/L for each 10-mmHg decrease in
PaCO2. Chronic hypocapnia reduces the serum HCO3
−
FURTHER READINGS
DUBOSE TD JR:Acid-base disorders, in Brenner and Rector’s The Kidney,
8th ed, BM Brenner (ed). Philadelphia, Saunders, 2007, pp 505–546
———, ALPERN RJ: Renal tubular acidosis, in The Metabolic and
Molecular Bases of Inherited Disease, 8th ed, CR Scriver et al (eds).
New York, McGraw-Hill, 2001, pp 4983–5021
GALLA JH: Metabolic alkalosis, in Acid-Base and Electrolyte Disorders—
A Companion to Brenner and Rector’s The Kidney,TD DuBose, LL
Hamm (eds). Philadelphia, Saunders, 2002, pp 109–128
LASKI ME, WESSON DE: Lactic acidosis, in Acid-Base and Electrolyte
Disorders—A Companion to Brenner and Rector’s The Kidney, TD
DuBose, LL Hamm (eds). Philadelphia, Saunders, 2002, pp 83–107
MADIAS NE: Respiratory alkalosis, in Acid-Base and Electrolyte Disor-
ders—A Companion to Brenner and Rector’s The Kidney,TD DuBose,
LL Hamm (eds). Philadelphia, Saunders, 2002, pp 147–164
WESSON DE et al: Clinical syndromes of metabolic alkalosis, in The
Kidney: Physiology and Pathophysiology, 3rd ed, DW Seldin, G
Giebisch (eds). Philadelphia, Lippincott Williams and Wilkins,
2000, pp 2055–2072
Acidosis and Alkalosis
423
CHAPTER 40
Treatment:
RESPIRATORY ALKALOSIS
The management of respiratory alkalosis is directed
toward alleviation of the underlying disorder. If respira-
tory alkalosis complicates ventilator management,
changes in dead space, tidal volume, and frequency
can minimize the hypocapnia. Patients with the hyper-
ventilation syndrome may benefit from reassurance,
rebreathing from a paper bag during symptomatic
attacks, and attention to underlying psychological
stress. Antidepressants and sedatives are not recom-
mended. β-Adrenergic blockers may ameliorate periph-
eral manifestations of the hyperadrenergic state.
by 4.0 mmol/L for each 10-mmHg decrease in PaCO2.
It is unusual to observe a plasma HCO3
−<12 mmol/L as
a result of a pure respiratory alkalosis.
When a diagnosis of respiratory alkalosis is made, its
cause should be investigated.The diagnosis of hyperven-
tilation syndrome is made by exclusion. In difﬁcult
cases, it may be important to rule out other conditions
such as pulmonary embolism, coronary artery disease,
and hyperthyroidism.
Valder Arruda
I
Katherine A. High
Deﬁciencies of coagulation factors have been recognized
for centuries. Patients with genetic deﬁciencies of plasma
coagulation factors exhibit lifelong recurrent bleeding
episodes into joints, muscles, and closed spaces, either
spontaneously or after injuries.The most common inher-
ited factor deﬁciencies are the hemophilias, X-linked dis-
eases caused by deﬁciency of factor (F) VIII (hemophilia
A) or factor IX (FIX, hemophilia B). Rare congenital
bleeding disorders caused by deﬁciencies of other fac-
tors, including FII (prothrombin), FV, FVII, FX, FXI,
FXIII, and ﬁbrinogen, are usually inherited in an auto-
somal recessive manner (Table 41-1).Advances in char-
acterization of the molecular bases of clotting factor
deﬁciencies have contributed to a better understanding
of the disease phenotypes and may allow more targeted
therapeutic approaches through the development of small
molecules, recombinant proteins, or cell- and gene-based
therapies.
Commonly used tests of hemostasis provide the initial
screening for clotting factor activity (Fig. 41-1), and
disease phenotype often correlates with the level of clot-
ting activity.Whereas an isolated abnormal prothrombin
time (PT) suggests FVII deﬁciency, a prolonged acti-
vated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) indicates most
commonly hemophilia or FXI deﬁciency (Fig. 41-1).The
prolongation of both PT and aPTT suggests deﬁciency
of FV, FX, FII, or ﬁbrinogen abnormalities.The addition
of the missing factor to the subject’s plasma at a range of
doses will correct the abnormal clotting times; the result
COAGULATION DISORDERS
is expressed as percent of the activity observed in normal
subjects.
Acquired deﬁciencies of plasma coagulation are more
frequent than congenital disorders; the most common
disorders include hemorrhagic diathesis of liver disease,
disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC), and vita-
min K deﬁciency. In these disorders, blood coagulation
is hampered by the deﬁciency of more than one clotting
factor, and the bleeding episodes result from perturba-
tion of both primary (e.g., platelet and vessel wall inter-
actions) and secondary (coagulation) hemostasis.
The development of antibodies to coagulation plasma
proteins, clinically termed inhibitors, is a relatively rare
problem that most often affects patients with hemophilia
A or B and FXI-deﬁcient who receive repeated doses of
the missing protein to control bleeding episodes.
Inhibitors also occur among subjects without genetic
deﬁciency of clotting factors—e.g., in the postpartum
setting, as a manifestation of underlying autoimmune or
neoplastic disease, or idiopathically. Rare cases of
inhibitors to thrombin or FV have been reported in
patients receiving topical bovine thrombin preparation
as a local hemostatic agent in complex surgeries. The
diagnosis of inhibitors is based on the same tests as those
used to diagnose inherited plasma coagulation factor
deﬁciencies. However, the addition of the missing protein
to the plasma of a subject with an inhibitor does not
correct the abnormal aPTT or PT tests.This is the major
laboratory difference between deﬁciencies and inhibitors.
CHAPTER 41
CHAPTER 41
424
I Hemophilia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .425
Pathogenesis and Clinical Manifestations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .425
Factor XI Deﬁciency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .428
I Other Rare Bleeding Disorders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .428
Familial Multiple Coagulation Deﬁciencies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .429
Disseminated Intravascular Coagulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .429
Vitamin K Deﬁciency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .432
Coagulation Disorders Associated with Liver Failure . . . . . . . .432
Acquired Inhibitors of Coagulation Factors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .433
I Further Readings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 433
Additional tests are required to measure the speciﬁcity
of the inhibitor and its titer.
The treatment of patients with these bleeding disor-
ders often requires replacement of the deﬁcient protein
using recombinant or puriﬁed plasma–derived products
or fresh-frozen plasma (FFP). Therefore, it is imperative
to arrive at a proper diagnosis to optimize patient care
without unnecessary exposure to the risks of blood-
borne disease.
HEMOPHILIA
PATHOGENESIS AND CLINICAL
MANIFESTATIONS
Hemophilia is an X-linked recessive hemorrhagic dis-
ease caused by mutations in the F8 gene (hemophilia A
or classic hemophilia) or F9 gene (hemophilia B). The
disease affects one in 10,000 men worldwide in all eth-
nic groups; hemophilia A represents 80% of all cases.
Men are clinically affected; women, who carry a single
mutated gene, are generally asymptomatic. Family his-
tory of the disease is absent in approximately 30% of
cases. In these cases, 80% of the mothers are carriers of
the de novo mutated allele. More than 500 different
mutations have been identiﬁed in the F8 or F9 genes.
One of the most common hemophilia A mutations
results from an inversion of the intron 22 sequence,
which is present in 40% of cases of severe hemophilia A.
Advances in molecular diagnosis now permit precise
identiﬁcation of mutations, allowing accurate diagnosis
of female carriers of the hemophilia gene in affected
families.
Clinically, hemophilia A and hemophilia B are indis-
tinguishable. The disease phenotype correlates with the
residual activity of FVIII or FIX and can be classiﬁed as
severe (<1%), moderate (1–5%), or mild (6–30%). In the
severe and moderate forms, the disease is characterized
by bleeding episodes into the joints (hemarthroses), soft
Coagulation Disorders
425
CHAPTER 41
TABLE 41-1
GENETIC AND LABORATORY CHARACTERISTICS OF INHERITED COAGULATION DISORDERS
CLOTTING 
PREVALENCE 
MINIMUM 
PLASMA 
FACTOR 
INHERI-
IN GENERAL 
HEMOSTATIC 
HALF-
DEFICIENCY
TANCE
POPULATION
aPTT
PT
TT
LEVELS
TREATMENT
LIFE
Fibrinogen
AR
1 in 1,000,000
+
+
+
100 mg/dL
Cryoprecipitate
2–4 d
Prothrombin
AR
1 in 2,000,000
+
+
−
20–30%
FFP/PCCs
3–4 d
Factor V
AR
1 in 1,000,000
+/−
+/−
−
15–20%
FFP
36 h
Factor VII
AR
1 in 500,000
−
+
−
15–20%
FFP/PCCs
4–6 h
Factor VIII
X-linked
1 in 5,000
+
−
−
30%
FVIII concentrates
8–12 h
Factor IX
X-linked
1 in 30,000
+
−
−
30%
FIX concentrates
18–24 h
Factor X
AR
1 in 1,000,000
+/−
+/−
−
15–20%
FFP/PCCs
40–60 h
Factor XI
AR
1 in 1,000,000
+
−
−
15–20%
FFP
40–70 h
Factor XII
AR
ND
+
−
−
b
b
60 h
HK
AR
ND
+
−
−
b
b
150 h
Prekallikrein
AR
ND
+
−
−
b
b
35 h
Factor XIII
AR
1 in 2,000,000
−
−
+/−
2–5%
Cryoprecipitate
11–14 d
a Values within normal range (−) or prolonged (+).
b No risk for bleeding; treatment is not indicated.
Note: aPTT, activated partial thromboplastin time; AR, autosomal recessive; FFP, fresh-frozen plasma; HK, high-molecular-weight kininogen;
ND, not determined; PCCs, prothrombin complex concentrates; PT, prothrombin time; TT, thrombin time.
LABORATORY 
ABNORMALITYa
Intrinsic Pathway
Extrinsic Pathway
Common Pathway
Cross-linked
fibrin clot
aPTT
Contact phase
PK FXlla
HMWH
XI
XIa
Ca2+
IXa
Ca2+
Ca2+
IX
  VIII
  VIIIa
PL
X
Xa
X
Ca2+
PL
Va
V
Prothrombin
Thrombin
Fibrinogen
Fibrin monomer
Fibrin 
polymer
TT
  XIIIa
aPTT/PT
VIIa tissue factor
PT
VII
FIGURE 41-1
Coagulation cascade and laboratory assessment of clot-
ting factor deﬁciency by activated partial prothrombin time
(aPTT), prothrombin time (PT), and thrombin time (TT).
SECTION V
Disorders Complicating Critical Illnesses and Their Management
426 tissues, and muscles after minor trauma or even sponta-
neously. Patients with mild disease experience infre-
quent bleeding that is usually secondary to trauma.
Among those with residual FVIII or FIX activity >25%
of normal, the disease is discovered only by bleeding
after major trauma or during routine presurgery labora-
tory tests.Typically, the global tests of coagulation show
only an isolated prolongation of the aPTT assay. Patients
with hemophilia have normal bleeding times and
platelet counts. The diagnosis is made after speciﬁc
determination of FVIII or FIX clotting activity.
Early in life, bleeding may present after circumcision
or rarely as intracranial hemorrhages. The disease is
more evident when children begin to walk or crawl. In
the severe form, the most common bleeding manifesta-
tions are the recurrent hemarthroses, which can affect
every joint but mainly affect knees, elbows, ankles,
shoulders, and hips. Acute hemarthroses are painful, and
clinical signs are local swelling and erythema. To avoid
pain, the patient may adopt a ﬁxed position, which leads
eventually to muscle contractures. Very young children
who are unable to communicate verbally show irritability
and a lack of movement of the affected joint. Chronic
hemarthroses are debilitating, with synovial thickening
and synovitis in response to the intraarticular blood.
After a joint has been damaged, recurrent bleeding
episodes result in the clinically recognized “target joint,”
which then establishes a vicious cycle of bleeding,
resulting in progressive joint deformity that in critical
cases requires surgery as the only therapeutic option.
Hematomas into the muscle of distal parts of the limbs
may lead to external compression of arteries, veins, or
nerves, which can evolve to a compartment syndrome.
Bleeding into the oropharyngeal spaces, the central
nervous system (CNS), or the retroperitoneum is life-
threatening and requires immediate therapy. Retroperi-
toneal hemorrhages can accumulate large quantities of
blood along with formation of masses with calciﬁcation
and inﬂammatory tissue reaction (pseudotumor syndrome),
and they can also result in damage to the femoral nerve.
Pseudotumors can also form in bones, especially the
long bones of the lower limbs. Hematuria is frequent
among hemophilia patients, even in the absence of geni-
tourinary pathology. It is often self-limited and may not
require speciﬁc therapy.
Treatment:
HEMOPHILIA
Without treatment, patients with severe hemophilia
have a limited life expectancy. Advances in the blood
fractionation industry during World War II resulted in the
realization that plasma could be used to treat people
with hemophilia, but the volumes required to achieve
even modest elevation of circulating factor levels limits
the utility of plasma infusion as an approach to disease
management.The discovery in the 1960s that cryoprecip-
itate fraction of plasma was enriched for FVIII, in addition
to the eventual puriﬁcation of FVIII and FIX from plasma,
led to the introduction of home infusion therapy with
factor concentrates in the 1970s. The availability of fac-
tor concentrates resulted in a dramatic improvement in
life expectancy and in quality of life for people with
severe hemophilia. However, the contamination of the
blood supply with hepatitis viruses and, subsequently,
HIV resulted in widespread transmission of these blood-
borne infections within the hemophilia population;
complications of HIV and of hepatitis C are now the
leading causes of death among U.S. adults with severe
hemophilia. The introduction of viral inactivation steps
in the preparation of plasma-derived products in the
mid-1980s greatly reduced the risk of HIV and hepatitis,
and the risks were further reduced by the successful
production of recombinant FVIII and FIX proteins, both
licensed in the 1990s. It is uncommon for hemophilic
patients born after 1985 to have contracted either hepati-
tis or HIV, and for these individuals, life expectancy is in
the range of 65 years of age.
Factor replacement therapy for hemophilia can be
provided either in response to a bleeding episode or as a
prophylactic treatment.Primary prophylaxis is deﬁned as
a strategy for maintaining the missing clotting factor at
levels ~1% or higher on a regular basis to prevent bleeds,
especially the onset of hemarthroses. Hemophilic boys
receiving regular infusions of FVIII (3 days/week) or FIX
(2 days/week) can reach puberty without detectable
joint abnormalities. Although highly recommended,
this regimen is performed for <30% of patients
because of the high cost, difficulties in accessing
peripheral veins in young patients, and the potential
infectious and thrombotic risks of long-term central
vein catheters.
General considerations regarding the treatment of
bleeds in hemophilia include (1) the need to begin the
treatment as soon as possible because symptoms often
precede objective evidence of bleeding; because of the
superior efﬁcacy of early therapeutic intervention, clas-
sic symptoms of bleeding into the joint in a reliable
patient, headaches, or automobile or other accidents,
require prompt replacement and further laboratory
investigation; and (2) the need to avoid drugs that ham-
per platelet function, such as aspirin or aspirin-contain-
ing drugs, to control pain, drugs such as ibuprofen or
propoxyphene are preferred.
Factors VIII and IX are dosed in units. One unit is 
by deﬁnition the amount of FVIII (100 ng/mL) or FIX 
(5 μg/mL) in 1 mL of normal plasma.One unit of FVIII per
kilogram of body weight increases the plasma FVIII level
by 2%. One can calculate the dose needed to increase
FVIII levels to 100% in a 70-kg severe hemophilia patient
CHAPTER 41
427
Coagulation Disorders
(<1%) using the simple formula below. Thus, 3500 units
of FVIII will increase the circulating level to 100%.
FVIII dose (IU) = Target FVIII levels −FVIII baseline levels 
× Body weight (kg) × 0.5 unit/kg
The doses for FIX replacement are different from those
for FVIII, because FIX recovery postinfusion is usually
only 50% of the predicted value. Therefore, the formula
for FIX replacement is
FIX dose (IU) = Target FIX levels −FIX baseline levels 
× Body weight (kg) × 1.0 unit/kg
The FVIII half-life of 8–12 h requires injections twice a
day to maintain therapeutic levels; the FIX half-life is
longer (~24 h, so that once-a-day injection is sufﬁcient.
In speciﬁc situations such as postsurgery, continuous
infusion of factor may be desirable because of its safety
in achieving sustained factor levels at a lower total cost.
Cryoprecipitate is enriched with FVIII protein (each
bag contains ~80 IU of FVIII) and was commonly used
for the treatment of patients with hemophilia A
decades ago; it is still in use in some developing coun-
tries, but because of the risk of bloodborne diseases,
this product should be avoided in hemophilia patients
when factor concentrates are available.
Mild bleeds such as uncomplicated hemarthroses
and superﬁcial hematomas require initial therapy with
factor levels of 30–50%. Additional doses to maintain
levels of 15–25% for 2 or 3 days are indicated for severe
hemarthroses, especially when these episodes affect
the “target joint.”Large hematomas, or bleeds into deep
muscles, require factor levels of 50% or even higher if
the clinical symptoms do not improve, and factor
replacement may be required for a period of 1 week or
longer. The control of serious bleeds, including those
that affect the oropharyngeal spaces, CNS, and the
retroperitoneum, require sustained protein levels of
50–100% for 7–10 days. Prophylactic replacement for
surgery is aimed at achieving normal factor levels
(100%) for a period of 7–10 days; replacement can then
be tapered, depending on the extent of the surgical
wounds. Oral surgery is associated with extensive tissue
damage, which usually requires factor replacement for
1–3 days coupled with oral antiﬁbrinolytic drugs.
NONTRANSFUSION THERAPY 
IN HEMOPHILIA
DDAVP (1-deamino-8-D-arginine vasopres-
sin)
DDAVP is a synthetic vasopressin analogue that
causes a transient increase in FVIII and von Willebrand
factor (vWF), but not FIX, through a mechanism involv-
ing release from endothelial cells. Patients with moder-
ate or mild hemophilia A should be tested to determine
if they respond to DDAVP before a therapeutic application.
DDAVP at doses of 0.3 μg/kg body weight infused over a
20-min period is expected to increase FVIII levels by two-
to threefold over baseline, peaking between 30–60 min
postinfusion. DDAVP does not improve FVIII levels in
severe hemophilia A patients because there are no stores
to release.Repeated dosing of DDAVP results in tachyphy-
laxis because the mechanism is an increase in release
rather than de novo synthesis of FVIII and vWF.More than
three consecutive doses become ineffective, and if fur-
ther therapy is indicated, FVIII replacement is required to
achieve hemostasis.
Antiﬁbrinolytic Drugs
Bleeding in the gums, in
the gastrointestinal tract, and during oral surgery
requires the use of oral antifibrinolytic drugs such as
ε-aminocaproic acid (EACA) or tranexamic acid to con-
trol local hemostasis. The duration of the treatment
depending on the clinical indication is 1 week or longer.
Tranexamic acid is given at doses of 25 mg/kg three to
four times a day. EACA treatment requires a loading
dose of 200 mg/kg (maximum of 10 g) followed by
100 mg/kg (maximum 30 g/d) every 6 h.These drugs are
not indicated to control hematuria because of the risk of
formation of an occlusive clot in the lumen of genitouri-
nary tract structures.
COMPLICATIONS
Inhibitor Formation
The formation of alloanti-
bodies to FVIII or FIX is currently the major complication
of hemophilia treatment.The prevalence of inhibitors to
FVIII is estimated at 5–10% of all cases and approxi-
mately 20% of severe hemophilia A patients. Inhibitors
to FIX are detected in only 3–5% of all hemophilia B
patients. The high-risk group for inhibitor formation
includes severe deﬁciency (>80% of all cases of inhibitors),
familial history of inhibitors, African descent, mutations
in the FVIII or FIX gene resulting in deletion of large cod-
ing regions, or gross gene rearrangements. Inhibitors
usually appear early in life, at a median of 2 years of age,
and after 10 cumulative days of exposure.
The clinical diagnosis of inhibitor is suspected when
patients do not respond to factor replacement at thera-
peutic doses. Inhibitors increase both morbidity and
mortality in hemophilia. Because early detection of an
inhibitor is critical to a successful correction of the
bleeding or to eradication of the antibody, most hemo-
philia centers perform annual screening for inhibitors.
The laboratory test required to conﬁrm the presence of
an inhibitor is an aPTT mixed with normal plasma. In
most hemophilia patients, a 1:1 mix with normal plasma
completely corrects the aPTT. In inhibitor patients, the
aPTT on a 1:1 mix is abnormally prolonged because the
inhibitor neutralizes the FVIII clotting activity of the nor-
mal plasma. The Bethesda assay uses a similar principle
and deﬁnes the speciﬁcity of the inhibitor and its titer.
SECTION V
Disorders Complicating Critical Illnesses and Their Management
428
FACTOR XI DEFICIENCY
Factor XI is a zymogen of an active serine protease (FXIa)
in the intrinsic pathway of blood coagulation that acti-
vates FIX (see Fig. 41-1).There are two pathways for the
formation of FXIa. In an aPTT-based assay, the protease
is the result of activation by FXIIa in conjunction with
high-molecular-weight kininogen and kallikrein.Throm-
bin appears to be the physiologic activator of FXI.The
generation of thrombin by the tissue-factor/factor VIIa
pathway activates FXI on the platelet surface, which con-
tributes to additional thrombin generation after the clot
has formed and thus augments resistance to ﬁbrinolysis
through a thrombin-activated ﬁbrinolytic inhibitor (TAFI).
Factor XI deﬁciency is a rare bleeding disorder that
occurs in the general population at a frequency of one
in a million. However, the disease is highly prevalent
among Ashkenazi and Iraqi Jewish populations, reaching
a frequency of 6% as heterozygotes and 0.1–0.3% as
homozygotes. More than 65 mutations in the FXI gene
have been reported, but two to three mutations are
found among affected Jewish populations.
Normal FXI clotting activity levels range from 70 to
150 U/dL. In heterozygous patients with moderate deﬁ-
ciency, FXI ranges from 20 to 70 U/dL, but in homozy-
gous or double heterozygote patients, FXI levels are
<1–20 U/dL. Patients with FXI levels <10% of normal
have a high risk of bleeding, but the disease phenotype
does not always correlate with residual FXI clotting activ-
ity.A family history is indicative of the risk of bleeding in
the propositus. Clinically, the presence of mucocutaneous
hemorrhages such as bruises, gum bleeding, epistaxis,
hematuria, and menorrhagia are common, especially after
trauma.This hemorrhagic phenotype suggests that tissues
rich in ﬁbrinolytic activity are more susceptible to FXI
deﬁciency. Postoperative bleeding is common but not
always present, even among patients with very low FXI
levels.
The results are expressed in Bethesda units (BU), in
which 1 BU is the amount of antibody that neutralizes
50% of the FVIII or FIX present in normal plasma after
2 h of incubation at 37ϒC. Clinically, inhibitor patients
are classiﬁed as low responders or high responders,
which provides guidelines for optimal therapy. Therapy
for inhibitor patients has two goals: the control of acute
bleeding episodes and the eradication of the inhibitor.
For the control of bleeding episodes, low responders
(those with titers <5 BU) respond well to high doses of
human or porcine FVIII (50–100 units/kg) with minimal
or no increase in the inhibitor titers. However, high-
responder patients (those with initial inhibitor titer
>10 BU or an anamnestic response in the antibody titer
to >10 BU even if low titer initially) do not respond to
FVIII or FIX concentrates. The control of bleeding
episodes in high-responder patients can be achieved
by using concentrates enriched for prothrombin, FVII,
FIX, FX [prothrombin complex concentrates (PCCs) or
activated PCCs], and more recently by recombinant
activated factor VII (FVIIa) (Fig. 41-1).The rates of thera-
peutic success have been higher for FVIIa than for PCC
or aPCC. For eradication of the inhibitory antibody,
immunosuppression is not effective. The most effec-
tive strategy is immune tolerance induction (ITI) based
on daily infusion of the missing protein until the
inhibitor disappears, typically requiring periods longer
than 1 year, with success rates in the range of 60%.
Promising results have been obtained by adding anti-
CD20 monoclonal antibody (rituximab) as a coadju-
vant for the eradication of high levels of antibody in
patients undergoing ITI.
Infectious 
Diseases
Hepatitis C virus (HCV)
infection is the major cause of morbidity and the second
leading cause of death in hemophilia patients exposed
to older clotting factor concentrates. The vast majority
of young patients treated with plasma-derived products
from 1970 to 1985 became infected with HCV. It has
been estimated that >80% of patients older than 20 years
of age were HCV antibody positive as of 2006. The
comorbidity of the underlying liver disease in hemo-
philia patients is clear when these individuals require
invasive procedures; correction of both genetic and
acquired (secondary to liver disease) deﬁciencies may
be needed. Infection with HIV also swept the population
of patients treated with plasma-derived concentrates
two decades ago. Co-infection of HCV and HIV, present
in almost 50% of hemophilia patients, is an aggravating
factor for the evolution of liver disease. The response to
HCV antiviral therapy in hemophilia is restricted to
<30% of patients and is even poorer among those with
both HCV and HIV infection. End-stage liver disease
requiring organ transplantation may be curative for
both the liver disease and for hemophilia.
Treatment:
FACTOR XI DEFICIENCY
The treatment of FXI deﬁciency is based on the infusion
of FFP at doses of 15–20 mL/kg to maintain trough lev-
els ranging from 10 to 20%. Because FXI has a half-life of
40–70 h, the replacement therapy can be given on alter-
nate days. The use of antiﬁbrinolytic drugs is beneﬁcial
to control bleeds, with the exception of hematuria or
bleeds in the bladder. The development of a FXI
inhibitor was observed in 10% of severely FXI-deﬁcient
patients who received replacement therapy.
OTHER RARE BLEEDING DISORDERS
Collectively, the inherited disorders resulting from deﬁ-
ciencies of clotting factors other than FVIII, FIX, and
CHAPTER 41
429
Coagulation Disorders
K–dependent factors, a critical step for calcium and
phospholipid binding of these proteins (Fig. 41-2).The
enzymes γ-glutamylcarboxylase and epoxide reductase
are critical for the metabolism and regeneration of vita-
min K. Mutations in the genes encoding the gamma-
carboxylase (GGCX) or vitamin K epoxide reductase
complex 1 (VKORC1) result in defective enzymes and
thus in vitamin K–dependent factors with reduced
activity, varying from 1 to 30% of normal. The disease
phenotype is characterized by mild to severe bleeding
episodes present from birth. Some patients respond to
high doses of vitamin K. For severe bleeding, replace-
ment therapy with FFP or PCCs may be necessary for
achieving full hemostatic control.
DISSEMINATED INTRAVASCULAR
COAGULATION
DIC is a clinicopathologic syndrome characterized by
widespread intravascular ﬁbrin formation in response to
excessive blood protease activity that overcomes the
natural anticoagulant mechanisms. DIC is associated
with several underlying pathologies (Table 41-2). The
most common causes are bacterial sepsis, malignant dis-
orders such as solid tumors or acute promyelocytic
leukemia (APL), and obstetric causes. DIC is diagnosed
in almost half of pregnant women with abruptio placen-
tae or amniotic ﬂuid embolism. Trauma, particularly to
the brain, can also result in DIC.The exposure of blood
to phospholipids from damaged tissue, hemolysis, and
endothelial damage are all contributing factors to the
development of DIC in this setting. Purpura fulminans
is a severe form of DIC resulting from thrombosis of
extensive areas of the skin; it affects predominantly
young children after viral or bacterial infection, particu-
larly those with inherited or acquired hypercoagulability
FXI (Table 41-1) represent a group of rare bleeding dis-
eases. The bleeding symptoms in these patients vary
from asymptomatic (dysﬁbrinogenemia or FVII deﬁ-
ciency) to life threatening (FX or FXIII deﬁciency).
There is no pathognomonic clinical manifestation that
suggests one speciﬁc disease, but overall, in contrast to
hemophilia, hemarthrosis is a rare event, and bleeding in
the mucosal tract or after umbilical cord clamping is
common. Individuals heterozygous for plasma coagula-
tion deﬁciencies are often asymptomatic.The laboratory
assessment for the speciﬁc deﬁcient factor after screen-
ing with general coagulation tests (Table 41-1) will
establish the diagnosis.
Replacement therapy using FFP or PCCs (containing
prothrombin, FVII, FIX, and FX) provides adequate
hemostasis in response to bleeds or as prophylactic treat-
ment.The use of PCCs should be carefully monitored and
avoided in patients with underlying liver disease or those
at high risk for thrombosis because of the risk of DIC.
FAMILIAL MULTIPLE COAGULATION
DEFICIENCIES
Several bleeding disorders are characterized by the
inherited deﬁciency of more than one plasma coagula-
tion factor. To date, the genetic defects in two of these
diseases have been characterized, and they provide new
insights into the regulation of hemostasis by genes
encoding proteins outside blood coagulation.
Combined Deﬁciency of FV and FVII
Patients with combined FV and FVIII deﬁciency
exhibit ~5% of residual clotting activity of each factor.
Interestingly, the disease phenotype is a mild bleeding
tendency, often after trauma. An underlying mutation
has been identiﬁed in the endoplasmic reticulum/Golgi
intermediate compartment (ERGIC-53) gene, a man-
nose-binding protein localized in the Golgi apparatus
that functions as a chaperone for both FV and FVIII. In
other families, mutations in the multiple coagulation
factor deﬁciency 2 (MCFD2) gene have been deﬁned;
this gene encodes a protein that forms a Ca2+-dependent
complex with ERGIC-53 and provides cofactor activity
in the intracellular mobilization of both FV and FVIII.
Multiple Deﬁciencies of Vitamin 
K–Dependent Coagulation Factors
Two enzymes involved in vitamin K metabolism have
been associated with combined deﬁciency of all vitamin
K–dependent proteins, including the procoagulant pro-
teins prothrombin,VII, IX, and X and the anticoagulants
protein C and protein S.Vitamin K is a fat-soluble vita-
min that is a cofactor for carboxylation of the gamma
carbon of the glutamic acid residues in the vitamin
Epoxide
reductase
Vitamin K
epoxide
Carboxylase
Vitamin K
reduced
Glutamic acid
γ-Carboxyglutamic
acid
Warfarin
FIGURE 41-2
The vitamin K cycle. Vitamin K is a cofactor for the formation
of γ-carboxyglutamic acid residues on coagulation proteins.
Vitamin K–dependent γ-glutamylcarboxylase, the enzyme that
catalyzes the vitamin K epoxide reductase, regenerates
reduced vitamin K. Warfarin blocks the action of the reduc-
tase and competitively inhibits the effects of vitamin K.
SECTION V
Disorders Complicating Critical Illnesses and Their Management
430
turn leads to systemic bleeding. This is further aggra-
vated by secondary hyperﬁbrinolysis. Studies in animals
demonstrate that the ﬁbrinolytic system is indeed sup-
pressed at the time of maximal activation of coagulation.
Interestingly, in patients with APL, a severe hyperﬁbri-
nolytic state often occurs in addition to the coagulation
activation.The release of several proinﬂammatory cytokines
such as interleukin-6 and tumor necrosis factor α play
central roles in mediating the coagulation defects in DIC
and symptoms associated with systemic inﬂammatory
response syndrome.
Clinical manifestations of DIC are related to the
magnitude of the imbalance of hemostasis, to the under-
lying disease, or to both.The most common ﬁndings are
bleeding ranging from oozing from venipuncture sites,
petechiae, and ecchymoses to severe hemorrhage from
the gastrointestinal tract or lung or into the CNS. In
chronic DIC, the bleeding symptoms are discrete and
restricted to skin or mucosal surfaces.The hypercoagula-
bility of DIC manifests as the occlusion of vessels in the
microcirculation and resulting organ failure.Thrombosis
of large vessels and cerebral embolism can also occur.
Hemodynamic complications and shock are common
among patients with acute DIC. The mortality ranges
from 30 to >80% depending on the underlying disease,
the severity of the DIC, and the age of the patient.
The diagnosis of clinically signiﬁcant DIC is based on
the presence of clinical or laboratory abnormalities of
coagulation or thrombocytopenia.The laboratory diagnosis
of DIC should prompt a search for the underlying disease
if it is not already apparent. No single test establishes the
caused by deﬁciencies of the components of the protein
C pathway. Neonates homozygous for protein C deﬁ-
ciency also have a high risk for purpura fulminans with
or without thrombosis of large vessels.
The central mechanism of DIC is the uncontrolled
generation of thrombin by exposure of the blood to
pathologic levels of tissue factor (Fig. 41-3). Simultane-
ous suppression of physiologic anticoagulant mecha-
nisms and abnormal ﬁbrinolysis further accelerate the
process. Together these abnormalities contribute to sys-
temic ﬁbrin deposition in small- and mid-sized vessels.
The duration and intensity of the ﬁbrin deposition can
compromise the blood supply of many organs, especially
the lung, kidney, liver, and brain, with consequent organ
failure.The sustained activation of coagulation results in
consumption of clotting factors and platelets, which in
Uncontrolled thrombin
generation
Fibrin deposits in the
microcirculation
Red blood cell
damage and 
hemolysis
Ischemic
tissue
damage
Failure 
multiple
organs
Vessel
patency
Secondary
fibrinolysis
FDP D-Dimer
Diffuse bleeding
Consumption of platelets
and coagulation factors
DIC
FIGURE 41-3
The pathophysiology of disseminated intravascular coag-
ulation (DIC). Interactions between coagulation and ﬁbri-
nolytic pathways result in bleeding and thrombosis in the
microcirculation in patients with DIC. FDP, ﬁbrin degradation
product; RBC, red blood cell.
TABLE 41-2
COMMON CLINICAL CAUSES OF DISSEMINATED
INTRAVASCULAR COAGULATION
Sepsis
Immunologic disorders
Bacterial
Acute hemolytic  
Staphylococci, streptococci,
transfusion reaction
pneumococci, meningo-
Organ or tissue 
cocci, gram-negative bacilli
transplant rejection
Viral
Graft-versus-host disease
Mycotic
Parasitic
Rickettsial
Trauma and tissue injury
Drugs
Brain injury (gunshot)
Fibrinolytic agents
Extensive burns
Aprotinin
Fat embolism
Warfarin (especially in 
Rhabdomyolysis
neonates with protein 
C deﬁciency)
Prothrombin complex 
concentrates
Recreational drugs 
(amphetamines)
Vascular disorders
Envenomation
Giant hemangiomas 
Snake 
(Kasabach-Merrit 
Insects
syndrome)
Large vessel aneurysms 
(e.g., aorta)
Obstetric complications
Liver disease
Abruptio placentae
Fulminant hepatic failure
Amniotic ﬂuid embolism
Cirrhosis
Dead fetus syndrome
Fatty liver of pregnancy
Septic abortion
Cancer
Miscellaneous
Adenocarcinoma (e.g., 
Shock
prostate, pancreas)
Respiratory distress 
Hematologic malignancies 
syndrome
(acute promyelocytic 
Massive transfusion
leukemia)
CHAPTER 41
431
Coagulation Disorders
diagnosis of DIC. The laboratory investigation should
include coagulation tests [aPTT, PT, thrombin time
(TT)] and markers of ﬁbrin degradation products (FDP)
in addition to platelet and red blood cell  (RBC) count
and analysis of the blood smear. These tests should be
repeated over a period of 6–8 h because an initially mild
abnormality can changed dramatically in patients with
severe DIC.
Common ﬁndings include the prolongation of PT or
aPTT; platelet counts 100,000/mm3, or a rapid decline
in platelet numbers; the presence of schistocytes (frag-
mented RBCs) in the blood smear; and elevated levels
of FDP.The most sensitive test for DIC is the FDP level.
DIC is an unlikely diagnosis in the presence of normal
levels of FDP. The D-dimer test is more speciﬁc for
detection of ﬁbrin (but not ﬁbrinogen) degradation
products and indicates that the cross-linked ﬁbrin has
been digested by plasmin. Because ﬁbrinogen has a pro-
longed half-life, plasma levels diminish acutely only in
severe cases of DIC. High-grade DIC is also associated
with levels of antithrombin III (ATIII) or plasminogen
activity <60% of normal.
Chronic Disseminated Intravascular 
Coagulation
Low-grade, compensated DIC can occur in certain clin-
ical situations, including giant hemangioma, metastatic
carcinoma, or the dead fetus syndrome. Plasma levels of
FDP or D-dimers are elevated. aPTT, PT, and ﬁbrinogen
values are within the normal range or high. Mild
thrombocytopenia or normal platelet counts are also
common ﬁndings. RBC fragmentation is often detected
but at a lower degree than in acute DIC.
Differential Diagnosis
The differential diagnosis between DIC and severe liver
disease is challenging and requires serial measurements
of the laboratory parameters of DIC. Patients with
severe liver disease are at risk for bleeding and manifest
laboratory features that include thrombocytopenia
(caused by platelet sequestration, portal hypertension, or
hypersplenism), decreased synthesis of coagulation fac-
tors and natural anticoagulants, and elevated levels of
FDP because of reduced hepatic clearance. However, in
contrast to DIC, these laboratory parameters in patients
with liver disease do not change rapidly. Other impor-
tant differential ﬁndings include the presence of portal
hypertension or other clinical or laboratory evidence of
underlying liver disease.
Microangiopathic disorders such as thrombotic throm-
bocytopenic purpura present an acute clinical onset of
illness accompanied by thrombocytopenia, RBC frag-
mentation, and multiorgan failure.There is, however, no
consumption of clotting factors or hyperﬁbrinolysis.
Treatment:
DISSEMINATED INTRAVASCULAR
COAGULATION
The morbidity and mortality associated with DIC are pri-
marily related to the underlying disease rather than the
complications of the DIC. The control or elimination of
the underlying cause should therefore be the primary
concern. Patients with severe DIC require control of
hemodynamic parameters, respiratory support, and
sometimes invasive surgical procedures. Attempts to
treat DIC without accompanying treatment of the
causative disease are likely to fail.
MANAGEMENT OF HEMORRHAGIC SYMP-
TOMS
The control of bleeding in DIC patients with
marked thrombocytopenia (platelet counts <10,000–
20,000/mm3) and low levels of coagulation factors
require replacement therapy. The PT (>1.5 × normal)
provides a good indicator of the severity of the clotting
factor consumption. Replacement with FFP is indicated
(1 unit of FFP increases most coagulation factors by 3%
in an adult without DIC). Low levels of fibrinogen
(<100 mg/dL) or brisk hyperﬁbrinolysis require infusion
of cryoprecipitate (plasma fraction enriched for ﬁbrino-
gen, FVIII, and vWF).The replacement of 10 U of cryopre-
cipitate for every 2–3 unit of FFP is sufﬁcient to correct
the hemostasis.The transfusion scheme must be adjusted
according to the patient’s clinical and laboratory evolu-
tion.Platelet concentrates at a dose of 1–2 U/10 kg body
weight are sufﬁcient for most DIC patients with severe
thrombocytopenia.
Clotting factor concentrates are not recommended
for control of bleeding in patients with DIC because of
the limited efﬁcacy afforded by replacement of single
factors (factor VIII or IX concentrates) and the high risk
of products containing traces of activated blood pro-
teases (PCCs),which further aggravates the disease.
REPLACEMENT OF COAGULATION OR FIB-
RINOLYSIS INHIBITORS
Drugs to control coagu-
lation such as heparin, ATIII concentrates, or antiﬁbri-
nolytic drugs have all been tried in the treatment of
patients with DIC. Low doses of continuous infusion
heparin (5–10 U/kg per h) may be effective in patients
with low-grade DIC associated with solid tumor or APL
or in a setting with recognized thrombosis. Heparin is
also indicated for the treatment of purpura fulminans,
during the surgical resection of giant hemangiomas,
and during removal of a dead fetus.In acute DIC, the use
of heparin is likely to aggravate bleeding. To date, the
use of heparin in severe DIC patients is of no proven sur-
vival beneﬁt.
The use of antiﬁbrinolytic drugs, EACA, or tranexamic
acid to prevent ﬁbrin degradation by plasmin may
reduce bleeding episodes in patients with DIC and con-
ﬁrmed hyperﬁbrinolysis. However, these drugs can
SECTION V
Disorders Complicating Critical Illnesses and Their Management
432
can diminish the risk of bleeding while maintaining
therapeutic anticoagulation for an underlying prothrom-
botic state.
COAGULATION DISORDERS ASSOCIATED
WITH LIVER FAILURE
The liver is central to hemostasis because it is the site of
synthesis and clearance of most procoagulant and natural
anticoagulant proteins and of essential components of
the ﬁbrinolytic system. Liver failure is associated with a
high risk of bleeding because of deﬁcient synthesis of
procoagulant factors and enhanced ﬁbrinolysis. Throm-
bocytopenia is common in patients with liver disease
and may be caused by congestive splenomegaly (hyper-
splenism) or immune-mediated shortened platelet life
span (primary biliary cirrhosis). In addition, several
anatomic abnormalities secondary to underlying liver
disease further promote the occurrence of hemorrhage
(Table 41-3). Dysﬁbrinogenemia is a relatively com-
mon ﬁnding in patients with liver disease caused by
impaired ﬁbrin polymeratization. The development of
DIC concomitant to chronic liver disease is common
and may enhance the risk for bleeding. Laboratory eval-
uation is mandatory for an optimal therapeutic strategy,
either to control ongoing bleeding or to prepare patients
with liver disease for invasive procedures.Typically, these
patients present with prolonged PT, aPTT, and TT,
VITAMIN K DEFICIENCY
Vitamin K–dependent proteins are a heterogenous group,
including clotting factor proteins and proteins found in
bone, lung, kidney, and placenta. Vitamin K mediates
posttranslational modiﬁcation of glutamate residues to
γ-carboxyglutamate, a critical step for the activity of vit-
amin K–dependent proteins for calcium binding and
proper assembly to phospholipid membranes (Fig. 41-2).
Inherited deﬁciency of the functional activity of the
enzymes involved in vitamin K metabolism, notably the
GGCX or VKOR-1 (see earlier), results in bleeding dis-
orders. The amount of vitamin K in the diet is often
limiting for the carboxylation reaction; thus, recycling of
vitamin K is essential to maintain normal levels of vita-
min K–dependent proteins. In adults, low dietary intake
alone is seldom reason for severe vitamin K deﬁciency
but may become common in association with the use of
broad-spectrum antibiotics. Disease or surgical interven-
tions that affect the ability of the intestinal tract to
absorb vitamin K, either through anatomic alterations or
by changing the fat content of bile salts and pancreatic
juices in the proximal small bowel, can result in signiﬁ-
cant reduction of vitamin K levels. Chronic liver diseases
such as primary biliary cirrhosis also deplete vitamin K
stores. Neonatal vitamin K deﬁciency and the resulting
hemorrhagic disease of the newborn have been almost
entirely eliminated by routine administration of vitamin
K to all neonates. Prolongation of PT values is the most
common and earliest ﬁnding in vitamin K–deﬁcient
patients because of reduction in prothrombin, FVII,
FIX, and FX levels. FVII has the shortest half-life among
these factors, which can prolong the PT before changes
in the aPTT. Parenteral administration of vitamin K at a
total dose of 10 mg is sufﬁcient to restore normal levels
of clotting factor within 8–10 h. In the presence of
ongoing bleeding or a need for immediate correction
before an invasive procedure, replacement with FFP or
PCC is required. PCC should be avoided in patients
with severe underlying liver disorders because of their
high risk of thrombosis.The reversal of excessive antico-
agulant therapy with warfarin or warfarin-like drugs can be
achieved by minimal doses of vitamin K (1 mg orally or
by IV injection) for asymptomatic patients.This strategy
increase the risk of thrombosis, and concomitant use of
heparin is indicated. Patients with APL or those with
chronic DIC associated with giant hemangiomas are
among the few patients who may beneﬁt from this
therapy.
The use of protein C concentrates to treat purpura
fulminans associated with acquired protein C deﬁciency
or meningococcemia has been proven effective. The
results from the replacement of ATIII in early-phase
studies are promising but require further study.
TABLE 41-3
COAGULATION DISORDERS AND HEMOSTASIS IN
LIVER DISEASE
Bleeding
Portal hypertension
Esophageal varices
Thrombocytopenia
Splenomegaly
Chronic or acute DIC
Decreased synthesis of clotting factors
Hepatocyte failure
Vitamin K deﬁciency
Systemic ﬁbrinolysis
DIC
Dysﬁbrinogenemia
Thrombosis
Decreased synthesis of coagulation inhibitors: protein C, 
protein S, antithrombin
Hepatocyte failure
Vitamin K deﬁciency (protein C, protein S)
Failure to clear activated coagulation proteins (DIC)
Dysﬁbrinogenemia
Iatrogenic: transfusion of prothrombin complex
concentrates
Antiﬁbrinolytic agents: EACA, tranexamic acid
Note:
DIC, 
disseminated 
intravascular 
coagulation; 
EACA, 
ε-aminocaproic acid.
CHAPTER 41
433
Coagulation Disorders
history of open surgery in which topical thrombin is
used, especially preparations containing bovine FV, is
sometimes associated. Bleeding episodes occur commonly
into soft tissues and in the gastrointestinal or urinary tracts
and skin. In contrast to hemophilia, hemarthrosis is rare.
Retroperitoneal hemorrhages and other life-threatening
bleeding may appear suddenly. The overall mortality in
untreated patients ranges from 8 to 22%, and most deaths
occur within the ﬁrst few weeks after presentation.The
diagnosis is based on the prolonged aPTT with normal
PT and TT.The aPTT remains prolonged after mixture
of the test plasma with equal amounts of pooled normal
plasma for 2 h at 37°C.The Bethesda assay using FVIII-
deﬁcient plasma as performed for inhibitor detection in
hemophilia will conﬁrm the diagnosis. Major bleeding is
treated with high doses of human or porcine FVIII, PCC/
PCCa, or recombinant FVIIa. High-dose IV γ-globulin
and anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody (rituximab) have
been reported to be effective in patients with autoanti-
bodies to FVIII. In contrast to hemophilia, inhibitors in
nonhemophilia patients are sometimes responsive to
prednisone alone or in association with cytotoxic therapy
(e.g., cyclophosphamide).
The presence of lupus anticoagulant can be associated
with venous or arterial thrombotic disease. However,
bleeding has also been reported in lupus anticoagulant; it
is attributable to the presence of antibodies to prothrom-
bin, which results in hypoprothrombinemia. Both disor-
ders show a prolonged PTT that does not correct on
mixing. To distinguish acquired inhibitors from lupus
anticoagulants, results of the dilute Russell’s viper venom
test and the hexagonal-phase phospholipids test will be
negative in patients with an acquired inhibitor and posi-
tive in patients with lupus anticoagulants. Moreover, lupus
anticoagulant interferes with the clotting activity of many
factors (FVIII, FIX, FXII, FXI); acquired inhibitors are
speciﬁc to a single factor.
FURTHER READINGS
CALDWELL SH et al: Coagulation disorders and hemostasis in liver
disease: Pathophysiology and critical assessment of current man-
agement. Hepatology 44:1039, 2006
DUBOSE TD: Metabolic alkalosis, in Primer on Kidney Diseases, 5th
ed,A Greenberg (ed). Saunders Elsevier, 2009, pp 84–90
———:Acid-base disorders, in Brenner and Rector’s The Kidney, 8th ed,
BM Brenner (ed).Philadelphia,Saunders,2008,pp 505–546
HOYER LW: Hemophilia A. N Engl J Med 330:39, 1994
KEY NS, NEGRIER C: Coagulation factor concentrates: Past, present,
and future. Lancet 370:439, 2007
LEVI M, OPAL SM: Coagulation abnormalities in critically ill
patients. Crit Care 10:222, 2006
MANNUCCI PM, et al: Recessively inherited coagulation disorders.
Blood 104:1243, 2004
STAFFORD DW:The vitamin K cycle. J Thromb Haemost 3:1873, 2005
depending on the degree of liver damage; thrombocytope-
nia; and a normal or slight increase of FDP. Fibrinogen
levels are diminished only in those with fulminant hepati-
tis, decompensated cirrhosis, or advanced liver disease or
in the presence of DIC.The presence of prolonged TT,
normal ﬁbrinogen, and FDP levels suggests dysﬁbrino-
genemia. FVIII levels are often normal or elevated in
patients with liver failure, and decreased levels suggest
superimposing DIC. Because FV is only synthesized in
the hepatocyte and is not a vitamin K–dependent pro-
tein, reduced levels of FV may be an indicator of hepa-
tocyte failure. Normal levels of FV and low levels of
FVII suggest vitamin K deﬁciency.Vitamin K levels may
be reduced in patients with liver failure caused by com-
promised storage in hepatocellular disease, changes in bile
acids, or cholestasis that can diminish the absorption of
vitamin K. Replacement of vitamin K may be desirable
(10 mg given by slow IV injection) to improve hemostasis.
Treatment with FFP is the most effective way to cor-
rect hemostasis in patients with liver failure. Infusion of
FFP (5–10 mL/kg; each bag contains ~200 mL) is sufﬁ-
cient to ensure 10–20% of normal levels of clotting fac-
tors but not correction of PT or aPTT. Even high doses
of FFP (20 mL/kg) do not correct the clotting times in
all patients. Monitoring for clinical symptoms and clot-
ting times will determine if repeated doses are required
8–12 h after the ﬁrst infusion. Platelet concentrates are
indicated when platelet counts are <10,000–20,000/mm3
to control an ongoing bleed or immediately before an
invasive procedure if counts are <50,000/mm3. Cryopre-
cipitate is indicated only when ﬁbrinogen levels are
<100 mg/mL; dosing is six bags for a 70-kg patient
daily. As noted above, PCC infusion in patients with
liver failure should be avoided because of the high risk
of thrombotic complications. The safety of antiﬁbri-
nolytic drugs to control bleeding in patients with liver
failure is not yet well deﬁned and should be avoided.
ACQUIRED INHIBITORS 
OF COAGULATION FACTORS
An acquired inhibitor is an immune-mediated disease char-
acterized by the presence of an autoantibody against a
speciﬁc clotting factor. FVIII is the most common target
of antibody formation, but inhibitors to prothrombin, FV,
FIX, FX, and FXI are also reported. The disease occurs
predominantly in older adults (median age, 60 years) but
occasionally in pregnant or postpartum women with no
previous history of bleeding. In 50% of patients with
inhibitors, no underlying disease is identiﬁed at the time
of diagnosis. In the remaining half, the causes are
autoimmune diseases, malignancies (lymphomas, prostate
cancer), dermatologic diseases, and pregnancy. Previous
I Mechanisms of Action . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .434
Inhibition of Cell Wall Synthesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .437
Inhibition of Protein Synthesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .438
Inhibition of Bacterial Metabolism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .439
Inhibition of Nucleic Acid Synthesis or Activity . . . . . . . . . . . .439
Alteration of Cell-Membrane Permeability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .440
I Mechanisms of Resistance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .440
β-Lactam Antibiotics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .440
Vancomycin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .441
Aminoglycosides . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .441
Macrolides, Ketolides, Lincosamides, and Streptogramins . . .441
Chloramphenicol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .441
Tetracyclines and Tigecycline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .441
Mupirocin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .441
Trimethoprim and Sulfonamides . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .442
Quinolones . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .442
Rifampin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .442
Linezolid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .442
Multiple Antibiotic Resistance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .442
I Pharmacokinetics of Antibiotics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .442
Absorption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .442
Distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .443
Metabolism and Elimination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .443
I Principles of Antibacterial Chemotherapy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .443
Susceptibility of Bacteria to Antibacterial Drugs In Vitro . . . . .444
Pharmacodynamics: Relationship of Pharmacokinetics 
and In Vitro Susceptibility to Clinical Response . . . . . . . . .444
Status of the Host . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .445
Site of Infection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .446
Combination Chemotherapy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .447
Empirical Therapy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .447
I Choice of Antibacterial Therapy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .448
I Adverse Reactions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .450
I Drug Interactions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .450
Macrolides and Ketolides . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .450
Quinupristin/Dalfopristin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .450
Linezolid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .450
Tetracyclines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .450
Sulfonamides . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .451
Fluoroquinolones . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .452
Rifampin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .452
Metronidazole . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .453
I Prophylaxis of Bacteria Infections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .453
I Duration of Therapy and Treatment Failure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .454
I Mechanisms to Optimize Antimicrobial Use . . . . . . . . . . . . . .454
I Further Readings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .455
Gordon L. Archer
I
Ronald E. Polk
The development of vaccines and drugs that prevent
and cure bacterial infections was one of the twentieth
century’s major contributions to human longevity and
quality of life. Antibacterial agents are among the most
commonly prescribed drugs of any kind worldwide.
Used appropriately, these drugs are lifesaving. However,
their indiscriminate use drives up the cost of health care,
leads to a plethora of side effects and drug interactions;
and fosters the emergence of bacterial resistance, render-
ing previously valuable drugs useless.The rational use of
antibacterial agents depends on an understanding of 
(1) the drugs’ mechanisms of action, spectrum of activity,
pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, toxicities, and
interactions;(2) mechanisms underlying bacterial resistance;
TREATMENT AND PROPHYLAXIS 
OF BACTERIAL INFECTIONS
and (3) strategies that can be used by clinicians to limit
resistance. In addition, patient-associated parameters,
such as infection site, other drugs being taken, allergies,
and immune and excretory status, are critically impor-
tant to appropriate therapeutic decisions. This chapter
provides speciﬁc data required for making informed
choices of antibacterial agents.
MECHANISMS OF ACTION
Antibacterial agents, like all antimicrobial drugs, are
directed against unique targets not present in mam-
malian cells. The goal is to limit toxicity to the host
and maximize chemotherapeutic activity affecting
CHAPTER 42
CHAPTER 42
434
Treatment and Prophylaxis of Bacterial Infections
435
CHAPTER 42
Mechanisms of Action
GRAM-NEGATIVE
GRAM-POSITIVE
LPS
OM
PG
PBP
PBP
PBP
PBP
IM
LPS
OM
PG
IM
PG
IM
Capsule
PG
IM
Capsule
N
A
A
B
O
A,D,E,F,J,M
C,D,E,F,G,H,I,J,K,M
2
2
3
3
1
5
5
5
5a
7a
7a
7b
5b
4
10
4
B
4
6
6
A,D,E,F,M
6
D,E,F,M
D,F,H
6
A
A
5aA
A
6
6
3
7
7
7
8
8
8
8
8
9
9
Porin
Porin
C,D,H,I
E,F
G
M
8
M
8
K
8
J
8 G
K
J
L
50s
30s
50s
30s
tRNA
synthetase
tRNA
synthetase
RNA
polymerase
DNA
gyrase
DHFR
DHPS
RNA
polymerase
DNA
gyrase
DHFR
DHPS
A,F
B
C,E,M
6
C,E,H,M
C,H,I
E
5b
A
Ac
Ad
P
Mechanisms of Resistance
GRAM-NEGATIVE
GRAM-POSITIVE
Detergent action on lipid gram  –  outer membrane.
Penetration of hydrophilic drugs through porin channels
in gram  –  outer membrane.
Free diffusion through gram  +  cell envelope with binding
to cell wall PG or
Binding to cell membrane PBP. Drug confined to space
external to IM.
Binding to ribosomal target for protein synthesis inhibition.
Antibiotic interaction with target protein leading to metabolic
(DHFR, DHPS), protein synthetic (tRNA synthetase), or nucleic
acid (DNA gyrase, RNA polymerase) abnormalities.
10 Insertion into cell membrane, disrupting membrane potential.
Diffusion or transport of drugs with intracellular target
through IM.
Direct interaction of reactive intermediates with nucleic acid.
3
4
5b
5a
6
7a
8
Mutant porin channels decrease antimicrobial penetration.
1 Intrinsic resistance: Inability of antibiotic to penetrate
gram  –  envelope (e.g., vancomycin).
Production of insensitive target by acquired gene mediating
production of altered peptidoglycan.
Production of -lactam-insensitive PBP target by mutation
of gene or acquisition of new gene.
Inactivation of β-lactam antibiotic by -lactamases in periplasm
(gram  – ) or surrounding medium (gram  + ).
Decreased ribosomal binding due to target site alteration.
7b Inactivation of drug by chemical modification leading to
decreased ribosomal interaction.
Mutation of target gene or acquisition of new gene producing
a drug-insensitive target protein.
Active efflux of drugs from cytoplasm or from gram  –  
periplasm.
FIGURE 42-1
Mechanisms of action of and resistance to antibacterial
agents. Black lines trace the routes of drug interaction with
bacterial cells, from entry to target site. The letters in each
ﬁgure indicate speciﬁc antibacterial agents or classes of
agents, as shown in Table 42-1. The numbers correspond to
mechanisms listed beneath each panel. 50s and 30s, large 
and small ribosome subunits; Ac, acetylation; Ad, adenyla-
tion; DHFR, dihydrofolate reductase; DHPS, dihydropteroate
synthetase; 
IM, 
inner 
(cytoplasmic) 
membrane; 
LPS,
lipopolysaccharide; OM, outer membrane; P, phosphoryla-
tion; PBP, penicillin-binding protein; PG, peptidoglycan.
invading microbes only. Bactericidal drugs kill the bacteria
that are within their spectrum of activity; bacteriostatic
drugs only inhibit bacterial growth. Although bacterio-
static activity is adequate for the treatment of most
infections, bactericidal activity may be necessary for
cure in patients with altered immune systems (e.g.,
neutropenia), protected infectious foci (e.g., endocardi-
tis or meningitis), or specific infections (e.g., compli-
cated Staphylococcus aureus bacteremia).The mechanisms
of action of the antibacterial agents to be discussed in
this section are summarized in Table 42-1 and are
depicted in Fig. 42-1.
Disorders Complicating Critical Illnesses and Their Management
436
SECTION V
TABLE 42-1
MECHANISMS OF ACTION OF AND RESISTANCE TO MAJOR CLASSES OF ANTIBACTERIAL AGENTS
LETTER FOR
ANTIBACTERIAL
MAJOR 
MECHANISM 
MAJOR MECHANISMS  
FIG. 42-1
AGENTa
CELLULAR TARGET
OF ACTION
OF RESISTANCE
A
β-Lactams (penicillins
Cell wall
Inhibit cell wall cross-linking
1. Drug inactivation (β-lactamase)
and cephalosporins)
2. Insensitivity of target
(alteredPBPs)
3. Decreased permeability (altered
gram-negative outer-membrane 
porins)
4. Active efﬂux
B
Vancomycin
Cell wall
Interferes with addition of
Alteration of target (substitution of
new cell wall subunits
terminal amino acid of
(muramyl pentapeptides)
peptidoglycan subunit)
Bacitracin
Cell wall
Prevents addition of cell wall
Not deﬁned
subunits by inhibiting
recycling of membrane
lipid carrier
C
Macrolides
Protein synthesis
Bind to 50S ribosomal
1. Alteration of target (ribosomal
(erythromycin)
subunit
methylation and mutation of
23S rRNA)
2. Active efﬂux
Lincosamides
Protein synthesis
Bind to 50S ribosomal 
Alteration of target (ribosomal
(clindamycin)
subunit
methylation)
D
Chloramphenicol
Protein synthesis
Binds to 50S ribosomal
1. Drug inactivation (chloram-
subunit
phenicol acetyltransferase)
2. Active efﬂux
E
Tetracycline
Protein synthesis
Binds to 30S ribosomal
1. Decreased intracellular drug
subunit
accumulation (active efﬂux)
2. Insensitivity of target
F
Aminoglycosides
Protein synthesis
Bind to 30S ribosomal
1. Drug inactivation (aminoglycoside-
(gentamicin)
subunit
modifying enzyme)
2. Decreased permeability through
gram-negative outer membrane
3. Active efﬂux
G
Mupirocin
Protein synthesis
Inhibits isoleucine tRNA
Mutation of gene for target protein
synthetase
or acquisition of new gene for 
drug-insensitive target
H
Quinupristin/
Protein synthesis
Binds to 50S ribosomal
1. Alteration of target (ribosomal
dalfopristin
subunit
methylation: dalfopristin)
(Synercid)
2. Active efﬂux (quinupristin)
3. Drug inactivation (quinupristin
and dalfopristin)
I
Linezolid
Protein synthesis
Bind to 50S ribosomal
Alteration of target (mutation 
subunit
of 23S rRNA)
J
Sulfonamides
Cell metabolism
Competitively inhibit 
Production of insensitive targets
and trimethoprim
enzymes involved in two
(dihydropteroate synthetase
steps of folic acid
[sulfonamides] and dihydrofolate
biosynthesis
reductase [trimethoprim]) that
bypass metabolic block
K
Rifampin
Nucleic acid
Inhibits DNA-dependent
Insensitivity of target (mutation of
synthesis
RNA polymerase
polymerase gene)
L
Metronidazole
Nucleic acid 
Intracellularly generates
Not deﬁned
synthesis
short-lived reactive
intermediates that damage
DNA by electron transfer
system
M
Quinolones
DNA synthesis
Inhibit DNA gyrase 
1. Insensitivity of target (mutation
(ciproﬂoxacin)
(A subunit) I and 
of gyrase genes)
topoisomerase IV
2. Decreased intracellular drug
accumulation (active efﬂux)
Novobiocin
DNA synthesis
Inhibits DNA gyrase
Not deﬁned
(B subunit)
Treatment and Prophylaxis of Bacterial Infections
437
CHAPTER 42
TABLE 42-1 (CONTINUED )
MECHANISMS OF ACTION OF AND RESISTANCE TO MAJOR CLASSES OF ANTIBACTERIAL AGENTS
LETTER FOR
ANTIBACTERIAL
MAJOR 
MECHANISM 
MAJOR MECHANISMS  
FIG. 42-1
AGENTa
CELLULAR TARGET
OF ACTION
OF RESISTANCE
N
Polymyxins
Cell membrane
Disrupt membrane
Not deﬁned
(polymyxin B)
permeability by charge
alteration
Gramicidin
Cell membrane
Forms pores
Not deﬁned
O
Daptomycin
Cell membrane
Forms channels that 
Not deﬁned
disrupt membrane 
potential
a Compounds in parentheses are major representatives for the class.
Note: PBP, penicillin-binding protein.
INHIBITION OF CELL WALL SYNTHESIS
One major difference between bacterial and mammalian
cells is the presence in bacteria of a rigid wall external
to the cell membrane. The wall protects bacterial cells
from osmotic rupture, which would result from the cell’s
usual marked hyperosmolarity (by ≤20 atm) relative to
the host environment.The structure conferring cell wall
rigidity and resistance to osmotic lysis in both gram-
positive and gram-negative bacteria is peptidoglycan, a
large, covalently linked sacculus that surrounds the bac-
terium. In gram-positive bacteria, peptidoglycan is the
only layered structure external to the cell membrane and
is thick (20–80 nm); in gram-negative bacteria, there is
an outer membrane external to a very thin (1-nm) pep-
tidoglycan layer.
Chemotherapeutic agents directed at any stage of
the synthesis, export, assembly, or cross-linking of pep-
tidoglycan lead to inhibition of bacterial cell growth
and, in most cases, to cell death. Peptidoglycan is com-
posed of (1) a backbone of two alternating sugars,
N-acetylglucosamine and N-acetylmuramic acid; (2) a
chain of four amino acids that extends down from the
backbone (stem peptides); and (3) a peptide bridge
that cross-links the peptide chains. Peptidoglycan is
formed by the addition of subunits (a sugar with its
five attached amino acids) that are assembled in the
cytoplasm and transported through the cytoplasmic
membrane to the cell surface. Subsequent cross-linking
is driven by cleavage of the terminal stem-peptide
amino acid.
Virtually all the antibiotics that inhibit bacterial cell
wall synthesis are bactericidal. That is, they eventually
result in the cell’s death because of osmotic lysis.
However, much of the loss of cell wall integrity after
treatment with cell wall–active agents is because of the
bacteria’s own cell wall remodeling enzymes (autolysins)
that cleave peptidoglycan bonds in the normal course of
cell growth. In the presence of antibacterial agents that
inhibit cell wall growth, autolysis proceeds without nor-
mal cell wall repair; weakness and eventual cellular lysis
occur.
Antibacterial agents act to inhibit cell wall synthesis
in several ways, as described below.
Bacitracin
Bacitracin, a cyclic peptide antibiotic, inhibits the con-
version to its active form of the lipid carrier that moves
the water-soluble cytoplasmic peptidoglycan subunits
through the cell membrane to the cell exterior.
Glycopeptides
Glycopeptides (vancomycin and teicoplanin) are high-
molecular-weight antibiotics that bind to the terminal
D-alanine–D-alanine component of the stem peptide
while the subunits are external to the cell membrane
but still linked to the lipid carrier.This binding sterically
inhibits the addition of subunits to the peptidoglycan
backbone.
β-Lactam Antibiotics
β-Lactam antibiotics (penicillins, cephalosporins, car-
bapenems, and monobactams; Table 42-2) are character-
ized by a four-membered β-lactam ring and prevent the
cross-linking reaction called transpeptidation.The energy for
attaching a peptide cross-bridge from the stem peptide of
one peptidoglycan subunit to another is derived from the
cleavage of a terminal D-alanine residue from the subunit
stem peptide.The cross-bridge amino acid is then attached
to the penultimate D-alanine by transpeptidase enzymes.
The β-lactam ring of the antibiotic forms an irreversible
covalent acyl bond with the transpeptidase enzyme (prob-
ably because of the antibiotic’s steric similarity to the
enzyme’s D-alanine–D-alanine target), preventing the
cross-linking reaction.Transpeptidases and similar enzymes
involved in cross-linking are called penicillin-binding proteins
(PBPs) because they all have active sites that bind β-lactam
antibiotics.
INHIBITION OF PROTEIN SYNTHESIS
Most of the antibacterial agents that inhibit protein syn-
thesis interact with the bacterial ribosome.The difference
between the composition of bacterial and mammalian
ribosomes gives these compounds their selectivity.
Aminoglycosides
Aminoglycosides (gentamicin, kanamycin, tobramycin,
streptomycin, neomycin, and amikacin) are a group of
structurally related compounds containing three linked
hexose sugars. They exert a bactericidal effect by bind-
ing irreversibly to the 30S subunit of the bacterial ribo-
some and blocking initiation of protein synthesis.
Uptake of aminoglycosides and their penetration through
the cell membrane constitute an aerobic, energy-depen-
dent process. Thus, aminoglycoside activity is markedly
reduced in an anaerobic environment. Spectinomycin, an
aminocyclitol antibiotic, also acts on the 30S ribosomal
subunit but has a different mechanism of action from
the aminoglycosides and is bacteriostatic rather than
bactericidal.
Macrolides, Ketolides, and Lincosamides
Macrolide antibiotics (erythromycin, clarithromycin, and
azithromycin) consist of a large lactone ring to which
sugars are attached.
Ketolide antibiotics,
including
telithromycin, replace the cladinose sugar on the
macrolactone ring with a ketone group. These drugs
bind speciﬁcally to the 50S portion of the bacterial
ribosome and inhibit protein chain elongation.
Although structurally unrelated to the macrolides, lin-
cosamides (clindamycin and lincomycin) bind to a site on
the 50S ribosome nearly identical to the binding site for
macrolides.
Streptogramins
Streptogramins [quinupristin (streptogramin B) and dal-
fopristin (streptogramin A)], which are supplied as a
combination in Synercid, are peptide macrolactones that
Disorders Complicating Critical Illnesses and Their Management
438
SECTION V
TABLE 42-2
CLASSIFICATION OF β-LACTAM ANTIBIOTICS
ROUTE OF ADMINISTRATION
CLASS
PARENTERAL
ORAL
Penicillins
β-Lactamase–susceptible
Narrow-spectrum
Penicillin G
Penicillin V
Enteric-active
Ampicillin
Amoxicillin, ampicillin
Enteric-active and antipseudomonal
Ticarcillin, piperacillin
None
β-Lactamase–resistant
Antistaphylococcal
Oxacillin, nafcillin
Cloxacillin, dicloxacillin
Combined with β-lactamase
Ticarcillin plus clavulanic
Amoxicillin plus clavulanic
inhibitors
acid, ampicillin plus
acid
sulbactam, piperacillin
plus tazobactam
Cephalosporins
First generation
Cefazolin, cephalothin,
Cephalexin, cephradine, 
cephapirin
cefadroxil
Second generation
Haemophilus active
Cefamandole, cefuroxime,
Cefaclor, cefuroxime axetil, 
cefonicid, ceforanide
ceftibuten, cefdinir, 
cefpodoxime,a cefprozil, 
loracarbef
Bacteroides active
Cefoxitin, cefotetan,
None
cefmetazole
Third generation
Extended spectrum
Ceftriaxone, cefotaxime,
None
ceftizoxime
Extended spectrum and
Ceftazidime, cefepime
None
antipseudomonal
Carbapenems
Imipenem-cilastatin,
None
meropenem, ertapenem
Monobactams
Aztreonam
None
a Some sources classify cefpodoxime as a third-generation oral agent because of a marginally broader spectrum.
Treatment and Prophylaxis of Bacterial Infections
439
CHAPTER 42
also bind to the 50S ribosomal subunit and block pro-
tein synthesis.Whereas streptogramin B binds to a ribo-
somal site similar to the binding site for macrolides and
lincosamides, streptogramin A binds to a different ribo-
somal site, blocking the late phase of protein synthesis.
The two streptogramins act synergistically to kill bacte-
ria if the strain is susceptible to both components.
Chloramphenicol
Chloramphenicol consists of a single aromatic ring and a
short side chain. This antibiotic binds reversibly to the
50S portion of the bacterial ribosome at a site close to
but not identical with the binding sites for the
macrolides and lincosamides, inhibiting peptide bond
formation.
Linezolid
Linezolid is the only commercially available drug in the
oxazolidinone class. Linezolid binds to the 50S ribosomal
subunit and blocks the initiation of protein synthesis.
Tetracyclines and Glycylcyclines
Tetracyclines (tetracycline, doxycycline, and minocy-
cline) and glycylcyclines (tigecycline) consist of four
aromatic rings with various substituent groups. They
interact reversibly with the bacterial 30S ribosomal sub-
unit, blocking the binding of aminoacyl tRNA to the
mRNA–ribosome 
complex.
This 
mechanism 
is
markedly different from that of the aminoglycosides,
which also bind to the 30S subunit.
Mupirocin
Mupirocin (pseudomonic acid) inhibits isoleucine tRNA
synthetase by competing with bacterial isoleucine for its
binding site on the enzyme and depleting cellular stores
of isoleucine-charged tRNA.
INHIBITION OF BACTERIAL METABOLISM
The antimetabolites are all synthetic compounds that
interfere with bacterial synthesis of folic acid. Products
of the folic acid synthesis pathway function as coen-
zymes for the one-carbon transfer reactions that are
essential for the synthesis of thymidine, all purines, and
several amino acids. Inhibition of folate synthesis leads to
cessation of bacterial cell growth and, in some cases,
to bacterial cell death. The principal antibacterial
antimetabolites are sulfonamides (sulﬁsoxazole, sulfadi-
azine, and sulfamethoxazole) and trimethoprim.
Sulfonamides
Sulfonamides are structural analogues of p-aminobenzoic
acid (PABA), one of the three structural components of
folic acid (the other two being pteridine and glutamate).
The ﬁrst step in the synthesis of folic acid is the addition
of PABA to pteridine by the enzyme dihydropteroic acid
synthetase. Sulfonamides compete with PABA as sub-
strates for the enzyme. The selective effect of sulfon-
amides is because of the fact that bacteria synthesize
folic acid but mammalian cells cannot synthesize the
cofactor and must use exogenous supplies. However, the
activity of sulfonamides can be greatly reduced by the
presence of excess PABA or by the exogenous addition
of end products of one-carbon transfer reactions (e.g.,
thymidine and purines). High concentrations of the lat-
ter substances may be present in some infections as a
result of tissue and white blood cell breakdown, com-
promising sulfonamide activity.
Trimethoprim
Trimethoprim is a diaminopyrimidine, a structural ana-
logue of the pteridine moiety of folic acid. Trimetho-
prim is a competitive inhibitor of dihydrofolate reduc-
tase; this enzyme is responsible for reduction of
dihydrofolic acid to tetrahydrofolic acid—the essential
ﬁnal component in the folic acid synthesis pathway.
Similar to that of the sulfonamides, the activity of
trimethoprim is compromised in the presence of exoge-
nous thymine or thymidine.
INHIBITION OF NUCLEIC ACID SYNTHESIS
OR ACTIVITY
Numerous antibacterial compounds have disparate
effects on nucleic acids.
Quinolones
The quinolones, including nalidixic acid and its ﬂuori-
nated derivatives (ciproﬂoxacin, levoﬂoxacin, and moxi-
ﬂoxacin), are synthetic compounds that inhibit the
activity of the A subunit of the bacterial enzyme DNA
gyrase as well as topoisomerase IV. DNA gyrase and
topoisomerases are responsible for negative supercoiling
of DNA—an essential conformation for DNA replica-
tion in the intact cell. Inhibition of the activity of DNA
gyrase and topoisomerase IV is lethal to bacterial cells.
The antibiotic novobiocin also interferes with the activity
of DNA gyrase, but it interferes with the B subunit.
Rifampin
Rifampin, used primarily against Mycobacterium tuberculo-
sis, is also active against a variety of other bacteria.
Rifampin binds tightly to the B subunit of bacterial
DNA-dependent RNA polymerase, thus inhibiting
transcription of DNA into RNA. Mammalian-cell
RNA polymerase is not sensitive to this compound.
Nitrofurantoin
Nitrofurantoin, a synthetic compound, causes DNA
damage.The nitrofurans, compounds containing a single
ﬁve-membered ring, are reduced by a bacterial enzyme
to highly reactive, short-lived intermediates that are
thought to cause DNA strand breakage, either directly
or indirectly.
Metronidazole
Metronidazole, a synthetic imidazole, is active only
against anaerobic bacteria and protozoa. The reduction
of metronidazole’s nitro group by the bacterial anaerobic
electron-transport system produces a transient series of
reactive intermediates that are thought to cause DNA
damage.
ALTERATION OF CELL-MEMBRANE
PERMEABILITY
Polymyxins
The polymyxins [polymyxin B and colistin (polymyxin E)]
are cyclic, basic polypeptides.They behave as cationic, sur-
face-active compounds that disrupt the permeability 
of both the outer and the cytoplasmic membranes of
gram-negative bacteria.
Gramicidin A
Gramicidin A is a polypeptide of 15 amino acids that
acts as an ionophore, forming pores or channels in lipid
bilayers.
Daptomycin
Insertion of daptomycin, a new bactericidal lipopeptide
antibiotic, into the cell membrane of gram-positive
bacteria forms a channel that causes depolarization of
the membrane by efﬂux of intracellular ions, resulting
in cell death.
MECHANISMS OF RESISTANCE
Some bacteria exhibit intrinsic resistance to certain classes
of antibacterial agents (e.g., obligate anaerobic bacteria
to aminoglycosides and gram-negative bacteria to van-
comycin). In addition, bacteria that are ordinarily sus-
ceptible to antibacterial agents can acquire resistance.
Acquired resistance is a major limitation to effective
antibacterial chemotherapy. Resistance can develop by
mutation of resident genes or by acquisition of new
genes. New genes mediating resistance are usually spread
from cell to cell by way of mobile genetic elements such
as plasmids, transposons, and bacteriophages. The resis-
tant bacterial populations ﬂourish in areas of high
antimicrobial use, where they enjoy a selective advantage
over susceptible populations.
The major mechanisms used by bacteria to resist the
action of antimicrobial agents are inactivation of the
compound, alteration or overproduction of the antibac-
terial target through mutation of the target protein’s
gene, acquisition of a new gene that encodes a drug-
insensitive target, decreased permeability of the cell enve-
lope to the agent, failure to convert an inactive prodrug
to its active derivative, and active efﬂux of the compound
from the periplasm or interior of the cell. Speciﬁc mech-
anisms of bacterial resistance to the major antibacterial
agents are outlined below, summarized in Table 42-1, and
depicted in Fig. 42-1.
β-LACTAM ANTIBIOTICS
Bacteria develop resistance to β-lactam antibiotics by a
variety of mechanisms.The most common is the destruc-
tion of the drug by β-lactamases. The β-lactamases of
gram-negative bacteria are conﬁned to the periplasm
between the inner and outer membranes, whereas the
gram-positive bacteria secrete their β-lactamases into
the surrounding medium.These enzymes have a higher
afﬁnity for the antibiotic than the antibiotic has for its
target. Binding results in hydrolysis of the β-lactam ring.
Genes encoding β-lactamases have been found in both
chromosomal and extrachromosomal locations and in
both gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria; these
genes are often on mobile genetic elements. Many
“advanced-generation” β-lactam antibiotics, such as cef-
triaxone and cefepime, are stable in the presence of plas-
mid-mediated β-lactamases and are active against bacte-
ria resistant to earlier-generation β-lactam antibiotics.
However, extended-spectrum β-lactamases (ESBLs),
either acquired on mobile genetic elements by gram-
negative bacteria (e.g.,
Klebsiella pneumoniae
and
Escherichia coli) or present as stable chromosomal genes
in other gram-negative species (e.g., Enterobacter spp.),
have broad substrate speciﬁcity, hydrolyzing virtually all
penicillins and cephalosporins. One strategy that has
been devised for circumventing resistance mediated by
β-lactamases is to combine the β-lactam agent with an
inhibitor that avidly binds the inactivating enzyme, pre-
venting its attack on the antibiotic. Unfortunately, the
inhibitors (e.g., clavulanic acid, sulbactam, and tazobac-
tam) do not bind all chromosomal β-lactamases (e.g.,
that of Enterobacter spp.) and thus cannot be depended
on to prevent the inactivation of β-lactam antibiotics by
such enzymes. No β-lactam antibiotic or inhibitor has
been produced that can resist all of the many β-lactamases
that have been identiﬁed.
A second mechanism of bacterial resistance to β-lactam
antibiotics is an alteration in PBP targets so that the PBPs
have a markedly reduced afﬁnity for the drug. Although
this alteration may occur by mutation of existing genes,
the acquisition of new PBP genes (as in staphylococcal
resistance to methicillin) or of new pieces of PBP genes
(as in streptococcal, gonococcal, and meningococcal resis-
tance to penicillin) is more important.
A ﬁnal resistance mechanism is the coupling, in
gram-negative bacteria, of a decrease in outer-membrane
permeability with rapid efﬂux of the antibiotic from the
periplasm to the cell exterior. Mutations of genes
encoding outer-membrane protein channels called porins
Disorders Complicating Critical Illnesses and Their Management
440
SECTION V
Treatment and Prophylaxis of Bacterial Infections
441
CHAPTER 42
decrease the entry of β-lactam antibiotics into the cell,
and additional proteins form channels that actively
pump β-lactams out of the cell. Resistance of Enter-
obacteriaceae to some cephalosporins and resistance of
Pseudomonas spp. to cephalosporins and piperacillin are
the best examples of this mechanism.
VANCOMYCIN
Clinically important resistance to vancomycin was 
ﬁrst described among enterococci in France in 1988.
Vancomycin-resistant enterococci (VRE) have subse-
quently become disseminated worldwide. The genes
encoding resistance are carried on plasmids that can
transfer themselves from cell to cell and on transposons
that can jump from plasmids to chromosomes. Resis-
tance is mediated by enzymes that substitute D-lactate
for D-alanine on the peptidoglycan stem peptide so that
there is no longer an appropriate target for vancomycin
binding. This alteration does not appear to affect cell
wall integrity, however. This type of acquired van-
comycin resistance was conﬁned for 14 years to entero-
cocci—more speciﬁcally, to Enterococcus faecium rather
than the more common pathogen E. faecalis. However,
since 2002, S. aureus isolates that are highly resistant to
vancomycin have been recovered from four patients in
the United States. All of the isolates contain vanA, the
gene that mediates vancomycin resistance in entero-
cocci. In addition, since 1996, a few isolates of both 
S. aureus and Staphylococcus epidermidis that display a four-
to eightfold reduction in susceptibility to vancomycin
have been found worldwide, and many more isolates
may contain subpopulations with reduced vancomycin
susceptibility.These isolates have not acquired the genes
that mediate vancomycin resistance in enterococci but
are mutant bacteria with markedly thickened cell walls.
These mutants were apparently selected in patients who
were undergoing prolonged vancomycin therapy. The
failure of vancomycin therapy in some patients infected
with S. aureus or S. epidermidis strains exhibiting only
intermediate susceptibility to this drug is thought to
have resulted from this resistance.
AMINOGLYCOSIDES
The most common aminoglycoside resistance mecha-
nism is inactivation of the antibiotic. Aminoglycoside-
modifying enzymes, usually encoded on plasmids, trans-
fer phosphate, adenyl, or acetyl residues from intracellular
molecules to hydroxyl or amino side groups on the
antibiotic.The modiﬁed antibiotic is less active because
of diminished binding to its ribosomal target. Modifying
enzymes that can inactivate any of the available aminogly-
cosides have been found in both gram-positive and gram-
negative bacteria. A second aminoglycoside resistance
mechanism, which has been identiﬁed predominantly in
clinical isolates of Pseudomonas aeruginosa, is decreased
antibiotic uptake, presumably caused by alterations in
the bacterial outer membrane.
MACROLIDES, KETOLIDES,
LINCOSAMIDES, AND STREPTOGRAMINS
Resistance in gram-positive bacteria, which are the usual
target organisms for macrolides, ketolides, lincosamides,
and streptogramins, can be caused by the production of
an enzyme—most commonly plasmid encoded—that
methylates ribosomal RNA, interfering with binding of
the antibiotics to their target. Methylation mediates resis-
tance to erythromycin, clarithromycin, azithromycin,
clindamycin, and streptogramin B. Resistance to strep-
togramin B converts quinupristin/dalfopristin from a bac-
tericidal to a bacteriostatic antibiotic. Streptococci can
also actively cause the efﬂux of macrolides, and staphylo-
cocci can cause the efﬂux of macrolides, clindamycin, and
streptogramin A. Ketolides such as telithromycin retain
activity against most isolates of Streptococcus pneumoniae
that are resistant to macrolides. In addition, staphylococci
can inactivate streptogramin A by acetylation and strep-
togramin B by either acetylation or hydrolysis. Finally,
mutations in 23S ribosomal RNA that alter the binding
of macrolides to their targets have been found in both
staphylococci and streptococci.
CHLORAMPHENICOL
Most bacteria resistant to chloramphenicol produce a
plasmid-encoded enzyme, chloramphenicol acetyltrans-
ferase that inactivates the compound by acetylation.
TETRACYCLINES AND TIGECYCLINE
The most common mechanism of tetracycline resistance
in gram-negative bacteria is a plasmid-encoded active-
efﬂux pump that is inserted into the cytoplasmic mem-
brane and extrudes antibiotic from the cell. Resistance
in gram-positive bacteria is either caused by active efﬂux
or by ribosomal alterations that diminish binding of the
antibiotic to its target. Genes involved in ribosomal pro-
tection are found on mobile genetic elements. A new
parenteral tetracycline derivative (a glycylcycline), tige-
cycline, is active against tetracycline-resistant bacteria
because it is not removed by efﬂux and can bind to
altered ribosomes.
MUPIROCIN
Although the topical compound mupirocin was intro-
duced into clinical use relatively recently; resistance is
already becoming widespread in some areas.The mecha-
nism appears to be either mutation of the target isoleucine
tRNA synthetase so that it is no longer inhibited by the
antibiotic or plasmid-encoded production of a form of the
target enzyme that binds mupirocin poorly.
TRIMETHOPRIM AND SULFONAMIDES
The most prevalent mechanism of resistance to trimetho-
prim and the sulfonamides in both gram-positive and
gram-negative bacteria is the acquisition of plasmid-
encoded genes that produce a new,drug-insensitive target—
speciﬁcally, an insensitive dihydrofolate reductase for
trimethoprim and an altered dihydropteroate synthetase
for sulfonamides.
QUINOLONES
The most common mechanism of resistance to
quinolones is the development of one or more muta-
tions in target DNA gyrases and topoisomerase IV that
prevent the antibacterial agent from interfering with the
enzymes’ activity. Some gram-negative bacteria develop
mutations that both decrease outer-membrane porin
permeability and cause active drug efﬂux from the cyto-
plasm. Mutations that result in active quinolone efﬂux
are also found in gram-positive bacteria.
RIFAMPIN
Bacteria rapidly become resistant to rifampin by develop-
ing mutations in the B subunit of RNA polymerase that
render the enzyme unable to bind the antibiotic. The
rapid selection of resistant mutants is the major limitation
to the use of this antibiotic against otherwise susceptible
staphylococci and requires that the drug be used in com-
bination with another antistaphylococcal agent.
LINEZOLID
Enterococci, streptococci, and staphylococci become
resistant to linezolid in vitro by mutation of the 23S
rRNA binding site. Clinical isolates of E. faecium and E.
faecalis acquire resistance to linezolid readily by this
mechanism, often during therapy, but linezolid-resistant
staphylococcal and streptococcal isolates are rare.
MULTIPLE ANTIBIOTIC RESISTANCE
The acquisition by one bacterium of resistance to mul-
tiple antibacterial agents is becoming increasingly com-
mon.The two major mechanisms are the acquisition of
multiple unrelated resistance genes and the develop-
ment of mutations in a single gene or gene complex
that mediates resistance to a series of unrelated com-
pounds. The construction of multiresistant strains by
acquisition of multiple genes occurs by sequential steps
of gene transfer and environmental selection in areas of
high-level antimicrobial use. In contrast, mutations in a
single gene can conceivably be selected in a single step.
Bacteria that are multiresistant by virtue of the acquisi-
tion of new genes include hospital-associated strains of
gram-negative bacteria, enterococci, and staphylococci
and community-acquired strains of salmonellae, gono-
cocci, and pneumococci. Mutations that confer resis-
tance to multiple unrelated antimicrobial agents occur
in the genes encoding outer-membrane porins and
efﬂux proteins of gram-negative bacteria. These muta-
tions decrease bacterial intracellular and periplasmic
accumulation of β-lactams, quinolones, tetracyclines,
chloramphenicol, and aminoglycosides. Multiresistant
bacterial isolates pose increasing problems in U.S. hos-
pitals; strains resistant to all available antibacterial
chemotherapy have already been identiﬁed.
PHARMACOKINETICS OF ANTIBIOTICS
The pharmacokinetic proﬁle of an antibacterial agent refers to
concentrations in serum and tissue versus time and reﬂects
the processes of absorption, distribution, metabolism, and
excretion. Important characteristics include peak and
trough serum concentrations and mathematically derived
parameters such as half-life, clearance, and distribution vol-
ume. Pharmacokinetic information is useful for estimating
the appropriate antibacterial dose and frequency of admin-
istration, adjusting dosages in patients with impaired
excretory capacity, and comparing one drug with another.
In contrast, the pharmacodynamic proﬁle of an antibiotic
refers to the relationship between the pharmacokinetics of
the antibiotic and its minimal inhibitory concentrations
(MICs) for bacteria (see “Principles of Antibacterial
Chemotherapy,”later in the chapter).
ABSORPTION
Antibiotic absorption refers to the rate and extent of a
drug’s systemic bioavailability after oral, IM, or IV
administration.
Oral Administration
Most patients with infection are treated with oral antibac-
terial agents in the outpatient setting. Advantages of oral
therapy over parenteral therapy include lower cost, gener-
ally fewer adverse effects (including complications of
indwelling lines), and greater acceptance by patients.The
percentage of an orally administered antibacterial agent
that is absorbed (i.e., its bioavailability) ranges from as little
as 10–20% (erythromycin and penicillin G) to nearly
100% [amoxicillin, clindamycin, metronidazole, doxycy-
cline, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMX),
linezolid, and most ﬂuoroquinolones].These differences
in bioavailability are not clinically important as long as
drug concentrations at the site of infection are sufﬁcient
to inhibit or kill the pathogen. However, therapeutic
Disorders Complicating Critical Illnesses and Their Management
442
SECTION V
Treatment and Prophylaxis of Bacterial Infections
443
CHAPTER 42
efﬁcacy may be compromised when absorption is
reduced as a result of physiologic or pathologic condi-
tions (e.g., the presence of food for some drugs or the
shunting of blood away from the gastrointestinal tract in
patients with hypotension), drug interactions (e.g., that
of quinolones and metal cations), or noncompliance.
The oral route is usually used for patients with rela-
tively mild infections in whom absorption is not
thought to be compromised by the preceding condi-
tions. In addition, the oral route can often be used in
more severely ill patients after they have responded to
parenteral therapy.
Intramuscular Administration
Although the IM route of administration usually results
in 100% bioavailability, it is not as widely used in the
United States as the oral and IV routes, partly because of
the pain often associated with IM injections and the rel-
ative ease of IV access in hospitalized patients. IM injec-
tion may be suitable for speciﬁc indications requiring an
“immediate” and reliable effect (e.g., with long-acting
forms of penicillin, including benzathine and procaine,
and with single doses of ceftriaxone for acute otitis
media or uncomplicated gonococcal infection).
Intravenous Administration
The IV route is appropriate when oral antibacterial
agents are not effective against a particular pathogen,
when bioavailability is uncertain, or when larger doses
are required than are feasible with the oral route.After IV
administration, bioavailability is 100%; serum concentra-
tions are maximal at the end of the infusion. For many
patients in whom long-term antimicrobial therapy is
required and oral therapy is not feasible, outpatient par-
enteral antibiotic therapy (OPAT), including the use of
convenient portable pumps, may be cost effective and
safe.Alternatively, some oral antibacterial drugs (e.g., ﬂu-
oroquinolones) are sufﬁciently active against Enterobac-
teriaceae to provide potency equal to that of parenteral
therapy; oral use of such drugs may allow the patient to
return home from the hospital earlier or to avoid hospi-
talization entirely.
DISTRIBUTION
To be effective, concentrations of an antibacterial agent
must exceed the pathogen’s MIC. Serum antibiotic con-
centrations usually exceed the MIC for susceptible bacte-
ria, but because most infections are extravascular, the
antibiotic must also distribute to the site of the infection.
Concentrations of most antibacterial agents in interstitial
ﬂuid are similar to free-drug concentrations in serum.
However,when the infection is located in a “protected”site
where penetration is poor,such as cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF),
the eye, the prostate, or infected cardiac vegetations, high
parenteral doses or local administration for prolonged
periods may be required for cure. In addition, even though
an antibacterial agent may penetrate to the site of infec-
tion, its activity may be antagonized by factors in the local
environment, such as an unfavorable pH or inactivation by
cellular degradation products. For example, because the
activity of aminoglycosides is reduced at acidic pH, the
acidic environment in many infected tissues may be partly
responsible for the relatively poor efﬁcacy of aminoglyco-
side monotherapy. In addition, the abscess milieu reduces
the penetration and local activity of many antibacterial
compounds, so surgical drainage may be required for cure.
Most bacteria that cause human infections are located
extracellularly. Intracellular pathogens such as Legionella,
Chlamydia, Brucella, and Salmonella spp. may persist or cause
relapse if the antibacterial agent does not enter the cell. In
general, β-lactams, vancomycin, and aminoglycosides pen-
etrate cells poorly, whereas macrolides, ketolides, tetracy-
clines, metronidazole, chloramphenicol, rifampin, TMP-
SMX,and quinolones penetrate cells well.
METABOLISM AND ELIMINATION
Similar to other drugs, antibacterial agents are disposed
of by hepatic elimination (metabolism or biliary elimi-
nation), renal excretion of the unchanged or metabo-
lized form, or a combination of the two processes. For
most of the antibacterial drugs, metabolism leads to loss
of in vitro activity, although some agents, such as cefo-
taxime, rifampin, and clarithromycin, have bioactive
metabolites that may contribute to their overall efﬁcacy.
The most practical application of information on the
mode of excretion of an antibacterial agent is in adjust-
ing the dosage when elimination capability is impaired
(Table 42-3). Direct, non-idiosyncratic toxicity from
antibacterial drugs may result from failure to reduce the
dosage given to patients with impaired elimination. For
agents that are primarily cleared intact by glomerular 
ﬁltration, drug clearance is correlated with creatinine
clearance, and estimates of the latter can be used to
guide dosage. For drugs whose elimination is primarily
hepatic, no simple marker is useful for dosage adjust-
ment in patients with liver disease. However, in patients
with severe hepatic disease, residual metabolic capability
is usually sufﬁcient to preclude accumulation and toxic
effects.
PRINCIPLES OF ANTIBACTERIAL
CHEMOTHERAPY
The choice of an antibacterial compound for a particu-
lar patient and a speciﬁc infection involves more than
just a knowledge of the agent’s pharmacokinetic proﬁle
and in vitro activity. The basic tenets of chemotherapy,
to be elaborated below, include the following: When
appropriate, material containing the infecting organism(s)
should be obtained before the start of treatment so that
presumptive identiﬁcation can be made by microscopic
examination of stained specimens and the organism can
be grown for deﬁnitive identiﬁcation and susceptibility
testing.Awareness of local susceptibility patterns is useful
when the patient is treated empirically. After the organ-
ism has been identiﬁed and its susceptibility to antibac-
terial agents have been determined, the regimen with
the narrowest effective spectrum should be chosen.The
choice of antibacterial agent is guided by the
pharmacokinetic and adverse reaction proﬁle of active
compounds, the site of infection, the immune status of
the host, and evidence of efﬁcacy from well-performed
clinical trials. If all other factors are equal, the least
expensive antibacterial regimen should be chosen.
SUSCEPTIBILITY OF BACTERIA TO
ANTIBACTERIAL DRUGS IN VITRO
Determination of the susceptibility of the patient’s infect-
ing organism to a panel of appropriate antibacterial agents
is an essential ﬁrst step in devising a chemotherapeutic
regimen. Susceptibility testing is designed to estimate the
susceptibility of a bacterial isolate to an antibacterial drug
under standardized conditions. These conditions favor
rapidly growing aerobic or facultative organisms and assess
bacteriostasis only. Specialized testing is required for the
assessment of bactericidal antimicrobial activity; for the
detection of resistance among such fastidious organisms as
obligate anaerobes, Haemophilus spp., and pneumococci;
and for the determination of resistance phenotypes with
variable expression, such as resistance to methicillin or
oxacillin among staphylococci. Antimicrobial susceptibil-
ity testing is important when susceptibility is unpre-
dictable, most often as a result of increasing acquired resis-
tance among bacteria infecting hospitalized patients.
PHARMACODYNAMICS: RELATIONSHIP 
OF PHARMACOKINETICS AND IN VITRO
SUSCEPTIBILITY TO CLINICAL RESPONSE
Bacteria have often been considered susceptible to an
antibacterial drug if the achievable peak serum concen-
tration exceeds the MIC by approximately fourfold.The
breakpoint is the concentration of the antibiotic that sep-
arates susceptible from resistant bacteria (Fig. 42-2).
When a majority of the isolates of a given bacterial
species are inhibited at concentrations below the break-
point, the species is considered to be within the spec-
trum of the antibiotic.
Disorders Complicating Critical Illnesses and Their Management
444
SECTION V
TABLE 42-3
ANTIBACTERIAL DRUG DOSE ADJUSTMENTS IN PATIENTS 
WITH RENAL IMPAIRMENT
ANTIBIOTIC
MAJOR ROUTE
DOSAGE ADJUSTMENT
OF EXCRETION
WITH RENAL IMPAIRMENT
Aminoglycosides
Renal
Yes
Azithromycin
Biliary
No
Cefazolin
Renal
Yes
Cefepime
Renal
Yes
Ceftazidime
Renal
Yes
Ceftriaxone
Renal/biliary
Modest reduction in severe renal
impairment
Ciproﬂoxacin
Renal/biliary
Only in severe renal insufﬁciency
Clarithromycin
Renal/biliary
Only in severe renal nsufﬁciency
Daptomycin
Renal
Yes
Erythromycin
Biliary
Only when given in high IV doses
Levoﬂoxacin
Renal
Yes
Linezolid
Metabolism
No
Metronidazole
Biliary
No
Nafcillin
Biliary
No
Penicillin G
Renal
Yes (when given in high IV doses)
Piperacillin
Renal
Only with Clcr of <40 mL/min
Quinupristin/
Metabolism
No
dalfopristin
Ticarcillin
Renal
Yes
Tigecycline
Biliary
No
TMP-SMX
Renal/biliary
Only in severe renal insufﬁciency
Vancomycin
Renal
Yes
Note: Clcr, creatinine clearance rate; TMP-SMX, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole.
Treatment and Prophylaxis of Bacterial Infections
445
CHAPTER 42
The pharmacodynamic proﬁle of an antibiotic refers
to the quantitative relationships between the time course
of antibiotic concentrations in serum and tissue, in vitro
susceptibility (MIC), and microbial response (inhibition
of growth or rate of killing). Three pharmacodynamic
parameters quantify these relationships: the ratio of the
area under the plasma concentration vs. time curve to
MIC (AUC/MIC), the ratio of the maximal serum con-
centration to the MIC (Cmax/MIC), and the time during
a dosing interval that plasma concentrations exceed the
MIC (t >MIC). The pharmacodynamic proﬁle of an
antibiotic class is characterized as either concentration
dependent (ﬂuoroquinolones, aminoglycosides), such that
an increase in antibiotic concentration leads to a more
rapid rate of bacterial death, or time dependent (β-lactams),
such that the reduction in bacterial density is propor-
tional to the time that concentrations exceed the MIC.
For concentration-dependent antibiotics, the Cmax/MIC
or AUC/MIC ratio correlates best with the reduction in
microbial density in vitro and in animal investigations.
Dosing strategies attempt to maximize these ratios by the
administration of a large dose relative to the MIC for
anticipated pathogens, often at long intervals (relative to
the serum half-life). Once-daily dosing of aminoglyco-
side antibiotics is the most practical consequence of these
relationships. In contrast, dosage strategies for time-
dependent antibiotics emphasize the administration of
doses sufﬁcient to maintain serum concentrations above
the MIC for a critical portion of the dose interval.
Response to β-lactam antibiotics, measured as the
decline in bacterial density at the site of infection, is
maximal when serum and tissue concentrations are
maintained above the MIC for 30–50% of the dose
interval. For example, the use of high-dose amoxicillin
(90–100 mg/kg per day) in the treatment of acute otitis
media increases not only the penetration of amoxicillin
into the inner ear but also the duration of time that con-
centrations exceed the MIC for pneumococci. This
approach provides effective therapy in most patients,
including those whose pneumococcal isolates are peni-
cillin resistant.The clinical implications of these pharma-
codynamic relationships are in the early stages of investi-
gation; their elucidation should eventually result in more
rational antibacterial dosage regimens. Table 42-4 sum-
marizes the pharmacodynamic properties of the major
antibiotic classes.
STATUS OF THE HOST
Various host factors must be considered in the devising
of antibacterial chemotherapy. The host’s antibacterial
immune function is of importance, particularly as it relates
to opsonophagocytic function. Because the major host
defense against acute, overwhelming bacterial infection
is the polymorphonuclear leukocyte, patients with neu-
tropenia must be treated aggressively and empirically
with bactericidal drugs for suspected infection. Likewise,
patients who have deﬁcient humoral immunity (e.g.,
those with chronic lymphocytic leukemia and multiple
myeloma) and individuals with surgical or functional
asplenia (e.g., sickle cell disease) should be treated
empirically for infections with encapsulated organisms,
especially the pneumococcus.
Pregnancy increases the risk of toxicity of certain
antibacterial drugs for the mother (e.g., hepatic toxicity
of tetracycline), affects drug disposition and pharmaco-
kinetics, and—because of the risk of fetal toxicity—
severely limits the choice of agents for treating infec-
tions. Certain antibacterial agents are contraindicated in
5
4
3
2
1
0
Concentration, 
μ
g/mL
0
5
10
15
20
25
Time, h
Organism A
Breakpoint
Organism B
Organism C
FIGURE 42-2
Relationship between pharmacokinetics of an antibiotic
and susceptibility. Organism A is resistant, organism B is
moderately susceptible, and organism C is very susceptible.
Pharmacodynamic indices include the ratio of the peak
serum concentration to minimal inhibitory concentration
(MIC) (Cmax/MIC), the ratio of the area under the serum con-
centration vs. time curve to MIC (AUC/MIC), and the time
that serum concentrations exceed the MIC (t >MIC).
TABLE 42-4
PHARMACODYNAMIC INDICES OF MAJOR
ANTIMICROBIAL CLASSES
PARAMETER
PREDICTING RESPONSE
DRUG OR DRUG CLASS
Time above the MIC
Penicillins, cephalosporins,
carbapenems, aztreonam
24-h AUC/MIC
Aminoglycosides, ﬂuoro
quinolones, tetracyclines,
vancomycin, macrolides,
clindamycin, quinupristin/
dalfopristin, tigecycline, 
daptomycin
Peak to MIC
Aminoglycosides, ﬂuoro
quinolones
Note: AUC, area under the concentration curve; MIC, minimal
inhibitory concentration.
pregnancy either because their safety has not been
established (categories B and C) or because they are
known to be toxic (categories D and X). Table 42-5
summarizes drug safety in pregnancy.
In patients with concomitant viral infections, the inci-
dence of adverse reactions to antibacterial drugs may be
unusually high. For example, persons with infectious
mononucleosis and those infected with HIV experience
skin reactions more often to penicillins and folic acid
synthesis inhibitors such as TMP-SMX, respectively.
In addition, the patient’s age, gender, racial heritage,
genetic background, and excretory status all determine
the incidence and type of side effects that can be
expected with certain antibacterial agents.
SITE OF INFECTION
The location of the infected site may play a major role in
the choice and dose of antimicrobial drug. Patients with
suspected meningitis should receive drugs that can cross
the blood–CSF barrier; in addition, because of the relative
paucity of phagocytes and opsonins at the site of infec-
tion, the agents should be bactericidal. Chloramphenicol,
an older drug that is occasionally useful in the treatment
of meningitis, is bactericidal for common organisms caus-
ing meningitis (i.e., meningococci, pneumococci, and
Haemophilus inﬂuenzae, but not enteric gram-negative
bacilli), is highly lipid soluble, and enters the CSF well.
However, β-lactam drugs, the mainstay of therapy for
most of these infections, do not normally reach high lev-
els in the CSF. Their efﬁcacy is based on the increased
permeability of the blood–brain and blood–CSF barriers
to hydrophilic molecules during inﬂammation and the
extreme susceptibility of most infectious organisms to
even small amounts of β-lactam drug.
The vegetation, which is the major site of infection
in bacterial endocarditis, is also a focus that is protected
from normal host-defense mechanisms. Antibacterial
therapy needs to be bactericidal, with the selected agent
administered parenterally over a long period and at a
dose that produces serum levels at least eight times
higher than the minimal bactericidal concentration
(MBC) for the infecting organism. Likewise, osteomyelitis
involves a site that is resistant to opsonophagocytic
removal of infecting bacteria; furthermore, avascular
bone (sequestrum) represents a foreign body that thwarts
normal host-defense mechanisms. Chronic prostatitis is
exceedingly difﬁcult to cure because most antibiotics do
not penetrate through the capillaries serving the prostate,
especially when acute inﬂammation is absent. Intraocular
infections, especially endophthalmitis, are difﬁcult to treat
because retinal capillaries lacking fenestration hinder
drug penetration into the vitreous from blood. Inﬂam-
mation does little to disrupt this barrier. Thus, direct
injection into the vitreous is necessary in many cases.
Antibiotic penetration into abscesses is usually poor, and
local conditions (e.g., low pH or the presence of enzymes
that hydrolyze the drug) may further antagonize antibac-
terial activity.
In contrast, urinary tract infections (UTIs), when con-
ﬁned to the bladder, are relatively easy to cure, partly
because of the higher concentration of most antibiotics
Disorders Complicating Critical Illnesses and Their Management
446
SECTION V
TABLE 42-5
ANTIBACTERIAL DRUGS IN PREGNANCY
ANTIBACTERIAL DRUG
TOXICITY IN PREGNANCY
RECOMMENDATION
Aminoglycosides
Possible 8th-nerve toxicity
Cautiona
Chloramphenicol
Gray syndrome in newborns
Caution at term
Fluoroquinolones
Arthropathy in immature animals
Caution
Clarithromycin
Teratogenicity in animals
Contraindicated
Ertapenem
Decreased weight in animals
Caution
Erythromycin estolate
Cholestatic hepatitis
Contraindicated
Imipenem/cilastatin
Toxicity in some pregnant animals
Caution
Linezolid
Embryonic and fetal toxicity in rats
Caution
Meropenem
Unknown
Caution
Metronidazole
None known, but carcinogenic in rats
Caution
Nitrofurantoin
Hemolytic anemia in newborns
Caution; contraindicated 
at term
Quinupristin/dalfopristin
Unknown
Caution
Sulfonamides
Hemolysis in newborns with G6PDb
Caution; contraindicated
deﬁciency; kernicterus in newborn
at term
Tetracyclines/tigecycline
Tooth discoloration, inhibition of bone 
Contraindicated
growth in fetuses; hepatotoxicity
Vancomycin
Unknown
Caution
a Use only for strong clinical indication in the absence of a suitable alternative.
b G6PD, glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase
Treatment and Prophylaxis of Bacterial Infections
447
CHAPTER 42
in urine than in blood. Because blood is the usual refer-
ence ﬂuid in deﬁning susceptibility (Fig. 42-2), even
organisms found to be resistant to achievable serum
concentrations may be susceptible to achievable urine
concentrations. For drugs that are used only for the
treatment of UTIs, such as the urinary tract antiseptics
nitrofurantoin and methenamine salts, achievable urine
concentrations are used to determine susceptibility.
Nitrofurantoin is often active against VRE and is a less
expensive alternative to linezolid for the treatment of
lower UTIs.
COMBINATION CHEMOTHERAPY
One of the tenets of antibacterial chemotherapy is that
if the infecting bacterium has been identiﬁed, the most
speciﬁc chemotherapy possible should be used.The use
of a single agent with a narrow spectrum of activity
against the pathogen diminishes the alteration of normal
ﬂora and thus limits the overgrowth of resistant
nosocomial organisms (e.g., Candida albicans, enterococci,
Clostridium difﬁcile, methicillin-resistant staphylococci),
avoids the potential toxicity of multiple-drug regimens,
and reduces the cost. However, certain circumstances call
for the use of more than one antibacterial agent.These are
summarized below.
1. Prevention of the emergence of resistant mutants. Sponta-
neous mutations occur at a detectable frequency in cer-
tain genes encoding the target proteins for some
antibacterial agents.The use of these agents can elimi-
nate the susceptible population, select out resistant
mutants at the site of infection, and result in the failure
of chemotherapy. Resistant mutants are usually selected
when the MIC of the antibacterial agent for the infect-
ing bacterium is close to achievable levels in serum or
tissues or when the site of infection limits the access or
activity of the agent.Among the most common exam-
ples are rifampin for staphylococci, imipenem for
Pseudomonas spp., and ﬂuoroquinolones for staphylo-
cocci and Pseudomonas spp. Small-colony variants of
staphylococci resistant to aminoglycosides also emerge
during monotherapy with these antibiotics. A second
antibacterial agent with a mechanism of action differ-
ent from that of the ﬁrst is added to prevent the emer-
gence of these resistant mutants (e.g., imipenem plus an
aminoglycoside or a ﬂuoroquinolone for systemic
Pseudomonas infections). However, because resistant
mutants have emerged after combination chemother-
apy,this approach clearly is not uniformly successful.
2. Synergistic or additive activity. Synergistic or additive
activity involves a lowering of the MIC or MBC of
each or all of the drugs tested in combination against
a speciﬁc bacterium. In synergy, each agent is more
active when combined with a second drug than it
would be alone, and the drugs’ combined activity is
therefore greater than the sum of the individual
activities of each drug. In an additive relationship, the
combined activity of the drugs is equal to the sum of
their individual activities. Among the best examples
of a synergistic or additive effect, conﬁrmed both in
vitro and by animal studies, are the enhanced bacteri-
cidal activities of certain β-lactam/aminoglycoside
combinations against enterococci, viridans strepto-
cocci, and P. aeruginosa. The synergistic or additive
activity of these combinations has also been demon-
strated against selected isolates of enteric gram-negative
bacteria and staphylococci. The combination of
trimethoprim and sulfamethoxazole has synergistic or
additive activity against many enteric gram-negative
bacteria. Most other antimicrobial combinations dis-
play indifferent activity (i.e., the combination is no
better than the more active of the two agents alone),
and some combinations (e.g., penicillin plus tetracy-
cline against pneumococci) may be antagonistic (i.e.,
the combination is worse than either drug alone).
3. Therapy directed against multiple potential pathogens. For
certain infections, either a mixture of pathogens is sus-
pected or the patient is desperately ill with an as-yet-
unidentiﬁed infection (see Empirical Therapy below).
In these situations, the most important of the likely
infecting bacteria must be covered by therapy until
culture and susceptibility results become available.
Examples of the former infections are intraabdominal
or brain abscesses and infections of the limbs in dia-
betic patients with microvascular disease.The latter sit-
uations include fevers in neutropenic patients, acute
pneumonia from aspiration of oral ﬂora by hospital-
ized patients, and septic shock or sepsis syndrome.
EMPIRICAL THERAPY
In many situations, antibacterial therapy is begun before
a speciﬁc bacterial pathogen has been identiﬁed. The
choice of agent is guided by the results of studies identi-
fying the usual pathogens at that site or in that clinical
setting, by pharmacodynamic considerations, and by the
resistance proﬁle of the expected pathogens in a particu-
lar hospital or geographic area. Situations in which
empirical therapy is appropriate include the following.
1. Life-threatening infection.
Any suspected bacterial
infection in a patient with a life-threatening illness
should be treated presumptively. Therapy is usually
begun with more than one agent and is later tailored
to a speciﬁc pathogen if one is eventually identiﬁed.
Early therapy with an effective antimicrobial regimen
has consistently been demonstrated to improve sur-
vival rates.
2. Treatment of community-acquired infections. In many situa-
tions, it is appropriate to treat non–life-threatening
infections without obtaining cultures. These situations
include outpatient infections such as community-
acquired upper and lower respiratory tract infections,
cystitis, cellulitis or local wound infection, urethritis,
and prostatitis.However,if any of these infections recurs
or fails to respond to initial therapy, every effort should
be made to obtain cultures to guide retreatment.
CHOICE OF ANTIBACTERIAL THERAPY
Infections for which speciﬁc antibacterial agents are
among the drugs of choice are detailed in Table 42-6. No
attempt has been made to include all of the potential situ-
ations in which antibacterial agents may be used. A more
Disorders Complicating Critical Illnesses and Their Management
448
SECTION V
TABLE 42-6
INFECTIONS FOR WHICH SPECIFIC ANTIBACTERIAL AGENTS ARE AMONG THE DRUGS OF CHOICE 
COMMON PATHOGEN(s) 
AGENT
INFECTIONS
(RESISTANCE RATE, %)a
Penicillin G
Syphilis, yaws, leptospirosis, groups A and B 
Neisseria meningitidisb (intermediate,c
streptococcal infections, pneumococcal infections, 
15–30; resistant, 0; geographic variation)
actinomycosis, oral and periodontal infections, 
Viridans streptococci (intermediate,
meningococcal meningitis and meningococcemia, 
15–30; resistant, 5–10)
viridans streptococcal endocarditis, clostridial 
Streptococcus pneumoniae
myonecrosis, tetanus, anthrax, rat-bite fever, 
(intermediate, 23; resistant, 17)
Pasteurella multocida infections, and erysipeloid 
(Erysipelothrix rhusiopathiae)
Ampicillin, amoxicillin
Salmonellosis, acute otitis media, Haemophilus 
Escherichia coli (37)
inﬂuenzae meningitis and epiglottitis, Listeria 
H. inﬂuenzae (35)
monocytogenes meningitis, Enterococcus 
Salmonella spp.b (30–50; geographic 
faecalis UTI
variation)
Enterococcus spp. (24)
Nafcillin, oxacillin
Staphylococcus aureus (non-MRSA) bacteremia 
S. aureus (46; MRSA)
and endocarditis
Staphylococcus epidermidis (78; MRSE)
Piperacillin plus 
Intraabdominal infections (facultative enteric 
P. aeruginosa (6)
tazobactam
gram-negative bacilli plus obligate anaerobes);
infections caused by mixed ﬂora (aspiration
pneumonia, diabetic foot ulcers); infections caused
by Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Cefazolin
E. coli UTI, surgical prophylaxis, S. aureus
E. coli (7)
(non-MRSA) bacteremia and endocarditis
S. aureus (46; MRSA)
Cefoxitin, cefotetan
Intraabdominal infections and pelvic 
Bacteroides fragilis (12)
inﬂammatory disease
Ceftriaxone
Gonococcal infections, pneumococcal meningitis, 
S. pneumoniae (intermediate,
viridans streptococcal endocarditis, salmonellosis 
16; resistant, 0)
and typhoid fever, hospital-acquired infections 
E. coli and Klebsiella pneumoniae
caused by nonpseudomonal facultative 
(1; ESBL producers)
gram-negative enteric bacilli
Ceftazidime, cefepime
Hospital-acquired infections caused by facultative 
P. aeruginosa (16)
gram-negative enteric bacilli and Pseudomonas spp.
(See ceftriaxone for ESBL producers)
Imipenem, meropenem
Intraabdominal infections, hospital-acquired 
P. aeruginosa (6)
infections (non-MRSA), infections caused by 
Acinetobacter spp. (35)
Enterobacter spp. and ESBL-producing 
gram-negative bacilli
Aztreonam
Hospital-acquired infections caused by facultative 
P. aeruginosa (16)
gram-negative bacilli and Pseudomonas spp. in 
penicillin-allergic patients
Vancomycin
Bacteremia, endocarditis, and other serious 
Enterococcus spp. (24)
infections  caused by MRSA infect6ion; 
pneumococcal meningitis; antibiotic-associated 
pseudomembranous colitisd
Daptomycin
VRE infections; MRSA bacteremia
UNK 
Gentamicin, 
Combined with a penicillin for staphylococcal,
Gentamicin: E. coli (6)
amikacin, tobramycin
enterococcal, or viridans streptococcal  
P. aeruginosa (17)
endocarditis; combined with a β-lactam antibiotic 
Acinetobacter spp. (32)
for gram-negative bacteremia; pyelonephritis
Erythromycin, 
Legionella, Campylobacter, and Mycoplasma
S. pneumoniae (28)
clarithromycin, 
infections; CAP; group A streptococcal pharyngitis 
Streptococcus pyogenesb
azithromycin
in penicillin-allergic patients; bacillary angiomatosis 
(0–10; geographic variation)
(Bartonella henselae); gastric infections caused by 
H. pylorib (2–20; geographic variation)
Helicobacter pylori infection; Mycobacterium
avium-intracellulare infections
Treatment and Prophylaxis of Bacterial Infections
449
CHAPTER 42
TABLE 42-6 (CONTINUED)
INFECTIONS FOR WHICH SPECIFIC ANTIBACTERIAL AGENTS ARE AMONG THE DRUGS OF CHOICE 
COMMON PATHOGEN(S) 
AGENT
INFECTIONS
(RESISTANCE RATE, %)a
Clindamycin
Severe, invasive group A streptococcal infections; 
S. aureus (nosocomial, 58; 
infections caused by obligate anaerobes; infections 
CA-MRSA, 10b)
caused by susceptible staphylococci
Doxycycline, 
Acute bacterial exacerbations of chronic bronchitis, 
S. pneumoniae (17)
minocycline
granuloma inguinale, brucellosis (with streptomycin), 
MRSA (5)
tularemia, glanders, melioidosis, spirochetal 
infections caused by Borrelia spp. Infection 
(Lyme disease and relapsing fever; doxycycline), 
infections caused by Vibrio vulniﬁcus, some 
Aeromonas infections, infections caused by 
Stenotrophomonas (minocycline), plague, 
ehrlichiosis, chlamydial infections (doxycycline), 
granulomatous skin infections caused by 
Mycobacterium marinum infection (minocycline), 
rickettsial infections, mild CAP, skin and soft  
infections caused by gram-positive cocci tissue
(CA-MRSA infections, leptospirosis, syphilis, 
actinomycosis in penicillin-allergic
patients)
Trimethoprim-
Community-acquired UTI; S. aureus skin and 
E. coli (19)
sulfamethoxazole
soft tissue infections (CA-MRSA)
MRSA (3)
Sulfonamides
Nocardial infections, leprosy (dapsone, a sulfone), 
UNK
and toxoplasmosis (sulfadiazine)
Ciproﬂoxacin, 
CAP (levoﬂoxacin and moxiﬂoxacin); UTI; bacterial 
S. pneumoniae (1)
levoﬂoxacin, 
gastroenteritis; hospital-acquired gram-negative 
E. coli (13)
moxiﬂoxacin
enteric infections; Pseudomonas infections
P. aeruginosa (23)
(ciproﬂoxacin and levoﬂoxacin)
Salmonella spp. (10–50; geographic 
variation)
Neisseria gonorrhoeaeb (0–5, non–West 
Coast U.S.; 10–15, California and 
Hawaii; 20–70, Asia, England,
Wales)
Rifampin
Staphylococcal foreign body infections, 
Staphylococci rapidly develop 
in combination with other antistaphylococcal  
resistance during rifampin 
agents; Legionella pneumonia
monotherapy.
Metronidazole
Obligate anaerobic gram-negative bacteria 
UNK
(Bacteroides spp.): abscess in the lung, brain, 
or abdomen; bacterial vaginosis; antibiotic-
associated Clostridium difﬁcile disease
Linezolid
VRE; staphylococcal skin and soft tissue 
UNK
infection (CA-MRSA)
Polymyxin E (colistin)
Hospital-acquired infection caused by 
UNK
gram-negative bacilli resistant to all other 
chemotherapy: P. aeruginosa, Acinetobacter spp.,
Stenotrophomonas maltophilia
Quinupristin/
VRE
Vancomycin-resistant E. faecalisb (100)
dalfopristin
Vancomycin-resistant E. faecium (10)
Mupirocin
Topical application to nares to eradicate 
UNK
S. aureus carriage
a Unless otherwise noted, resistance rates are based on all isolates tested in 2005 in the clinical microbiology laboratory at Virginia Commonwealth Uni-
versity Medical Center. The rates are consistent with those reported by the National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance System (Am J Infect Control
32:470, 2004).
b Data from recent literature sources.
c Intermediate resistance.
d Drug is given orally for this indication.
Note: CA-MRSA, community-acquired methicillin-resistant S. aureus; CAP, community-acquired pneumonia; ESBL, extended-spectrum β-lactamase;
MRSA, methicillin-resistant S. aureus; MRSE, methicillin-resistant S. epidermidis; UTI, urinary tract infection; VRE, vancomycin-resistant enterococci;
UNK, resistance rates unknown.
Disorders Complicating Critical Illnesses and Their Management
450
SECTION V
detailed discussion of speciﬁc bacteria and infections that
they cause can be found elsewhere in this volume.
The choice of antibacterial therapy increasingly
involves an assessment of the acquired resistance of major
microbial pathogens to the antimicrobial agents available
to treat them. Resistance rates are dynamic (Table 42-6),
both increasing and decreasing in response to the envi-
ronmental pressure applied by antimicrobial use. For
example, a threefold increase in ﬂuoroquinolone use in
the community between 1995 and 2002 was associated
with increasing rates of quinolone resistance in commu-
nity-acquired strains of S. pneumoniae, E. coli, Neisseria gon-
orrhoeae, and K. pneumoniae. Fluoroquinolone resistance
has also emerged rapidly among nosocomial isolates of S.
aureus and Pseudomonas spp. as hospital use of this drug
class has increased. In contrast, staphylococcal resistance to
tetracyclines has decreased as the use of these antibiotics
has declined. It is important to note that, in many cases,
wide variations in worldwide antimicrobial-resistance
trends may not be reﬂected in the values recorded at U.S.
hospitals (e.g., for ﬂuoroquinolone resistance in N. gonor-
rhoeae).Therefore, the most important factor in choosing
initial therapy for an infection in which the susceptibility
of the speciﬁc pathogen(s) is not known is information
on local resistance rates.This information can be obtained
from local clinical microbiology laboratories, state health
departments, or publications of the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention (e.g., Emerging Infectious Diseases
and Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report).
ADVERSE REACTIONS
Adverse drug reactions are frequently classiﬁed by mecha-
nism as either dose related (“toxic”) or unpredictable. Unpre-
dictable reactions are either idiosyncratic or allergic.
Dose-related reactions include aminoglycoside-induced
nephrotoxicity,
linezolid-induced 
thrombocytopenia,
penicillin-induced seizures,
and vancomycin-induced
anaphylactoid reactions. Many of these reactions can be
avoided by reducing the dosage in patients with impaired
renal function, limiting the duration of therapy, or reduc-
ing the rate of administration. Adverse reactions to
antibacterial agents are a common cause of morbidity,
requiring alteration in therapy and additional expense,
and they occasionally result in death. Elderly patients,
often those with the more severe infections, may be espe-
cially prone to certain adverse reactions.The most clini-
cally relevant adverse reactions to common antibacterial
drugs are listed in Table 42-7.
DRUG INTERACTIONS
Antimicrobial drugs are a common cause of drug–drug
interactions. Table 42-8 lists the most common and
best-documented interactions of antibacterial agents
with other drugs and characterizes the clinical relevance
of these interactions. Coadministration of drugs paired
in the tables does not necessarily result in clinically
important adverse consequences. Recognition of the
potential for an interaction before the administration of
an antibacterial agent is crucial to the rational use of
these drugs because adverse consequences can often be
prevented if the interaction is anticipated. Table 42-8 is
intended only to heighten awareness of the potential for
an interaction.Additional sources should be consulted to
identify appropriate options.
MACROLIDES AND KETOLIDES
Erythromycin, clarithromycin, and telithromycin inhibit
CYP3A4, the hepatic P450 enzyme that metabolizes
many drugs, including cyclosporine, certain statins (lovas-
tatin, simvastatin), theophylline, carbamazepine, warfarin,
certain antineoplastic agents (e.g., vincristine, irinotecan),
and ergot alkaloids. In ~10% of patients receiving digoxin,
concentrations increase signiﬁcantly when erythromycin
or telithromycin is coadministered, and this increase may
lead to digoxin toxicity. Azithromycin has little effect on
the metabolism of other drugs.
Many drugs (e.g., azole antifungal drugs, diltiazem,
verapamil, and nefazodone) can also increase absorp-
tion or inhibit erythromycin metabolism.These effects
are associated with prolongation of the QT interval
and a fivefold increase in mortality rate. This example
serves as a reminder that the true significance of
drug–drug interactions may be subtle yet profound and
that close attention to the evolving safety literature is
important.
QUINUPRISTIN/DALFOPRISTIN
Quinupristin/dalfopristin is an inhibitor of CYP3A4. Its
interactions with other drugs should be similar to those
of erythromycin.
LINEZOLID
Linezolid is a monoamine oxidase inhibitor. Its con-
comitant administration with sympathomimetics (e.g.,
phenylpropanolamine) and with foods with high con-
centrations of tyramine should be avoided. Many case
reports describe serotonin syndrome after coadministra-
tion of linezolid with selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitors.
TETRACYCLINES
The most important interaction involving tetracyclines is
reduced absorption when these drugs are coadministered
with divalent and trivalent cations, such as antacids, iron
compounds, or dairy products. Food also adversely affects
Treatment and Prophylaxis of Bacterial Infections
451
CHAPTER 42
TABLE 42-7
MOST CLINICALLY RELEVANT ADVERSE REACTIONS TO COMMON ANTIBACTERIAL DRUGS
DRUG
ADVERSE EVENT
COMMENTS
β-Lactams
Allergies in ∼1–4% of treatment courses
Cephalosporins cause allergy in 2–4% of 
penicillin-allergic patients. Aztreonam is safe 
in β-lactam–allergic patients.
Nonallergic skin reactions
Ampicillin “rash” is common among patients 
with Epstein-Barr virus infection.
Diarrhea, including Clostridium difﬁcile colitis 
—
Vancomycin
Anaphylactoid reaction (“red man syndrome”)
Give as a 1- to 2-h infusion.
Nephrotoxicity, ototoxicity, allergy, neutropenia
Rare
Aminoglycosides
Nephrotoxicity (generally reversible)
Greatest with prolonged therapy in the elderly 
or with preexisting renal insufﬁciency. Monitor 
serum creatinine every 2–3 days. 
Ototoxicity (often irreversible) 
Risk factors similar to those for nephrotoxicity; 
both vestibular and hearing toxicities
Macrolides/ketolides
GI distress
Most common with erythromycin
Ototoxicity
High-dose IV erythromycin 
Cardiac toxicity
QTc prolongation and torsades de pointes, 
especially when inhibitors of erythromycin 
metabolism are given simultaneously 
Hepatic toxicity (telithromycin)
Warning added to prescribing information 
(July 2006)
Respiratory failure in patients with myasthenia 
Warning added to prescribing information 
gravis (telithromycin)
(July 2006)
Clindamycin
Diarrhea, including C. difﬁcile colitis
—
Sulfonamides
Allergic reactions
Rashes (more common in HIV-infected 
patients); serious dermal reactions, including 
erythema multiforme, Stevens-Johnson 
syndrome, toxic epidermal necrolysis
Hematologic reactions
Uncommon; include agranulocytosis and 
granulocytopenia (more common in 
HIV-infected patients), hemolytic and 
megaloblastic anemia, thrombocytopenia
Renal insufﬁciency
Crystalluria with sulfadiazine therapy
Fluoroquinolones
Diarrhea, including C. difﬁcile colitis
—
Contraindicated for general use in patients 
Appear safe in treatment of pulmonary 
<18 years old and pregnant women
infections in children with cystic ﬁbrosis
CNS adverse effects (e.g., insomnia)
—
Miscellaneous: allergies, tendon rupture, 
Rare
dysglycemias, QTc prolongation
Rifampin
Hepatotoxicity
Rare
Orange discoloration of urine and body ﬂuids
Common
Miscellaneous: ﬂulike symptoms, hemolysis, 
Uncommon; usually related to intermittent 
renal insufﬁciency 
administration
Metronidazole
Metallic taste
Common
Tetracyclines/
GI distress
≤20% with tigecycline
glycylcyclines
Esophageal ulceration
Doxycycline (take in A.M. with ﬂuids)
Linezolid
Myelosuppression
Follows long-term treatment
Ocular and peripheral neuritis
Follow long-term treatment
Daptomycin
Distal muscle pain or weakness
Weekly creatine phosphokinase 
measurements, especially in patients also 
receiving statins
Note: CNS, central nervous system; GI, gastrointestinal.
absorption of most tetracyclines. Inducers of hepatic
isoenzymes, such as phenytoin and rifampin, increase the
clearance of doxycycline; although the clinical signiﬁ-
cance of this effect is unknown, use of an alternative
antibiotic may be appropriate.
SULFONAMIDES
Sulfonamides,
including TMP-SMX,
increase the
hypoprothrombinemic effect of warfarin by inhibition
of its metabolism or by protein-binding displacement.
FLUOROQUINOLONES
There are two clinically important drug interactions
involving ﬂuoroquinolones. First, similar to tetracyclines,
all ﬂuoroquinolones are chelated by divalent and triva-
lent cations, with a consequential signiﬁcant reduction
in absorption. Second, ciproﬂoxacin inhibits the hepatic
enzyme that metabolizes theophylline. Scattered case
reports suggest that quinolones can also potentiate the
effects of warfarin, but this effect has not been observed
in most controlled trials.
RIFAMPIN
Rifampin is an excellent inducer of many cytochrome
P450 enzymes and increases the hepatic clearance of a
large number of drugs, including the following (with the
indicated 
predictable 
outcomes):
HIV-1 
protease
inhibitors (loss of viral suppression), oral contraceptives
(pregnancy), warfarin (decreased prothrombin times),
cyclosporine and prednisone (organ rejection or exacer-
bations of any underlying inﬂammatory condition), and
verapamil and diltiazem (increased dosage requirements).
Disorders Complicating Critical Illnesses and Their Management
452
SECTION V
TABLE 42-8
INTERACTIONS OF ANTIBACTERIAL AGENTS WITH OTHER DRUGS
POTENTIAL CONSEQUENCE
ANTIBIOTIC
INTERACTS WITH
(CLINICAL SIGNIFICANCEa)
Erythromycin/
Theophylline
Theophylline toxicity (1)
clarithromycin/telithromycin
Carbamazepine
CNS depression (1)
Digoxin
Digoxin toxicity (2)
Triazolam/midazolam
CNS depression (2)
Ergotamine
Ergotism (1)
Warfarin
Bleeding (2)
Cyclosporine/tacrolimus
Nephrotoxicity (1)
Cisapride
Cardiac arrhythmias (1)
Statinsb
Rhabdomyolysis (2)
Valproate
Valproate toxicity (2)
Vincristine/vinblastine
Excess neurotoxicity (2)
Quinupristin/dalfopristin
Similar to erythromycinc
Fluoroquinolones
Theophylline
Theophylline toxicity (2)d
Antacids/sucralfate/iron
Subtherapeutic antibiotic levels (1)
Tetracycline
Antacids/sucralfate/iron
Subtherapeutic antibiotic levels (1)
Trimethoprim-
Phenytoin
Phenytoin toxicity (2)
sulfamethoxazole
Oral hypoglycemics
Hypoglycemia (2)
Warfarin
Bleeding (1)
Digoxin
Digoxin toxicity (2)
Metronidazole
Ethanol
Disulﬁram-like reactions (2)
Fluorouracil
Bone marrow suppression (1)
Warfarin
Bleeding (2)
Rifampin
Warfarin
Clot formation (1)
Oral contraceptives
Pregnancy (1)
Cyclosporine/tacrolimus
Rejection (1)
HIV-1 protease inhibitors
Increased viral load, resistance (1)
Nonnucleoside reverse-transcriptase 
Increased viral load, resistance (1)
inhibitors
Glucocorticoids
Loss of steroid effect (1)
Methadone
Narcotic withdrawal symptoms (1)
Digoxin
Subtherapeutic digoxin levels (1)
Itraconazole
Subtherapeutic itraconazole levels (1)
Phenytoin
Loss of seizure control (1)
Statins
Hypercholesterolemia (1)
Diltiazem
Subtherapeutic diltiazem levels (1)
Verapamil
Subtherapeutic verapamil levels (1)
a1 = a well-documented interaction with clinically important consequences; 2 = an interaction of uncertain frequency but of potential clinical
importance.
bLovastatin and simvastatin are most affected; pravastatin and atorvastatin are less prone to clinically important effects.
cThe macrolide antibiotics and quinupristin/dalfopristin inhibit the same human metabolic enzyme, CYP3A4, and similar interactions are 
anticipated.
dCiproﬂoxacin only. Levoﬂoxacin and moxiﬂoxacin do not inhibit theophylline metabolism.
Note: New interactions are commonly reported after marketing. Consult the most recent prescribing information for updates.
CNS, central nervous system.
Treatment and Prophylaxis of Bacterial Infections
453
CHAPTER 42
Before rifampin is prescribed for any patient, a review of
concomitant drug therapy is essential.
METRONIDAZOLE
Metronidazole can cause a disulﬁram-like syndrome
when alcohol is ingested.Thus, patients taking metron-
idazole should be instructed to avoid alcohol. Inhibition
of the metabolism of warfarin by metronidazole leads to
signiﬁcant increases in prothrombin times.
PROPHYLAXIS OF BACTERIAL
INFECTIONS
Antibacterial agents are occasionally indicated for use in
patients who have no evidence of infection but who
have been or are expected to be exposed to bacterial
pathogens under circumstances that constitute a major
risk of infection. The basic tenets of antimicrobial pro-
phylaxis are as follows. (1) The risk or potential severity
of infection should outweigh the risk of side effects
from the antibacterial agent. (2) The antibacterial agent
should be given for the shortest period necessary to pre-
vent target infections. (3) The antibacterial agent should
be given before the expected period of risk (e.g., within
1 h of incision before elective surgery) or as soon as
possible after contact with an infected individual (e.g.,
prophylaxis for meningococcal meningitis).
Table 42-9 lists the major indications for antibacter-
ial prophylaxis in adults. The table includes only those
indications that are widely accepted, supported by well-
designed studies, or recommended by expert panels.
Prophylaxis is also used but is less widely accepted for
recurrent cellulitis in conjunction with lymphedema,
TABLE 42-9
PROPHYLAXIS OF BACTERIAL INFECTIONS IN ADULTS
CONDITION
ANTIBACTERIAL AGENT
TIMING OR DURATION OF PROPHYLAXIS
Nonsurgical
Cardiac lesions susceptible
Amoxicillina
Before and after procedures causing 
to bacterial endocarditis
bacteremia
Recurrent Staphylococcus
Mupirocin
5 days (intranasal)
aureus infections
Contact with patient with
Rifampin
2 days
meningococcal meningitis
Fluoroquinolone
Single dose
Bite woundsb
Penicillin V or amoxicillin/
3–5 days
clavulanic acid
Recurrent cystitis
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole or 
3 times per week for ≤1 year or after
a ﬂuoroquinolone or nitrofurantoin
sexual intercourse
Surgical
Clean (cardiac, vascular, neurologic,
Cefazolin (vancomycin)c
Before and during procedure
or orthopedic surgery)
Ocular
Topical combinations and 
During and at end of procedure
subconjunctival cefazolin
Clean-contaminated (head and neck,
Cefazolin (or clindamycin for 
Before and during procedure
high-risk gastroduodenal or biliary 
head and neck)
tract surgery; high-risk cesarean 
section; hysterectomy)
Clean-contaminated (vaginal or 
Cefazolin or cefoxitin or cefotetan
Before and during procedure
abdominal hysterectomy)
Clean-contaminated (high-risk 
Fluoroquinolone
Before and during procedure
genitourinary surgery)
Clean-contaminated (colorectal 
Cefoxitin or cefotetan (add oral 
Before and during procedure
surgery or appendectomy)
neomycin + erythromycin for
colorectal)
Dirtyb (ruptured viscus)
Cefoxitin or cefotetan ± gentamicin,
Before and for 3–5 days after procedure
clindamycin + gentamicin, or another
appropriate regimen directed at 
anaerobes and gram-negative 
aerobes
Dirtyb (traumatic wound)
Cefazolin
Before and for 3–5 days after trauma
a Gentamicin should be added to the amoxicillin regimen for high-risk gastrointestinal and genitourinary procedures; vancomycin should be used
in penicillin-allergic patients.
b In these cases, use of antibacterial agents actually constitutes treatment of infection rather than prophylaxis.
c Vancomycin is recommended only in institutions that have a high incidence of infection with methicillin-resistant staphylococci.
recurrent pneumococcal meningitis in conjunction
with deﬁciencies in humoral immunity or CSF leaks,
traveler’s diarrhea, gram-negative sepsis in conjunction
with neutropenia, and spontaneous bacterial peritonitis
in conjunction with ascites. The use of antibacterial
agents in children to prevent rheumatic fever and otitis
media under certain circumstances is also common
practice.
The major use of antibacterial prophylaxis is to prevent
infections after surgical procedures. Antibacterial agents
are administered just before the surgical procedure—and,
for long operations, during the procedure as well—to
ensure high drug concentrations in serum and tissues dur-
ing surgery.The objective is to eradicate bacteria originat-
ing from the air of the operating suite, the skin of the sur-
gical team, and the patient’s own ﬂora that may
contaminate the wound. In all but colorectal surgical pro-
cedures, prophylaxis is predominantly directed against
staphylococci, and cefazolin is the most commonly rec-
ommended drug. Prophylaxis is intended to prevent
wound infection or infection of implanted devices, not all
infections that may occur during the postoperative period
(e.g., UTIs or pneumonia). Prolonged prophylaxis (>24 h)
merely alters the normal ﬂora and favors infections with
organisms resistant to the antibacterial agents used. A
focus on appropriate surgical prophylaxis by the Centers
for Medicare and Medicaid Services, coupled with
national efforts by surgical societies, appears to be having
a favorable impact on the appropriate use of antimicrobial
drugs in the surgical setting, although additional improve-
ments are needed.
DURATION OF THERAPY AND
TREATMENT FAILURE
Until recently, there was little incentive to establish the
most appropriate duration of treatment; patients were
instructed to take a 7- or 10-day course of treatment for
most common infections.A number of recent investiga-
tions have evaluated shorter durations of therapy, espe-
cially in patients with community-acquired pneumonia.
Table 42-10 lists common bacterial infections for
which treatment duration guidelines have been estab-
lished or for which there is sufﬁcient clinical experience
to establish treatment durations. The ultimate test of
cure for a bacterial infection is the absence of relapse
when therapy is discontinued. Relapse is deﬁned as a
recurrence of infection with the identical organism that
caused the ﬁrst infection. In general, therefore, the dura-
tion of therapy should be long enough to prevent
relapse yet not be excessive. Extension of therapy
beyond the limit of effectiveness may increase the med-
ication’s side effects and encourage the selection of resis-
tant bacteria.The art of treating bacterial infections lies
in the ability to determine the appropriate duration of
therapy for infections that are not covered by established
guidelines. Retreatment of infections for which therapy
has failed usually requires a prolonged course (>4 weeks)
with combinations of antibacterial agents.
MECHANISMS TO OPTIMIZE
ANTIMICROBIAL USE
Antibiotic use is often not “rational,” and it is easy to
understand why. The diagnosis of bacterial infection is
often uncertain, and patients may expect or demand
antimicrobial agents in this tenuous situation.There is a
bewildering array of drugs, each with claims of superi-
ority over the competition. The rates of resistance for
many bacterial pathogens are ever-changing, and even
experts may not agree on the clinical signiﬁcance of
resistance in some pathogens. Investigations consistently
report that ~50% of antibiotic use is in some way “inap-
propriate.” Aside from the monetary cost of using
unnecessary or overly expensive antibiotics, there are the
Disorders Complicating Critical Illnesses and Their Management
454
SECTION V
TABLE 42-10
DURATION OF THERAPY FOR BACTERIAL
INFECTIONS
DURATION
OF THERAPY
INFECTIONS
Single dose
Gonococcal urethritis, streptococcal
pharyngitis (penicillin G benzathine),
primary and secondary syphilis 
(penicillin G benzathine)
3 days
Cystitis in young women, community-
or travel-acquired diarrhea
3–10 days
Community-acquired pneumonia 
(3–5 days), community-acquired
meningitis (pneumococcal or
meningococcal), antibiotic-associated
diarrhea (10 days), Giardia enteritis,
cellulitis, epididymitis
2 weeks
Helicobacter pylori–associated peptic
ulcer, neurosyphilis (penicillin IV),
penicillin-susceptible viridans strep
tococcal endocarditis (penicillin plus
aminoglycoside), disseminated gono
coccal infection with arthritis, acute
pyelonephritis, uncomplicated 
Staphylococcus aureus catheter-
associated bacteremia
3 weeks
Lyme disease, septic arthritis 
(nongonococcal)
4 weeks
Acute and chronic prostatitis, infective
endocarditis (penicillin-resistant
streptococcal)
>4 weeks
Acute and chronic osteomyelitis,
S. aureus endocarditis, foreign-body
infections (prosthetic valve and joint
infections), relapsing pseudomem-
branous colitis
more serious costs associated with excess morbidity
from superinfections such as Clostridium difﬁcile disease,
adverse drug reactions, drug interactions, and selection
of resistant organisms. Although these costs are not yet
well quantiﬁed, they add substantially to the overall costs
of medical care.
At a time when fewer new antimicrobial drugs are
entering the worldwide market than in the past, much
has been written about the continued increase in rates of
resistant microorganisms and its causes. The message
seems clear: the use of existing and new antimicrobial
agents must be more judicious and infection control
more effective if we are to slow or reverse trends in resis-
tance. The phrase antimicrobial stewardship is used to
describe the new attitude toward antibacterial agents that
must be adopted to preserve their usefulness.Appropriate
stewardship requires that these drugs be used only when
necessary, at the most appropriate dosage, and for the
most appropriate duration. Increasing attention is being
given to the relationships between differences in antibi-
otic consumption and differences in rates of resistance in
different countries. Although some newer antibacterial
drugs undeniably represent important advances in ther-
apy, many offer no advantage over older, less expensive
agents. With rare exceptions, newer drugs are usually
found to be no more effective than the comparison
antibiotic in controlled trials despite the “high prevalence
of resistance” often touted to market the advantage of
the new antibiotic over older therapies.
The following suggestions are intended to provide
guidance through the antibiotic maze. First, objective
evaluation of the merits of newer and older drugs is
available. Online references such as the Johns Hopkins
website (hopkins-abxguide.org) offer current and practi-
cal information regarding antimicrobial drugs and treat-
ment regimens. Evidence-based practice guidelines for
most infections are available from the Infectious Diseases
Society of America (www.idsociety.org). Second, clini-
cians should become comfortable using a few drugs rec-
ommended by independent experts and professional
organizations and should resist the temptation to use a
new drug unless the merits are clear.A new antibacterial
agent with a “broader spectrum and greater potency” or
a “higher serum concentration-to-MIC ratio” will not
necessarily be more clinically efﬁcacious.Third, clinicians
should become familiar with local bacterial susceptibility
proﬁles. It may not be necessary to use a new drug with
“improved activity against P. aeruginosa” if that pathogen
is rarely encountered or if it retains full susceptibility to
older drugs. Fourth, a skeptical attitude toward manufac-
turers’ claims is still appropriate. For example, increasing
rates of penicillin resistance in S. pneumoniae have been
used to promote the use of broader-spectrum drugs,
notably the ﬂuoroquinolones. However, except in
patients with meningitis, amoxicillin is still effective for
infections caused by these “penicillin-resistant” strains.
Finally, with regard to inpatient treatment with antibac-
terial drugs, a number of efforts to improve use are under
study.The strategy of antibiotic “cycling” or rotation has
not proved effective, but other strategies, such as hetero-
geneity or diversity of antibiotic use, may hold promise.
Adoption of other evidence-based strategies to improve
antimicrobial use may be the best way to retain the util-
ity of existing compounds. For example, appropriate
empirical treatment of a seriously ill patient with one or
more broad-spectrum agents is important for improving
survival rates, but therapy may often be simpliﬁed by
switching to a narrower-spectrum agent or even an oral
drug after the results of cultures and susceptibility tests
become available. Although there is an understandable
temptation not to alter effective therapy, switching to a
more speciﬁc agent after the patient’s clinical condition
has improved does not compromise outcome. A promis-
ing and active area of research includes the use of shorter
courses of antimicrobial therapy. Many antibiotics that
once were given for 7–10 days can be given for 3–5 days
with no loss of efﬁcacy and no increase in relapse rates
(Table 42-10). Adoption of new guidelines for shorter-
course therapy will not undermine the care of patients,
many unnecessary complications and expenses will be
avoided, and the useful life of these valuable drugs will
perhaps be extended.
FURTHER READINGS
BARTLETT JG, PERL TM:The new Clostridium difﬁcile—What does it
mean? N Engl J Med 353:2503, 2005
COSGROVE SE, CARMELI Y: The impact of antimicrobial resistance
on health and economic outcomes. Clin Infect Dis 36:1433,
2003
FISHMAN N:Antimicrobial stewardship.Am J Med 119:S53, 2006
GRUCHALLA RS, PIRMOHAMED M: Antibiotic allergy. N Engl J Med
354:601, 2006
JACOBY GA, MUNOZ-PRICE LS: The new β-lactamases. N Engl J
Med 352:380, 2005
KOLLEF M:Appropriate empirical antibacterial therapy for nosocomial
infections: Getting it right the ﬁrst time. Drugs 63:2157, 2003
NAHUM GG et al:Antibiotic use in pregnancy and lactation:What is
and is not known about teratogenic and toxic risks. Obstet
Gynecol 107:1120, 2006
PETERSON LR: Penicillins for treatment of pneumococcal pneumo-
nia: Does in vitro resistance really matter? Clin Infect Dis
42:224, 2006
POLK HC JR: Continuing reﬁnements in surgical antibiotic prophy-
laxis.Arch Surg 140:1066, 2005
RAY WA et al: Oral erythromycin and the risk of sudden death from
cardiac causes. N Engl J Med 351:1089, 2004
Treatment and Prophylaxis of Bacterial Infections
455
CHAPTER 42
Lindsey R. Baden
I
Raphael Dolin
The ﬁeld of antiviral therapy—both the number of
antiviral drugs and our understanding of their optimal
use—continues to lag behind the ﬁeld of antibacterial
drug treatment, in which >70 years of experience has now
been accumulated, but signiﬁcant progress has been made
in recent years on new drugs for several viral infections.
The development of antiviral drugs poses several
challenges.Viruses replicate intracellularly and often use
host cell enzymes, macromolecules, and organelles for
synthesis of viral particles. Therefore, useful antiviral
compounds must discriminate between host and viral
functions with a high degree of speciﬁcity; agents without
such selectivity are likely to be too toxic for clinical use.
The development of laboratory assays to assist clini-
cians in the appropriate use of antiviral drugs is also in
its early stages. Phenotypic and genotypic assays for
resistance to antiviral drugs are becoming more widely
available, and correlations of laboratory results with clin-
ical outcomes in various settings are beginning to be
deﬁned. Of particular note has been the development of
highly sensitive and speciﬁc methods that measure the
concentration of virus in blood (virus load) and permit
direct assessment of the antiviral effect of a given drug
ANTIVIRAL CHEMOTHERAPY, EXCLUDING 
ANTIRETROVIRAL DRUGS
regimen in that compartment in the host. Virus load
measurements have been useful in recognizing the risk
of disease progression in patients with certain viral
infections and in identifying patients to whom antiviral
chemotherapy might be of greatest beneﬁt. Similar to
any in vitro laboratory test, these tests yield results that
are highly dependent on (and likely to vary with) the
laboratory techniques used.
Information regarding the pharmacokinetics of some
antiviral drugs, particularly in diverse clinical settings, is
limited. Assays to measure the concentrations of these
drugs, especially of their active moieties within cells, are
primarily research procedures and are not widely available
to clinicians.Thus, relatively few guidelines are available for
adjusting dosages of antiviral agents to maximize antiviral
activity and minimize toxicity. Consequently, clinical use
of antiviral drugs must be accompanied by particular vigi-
lance with regard to unanticipated adverse effects.
Similar to that of other infections, the course of viral
infections is profoundly affected by an interplay of the
pathogen with a complex set of host defenses.The pres-
ence or absence of preexisting immunity, the ability to
mount humoral or cell-mediated immune responses, and
CHAPTER 43
CHAPTER 43
456
I Antiviral Drugs Active against Respiratory Infections . . . . . . .461
Zanamivir and Oseltamivir . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .461
Amantadine and Rimantadine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .462
Ribavirin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .463
I Antiviral Drugs Active against Herpesvirus Infections . . . . . . .463
Acyclovir and Valacyclovir . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .463
Cidofovir . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .465
Fomivirsen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .465
Ganciclovir and Valganciclovir . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .465
Famciclovir and Penciclovir . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .466
Foscarnet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .466
Triﬂuridine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .467
Vidarabine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .467
I Antiviral Drugs Active against Hepatitis Viruses . . . . . . . . . . .467
Lamivudine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .467
Adefovir . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .467
Tenofovir . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .468
Entecavir . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .468
Telbivudine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .468
I Interferons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .468
I Further Readings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 469
the stimulation of innate immunity are important deter-
minants of the outcome of viral infections.The state of
the host’s defenses needs to be considered when antiviral
agents are used or evaluated.
As with any therapy, the optimal use of antiviral com-
pounds requires a speciﬁc and timely diagnosis. For some
viral infections, such as herpes zoster, the clinical manifes-
tations are so characteristic that a diagnosis can be made
on clinical grounds alone. For other viral infections, such
as inﬂuenza A, epidemiologic information (e.g., the docu-
mentation of a community-wide outbreak) can be used to
make a presumptive diagnosis with a high degree of accu-
racy. However, for most other viral infections, including
herpes simplex encephalitis, cytomegaloviral infections
other than retinitis, and enteroviral infections, diagnosis on
clinical grounds alone cannot be accomplished with cer-
tainty. For such infections, rapid viral diagnostic techniques
are of great importance. Considerable progress has been
made in recent years in the development of such tests,
which are now widely available for a number of viral
infections.
Despite these complexities, the efﬁcacy of a number
of antiviral compounds has been clearly established in
rigorously conducted and controlled studies.As summa-
rized in Table 43-1, this chapter reviews the antiviral
drugs that are currently approved or are likely to be
considered for approval in the near future for use against
viral infections other than those caused by HIV.
Antiviral Chemotherapy, Excluding Antiretroviral Drugs
457
CHAPTER 43
TABLE 43-1
ANTIVIRAL CHEMOTHERAPY AND CHEMOPROPHYLAXIS
INFECTION
DRUG
ROUTE
DOSAGE
COMMENTS
Inﬂuenza A and B
Prophylaxis
Oseltamivir
Oral
Adults: 75 mg/d
Prophylaxis must continue for the 
Children 1 yr: 30–75 mg/d,
duration of the outbreak and can 
depending on weight
be administered simultaneously with 
Zanamivir
Inhaled orally Adults and children 5 yrs:
inactivated vaccine. Unless the 
10 mg/d
sensitivity of isolates is known, 
Amantadinea or Oral
Adults: 200 mg/d
neither amantadine nor rimantadine 
rimantadinea
Children 1–9 yrs: 5 mg/kg 
is currently recommended for 
per day (maximum, 
prophylaxis or therapy because of 
150 mg/d)
the high rate of resistance in 
inﬂuenza A/H3N2 viruses since the 
2005–2006 season.
Treatment
Oseltamivir
Oral
Adults: 75 mg bid for 5 days
When started within 2 days of onset, 
Children 1–12 yrs: 30–75 mg 
zanamivir and oseltamivir reduce 
bid for 5 days
symptoms by 1.0–1.5 and 1.3 days, 
Zanamivir
Inhaled orally
Adults and children 7 yrs: 
respectively, in uncomplicated 
10 mg bid for 5 days
disease. Zanamivir may exacerbate 
Amantadinea
Oral
Adults: 100 qd or bid
bronchospasm in patients with 
Children 1–9 yrs: 5 mg/kg per
asthma. Oseltamivir’s side effects 
day (maximum, 150 mg/d) 
of nausea and vomiting can be 
for 5–7 days
reduced in frequency by drug 
Rimantadinea
Oral
100 qd or bid for 5–7 days in 
administration with food. 
adults
Amantadine and rimantadine are 
similarly effective in uncomplicated 
inﬂuenza caused by sensitive 
viruses. None of the listed drugs 
has been thoroughly studied in 
complicated cases (e.g., pneumonia).
RSV infection
Ribavirin
Small-particle Administered continuously 
Ribavirin is used for treatment of
aerosol
from reservoir containing 
infants and young children 
20 mg/mL for 3–6 days
hospitalized with RSV pneumonia 
and bronchiolitis.
CMV retinitis in 
Ganciclovir
IV
5 mg/kg bid for 14–21 days; 
Ganciclovir, valganciclovir, foscarnet, 
immunocompro-
then 5 mg/kg per day as 
and cidofovir are approved for 
mised host (AIDS)
maintenance dose
treatment of CMV retinitis in patients 
Oral
1 g tid as maintenance dose
with AIDS. They are also used for 
colitis, pneumonia, or “wasting” 
syndrome associated with CMV and 
for prevention of CMV disease in 
transplant recipients.
(Continued)
458
Disorders Complicating Critical Illnesses and Their Management
SECTION V
TABLE 43-1 (CONTINUED)
ANTIVIRAL CHEMOTHERAPY AND CHEMOPROPHYLAXIS
INFECTION
DRUG
ROUTE
DOSAGE
COMMENTS
CMV retinitis 
Valganciclovir
Oral
900 mg bid for 21 days; then 
Valganciclovir has largely supplanted 
(continued)
900 mg/d as maintenance 
oral ganciclovir and is frequently 
dose
used in place of IV ganciclovir.
Foscarnet
IV
60 mg/kg q8h for 14–21 days;
Foscarnet is not myelosuppressive 
then 90–120 mg/kg per day 
and is active against acyclovir- and 
as maintenance dose
ganciclovir-resistant herpesviruses.
Cidofovir
IV
5 mg/kg once weekly for 
2 weeks, then once every 
other week; given with 
probenecid and hydration
Fomivirsen
Intravitreal
330 mg on day 1 and day 15, Fomivirsen has reduced the rate of 
followed by 330 mg monthly 
progression of CMV retinitis in 
as maintenance
patients in whom other regimens 
have failed or have not been well 
tolerated. The major form of toxicity 
is ocular inﬂammation.
Varicella
Immunocompetent
Acyclovir
Oral
20 mg/kg (maximum, 800 mg)
Treatment confers modest clinical 
host
four or ﬁve times daily for 
beneﬁt when administered within 
5 days
24 h of rash onset.
Immunocom-
Acyclovir
IV
10 mg/kg q8h for 7 days
A change to oral valacyclovir can be 
promised host
considered after fever has subsided 
if there is no evidence of visceral 
involvement.
Herpes simplex 
Acyclovir
IV
10 mg/kg q8h for 14–21 days
Results are optimal when therapy is 
encephalitis
initiated early. Some authorities 
recommend treatment for 21 days 
to prevent relapses.
Neonatal herpes 
Acyclovir
IV
10 mg/kg q8h for 14–21 days
Serious morbidity is common despite 
simplex
therapy. Prolonged oral 
administration of acyclovir after 
initial IV therapy has been 
suggested because of long-term 
sequelae associated with cutaneous 
recurrences of HSV infection.
Genital herpes simplex
Primary (treatment)
Acyclovir
IV
5 mg/kg q8h for 5–10 days
The IV route is preferred for infections 
severe enough to warrant 
hospitalization or with neurologic 
complications.
Oral
200 mg ﬁve times daily 
The oral route is preferred for patients
for 10 days
whose condition does not warrant 
hospitalization. Adequate hydration 
must be maintained.
Acyclovir
Topical
5% ointment; four to six 
Topical use—largely supplemented 
applications daily for 
by oral therapy—may obviate 
7–10 days
systemic administration to pregnant 
women. Systemic symptoms and 
untreated areas are not affected.
Valacyclovir
Oral
1 g bid for 10 days
Valacyclovir appears to be as 
effective as acyclovir but can be 
administered less frequently.
Famciclovir
Oral
250 mg tid for 5–10 daysb
Famciclovir appears to be similar in 
effectiveness to acyclovir.
Recurrent (treatment)
Acyclovir
Oral
200 mg ﬁve times daily 
Clinical effect is modest and is 
for 5 days
enhanced if therapy is initiated early. 
Famciclovir
Oral
1000 mg bid for 1 day
Treatment does not affect 
Valacyclovir
Oral
500 mg bid for 3 days
recurrence rates.
Antiviral Chemotherapy, Excluding Antiretroviral Drugs
459
CHAPTER 43
TABLE 43-1 (CONTINUED)
ANTIVIRAL CHEMOTHERAPY AND CHEMOPROPHYLAXIS
INFECTION
DRUG
ROUTE
DOSAGE
COMMENTS
Genital herpes 
(continued)
Recurrent 
Acyclovir
Oral
400 mg bid for 12 months
Suppressive therapy is 
(suppression)
Valacyclovir
Oral
500–1000 mg/d
recommended only for patients with 
Famciclovir
Oral
125–250 mg bid
at least 6–10 recurrences per year. 
“Breakthrough” occasionally takes 
place, and asymptomatic shedding 
of virus occurs. The need for 
suppressive therapy should be 
reevaluated after 1 year. Suppression
with valacyclovir reduces 
transmission of genital HSV among 
discordant couples.
Mucocutaneous
herpes simplex in 
immunocompro-
mised host
Treatment
Acyclovir
IV
5 mg/kg q8h for 7 days
The choice of the IV or oral route 
Oral
400 mg ﬁve times daily
depends on the severity of infection 
for 10 days
and the patient’s ability to take oral 
Topical
5% ointment; four to six 
medication. Oral or IV treatment has 
applications daily for 
supplanted topical therapy except 
7 days or until healed
for small, easily accessible lesions. 
Valacyclovir
Oral
1 g tid for 7 daysb
Foscarnet is used for 
Famciclovir
Oral
500 mg bid for 4 daysc
acyclovir-resistant viruses.
Prevention of recur-
Acyclovir
Oral
200 mg bid
Treatment is administered during 
rence during intense
IV
5 mg/kg q12h
periods when intense immunosup-
immunosuppression
Valacyclovir
Oral
1 g tidb
pression is expected (e.g., during 
Famciclovir
Oral
500 mg bidb
antitumor chemotherapy or after 
transplantation) and is usually 
continued for 2–3 months.
Herpes simplex 
Penciclovir
Topical
1.0% cream applied q2h 
Treatment shortens healing time and 
orolabialis
during waking hours 
symptoms by 0.5–1.0 day (compared
(recurrent)
for 4 days
with placebo).
Valacyclovir
Oral
2 g q12h for 1 day
Therapy begun at the earliest 
symptom reduces disease duration 
by 1 day.
Famciclovirb
Oral
500 mg tid for 5 days
Therapy begun 48 h after UV light 
exposure decreases time to healing 
by 2 days.
Docosonald
Topical
10% cream ﬁve times daily 
Application at initial symptoms 
until healed
reduces healing time by 1 day.
Herpes simplex 
Triﬂuridine
Topical
1 drop of 1% ophthalmic 
Therapy should be undertaken in 
keratitis
solution q2h while awake 
consultation with an 
(maximum, 9 drops daily)
ophthalmologist.
Vidarabine
Topical
0.5-in ribbon of 3% ophthal-
mic ointment ﬁve times daily
Herpes zoster
Immunocompetent 
Valacyclovir
Oral
1 g tid for 7 days
Valacyclovir may be more effective 
host
than acyclovir for pain relief; 
otherwise, it has a similar effect on 
cutaneous lesions and should be 
given within 72 h of rash onset.
(Continued)
460
Disorders Complicating Critical Illnesses and Their Management
SECTION V
TABLE 43-1 (CONTINUED)
ANTIVIRAL CHEMOTHERAPY AND CHEMOPROPHYLAXIS
INFECTION
DRUG
ROUTE
DOSAGE
COMMENTS
Herpes zoster
Famciclovir
Oral
500 mg q8h for 7 days
The duration of postherpetic neuralgia
Immunocompetent 
is shorter than with placebo. 
host
Famciclovir showed overall efﬁcacy 
(continued)
similar to that of acyclovir in a 
comparative trial. It should be given 
72 h after rash onset.
Acyclovir
Oral
800 mg ﬁve times 
Acyclovir causes faster resolution of 
daily for 7–10 days
skin lesions than placebo and 
provides some relief of acute 
symptoms if given within 72 h of 
rash onset. Combined with tapering 
doses of prednisone, acyclovir 
improves quality-of-life outcomes.
Immunocom-
Acyclovir
IV
10 mg/kg q8h for 7 days
Effectiveness in localized zoster is 
promised host
Oral
800 mg ﬁve times daily for 
most marked when treatment is 
7 days
given early. Foscarnet may be used 
Famciclovir
Oral
500 mg tid for 10 daysb
for VZV infections that are resistant 
to acyclovir.
Herpes zoster 
Acyclovir
Oral
600 mg ﬁve times daily 
Treatment reduces ocular 
ophthalmicus
for 10 days
complications, including ocular 
keratitis and uveitis.
Condyloma
IFN-α2b
Intralesional
1 million units per wart 
Intralesional treatment frequently 
acuminatum
(maximum of 5) thrice 
results in regression of warts, but 
weekly for 3 weeks
lesions often recur. Parenteral 
IFN-αn3
Intralesional
250,000 units per wart 
administration may be useful if 
(maximum of 10) twice 
lesions are numerous.
weekly for up to 8 weeks
Chronic hepatitis B
IFN-α2b
SC
5 million units daily or 
HBeAg and DNA are eliminated in 
10 million units thrice weekly
33–37% of cases. Histopathologic 
for 16–24 weeks
improvement is also seen.
Pegylated 
SC
180 μg weekly for 48 weeks
HBeAg and DNA are eliminated in 
IFN-α2a
32–43% of recipients.
Lamivudine
Oral
100 mg/d for 12–18 months; 
The efﬁcacy of lamivudine is similar 
150 mg bid as part of 
to that of IFN, but lamivudine is 
therapy for HIV infection
better tolerated. Resistance 
develops in 24% of recipients when 
lamivudine is used as monotherapy 
for 1 year.
Adefovir 
Oral
10 mg/d for 48 months
A return of ALT levels to normal is 
dipivoxil
documented in 48–72% of 
recipients and improved liver 
histopathology in 53–64%. 
Adefovir is effective in lamivudine-
resistant hepatitis B. Renal function 
should be monitored.
Entecavir
Oral
0.5 mg/d for 48 weeks 
Normalization of ALT is seen in 
(1 mg/d if HBV is resistant 
68–78% of recipients and loss of 
to lamivudine)
HBeAg in 21%. Entecavir is active 
against lamivudine-resistant HBV.
Telbivudine
Oral
600 mg/d for 52 weeks
Reduction of HBV DNA by >5 log10
copies/mL along with either normal- 
ization of ALT or loss of serum 
HBeAg is seen in 75% of recipients. 
Myopathy may occur.
ANTIVIRAL DRUGS ACTIVE AGAINST 
RESPIRATORY INFECTIONS
ZANAMIVIR AND OSELTAMIVIR
Zanamivir and oseltamivir are inhibitors of the inﬂuenza
viral neuraminidase enzyme, which is essential for release
of the virus from infected cells and for its subsequent
spread throughout the respiratory tract of the infected
host.The enzyme cleaves terminal sialic acid residues and
thus destroys the cellular receptors to which the viral
hemagglutinin attaches. Zanamivir and oseltamivir are
sialic acid transition-state analogues and are highly active
and speciﬁc inhibitors of the neuraminidases of both
inﬂuenza A and B viruses.The antineuraminidase activity
of the two drugs is similar, although zanamivir has some-
what greater in vitro activity against inﬂuenza B. Both
zanamivir and oseltamivir act through competitive and
reversible inhibition of the active site of inﬂuenza A and
B viral neuraminidases and have relatively little effect on
mammalian cell enzymes.
Oseltamivir phosphate is an ethyl ester prodrug that is
converted to oseltamivir carboxylate by esterases in the
liver. Orally administered oseltamivir has a bioavailability
of >60% and a plasma half-life of 7–9 h. The drug is
excreted unmetabolized, primarily by the kidneys.
Zanamivir has low oral bioavailability and is adminis-
tered orally via a handheld inhaler. By this route, ~15%
of the dose is deposited in the lower respiratory tract,
and low plasma levels of the drug are detected.
Orally inhaled zanamivir is generally well tolerated,
although exacerbations of asthma may occur.The toxicities
most frequently encountered with orally administered
oseltamivir are nausea, gastrointestinal discomfort, and (less
commonly) vomiting. Gastrointestinal discomfort is usu-
ally transient and is less likely if the drug is administered
Antiviral Chemotherapy, Excluding Antiretroviral Drugs
461
CHAPTER 43
TABLE 43-1 (CONTINUED)
ANTIVIRAL CHEMOTHERAPY AND CHEMOPROPHYLAXIS
INFECTION
DRUG
ROUTE
DOSAGE
COMMENTS
Chronic hepatitis C
IFN-α2a or 
SC
3 million units thrice weekly
A return of ALT levels to normal is 
IFN-α2b
for 12–18 months
documented in 54% of recipients 
but is sustained in only 28%. 
Improvement in liver histopathology 
is seen.
IFN-α2b/
SC (IFN)/oral
3 million units thrice weekly 
Combination therapy results in 
ribavirin
(ribavirin)
(IFN)/1000–1200 mg daily 
sustained responses in up to 
(ribavirin) for 6–12 months
40–50% of all recipients.
Pegylated 
SC
1 μg/kg weekly for 
The slower clearance of pegylated 
IFN-α2b
12–24 months
IFNs than of standard IFNs permits 
Pegylated 
SC
180 μg weekly for 
once-weekly administration. The 
IFN-α2a
12–24 months
pegylated formulations appear to be 
Pegylated 
SC (IFN)/oral
1.5 μg/kg weekly 
superior to standard IFNs in 
IFN-α2b/
(ribavirin)
(IFN)/800–1200 mg 
tolerability and efﬁcacy, both as 
ribavirin
daily (ribavirin)d
monotherapy and in combination 
for 24–48 weeks
with ribavirin. Sustained virologic 
Pegylated 
SC (IFN)/oral
180 μg weekly (IFN)/
responses were seen in 42–46% of 
IFN-α2a/ 
(ribavirin)
800–1200 mg daily 
genotype 1 patients and in 76–82% of
ribavirin
(ribavirin) for 24–48 weeks
those infected with genotype 2 or 3.
IFN-alfacon
SC
9–15 μg thrice weekly 
Doses of 9 and 15 μg are equivalent 
for 6–12 months
to IFN-α2a and IFN-α2b doses of 
3 million and 5 million units, 
respectively.
Chronic hepatitis D
IFN-α2a or 
SC
9 million units thrice weekly 
The overall efﬁcacy and the optimal 
IFN-α2b
for 12 months
regimen and duration of therapy 
have not been established. 
Responses usually are not sustained
when therapy is stopped.
a Inﬂuenza A only. Unless isolate sensitivity is known, not recommended for prophylaxis or therapy since 2005–2006 because of high rates of
resistance in inﬂuenza A/H3N2 viruses.
b Not approved for this indication by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA).
c Approved by the FDA for treatment of HIV-infected individuals.
d Active ingredient: benzyl alcohol. Available without prescription.
Note: ALT, alanine aminotransferase; CMV, cytomegalovirus; HBeAg, hepatitis B e antigen; HBV, hepatitis B virus; HSV, herpes simplex virus;
IFN, interferon; RSV, respiratory syncytial virus; UV, ultraviolet; VZV, varicella-zoster virus.
with food. Recently, neuropsychiatric events (e.g., delir-
ium, self-injury) have been reported in children who
have been taking oseltamivir, primarily in Japan.
Inhaled zanamivir and orally administered oseltamivir
have been effective in the treatment of naturally occur-
ring inﬂuenza A or B in otherwise healthy adults. In
placebo-controlled studies, illness has been shortened by
1.0–1.5 days of therapy with either of these drugs when
treatment is administered within 2 days of onset.A recent
meta-analysis of clinical studies of oseltamivir suggests
that treatment may reduce the likelihood of certain
respiratory tract complications of influenza. Once-
daily inhaled zanamivir or once-daily orally adminis-
tered oseltamivir provides effective prophylaxis against
laboratory-documented influenza A– and influenza
B–associated illness.
The emergence of viruses resistant to zanamivir or
oseltamivir occurs but appears to be less frequent than the
emergence of resistance to the adamantanes in clinical
studies carried out thus far. In one pediatric study, 5.5% of
patients treated with oseltamivir developed resistant iso-
lates.A somewhat higher rate of resistance was noted in a
recent pediatric study of oseltamivir from Japan. Resis-
tance to the neuraminidase inhibitors may develop by
changes in the viral neuraminidase enzyme, by changes in
the hemagglutinin that make it more resistant to the
actions of the neuraminidase, or by both mechanisms.
Some isolates that are resistant to oseltamivir may remain
sensitive to zanamivir. Since the mechanisms of action of
the neuraminidase inhibitors differ from those of the
adamantanes (see below), zanamivir and oseltamivir are
active against strains of inﬂuenza A virus that are resistant
to amantadine and rimantadine.
Zanamivir and oseltamivir have been approved by the
U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the treat-
ment of inﬂuenza in adults and in children (those 7 years
old for zanamivir and those 1 year of age for oseltamivir)
who have been symptomatic for 2 days. Oseltamivir
is approved for prophylaxis of inﬂuenza in individuals
1 year of age and zanamivir for those 5 years of age
(Table 43-1).
AMANTADINE AND RIMANTADINE
Amantadine and the closely related compound rimanta-
dine are primary symmetric amines that display antiviral
activity limited to inﬂuenza A viruses. Amantadine and
rimantadine have been shown to be efﬁcacious in the
prophylaxis and treatment of inﬂuenza A infections in
humans for >40 years. High frequencies of resistance to
these drugs were noted among inﬂuenza A/H3N2 viruses
in the 2005–2006 inﬂuenza season and continue to be
seen up to the present (2006–2007).Therefore,these agents
are no longer recommended unless the sensitivity of the
individual inﬂuenza A isolate is known, in which case their
use may be considered.Amantadine and rimantadine act
through inhibition of the ion channel function of the
inﬂuenza A M2 matrix protein, on which appropriate
uncoating of the virus depends.A substitution of a single
amino acid at critical sites in the M2 protein can result in
a virus that is resistant to amantadine and rimantadine.
Amantadine and rimantadine have been shown to be
effective in the prophylaxis of inﬂuenza A in large-scale
studies of young adults and in less extensive studies of
children and elderly persons. In such studies, efﬁcacy
rates of 55–80% in the prevention of inﬂuenza-like ill-
ness were noted, and even higher rates were reported
when virus-speciﬁc attack rates were calculated.Amanta-
dine and rimantadine have also been found to be effec-
tive in the treatment of inﬂuenza A infection in studies
involving predominantly young adults and, to a lesser
extent, children. Administration of these compounds
within 24–72 h after the onset of illness has resulted in a
reduction of the duration of signs and symptoms by
~50% from that in placebo recipients.The effect on signs
and symptoms of illness is superior to that of commonly
used antipyretic-analgesic agents. Only anecdotal reports
are available concerning the efﬁcacy of amantadine or
rimantadine in the prevention or treatment of complica-
tions of inﬂuenza (e.g., pneumonia).
Amantadine and rimantadine are available only in oral
formulations and are ordinarily administered to adults
once or twice daily, with a dosage of 100–200 mg/d.
Despite their structural similarities, the two compounds
have different pharmacokinetics. Amantadine is not
metabolized and is excreted almost entirely by the kid-
neys, with a half-life of 12–17 h and peak plasma con-
centrations of 0.4 μg/mL. In contrast, rimantadine is
extensively metabolized to hydroxylated derivatives and
has a half-life of 30 h. Only 30–40% of an orally admin-
istered dose of rimantadine is recovered in the urine.The
peak plasma levels of rimantadine are approximately half
those of amantadine, but rimantadine is concentrated in
respiratory secretions to a greater extent than amantadine.
For prophylaxis, the compounds must be administered
daily for the period at risk (i.e., the peak duration of the
outbreak). For therapy, amantadine or rimantadine is
generally administered for 5–7 days.
Although these compounds are generally well toler-
ated, 5–10% of amantadine recipients experience mild
central nervous system (CNS) side effects consisting pri-
marily of dizziness, anxiety, insomnia, and difﬁculty in
concentrating. These effects are rapidly reversible upon
cessation of the drug.At a dosage of 200 mg/d, rimanta-
dine is better tolerated than amantadine; in a large-scale
study of young adults, adverse effects were no more
frequent among rimantadine recipients than among
placebo recipients. Seizures and worsening of congestive
heart failure have also been reported in patients treated
with amantadine, although a causal relationship has not
been established. The dosage of amantadine should be
reduced to 100 mg/d in patients with renal insufﬁciency
462
Disorders Complicating Critical Illnesses and Their Management
SECTION V
[i.e., a creatinine clearance rate (CrCl) of <50 mL/min]
and in elderly patients.A rimantadine dose of 100 mg/d
should be used for patients with a CrCl of <10 mL/min
and, in elderly patients.
RIBAVIRIN
Ribavirin is a synthetic nucleoside analogue that inhibits
a wide range of RNA and DNA viruses.The mechanism
of action of ribavirin is not completely deﬁned and may
be different for different groups of viruses. Ribavirin-
5′-monophosphate blocks the conversion of inosine-
5′-monophosphate to xanthosine-5′-monophosphate and
interferes with the synthesis of guanine nucleotides as well
as that of both RNA and DNA. Ribavirin-5′-monophos-
phate also inhibits capping of virus-speciﬁc messenger
RNA in certain viral systems. In studies demonstrating the
effectiveness of ribavirin in the treatment of respiratory
syncytial virus (RSV) infection in infants, the compound
was administered as a small-particle aerosol. In infants with
RSV infection who were given ribavirin by continuous
aerosol for 3–6 days, illness and lower respiratory tract
signs resolved more rapidly and arterial oxygen desatura-
tion was less pronounced than in placebo-treated groups.
In addition, ribavirin has had a beneﬁcial clinical effect
in infants with RSV infection who require mechanical
ventilation. Aerosolized ribavirin has also been adminis-
tered to older children and adults with severe RSV and
parainﬂuenza virus infections (including immunosup-
pressed patients) and to older children and adults with
inﬂuenza A or B infection, but the beneﬁt of this treat-
ment, if any, is unclear. In RSV infections in immunosup-
pressed patients, ribavirin is often given in combination
with immunoglobulins.
Orally administered ribavirin has not been effective
in the treatment of inﬂuenza A virus infections. IV or
oral ribavirin has reduced mortality rates among patients
with Lassa fever; it has been particularly effective in this
regard when given within the ﬁrst 6 days of illness. IV
ribavirin has been reported to be of clinical beneﬁt in
the treatment of hemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome
caused by Hantaan virus and as therapy for Argentinian
hemorrhagic fever. Moreover, oral ribavirin has been
recommended for the treatment and prophylaxis of
Congo-Crimean hemorrhagic fever. An open-label trial
suggested that oral ribavirin may be beneﬁcial in the
treatment of Nipah virus encephalitis. Use of IV ribavirin
in patients with hantavirus pulmonary syndrome in the
United States has not been associated with clear-cut
beneﬁts. Oral administration of ribavirin reduces serum
aminotransferase levels in patients with chronic hepatitis
C virus (HCV) infection; because it appears not to
reduce serum HCV RNA levels, the mechanism of this
effect is unclear.The drug provides added beneﬁt when
given by mouth in doses of 800–1200 mg/d in combi-
nation with interferon (IFN) α2b or α2a (see later), and
the ribavirin/IFN combination has been approved for the
treatment of patients with chronic HCV infection.
Large doses of ribavirin (800–1000 mg/d PO) have
been associated with reversible hematopoietic toxicity.
This effect has not been observed with aerosolized rib-
avirin, apparently because little drug is absorbed system-
ically.Aerosolized administration of ribavirin is generally
well tolerated but occasionally is associated with bron-
chospasm, rash, or conjunctival irritation. Aerosolized
ribavirin has been approved for treatment of RSV infec-
tion in infants and should be administered under close
supervision, particularly in the setting of mechanical
ventilation, in which precipitation of the drug is possible.
Health care workers exposed to the drug have experi-
enced minor toxicity, including eye and respiratory tract
irritation. Because ribavirin is mutagenic, teratogenic, and
embryotoxic, its use is generally contraindicated in preg-
nancy. Its administration as an aerosol poses a risk to
pregnant health care workers.
ANTIVIRAL DRUGS ACTIVE AGAINST 
HERPESVIRUS INFECTIONS
ACYCLOVIR AND VALACYCLOVIR
Acyclovir is a highly potent and selective inhibitor of
the replication of certain herpesviruses, including herpes
simplex virus (HSV) types 1 and 2, varicella-zoster virus
(VZV), and Epstein-Barr virus (EBV). It is relatively
ineffective in the treatment of human cytomegalovirus
(CMV) infections; however, some studies have indicated
its effectiveness in the prevention of CMV-associated
disease in immunosuppressed patients. Valacyclovir, the
L-valyl ester of acyclovir, is converted almost entirely to
acyclovir by intestinal and hepatic hydrolysis after oral
administration. Valacyclovir has pharmacokinetic advan-
tages over orally administered acyclovir: it exhibits signif-
icantly greater oral bioavailability, results in higher blood
levels, and can be given less frequently than acyclovir
(two or three rather than ﬁve times daily).
The high degree of selectivity of acyclovir is related to its
mechanism of action, which requires that the compound
ﬁrst be phosphorylated to acyclovir monophosphate.
This phosphorylation occurs efﬁciently in herpesvirus-
infected cells by means of a virus-coded thymidine
kinase. In uninfected mammalian cells, little phosphory-
lation of acyclovir occurs, and the drug is therefore
concentrated in herpesvirus-infected cells. Acyclovir
monophosphate is subsequently converted by host cell
kinases to a triphosphate that is a potent inhibitor of
virus-induced DNA polymerase but has relatively little
effect on host-cell DNA polymerase. Acyclovir triphos-
phate can also be incorporated into viral DNA, with early
chain termination.
Acyclovir is available in IV, oral, and topical forms,
and valacyclovir is available in an oral formulation.
Antiviral Chemotherapy, Excluding Antiretroviral Drugs
463
CHAPTER 43
IV acyclovir is markedly effective in the treatment of muco-
cutaneous HSV infections in immunocompromised hosts,
in whom it reduces time to healing, duration of pain, and
virus shedding. When administered prophylactically dur-
ing periods of intense immunosuppression (e.g., related to
chemotherapy for leukemia or transplantation) and before
the development of lesions, IV acyclovir reduces the fre-
quency of HSV-associated disease.After prophylaxis is dis-
continued, HSV lesions recur. IV acyclovir is also effective
in the treatment of HSV encephalitis; two comparative
trials have indicated that acyclovir is more effective than
vidarabine for this indication (see below).
Because VZV is generally less sensitive to acyclovir
than is HSV, higher doses of acyclovir must be used to
treat VZV infections. In immunocompromised patients
with herpes zoster, IV acyclovir reduces the frequency
of cutaneous dissemination and visceral complications
and—in one comparative trial—was more effective than
vidarabine.Acyclovir, administered at dosages of 800 mg
PO ﬁve times a day, had a modest beneﬁcial effect on
localized herpes zoster lesions in both immunocompro-
mised and immunocompetent patients. Combination of
acyclovir with a tapering regimen of prednisone appeared
to be more effective than acyclovir alone in terms of
quality-of-life outcomes in immunocompetent patients
older than age 50 years with herpes zoster. A compara-
tive study of acyclovir (800 mg PO ﬁve times daily) and
valacyclovir (1 g PO tid) in immunocompetent patients
with herpes zoster indicated that the latter drug may
be more effective in eliciting the resolution of zoster-
associated pain. Orally administered acyclovir (600 mg
ﬁve times a day) reduced complications of herpes zoster
ophthalmicus in a placebo-controlled trial.
In chickenpox, a modest overall clinical beneﬁt is
attained when oral acyclovir therapy is begun within
24 h of the onset of rash in otherwise healthy children
(20 mg/kg, up to a maximum of 800 mg, four times a
day) or adults (800 mg ﬁve times a day). IV acyclovir has
also been reported to be effective in the treatment of
immunocompromised children with chickenpox.
The most widespread use of acyclovir is in the treat-
ment of genital HSV infections. IV or oral acyclovir or
oral valacyclovir has shortened the duration of symptoms,
reduced virus shedding, and accelerated healing when
used for the treatment of primary genital HSV infections.
Oral acyclovir and valacyclovir have also had a modest
effect in treatment of recurrent genital HSV infections.
However, the failure of treatment of either primary or
recurrent disease to reduce the frequency of subsequent
recurrences has indicated that acyclovir is ineffective in
eliminating latent infection. Chronic oral administration
of acyclovir for 1–6 years or of valacyclovir for 1 year
has reduced the frequency of recurrences markedly dur-
ing therapy; when the drug is discontinued, lesions recur.
In one study,suppressive therapy with valacyclovir (500 mg
once daily for 8 months) reduced transmission of HSV-2
genital infections among discordant couples by 50%. A
modest effect (i.e.,a reduction of disease duration by 1 day)
on herpes labialis was seen when valacyclovir was admin-
istered upon detection of the ﬁrst symptom of a lesion at
a dosage of 2 g every 12 h for 1 day. In AIDS patients,
chronic or intermittent administration of acyclovir has
been associated with the development of HSV and VZV
strains resistant to the action of the drug and with clinical
failures.The most common mechanism of resistance is a
deﬁciency of the virus-induced thymidine kinase. Patients
with HSV or VZV infections resistant to acyclovir have
frequently responded to foscarnet.
With the availability of the oral and IV forms, there
are few indications for topical acyclovir, although treat-
ment with this formulation has been modestly beneﬁcial
in primary genital HSV infections and in mucocutaneous
HSV infections in immunocompromised hosts.
Overall, acyclovir is remarkably well tolerated and is
generally free of toxicity. The most frequently encoun-
tered form of toxicity is renal dysfunction because of drug
crystallization, particularly after rapid IV administration
or with inadequate hydration. CNS changes, including
lethargy and tremors, are occasionally reported, primarily
in immunosuppressed patients. However, whether these
changes are related to acyclovir, to concurrent adminis-
tration of other therapy, or to underlying infection remains
unclear. Acyclovir is excreted primarily unmetabolized
by the kidney via both glomerular ﬁltration and tubular
secretion. Approximately 15% of a dose of acyclovir is
metabolized to 9-[(carboxymethoxy)methyl] guanine or
other minor metabolites. Reduction in dosage is indi-
cated in patients with a CrCl of <50 mL/min.The half-
life of acyclovir is ~3 h in normal adults, and the peak
plasma concentration after a 1-h infusion of a dose of 5
mg/kg is 9.8 μg/mL. Approximately 22% of an orally
administered acyclovir dose is absorbed, and peak plasma
concentrations of 0.3–0.9 μg/mL are attained after
administration of a 200-mg dose. Acyclovir penetrates
relatively well into the cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF), with
concentrations approaching half of those found in plasma.
Acyclovir causes chromosomal breakage at high
doses, but its administration to pregnant women has not
been associated with fetal abnormalities. Nonetheless,
the potential risks and beneﬁts of acyclovir should be
carefully assessed before the drug is used in pregnancy.
Valacyclovir exhibits three to ﬁve times greater bioavail-
ability than acyclovir. The concentration-time curve
for valacyclovir, given as 1 g PO three times daily, is
similar to that for acyclovir, given as 5 mg/kg IV every 
8 h.The safety proﬁles of valacyclovir and acyclovir are
similar, although thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura/
hemolytic-uremic syndrome has been reported in
immunocompromised patients who have received high
doses of valacyclovir (8 g/d).Valacyclovir is approved for
the treatment of herpes zoster,
initial and recurrent
episodes of genital HSV infections in immunocompetent
464
Disorders Complicating Critical Illnesses and Their Management
SECTION V
adults, and herpes labialis as well as for suppressive treat-
ment of genital herpes.Although it has not been exten-
sively studied in other clinical settings involving HSV or
VZV infections, many consultants use valacyclovir rather
than oral acyclovir in settings where the latter has been
approved because of valacyclovir’s superior pharmacoki-
netics and more convenient dosing schedule.
CIDOFOVIR
Cidofovir is a phosphonate nucleotide analogue of cyto-
sine. Its major use is in CMV infections, particularly
retinitis, but it is active against a broad range of her-
pesviruses, including HSV; human herpesvirus (HHV)
type 6; HHV-8; and certain other DNA viruses such
as polyomaviruses, papillomaviruses, adenoviruses, and
poxviruses, including variola (smallpox) and vaccinia.
Cidofovir does not require initial phosphorylation by
virus-induced kinases; the drug is phosphorylated by host
cell enzymes to cidofovir diphosphate, which is a com-
petitive inhibitor of viral DNA polymerases and, to a
lesser extent, of host cell DNA polymerases. Incorpora-
tion of cidofovir diphosphate slows or terminates nascent
DNA chain elongation. Cidofovir is active against HSV
isolates that are resistant to acyclovir because of absent or
altered thymidine kinase and against CMV isolates that
are resistant to ganciclovir because of UL97 phospho-
transferase mutations. Cidofovir is usually active against
foscarnet-resistant CMV, although cross-resistance to fos-
carnet as well as to ganciclovir has been described.
Cidofovir has poor oral availability and is administered
IV. It is excreted primarily by the kidney and has a
plasma half-life of 2.6 h. Cidofovir diphosphate’s intra-
cellular half-life of >48 h is the basis for the recom-
mended dosing regimen of 5 mg/kg once a week for the
initial 2 weeks and then 5 mg/kg every other week.The
major toxic effect of cidofovir is proximal renal tubular
injury, as manifested by elevated serum creatinine levels
and proteinuria.The risk of nephrotoxicity can be reduced
by vigorous saline hydration and concomitant oral admin-
istration of probenecid. Neutropenia, rashes, and gastroin-
testinal tolerance may also occur.
IV cidofovir has been approved for the treatment of
CMV retinitis in AIDS patients who are intolerant of
ganciclovir or foscarnet or in whom those drugs have
failed. In a controlled study, a maintenance dosage of 
5 mg/kg per week administered to AIDS patients reduced
the progression of CMV retinitis from that seen at 
3 mg/kg. IV cidofovir has been reported anecdotally to
be effective for treatment of acyclovir-resistant mucocu-
taneous HSV infections. Likewise, topically administered
cidofovir is reportedly beneﬁcial against these infections
in HIV-infected patients; it is also being studied for
the treatment of anogenital warts. Anecdotal use of IV
cidofovir has been described in disseminated adenoviral
infections in immunosuppressed patients, but its efﬁcacy,
if any, is not known.An ophthalmic formulation is being
studied as treatment for adenoviral keratoconjunctivitis.
Intravitreal cidofovir has been used to treat CMV retini-
tis but has been associated with signiﬁcant toxicity.
FOMIVIRSEN
Fomivirsen is the ﬁrst antisense oligonucleotide approved
by the FDA for therapy in humans.This phosphorothioate
oligonucleotide, 21 nucleotides in length, inhibits CMV
replication through interaction with CMV messenger
RNA. Fomivirsen is complementary to messenger tran-
scripts of the major immediate early region 2 (IE2) of
CMV, which codes for proteins regulating viral gene
expression. In addition to its antisense mechanism of
action,fomivirsen may exert activity against CMV through
inhibition of viral adsorption to cells as well as direct
inhibition of viral replication. Because of its different
mechanism of action, fomivirsen is active against CMV
isolates that are resistant to nucleoside or nucleotide
analogues, such as ganciclovir, foscarnet, and cidofovir.
Fomivirsen has been approved for intravitreal admin-
istration in the treatment of CMV retinitis in AIDS
patients who have failed to respond to other treatments
or cannot tolerate them. Injections of 330 mg for two
doses 2 weeks apart followed by maintenance doses of
330 mg monthly signiﬁcantly reduce the rate of pro-
gression of CMV retinitis. The major toxicity is ocular
inﬂammation, including vitritis and iritis, which usually
responds to topically administered glucocorticoids.
GANCICLOVIR AND VALGANCICLOVIR
An analogue of acyclovir, ganciclovir is active against HSV
and VZV and is markedly more active than acyclovir
against CMV. Ganciclovir triphosphate inhibits CMV
DNA polymerase and can be incorporated into CMV
DNA, whose elongation it eventually terminates. In HSV-
and VZV-infected cells, ganciclovir is phosphorylated by
virus-encoded thymidine kinases; in CMV-infected cells,
it is phosphorylated by a viral kinase encoded by the
UL97 gene. Ganciclovir triphosphate is present in 10-fold
higher concentrations in CMV-infected cells than in
uninfected cells. Ganciclovir is approved for the treatment
of CMV retinitis in immunosuppressed patients and for
the prevention of CMV disease in transplant recipients. It
is widely used for the treatment of other CMV-associated
syndromes, including pneumonia, esophagogastrointestinal
infections, hepatitis, and “wasting” illness.
Ganciclovir is available for IV or oral administration.
Because its oral bioavailability is low (5–9%), relatively
large doses (1 g three times daily) must be administered by
this route. Oral ganciclovir has largely been supplanted by
valganciclovir, which is the L-valyl ester of ganciclovir.
Valganciclovir is well absorbed orally, with a bioavailability
of 60%, and is rapidly hydrolyzed to ganciclovir in the
Antiviral Chemotherapy, Excluding Antiretroviral Drugs
465
CHAPTER 43
intestine and liver.The area under the curve for a 900-mg
dose of valganciclovir is equivalent to that for 5 mg/kg of
ganciclovir given IV, although peak serum concentrations
are ~40% lower for valganciclovir.The serum half-life is
3.5 h after IV administration of ganciclovir and 4.0 h after
PO administration of valganciclovir.Ganciclovir is excreted
primarily by the kidneys in an unmetabolized form, and
its dosage should be reduced in cases of renal failure.
The most commonly used dosage for initial IV therapy
is 5 mg/kg every 12 h for 14–21 days; this regimen is
followed by an IV maintenance dose of 5 mg/kg per
day or ﬁve times per week. For oral therapy with val-
ganciclovir, the dosage is 900 mg twice daily for 21 days
followed by 900 mg once a day for maintenance, with
dose adjustment in patients with renal dysfunction.Intraoc-
ular ganciclovir, given by either intravitreal injection or
intraocular implantation, has also been used to treat CMV
retinitis.
Ganciclovir is effective as prophylaxis against CMV-
associated disease in organ and bone marrow transplant
recipients. Oral ganciclovir administered prophylactically
to AIDS patients with CD4+T cell counts of <100/μL has
provided protection against the development of CMV
retinitis. However, the long-term beneﬁts of this approach
to prophylaxis in AIDS patients have not been established,
and most experts do not recommend the use of oral ganci-
clovir for this purpose.As already mentioned,valganciclovir
has supplanted oral ganciclovir when oral prophylaxis or
therapy is considered.
The administration of ganciclovir has been associated
with profound bone marrow suppression, particularly
neutropenia, which signiﬁcantly limits the drug’s use in
many patients. Bone marrow toxicity is potentiated in the
setting of renal dysfunction and when other bone marrow
suppressants,such as zidovudine,are used concomitantly.
Resistance has been noted in CMV isolates obtained
after therapy with ganciclovir, especially in patients with
AIDS. Such resistance may develop through a mutation in
either the viral UL97 gene or the viral DNA polymerase.
Ganciclovir-resistant isolates are usually sensitive to foscar-
net (see later) or cidofovir (see earlier).
FAMCICLOVIR AND PENCICLOVIR
Famciclovir is the diacetyl 6-deoxyester of the guanosine
analogue penciclovir. Famciclovir is well absorbed orally,
has a bioavailability of 77%, and is rapidly converted to
penciclovir by deacetylation and oxidation in the intes-
tine and liver. Penciclovir’s spectrum of activity and
mechanism of action are similar to those of acyclovir.
Thus, penciclovir is usually not active against acyclovir-
resistant viruses. However, some acyclovir-resistant viruses
with altered thymidine kinase or DNA polymerase sub-
strate speciﬁcity may be sensitive to penciclovir.This drug
is phosphorylated initially by a virus-encoded thymidine
kinase and subsequently by cellular kinases to penciclovir
triphosphate, which inhibits HSV-1, HSV-2, VZV, and
EBV as well as hepatitis B virus (HBV).The serum half-
life of penciclovir is 2 h, but the intracellular half-life of
penciclovir triphosphate is 7–20 h—markedly longer
than that of acyclovir triphosphate.The latter is the basis
for the less frequent (twice-daily) dosing schedule for
famciclovir than for acyclovir. Penciclovir is eliminated
primarily in the urine by both glomerular ﬁltration and
tubular secretion.The usually recommended dosage inter-
val should be adjusted for renal insufﬁciency.
Clinical trials involving immunocompetent adults
with herpes zoster showed that famciclovir was superior
to placebo in eliciting the resolution of skin lesions and
virus shedding and in shortening the duration of pos-
therpetic neuralgia; moreover, administered at 500 mg
every 8 h, famciclovir was at least as effective as acyclovir
administered at a dose of 800 mg PO ﬁve times daily.
Famciclovir was also effective in the treatment of herpes
zoster in immunosuppressed patients. Clinical trials have
demonstrated its effectiveness in the suppression of genital
HSV infections for 1 year and in the treatment of initial
and recurrent episodes of genital herpes. Famciclovir is
effective as therapy for mucocutaneous HSV infections
in HIV-infected patients.Application of a 1% penciclovir
cream reduces the duration of signs and symptoms of
herpes labialis in immunocompetent patients (by 0.5–
1.0 day) and has been approved for that purpose by the
FDA. Famciclovir is generally well tolerated, with occa-
sional headache, nausea, and diarrhea reported in fre-
quencies similar to those among placebo recipients.The
administration of high doses of famciclovir for 2 years
was associated with an increased incidence of mammary
adenocarcinomas in female rats, but the clinical signifi-
cance of this effect is unknown.
FOSCARNET
Foscarnet (phosphonoformic acid) is a pyrophosphate-
containing compound that potently inhibits herpesviruses,
including CMV. This drug inhibits DNA polymerases at
the pyrophosphate binding site at concentrations that have
relatively little effect on cellular polymerases. Foscarnet
does not require phosphorylation to exert its antiviral
activity and is therefore active against HSV and VZV iso-
lates that are resistant to acyclovir because of deﬁciencies
in thymidine kinase as well as against most ganciclovir-
resistant strains of CMV. Foscarnet also inhibits the reverse
transcriptase of HIV and is active against HIV in vivo.
Foscarnet is poorly soluble and must be administered
IV via an infusion pump in a dilute solution over 1–2 h.
The plasma half-life of foscarnet is 3–5 h and increases
with decreasing renal function because the drug is elim-
inated primarily by the kidneys. It has been estimated
that 10–28% of a dose may be deposited in bone, where
it can persist for months.The most common initial dosage
of foscarnet—60 mg/kg every 8 h for 14–21 days—is
466
Disorders Complicating Critical Illnesses and Their Management
SECTION V
followed by a maintenance dose of 90–120 mg/kg once
a day.
Foscarnet is approved for the treatment of CMV retinitis
in patients with AIDS and of acyclovir-resistant mucocu-
taneous HSV infections. In a comparative clinical trial, the
drug appeared to be about as efﬁcacious as ganciclovir
against CMV retinitis but was associated with a longer sur-
vival period, possibly because of its activity against HIV.
Intraocular foscarnet has been used to treat CMV retinitis.
Foscarnet has also been used to treat acyclovir-resistant
HSV and VZV infections as well as ganciclovir-resistant
CMV infections, although resistance to foscarnet has
been reported in CMV isolates obtained during therapy.
Foscarnet has also been used to treat HHV-6 infections in
immunosuppressed patients.
The major form of toxicity associated with foscarnet
is renal impairment. Thus, renal function should be
monitored closely, particularly during the initial phase of
therapy. Because foscarnet binds divalent metal ions,
hypocalcemia, hypomagnesemia, hypokalemia, and hypo-
or hyperphosphatemia can develop. Saline hydration and
slow infusion appear to protect the patient against nephro-
toxicity and electrolyte disturbances.Although hematologic
abnormalities have been documented (most commonly
anemia), foscarnet is not generally myelosuppressive and
may be administered concomitantly with myelosuppressive
medications such as zidovudine.
TRIFLURIDINE
Triﬂuridine is a pyrimidine nucleoside active against
HSV-1, HSV-2, and CMV. Triﬂuridine monophosphate
irreversibly inhibits thymidylate synthetase, and triﬂuri-
dine triphosphate inhibits viral and, to a lesser extent,
cellular DNA polymerases. Because of systemic toxicity,
its use is limited to topical therapy.Triﬂuridine is approved
for treatment of HSV keratitis, for which trials have
shown that it is more effective than topical idoxuridine
but similar in efﬁcacy to topical vidarabine. The drug
has beneﬁted some patients with HSV keratitis who have
failed to respond to idoxuridine or vidarabine. Topical
application of triﬂuridine to sites of acyclovir-resistant
HSV mucocutaneous infections has also been beneﬁcial
in some cases.
VIDARABINE
Vidarabine is a purine nucleoside analogue with activity
against HSV-1, HSV-2,VZV, and EBV.Vidarabine inhibits
viral DNA synthesis through its 5′-triphosphorylated
metabolite, although its precise molecular mechanisms of
action are not completely understood. IV-administered
vidarabine has been shown to be effective in the treat-
ment of herpes simplex encephalitis, mucocutaneous
HSV infections, herpes zoster in immunocompromised
patients, and neonatal HSV infections. Its use has been
supplanted by that of IV acyclovir, which is more effective
and easier to administer. Production of the IV prepara-
tion has been discontinued by the manufacturer, but
vidarabine is available as an ophthalmic ointment, which
is effective in the treatment of HSV keratitis.
ANTIVIRAL DRUGS ACTIVE AGAINST 
HEPATITIS VIRUSES
LAMIVUDINE
Lamivudine is a pyrimidine nucleoside analogue that
is used primarily in combination therapy against HIV
infection. It is also active against HBV through inhibi-
tion of the viral DNA polymerase and has been approved
for the treatment of chronic HBV infection. At dosages
of 100 mg/d for 1 year, lamivudine is well tolerated and
results in suppression of HBV DNA levels, normalization
of serum aminotransferase levels in 50–70% of patients,
and reduction of hepatic inﬂammation and ﬁbrosis in
50–60% of patients. Loss of hepatitis B e antigen (HBeAg)
occurs in 30% of patients. Resistance to lamivudine devel-
ops in 24% of patients treated for 1 year and is associated
with changes in the YMDD motif of HBV DNA poly-
merase.This is an important limitation of monotherapy
with the drug. Lamivudine is being evaluated as a com-
ponent of combination regimens (with IFNs and other
nucleoside or nucleotide analogues listed below) for the
treatment of hepatitis B. Lamivudine appears to be useful
in the prevention or suppression of HBV infection asso-
ciated with liver transplantation.
ADEFOVIR
Adefovir dipivoxil is an acyclic nucleotide analogue of
adenosine monophosphate that has activity against HBV,
HIV, HSV, and CMV. It is phosphorylated by cellular
kinases to the active triphosphate moiety, which is a
competitive inhibitor of HBV DNA polymerase and
results in chain termination after incorporation into
nascent viral DNA.Adefovir is administered orally and is
eliminated primarily by the kidneys, with a plasma half-
life of 7.5 h. In clinical studies, therapy with adefovir at
10 mg/d for 48 weeks resulted in normalization of alanine
aminotransferase (ALT) levels in 48–72% of patients and
improved liver histology in 53–64%; it also resulted in a
3.6-log10 reduction in the number of HBV DNA copies
per milliliter of plasma. Adefovir was effective in treat-
ment-naive patients as well as in those infected with
lamivudine-resistant HBV. Resistance to adefovir appears
to develop less readily than that to lamivudine, but ade-
fovir resistance rates of 15–18% have been reported after
192 weeks of treatment.This agent is generally well tol-
erated. Signiﬁcant nephrotoxicity attributable to adefovir
is uncommon at the dosage used in the treatment of
HBV infections (10 mg/d) but is a treatment-limiting
Antiviral Chemotherapy, Excluding Antiretroviral Drugs
467
CHAPTER 43
adverse effect at the higher doses used in therapy for
HIV infections (30–120 mg/d). In any case, renal func-
tion should be monitored in patients taking adefovir,
even at the lower dose. Adefovir is approved only for
treatment of chronic HBV infection.
TENOFOVIR
Tenofovir disoproxil fumarate is a nucleotide analogue of
adenosine monophosphate with activity against both
retroviruses and hepadnaviruses. In patients co-infected
with HIV and HBV, tenofovir reduces HBV loads by
3–4 log10 copies/mL at 24 weeks and is effective against
lamivudine-resistant HBV.The drug is approved only for
treatment of HIV infection, but its use should be con-
sidered in patients co-infected with HIV and HBV.
ENTECAVIR
Entecavir is a cyclopentyl guanosine analogue that inhibits
HBV through inhibition of HBV DNA polymerase by
entecavir triphosphate and is also active against HIV. In
vitro, entecavir is more potent than lamivudine or adefovir
against HBV and is also effective against lamivudine-
resistant HBV. Administration of entecavir at 0.5 mg/d
PO for 48 weeks results in a reduction of HBV DNA by
5.0–6.9 log10 copies/mL, normalization of ALT values in
68–78% of recipients, and loss of HBeAg in 21%. Ente-
cavir is highly bioavailable but should be taken on an
empty stomach because food interferes with its absorp-
tion. The drug is eliminated primarily in unchanged
form by the kidneys, and its dosage should be adjusted
for patients with CrCl values of <50 mg/min. Overall,
entecavir is well tolerated. Resistance to entecavir has
not been observed during the treatment of naive patients;
however, resistance was noted in 7–10% of lamivudine-
refractory patients at 48 weeks of treatment with ente-
cavir. Entecavir-resistant strains appear to be sensitive to
adefovir.As with other anti-HBV treatments, exacerbation
of hepatitis may occur when entecavir therapy is stopped.
Entecavir is approved for treatment of chronic hepatitis
B in adults.
TELBIVUDINE
Telbivudine is the β-L enantiomer of thymidine and is a
potent inhibitor of HBV. Its active form is telbivudine
triphosphate, which inhibits HBV DNA polymerase but
has little or no activity against human DNA polymerase.
Administration of telbivudine at 600 mg/d PO for 
52 weeks to patients with chronic hepatitis B resulted in
reduction of HBV DNA by >5 log10 copies/mL along
with either loss of serum HBeAg or normalization of ALT
in 75% of recipients. After 2 years of therapy, resistance
to telbivudine was noted in isolates from 8.6–21.6% of
patients. Telbivudine-resistant HBV is usually resistant
to lamivudine as well but is generally susceptible to
adefovir.
Telbivudine is eliminated primarily by the kidneys,
and the dosage should be reduced in patients with a
ClCr value of <50 mL/min.Telbivudine is generally well
tolerated, but increases in serum creatinine kinases and
clinically evident myopathy have been observed.As with
other anti-HBV drugs, hepatitis may be exacerbated in
patients who have discontinued telbivudine therapy.
Telbivudine has been approved for the treatment of
adults with chronic hepatitis B who have evidence of
viral replication and either persistent elevation in serum
aminotransferases or histologically active disease.
INTERFERONS
IFNs are cytokines that exhibit a broad spectrum of
antiviral activities as well as immunomodulating and
antiproliferative properties. IFNs are not available for oral
administration but must be given IM, SC, or IV. Early
studies with human leukocyte IFN demonstrated an effect
in the prophylaxis of experimentally induced rhinovirus
infections in humans and in the treatment of VZV infec-
tions in immunosuppressed patients. DNA recombi-
nant technology has made available highly puriﬁed α, β,
and γ IFNs that have been evaluated in a variety of viral
infections. Results of such trials have conﬁrmed the
effectiveness of intranasally administered IFN in the pro-
phylaxis of rhinovirus infections, although its use has
been associated with nasal mucosal irritation. Studies have
also demonstrated a beneﬁcial effect of intralesionally or
systemically administered IFNs on genital warts. The
effect of systemic administration consists primarily of a
reduction in the size of the warts, and this mode of ther-
apy may be useful in persons who have numerous warts
that cannot easily be treated by individual intralesional
injections. However, lesions frequently recur after either
intralesional or systemic IFN therapy is discontinued.
IFNs have undergone extensive study in the treat-
ment of chronic HBV infection. The administration of
IFN-α2b (5 million units daily or 10 million units three
times a week for 16–24 weeks) to patients with stable
chronic HBV infection resulted in loss of markers of
HBV replication, such as HBeAg and HBV DNA, in
33–37% of cases; 8% of patients also became negative for
hepatitis B surface antigen. In >80% of patients who lose
HBeAg and HBV DNA markers, serum aminotransferases
return to normal levels, and both short- and long-term
improvements in liver histopathology have been described.
Predictors of a favorable response to therapy include low
pretherapy levels of HBV DNA, high pretherapy serum
levels of ALT, a short duration of chronic HBV infection,
and active inﬂammation in liver histopathology. Poor
responses are seen in immunosuppressed patients, includ-
ing those with HIV infection.A longer duration of therapy
468
Disorders Complicating Critical Illnesses and Their Management
SECTION V
(12–24 months) is recommended for HBeAg-negative
chronic hepatitis B.Adverse effects of the above doses of
IFN are common and include fever, chills, myalgia,
fatigue, neurotoxicity (primarily manifested as somno-
lence, depression, anxiety, and confusion), and leukope-
nia. Approximately 25% of patients receiving a daily
dose of 5 million units require dose reduction, but <5%
require discontinuation of therapy. Pegylated IFNs,
which are covalently linked with monomethoxy poly-
ethylene glycol, have a markedly reduced clearance rate.
Therefore, they can be administered less frequently, are
better tolerated, and may be more effective in some set-
tings than standard IFNs (see discussion of hepatitis C
below). Pegylated IFN-α2a is approved for the treatment
of patients with chronic hepatitis B who are either positive
or negative for HBeAg (Table 43-1).
Several IFN preparations,including IFN-α2a,IFN-α2b,
IFN-alfacon-1,and IFN-αm1 (lymphoblastoid),have been
studied as therapy for chronic HCV infections.A variety
of monotherapy regimens have been used, of which the
most common is IFN-α2b or -α2a at 3 million units
three times per week for 12–18 months.The addition of
oral ribavirin to IFN-α2b—either as initial therapy or
after failure of IFN therapy alone—results in signiﬁcantly
higher rates of sustained virologic or serum ALT responses
(40–50%) than are obtained with monotherapy. Com-
parative studies indicate that pegylated IFN-α2b or -α2a
therapy is more effective than standard IFN treatment
against chronic HCV infection.The combination of SC
pegylated IFN and oral ribavirin is more convenient and
appears to be the most effective regimen for treatment
of chronic hepatitis C. With this combination regimen,
sustained virologic responses were seen in 42–46% of
patients with genotype 1 infection and in 76–82% of
patients with genotype 2 or 3 infection. Ribavirin appears
to have a small antiviral effect in HCV infection but may
also be working through an immunomodulatory effect
in combination with IFN. Optimal results with ribavirin
appear to be associated with weight-based dosing. Prog-
nostic factors for a favorable response include an age of
<45 years, a short duration of infection, low levels of HCV
RNA, and infection with HCV genotypes other than 1.
IFN-alfacon, a synthetic “consensus” α interferon, appears
to produce response rates similar to those elicited by
IFN-α2a or -α2b alone and is also approved in the United
States for the treatment of chronic hepatitis C.
The efﬁcacy of IFN-α treatment for chronic hepatitis
D remains unestablished. Anecdotal reports suggested
that dosages ranging from 5 million U/d to 9 million
units three times per week for 12 months elicit bio-
chemical and virologic responses. Results from small
controlled trials have been inconsistent, and observed
responses have not generally been sustained. Limited
experience has been published with the use of pegylated
IFN-α2b for treatment of hepatitis D, but some consul-
tants prefer this agent for this indication because of its
pharmacologic advantages over standard IFN.
FURTHER READINGS
BEUTNER KR et al:Valaciclovir compared with acyclovir for improved
therapy for herpes zoster in immunocompetent adults.Antimicrob
Agents Chemother 39:1546, 1995
COUCH RB: Drug therapy: Prevention and treatment of inﬂuenza.
N Engl J Med 343:1778, 2000
CRUMPACKER CS: Ganciclovir. N Engl J Med 335:721, 1996
DOLIN R et al: A controlled trial of amantadine and rimantadine in
the prophylaxis of inﬂuenza A infection. N Engl J Med 307:580,
1982
FIELD JJ, HOOFNAGLE JH: Mechanism of action of interferon and rib-
avirin in treatment of hepatitis C. Nature 436:967, 2005
GISH RG et al: Safety and antiviral activity of emtricitabine (FTC)
for the treatment of chronic hepatitis B infection: A two-year
study. J Hepatol 43:60, 2005
HALL CB et al:Aerosolized ribavirin treatment of infants with respi-
ratory syncytial viral infection:A randomized double-blind study.
N Engl J Med 308:1443, 1983
HAYDEN FG: Antiviral drugs (other than antiretrovirals), in Principles
and Practice of Infectious Diseases, 6th ed, JE Bennett et al (eds).
Philadelphia, Elsevier Churchill Livingstone, 2005, pp 514–551
LAI CL et al: Entecavir versus lamivudine for patients with HBeAg-
negative chronic hepatitis B. N Engl J Med 354:186, 2006
LALEZARI JP et al: Randomized controlled study of the safety and efﬁ-
cacy of IV cidofovir for the treatment of relapsing cytomegalovirus
retinitis in patients with AIDS.J AIDS 17:339,1998
LOK AS et al: Management of hepatitis B: 2000—summary of a
workshop. Gastroenterology 120:1828, 2001
MARTIN DF et al: A controlled trial of valganciclovir as induction
therapy for cytomegalovirus retinitis. N Engl J Med 346:1119,
2002
NATIONAL INSTITUTES
OF HEALTH CONSENSUS DEVELOPMENT
CONFERENCE STATEMENT: Management of hepatitis C. September
12,2002 (available at www.niaid.nih.gov)
TREANOR JJ et al: Efﬁcacy and safety in treating acute inﬂuenza: A
randomized controlled trial. U.S. Oral Neuraminidase Study
Group. JAMA 283:1016, 2000
Antiviral Chemotherapy, Excluding Antiretroviral Drugs
469
CHAPTER 43
John E. Edwards, Jr.
TERMINOLOGY AND MICROBIOLOGY
Traditionally, fungal infections have been classiﬁed into
speciﬁc categories based on both anatomic location and
epidemiology.The most common general anatomic cate-
gories are mucocutaneous and deep organ infection; the
most common general epidemiologic categories are
endemic and opportunistic. Although mucocutaneous infec-
tions can cause serious morbidity, they are rarely fatal. Deep
organ infections also cause severe illness in many cases, but in
contrast to mucocutaneous infections, they are often fatal.
The endemic mycoses (e.g., coccidioidomycosis) are infec-
tions caused by fungal organisms that are not part of the
normal human microbial ﬂora and are acquired from envi-
ronmental sources. In contrast, opportunistic mycoses are
caused by organisms (e.g., Candida and Aspergillus spp.) that
frequently are components of the normal human ﬂora and
whose ubiquity in nature renders them easily acquired by
immunocompromised hosts. Opportunistic fungi cause
serious infections when the immunologic response of the
host becomes ineffective, allowing the organisms to transi-
tion from harmless commensals to invasive pathogens.
Frequently, the diminished effectiveness of the immune
system is a result of advanced modern therapies that coin-
cidentally either unbalance the host’s microﬂora or directly
interfere with immunologic responses. Endemic mycoses
cause more severe illness in immunocompromised patients
than in immunocompetent individuals.
Patients acquire infection with endemic fungi almost
exclusively by inhalation. The soil is the natural reser-
voir for the vast majority of endemic mycoses. The 
DIAGNOSIS AND TREATMENT 
OF FUNGAL INFECTIONS
dermatophytic fungi may be acquired by human-to-
human transmission, but the majority of infections
result from environmental contact. In contrast, the
opportunistic fungus Candida invades the host from
normal sites of colonization, usually the mucous mem-
branes of the gastrointestinal tract. In general, innate
immunity is the primary defense mechanism against
fungi. Although antibodies are formed during many
fungal infections (and even during commensalism), they
generally do not constitute the primary mode of
defense. Nevertheless, in selected infections, as discussed
below, measurement of antibody titers may be a useful
diagnostic test.
Three other terms frequently used in clinical discus-
sions of fungal infections are yeast, mold, and dimorphic
fungus. Yeasts are seen as rounded single cells or as bud-
ding organisms. Candida and Cryptococcus spp. are tradi-
tionally classiﬁed as yeasts. Molds grow as ﬁlamentous
forms called hyphae both at room temperature and when
they invade tissue. Aspergillus, Rhizopus spp. [the species
that causes mucormycosis (zygomycosis)], and fungi
commonly infecting the skin to cause ringworm and
related cutaneous conditions are classiﬁed as molds.
Variations occur within this classiﬁcation of yeasts and
molds. For instance, when Candida spp. infects tissue,
both yeasts and ﬁlamentous forms may occur (except
with Candida glabrata, which forms only yeasts in tis-
sue); in contrast, Cryptococcus spp. exists only in yeast
form. Dimorphic is the term used to describe fungi that
grow as yeasts or large spherical structures in tissue but
CHAPTER 44
CHAPTER 44
470
Terminology and Microbiology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .470
Diagnosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .471
I Further Readings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .474
Diagnosis and Treatment of Fungal Infections
471
CHAPTER 44
as ﬁlamentous forms at room temperature in the environ-
ment. Classiﬁed in this group are the organisms causing
blastomycosis, paracoccidioidomycosis, coccidioidomyco-
sis, histoplasmosis, blastomycosis, and sporotrichosis.
The incidence of fungal infections has increased sub-
stantially over the past several decades. Opportunistic
infections have increased in frequency as a consequence
of intentional immunosuppression in organ and stem
cell transplantation and many other diseases, the admin-
istration of cytotoxic chemotherapy for cancers, and 
the liberal use of antibacterial agents. The incidence of
endemic mycoses has increased in geographic locations
where there has been substantial population growth.
DIAGNOSIS
The deﬁnitive diagnosis of any fungal infection requires
histopathologic identiﬁcation of the fungus invading tis-
sue accompanied by evidence of an inﬂammatory
response.The identiﬁcation of an inﬂammatory response
has been especially important with regard to Aspergillus
infection. Aspergillus spp. is ubiquitous and can ﬂoat from
the air onto biopsy material. Therefore, in rare but
important instances, this fungus is an ex vivo contami-
nant during processing of a specimen for microscopy,
with a consequent incorrect diagnosis. The stains most
commonly used to identify fungi are periodic acid–Schiff
and Gomori methenamine silver. Candida spp., unlike
other fungi, is visible on gram-stained tissue smears.
Hematoxylin and eosin stain is not sufﬁcient to identify
Candida spp. in tissue specimens.When positive, an India
ink preparation of cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF) is diagnostic
for cryptococcosis. Most laboratories now use calcoﬂuor
white staining coupled with ﬂuorescent microscopy to
identify fungi in ﬂuid specimens.
Extensive investigations of the diagnosis of deep
organ fungal infections have yielded a variety of tests
with different degrees of speciﬁcity and sensitivity.
The most reliable tests are the detection of antibody to
Coccidioides immitis and Histoplasma capsulatum in serum
and CSF, the detection of cryptococcal polysaccharide
antigen in serum and CSF, and the detection of Histo-
plasma antigen in urine or serum. The test for galac-
tomannan has been used extensively in Europe and is
now approved in the United States for diagnosis of
aspergillosis. This test requires additional validation
before its true usefulness can be determined. Sources of
concern are the incidence of false-negative results and
the need for multiple serial tests to reduce this inci-
dence. The β-glucan test for Candida spp. is also under
evaluation, but similar to the galactomannan test,
requires additional validation. Numerous polymerase
chain reaction assays to detect antigens are in the devel-
opmental stages, as are nucleic acid hybridization tech-
niques; however, these methods are not currently used
on a widespread basis in major medical centers.
Of the fungal organisms, Candida spp. is by far most
frequently recovered from blood.Although Candida spp.
can be detected with any of the automated blood culture
systems widely used at present, the lysis-centrifugation
technique increases the sensitivity of blood cultures
for less common organisms (e.g., H. capsulatum) and
should be used when disseminated fungal infection is
suspected.
Except in the cases of coccidioidomycosis, cryptococ-
cosis, and histoplasmosis, there are no fully validated and
widely used tests for serodiagnosis of disseminated fun-
gal infection. Skin tests for the endemic mycoses are no
longer available.
Treatment:
FUNGAL INFECTIONS
This discussion is intended as a brief overview of gen-
eral strategies for the use of antifungal agents in the
treatment of patients with fungal infections. Details on
regimens, schedules, and strategies are discussed in
the chapters on specific mycoses.
Because fungal organisms are eukaryotic cells that
contain most of the same organelles (with many of the
same physiologic functions) as human cells, the identiﬁ-
cation of drugs that selectively kill or inhibit fungi but
are not toxic to human cells has been highly problem-
atic. Far fewer antifungal than antibacterial agents have
been introduced into clinical medicine.
AMPHOTERICIN B (AmB)
The introduction of
AmB in the late 1950s revolutionized the treatment of
patients with fungal infections in deep organs.Before AmB
became available, cryptococcal meningitis and other dis-
seminated fungal infections were nearly always fatal. For
nearly a decade after AmB was introduced, it was the only
effective agent for the treatment of patients with life-
threatening fungal infections. AmB remains the broadest-
spectrum antifungal agent but carries several disadvan-
tages, including signiﬁcant nephrotoxicity, lack of an oral
preparation, and unpleasant side effects (fever, chills, and
nausea) during treatment. To circumvent nephrotoxicity
and infusion side effects, lipid formulations of AmB were
developed and have virtually replaced the original col-
loidal deoxycholate formulation in clinical use (although
the older formulation is still available). The lipid formula-
tions include liposomal AmB (L-AB; 435 mg/kg per day)
and AmB lipid complex (ABLC; 5 mg/kg per day). A third
preparation, AmB colloidal dispersion (ABCD; 3–4 mg/kg
per day), is rarely used because of the high incidence of
side effects associated with infusion. (The doses listed are
standard doses for adults with invasive infection.)
The lipid formulations of AmB have the disadvan-
tage of being considerably more expensive than the
Disorders Complicating Critical Illnesses and Their Management
472
SECTION V
deoxycholate formulation. Experience is still accumu-
lating on the comparative efﬁcacy, toxicity, and advan-
tages of the different formulations for speciﬁc clinical
fungal infections [e.g., central nervous system (CNS)
infection].Whether there is a clinically signiﬁcant differ-
ence in these drugs with respect to CNS penetration or
nephrotoxicity remains controversial. Despite these
issues and despite the expense, the lipid formulations
are now much more commonly used than AmB deoxy-
cholate in the United States.
AZOLES
This class of antifungal drugs offers impor-
tant advantages over AmB: the azoles cause little or no
nephrotoxicity and are available in oral preparations.
Early azoles included ketoconazole and miconazole,
which have been replaced by newer agents for the
treatment of patients with deep organ fungal infections.
The azoles’ mechanism of action is inhibition of ergos-
terol synthesis in the fungal cell wall. Unlike AmB, these
drugs are considered fungistatic,not -cidal.
Fluconazole
Since its introduction, ﬂuconazole has
played an extremely important role in the treatment of a
wide variety of serious fungal infections. Its major advan-
tages are the availability of both oral and IV formulations,
a long half-life, satisfactory penetration of most body ﬂu-
ids (including ocular ﬂuid and CSF), and minimal toxicity
(especially relative to AmB). Its disadvantages include
(usually reversible) hepatotoxicity and—at high doses—
alopecia,muscle weakness,and dry mouth with a metallic
taste. Fluconazole is not effective for the treatment of
aspergillosis, mucormycosis, or Scedosporium apiosper-
mum infections. It is less effective than the newer azoles
against C.glabrata and Candida krusei.
Fluconazole has become the agent of choice for the
treatment of coccidioidal meningitis, although relapses
have occurred after therapy with this drug. In addition,
ﬂuconazole is useful for both consolidation and mainte-
nance therapy for cryptococcal meningitis. This agent
has been shown to be as efﬁcacious as AmB in the treat-
ment of candidemia. The effectiveness of ﬂuconazole in
candidemia and the drug’s relatively minimal toxicity in
conjunction with the inadequacy of diagnostic tests for
widespread hematogenously disseminated candidiasis
have led to a change in the paradigm for candidemia
management. The standard of care is now to treat all
candidemic patients with an antifungal agent and to
change all their intravascular lines, if feasible, rather
than merely to remove a singular suspect intravascular
line and then observe the patient.The usual ﬂuconazole
regimen for treatment of candidemia is 400 mg/d given
until 2 weeks after the last positive blood culture.
Fluconazole is considered effective as fungal prophy-
laxis in bone marrow transplant recipients and high-risk
liver transplant patients. Its use for prophylaxis in
patients with leukemia, in AIDS patients with low CD4+
T cell counts, and in patients on surgical intensive care
units remains controversial.
Voriconazole
Similar to ﬂuconazole, voriconazole is
available in both oral and IV formulations. Voriconazole
has a broader spectrum than ﬂuconazole against Can-
dida spp. (including C. glabrata and C. krusei) and is
active against Aspergillus, Scedosporium, and Fusarium
spp. It is generally considered the ﬁrst-line drug of
choice for treatment of aspergillosis. A few case reports
have shown voriconazole to be effective in individual
patients with coccidioidomycosis, blastomycosis, and
histoplasmosis, but (because of limited data) this agent
is not recommended for treatment of the endemic
mycoses. Among the disadvantages of voriconazole
(compared with ﬂuconazole) are its more numerous
interactions with many of the drugs used in patients
predisposed to fungal infections. Hepatotoxicity, skin
rashes (including photosensitivity), and visual distur-
bances are relatively common. Voriconazole is also con-
siderably more expensive than fluconazole. Moreover,
it is advisable to monitor voriconazole levels in certain
patients because (1) this drug is completely metabo-
lized in the liver by CYP2C9, CYP3A4, and CYP2C19 and
(2) human genetic variability in CYP2C19 activity
exists. Dosages should be reduced accordingly in those
patients with liver failure. Dose adjustments for renal
insufﬁciency are not necessary; however, because the 
IV formulation is prepared in cyclodextrin, it should not
be given to patients with severe renal insufﬁciency.
Itraconazole
Itraconazole is available in IV and oral
(capsule and suspension) formulations. Varying blood
levels among patients taking oral itraconazole reflect a
disadvantage compared with the other azoles. Itra-
conazole is the drug of choice for mild to moderate
histoplasmosis and blastomycosis and has often been
used for chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis. It has
been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administra-
tion (FDA) for use in febrile neutropenic patients.
Itraconazole has also proven useful for the treatment
of chronic coccidioidomycosis, sporotrichosis, and 
S. apiospermum infection. The mucocutaneous and
cutaneous fungal infections that have been treated
successfully with itraconazole include oropharyngeal
candidiasis (especially in AIDS patients), tinea versi-
color, tinea capitis, and onychomycosis. Disadvantages
of itraconazole include its poor penetration into the
CSF, the use of cyclodextrin in both the oral suspension
and the IV preparation, the variable absorption of the
capsules, and the need for monitoring of blood levels
in patients taking capsules for disseminated mycoses.
In recent years, reported cases of severe congestive
heart failure in patients taking itraconazole have been
a source of concern. Similar to the other azoles, itra-
conazole can cause hepatic toxicity.
Diagnosis and Treatment of Fungal Infections
473
CHAPTER 44
Posaconazole
Posaconazole has been approved by the
FDA for prophylaxis of aspergillosis and candidiasis in
patients at high risk for developing these infections
because of severe immunocompromise.This drug has also
been evaluated for the treatment of patients with zygomy-
cosis, fusariosis, aspergillosis, and oropharyngeal candidia-
sis. The relevant studies of posaconazole in zygomycosis,
fusariosis, and aspergillosis have examined salvage ther-
apy. A study of >90 patients whose zygomycosis was
refractory to other therapy yielded encouraging results.
No trials of posaconazole for the treatment of candidemia
have yet been reported. Case reports have described the
drug’s efﬁcacy in coccidioidomycosis and histoplasmosis.
Controlled trials have shown its effectiveness as a prophy-
lactic agent in patients with acute leukemia and in bone
marrow transplant recipients. In addition, posaconazole
has been found to be effective against ﬂuconazole-
resistant Candida spp.The results of a large-scale study of
the use of posaconazole as salvage therapy for aspergillo-
sis have been promising but, as of this writing, have not
been published in a peer-reviewed format.
ECHINOCANDINS
The echinocandins, including the
approved drugs caspofungin, anidulafungin, and micafun-
gin, have added considerably to the antifungal armamen-
tarium. All three of these agents inhibit β-1,3-glucan syn-
thase,which is necessary for cell wall synthesis in fungi and
is not a component of human cells.None of these agents is
available in an oral formulation.The echinocandins are con-
sidered fungicidal for Candida spp. and fungistatic for
Aspergillus spp.Theirgreatestusetodateisagainstcandidal
infections. They offer two advantages: broad-spectrum
activity against all Candida spp. and relatively low toxicity.
The minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) of all the
echinocandins are highest against C. parapsilosis; it is not
clear whether these higher MIC values represent less clini-
cal effectiveness against this species.The echinocandins are
amongthesafestantifungalagents.
In controlled trials, caspofungin has been at least as
efﬁcacious as AmB for the treatment of candidemia and
invasive candidiasis and as efﬁcacious as ﬂuconazole for
the treatment of candidal esophagitis. In addition,
caspofungin has been efﬁcacious as salvage therapy for
aspergillosis. At present, it is used most extensively for
the treatment of candidemic patients, especially before
the infecting species is precisely identiﬁed.
Anidulafungin has been approved by the FDA as ther-
apy for candidemia in nonneutropenic patients and for
Candida esophagitis, intraabdominal infection, and peri-
tonitis. In controlled trials, anidulafungin has been more
efﬁcacious than ﬂuconazole against candidemia and inva-
sive candidiasis and as efﬁcacious as ﬂuconazole against
candidal esophagitis. When anidulafungin is used with
cyclosporine, tacrolimus, or voriconazole, no dosage
adjustment is required for either drug in the combination.
Micafungin has been approved for the treatment of
esophageal candidiasis and for prophylaxis in patients
receivingstemcelltransplants.Studiesthusfarhaveshown
that coadministration of micafungin and cyclosporine
does not require dose adjustments for either drug. When
micafungin is given with sirolimus, the AUC increases for
sirolimus, usually necessitating a reduction in its dose. In
open-labeltrials,favorableresultshavebeenobtainedwith
micafungin for the treatment of deep-seated Aspergillus
andCandida infections.
FLUCYTOSINE 
(5-FLUOROCYTOSINE)
The
use of ﬂucytosine has diminished in recent years as
newer antifungal drugs have been developed. Flucyto-
sine has a unique mechanism of action based on intra-
fungal conversion to 5-ﬂuorouracil, which is toxic to the
cell. Development of resistance to the compound has
limited its use as a single agent. Flucytosine is nearly
always used in combination with AmB.Its good penetra-
tion into the CSF makes it attractive for use with AmB for
treatment of cryptococcal meningitis. Flucytosine has
also been recommended for the treatment of candidal
meningitis in combination with AmB; comparative trials
with AmB alone have not been done.Signiﬁcant and fre-
quent bone marrow depression is seen with ﬂucytosine
when this drug is used with AmB.
GRISEOFULVIN AND TERBINAFINE
Histori-
cally, griseofulvin has been useful primarily for ringworm
infection. This agent is usually given for relatively long
periods. Terbinaﬁne has been used primarily for ony-
chomycosis but also for ringworm. In comparative stud-
ies, terbinaﬁne has been as effective as itraconazole and
more effective than griseofulvin for both conditions.
TOPICAL ANTIFUNGAL AGENTS
A detailed
discussion of the agents used for the treatment of cuta-
neous fungal infections and onychomycosis is beyond
the scope of this chapter; readers are referred to the der-
matology literature. Many classes of compounds have
been used to treat patients with the common fungal
infections of the skin. Among the azoles used are clotri-
mazole, econazole, miconazole, oxiconazole, sulcona-
zole,
ketoconazole,
tioconazole,
butaconazole,
and 
terconazole. In general, topical treatment of vaginal can-
didiasis has been successful.Because there is considered
to be little difference in the efﬁcacy of the various vagi-
nal preparations, the choice of agent is made by the
physician, the patient, or both on the basis of preference
and availability. Fluconazole given orally at 150 mg has
the advantage of not requiring repeated intravaginal
application. Nystatin is a polyene that has been used for
both oropharyngeal thrush and vaginal candidiasis.
Useful agents in other classes include ciclopirox
olamine, halprogin, terbinaﬁne, naftiﬁne, tolnaftate, and
undecylenic acid.
Disorders Complicating Critical Illnesses and Their Management
474
SECTION V
FURTHER READINGS
BATTI Z et al: Review of epidemiology, diagnosis, and treatment of
invasive mould infections in allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell
transplant recipients. Mycopathologia 162:1, 2006
CHU JH et al: Hospitalizations for endemic mycoses: A population-
based national study. Clin Infect Dis 42:822, 2006
DEPAUW BE: Increasing fungal infections in the intensive care unit.
Surg Infect (Larchmt) 7(Suppl 2):S93, 2006
DISMUKES WE: Antifungal therapy: Lessons learned over the past 
27 years. Clin Infect Dis 42:1289, 2006
ENOCH DA et al: Invasive fungal infections: A review of epidemiol-
ogy and management options. J Med Microbiol 55:809, 2006
KAUFFMAN CA: Clinical efﬁcacy of new antifungal agents. Curr
Opin Microbiol 9:1, 2006
LIPSETT PA: Surgical critical care: Fungal infections in surgical
patients. Crit Care Med 34(9 Suppl):S215, 2006
MANDELL GL et al (eds): Mycoses, in Principles and Practice of Infectious
Diseases, 6th ed. Philadelphia, Elsevier Churchill Livingstone,
2005, pp 2935–3094
WHEAT LJ: Antigen detection, serology, and molecular diagnosis of
invasive mycoses in the immunocompromised host. Transpl
Infect Dis 8:128, 2006
475
I Structural-Obstructive Oncologic Emergencies . . . . . . . . . . .475
Superior Vena Cava Syndrome . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .475
Pericardial Effusion or Tamponade . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .476
Intestinal Obstruction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .478
Urinary Obstruction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .478
Malignant Biliary Obstruction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .478
Spinal Cord Compression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .479
Increased Intracranial Pressure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .481
Neoplastic Meningitis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .481
Seizures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .482
Pulmonary and Intracerebral Leukocytostasis . . . . . . . . . . . .482
Hemoptysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .483
Airway Obstruction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .483
I Metabolic Emergencies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .484
Hypercalcemia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .484
Syndrome of Inappropriate Secretion 
of Antidiuretic Hormone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .484
Lactic Acidosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .484
Hypoglycemia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .484
Adrenal Insufﬁciency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .484
I Treatment-Related Emergencies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .485
Tumor Lysis Syndrome . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .485
Human Antibody Infusion Reactions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .486
Hemolytic-Uremic Syndrome . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .486
Neutropenia and Infection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .487
Pulmonary Inﬁltrates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .487
Neutropenic Enterocolitis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .488
Hemorrhagic Cystitis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .489
Hypersensitivity Reactions to Antineoplastic Drugs . . . . . . . .489
I Further Readings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 489
Rasim Gucalp
I
Janice P. Dutcher
Emergencies in patients with cancer may be classiﬁed
into three groups: pressure or obstruction caused by a
space-occupying lesion, metabolic or hormonal prob-
lems (paraneoplastic syndromes), and treatment-related
complications.
STRUCTURAL-OBSTRUCTIVE
ONCOLOGIC EMERGENCIES
SUPERIOR VENA CAVA SYNDROME
Superior vena cava syndrome (SVCS) is the clinical
manifestation of superior vena cava (SVC) obstruction,
with severe reduction in venous return from the head,
neck, and upper extremities. Malignant tumors, such as
lung cancer, lymphoma, and metastatic tumors, are
responsible for the majority of SVCS cases. With the
expanding use of intravascular devices (e.g., permanent
central venous access catheters, pacemaker/deﬁbrillator
leads), the prevalence of benign causes of SVCS is
increasing. Lung cancer, particularly of small cell and
squamous cell histologies, accounts for approximately
ONCOLOGIC EMERGENCIES
85% of all cases of malignant origin. In young adults,
malignant lymphoma is a leading cause of SVCS.
Hodgkin’s lymphoma involves the mediastinum more
commonly than other lymphomas but rarely causes
SVCS. When SVCS is noted in a young man with a
mediastinal mass, the differential diagnosis is lymphoma
versus primary mediastinal germ cell tumor. Metastatic
cancers to the mediastinum, such as testicular and breast
carcinomas, account for a small proportion of cases.
Other causes include benign tumors, aortic aneurysm,
thyromegaly, thrombosis, and ﬁbrosing mediastinitis
from prior irradiation or histoplasmosis.
Patients with SVCS usually present with neck and
facial swelling (especially around the eyes), dyspnea, and
cough. Other symptoms include hoarseness, tongue
swelling, headaches, nasal congestion, epistaxis, hemopt-
ysis, dysphagia, pain, dizziness, syncope, and lethargy.
Bending forward or lying down may aggravate the
symptoms. The characteristic physical ﬁndings are
dilated neck veins; an increased number of collateral
veins covering the anterior chest wall; cyanosis; and
edema of the face, arms, and chest. More severe cases
CHAPTER 45
CHAPTER 45
Disorders Complicating Critical Illnesses and Their Management
include proptosis, glossal and laryngeal edema, and
obtundation. The clinical picture is milder if the
obstruction is located above the azygos vein.
Signs and symptoms of cerebral or laryngeal edema,
although rare, are associated with a poorer prognosis and
require urgent evaluation. Seizures are more likely
related to brain metastases than to cerebral edema from
venous occlusion. Patients with small cell lung cancer
and SVCS have a higher incidence of brain metastases
than those without SVCS.
Cardiorespiratory symptoms at rest, particularly with
positional changes, suggest signiﬁcant airway and vascular
obstruction and limited physiologic reserve. Cardiac arrest
or respiratory failure can occur, particularly in patients
receiving sedatives or undergoing general anesthesia.
The diagnosis of SVCS is a clinical one. The most
signiﬁcant chest radiographic ﬁnding is widening of the
superior mediastinum, most commonly on the right
side. Pleural effusion occurs in only 25% of patients,
often on the right side. However, a normal chest radi-
ograph is still compatible with the diagnosis if other
characteristic ﬁndings are present. CT provides the most
reliable view of the mediastinal anatomy. The diagnosis
of SVCS requires diminished or absent opaciﬁcation of
central venous structures with prominent collateral
venous circulation. MRI has no advantages over CT.
Invasive procedures, including bronchoscopy, percuta-
neous needle biopsy, mediastinoscopy, and even thoraco-
tomy, can be performed by a skilled clinician without
any major risk of bleeding. For patients with a known
cancer, a detailed workup usually is not necessary, and
appropriate treatment may be started after obtaining a
CT scan of the thorax. For those with no history of
malignancy, a detailed evaluation is essential to rule out
benign causes and determine a speciﬁc diagnosis to
direct the appropriate therapy.
476
SECTION V
Treatment:
SUPERIOR VENA CAVA SYNDROME
The one potentially life-threatening complication of a
superior mediastinal mass is tracheal obstruction. Upper
airway obstruction demands emergent therapy. Diuret-
ics with a low-salt diet, head elevation, and oxygen may
produce temporary symptomatic relief. Glucocorticoids
may be useful at shrinking lymphoma masses; they are
of no beneﬁt in patients with lung cancer.
Radiation therapy is the primary treatment for SVCS
caused by non–small cell lung cancer and other
metastatic solid tumors.Chemotherapy is effective when
the underlying cancer is small cell carcinoma of the lung,
lymphoma, or germ cell tumor.SVCS recurs in 10–30% of
patients; it may be palliated with the use of intravascular
self-expanding stents (Fig. 45-1). Early stenting may be
necessary in patients with severe symptoms; however,
the prompt increase in venous return after stenting may
precipitate heart failure and pulmonary edema. Surgery
may provide immediate relief for patients in whom a
benign process is the cause.
Clinical improvement occurs in most patients,
although this improvement may be attributable to the
development of adequate collateral circulation. The
mortality associated with SVCS does not relate to caval
obstruction but rather to the underlying cause.
SUPERIOR VENA CAVA SYNDROME AND
CENTRAL VENOUS CATHETERS IN ADULTS
The use of long-term central venous catheters has
become common practice in patients with cancer. Major
vessel thrombosis may occur. In these cases, catheter
removal should be combined with anticoagulation to
prevent embolization. SVCS in this setting, if detected
early, can be treated by ﬁbrinolytic therapy without sac-
riﬁcing the catheter. The routine use of low-dose war-
farin or low-molecular-weight heparin to prevent
thrombosis related to permanent central venous access
catheters in cancer patients is not recommended.
PERICARDIAL EFFUSION OR TAMPONADE
Malignant pericardial disease is found at autopsy in 5–10%
of patients with cancer, most frequently with lung cancer,
breast cancer, leukemias, and lymphomas. Cardiac tampon-
ade as the initial presentation of extrathoracic malignancy
is rare.The origin is not malignancy in about 50% of can-
cer patients with symptomatic pericardial disease, but it
can be related to irradiation, drug-induced pericarditis,
hypothyroidism,
idiopathic pericarditis,
infection,
or
autoimmune diseases. Two types of radiation pericarditis
occur: (1) an acute inﬂammatory, effusive pericarditis
occurring within months of irradiation, which usually
resolves spontaneously, and (2) a chronic effusive pericardi-
tis that may appear up to ≤20 years after radiation therapy
and is accompanied by a thickened pericardium.
Most patients with pericardial metastasis are asympto-
matic. However, the common symptoms are dyspnea,
cough, chest pain, orthopnea, and weakness. Pleural effu-
sion,
sinus tachycardia,
jugular venous distension,
hepatomegaly, peripheral edema, and cyanosis are the
most frequent physical ﬁndings. Relatively speciﬁc diag-
nostic ﬁndings, such as paradoxical pulse, diminished
heart sounds, pulsus alternans (pulse waves alternating
between those of greater and lesser amplitude with suc-
cessive beats), and friction rub, are less common than
with nonmalignant pericardial disease. Chest radiography
and electrocardiography (ECG) reveal abnormalities in
90% of patients, but half of these abnormalities are non-
speciﬁc. Echocardiography is the most helpful diagnostic
test. Pericardial ﬂuid may be serous, serosanguineous, or
Oncologic Emergencies
477
CHAPTER 45
hemorrhagic, and cytologic examination of pericardial
ﬂuid is diagnostic in most patients. Cancer patients with
pericardial effusion containing malignant cells on cytol-
ogy have a very poor survival (~7 weeks).
A
B
C
FIGURE 45-1
Superior vena cava syndrome (SVCS). A. Chest radi-
ographs of a 59-year-old man with recurrent SVCS
caused by non–small cell lung cancer showing a right
paratracheal mass with right pleural effusion. B. CT of
the same patient demonstrating obstruction of the SVC
with thrombosis (arrow) by the lung cancer (square) and
collaterals (arrowheads). C. Balloon angioplasty (arrow-
head) with walstent (arrow) in the same patient.
Treatment:
PERICARDIAL EFFUSION OR 
TAMPONADE
Pericardiocentesis with or without the introduction of
sclerosing agents, the creation of a pericardial window,
complete pericardial stripping, cardiac irradiation, or 
systemic chemotherapy are effective treatments. Acute
pericardial tamponade with life-threatening hemody-
namic instability requires immediate drainage of ﬂuid.
This can be quickly achieved by pericardiocentesis. The
recurrence rate after percutaneous catheter drainage is
around 20%. Sclerotherapy (pericardial instillation of
bleomycin, mitomycin C, or tetracycline) may decrease
recurrences. Alternatively, subxiphoid pericardiotomy can
be performed in 45 min under local anesthesia. Thoraco-
scopic pericardial fenestration can be used for benign
causes; however, 60% of malignant pericardial effusions
recur after this procedure.
SECTION V
478
Disorders Complicating Critical Illnesses and Their Management
URINARY OBSTRUCTION
Urinary obstruction may occur in patients with prosta-
tic or gynecologic malignancies, particularly cervical
carcinoma; metastatic disease from other primary sites
such as carcinomas of the breast, stomach, lung, colon,
and pancreas; or lymphomas. Radiation therapy to
pelvic tumors may cause ﬁbrosis and subsequent ureteral
obstruction. Bladder outlet obstruction is usually caused
by prostate and cervical cancers and may lead to bilateral
hydronephrosis and renal failure.
Flank pain is the most common symptom. Persistent
urinary tract infection, persistent proteinuria, or hema-
turia in patients with cancer should raise suspicion of
ureteral obstruction. Total anuria or anuria alternating
with polyuria may occur.A slow, continuous increase in
the serum creatinine level necessitates immediate evalua-
tion. Renal ultrasonography is the safest and cheapest
way to identify hydronephrosis. The function of an
obstructed kidney can be evaluated by a nuclear scan.
CT scan can reveal the point of obstruction and identify
a retroperitoneal mass or adenopathy.
INTESTINAL OBSTRUCTION
Intestinal obstruction and reobstruction are common prob-
lems in patients with advanced cancer,particularly colorec-
tal or ovarian carcinoma. However, other cancers, such as
lung or breast cancer and melanoma,can metastasize within
the abdomen, leading to intestinal obstruction. Typically,
obstruction occurs at multiple sites. Melanoma has a
predilection for involving the small bowel;this involvement
may be isolated, and resection may result in prolonged sur-
vival. Intestinal pseudoobstruction is caused by inﬁltration
of the mesentery or bowel muscle by tumor, involvement
of the celiac plexus, or paraneoplastic neuropathy in
patients with small cell lung cancer. Paraneoplastic neu-
ropathy is associated with IgG antibodies reactive to neu-
rons of the myenteric and submucosal plexuses of the
jejunum and stomach.Ovarian cancer can lead to authentic
luminal obstruction or to pseudoobstruction that results
when circumferential invasion of a bowel segment arrests
the forward progression of peristaltic contractions.
The onset of obstruction is usually insidious. Pain is the
most common symptom and is usually colicky in nature.
Pain can also be caused by abdominal distension, tumor
masses, or hepatomegaly.Vomiting can be intermittent or
continuous. Patients with complete obstruction usually
have constipation. The physical examination may reveal
abdominal distension with tympany, ascites, visible peristal-
sis, high-pitched bowel sounds, and tumor masses. Erect
plain abdominal ﬁlms may reveal multiple air-ﬂuid levels
and dilation of the small or large bowel.Acute cecal dila-
tion to >12–14 cm is considered a surgical emergency
because of the high likelihood of rupture. CT scan is use-
ful in differentiating benign from malignant causes of
obstruction in patients who have undergone surgery for
malignancy. Malignant obstruction is suggested by a mass
at the site of obstruction or prior surgery, adenopathy, or
an abrupt transition zone and irregular bowel thickening
at the obstruction site. Benign obstruction is more likely
when CT shows mesenteric vascular changes, a large vol-
ume of ascites, or a smooth transition zone and smooth
bowel thickening at the obstruction site.The prognosis for
a patient with cancer who develops intestinal obstruction
is poor; the median survival is 3–4 months.About 25–30%
of patients are found to have intestinal obstruction due to
causes other than cancer. Adhesions from previous opera-
tions are a common benign cause. Ileus induced by vin-
cristine or other drugs is another reversible cause.
Treatment:
INTESTINAL OBSTRUCTION
The management of intestinal obstruction in patients
with advanced malignancy depends on the extent of
the underlying malignancy and the functional status of
the major organs. The initial management should
include surgical evaluation. Operation is not always 
Treatment:
URINARY OBSTRUCTION
Obstruction associated with ﬂank pain, sepsis, or ﬁstula
formation is an indication for immediate palliative urinary
diversion. Internal ureteral stents can be placed under
local anesthesia. Percutaneous nephrostomy offers an
alternative approach for drainage. In the case of bladder
outlet obstruction caused by malignancy, a suprapubic
cystostomy can be used for urinary drainage.
successful and may lead to further complications with a
substantial mortality rate (10–20%). Laparoscopy can
diagnose and treat malignant bowel obstruction in
some cases. Self-expanding metal stents placed in the
gastric outlet, duodenum, proximal jejunum, colon, or
rectum may palliate obstructive symptoms at those sites
without major surgery.
Patients known to have
advanced intraabdominal malignancy should receive a
prolonged course of conservative management, includ-
ing 
nasogastric 
decompression.
Treatment 
with
antiemetics, antispasmodics, and analgesics may allow
patients to remain outside the hospital. Octreotide may
relieve obstructive symptoms through its inhibitory
effect on gastrointestinal secretion.
MALIGNANT BILIARY OBSTRUCTION
This common clinical problem can be caused by a
primary carcinoma arising in the pancreas, ampulla of
Vater, bile duct, or liver or by metastatic disease to the
CHAPTER 45
479
Oncologic Emergencies
Expanding extradural tumors induce injury through
several mechanisms. Obstruction of the epidural venous
plexus leads to edema. Local production of inﬂamma-
tory cytokines enhances blood ﬂow and edema forma-
tion. Compression compromises blood ﬂow, leading to
ischemia. Production of vascular endothelial growth fac-
tor is associated with spinal cord hypoxia and has been
implicated as a potential cause of damage after spinal
cord injury.
The most common initial symptom in patients with
spinal cord compression is localized back pain and tender-
ness caused by involvement of vertebrae by tumor. Pain is
usually present for days or months before other neurologic
ﬁndings appear. It is exacerbated by movement and by
coughing or sneezing. It can be differentiated from the
pain of disc disease by the fact that it worsens when the
patient is supine. Radicular pain is less common than
localized back pain and usually develops later. Radicular
pain in the cervical or lumbosacral areas may be unilateral
or bilateral. Radicular pain from the thoracic roots is often
bilateral and is described by patients as a feeling of tight,
band-like constriction around the thorax and abdomen.
Typical cervical radicular pain radiates down the arm; in
the lumbar region, the radiation is down the legs. Lher-
mitte’s sign, a tingling or electric sensation down the back
and upper and lower limbs upon ﬂexing or extending the
neck, may be an early sign of cord compression. Loss of
bowel or bladder control may be the presenting symptom
but usually occurs late in the course.
On physical examination, pain induced by straight leg
raising, neck ﬂexion, or vertebral percussion may help to
determine the level of cord compression. Patients
develop numbness and paresthesias in the extremities or
trunk. Loss of sensibility to pinprick is as common as loss
of sensibility to vibration or position.The upper limit of
the zone of sensory loss is often one or two vertebrae
below the site of compression. Motor ﬁndings include
weakness, spasticity, and abnormal muscle stretching. An
extensor plantar reﬂex reﬂects signiﬁcant compression.
Deep tendon reﬂexes may be brisk. Motor and sensory
loss usually precedes sphincter disturbance. Patients with
autonomic dysfunction may present with decreased anal
tonus, decreased perineal sensibility, and a distended blad-
der.The absence of the anal wink reﬂex or the bulbocav-
ernosus reﬂex conﬁrms cord involvement. In doubtful
cases, evaluation of postvoiding urinary residual volume
can be helpful. A residual volume of >150 mL suggests
bladder dysfunction. Autonomic dysfunction is an unfa-
vorable prognostic factor. Patients with progressive neuro-
logic symptoms should undergo frequent neurologic
examinations and rapid therapeutic intervention. Other
illnesses that may mimic cord compression include osteo-
porotic vertebral collapse, disc disease, pyogenic abscess or
vertebral tuberculosis, radiation myelopathy, neoplastic
leptomeningitis, benign tumors, epidural hematoma, and
spinal lipomatosis.
periductal lymph nodes or liver parenchyma. The most
common metastatic tumors causing biliary obstruction
are gastric, colon, breast, and lung cancers. Jaundice,
light-colored stools, dark urine, pruritus, and weight loss
caused by malabsorption are usual symptoms. Pain and
secondary infection are uncommon in patients with
malignant biliary obstruction. Ultrasonography, CT
scan, or percutaneous transhepatic or endoscopic retro-
grade cholangiography will identify the site and nature
of the biliary obstruction.
Treatment:
MALIGNANT BILIARY OBSTRUCTION
Palliative intervention is indicated only in patients with
disabling pruritus resistant to medical treatment, severe
malabsorption,or infection.Stenting under radiographic
control, surgical bypass, or radiation therapy with or
without chemotherapy may alleviate the obstruction.
The choice of therapy should be based on the site of
obstruction (proximal versus distal), the type of tumor
(sensitive to radiotherapy, chemotherapy, or neither),
and the general condition of the patient. In the absence
of pruritus, biliary obstruction may be a largely asymp-
tomatic cause of death.
SPINAL CORD COMPRESSION
Malignant spinal cord compression (MSCC) is deﬁned
as compression of the spinal cord, cauda equina, or both
by an extradural tumor mass. The minimum radiologic
evidence for cord compression is indentation of the
theca at the level of clinical features. Spinal cord com-
pression occurs in 5–10% of patients with cancer.
Epidural tumor is the ﬁrst manifestation of malignancy
in about 10% of patients.The underlying cancer is usu-
ally identiﬁed during the initial evaluation; lung cancer
is the most common cause of MSCC.
Metastatic tumor involves the vertebral column more
often than any other part of the bony skeleton. Lung,
breast, and prostate cancer are the most frequent offend-
ers. Multiple myeloma also has a high incidence of spine
involvement. Lymphomas, melanoma, renal cell cancer,
and genitourinary cancers also cause spinal cord com-
pression. The thoracic spine is the most common site
(70%) followed by the lumbosacral spine (20%) and the
cervical spine (10%). Involvement of multiple sites is
most frequent in patients with breast and prostate carci-
noma. Cord injury develops when metastases to the ver-
tebral body or pedicle enlarge and compress the under-
lying dura. Another cause of cord compression is direct
extension of a paravertebral lesion through the interver-
tebral foramen. These cases usually involve lymphoma,
myeloma, or pediatric neoplasm. Parenchymal spinal
cord metastasis caused by hematogenous spread is rare.
SECTION V
480
Disorders Complicating Critical Illnesses and Their Management
the diagnosis of cancer. The role of bone scans in the
detection of cord compression is not clear; this method is
sensitive but less speciﬁc than spinal radiography.
The full-length image of the cord provided by MRI is
useful. Multiple epidural metastases are noted in 25% of
patients with cord compression, and their presence inﬂu-
ences treatment plans. On T1-weighted images, good con-
trast is noted between the cord, cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF),
and extradural lesions. Owing to its sensitivity in demon-
strating the replacement of bone marrow by tumor, MRI
can show which parts of a vertebra are involved by
tumor. MRI also visualizes intraspinal extradural masses
compressing the cord.T2-weighted images are most use-
ful for the demonstration of intramedullary pathology.
Gadolinium-enhanced MRI can help to delineate
intramedullary disease. MRI is as good as or better than
myelography plus postmyelogram CT scan in detecting
metastatic epidural disease with cord compression. Myel-
ography should be reserved for patients who have poor
MR images or who cannot undergo MRI promptly. CT
scan in conjunction with myelography enhances the
detection of small areas of spinal destruction.
In patients with cord compression and an unknown
primary tumor, a simple workup, including chest radiog-
raphy, mammography, measurement of prostate-speciﬁc
antigen, and abdominal CT, usually reveals the underly-
ing malignancy.
Cauda equina syndrome is characterized by low back
pain; diminished sensation over the buttocks, posterior-
superior thighs, and perineal area in a saddle distribu-
tion; rectal and bladder dysfunction; sexual impotence;
absent bulbocavernous, patellar, and Achilles’ reﬂexes;
and variable amount of lower extremity weakness. This
reﬂects compression of nerve roots as they form the
cauda equina after leaving the spinal cord.
Patients with cancer who develop back pain should
be evaluated for spinal cord compression as quickly as
possible (Fig. 45-2). Treatment is more often successful
in patients who are ambulatory and still have sphincter
control at the time treatment is initiated. Patients should
have a neurologic examination and plain ﬁlms of the
spine. Those whose physical examination suggests cord
compression should receive dexamethasone (24 mg IV
every 6 h), starting immediately.
Erosion of the pedicles (the “winking owl” sign) is the
earliest radiologic ﬁnding of vertebral tumor. Other radi-
ographic changes include increased intrapedicular distance,
vertebral destruction, lytic or sclerotic lesions, scalloped
vertebral bodies, and vertebral body collapse.Vertebral col-
lapse is not a reliable indicator of the presence of tumor;
about 20% of cases of vertebral collapse, particularly those
in older patients and postmenopausal women, are not
attributable to cancer but to osteoporosis. Also, a normal
appearance on plain ﬁlms of the spine does not exclude
FIGURE 45-2
Management of cancer patients with back pain.
Back Pain
Suspicious for
myelopathy
Normal
Plain spine
  radiographs
High-dose
  dexamethasone
Normal
Abnormal
Symptomatic
  treatment
Epidural
  metastases
Bone metastases but no
  epidural metastases
No
  metastases
Radiation therapy
+ dexamethasone
Radiation therapy
Symptomatic
  therapy
Neurologic exam
MRI
Treatment:
SPINAL CORD COMPRESSION
The treatment of patients with spinal cord compression
is aimed at relief of pain and restoration or preservation
of neurologic function (Fig. 45-2).
Radiation therapy plus glucocorticoids is generally
the initial treatment of choice for most patients with
spinal cord compression. Up to 75% of patients treated
when still ambulatory remain ambulatory, but only 10%
of patients with paraplegia recover walking capacity.
Indications for surgical intervention include unknown
etiology, failure of radiation therapy, a radioresistant
tumor type (e.g., melanoma or renal cell cancer), patho-
logic fracture dislocation, and rapidly evolving neuro-
logic symptoms. Laminectomy is done for tissue diag-
nosis and for the removal of posteriorly localized
epidural deposits in the absence of vertebral body dis-
ease. Because most cases of epidural spinal cord com-
pression are caused by anterior or anterolateral
extradural disease, resection of the anterior vertebral
body along with the tumor, followed by spinal stabiliza-
tion, has achieved good results. A randomized trial
showed that patients who underwent an operation fol-
lowed by radiotherapy (within 14 days) retained the
ability to walk signiﬁcantly longer than those treated
with radiotherapy alone. Surgically treated patients also
CHAPTER 45
481
Oncologic Emergencies
CT scan and MRI are equally effective in the diag-
nosis of brain metastases. CT scan with contrast should
be used as a screening procedure. The CT scan shows
brain metastases as multiple enhancing lesions of various
sizes with surrounding areas of low-density edema. If a
single lesion or no metastases are visualized by contrast-
enhanced CT, MRI of the brain should be performed.
Gadolinium-enhanced MRI is more sensitive than CT
at revealing meningeal involvement and small lesions,
particularly in the brainstem or cerebellum.
Intracranial hypertension secondary to tretinoin ther-
apy has been reported.
maintained continence and neurologic function signiﬁ-
cantly longer than patients in the radiation group. The
length of survival was not signiﬁcantly different in the
two groups, although there was a trend toward longer
survival in the surgery group.The study drew some criti-
cism for the poorer-than-expected results in the
patients who did not have surgery. However, patients
should be evaluated for surgery.
Conventional radiotherapy has a role after surgery.
Chemotherapymayhavearoleinpatientswithchemosen-
sitive tumors who have had prior radiotherapy to the same
region and who are not candidates for surgery. Most
patients with prostate cancer who develop cord compres-
sion have already had hormonal therapy; however, for
those who have not, androgen deprivation is combined
withsurgeryandradiotherapy.
Patients with metastatic vertebral tumors may bene-
ﬁt from percutaneous vertebroplasty, which is injection
of acrylic cement into a collapsed vertebra to stabilize
the fracture. Pain palliation is common, and local antitu-
mor effects have been noted. Cement leakage may
cause symptoms in about 10% of patients.
The histology of the tumor is an important determi-
nant of both recovery and survival.Rapid onset and pro-
gression of signs and symptoms are poor prognostic
features.
INCREASED INTRACRANIAL PRESSURE
About 25% of patients with cancer die with intracranial
metastases.The cancers that most often metastasize to the
brain are lung and breast cancers and melanoma. Brain
metastases often occur in the presence of systemic disease,
and they frequently cause major symptoms, disability, and
early death. The initial presentation of brain metastases
from a previously unknown primary cancer is common.
Lung cancer is most commonly the primary malignancy.
Chest CT scans and brain MRI as the initial diagnostic
studies can identify a biopsy site in most patients.
The signs and symptoms of a metastatic brain tumor are
similar to those of other intracranial expanding lesions and
include headache; nausea; vomiting; behavioral changes;
seizures; and focal, progressive neurologic changes. Occa-
sionally, the onset is abrupt, resembling a stroke, with the
sudden appearance of headache, nausea, vomiting, and
neurologic deﬁcits.This picture is usually caused by hem-
orrhage into the metastasis. Patients with melanoma, germ
cell tumors, and renal cell cancers have a particularly high
incidence of intracranial bleeding. The tumor mass and
surrounding edema may cause obstruction of the circula-
tion of CSF, with resulting hydrocephalus. Patients with
increased intracranial pressure (ICP) may have papilledema
with visual disturbances and neck stiffness. As the mass
enlarges, brain tissue may be displaced through the ﬁxed
cranial openings, producing various herniation syndromes.
Treatment:
INCREASED INTRACRANIAL PRESSURE
If signs and symptoms of brain herniation (particularly
headache, drowsiness, and papilledema) are present, the
patient should be intubated and hyperventilated to
maintain PCO2 between 25 and 30 mmHg and should
receive infusions of mannitol (1–1.5 g/kg) every 6 h.
Dexamethasone is the best initial treatment for all
symptomatic patients with brain metastases (see ear-
lier). Patients with multiple lesions should receive
whole-brain radiation therapy. Patients with a single
brain metastasis and with controlled extracranial dis-
ease may be treated with surgical excision followed by
whole-brain radiation therapy, especially if they are
younger than age 60 years. Radioresistant tumors
should be resected if possible. Stereotactic radiosurgery
is an effective treatment for inaccessible or recurrent
lesions. With a gamma knife or linear accelerator, multi-
ple small, well-collimated beams of ionizing radiation
destroy lesions seen on MRI. Some patients with
increased ICP associated with hydrocephalus may bene-
ﬁt from shunt placement. If neurologic deterioration is
not reversed with medical therapy, ventriculotomy to
remove CSF or craniotomy to remove tumors or
hematomas may be necessary.
NEOPLASTIC MENINGITIS
Tumor involving the leptomeninges is a complication of
both primary central nervous system (CNS) tumors and
tumors that metastasize to the CNS. The incidence is
estimated at 3–8% of patients with cancer. Melanoma,
breast and lung cancer, lymphoma (including that asso-
ciated with AIDS), and acute leukemia are the most
common causes. Synchronous intraparenchymal brain
metastases are evident in 11–31% of patients with neo-
plastic meningitis.
Patients typically present with multifocal neurologic
signs and symptoms, including headache, gait abnormal-
ity, mental changes, nausea, vomiting, seizures, back or
radicular pain, and limb weakness. Signs include cranial
SECTION V
482
Disorders Complicating Critical Illnesses and Their Management
SEIZURES
Seizures occurring in a patient with cancer can be
caused, by the tumor itself, by metabolic disturbances,
by radiation injury,
by cerebral infarctions,
by
chemotherapy-related encephalopathies, or by CNS
infections. Metastatic disease to the CNS is the most
common cause of seizures in patients with cancer.
However, seizures occur more frequently in those with
primary brain tumors than in those with metastatic
brain lesions. Seizures are a presenting symptom of
CNS metastasis in 6–29% of cases. Approximately 10%
of patients with CNS metastasis eventually develop
seizures. The presence of frontal lesions correlates with
early seizures, and the presence of hemispheric symp-
toms increases the risk for late seizures. Both early and
late seizures are uncommon in patients with posterior
fossa lesions. Seizures are also common in patients with
CNS metastases from melanoma.Very rarely, cytotoxic
drugs such as etoposide, busulfan, and chlorambucil
cause seizures.
nerve palsies, extremity weakness, paresthesia, and
decreased deep tendon reﬂexes.
Diagnosis is made by demonstrating malignant cells in
the CSF; however, up to 40% of patients may have false-
negative CSF cytology results. An elevated CSF protein
level is nearly always present (except in HTLV-1–associ-
ated adult T cell leukemia). Patients with neurologic signs
and symptoms consistent with neoplastic meningitis who
have negative CSF cytology results but an elevated CSF
protein level should have the spinal tap repeated at least
three times for cytologic examination before the diagno-
sis is rejected. MRI ﬁndings suggestive of neoplastic
meningitis include leptomeningeal, subependymal, dural,
or cranial nerve enhancement; superﬁcial cerebral lesions;
and communicating hydrocephalus. Spinal cord imaging
by MRI is a necessary component of the evaluation of
nonleukemia neoplastic meningitis because ~20% of
patients have cord abnormalities, including intradural
enhancing nodules that are diagnostic for leptomeningeal
involvement. Cauda equina lesions are common, but
lesions may be seen anywhere in the spinal canal. Radio-
labeled CSF ﬂow studies are abnormal in up to 70% of
patients with neoplastic meningitis; ventricular outlet
obstruction, abnormal ﬂow in the spinal canal, or
impaired ﬂow over the cerebral convexities may affect
distribution of intrathecal chemotherapy, resulting in
decreased efﬁcacy or increased toxicity. Radiation ther-
apy may correct CSF ﬂow abnormalities before use of
intrathecal chemotherapy. Neoplastic meningitis can also
lead to intracranial hypertension and hydrocephalus.
Placement of a ventriculoperitoneal shunt may effec-
tively palliate symptoms in these patients.
The development of neoplastic meningitis usually
occurs in the setting of uncontrolled cancer outside the
CNS; thus, prognosis is poor (median survival 10–12
weeks). However, treatment of the neoplastic meningitis
may successfully alleviate symptoms and control the
CNS spread.
Treatment:
NEOPLASTIC MENINGITIS
Intrathecal chemotherapy, usually methotrexate, cytara-
bine, or thiotepa, is delivered by lumbar puncture or by
an intraventricular reservoir (Ommaya) three times a
week until the CSF is free of malignant cells. Injections
are given twice a week for 1 month and then weekly for
1 month. An extended-release preparation of cytarabine
(DepoCyt e) has a longer half-life and is more effective
than other formulations. Among solid tumors, breast
cancer responds best to therapy. Patients with neoplas-
tic meningitis from either acute leukemia or lymphoma
may be cured of their CNS disease if the systemic dis-
ease can be eliminated.
Treatment:
SEIZURES
Patients in whom seizures caused by CNS metastases
have been demonstrated should receive anticonvulsive
treatment with diphenylhydantoin. Prophylactic anti-
convulsant therapy is not recommended unless the
patient is at a high risk for late seizures (melanoma pri-
mary, hemorrhagic metastases, treatment with radio-
surgery). In those patients, serum diphenylhydantoin
levels should be monitored closely and the dosage
adjusted according to serum levels. Phenytoin induces
the hepatic metabolism of dexamethasone, reducing its
half-life, and dexamethasone may decrease phenytoin
levels. Most antiseizure medications induce CYP450,
which alters the metabolism of antitumor agents,
including irinotecan, taxanes, and etoposide, as well as
molecular targeted agents, including imatinib, geﬁtinib,
and tipifarnib.
PULMONARY AND INTRACEREBRAL
LEUKOCYTOSTASIS
Hyperleukocytosis and the leukostasis syndrome associ-
ated with it is a potentially fatal complication of acute
leukemia [particularly acute myeloid leukemia (AML)]
that can occur when the peripheral blast cell count is
>100,000/mL. The frequency of hyperleukocytosis is
5–13% in AML and 10–30% in acute lymphoid
leukemia; however, leukostasis is rare in lymphoid
leukemia.At such high blast cell counts, blood viscosity
is increased, blood ﬂow is slowed by aggregates of
tumor cells, and the primitive myeloid leukemic cells
CHAPTER 45
483
Oncologic Emergencies
surgical procedure or the lesion is treated with a
neodymium:yttrium-aluminum-garnet (Nd:YAG) laser.
The surgical option is preferred. Bronchial artery
embolization may control brisk bleeding in 75–90% of
patients, permitting the definitive surgical procedure
to be done more safely. Embolization without defini-
tive surgery is associated with rebleeding in 20–50%
of patients. Patients with recurrent hemoptysis usually
respond to a second embolization procedure. A
postembolization syndrome characterized by pleuritic
pain, fever, dysphagia, and leukocytosis may occur; it
lasts 5–7 days and resolves with symptomatic treat-
ment. Bronchial or esophageal wall necrosis, myocar-
dial infarction, and spinal cord infarction are rare
complications.
Pulmonary hemorrhage with or without hemoptysis
in hematologic malignancies is often associated with
fungal infections, particularly Aspergillus spp. After gran-
ulocytopenia resolves, the lung inﬁltrates in aspergillosis
may cavitate and cause massive hemoptysis.Thrombocy-
topenia and coagulation defects should be corrected if
possible. Surgical evaluation is recommended in patients
with aspergillosis-related cavitary lesions.
AIRWAY OBSTRUCTION
Airway obstruction refers to a blockage at the level of the
mainstem bronchi or above. It may result either from
intraluminal tumor growth or from extrinsic compres-
sion of the airway. The most common cause of malig-
nant upper airway obstruction is invasion from an adja-
cent primary tumor, most commonly lung cancer,
followed by esophageal, thyroid, and mediastinal malig-
nancies. Extrathoracic primary tumors such as renal,
colon, or breast cancer can cause airway obstruction
through endobronchial or mediastinal lymph node
metastases. Patients may present with dyspnea, hemoptysis,
stridor, wheezing, intractable cough, postobstructive
pneumonia, or hoarseness. Chest radiographs usually
demonstrate obstructing lesions. CT scans reveal the
extent of the tumor. Cool, humidiﬁed oxygen; gluco-
corticoids; and ventilation with a mixture of helium and
oxygen (Heliox) may provide temporary relief. If the
obstruction is proximal to the larynx, a tracheostomy
may be lifesaving. For more distal obstructions, particu-
larly intrinsic lesions incompletely obstructing the air-
way, bronchoscopy with laser treatment, photodynamic
therapy, or stenting can produce immediate relief in
most patients (Fig. 45-3). However, radiation therapy
(either external-beam irradiation or brachytherapy)
given together with glucocorticoids may also open the
airway. Symptomatic extrinsic compression may be palli-
ated by stenting. Patients with primary airway tumors
such as squamous cell carcinoma, carcinoid tumor, ade-
nocystic carcinoma, or non–small cell lung cancer
should have surgery.
are capable of invading through endothelium and caus-
ing hemorrhage. The brain and lungs are most com-
monly affected. Patients with brain leukostasis may
experience stupor, headache, dizziness, tinnitus, visual
disturbances, ataxia, confusion, coma, or sudden death.
Administration of 600 cGy of whole-brain irradiation
can protect against this complication and can be fol-
lowed by rapid institution of antileukemic therapy. Pul-
monary leukostasis may present as respiratory distress
and hypoxemia and progress to respiratory failure. Chest
radiographs may be normal but usually show interstitial
or alveolar inﬁltrates. Arterial blood gas results should
be interpreted cautiously. Rapid consumption of plasma
oxygen by the markedly increased number of white
blood cells can cause spuriously low arterial oxygen
tension. Pulse oximetry is the most accurate way of
assessing oxygenation in patients with hyperleukocyto-
sis. Leukapheresis may be helpful in decreasing circulat-
ing blast counts.Treatment of the leukemia can result in
pulmonary hemorrhage from lysis of blasts in the lung,
called leukemic cell lysis pneumopathy. Intravascular vol-
ume depletion and unnecessary blood transfusions may
increase blood viscosity and worsen the leukostasis syn-
drome. Leukostasis is not a feature of the high white
blood cell counts associated with chronic lymphoid or
chronic myeloid leukemia.
When patients with acute promyelocytic leukemia
are treated with differentiating agents such as tretinoin
and arsenic trioxide, cerebral or pulmonary leukostasis
may occur as tumor cells differentiate into mature neu-
trophils. This complication can be largely avoided by
using cytotoxic chemotherapy together with the differ-
entiating agents.
HEMOPTYSIS
Hemoptysis may be caused by nonmalignant condi-
tions, but lung cancer accounts for a large proportion
of cases. Up to 20% of patients with lung cancer have
hemoptysis some time in their course. Endobronchial
metastases from carcinoid tumors, breast cancer, colon
cancer, kidney cancer, and melanoma may also cause
hemoptysis. The volume of bleeding is often difficult
to gauge. Massive hemoptysis is defined as >600 mL
of blood produced in 24 h. However, any hemoptysis
should be considered massive if it threatens life.When
respiratory difficulty occurs, hemoptysis should be
treated emergently. The first priorities are to maintain
the airway, optimize oxygenation, and stabilize the
hemodynamic status. Often patients can tell where the
bleeding is occurring.They should be placed bleeding
side down and given supplemental oxygen. If large-
volume bleeding continues or the airway is compro-
mised, the patient should be intubated and undergo
emergency bronchoscopy. If the site of bleeding is
detected, either the patient undergoes a definitive 
SECTION V
484
Disorders Complicating Critical Illnesses and Their Management
HYPOGLYCEMIA
Persistent hypoglycemia is occasionally associated with
tumors other than pancreatic islet cell tumors. Usually
these tumors are large; tumors of mesenchymal origin,
hepatomas, or adrenocortical tumors may cause hypo-
glycemia. Mesenchymal tumors are usually located in the
retroperitoneum or thorax. Obtundation, confusion, and
behavioral aberrations occur in the postabsorptive period
and may precede the diagnosis of the tumor. These
tumors often secrete incompletely processed insulin-like
growth factor II (IGF-II), a hormone capable of activat-
ing insulin receptors and causing hypoglycemia. Tumors
secreting incompletely processed big IGF-II are charac-
terized by an increased ratio of IGF-II to IGF-I, sup-
pressed insulin and C peptide level, and inappropriately
low growth hormone and β-hydroxybutyrate concentra-
tions. Rarely, hypoglycemia is caused by insulin secretion
by a non–islet cell carcinoma. The development of
hepatic dysfunction from liver metastases and increased
glucose consumption by the tumor can contribute to
hypoglycemia. If the tumor cannot be resected, hypo-
glycemia symptoms may be relieved by the administra-
tion of glucose, glucocorticoids, or glucagon.
Hypoglycemia can be artifactual; hyperleukocytosis
from leukemia, myeloproliferative diseases, leukemoid
reactions, or colony-stimulating factor treatment can
increase glucose consumption in the test tube after
blood is drawn, leading to pseudohypoglycemia.
ADRENAL INSUFFICIENCY
In patients with cancer, adrenal insufﬁciency may go
unrecognized because the symptoms, such as nausea,
vomiting, anorexia, and orthostatic hypotension, are
nonspeciﬁc and may be mistakenly attributed to pro-
gressive cancer or to therapy. Primary adrenal insufﬁ-
ciency may develop owing to replacement of both
METABOLIC EMERGENCIES
HYPERCALCEMIA
Hypercalcemia is the most common paraneoplastic 
syndrome.
SYNDROME OF INAPPROPRIATE
SECRETION OF ANTIDIURETIC HORMONE
Hyponatremia is a common electrolyte abnormality in
cancer patients, and the syndrome of inappropriate secre-
tion of antidiuretic hormone (SIADH) is the most com-
mon cause of hyponatremia among patients with cancer.
LACTIC ACIDOSIS
Lactic acidosis is a rare and potentially fatal metabolic
complication of cancer. Lactic acidosis associated with
sepsis, and circulatory failure is a common preterminal
event in many malignancies. Lactic acidosis in the
absence of hypoxemia may occur in patients with
leukemia, lymphoma, or solid tumors. Extensive involve-
ment of the liver by tumor is present in most cases.
Alteration of liver function may be responsible for the
lactate accumulation. HIV-infected patients have an
increased risk of aggressive lymphoma; lactic acidosis
that occurs in such patients may be related either to the
rapid growth of the tumor or from toxicity of nucleo-
side reverse transcriptase inhibitors. Symptoms of lactic
acidosis include tachypnea, tachycardia, change of men-
tal status, and hepatomegaly. The serum level of lactic
acid may reach 10–20 meq/L (90–180 mg/dL). Treat-
ment is aimed at the underlying disease. The danger
from lactic acidosis is from the acidosis, not the lactate.
Sodium bicarbonate should be added if acidosis is very
severe or if hydrogen ion production is very rapid and
uncontrolled.The prognosis is poor.
FIGURE 45-3
Airway obstruction. A. CT scan of a 62-year-old-man with tra-
cheal obstruction caused by renal carcinoma showing paratra-
cheal mass with tracheal invasion or obstruction (arrow).
B. Chest x-ray of the same patient after stent (arrows) placement.
A
B
CHAPTER 45
485
Oncologic Emergencies
urinary creatinine is >1 in patients with acute hyper-
uricemic nephropathy and <1 in patients with renal fail-
ure from other causes.
Hyperphosphatemia, which can be caused by the
release of intracellular phosphate pools by tumor lysis,
produces a reciprocal depression in serum calcium,
which causes severe neuromuscular irritability and tetany.
Deposition of calcium phosphate in the kidney and
hyperphosphatemia may cause renal failure. Potassium is
the principal intracellular cation, and massive destruction
of malignant cells may lead to hyperkalemia. Hyper-
kalemia in patients with renal failure may rapidly
become life threatening by causing ventricular arrhyth-
mias and sudden death.
The likelihood that TLS will occur in patients with
Burkitt’s lymphoma is related to the tumor burden and
renal function. Hyperuricemia and high serum levels of
lactate dehydrogenase (LDH >1500 U/L), both of which
correlate with total tumor burden, also correlate with the
risk of TLS. In patients at risk for TLS, pretreatment eval-
uations should include a complete blood count, serum
chemistry evaluation, and urinalysis. High leukocyte and
platelet counts may artiﬁcially elevate potassium levels
(“pseudohyperkalemia”) because of lysis of these cells
after the blood is drawn. In these cases, plasma potassium
instead of serum potassium should be followed. In
pseudohyperkalemia, no ECG abnormalities are present.
In patients with abnormal baseline renal function, the
kidneys and retroperitoneal area should be evaluated by
sonography, CT, or both to rule out obstructive uropa-
thy. Urine output should be watched closely.
glands by metastases (lung, breast, colon, or kidney can-
cer; lymphoma), to removal of both glands, or to
hemorrhagic necrosis in association with sepsis or anti-
coagulation. Impaired adrenal steroid synthesis occurs in
patients being treated for cancer with mitotane, keto-
conazole, or aminoglutethimide or undergoing rapid
reduction in glucocorticoid therapy. Rarely, metastatic
replacement causes primary adrenal insufﬁciency as the
ﬁrst manifestation of an occult malignancy. Metastasis to
the pituitary or hypothalamus is found at autopsy in
5% of patients with cancer, but associated secondary
adrenal insufﬁciency is rare. Megestrol acetate, which is
used to manage cancer and HIV-related cachexia, may
suppress plasma levels of cortisol and adrenocorti-
cotropic hormone (ACTH). Patients taking megestrol
may develop adrenal insufﬁciency, and even those whose
adrenal dysfunction is not symptomatic may have inade-
quate adrenal reserve if they become seriously ill. Cra-
nial irradiation for childhood brain tumors may affect
the hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenal axis, resulting in sec-
ondary adrenal insufﬁciency.
Acute adrenal insufﬁciency is potentially lethal.Treat-
ment of suspected adrenal crisis is initiated after the
sampling of serum cortisol and ACTH levels.
TREATMENT-RELATED EMERGENCIES
TUMOR LYSIS SYNDROME
Tumor lysis syndrome (TLS) is characterized by hyper-
uricemia, hyperkalemia, hyperphosphatemia, and hypocal-
cemia and is caused by the destruction of a large number
of rapidly proliferating neoplastic cells. Acidosis may also
develop.Acute renal failure occurs frequently.
TLS is most often associated with the treatment of
Burkitt’s lymphoma, acute lymphoblastic leukemia, and
other high-grade lymphomas, but it also may be seen with
chronic leukemias and, rarely, with solid tumors.This syn-
drome has been seen in patients with chronic lymphocytic
leukemia after treatment with nucleosides. TLS has been
observed with administration of glucocorticoids, hor-
monal agents such as letrozole and tamoxifen, and mono-
clonal antibodies such as rituximab and gemtuzumab.
TLS usually occurs during or shortly (1–5 days) after
chemotherapy. Rarely, spontaneous necrosis of malignan-
cies causes TLS.
Hyperuricemia may be present at the time of
chemotherapy. Effective treatment kills malignant cells
and leads to increased serum uric acid levels from the
turnover of nucleic acids. Owing to the acidic local envi-
ronment, uric acid can precipitate in the tubules, medulla,
and collecting ducts of the kidney, leading to renal failure.
Lactic acidosis and dehydration may contribute to the
precipitation of uric acid in the renal tubules.The ﬁnding
of uric acid crystals in the urine is strong evidence for
uric acid nephropathy. The ratio of urinary uric acid to
Treatment:
TUMOR LYSIS SYNDROME
Recognition of risk and prevention are the most impor-
tant steps in the management of patients with this syn-
drome (Fig. 45-4). The standard preventive approach
consists of allopurinol, urinary alkalinization, and aggres-
sive hydration. IV allopurinol may be given to patients
who cannot tolerate oral therapy. In some cases, uric acid
levels cannot be lowered sufﬁciently with the standard
preventive approach. Rasburicase can be effective in
these instances. Urate oxidase is missing from primates
and catalyzes the conversion of poorly soluble uric acid to
readily soluble allantoin.Rasburicase acts rapidly,decreas-
ing uric acid levels within hours; however, it may cause
hypersensitivity reactions (HSRs) such as bronchospasm,
hypoxemia, and hypotension. Rasburicase is contraindi-
cated in patients with glucose-6-phosphate dehydroge-
nase deﬁciency who are unable to break down hydrogen
peroxide, an end product of the urate oxidase reaction.
Despite aggressive prophylaxis, TLS or oliguric or anuric
renal failure may occur. Care should be taken to prevent
worsening of symptomatic hypocalcemia by induction of
SECTION V
486
Disorders Complicating Critical Illnesses and Their Management
liver enzymes, D-dimer, LDH, and prolongation of the
prothrombin time may occur. This syndrome is related
to release of inﬂammatory cytokines, such as tumor
necrosis factor (TNF) α and interleukin 6. Diphenhy-
dramine and acetaminophen can often prevent or sup-
press the symptoms. If they occur, the infusion is
stopped and restarted at half the initial infusion rate after
the symptoms have abated.
HEMOLYTIC-UREMIC SYNDROME
Hemolytic-uremic syndrome (HUS) and, less com-
monly, thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP)
occurring after treatment with antineoplastic drugs have
been described. Mitomycin is by far the most common
agent causing this peculiar syndrome. Other chemother-
apeutic agents, including cisplatin, bleomycin, and gem-
citabine, have also been reported to be associated with
this syndrome. It occurs most often in patients with gas-
tric, colorectal, pancreatic, and breast carcinoma. In one
series, 35% of patients were without evident cancer at
the time this syndrome appeared. Secondary HUS/TTP
has also been reported as a rare but sometimes fatal
complication of bone marrow transplantation (BMT).
HUS usually has its onset 4–8 weeks after the last
dose of chemotherapy, but it is not rare to detect it sev-
eral months later. HUS is characterized by microangio-
pathic hemolytic anemia, thrombocytopenia, and renal
failure. Dyspnea, weakness, fatigue, oliguria, and purpura
are also common initial symptoms and ﬁndings. Sys-
temic hypertension and pulmonary edema frequently
occur. Severe hypertension, pulmonary edema, and rapid
worsening of hemolysis and renal function may occur
after a blood or blood product transfusion. Cardiac ﬁnd-
ings include atrial arrhythmias, pericardial friction rub,
and pericardial effusion. Raynaud’s phenomenon is part
of the syndrome in patients treated with bleomycin.
Laboratory ﬁndings include severe to moderate ane-
mia associated with red blood cell fragmentation and
numerous schistocytes on peripheral smear. Reticulocy-
tosis, decreased plasma haptoglobin, and an LDH level
document hemolysis.The serum bilirubin level is usually
normal or slightly elevated.The Coombs’ test is negative.
The white blood cell count is usually normal, and
thrombocytopenia (<100,000/μL) is almost always pre-
sent. Most patients have a normal coagulation proﬁle,
although some have mild elevations in thrombin time
and in level of ﬁbrin degradation products. The serum
creatinine level is elevated at presentation and shows a
pattern of subacute worsening within weeks of the initial
azotemia. The urinalysis reveals hematuria, proteinuria,
and granular or hyaline casts, and circulating immune
complexes may be present.
The basic pathologic lesion appears to be deposition
of ﬁbrin in the walls of capillaries and arterioles, and
these deposits are similar to those seen in HUS from
alkalosis during bicarbonate infusion. Administration of
sodium bicarbonate may also lead to urinary precipita-
tion of calcium phosphate, which is less soluble at alka-
line pH. Dialysis is often necessary and should be consid-
ered early in the course. Hemodialysis is preferred.
Hemoﬁltration offers a gradual, continuous method of
removing cellular byproducts and ﬂuid. The prognosis is
excellent, and renal function recovers after the uric acid
level is lowered to ≤10 mg/dL.
Maintain hydration by administration of normal
  or 1/2 normal saline at 3000 mL/m2 per day
Keep urine pH at 7.0 or greater by administration of
  sodium bicarbonate
Administer allopurinol at 300 mg/m2 per day
Monitor serum chemistry
Serum uric acid>8.0 mg/dL
Serum creatinine>1.6 mg/dL
Correct treatable renal failure
  (obstruction)
Start recombinant urate
   oxidase, 0.2 mg/kg IV daily
If, after 24–48 h
Serum uric acid<8.0 mg/dL
Serum creatinine<1.6 mg/dL
Urine pH>7.0
Serum K+ >6.0 meq/L
Serum uric acid>10 mg/dL
Serum creatinine>10 mg/dL
Serum phosphate>10 mg/dL or increasing
Symptomatic hypocalcemia present
If
Delay chemotherapy or start
  dialysis
Start chemotherapy
Discontinue bicarbonate
  administration
Monitor serum chemistry
  every 6–12 h
Begin hemodialysis
PT MANAGEMENT FOR TUMOR LYSIS
FIGURE 45-4
Management of patients at high risk for the tumor lysis
syndrome.
HUMAN ANTIBODY INFUSION REACTIONS
The initial infusion of human or humanized antibodies
(e.g., rituximab, gemtuzumab, trastuzumab) is associated
with fever, chills, nausea, asthenia, and headache in ≤50%
of treated patients. Bronchospasm and hypotension
occur in 1% of patients.The pathogenesis is thought to
be activation of immune effector processes (cells and
complement). In the presence of high levels of circulat-
ing lymphoid tumor cells, thrombocytopenia, a rapid
decrease in circulating tumor cells, and mild electrolyte
evidence of TLS may also occur. In addition, increased
CHAPTER 45
487
Oncologic Emergencies
radiotherapy and preexisting lung disease, may potentiate
the pulmonary toxicity. Supplemental oxygen may poten-
tiate the effects of drugs and radiation injury. Patients
should always be managed with the lowest FIO2 that is suf-
ﬁcient to maintain hemoglobin saturation.
The onset of symptoms may be insidious, with symp-
toms including dyspnea, nonproductive cough, and
tachycardia. Patients may have bibasilar crepitant rales,
end-inspiratory crackles, fever, and cyanosis. The chest
radiograph generally shows an interstitial and sometimes
an intraalveolar pattern that is strongest at the lung bases
and may be symmetric. A small effusion may occur.
Hypoxemia with decreased carbon monoxide diffusing
capacity is always present. Glucocorticoids may be help-
ful in patients in whom pulmonary toxicity is related to
radiation therapy or to chemotherapy.Treatment is oth-
erwise supportive.
Molecular targeted agents, imatinib, erlotinib, and
geﬁtinib are potent inhibitors of tyrosine kinases.These
drugs may cause interstitial lung disease. In the case of
geﬁtinib, preexisting ﬁbrosis, poor performance status,
and prior thoracic irradiation are independent risk fac-
tors; this complication has a high fatality rate. In Japan,
the incidence of interstitial lung disease associated with
geﬁtinib is ~4.5%.
Radiation pneumonitis and ﬁbrosis are relatively fre-
quent side effects of thoracic radiation therapy.They may
be acute or chronic. Radiation-induced lung toxicity is a
function of the irradiated lung volume, dose per fraction,
and radiation dose. The larger the irradiated lung ﬁeld,
the higher the risk for radiation pneumonitis. Radiation
pneumonitis usually develops from 2 to 6 months after
completion of radiotherapy. The clinical syndrome,
which varies in severity, consists of dyspnea, cough with
scanty sputum, low-grade fever, and an initial hazy inﬁl-
trate on chest radiographs.The inﬁltrate and tissue dam-
age usually are conﬁned to the radiation ﬁeld. The
patients subsequently may develop a patchy alveolar inﬁl-
trate and air bronchograms, which may progress to acute
respiratory failure that is sometimes fatal. A lung biopsy
may be necessary to make the diagnosis. Asymptomatic
inﬁltrates found incidentally after radiation therapy need
not be treated. However, prednisone should be adminis-
tered to patients with fever or other symptoms. The
dosage should be tapered slowly after the resolution of
radiation pneumonitis because abrupt withdrawal of glu-
cocorticoids may cause an exacerbation of pneumonia.
Delayed radiation ﬁbrosis may occur years after radiation
therapy and is signaled by dyspnea on exertion. It is often
mild, but it can progress to chronic respiratory failure.
Therapy is supportive.
Classical radiation pneumonitis that leads to pul-
monary ﬁbrosis is caused by radiation-induced produc-
tion of local cytokines, such as platelet-derived growth
factor β,TNF, and transforming growth factor β, in the
radiation ﬁeld. An immunologically mediated sporadic
other causes. These microvascular abnormalities involve
mainly the kidneys and rarely occur in other organs.The
pathogenesis of chemotherapy-related HUS is unknown.
Other forms of HUS/TTP are related to a decrease in
processing of von Willebrand factor by a protease called
ADAMTS13.
The case fatality rate is high; most patients die within
a few months. Plasmapheresis and plasma exchange may
normalize the hematologic abnormalities, but renal fail-
ure is not reversed in most patients. Immunoperfusion
over a staphylococcal protein A column is the most suc-
cessful treatment.About half of the patients treated with
immunoperfusion respond with resolution of thrombo-
cytopenia, improvement in anemia, and stabilization of
renal failure. Treatment is well tolerated. It is not clear
how the treatment works.
NEUTROPENIA AND INFECTION
These remain the most common, serious complications
of cancer therapy.
PULMONARY INFILTRATES
Patients with cancer may present with dyspnea associated
with diffuse interstitial inﬁltrates on chest radiographs.
Such inﬁltrates may be caused by progression of the
underlying malignancy, treatment-related toxicities, infec-
tion,or unrelated diseases.The cause may be multifactorial;
however, most commonly, they occur as a consequence of
treatment. Inﬁltration of the lung by malignancy has been
described in patients with leukemia, lymphoma, and breast
and other solid cancers. Pulmonary lymphatics may be
involved diffusely by neoplasm (pulmonary lymphangitic
carcinomatosis), resulting in a diffuse increase in interstitial
markings on chest radiographs.The patient is often mildly
dyspneic at the onset, but pulmonary failure develops over
a period of weeks. In some patients, dyspnea precedes
changes on the chest radiographs and is accompanied by a
nonproductive cough. This syndrome is characteristic of
solid tumors. In patients with leukemia, diffuse micro-
scopic neoplastic peribronchial and peribronchiolar inﬁl-
tration is frequent but may be asymptomatic. However,
some patients present with diffuse interstitial inﬁltrates, an
alveolar capillary block syndrome, and respiratory distress.
In these situations, glucocorticoids can provide sympto-
matic relief, but speciﬁc chemotherapy should always be
started promptly.
Several cytotoxic agents, such as bleomycin, methotrex-
ate, busulfan, and the nitrosoureas, may cause pulmonary
damage. The most frequent presentations are interstitial
pneumonitis, alveolitis, and pulmonary ﬁbrosis. Some
cytotoxic agents,including methotrexate and procarbazine,
may cause an acute HSR. Cytosine arabinoside has been
associated with noncardiogenic pulmonary edema.
Administration of multiple cytotoxic drugs, as well as
SECTION V
488
Disorders Complicating Critical Illnesses and Their Management
high-dose chemotherapy (Fig. 45-5). The patient devel-
ops right lower quadrant abdominal pain, often with
rebound tenderness and a tense, distended abdomen, in a
setting of fever and neutropenia. Watery diarrhea (often
containing sloughed mucosa) and bacteremia are com-
mon, and bleeding may occur. Plain abdominal ﬁlms are
generally of little value in the diagnosis; the CT scan may
show marked bowel wall thickening, particularly in the
cecum, with bowel wall edema. Patients with bowel wall
thickness >10 mm on ultrasonography have higher mor-
tality rates. However, bowel wall thickening is signiﬁ-
cantly more prominent in patients with Clostridium difﬁcile
colitis. Pneumatosis intestinalis is a more speciﬁc ﬁnding
that is seen only in those with neutropenic enterocolitis
and ischemia. The combined involvement of the small
and large bowel suggests a diagnosis of neutropenic
radiation pneumonitis occurs in about 10% of patients;
bilateral alveolitis mediated by T cells results in inﬁltrates
outside the radiation ﬁeld.This form of radiation pneu-
monitis usually resolves without sequelae.
Pneumonia is a common problem in patients under-
going treatment for cancer. Bacterial pneumonia typically
causes a localized inﬁltrate on chest radiographs.Therapy
is tailored to the causative organism.When diffuse inter-
stitial inﬁltrates appear in a febrile patient, the differential
diagnosis is extensive and includes pneumonia caused by
infection with Pneumocystis carinii; viral infections, includ-
ing cytomegalovirus, adenovirus, herpes simplex virus,
herpes zoster, respiratory syncytial virus, or intracellular
pathogens such as Mycoplasma and Legionella spp.; effects
of drugs or radiation; tumor progression; nonspeciﬁc
pneumonitis;and fungal disease.Detection of opportunistic
pathogens in pulmonary infections is still a challenge.
Diagnostic tools include chest radiographs, CT scans,
bronchoscopy with bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL), brush
cytology, transbronchial biopsy, ﬁne-needle aspiration, and
open lung biopsy. In addition to the culture, evaluation of
BAL ﬂuid for P. carinii by polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) and Aspergillus antigen improve the diagnostic
yield. Patients with cancer who are neutropenic and have
fever and local inﬁltrates on chest radiographs should be
treated initially with broad-spectrum antibiotics, such as
ceftazidime or imipenem.A new or persistent focal inﬁl-
trate not responding to broad-spectrum antibiotics argues
for initiation of empiric antifungal therapy.When diffuse
bilateral inﬁltrates develop in patients with febrile neu-
tropenia, broad-spectrum antibiotics plus trimethoprim-
sulfamethoxazole, with or without erythromycin, should
be initiated.The addition of an antiviral agent is necessary
in some settings, such as patients undergoing allogeneic
hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. The empiric
administration of trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole plus
erythromycin to patients without neutropenia and these
antibiotics plus ceftazidime to patients with neutropenia
covers nearly every treatable diagnosis (except tumor pro-
gression) and gives as good overall survival as a strategy
based on early invasive intervention with BAL or open
lung biopsy. If the patient does not improve in 4 days,
open lung biopsy is the procedure of choice. Bron-
choscopy with BAL may be used in patients who are
poor candidates for surgery.
In patients with pulmonary inﬁltrates who are
afebrile, heart failure and multiple pulmonary emboli
are in the differential diagnosis.
NEUTROPENIC ENTEROCOLITIS
Neutropenic enterocolitis (typhlitis) is the inﬂammation and
necrosis of the cecum and surrounding tissues that may
complicate the treatment of acute leukemia.This compli-
cation has also been seen in patients with other forms of
cancer treated with taxanes and in patients receiving
A
B
FIGURE 45-5
Abdominal CT scans of a 72-year-old woman with neu-
tropenic enterocolitis secondary to chemotherapy. A. Air
in the inferior mesenteric vein (arrow) and bowel wall with
pneumatosis intestinalis. B. CT scan of the upper abdomen
demonstrating air in the portal vein (arrows).
CHAPTER 45
489
Oncologic Emergencies
enterocolitis. Rapid institution of broad-spectrum antibi-
otics and nasogastric suction may reverse the process.
Surgical intervention should be considered if no
improvement is seen by 24 h after the start of antibiotic
treatment. If the localized abdominal ﬁndings become
diffuse, the prognosis is poor.
C. difﬁcile colitis is increasing in incidence. Newer
strains of C. difﬁcile produce about 20 times more of
toxins A and B compared to previously studied strains.
C. difﬁcile risk is also increased with chemotherapy.
Antibiotic coverage for C. difﬁcile should be added if
pseudomembranous colitis cannot be excluded.
HEMORRHAGIC CYSTITIS
Hemorrhagic cystitis can develop in patients receiving
cyclophosphamide or ifosfamide. Both drugs are metabo-
lized to acrolein, which is a strong chemical irritant that
is excreted in the urine. Prolonged contact or high con-
centrations may lead to bladder irritation and hemor-
rhage. Symptoms include gross hematuria, frequency,
dysuria, burning, urgency, incontinence, and nocturia.
The best management is prevention. Maintaining a high
rate of urine ﬂow minimizes exposure. In addition,
2-mercaptoethanesulfonate (mesna) detoxiﬁes the metabo-
lites and can be coadministered with the instigating
drugs. Mesna usually is given three times on the day of
ifosfamide administration in doses that are each 20% of
the total ifosfamide dose. If hemorrhagic cystitis devel-
ops, the maintenance of a high urine ﬂow may be sufﬁ-
cient supportive care. If conservative management is not
effective, irrigation of the bladder with a 0.37–0.74%
formalin solution for 10 min stops the bleeding in most
cases. N-acetylcysteine may also be an effective irrigant.
Prostaglandins (carboprost) can inhibit the process. In
extreme cases, ligation of the hypogastric arteries, urinary
diversion, or cystectomy may be necessary.
Hemorrhagic cystitis also occurs in patients who
undergo BMT. In the BMT setting, early-onset hemor-
rhagic cystitis is related to drugs in the treatment regi-
men (e.g., cyclophosphamide), and late-onset hemor-
rhagic cystitis is usually caused by the polyoma virus
BKV or adenovirus type 11. BKV load in urine alone or
in combination with acute graft-versus-host disease cor-
relate with development of hemorrhagic cystitis. Viral
causes are usually detected by PCR-based diagnostic
tests. Treatment of viral hemorrhagic cystitis is largely
supportive, with reduction in doses of immunosuppres-
sive agents, if possible. No antiviral therapy is approved,
although cidofovir is being tested.
HYPERSENSITIVITY REACTIONS TO
ANTINEOPLASTIC DRUGS
Many antineoplastic drugs may cause HSR.These reac-
tions are unpredictable and potentially life threatening.
Most reactions occur during or within hours of par-
enteral drug administration. Taxanes; platinum com-
pounds; asparaginase; etoposide; and biologic agents,
including rituximab, bevacizumab, trastuzumab, gem-
tuzumab, cetuximab, and alemtuzumab, are more com-
monly associated with acute HSR than are other agents.
Acute HSRs to some drugs, such as taxanes, occur dur-
ing the ﬁrst or second dose administered. HSR from
platinum compounds occurs after prolonged exposure.
Skin testing may identify patients with high risk for
HSR after carboplatin exposure. Premedication with
histamine H1 and H2 receptor antagonists and gluco-
corticoids reduces the incidence of HSR to taxanes,
particularly paclitaxel. Despite premedication, HSR may
still occur. In these cases, retreatment may be attempted
with care, but use of alternative agents may be required.
FURTHER READINGS
ALBANELL J, BASELGA J: Systemic therapy emergencies. Semin Oncol
27:347, 2000
COIFFIER B, RIOUFFOL C: Management of tumor lysis syndrome in
adults. Expert Rev Anticancer Ther 7:233, 2007
DAVIS MP et al: Modern management of cancer-related intestinal
obstruction. Curr Oncol Rep 2:343, 2000
GLEISSNER B et al: Neoplastic meningitis. Lancet Neurol 5:443, 2006
GORNIK HL et al: Abnormal cytology predicts poor prognosis in
cancer patients with pericardial effusion. J Clin Oncol 23:5211,
2005
GORSCHLUTER M et al: Neutropenic enterocolitis in adults: System-
atic analysis of evidence quality. Eur J Hematol 75:1, 2005
LOBLAW DA et al: Systematic review of the diagnosis and manage-
ment of malignant extradural spinal cord compression:The Can-
cer Care Ontario Practice Guidelines Initiative’s neuro-oncology
disease site group. J Clin Oncol 23:2028, 2005
RICE TW et al:The superior vena cava syndrome: Clinical character-
istics and evolving etiology. Medicine 85:37, 2006
RIPAMONTI C et al: Respiratory problems in advanced cancer. Sup-
port Care Cancer 10:204, 2002
ZANOTTI KM et al: Prevention and management of antineoplastic-
induced hypersensitivity reactions. Drug Saf 24:767, 2001
This page intentionally left blank 
Alexander Kratz
I
Michael A. Pesce
I
Daniel J. Fink†
INTRODUCTORY COMMENTS
The following are tables of reference values for labora-
tory tests, special analytes, and special function tests. A
variety of factors can inﬂuence reference values. Such
variables include the population studied, the duration
and means of specimen transport, laboratory methods
and instrumentation, and even the type of container
used for the collection of the specimen. The reference
or “normal” ranges given in this appendix may therefore
not be appropriate for all laboratories, and these values
should only be used as general guidelines. Whenever
possible, reference values provided by the laboratory
performing the testing should be used in the interpreta-
tion of laboratory data.Values supplied in this Appendix
reﬂect typical reference ranges in adults. Pediatric refer-
ence ranges may vary signiﬁcantly from adult values.
LABORATORY VALUES OF 
CLINICAL IMPORTANCE
In preparing the Appendix, the authors have taken
into account the fact that the system of international
units (SI, Système International d’Unités) is used in
most countries and in some medical journals. However,
clinical laboratories may continue to report values in
“conventional” units. Therefore, both systems are pro-
vided in the Appendix. The dual system is also used in
the text except for (1) those instances in which the
numbers remain the same but only the terminology is
changed (e.g., mmol/L for meq/L or IU/L for mIU/mL),
when only the SI units are given and (2) most pressure
measurements (e.g., blood and cerebrospinal ﬂuid pres-
sures), when the conventional units (mmHg, mmH2O)
are used. In all other instances in the text, the SI unit is
followed by the traditional unit in parentheses.
APPENDIX
APPENDIX
491
I Introductory Comments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .491
I Reference Values for Laboratory Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .492
I Reference Values for Speciﬁc Analytes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .505
I Special Function Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .508
I Miscellaneous . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .512
I Further Readings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .512
†Deceased.
REFERENCE VALUES FOR LABORATORY TESTS
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
492
APPENDIX
TABLE A-1
HEMATOLOGY AND COAGULATION
ANALYTE
SPECIMEN
SI UNITS
CONVENTIONAL UNITS
Activated clotting time
WB
70–180 s
70–180 s
Activated protein C resistance 
P
NA
Ratio > 2.1
(factor V Leiden)
α2 Antiplasmin
P
0.87–1.55
87–155%
Antiphospholipid antibody panel
PTT-LA (lupus anticoagulant screen)
P
Negative
Negative
Platelet neutralization procedure
P
Negative
Negative
Dilute viper venom screen
P
Negative
Negative
Anticardiolipin antibody
S
IgG
0–15 arbitrary units
0–15 GPL
IgM
0–15 arbitrary units
0–15 MPL
Antithrombin III
P
Antigenic
220–390 mg/L
22–39 mg/dL
Functional
0.7–1.30 U/L
70–130%
Anti-Xa assay (heparin assay)
P
Unfractionated heparin
0.3–0.7 kIU/L
0.3–0.7 IU/mL
Low-molecular-weight heparin
0.5–1.0 kIU/L
0.5–1.0 IU/mL
Danaparoid (Orgaran)
0.5–0.8 kIU/L
0.5–0.8 IU/mL
Autohemolysis test
WB
0.004–0.045
0.4–4.50%
Autohemolysis test with glucose
WB
0.003–0.007
0.3–0.7%
Bleeding time (adult)
<7.1 min
<7.1 min
Bone marrow: see Table A-8
Clot retraction
WB
0.50–1.00/2 h
50–100%/2 h
Cryoﬁbrinogen
P
Negative
Negative
D-Dimer
P
0.22–0.74 μg/mL
0.22–0.74 μg/mL
Differential blood count
WB
Neutrophils
0.40–0.70
40–70%
Bands
0.0–0.05
0–5%
Lymphocytes
0.20–0.50
20–50%
Monocytes
0.04–0.08
4–8%
Eosinophils
0.0–0.6
0–6%
Basophils
0.0–0.02
0–2%
Eosinophil count
WB
150–300/μL
150–300/mm3
Erythrocyte count
WB
Men
4.30–5.60 × 1012/L
4.30–5.60 × 106/mm3
Women
4.00–5.20 × 1012/L
4.00–5.20 × 106/mm3
Erythrocyte life span
WB
Normal survival
120 days
120 days
Chromium labeled, half-life (t1/2) 
25–35 days
25–35 days
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate
WB
Women
0–20 mm/h
0–20 mm/h
Men
0–15 mm/h
0–15 mm/h
Euglobulin lysis time
P
7200–14400 s
120–240 min
Factor II, prothrombin
P
0.50–1.50
50–150%
Factor V
P
0.50–1.50
50–150%
Factor VII
P
0.50–1.50
50–150%
Factor VIII
P
0.50–1.50
50–150%
Factor IX
P
0.50–1.50
50–150%
Factor X
P
0.50–1.50
50–150%
Factor XI
P
0.50–1.50
50–150%
Factor XII
P
0.50–1.50
50–150%
Factor XIII screen
P
NA
Present
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
493
APPENDIX
TABLE A-1 (CONTINUED)
HEMATOLOGY AND COAGULATION
ANALYTE
SPECIMEN
SI UNITS
CONVENTIONAL UNITS
Factor inhibitor assay 
P
<0.5 Bethesda Units
<0.5 Bethesda Units
Fibrin(ogen) degradation products
P
0–1 mg/L
0–1 μg/mL
Fibrinogen
P
2.33–4.96 g/L
233–496 mg/dL
Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase 
WB
<2400 s
<40 min
(erythrocyte)
Ham’s test (acid serum)
WB
Negative
Negative
Hematocrit
WB
Men
0.388–0.464
38.8–46.4
Women
0.354–0.444
35.4–44.4
Hemoglobin
Plasma
P
6–50 mg/L
0.6–5.0 mg/dL
Whole blood
WB
Men
133–162 g/L
13.3–16.2 g/dL
Women
120–158 g/L
12.0–15.8 g/dL
Hemoglobin electrophoresis
WB
Hemoglobin A
0.95–0.98
95–98%
Hemoglobin A2
0.015–0.031
1.5–3.1%
Hemoglobin F
0–0.02
0–2.0%
Hemoglobins other than A, A2, or F
Absent
Absent
Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia 
P
Negative
Negative
antibody
Joint ﬂuid crystal
JF
NA
No crystals seen
Joint ﬂuid mucin
JF
NA
Only type I mucin present
Leukocytes
Alkaline phosphatase (LAP)
WB
0.2–1.6 μkat/L
13–100 μ/L
White blood cell count (WBC)
WB
3.54–9.06 × 109/L
3.54–9.06 × 103/mm3
Mean corpuscular hemoglobin (MCH)
WB
26.7–31.9 pg/cell
26.7–31.9 pg/cell
Mean corpuscular hemoglobin 
WB
323–359 g/L
32.3–35.9 g/dL
concentration (MCHC)
Mean corpuscular hemoglobin 
WB
24–36 pg
24–36 pg
of reticulocytes (CH)
Mean corpuscular volume (MCV)
WB
79–93.3 fL
79–93.3 μm3
Mean platelet volume (MPV)
WB
9.00–12.95 fL
9.00–12.95 μm3
Osmotic fragility of erythrocytes
WB
Direct
0.0035–0.0045
0.35–0.45%
Index
0.0030–0.0065
0.30–0.65%
Partial thromboplastin time, activated
P
26.3–39.4 s
26.3–39.4 s
Plasminogen
P
Antigen
84–140 mg/L
8.4–14.0 mg/dL
Functional
0.70–1.30
70–130%
Plasminogen activator inhibitor 1
P
4–43 μg/L
4–43 ng/mL
Platelet aggregation
PRP
NA
>65 aggregation in response 
to adenosine diphosphate, 
epinephrine, collagen, 
ristocetin, and arachidonic acid
Platelet count
WB
165–415 × 109/L
165–415 × 103/mm3
Platelet, mean volume
WB
6.4–11 fL
6.4–11.0 μm3
Prekallikrein assay
P
0.50–1.5
50–150%
Prekallikrein screen
P
No deﬁciency detected
Protein C
P
Total antigen
0.70–1.40
70–140%
Functional
0.70–1.30
70–130%
Protein S
P
Total antigen
0.70–1.40
70–140%
Functional
0.65–1.40
65–140%
Free antigen
0.70–1.40
70–140%
Prothrombin gene mutation G20210A
WB
NA
Not present
(Continued)
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
494
APPENDIX
TABLE A-1 (CONTINUED)
HEMATOLOGY AND COAGULATION
ANALYTE
SPECIMEN
SI UNITS
CONVENTIONAL UNITS
Prothrombin time
P
12.7–15.4 s
12.7–15.4 s
Protoporphyrin, free erythrocyte
WB
0.28–0.64 μmol/L of RBCs
16–36 μg/dL of RBCs
Red cell distribution width
WB
<0.145
<14.5%
Reptilase time
P
16–23.6 s
16–23.6 s
Reticulocyte count
WB
Men
0.008–0.023 RBCs 
0.8–2.3% RBCs
Women
0.008–0.020 RBCs
0.8–2.0% RBCs
Reticulocyte hemoglobin content
WB
>26 pg/cell
>26 pg/cell
Ristocetin cofactor (functional 
P
von Willebrand factor)
Blood group O
0.75 mean of normal
75% mean of normal
Blood group A
1.05 mean of normal
105% mean of normal
Blood group B
1.15 mean of normal
115% mean of normal
Blood group AB
1.25 mean of normal
125% mean of normal
Sickle cell test
WB
Negative
Negative
Sucrose hemolysis
WB
<0.1
<10% hemolysis
Thrombin time
P
15.3–18.5 s
15.3–18.5 s
Total eosinophils
WB
150–300 × 106/L
150–300/mm3
Transferrin receptor
S, P
9.6–29.6 nmol/L
9.6–29.6 nmol/L
Viscosity
Plasma
P
1.7–2.1
1.7–2.1
Serum
S
1.4–1.8
1.4–1.8
Von Willebrand factor (vWF) antigen 
P
(factor VIII:R antigen)
Blood group O
0.75 mean of normal
75% mean of normal
Blood group A
1.05 mean of normal
105% mean of normal
Blood group B
1.15 mean of normal
115% mean of normal
Blood group AB
1.25 mean of normal
125% mean of normal 
von Willebrand factor multimers
P
Normal distribution
Normal distribution
White blood cells: see “leukocytes”
Note: GPL, IgG/L; JF, joint ﬂuid; MPL, IgM/L; NA, not applicable; P, plasma; PRP, platelet-rich plasma; PTT-LA, partial thromboplastin time—Lupus
anticoagulant screen; RBC, red blood cell; S, serum; SI, Système International d’Unités; WB, whole blood.
TABLE A-2
CLINICAL CHEMISTRY AND IMMUNOLOGY
ANALYTE
SPECIMEN
SI UNITS
CONVENTIONAL UNITS
Acetoacetate
P
20–99 μmol/L
0.2–1.0 mg/dL
Adrenocorticotropin hormone (ACTH)
P
1.3–16.7 pmol/L
6.0–76.0 pg/mL
Alanine aminotransferase (AST, SGPT)
S
0.12–0.70 μkat/L
7–41 U/L
Albumin
S
Women
41–53 g/L
4.1–5.3 g/dL
Men
40–50 g/L
4.0–5.0 g/L
Aldolase
S
26–138 nkat/L
1.5–8.1 U/L
Aldosterone (adult)
Supine, normal-sodium diet
S, P
55–250 pmol/L
2–9 ng/dL
Upright, normal-sodium diet
S, P
2–5-fold increase over 
supine value
Supine, low-sodium diet
S, P
2–5-fold increase over 
normal sodium diet level
U
6.38–58.25 nmol/d
2.3–21.0 μg/24 h
α fetoprotein (adult)
S
0–8.5 μg/L
0–8.5 ng/mL 
α1 antitrypsin
S
1.0–2.0 g/L 
100–200 mg/dL
Ammonia, as NH3
P
11–35 μmol/L
19–60 μg/dL
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
495
APPENDIX
TABLE A-2 (CONTINUED)
CLINICAL CHEMISTRY AND IMMUNOLOGY
ANALYTE
SPECIMEN
SI UNITS
CONVENTIONAL UNITS
Amylase (method dependent)
S
0.34–1.6 μkat/L
20–96 U/L
Androstenedione (adult)
S
1.75–8.73 nmol/L
50–250 ng/dL
Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE)
S
0.15–1.1 μkat/L
9–67 U/L
Anion gap
S
7–16 mmol/L
7–16 mmol/L
Apo B/Apo A-1 ratio
0.35–0.98
0.35–0.98
Apolipoprotein A-1
S
1.19–2.40 g/L
119–240 mg/dL
Apolipoprotein B
S
0.52–1.63 g/L
52–163 mg/dL
Arterial blood gases
(HCO3
−)
22–30 mmol/L
22–30 meq/L
PCO2
4.3–6.0 kPa
32–45 mmHg
pH
7.35–7.45
7.35–7.45
PO2
9.6–13.8 kPa
72–104 mmHg
Aspartate aminotransferase (AST, SGOT)
S
0.20–0.65 μkat/L
12–38 U/L
Autoantibodies
Anti-adrenal antibody
S
NA
Negative at 1:10 dilution
Anti–double-strand (native) DNA
S
NA
Negative at 1:10 dilution
Anti–glomerular basement membrane antibodies
S
Qualitative
Negative
Negative
Quantitative
<5 kU/L
<5 U/mL
Anti-granulocyte antibody
S
NA
Negative
Anti-Jo-1 antibody
S
NA
Negative
Anti-La antibody
S
NA
Negative
Anti-mitochondrial antibody
S
NA
Negative
Antineutrophil cytoplasmic autoantibodies, 
S
cytoplasmic (C-ANCA)
Qualitative
Negative
Negative
Quantitative (antibodies to proteinase 3)
<2.8 kU/L
<2.8 U/mL
Antineutrophil cytoplasmic autoantibodies, 
S
perinuclear (P-ANCA)
Qualitative
Negative
Negative
Quantitative (antibodies to myeloperoxidase)
<1.4 kU/L
<1.4 U/mL
Antinuclear antibody
S
NA
Negative at 1:40
Anti–parietal cell antibody
S
NA
Negative at 1:20
Anti-Ro antibody
S
NA
Negative
Anti-platelet antibody
S
NA
Negative
Anti-RNP antibody
S
NA
Negative
Anti-Scl 70 antibody
S
NA
Negative
Anti-Smith antibody
S
NA
Negative
Anti–smooth muscle antibody
S
NA
Negative at 1:20
Anti-thyroglobulin
S
NA
Negative
Anti-thyroid antibody
S
<0.3 kIU/L
<0.3 IU/mL
B type natriuretic peptide (BNP)
P
Age and gender 
Age and gender speciﬁc: 
speciﬁc: <167 ng/L
<167 pg/mL
Bence Jones protein, serum
S
NA
None detected
Bence Jones protein, urine, qualitative
U
NA
None detected in 50×
concentrated urine
Bence Jones Protein, urine, quantitative
U
Kappa
<25 mg/L
<2.5 mg/dL
Lambda
<50 mg/L
<5.0 mg/dL
β2-Microglobulin
S
<2.7 mg/L
<0.27 mg/dL
U
<120 μg/d
<120 μg/day
Bilirubin
S
Total
5.1–22 μmol/L
0.3–1.3 mg/dL
Direct
1.7–6.8 μmol/L
0.1–0.4 mg/dL
Indirect
3.4–15.2 μmol/L
0.2–0.9 mg/dL
C peptide (adult)
S, P
0.17–0.66 nmol/L
0.5–2.0 ng/mL
(Continued)
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
496
APPENDIX
TABLE A-2 (CONTINUED)
CLINICAL CHEMISTRY AND IMMUNOLOGY
ANALYTE
SPECIMEN
SI UNITS
CONVENTIONAL UNITS
C1-esterase-inhibitor protein
S
Antigenic
124–250 mg/L
12.4–24.5 mg/dL
Functional
Present
Present
CA 125
S
0–35 kU/L
0–35 U/mL
CA 19-9
S
0–37 kU/L
0–37 U/mL
CA-15-3
S
0–34 kU/L
0–34 U/mL
CA27-29
S
0–40 kU/L
0–40 U/mL
Calcitonin
S
Men
3–26 ng/L
3–26 pg/mL
Women
2–17 ng/L
2–17 pg/mL
Calcium
S
2.2–2.6 mmol/L
8.7–10.2 mg/dL
Calcium, ionized
WB
1.12–1.32 mmol/L
4.5–5.3 mg/dL
Carbon dioxide content (TCO2)
P (sea level)
22–30 mmol/L
22–30 meq/L
Carboxyhemoglobin (carbon monoxide content)
WB
Nonsmokers
0–0.04
0–4%
Smokers
0.04–0.09
4–9%
Onset of symptoms
0.15–0.20
15–20%
Loss of consciousness and death
>0.50
>50%
Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA)
S
Nonsmokers
0.0–3.0 μg/L
0.0–3.0 ng/mL
Smokers
S
0.0–5.0 μg/L
0.0–5.0 ng/mL
Ceruloplasmin
S
250–630 mg/L
25–63 mg/dL
Chloride
S
102–109 mmol/L
102–109 meq/L
Cholesterol: see Table A-5
Cholinesterase
S
5–12 kU/L
5–12 U/mL
Complement
C3
S
0.83–1.77 g/L
83–177 mg/dL
C4
S
0.16–0.47 g/L
16–47 mg/dL
Total hemolytic complement (CH50)
S
50–150%
50–150%
Factor B
S
0.17–0.42 g/L
17–42 mg/dL
Coproporphyrins (types I and III)
U
150–470 μmol/d
100–300 μg/d
Cortisol
Fasting, 8 A.M.–12 noon
S
138–690 nmol/L
5–25 μg/dL
12 noon–8 P.M.
138–414 nmol/L
5–15 μg/dL
8 P.M.–8 A.M.
0–276 nmol/L
0–10 μg/dL
Cortisol, free
U
55–193 nmol/24 h
20–70 μg/24 h
C-reactive protein
S
0.2–3.0 mg/L
0.2–3.0 mg/L
Creatine kinase (total)
S
Women
0.66–4.0 μkat/L
39–238 U/L
Men
0.87–5.0 μkat/L
51–294 U/L
Creatine kinase-MB
S
Mass
0.0–5.5 μg/L
0.0–5.5 ng/mL
Fraction of total activity (by electrophoresis)
0–0.04
0–4.0%
Creatinine
S
Women
44–80 μmol/L
0.5–0.9 ng/mL
Men
53–106 μmol/L
0.6–1.2 ng/mL
Cryoproteins
S
NA
None detected
Dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) (adult)
Men
S
6.2–43.4 nmol/L
180–1250 ng/dL
Women
4.5–34.0 nmol/L
130–980 ng/dL
Dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) sulfate
S
Men
100–6190 μg/L
10–619 μg/dL
Premenopausal women
120–5350 μg/L
12–535 μg/dL
Postmenopausal women
300–2600 μg/L
30–260 μg/dL
Deoxycorticosterone (DOC) (adults)
S
61–576 nmol/L
2–19 ng/dL
11-Deoxycortisol (adults) (compound S) (8:00 A.M.)
S
0.34–4.56 nmol/L
12–158 ng/dL
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
497
APPENDIX
TABLE A-2 (CONTINUED)
CLINICAL CHEMISTRY AND IMMUNOLOGY
ANALYTE
SPECIMEN
SI UNITS
CONVENTIONAL UNITS
Dihydrotestosterone
Men
S, P
1.03–2.92 nmol/L
30–85 ng/dL
Women
0.14–0.76 nmol/L
4–22 ng/dL
Dopamine
P
< 475 pmol/L
<87 pg/mL
Dopamine
U
425–2610 nmol/d
65–400 μg/d
Epinephrine
P
Supine (30 min)
<273 pmol/L
< 50 pg/mL
Sitting
<328 pmol/L
< 60 pg/mL
Standing (30 min)
<491pmol/L
< 90 pg/mL
Epinephrine
U
0–109 nmol/d
0–20 μg/d
Erythropoietin
S
4–27 U/L
4–27 U/L
Estradiol
S, P
Premenopausal women 
Follicular phase
74–532 pmol/L
< 20–145 pg/mL
Mid-cycle peak
411–1626 pmol/L
112–443 pg/mL
Luteal phase
74–885 pmol/L
< 20–241 pg/mL
Postmenopausal women
217 pmol/L
< 59 pg/mL
Men
74 pmol/L
< 20 pg/mL
Estrone
S, P
Premenopausal women
Follicular phase
55–555 pmol/L
15–150 pg/mL
Luteal phase
55–740 pmol/L
15–200 pg/mL
Postmenopausal women
55–204 pmol/L
15–55 pg/mL
Men
55–240 pmol/L
15–65 pg/mL
Fatty acids, free (nonesteriﬁed)
P
< 0.28–0.89 mmol/L
< 8–25 mg/dL
Ferritin
S
Women
10–150 μg/L
10–150 ng/mL
Men
29–248 μg/L
29–248 ng/mL
Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH)
S, P
Premenopausal women
Follicular phase
3.0–20.0 IU/L
3.0–20.0 mIU/mL
Ovulatory phase
9.0–26.0 IU/L
9.0–26.0 mIU/mL
Luteal phase
1.0–12.0 IU/L
1.0–12.0 mIU/mL
Postmenopausal women
18.0–153.0 IU/L
18.0–153.0 mIU/mL
Men
1.0–12.0 IU/L
1.0–12.0 mIU/mL
Free testosterone, adults
Women
S
2.1–23.6 pmol/L
0.6–6.8 pg/mL
Men
163–847 pmol/L
47–244 pg/mL
Fructosamine
S
< 285 μmol/L
< 285 μmol/L
Gamma glutamyltransferase
S
0.15–0.99 μkat/L
9–58 U/L
Gastrin
S
<100 ng/L
<100 pg/mL
Glucagon
P
20–100 ng/L
20–100 pg/mL
Glucose (fasting)
P
Normal
4.2–6.1 mmol/L
75–110 mg/dL
Impaired glucose tolerance
6.2–6.9 mmol/L
111–125 mg/dL
Diabetes mellitus
>7.0 mmol/L
>125 mg/dL
Glucose, 2-h postprandial
P
3.9–6.7 mmol/L
70–120 mg/dL
Growth hormone (resting)
S
0.5–17.0 μg/L
0.5–17.0 ng/mL
Hemoglobin Alc
WB
0.04–0.06 Hb fraction
4.0–6.0%
High-density lipoprotein (HDL) (see Table A-5)
Homocysteine
P
4.4–10.8 μmol/L
4.4–10.8 μmol/L
Human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG)
S
Non-pregnant women
<5 IU/L
<5 mIU/mL
1–2 weeks postconception
9–130 IU/L
9–130 mIU/mL
2–3 weeks postconception
75–2600 IU/L
75–2600 mIU/mL
3–4 weeks postconception
850–20,800 IU/L
850–20,800 mIU/mL
(Continued)
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
498
APPENDIX
TABLE A-2 (CONTINUED)
CLINICAL CHEMISTRY AND IMMUNOLOGY
ANALYTE
SPECIMEN
SI UNITS
CONVENTIONAL UNITS
4–5 weeks postconception
4000–100,200 IU/L
4000–100,200 mIU/mL
5–10 weeks postconception
11,500–289,000 IU/L
11,500–289,000 mIU/mL
10–14 weeks postconception
18,300–137,000 IU/L
18,300–137,000 mIU/mL
Second trimester
1400–53,000 IU/L
1400–53,000 mIU/mL
Third trimester
940–60,000 IU/L
940–60,000 mIU/mL
β-Hydroxybutyrate
P
0–290 μmol/L
0–3 mg/dL
5-Hydroindoleacetic acid (5-HIAA)
U
10.5–36.6 μmol/d
2–7 mg/d
17-Hydroxyprogesterone (adult)
S
Men
0.15–7.5 nmol/L
5–250 ng/dL
Women
Follicular phase
0.6–3.0 nmol/L
20–100 ng/dL
Midcycle peak
3–7.5 nmol/L
100–250 ng/dL
Luteal phase
3–15 nmol/L
100–500 ng/dL
Postmenopausal
≤2.1 nmol/L
≤70 ng/dL
Hydroxyproline
U, 24 h
38–500 μmol/d
38–500 μmol/d
Immunoﬁxation
S
NA
No bands detected 
Immunoglobulin, quantitation (adults)
IgA
S
0.70–3.50 g/L
70–350 mg/dL
IgD
S
0–140 mg/L
0–14 mg/dL
IgE
S
24–430 μg/L
10–179 IU/mL
IgG
S
7.0–17.0 g/L
700–1700 mg/dL
IgG1
S
2.7–17.4 g/L
270–1740 mg/dL
IgG2
S
0.3–6.3 g/L
30–630 mg/dL
IgG3
S
0.13–3.2 g/L
13–320 mg/dL
IgG4
S
0.11–6.2 g/L
11–620 mg/dL
IgM
S
0.50–3.0 g/L
50–300 mg/dL
Insulin
S, P
14.35–143.5 pmol/L
2–20 μU/mL
Iron
S
7–25 μmol/L
41–141 μg/dL
Iron-binding capacity
S
45–73 μmol/L
251–406 μg/dL
Iron-binding capacity saturation
S
0.16–0.35
16–35%
JF crystal
JF
NA
No crystals seen
JF mucin
JF
NA
Only type I mucin present
Ketone (acetone)
S, U
Negative
Negative
17 Ketosteroids
U
0.003–0.012 g/d
3–12 mg/d
Lactate
P, arterial
0.5–1.6 mmol/L
4.5–14.4 mg/dL
P, venous
0.5–2.2 mmol/L
4.5–19.8 mg/dL
Lactate dehydrogenase
S
2.0–3.8 μkat/L
115–221 U/L
Lactate dehydrogenase isoenzymes
S
Fraction 1 (of total)
0.14–0.26
14–26%
Fraction 2
0.29–0.39
29–39%
Fraction 3
0.20–0.25
20–25%
Fraction 4
0.08–0.16
8–16%
Fraction 5
0.06–0.16
6–16%
Lipase (method dependent)
S
0.51–0.73 μkat/L
3–43 U/L
Lipids: see Table A-5
Lipoprotein (a)
S
0–300 mg/L
0–30 mg/dL
Low-density lipoprotein (LDL) (see Table A-5)
Luteinizing hormone (LH)
S, P
Premenopausal women
Menstruating
Follicular phase
2.0–15.0 U/L
2.0–15.0 U/L
Ovulatory phase
22.0–105.0 U/L
22.0–105.0 U/L
Luteal phase
0.6–19.0 U/L
0.6–19.0 U/L
Postmenopausal women
16.0–64.0 U/L
16.0–64.0 U/L
Men
2.0–12.0 U/L
2.0–12.0 U/L
Magnesium
S
0.62–0.95 mmol/L
1.5–2.3 mg/dL
Metanephrine
P
<0.5 nmol/L
<100 pg/mL
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
499
APPENDIX
TABLE A-2 (CONTINUED)
CLINICAL CHEMISTRY AND IMMUNOLOGY
ANALYTE
SPECIMEN
SI UNITS
CONVENTIONAL UNITS
Metanephrine
U
30–211 mmol/mol 
53–367 μg/g creatinine
creatinine
Methemoglobin
WB
0.0–0.01
0–1%
Microalbumin urine
U
24-h urine
0.0–0.03 g/d
0–30 mg/24 h
Spot urine
0.0–0.03 g/g creatinine
0–30 μg/mg creatinine
Myoglobin
S
Men
19–92 μg/L
19–92 μg/L
Women
12–76 μg/L
12–76 μg/L
Norepinephrine
U
89–473 nmol/d
15–80 μg/d
Norepinephrine
P
Supine (30 min)
650–2423 pmol/L
110–410 pg/mL
Sitting
709–4019 pmol/L
120–680 pg/mL
Standing (30 min)
739–4137 pmol/L
125–700 pg/mL
N-telopeptide (cross linked), NTx
S
Premenopausal women
6.2–19.0 nmol BCE
6.2–19.0 nmol BCE
Men
5.4–24.2 nmol BCE
5.4–24.2 nmol BCE
Bone collagen equivalent (BCE)
N-telopeptide (cross linked), NTx
U
Premenopausal women
17–94 nmol BCE/mmol 
17–94 nmol BCE/mmol 
creatinine
creatinine
Postmenopausal women
26–124 nmol BCE/mmol 
26–124 nmol BCE/mmol 
creatinine
creatinine
Men
21–83 nmol BCE/mmol 
21–83 nmol BCE/mmol 
creatinine
creatinine
Bone collagen equivalent (BCE)
5′ Nucleotidase
S
0.02–0.19 μkat/L
0–11 U/L
Osmolality
P
275–295 mosmol/kg 
275–295 mosmol/kg 
serum water
serum water
U
500–800 mosmol/kg water
500–800 mosmol/kg water
Osteocalcin
S
11–50 μg/L
11–50 ng/mL
Oxygen content
WB
Arterial (sea level)
17–21
17–21 vol%
Venous (sea level)
10–16
10–16 vol%
Oxygen percent saturation (sea level)
WB
Arterial
0.97
94–100%
Venous, arm
0.60–0.85
60–85%
Parathyroid hormone (intact)
S
8–51 ng/L
8–51 pg/mL
Phosphatase, alkaline 
S
0.56–1.63 μkat/L
33–96 U/L
Phosphorus, inorganic
S
0.81–1.4 mmol/L
2.5–4.3 mg/dL
Porphobilinogen
U
None
None
Potassium
S
3.5–5.0 mmol/L
3.5–5.0 meq/L
Prealbumin
S
170–340 mg/L
17–34 mg/dL
Progesterone
S, P
Women
Follicular
< 3.18 nmol/L
<1.0 ng/mL
Midluteal
9.54–63.6 nmol/L
3–20 ng/mL
Men
<3.18 nmol/L
<1.0 ng/mL
Prolactin
S
0–20 μg/L
0–20 ng/mL
Prostate-speciﬁc antigen (PSA)
S
Men<40 years
0.0–2.0 μg/L
0.0–2.0 ng/mL
Men>40 years
0.0–4.0 μg/L
0.0–4.0 ng/mL
PSA, free; in men 45–75 years, 
S
>0.25 associated with 
>25% associated with 
with PSA values 4–20 μg/mL
benign prostatic 
benign prostatic 
hyperplasia
hyperplasia
Protein fractions
S
Albumin
35–55 g/L
3.5–5.5 g/dL (50–60%)
(Continued)
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
500
APPENDIX
TABLE A-2 (CONTINUED)
CLINICAL CHEMISTRY AND IMMUNOLOGY
ANALYTE
SPECIMEN
SI UNITS
CONVENTIONAL UNITS
Globulin
20–35 g/L
2.0–3.5 g/dL (40–50%)
α1
2–4 g/L
0.2–0.4 g/dL (4.2–7.2%)
α2
5–9 g/L
0.5–0.9 g/dL (6.8–12%)
β
6–11 g/L
0.6–1.1 g/dL (9.3–15%)
γ
7–17 g/L
0.7–1.7 g/dL (13–23%)
Protein, total
S
67–86 g/L
6.7–8.6 g/dL
Pyruvate
P, arterial
40–130 μmol/L
0.35–1.14 mg/dL
P, venous
40–130 μmol/L
0.35–1.14 mg/dL
Rheumatoid factor
S, JF
<30 kIU/L
<30 IU/mL
Serotonin
WB
0.28–1.14 μmol/L
50–200 ng/mL
Serum protein electrophoresis
S
NA
Normal pattern
Sex hormone binding globulin (adults)
S
Men
13–71 nmol/L
13–71 nmol/L
Women
18–114 nmol/L
18–114 nmol/L
Sodium
S
136–146 mmol/L
136–146 meq/L
Somatomedin-C (IGF-1) (adult)
S
16–24 years
182–780 μg/L
182–780 ng/mL
25–39 years
114–492 μg/L
114–492 ng/mL
40–54 years
90–360 μg/L
90–360 ng/mL
>54 years
71–290 μg/L
71–290 ng/mL
Somatostatin
P
<25 ng/L
<25 pg/mL
Testosterone, total, morning sample
S
Women
0.21–2.98 nmol/L
6–86 ng/dL
Men
9.36–37.10 nmol/L
270–1070 ng/dL
Thyroglobulin
S
0.5–53 μg/L
0.5–53 ng/mL
Thyroid-binding globulin
S
13–30 mg/L
1.3–3.0 mg/dL
Thyroid-stimulating hormone
S
0.34–4.25 mIU/L
0.34–4.25 μIU/mL
Thyroxine, free (fT4)
S
10.3–21.9 pmol/L
0.8–1.7 ng/dL
Thyroxine, total (T4)
S
70–151 nmol/L
5.4–11.7 μg/dL
(Free) thyroxine index
S
6.7–10.9
6.7–10.9
Transferrin
S
2.0–4.0 g/L
200–400 mg/dL
Triglycerides (see Table A-5)
S
0.34–2.26 mmol/L
30–200 mg/dL
Triiodothyronine, free (fT3)
S
3.7–6.5 pmol/L
2.4–4.2 pg/mL
Triiodothyronine, total (T3)
S
1.2–2.1 nmol/L
77–135 ng/dL
Troponin I
S
Normal population, 99 %tile
0–0.08 μg/L
0–0.08 ng/mL
Cut-off for MI
>0.4 μg/L
>0.4 ng/mL
Troponin T
S
Normal population, 99 %tile
0–0.1 μg/L
0–0.01 ng/mL
Cut-off for MI
0–0.1 μg/L
0–0.1 ng/mL
Urea nitrogen
S
2.5–7.1 mmol/L
7–20 mg/dL
Uric acid
S
Women
0.15–0.33 μmol/L
2.5–5.6 mg/dL
Men
0.18–0.41 μmol/L
3.1–7.0 mg/dL
Urobilinogen
U
0.09–4.2 μmol/d
0.05–25 mg/24 h
Vanillylmandelic acid (VMA)
U, 24 h 
<30 μmol/d
<6 mg/d
Vasoactive intestinal polypeptide
P
0–60 ng/L
0–60 pg/mL
Note: JF, joint ﬂuid; MI, myocardial infarction; P, plasma; S, serum; SI, Système International d’Unités; U, urine; WB, whole blood.
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
501
APPENDIX
TABLE A-3
TOXICOLOGY AND THERAPEUTIC DRUG MONITORING
THERAPEUTIC RANGE
TOXIC LEVEL
DRUG
SI UNITS
CONVENTIONAL UNITS
SI UNITS
CONVENTIONAL UNITS
Acetaminophen
66–199 μmol/L
10–30 μg/mL
>1320 μmol/L
>200 μg/mL
Amikacin
Peak
34–51 μmol/L
20–30 μg/mL
>60 μmol/L
>35 μg/mL
Trough
0–17 μmol/L
0–10 μg/mL
>17 μmol/L
>10 μg/mL
Amitriptyline/nortriptyline
430–900 nmol/L
120–250 ng/mL
>1800 nmol/L
>500 ng/mL
(total drug)
Amphetamine
150–220 nmol/L
20–30 ng/mL
>1500 nmol/L
>200 ng/mL
Bromide
1.3–6.3 mmol/L
Sedation: 10–50 mg/dL
6.4–18.8 mmol/L
51–150 mg/dL: 
9.4–18.8 mmol/L
Epilepsy: 75–150 mg/dL
>18.8 mmol/L
mild toxicity
>37.5 mmol/L
>150 mg/dL: 
Severe toxicity
>300 mg/dL: Lethal
Carbamazepine
17–42 μmol/L
4–10 μg/mL
85 μmol/L
>20 μg/mL
Chloramphenicol
Peak
31–62 μmol/L
10–20 μg/mL
>77 μmol/L
>25 μg/mL
Trough
15–31 μmol/L
5–10 μg/mL
>46 μmol/L
>15 μg/mL
Chlordiazepoxide
1.7–10 μmol/L
0.5–3.0 μg/mL
>17 μmol/L
>5.0 μg/mL
Clonazepam
32–240 nmol/L
10–75 ng/mL 
>320 nmol/L
>100 ng/mL
Clozapine
0.6–2.1 μmol/L
200–700 ng/mL
>3.7 μmol/L
>1200 ng/mL
Cocaine
>3.3 μmol/L
>1.0 μg/mL
Codeine
43–110 nmol/mL
13–33 ng/mL
>3700 nmol/mL
>1100 ng/mL (lethal)
Cyclosporine
Renal transplant
0–6 months
208–312 nmol/L
250–375 ng/mL 
>312 nmol/L
>375 ng/mL 
6–12 months after 
166–250 nmol/L
200–300 ng/mL 
>250 nmol/L
>300 ng/mL 
transplant
>12 months 
83–125 nmol/L
100–150 ng/mL
>125 nmol/L
>150 ng/mL
Cardiac transplant
0–6 months
208–291 nmol/L
250–350 ng/mL
>291 nmol/L
>350 ng/mL
6–12 months after 
125–208 nmol/L
150–250 ng/mL
>208 nmol/L
>250 ng/mL
transplant
>12 months
83–125 nmol/L
100–150 ng/mL
>125 nmol/L
150 ng/mL
Lung transplant
0–6 months
250–374 nmol/L
300–450 ng/mL
>374 nmol/L
>450 ng/mL
Liver transplant
0–7 days
249–333 nmol/L
300–400 ng/mL
>333 nmol/L
>400 ng/mL
2–4 weeks
208–291 nmol/L
250–350 ng/mL
>291 nmol/L
>350 ng/mL
5–8 weeks
166–249 nmol/L
200–300 ng/mL
>249 nmol/L
>300 ng/mL
9–52 weeks
125–208 nmol/L
150–250 ng/mL
>208 nmol/L
>250 ng/mL
>1 year
83–166 nmol/L
100–200 ng/mL
>166 nmol/L
>200 ng/mL
Desipramine
375–1130 nmol/L
100–300 ng/mL
>1880 nmol/L
>500 ng/mL
Diazepam (and metabolite)
Diazepam
0.7–3.5 μmol/L
0.2–1.0 μg/mL
>7.0 μmol/L
>2.0 μg/mL
Nordazepam
0.4–6.6 μmol/L
0.1–1.8 μg/mL
>9.2 μmol/L
>2.5 μg/mL
Digoxin
0.64–2.6 nmol/L
0.5–2.0 ng/mL
>3.1 nmol/L
>2.4 ng/mL
Disopyramide
>7.4 μmol/L
2.5 μg/mL
20.6 μmol/L
>7 μg/mL
Doxepin and nordoxepin
Doxepin
0.36–0.98 μmol/L
101–274 ng/mL
>1.8 μmol/L
>503 ng/mL
Nordoxepin
0.38–1.04 μmol/L
106–291 ng/mL
>1.9 μmol/L
>531 ng/mL
Ethanol
Behavioral changes
>4.3 mmol/L
>20 mg/dL
Legal limit
≥17 mmol/L
≥80 mg/dL
Critical with acute 
exposure
>54 mmol/L
>250 mg/dL
(Continued)
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
502
APPENDIX
TABLE A-3 (CONTINUED)
TOXICOLOGY AND THERAPEUTIC DRUG MONITORING
THERAPEUTIC RANGE
TOXIC LEVEL
DRUG
SI UNITS
CONVENTIONAL UNITS
SI UNITS
CONVENTIONAL UNITS
Ethylene glycol
Toxic
>2 mmol/L
>12 mg/dL
Lethal
>20 mmol/L
>120 mg/dL
Ethosuximide
280–700 μmol/L
40–100 μg/mL
>700 μmol/L
>100 μg/mL
Flecainide
0.5–2.4 μmol/L
0.2–1.0 μg/mL
>3.6 μmol/L
>1.5 μg/mL
Gentamicin
Peak
10–21 μmol/mL
5–10 μg/mL
>25 μmol/mL
>12 μg/mL
Trough
0–4.2 μmol/mL
0–2 μg/mL
>4.2 μmol/mL
>2 μg/mL
Heroin (diacetyl 
>700 μmol/L
>200 ng/mL 
morphine)
(as morphine)
Ibuprofen
49–243 μmol/L
10–50 μg/mL
>97 μmol/L
>200 μg/mL
Imipramine
(and metabolite)
Desimipramine
375–1130 nmol/L
100–300 ng/mL
>1880 nmol/L
>500 ng/mL
Total Imipramine +
563–1130 nmol/L
150–300 ng/mL
>1880 nmol/L
>500 ng/mL
Desimipramine
Lidocaine
5.1–21.3 μmol/L
1.2–5.0 μg/mL
>38.4 μmol/L
>9.0 μg/mL
Lithium
0.5–1.3 meq/L
0.5–1.3 meq/L
>2 mmol/L
>2 meq/L
Methadone
1.3–3.2 μmol/L
0.4–1.0 μg/mL
>6.5 μmol/L
>2 μg/mL
Methamphetamine
20–30 ng/mL
0.1–1.0 μg/mL
Methanol
>6 mmol/L
>20 mg/dL
>16 mmol/L
>50 mg/dL: Severe 
toxicity
>28 mmol/L
>89 mg/dL: Lethal
Methotrexate
Low dose
0.01–0.1 μmol/L
0.01–0.1 μmol/L
>0.1 mmol/L
>0.1 mmol/L
High dose (24 h)
<5.0 μmol/L
<5.0 μmol/L
>5.0 μmol/L
>5.0 μmol/L
High dose (48 h)
<0.50 μmol/L
<0.50 μmol/L
>0.5 μmol/L
>0.5 μmol/L
High dose (72 h)
<0.10 μmol/L
<0.10 μmol/L
>0.1 μmol/L
>0.1 μmol/L
Morphine
35–250 μmol/L
10–70 ng/mL 
180–14000 μmol/L
50–4000 ng/mL
Nitroprusside 
103–499 μmol/L
6–29 μg/mL
860 μmol/L
>50 μg/mL
(as thiocyanate)
Nortriptyline
190–569 nmol/L
50–150 ng/mL
>1900 nmol/L
>500 ng/mL
Phenobarbital
65–172 μmol/L
15–40 μg/mL
>215 μmol/L
>50 μg/mL
Phenytoin
40–79 μmol/L
10–20 μg/mL
>118 μmol/L
>30 μg/mL
Phenytoin, Free
4.0–7.9 μg/mL
1–2 μg/mL
>13.9 μg/mL
>3.5 μg/mL
% Free
0.08–0.14
8–14%
Primidone and 
metabolite
Primidone
23–55 μmol/L
5–12 μg/mL
>69 μmol/L
>15 μg/mL
Phenobarbital
65–172 μmol/L
15–40 μg/mL
>215 μmol/L
>50 μg/mL
Procainamide
Procainamide
17 42 μmol/L
4–10 μg/mL
>51 μmol/L
>12 μg/mL
NAPA (N-
22–72 μmol/L
6–20 μg/mL
>126 μmol/L
>35 μg/mL
acetylprocainamide)
Quinidine
>6.2–15.4 μmol/L
2.0 –5.0 μg/mL
>31 μmol/L
>10 μg/mL
Salicylates
145–2100 μmol/L
2–29 mg/dL
>2172 μmol/L
>30 mg/dL
Sirolimus (trough level)
Kidney transplant
4.4–13.1 nmol/L
4–12 ng/mL
>16 nmol/L
>15 ng/mL
Tacrolimus (FK506) 
(trough)
Kidney and liver
0–2 months 
12–19 nmol/L
10–15 ng/mL
>25 nmol/L
>20 ng/mL
posttransplant
>2 months 
6–12 nmol/L
5–10 ng/mL
posttransplant
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
503
APPENDIX
TABLE A-3 (CONTINUED)
TOXICOLOGY AND THERAPEUTIC DRUG MONITORING
THERAPEUTIC RANGE
TOXIC LEVEL
DRUG
SI UNITS
CONVENTIONAL UNITS
SI UNITS
CONVENTIONAL UNITS
Heart
0–2 months 
19–25 nmol/L
15–20 ng/mL
>25 nmol/L
>20 ng/mL
posttransplant
3–6 months 
12–19 nmol/L
10–15 ng/mL
posttransplant
>6 months 
10–12 nmol/L
8–10 ng/mL 
posttransplant
Theophylline
56–111 μg/mL
10–20 μg/mL
>140 μg/mL
>25 μg/mL
Thiocyanate
After nitroprusside 
103–499 μmol/L
6–29 μg/mL
860 μmol/L
>50 μg/mL
infusion
Nonsmoker
17–69 μmol/L
1–4 μg/mL
Smoker
52–206 μmol/L
3–12 μg/mL
Tobramycin
Peak
11–22 μg/L
5–10 μg/mL
>26 μg/L
>12 μg/mL
Trough
0–4.3 μg/L
0–2 μg/mL
>4.3 μg/L
>2 μg/mL
Valproic acid
350–700 μmol/L
50–100 μg/mL
>1000 μmol/L
>150 μg/mL
Vancomycin
Peak
14–28 μmol/L
20–40 μg/mL
>55 μmol/L
>80 μg/mL
Trough
3.5–10.4 μmol/L
5–15 μg/mL
>14 μmol/L
>20 μg/mL
Note: SI, Système International d’Unités.
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
504
APPENDIX
TABLE A-4
VITAMINS AND SELECTED TRACE MINERALS
REFERENCE RANGE
SPECIMEN
ANALYTE
SI UNITS
CONVENTIONAL UNITS
Aluminum
S
<0.2 μmol/L
<5.41 μg/L
U, random
0.19–1.11 μmol/L
5–30 μg/L
Arsenic
WB
0.03–0.31 μmol/L
2–23 μg/L
U, 24 h
0.07–0.67 μmol/d
5–50 μg/d
Cadmium
WB
<44.5 nmol/L
<5.0 μg/L
Coenzyme Q10 (ubiquinone)
P
433–1532 μg/L
433–1532 μg/L
B carotene
S
0.07–1.43 μmol/L
4–77 μg/dL
Copper
S
11–22 μmol/L
70–140 μg/dL
U, 24 h
<0.95 μmol/d
<60 μg/d
Folic acid
RBC
340–1020 nmol/L cells
150–450 ng/mL cells
Folic acid
S
12.2–40.8 nmol/L
5.4–18.0 ng/mL
Lead (adult)
S
<0.5 μmol/L
<10 μg/dL
Mercury
WB
3.0–294 nmol/L
0.6–59 μg/L
U, 24 h
<99.8 nmol/L
<20 μg/L
Selenium
S
0.8–2.0 μmol/L
63–160 μg/L
Vitamin A
S
0.7–3.5 μmol/L
20–100 μg/dL
Vitamin B1 (thiamine)
S
0–75 nmol/L
0–2 μg/dL
Vitamin B2 (riboﬂavin)
S
106–638 nmol/L
4–24 μg/dL
Vitamin B6
P
20–121 nmol/L
5–30 ng/mL
Vitamin B12
S
206–735 pmol/L
279–996 pg/mL
Vitamin C (ascorbic acid)
S
23–57 μmol/L
0.4–1.0 mg/dL
Vitamin D3, 1,25-dihydroxy
S
60–108 pmol/L
25–45 pg/mL
Vitamin D3, 25-hydroxy
P
Summer
37.4–200 nmol/L
15–80 ng/mL
Winter
34.9–105 nmol/L
14–42 ng/mL
Vitamin E
S
12–42 μmol/L
5–18 μg/mL
Vitamin K
S
0.29–2.64 nmol/L
0.13–1.19 ng/mL
Zinc
S
11.5–18.4 μmol/L
75–120 μg/dL
Note: P, plasma; RBC, red blood cell; S, serum; SI, Système International d’Unités; WB, whole blood; U, urine.
TABLE A-5
CLASSIFICATION OF LOW-DENSITY LIPOPROTEIN, TOTAL, AND HIGH-DENSITY
LIPOPROTEIN CHOLESTEROL
LDL cholesterol, mg/dL (mmol/L)
<70 (<1.81)
Therapeutic option for very high-risk patients
<100 (<2.59)
Optimal
100–129 (2.59–3.34)
Near optimal or above optimal
130–159 (3.36–4.11)
Borderline high
160–189 (4.14–4.89)
High
≥190 (≥4.91)
Very high
Total cholesterol, mg/dL (mmol/L)
<200 (<5.17)
Desirable
200–239 (5.17–6.18)
Borderline high
≥240 (≥6.21)
High
HDL cholesterol, mg/dL (mmol/L)
<40 (<1.03)
Low
≥60 (≥1.55)
High
Note: HDL, high-density lipoprotein; LDL, low-density lipoprotein.
Source: Executive summary of the third report of the National Cholesterol Education Program
(NCEP) expert panel on detection, evaluation, and treatment of high blood cholesterol in adults (adult
treatment panel III). JAMA 285:2486, 2001; and Grundy SM et al for the Coordinating Committee of
the National Cholesterol Education Program: Implications of recent clinical trials for the National Choles-
terol Education Program Adult Treatment Panel III Guidelines. Circulation 110:227, 2004.
REFERENCE VALUES FOR SPECIFIC ANALYTES
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
505
APPENDIX
TABLE A-6
CEREBROSPINAL FLUIDa
REFERENCE RANGE
CONSTITUENT
SI UNITS
CONVENTIONAL UNITS
Osmolarity
292–297 mmol/kg water
292–297 mosmol/L
Electrolytes
Sodium
137–145 mmol/L
137–145 meq/L
Potassium
2.7–3.9 mmol/L
2.7–3.9 meq/L
Calcium
1.0–1.5 mmol/L
2.1–3.0 meq/L
Magnesium
1.0–1.2 mmol/L
2.0–2.5 meq/L
Chloride
116–122 mmol/L
116–122 meq/L
CO2 content
20–24 mmol/L
20–24 meq/L
PCO2
6–7 kPa
45–49 mmHg
pH
7.31–7.34
Glucose
2.22–3.89 mmol/L
40–70 mg/dL
Lactate
1–2 mmol/L
10–20 mg/dL
Total protein
Lumbar
0.15–0.5 g/L
15–50 mg/dL
Cisternal
0.15–0.25 g/L
15–25 mg/dL
Ventricular
0.06–0.15 g/L
6–15 mg/dL
Albumin
0.066–0.442 g/L
6.6–44.2 mg/dL
IgG
0.009–0.057 g/L
0.9–5.7 mg/dL
IgG index b
0.29–0.59
Oligoclonal bands
<2 bands not present in 
matched serum sample
Ammonia
15–47 μmol/L
25–80 μg/dL
Creatinine
44–168 μmol/L
0.5–1.9 mg/dL
Myelin basic protein
<4 μg/L
CSF pressure
50–180 mmH2O
CSF volume (adult)
~150 mL
Red blood cells
0
0
Leukocytes
Total
0–5 mononuclear cells per μL
0–5 mononuclear cells per mm3
Differential
Lymphocytes
60–70%
Monocytes
30–50%
Neutrophils
None
aBecause cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF) concentrations are equilibrium values, measurements of the same parameters in blood plasma obtained at
the same time are recommended. However, there is a time lag in attainment of equilibrium, and cerebrospinal levels of plasma constituents that
can ﬂuctuate rapidly (e.g., plasma glucose) may not achieve stable values until after a signiﬁcant lag phase.
bIgG index = CSF IgG(mg/dL) × serum albumin(g/dL)/Serum IgG(g/dL) × CSF albumin(mg/dL).
Note: SI, Système International d’Unités.
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
506
APPENDIX
TABLE A-7
URINE ANALYSIS
REFERENCE RANGE
SI UNITS
CONVENTIONAL UNITS
Acidity, titratable
20–40 mmol/d
20–40 meq/d
Ammonia
30–50 mmol/d
30–50 meq/d
Amylase
4–400 U/L
Amylase/creatinine clearance ratio ([Clam/Clcr] × 100)
1–5
1–5
Calcium (10 meq/d or 200 mg/d dietary calcium)
<7.5 mmol/d
<300 mg/d
Creatine, as creatinine
Women
<760 μmol/d
<100 mg/d
Men
<380 μmol/d
<50 mg/d
Creatinine
8.8–14 mmol/d
1.0–1.6 g/d
Eosinophils
<100,000 eosinophils/L
<100 eosinophils/mL
Glucose (glucose oxidase method)
0.3–1.7 mmol/d
50–300 mg/d
5-Hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5-HIAA)
10–47 μmol/d
2–9 mg/d
Iodine, spot urine
WHO classiﬁcation of iodine deﬁciency
Not iodine deﬁcient
>100 μg/L
>100 μg/L
Mild iodine deﬁciency
50–100 μg/L
50–100 μg/L
Moderate iodine deﬁciency
20–49 μg/L
20–49 μg/L
Severe iodine deﬁciency
<20 μg/L
<20 μg/L
Microalbumin
Normal
0.0–0.03 g/d
0–30 mg/d
Microalbuminuria
0.03–0.30 g/d
30–300 mg/d
Clinical albuminuria
>0.3 g/d
>300 mg/d
Microalbumin/creatinine ratio
Normal
0–3.4 g/mol creatinine
0–30 μg/mg creatinine
Microalbuminuria
3.4–34 g/mol creatinine
30–300 μg/mg creatinine
Clinical albuminuria
>34 g/mol creatinine
>300 μg/mg creatinine
Oxalate
Men
80–500 μmol/d
7–44 mg/d
Women
45–350 μmol/d
4–31 mg/d
pH
5.0–9.0
5.0–9.0
Phosphate (phosphorus) (varies with intake)
12.9–42.0 mmol/d
400–1300 mg/d
Potassium (varies with intake)
25–100 mmol/d
25–100 meq/d
Protein
<0.15 g/d
<150 mg/d
Sediment
Red blood cells
0–2/high power ﬁeld
White blood cells
0–2/high power ﬁeld
Bacteria
None
Crystals
None
Bladder cells
None
Squamous cells
None
Tubular cells
None
Broad casts
None
Epithelial cell casts
None
Granular casts
None
Hyaline casts
0–5/low power ﬁeld
Red blood cell casts
None
Waxy casts
None
White cell casts
None
Sodium (varies with intake)
100–260 mmol/d
100–260 meq/d
Speciﬁc gravity
1.001–1.035
1.001–1.035
Urea nitrogen 
214–607 mmol/d
6–17 g/d
Uric acid (normal diet)
1.49–4.76 mmol/d
250–800 mg/d
Note: SI, Système International d’Unités; WHO, World Health Organization.
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
507
APPENDIX
TABLE A-8
DIFFERENTIAL NUCLEATED CELL COUNTS OF BONE MARROW ASPIRATESa
OBSERVED RANGE, %
95% CONFIDENCE INTERVALS, %
MEAN, %
Blast cells
0–3.2
0–3.0
1.4
Promyelocytes
3.6–13.2
3.2–12.4
7.8
Neutrophil myelocytes
4–21.4
3.7–10.0
7.6
Eosinophil myelocytes
0–5.0
0–2.8
1.3
Metamyelocytes
1–7.0
2.3–5.9
4.1
Neutrophils
Men
21.0–45.6
21.9–42.3
32.1
Women
29.6–46.6
28.8–45.9
37.4
Eosinophils
0.4–4.2
0.3–4.2
2.2
Eosinophils plus eosinophil 
0.9–7.4
0.7–6.3
3.5
myelocytes
Basophils
0–0.8
0–0.4
0.1
Erythroblasts
Men
18.0–39.4
16.2–40.1
28.1
Women
14.0–31.8
13.0–32.0
22.5
Lymphocytes
4.6–22.6
6.0–20.0
13.1
Plasma cells
0–1.4
0–1.2
0.6
Monocytes
0–3.2
0–2.6
1.3
Macrophages
0–1.8
0–1.3
0.4
M:E ratio
Men
1.1–4.0
1.1–4.1
2.1
Women
1.6–5.4
1.6–5.2
2.8
a Based on bone marrow aspirate from 50 healthy volunteers (30 men, 20 women).
Source: From Bain BJ: The bone marrow aspirate of healthy subjects. Br J Haematol 94(1):206, 1996.
TABLE A-9
STOOL ANALYSIS
REFERENCE RANGE
SI UNITS
CONVENTIONAL UNITS
Amount
0.1–0.2 kg/d
100–200 g/24 h
Coproporphyrin
611–1832 nmol/d
400–1200 μg/24 h
Fat
Adults
<7 g/d
Adults on fat-free diet
< 4 g/d
Fatty acids
0–21 mmol/d
0–6 g/24 h
Leukocytes
None
None
Nitrogen
<178 mmol/d
<2.5 g/24 h
pH
7.0–7.5
Occult blood
Negative
Negative
Trypsin
20–95 U/g
Urobilinogen
85–510 μmol/d
50–300 mg/24 h
Uroporphyrins
12–48 nmol/d
10–40 μg/24 h
Water
<0.75
<75%
Note: SI, Système International d’Unités.
Source: Modiﬁed from Fishbach FT, Dunning MB III: A Manual of Laboratory and Diagnostic Tests,
7th ed. Philadelphia, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2004.
SPECIAL FUNCTION TESTS
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
508
APPENDIX
TABLE A-10
RENAL FUNCTION TESTS
REFERENCE RANGE
SI UNITS
CONVENTIONAL UNITS
Clearances (corrected to 1.72 m2 body surface area)
Measures of glomerular ﬁltration rate
Inulin clearance (Cl)
Men (mean ± 1 SD)
2.1 ± 0.4 mL/s
124 ± 25.8 mL/min
Women (mean ± 1 SD)
2.0 ± 0.2 mL/s
119 ± 12.8 mL/min
Endogenous creatinine clearance
1.5–2.2 mL/s
91–130 mL /min
Measures of effective renal plasma ﬂow 
and tubular function
p-Aminohippuric acid clearance (ClPAH)
Men (mean ± 1 SD)
10.9 ± 2.7 mL/s
654 ± 163 mL/min
Women (mean ± 1 SD)
9.9 ± 1.7 mL/s
594 ± 102 mL/min
Concentration and dilution test
Speciﬁc gravity of urine
After 12-h ﬂuid restriction
>1.025
>1.025
After 12-h deliberate water intake
≤1.003
≤1.003
Protein excretion, urine
<0.15 g/d
<150 mg/d
Speciﬁc gravity, maximal range
1.002–1.028
1.002–1.028
Tubular reabsorption, phosphorus
0.79–0.94 of ﬁltered load
79–94% of ﬁltered load
Note: SI, Système International d’Unités.
TABLE A-11
CIRCULATORY FUNCTION TESTS
RESULTS: REFERENCE RANGE
TEST
SI UNITS (RANGE)
CONVENTIONAL UNITS (RANGE)
Arteriovenous oxygen difference
30–50 mL/L
30–50 mL/L
Cardiac output (Fick)
2.5–3.6 L/m2 of body surface area 
2.5–3.6 L/m2 of body surface area 
per min
per min
Contractility indexes
Maximum LV dp/dt(dp/dt)/DP 
220 kPa/s (176–250 kPa/s) 
1650 mmHg/s (1320–1880 mmHg/s) 
when DP = 5.3 kPa (40 mmHg)
(37.6 ± 12.2)/s
(37.6 ± 12.2)/s
Mean normalized systolic ejection 
3.32 ± 0.84 end-diastolic volumes 
3.32 ± 0.84 end-diastolic volumes 
rate (angiography)
per second
per second
Mean velocity of circumferential 
1.83 ± 0.56 circumferences per second
1.83 ± 0.56 circumferences per second
ﬁber shortening (angiography)
Ejection fraction: SV/EDV
0.67 ± 0.08 (0.55–0.78)
0.67 ± 0.08 (0.55–0.78)
End-diastolic volume
70 ± 20.0 mL/m2 (60–88 mL/m2)
70 ± 20.0 mL/m2 (60–88 mL/m2)
End-systolic volume
25 ± 5.0 mL/m2 (20–33 mL/m2)
25 ± 5.0 mL/m2 (20–33 mL/m2)
Left ventricular work
Stroke work index
50 ± 20.0 (g•m)/m2 (30–110)
50 ± 20.0 (g•m)/m2 (30–110)
LV minute work index
1.8–6.6 [(kg•m)/m2]/min
1.8–6.6 [(kg•m)/m2]/min
Oxygen consumption index
110–150 mL
110–150 mL
Maximum oxygen uptake
35 mL/min (20–60 mL/min)
35 mL/min (20–60 mL/min)
Pulmonary vascular resistance
2–12 (kPa•s)/L
20–130 (dyn•s)/cm5
Systemic vascular resistance
77–150 (kPa•s)/L
770–1600 (dyn•s)/cm5
Note: DP, diastolic pressure; EDV, end-diastolic volume; LV, left ventricular; SI, Système International d’Unités; SV, stroke volume.
Source: Braunwald E et al: Heart Disease, 6th ed, Philadelphia, Saunders, 2001.
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
509
APPENDIX
TABLE A-12
GASTROINTESTINAL TESTS
RESULTS
TEST
SI UNITS
CONVENTIONAL UNITS
Absorption tests
D-Xylose: after overnight fast, 25 g xylose 
given in oral aqueous solution
Urine, collected for following 5 h
25% of ingested dose
25% of ingested dose
Serum, 2 h after dose
2.0–3.5 mmol/L
30–52 mg/dL
Vitamin A: a fasting blood specimen is obtained 
Serum level should increase to 
Serum level should increase to 
and 200,000 U of vitamin A in oil is given PO
twice fasting level in 3–5 h
twice fasting level in 3–5 h
Bentiromide test (pancreatic function): 500 mg 
bentiromide (Chymex) PO; p-aminobenzoic acid 
(PABA) measured
Plasma
> 3.6 (±1.1) μg/mL at 90 min
Urine
> 50% recovered in 6 h
> 50% recovered in 6 h
Gastric juice volume
Volume
24 h
2–3 L
2–3 L
Nocturnal
600–700 mL
600–700 mL
Basal, fasting
30–70 mL/h
30–70 mL/h
Reaction
pH
1.6–1.8
1.6–1.8
Titratable acidity of fasting juice
4–9 μmol/s
15–35 meq/h
Acid output
Basal
Women (mean ± 1 SD)
0.6 ± 0.5 μmol/s
2.0 ± 1.8 meq/h
Men (mean ± 1 SD)
0.8 ± 0.6 μmol/s
3.0 ± 2.0 meq/h
Maximal (after SC histamine acid phosphate, 
0.004 mg/kg body weight, and preceded 
by 50 mg promethazine, or after betazole, 
1.7 mg/kg body weight, or pentagastrin, 
6 μg/kg body weight)
Women (mean ± 1 SD)
4.4 ± 1.4 μmol/s
16 ± 5 meq/h
Men (mean ± 1 SD)
6.4 ± 1.4 μmol/s
23 ± 5 meq/h
Basal acid output/maximal acid output ratio
≤0.6
≤0.6
Gastrin, serum
0–200 μg/L
0–200 pg/mL
Secretin test (pancreatic exocrine function): 
1 U/kg body weight, IV
Volume (pancreatic juice) in 80 min
>2.0 mL/kg
>2.0 mL/kg
Bicarbonate concentration
>80 mmol/L
>80 meq/L
Bicarbonate output in 30 min
>10 mmol
>10 meq
Note: SI, Système International d’Unités.
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
510
APPENDIX
TABLE A-13
NORMAL VALUES OF DOPPLER ECHOCARDIOGRAPHIC MEASUREMENTS 
IN ADULTS
RANGE
MEAN
RVD (cm), measured at the base 
2.6–4.3
3.5 ± 0.4
in apical four-chamber view
LVID (cm), measured in the 
3.6–5.4
4.7 ± 0.4
parasternal long-axis view
Posterior LV wall thickness (cm)
0.6–1.1
0.9 ± 0.4
IVS wall thickness (cm)
0.6–1.1
0.9 ± 0.4
LA dimension (cm), AP dimension
2.3–3.8
3.0 ± 0.3
Aortic root dimension (cm)
2.0–3.5
2.4 ± 0.4
Aortic cusps separation (cm)
1.5–2.6
1.9 ± 0.4
Percentage of fractional shortening
34–44%
36%
Mitral ﬂow (m/s)
0.6–1.3
0.9
Tricuspid ﬂow (m/s)
0.3–0.7
0.5
Pulmonary artery (m/s)
0.6–0.9
0.75
Aorta (m/s)
1.0–1.7
1.35
Note: AP, anteroposterior; IVS, interventricular septum; LA, left atrium; LV, left ventricle; LVID, left
ventricular internal dimension; RVD, right ventricular dimension.
Source: From Weyman A: Principles and Practice of Echocardiography, 2d ed, Philadelphia, Lea &
Febiger, 1994.
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
511
APPENDIX
TABLE A-14
SUMMARY OF VALUES USEFUL IN PULMONARY PHYSIOLOGY
TYPICAL VALUES
MAN, AGE 40 YEARS, 75 kg, 
WOMAN, AGE 40 YEARS, 60 kg, 
SYMBOL
175 cm TALL
160 cm TALL
Pulmonary Mechanics
Spirometry—volume-time curves
Forced vital capacity
FVC
5.1 L
3.6 L
Forced expiratory volume in 1 s
FEV1
4.1 L
2.9 L
FEV1/FVC
FEV1% 
80%
82%
Maximal midexpiratory ﬂow
MMF (FEF 25–27)
4.8 L/s
3.6 L /s
Maximal expiratory ﬂow rate
MEFR (FEF 200–1200)
9.4 L/s
6.1 L /s
Spirometry—ﬂow-volume curves
Maximal expiratory ﬂow at 
Vmax 50 (FEF 50%) 
6.1 L/s
4.6 L /s
50% of expired vital capacity
Maximal expiratory ﬂow at 75%
Vmax 75 (FEF 75%)
3.1 L/s
2.5 L /s
of expired vital capacity
Resistance to airﬂow
Pulmonary resistance
RL (RL)
<3.0 (cmH2O/s)/L
Airway resistance
Raw
<2.5 (cmH2O/s)/L
Speciﬁc conductance
SGaw
>0.13 cmH2O/s
Pulmonary compliance
Static recoil pressure at total 
Pst TLC
25 ± 5 cmH2O
lung capacity
Compliance of lungs (static)
CL
0.2 L cmH2O
Compliance of lungs and thorax
C(L + T)
0.1 L cmH2O
Dynamic compliance of 
C dyn 20
0.25 ± 0.05 L/cmH2O
20 breaths/min
Maximal static respiratory 
pressures
Maximal inspiratory pressure
MIP
>90 cmH2O
>50 cmH2O
Maximal expiratory pressure
MEP
>150 cmH2O
>120 cmH2O
Lung Volumes 
Total lung capacity
TLC
6.7 L
4.9 L
Functional residual capacity
FRC
3.7 L
2.8 L
Residual volume
RV
2.0 L
1.6 L
Inspiratory capacity
IC
3.3 L
2.3 L
Expiratory reserve volume
ERV
1.7 L
1.1 L
Vital capacity
VC
5.0 L
3.4 L
Gas Exchange (Sea Level)
Arterial O2 tension
PaO2
12.7 ± 0.7 kPa (95 ± 5 mmHg)
Arterial CO2 tension
PaCO2
5.3 ± 0.3 kPa (40 ± 2 mmHg)
Arterial O2 saturation
SaO2
0.97 ± 0.02 (97 ± 2%)
Arterial blood pH
pH
7.40 ± 0.02
Arterial bicarbonate
HCO3
–
24 + 2 meq/L
Base excess
BE
0 ± 2 meq/L
Diffusing capacity for carbon 
DLCO
0.42 mL CO/s/mmHg (25 mL CO/min/mmHg)
monoxide (single breath)
Dead space volume
VD
2 mL/kg body wt
Physiologic dead space; dead 
VD/VT
space-tidal volume ratio
Rest
≤35% VT
Exercise
≤20% VT
Alveolar–arterial difference for O2
P(A–a)O2
≤2.7 kPa ≤20 kPa (≤20 mmHg) 
MISCELLANEOUS
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
512
APPENDIX
TABLE A-15
BODY FLUIDS AND OTHER MASS DATA
REFERENCE RANGE
SI UNITS
CONVENTIONAL UNITS
Ascitic ﬂuid
Body ﬂuid
Total volume (lean) of body weight
50–70% (in obese patients)
Intracellular
0.3–0.4 of body weight
Extracellular
0.2–0.3 of body weight
Blood
Total volume
Men
69 mL/kg body wt 
Women
65 mL/kg body wt
Plasma volume
Men
39 mL/kg body wt
Women
40 mL/kg body wt
Red blood cell volume
Men
30 mL/kg body wt
1.15–1.21 L/m2 of body surface area
Women
25 mL/kg body wt
0.95–1.00 L/m2 of body surface area
Body mass index
18.5–24.9 kg/m2
18.5–24.9 kg/m2
Note: SI, Système International d’Unités.
TABLE A-16
RADIATION-DERIVED UNITS
NAME FOR SI UNIT 
QUANTITY
OLD UNIT
SI UNIT
(ABBREVIATION)
CONVERSION
Activity
Curie (Ci)
Disintegrations per 
Becquerel (Bq)
1 Ci = 3.7 × 1010 Bq
second (dps)
1 mCi = 37 mBq
1 μCi = 0.037 MBq or 37 GBq
1 Bq = 2.703 × 10–11 Ci
Absorbed dose
rad
Joule per kilogram (J/kg)
Gray (Gy)
1 Gy = 100 rad
1 rad = 0.01 Gy
1 mrad = 10–3 cGy
Exposure
Roentgen (R)
Coulomb per kilogram (C/kg)
—
1 C/kg = 3876 R
1 R = 2.58 × 10–4 C/kg
1 mR = 258 pC/kg
Dose equivalent
Rem
Joule per kilogram (J/kg)
Sievert (Sv)
1 Sv = 100 rem
1 rem = 0.01 Sv
1 mrem = 10 μSv
Note: SI, Système International d’Unités.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors acknowledge the contributions of Dr. Patrick M. Sluss,
Dr. James L. Januzzi, and Dr. Kent B. Lewandrowski to this chapter
in previous editions of Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine.
FURTHER READINGS
KRATZ A et al: Case records of the Massachusetts General Hospital.
Weekly clinicopathological exercises. Laboratory reference val-
ues. N Engl J Med 351(15):1548, 2004
LEHMAN HP, HENRY JB: SI units, in Henry’s Clinical Diagnosis and
Management by Laboratory Methods, 21st ed, RC McPherson, MR
Pincus (eds). Philadelphia, Elsevier Saunders, 2007, pp 1404–1418
PESCE MA: Reference ranges for laboratory tests and procedures, in
Nelson’s Textbook of Pediatrics, 18th ed, RM Klegman et al (eds).
Philadelphia, Elsevier Saunders, 2007, pp 2943–2949
SOLBERG HE: Establishment and use of reference values, in Tietz
Textbook of Clinical Chemistry and Molecular Diagnostics, 4th ed,
CA Burtis et al (eds). Philadelphia, Elsevier Saunders, 2006, pp
425–448
DIRECTIONS: Choose the one best response for
each question.
1. A patient is evaluated in the emergency depart-
ment for peripheral cyanosis.Which of the follow-
ing is not a potential etiology?
A. Cold exposure
B. Deep venous thrombosis
C. Methemoglobinemia
D. Peripheral vascular disease
E. Raynaud’s phenomenon
2. Which of the following associations correctly pairs
clinical scenarios and community-acquired pneu-
monia (CAP) pathogens?
A. Aspiration pneumonia: Streptococcus pyogenes
B. Heavy alcohol use:atypical pathogens and Staphylococcus
aureus
C. Poor dental hygiene: Chlamydia pneumoniae, Klebsiella
pneumoniae
D. Structural lung disease: Pseudomonas aeruginosa, S. aureus
E. Travel to the southwestern United States:
Aspergillus spp.
3. A 54-year-old woman presents to the hospital
because of hemoptysis. She has coughed up approx-
imately 1 teaspoon of blood every day for the past 4
days. She has a history of cigarette smoking. A chest
radiogram shows diffuse bilateral inﬁltrates predomi-
nantly in the lower lobes. The hematocrit is 30%,
and the serum creatinine is 4.0 mg/dL. Both were
normal previously. Urinalysis shows 2+ protein and
red blood cell casts.The presence of autoantibodies
directed against which of the following is most
likely to yield a deﬁnitive diagnosis?
A. Glomerular basement membrane
B. Glutamic acid decarboxylase
C. Phospholipids
D. Smooth muscle
E. U1 ribonucleoprotein (RNP)
4. All of the following drugs can cause eosinophilic
pneumonia except
A. nitrofurantoin
B. sulfonamides
C. nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
D. isoniazid
E. amiodarone
5. A 24-year-old man presents to the emergency
department complaining of shortness of breath and
right-sided chest pain. The symptoms began
abruptly about 2 h previously. The pain is worse
with inspiration. He denies fevers and chills and
has not had any leg swelling. He has no past med-
ical history but smokes 1 pack of cigarettes daily.
On physical examination, he is tachypneic with a
respiratory rate of 24 breaths/min. His oxygen sat-
uration is 94% on room air. Breath sounds are
decreased in the right lung, and there is hyperreso-
nance to percussion.A chest radiograph conﬁrms a
50% pneumothorax of the right lung. What is the
best approach for treatment of this patient?
A. Needle aspiration of the pneumothorax
B. Observation and administration of 100% oxygen
C. Placement of a large-bore chest tube
D. Referral for thoracoscopy with stapling of blebs and
pleural abrasion
6. A 53-year-old woman presents to the hospital after an
episode of syncope. She has ongoing lightheadedness
and shortness of breath. She has a history of antiphos-
pholipid syndrome with prior pulmonary embolism
and has been nonadherent to her anticoagulation
recently. She has been prescribed warfarin (7.5 mg/d)
but reports taking it only intermittently. She does not
know her most recent International Normalized
Ratio (INR). On presentation to the emergency
department, she appears diaphoretic and tachypneic.
Her vital signs are blood pressure,86/44 mmHg;heart
rate, 130 bpm; respiratory rate, 30 breaths/min; and 
513
REVIEW AND SELF-ASSESSMENT∗
QUESTIONS
∗Questions and answers were taken from Wiener C et al (eds). Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine Self-Assessment and Board Review, 17th ed. New York:
McGraw-Hill, 2008.
Charles Wiener
I
Gerald Bloomﬁeld
I
Cynthia D. Brown
I
Joshua Schiffer
I
Adam Spivak
514
Review and Self-Assessment
6. (Continued)
SaO2 85% on room air. The cardiovascular examina-
tion shows a regular tachycardia without murmurs,
rubs, or gallops.The lungs are clear to auscultation.
On extremity examination, there is swelling of
her left thigh with a positive Homan’s sign. Chest
CT angiography confirms a saddle pulmonary
embolus with ongoing clot seen in the pelvic
veins on the left. Anticoagulation with unfrac-
tionated heparin is administered. After a fluid
bolus of 1 L, the patient’s blood pressure remains
low at 88/50 mmHg. Echocardiogram demon-
strates hypokinesis of the right ventricle. On
100% nonrebreather mask, the SaO2 is 92%.What
is the next best step in management of this
patient?
A. Continue the current management.
B. Continue IV ﬂuids at 500 mL/h for a total of 4 L of
ﬂuid resuscitation.
C. Refer the patient for inferior vena cava ﬁlter place-
ment and continue the current management.
D. Refer the patient for surgical embolectomy.
E. Treat the patient with dopamine and recombinant
tissue plasminogen activator (100 mg IV).
7 to 10. Among the following pulmonary func-
tion test results, pick those that are the most
likely finding in each of the following respiratory
disorders:
A. Increased total lung capacity (TLC), decreased vital
capacity (VC), decreased ratio of forced expiratory
volume in 1 s (FEV1) to forced vital capacity (FVC)
(FEV1/FVC ratio)
B. Decreased TLC, decreased VC, decreased residual vol-
ume (RV), increased FEV1/FVC ratio, normal maxi-
mum inspiratory pressure (MIP)
C. Decreased TLC, increased RV, normal FEV1/FVC
ratio, decreased MIP
D. Normal TLC, normal RV, normal FEV1/FVC ratio,
normal MIP
7. Myasthenia gravis
8. Idiopathic pulmonary ﬁbrosis
9. Familial pulmonary hypertension
10. Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
11. A 52-year-old woman presents with a community-
acquired pneumonia complicated by pleural effusion.
11. (Continued)
A thoracentesis is performed, with the following
results:
Appearance
Viscous, cloudy
pH
7.11
Protein
5.8 g/dL
LDH
285 IU/L
Glucose
66 mg/dL
WBC
3800/mm3
RBC
24,000/mm3
PMNs
93%
Gram stain
Many PMNs; no organism seen
Bacterial cultures are sent, but the results are not cur-
rently available. Which characteristic of the pleural
ﬂuid is most suggestive that the patient will require
tube thoracostomy?
A. Presence of >90% polymorphonucleocytes (PMNs)
B. Glucose <100 mg/dL
C. Presence of >1000 white blood cells
D. pH <7.20
E. Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) >two-thirds of the
normal upper limit for serum
12. A 63-year-old man with a long history of ciga-
rette smoking comes to see you for a 4-month
history of progressive shortness of breath and dys-
pnea on exertion.The symptoms have been indo-
lent with no recent worsening. He denies fever,
chest pain, and hemoptysis. He has a daily cough
of 3–6 tablespoons of yellow phlegm.The patient
says he has not seen a physician for more than 10
years. Physical examination is notable for normal
vital signs, a prolonged expiratory phase, scattered
rhonchi, elevated jugular venous pulsation, and
moderate pedal edema. The hematocrit is 49%.
Which of the following therapies is most likely to
prolong his survival?
A. Atenolol
B. Enalapril
C. Oxygen
D. Prednisone
E. Theophylline
13. A 23-year-old man is climbing Mount Kilimanjaro.
He has no medical problems and takes no medica-
tions. Shortly after beginning the climb, he devel-
ops severe shortness of breath. Physical examination
shows diffuse bilateral inspiratory crackles. Which
of the following is the most likely etiology?
13. (Continued)
A. Acute interstitial pneumonitis
B. Acute respiratory distress syndrome
C. Cardiogenic shock
D. Community-acquired pneumonia
E. High-altitude pulmonary edema
14. Which of the following statements about this con-
dition is true?
A. Acetazolamide is indicated for the treatment of this
disorder.
B. Older patients are more at risk for this disorder than
are younger patients because hypoxic vasoconstric-
tion is more pronounced as patients age.
C. Oxygen is an ineffective therapy for this disorder.
D. Persons who live at high altitudes are not at risk for
this disorder even when they return to a high altitude
after time spent at sea level.
E. Prevention can be achieved by means of gradual
ascent.
15. A 35-year-old man is seen in the clinic for evalu-
ation of infertility. He has never fathered any
children, and after 2 years of unprotected inter-
course, his wife has not achieved pregnancy.
Sperm analysis shows a normal number of sperm,
but they are immotile. His medical history is
notable for recurrent sinopulmonary infections,
and the patient recently was told that he has
bronchiectasis. Chest radiography is likely to show
which of the following?
A. Bihilar lymphadenopathy
B. Bilateral upper lobe inﬁltrates
C. Normal ﬁndings
D. Situs inversus
E. Water balloon–shaped heart
16. A 68-year-old woman presents to the emergency
department complaining of dyspnea. She has devel-
oped progressive shortness of breath over the past 
2 weeks. She has a slight dry cough and a right-sided
pleuritic chest pain. There have been no associated
fevers or chills. She smokes a pack of cigarettes daily
and has done so since 18 years of age. On physical
examination, she appears dyspneic at rest. Her vital
signs are blood pressure, 138/86 mmHg; heart
rate, 92 bpm; temperature, 37.1°C; respiratory rate,
24 breaths/min; and SaO2; 94% on room air.There is
dullness to percussion halfway up her right lung ﬁeld
with decreased tactile fremitus. Breath sounds are
decreased without egophony. The examination is
otherwise normal. A chest radiograph shows a large 
16. (Continued)
free-ﬂowing pleural effusion on the right and also
suggests mediastinal lymphadenopathy. The patient
undergoes thoracentesis, and 1500 mL of bloody-
appearing ﬂuid is removed. The results of the
pleural ﬂuid are pH, 7.46; red blood cell count, too
numerous to count; hematocrit, 3%; white blood
cell count, 230/μL (85% lymphocytes, 10% neu-
trophils, 5% mesothelial cells); protein, 4.6 g/dL;
lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), 340 U/L; and glu-
cose, 35 mg/dL. The corresponding values in the
serum are protein, 6.8 g/dL; LDH, 360 U/L; and
glucose, 115 mg/dL. A chest CT performed after
the thoracentesis shows residual moderate pleural
effusion with collapse of the right lower lobe and
enlarged mediastinal lymph nodes. Which of the
following tests is most likely to yield the cause of
the pleural effusion?
A. Mammography
B. Mediastinoscopy
C. Pleural ﬂuid cytology
D. Pleural ﬂuid culture
E. Thoracoscopic biopsy of the pleura
17. Which
of
the
following
conditions
would
be
expected to increase the residual volume (RV) of the
lung?
A. Bacterial pneumonia
B. Cryptogenic organizing pneumonia
C. Emphysema
D. Idiopathic pulmonary ﬁbrosis
E. Obesity
18. Match the following vasopressors with the state-
ment that best describes their action on the cardio-
vascular system.
1. Dobutamine
2. Low-dose dopamine (2–4 μg/kg per min)
3. Norepinephrine
4. Phenylephrine
A. Acts solely at α-adrenergic receptors to cause vaso-
constriction
B. Acts at β1-adrenergic receptors and dopaminergic
receptors to increase cardiac contractility and heart
rate. It also causes vasodilatation and increased
splanchnic and renal blood ﬂow.
C. Acts at β1- and, to a lesser extent, β2-adrenergic recep-
tors to increase cardiac contractility, heart rate, and
vasodilatation
D. Acts at α and β1-adrenergic receptors to increase
heart rate, cardiac contractility, and vasoconstriction
Review and Self-Assessment
515
19. What sleep disorder is depicted in the graphic
below (Fig. 19)?
22. (Continued)
called. Apparently, he had been coughing and com-
plaining of chills for the past few days; no further his-
tory is available from the nursing home staff.His med-
ical history is remarkable for Alzheimer’s dementia and
treated prostate cancer. The emergency responders
were able to appreciate a faint pulse and obtained a
blood pressure of 91/49 mmHg and a heart rate of
120 bpm.In the emergency room his blood pressure is
88/51 mmHg, and his heart rate is 131 bpm. He is
moaning and obtunded, localizes to pain, and has ﬂat
neck veins. Skin tenting is noted.A peripheral IV line
is placed, specimens for initial laboratory testing are
sent off, and an electrocardiogram and chest x-ray are
obtained. An anesthesiologist has been called to the
bedside and is assessing the patient’s airway.What is the
best immediate step in management?
A. Infuse hypertonic saline to increase the rate of vascu-
lar ﬁlling.
B. Infuse isotonic crystalloid solution via wide 
open IV.
C. Initiate IV pressors starting with Levophed.
D. Infuse a colloidal solution rapidly.
E. Transfuse packed red blood cells (pRBCs) until
hemoglobin is >10 g/dL.
23. Which of the following is true regarding hypov-
olemic shock?
A. Loss of 20–40% of the blood volume leads to shock
physiology.
B. Loss of <20% of the blood volume will manifest as
orthostasis.
C. Oliguria is a crucial prognostic sign of impending
vascular collapse.
D. Symptoms of hypovolemic shock differ from those of
hemorrhagic shock.
E. The first sign of hypovolemic shock is mental
obtundation.
516
Review and Self-Assessment
Snoring sounds
Nasal/oral airflow
Respiratory effort
Arterial O2 saturation
94 93
90 89
95 98 97 96 95 93 91 92
97 98 97 95 94 92 90 92
97 98 98 98 95 93
90 88
30 s
86
90
A. Cheyne-Stokes respiration
B. Central sleep apnea
C. Obstructive sleep apnea
D. Periodic limb movement disorder of sleep
20. A 42-year-old man presents with progressive dyspnea
on exertion, low-grade fevers, and weight loss over 6
months. He also is complaining of a primarily dry
cough, although occasionally he coughs up a thick,
mucoid sputum.There is no past medical history. He
does not smoke cigarettes. On physical examination,
the patient appears dyspneic with minimal exertion.
The patient’s temperature is 37.9°C (100.3°F).Oxygen
saturation is 91% on room air at rest. Faint basilar
crackles are heard. On laboratory studies, the patient
has polyclonal hypergammaglobulinemia and a hemat-
ocrit of 52%.A CT scan reveals bilateral alveolar inﬁl-
trates that are primarily perihilar in nature with a
mosaic pattern. The patient undergoes bronchoscopy
with bronchoalveolar lavage. The efﬂuent appears
milky. The cytopathology shows amorphous debris
with periodic acid-Schiff (PAS)–positive macrophages.
What is the diagnosis?
A. Bronchiolitis obliterans organizing pneumonia
B. Desquamative interstitial pneumonitis
C. Nocardiosis
D. Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia
E. Pulmonary alveolar proteinosis
21. What treatment is most appropriate at this time?
A. Prednisone and cyclophosphamide
B. Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
C. Prednisone
D. Whole-lung saline lavage
E. Doxycycline
22. An 86-year-old nursing home resident is brought by
ambulance to the local emergency department (ED).
He was found unresponsive in his bed, and 911 was 
FIGURE 19
24. A 24-year-old woman is brought to the emergency
department (ED) after attempting suicide with an
overdose of heroin. On arrival at the ED, in Jack-
sonville, FL, she is obtunded and has a respiratory rate
of 6 breaths/min. She is hypotensive with a blood
pressure of 84/60 mmHg and a heart rate of 80 bpm.
Her oxygen saturation is 70% on room air.An arter-
ial blood gas is performed showing the following:
pH, 7.09; PaCO2, 80 mmHg; PaO2, and 42 mmHg.
Which of the following statements is true regarding
the patient’s arterial blood gas?
A. The patient is hypoxic because of hypoventilation
with an increased A–a (alveolar-arterial) gradient.
B. The patient is hypoxic because of hypoventilation
with a normal A–a gradient.
C. The patient is hypoxic because of shunt with an
increased A–a gradient.
D. The patient is hypoxic because of ventilation/perfu-
sion (V˙/Q˙ ) mismatch with an increased A–a gradient.
25. A 49-year-old woman is admitted for an evaluation
of weakness. She complains of fatigue with repetitive
muscle use, with signiﬁcant fatigue and dysphagia by
the end of the day. Her activities have been signiﬁ-
cantly limited because of her fatigue, and she has sig-
niﬁcant orthopnea. During her evaluation, labora-
tory analysis reveals sodium, 137 meq/L; potassium,
3.8 meq/L; chloride, 94 meq/L; and bicarbonate,
31 meq/L. An arterial blood gas shows a pH of
7.33, PaCO2 of 60 mmHg, and PaO2 of 65 mmHg.
A chest x-ray is interpreted as “poor inspiratory
effort.” The oxygen saturation is 92% on room 
air.A ventilation/perfusion scan has normal perfu-
sion.Which of the following tests will most likely
identify the cause of this patient’s respiratory 
acidosis?
A. CT scan of the brain
B. Diffusing capacity for carbon monoxide
C. Esophagoscopy
D. Forced vital capacity (supine and upright)
E. Pulmonary angiogram
26. The most common cause of a pleural effusion is
A. Cirrhosis
B. Left ventricular failure
C. Malignancy
D. Pneumonia
E. Pulmonary embolism
27. A 52-year-old man presents with crushing substernal
chest pain. He has a history of coronary artery dis-
ease and has had two non–ST-elevation myocardial 
27. (Continued)
infarctions in the past 5 years, both requiring percu-
taneous intervention and intracoronary stent place-
ment. His electrocardiogram shows ST elevations
across the precordial leads, and he is taken emergently
to the catheterization laboratory. After angioplasty
and stent placement, he is transferred to the coronary
care unit. His vital signs are stable on transfer; how-
ever, 20 min after arrival, he is found to be unrespon-
sive. His radial pulse is thready, extremities are cool,
and blood pressure is difﬁcult to obtain; with a man-
ual cuff, it is 65/40 mmHg.The nurse turns to you
and asks what you would like to do next.Which of
the following accurately represents the physiologic
characteristics of this patient’s condition?
28. A 19-year-old normal nonsmoking woman has a
moderately severe pulmonary embolism while on
oral contraceptive pills. Which of the following is
the most likely predisposing factor?
A. Abnormal factor V
B. Abnormal protein C
C. Diminished protein C level
D. Diminished protein S level
E. Diminished antithrombin III level
29. A 22-year-old man has cystic ﬁbrosis. He currently
is hospitalized about three times yearly for infectious
exacerbations. He is colonized with Pseudomonas
aeruginosa and Staphylococcus aureus but has never had
Burkholderia cepacia complex. He remains active and
is in college studying architecture. He requires 2 L
of oxygen with exertion. The most recent pul-
monary function tests demonstrate a forced expira-
tory volume in 1 s (FEV1) that is 28% of the pre-
dicted value and an FEV1/FVC (forced vital
capacity) ratio of 44%. Measurement of his arterial
blood gas on room air show a pH of 7.38, PaCO2 of
46 mmHg, and PaO2 of 62 mmHg.Which of these
characteristics is an indication for referral for lung
transplantation?
A. Colonization with P. aeruginosa
B. FEV1 <30% predicted
C. FEV1/FVC ratio <50%
D. PaCO2 >40 mmHg
E. Use of oxygen with exertion
30. A 42-year-old woman presents to the emergency
department (ED) with acute onset of shortness of
breath. She recently had been to visit her parents
out of state and rode in a car for about 9 h each
way. Two days ago, she developed a mild calf pain
and swelling, but she thought that this was not 
Review and Self-Assessment
517
30. (Continued)
unusual after having been sitting with her legs
dependent for the recent trip. On arrival to the ED,
she is noted to be tachypneic. The vital signs are
blood pressure, 98/60 mmHg; heart rate, 114 bpm;
respiratory rate, 28 breaths/min; SaO2, 92% on room
air; and weight, 89 kg. Her lungs are clear bilaterally.
There is pain in the right calf with dorsiﬂexion of
the foot, and the right leg is more swollen than the
left. An arterial blood gas measurement shows a pH
of 7.22, PaCO2 of 18 mmHg, and PaO2 of 68 mmHg.
Kidney and liver function are normal. A helical CT
scan is performed using shielding of the uterus and
conﬁrms a pulmonary embolus. All of the following
agents can be used alone as initial therapy in this
patient except
A. Enoxaparin, 1 mg/kg SC twice daily
B. Fondaparinux, 7.5 mg SC once daily
C. Tinzaparin, 175 units/kg SC once daily
D. Unfractionated heparin (UFH) IV adjusted to main-
tain activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) 
two to three times the upper limit of normal
E. Warfarin, 7.5 mg PO once daily to maintain INR
at 2–3
31. Which of the following contacts with a patient
infected with tuberculosis is most likely to develop
the disease?
A. The child of a parent with smear-negative, culture-
positive pulmonary tuberculosis
B. The coworker in a small ofﬁce of a patient with
laryngeal tuberculosis
C. The HIV-negative partner of an HIV-infected patient
with pulmonary tuberculosis
D. The parent of a young child in diapers with renal
tuberculosis
E. The spouse of a patient with miliary tuberculosis
32. A 32-year-old man is brought to the emergency
department after developing sudden-onset shortness
of breath and chest pain while coughing. He reports a
3-month history of increasing dyspnea on exertion,
nonproductive cough, and anorexia with 15 lb of
weight loss. He has no past medical history and takes
no medications.The patient smokes one or two packs
of cigarettes a day,uses alcohol socially,and has no risk
factors for HIV infection.A chest radiogram shows a
right 80% pneumothorax, and there are nodular inﬁl-
trates in the left base that spare the costophrenic angle.
After placement of a chest tube, a chest CT shows
bilateral small nodular opacities in the lung bases and
multiple small cystic spaces in the lung apex.Which of
the following interventions is most likely to improve
the symptoms and radiograms?
32. (Continued)
A. IV α1 antitrypsin
B. Isoniazid, rifampin, ethambutol, and pyrazinamide
C. Prednisone and cyclophosphamide
D. Smoking cessation
E. Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
33. A 68-year-old man presents for evaluation of dysp-
nea on exertion. He states that he ﬁrst noticed the
symptoms about 3 years ago. At that time, he had
to stop walking the golf course and began to use a
cart, but he was still able to complete a full 
18 holes. Over the past year, he has stopped golﬁng
altogether because of breathlessness and states that
he has difﬁculty walking to and from his mailbox,
which is about 50 yards (46 m) from his house. He
also has a dry cough that occurs on most days. It is
not worse at night, and he can identify no triggers.
He denies wheezing. He has had no fevers, chills,
or weight loss. He denies any joint symptoms. He
is a former smoker of about 50 pack-years, but he
quit 8 years previously after being diagnosed with
coronary artery disease. In addition to coronary
artery disease, he also has benign prostatic hyper-
trophy for which he takes tamsulosin. His other
medications include aspirin, atenolol, and simvas-
tatin. On physical examination, he appears breath-
less after walking down the hallway to the exami-
nation room, but he quickly recovers upon resting.
Vital signs are blood pressure, 118/67 mmHg; heart
rate, 88 bpm; respiratory rate, 20 breaths/min; and
SaO2, 94% at rest decreasing to 86% after ambulat-
ing 300 ft (91 m). His lung examination shows
normal percussion and expansion.There are Velcro-
like crackles at both bases, and they are distributed
halfway through both lung ﬁelds. No wheezing is
noted. The cardiovascular examination is normal.
Digital clubbing is present. A chest CT is per-
formed and is shown in Fig. 33. He is referred 
518
Review and Self-Assessment
FIGURE 33
33. (Continued)
for surgical lung biopsy.Which statement below is
most typical of the pathology seen in this disease?
A. Dense amorphous ﬂuid within the alveoli diffusely
that stains positive with periodic acid-Schiff stain
B. Destruction of alveoli with resultant emphysematous
areas, predominantly in the upper lobes
C. Diffuse alveolar damage
D. Formation of noncaseating granulomas
E. Heterogeneous collagen deposition with ﬁbroblast
foci and honeycombing
34. A 68-year-old woman has been receiving mechani-
cal ventilation for 10 days for community-acquired
pneumonia.You are attempting to decide whether
the patient is appropriate for a spontaneous breath-
ing trial. Which of the following factors would
indicate that the patient is not likely to be success-
fully extubated?
A. Alert mental status
B. Positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) of 5 cmH2O
C. pH >7.35
D. Rapid shallow breathing index (respiratory rate/tidal
volume) >105
E. SaO2 >90% on FIO2 <0.5
35. A 34-year-old man presents for evaluation of a
cough that has been persistent for the past 
3 months. He recalls having an upper respiratory
tract infection before the onset of cough with
complaints of rhinitis, sore throat, and low-grade
fever. After these symptoms resolved, he states
that “the cold moved to my chest” about 10 days
later. He reports severe coughing episodes that
have been associated with posttussive emesis in
the past, but these are less frequent now. His
biggest complaint has been coughing that awak-
ens him from sleep at night and ultimately has
resulted in progressive fatigue. He denies wheez-
ing. Specific triggers for his cough include eating
cold foods, especially ice cream. He has no his-
tory of asthma or prior history of prolonged
cough. He denies symptoms of gastroesophageal
reflux disease. He breathes easily through his
nose and does not have seasonal rhinitis. He has
no past medical history. He works as an accoun-
tant in a new office building. He does not have
any fume exposure. He does not smoke or drink
alcohol. He has no pets. He does not recall 
his vaccination history but thinks he has not 
had any vaccinations since graduating from high
school. On physical examination, he appears
well. He is speaking in full sentences. He is 
190 cm tall and weighs 95.5 kg. His temperature is 
35. (Continued)
37.5°C, respiratory rate of 14 breaths/min, heart
rate is 64 bpm, and blood pressure is 112/72 mmHg.
His oxygen saturation is 97% on room air at rest.
Head, eyes, ears, nose, and throat examination
reveals no enlargement of the nasal turbinates,
with open nasal passages. The airway is Mallam-
pati class I without cobblestoning or erythema.
The lung examination is clear to auscultation.
No forced expiratory wheezes are present. The
cardiac, gastrointestinal, extremity, and neuro-
logic examinations are normal. His peak expira-
tory flow rate is 650 L/min. The forced expira-
tory volume in 1 s (FEV1) is 4.86 L (96%
predicted) and forced vital capacity (FVC) is
6.26 (99% predicted). The FEV1/FVC ratio is
78%. Which test is most likely to establish the
diagnosis correctly?
A. 24-h pH probe
B. Bordetella pertussis IgG and IgA levels
C. Methacholine challenge testing
D. Peak expiratory ﬂow monitoring in the workplace
E. Skin testing for allergens
36. A 45-year-old man is evaluated in the clinic for
asthma. His symptoms began 2 years ago and are
characterized by an episodic cough and wheezing
that responded initially to inhaled bronchodilators
and inhaled corticosteroids but now require nearly
constant prednisone tapers. He notes that the
symptoms are worst on weekdays, but he cannot
pinpoint specific triggers. His medications are an
albuterol metered-dose inhaler (MDI), a fluticas-
one MDI, and prednisone (10 mg/d PO). The
patient has no habits and works as a textile worker.
Physical examination is notable for mild diffuse
polyphonic expiratory wheezing but no other
abnormality. Which of the following is the most
appropriate next step?
A. Exercise physiology testing
B. Measurement of forced expiratory volume in 1 s
(FEV1) before and after work
C. Methacholine challenge testing
D. Skin testing for allergies
E. Sputum culture for Aspergillus fumigatus
37. A 46-year-old man is brought to your ofﬁce by his
wife. He is reluctant to admit that he has any
health problems. His wife, on the other hand, is
adamant that something be done about his sleepi-
ness. He admits that he is frequently sleepy at work
and falls asleep while watching television at night,
but he attributes this to stress on the job. His wife 
Review and Self-Assessment
519
37. (Continued)
describes loud snoring at night that begins almost
immediately when he falls asleep, punctuated by long
periods of no breathing at all. She believes that nei-
ther of them is getting enough sleep. On examina-
tion, he is a pleasant, obese man in no distress. He is
178 cm tall and weighs 111 kg. His blood pressure is
elevated at 146/92 mmHg. He has a normal
oropharynx and a short, squat neck. His lung sounds
are clear, and he has a protuberant, obese abdomen.
Pulses are intact.After completing the physical exam-
ination, the patient’s wife demands to know what is
wrong and what you are going to do about it.What
are the next steps in diagnosis and treatment?
A. He and his wife should be reassured that his symptoms
will improve as his work stress lessens.
B. He meets clinical criteria for obstructive sleep apnea
(OSA) and should be referred for surgery.
C. He should be prescribed a therapeutic trial of
modaﬁnil.
D. He should be started on low-dose continuous-positive
airway pressure (CPAP) ventilation at home.
E. He should undergo polysomnography, potentially
followed by a CPAP trial.
38. A 34-year-old woman seeks evaluation for a com-
plaint of cough and dyspnea on exertion that has
gradually worsened over 3 months.The patient has
no past history of pulmonary complaints and has
never had asthma. She started working in a pet
store approximately 6 months ago. Her duties there
include cleaning the reptile and bird cages. She
reports occasional low-grade fevers but has had no
wheezing. The cough is dry and nonproductive.
Before 3 months ago, the patient had no limitation
of exercise tolerance, but now she reports that she
gets dyspneic climbing two ﬂights of stairs. On
physical examination, the patient appears well. She
has an oxygen saturation of 95% on room air at rest
but desaturates to 91% with ambulation. Tempera-
ture is 37.7°C (99.8°F). The pulmonary examina-
tion is unremarkable. No clubbing or cyanosis is
present.The patient has a normal chest radiogram.
A high-resolution chest CT shows diffuse ground-
glass inﬁltrates in the lower lobes with the presence
of centrilobular nodules. A transbronchial biopsy
shows an interstitial alveolar inﬁltrate of plasma
cells, lymphocytes, and occasional eosinophils.
There are also several loose noncaseating granulo-
mas.All cultures are negative for bacterial, viral, and
fungal pathogens.What is the diagnosis?
A. Sarcoidosis
B. Psittacosis
38. (Continued)
C. Hypersensitivity pneumonitis
D. Nonspeciﬁc interstitial pneumonitis related to collagen
vascular disease
E. Aspergillosis
39. What treatment do you recommend?
A. Glucocorticoids
B. Doxycycline
C. Glucocorticoids plus azathioprine
D. Glucocorticoids plus removal of antigen
E. Amphotericin
40. A 71-year-old man presents with complaints of
cough and sputum production. He describes cough-
ing up a small amount of blood occasionally. He states
that his symptoms have worsened over a period of
years, and he now gets winded going up one ﬂight of
stairs. He has a distant history of treated tuberculosis
and has been treated for community-acquired pneu-
monia two to three times per year for the past several
years. He received a ﬂu vaccination this fall. He has
never smoked. On examination, his respirations are
16 breaths/min and regular. He has scattered rhonchi
and faint expiratory wheezes bilaterally on ausculta-
tion.He is not using accessory muscles to breathe.You
suspect that this patient may have bronchiectasis to
explain his recurrent infections.Which of the follow-
ing is true regarding making this diagnosis?
A. Bronchiectasis cannot be diagnosed in the setting of
an acute pulmonary infection.
B. Bronchoscopy is required to deﬁnitively diagnose
bronchiectasis.
C. Chest x-ray demonstrating honeycombing pattern
will make the diagnosis.
D. High-resolution chest CT scan is the preferred con-
ﬁrmatory test for bronchiectasis.
E. Physical examination is sufﬁcient to diagnose
bronchiectasis in a patient with this history.
41. All of the following are pulmonary manifestations
of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) except
A. Pleuritis
B. Progressive pulmonary ﬁbrosis
C. Pulmonary hemorrhage
D. Diaphragmatic dysfunction with loss of lung volumes
E. Pulmonary vascular disease
42. Which of the following is the most appropriate
therapy for a 60-year-old man with 2 weeks of
productive cough, fever, shortness of breath, and
the chest radiogram as shown in Fig. 42?
520
Review and Self-Assessment
42. (Continued)
A. Cephalexin
B. Ciproﬂoxacin
C. Clindamycin
D. Penicillin
E. Vancomycin
44. (Continued)
A. Candida glabrata
B. Inﬂuenza virus
C. Mycobacterium tuberculosis
D. Peptostreptococcus
E. Streptococcus pneumoniae
45. A 45-year-old woman is seen in the clinic for eval-
uation of a chronic cough. She reports a cough that
began in her early twenties that is occasionally pro-
ductive of yellow or green thick sputum. She has
been treated with innumerable courses of antibi-
otics, all with brief improvements in the symptoms.
The patient has been told that she has asthma, and
her only medications are ﬂuticasone and albuterol
metered-dose inhalers (MDIs). Physical examina-
tion is notable for normal vital signs and an oxygen
saturation of 92% on room air. The patient’s lungs
have dullness in the upper lobes bilaterally and dif-
fuse expiratory wheezing. She has mild digital
clubbing. The remainder of the physical examina-
tion is normal. Pulmonary function testing shows
airﬂow obstruction. Review of the sputum culture
data shows that she has had multiple positive cul-
tures for Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Staphylococcus
aureus. Posteroanterior (PA) and lateral chest radi-
ography show bilateral upper lobe inﬁltrates.
Which of the following tests is the most important
ﬁrst step in diagnosing the underlying disease?
A. Chest CT
B. Bronchoscopy with transbronchial biopsy
C. Sweat chloride testing
D. Blood polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for ΔF508
mutation
E. Sputum cytology
46. A 23-year-old hospital worker is evaluated for a
known contact with a patient with active tuberculo-
sis. One year ago his intermediate-strength puriﬁed
protein derivative (PPD) had 3 mm of induration;
now it has 13 mm of induration at 48 h. He has no
signiﬁcant past medical history and is on no medica-
tions. Subsequent management should include
A. Chest radiography
B. Isoniazid 300 mg/d for 3 months
C. Measurement of baseline liver function tests
D. Measurement of liver function tests every 3 months
E. Repeated intermediate-strength PPD testing in 2 weeks
47. A 72-year-old man with a long history of tobacco
use is seen in the clinic for 3 weeks of progressive
dyspnea on exertion. He has had a mild nonproduc-
tive cough and anorexia but denies fevers, chills, and 
Review and Self-Assessment
521
43. In the ﬁrst year after lung transplant, which of the
following is the most common cause of mortality?
A. Acute rejection
B. Bronchiolitis obliterans
C. Infection
D. Posttransplant lymphoproliferative disorder
E. Primary graft failure
44. A 52-year-old alcoholic man presents to a local
emergency department with purulent, productive
cough, shortness of breath, right-sided chest pain, and
fever. He thinks his symptoms started a few days ago.
On examination, he has a temperature of 38.8°C,
heart rate of 96 bpm, respirations of 22 breaths/min,
oxygen saturation of 85% on room air, and a blood
pressure of 115/92 mmHg. He has poor dentition
and fetid breath.There is dullness to percussion over
the right lower lung ﬁeld, and rales are auscultated
bilaterally. A chest radiograph shows a right-sided
opacity in the superior portion of the right lower
lobe with an air-ﬂuid level present.There appears to
be right-sided parenchymal consolidation as well.
Which of the following is the most likely etiologic
organism based on this presentation?
FIGURE 42
47. (Continued)
sweats. On physical examination, he has normal vital
signs and normal oxygen saturation on room air.
Jugular venous pressure is normal, and cardiac exam-
ination shows decreased heart sounds but no other
abnormality.The trachea is midline, and there is no
associated lymphadenopathy. On pulmonary exami-
nation, the patient has dullness over the left lower
lung ﬁeld, decreased tactile fremitus, decreased
breath sounds, and no voice transmission.The right
lung examination results are normal.After obtaining
chest plain ﬁlm, appropriate initial management at
this point would include which of the following?
A. IV antibiotics
B. Thoracentesis
C. Bronchoscopy
D. Deep suctioning
E. Bronchodilator therapy
48. Which of the following is the most common under-
lying medical condition of patients undergoing lung
transplantation?
A. Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
B. Cystic ﬁbrosis
C. Idiopathic pulmonary ﬁbrosis (IPF)
D. Pulmonary hypertension
E. Sarcoidosis
49. A 34-year-old woman complains of cough produc-
tive of green sputum, malaise, and headache over the
past week. She notes that two of her children
recently had colds, and she thought she caught it
from one of them. She smokes two packs of ciga-
rettes a day. On examination, she is afebrile, with a
heart rate of 125 bpm and respiratory rate of 
32 breaths/min. Oxygen saturation is 94% on room
air. She has pronounced use of her accessory respira-
tory musculature. Physical examination reveals dif-
fuse expiratory wheezing on auscultation of the
lungs. There are no areas of bronchophony or
egophony. In the proper clinical context, which of
the following is necessary to diagnose community-
acquired pneumonia (CAP)?
A. Abnormal white blood cell (WBC) count
B. Bronchial breath sounds
C. Elevated measures of inﬂammation (erythrocyte 
sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein)
D. Inﬁltrate on chest radiography
E. Supportive microbiologic data
50. A 50-year-old woman receives an uncomplicated
double-lung transplant for a history of primary 
50. (Continued)
pulmonary hypertension. She was cytomegalovirus
(CMV) seropositive and received CMV prophylaxis
immediately after the transplant. On postoperative
day 7, she develops a fever and a new inﬁltrate in the
right lung.Which of the following organisms is most
likely to be the causative agent of these ﬁndings?
A. Cytomegalovirus
B. Listeria monocytogenes
C. Nocardia asteroides
D. Pneumocystis carinii
E. Pseudomonas aeruginosa
51. Patients with chronic hypoventilation disorders often
complain of a headache upon wakening.What is the
cause of this symptom?
A. Arousals from sleep
B. Cerebral vasodilation
C. Cerebral vasoconstriction
D. Polycythemia
E. Nocturnal microaspiration and cough
52. Secondhand tobacco smoke has been associated
with which of the following?
A. Increased risk of lung cancer
B. Increased prevalence of respiratory illness
C. Excess cardiac mortality
D. A and B
E. A, B, and C
53. All of the following are factors that are related to
the increased incidence of sepsis in the United
States except
A. Aging of the population
B. Increased longevity of individuals with chronic disease
C. Increased risk of sepsis in individuals without
comorbidities
D. Increased risk of sepsis in individuals with AIDS
E. Increased use of immunosuppressive drugs
54. A 28-year-old man comes to the emergency depart-
ment with complaints of 1–2 days of fever, malaise,
cough, green sputum production, and dyspnea. He
is a cigarette smoker and works in a restaurant. He
has no signiﬁcant past medical history and takes no
medications. He is uncomfortable but alert with
temperature of 39.2°C, respiratory rate of 28
breaths/min, blood pressure of 110/70 mmHg,
heart rate of 105 bpm, and SaO2 on room air of
94%. His chemistry studies are normal. His white
blood cell (WBC) count is 15,500/μL.There are
bronchial breath sounds in the right lower lobe, and
522
Review and Self-Assessment
54. (Continued)
chest radiography shows consolidation in that area.
Which of the following is the most appropriate
antibiotic therapy?
A. Azithromycin
B. Ceftriaxone plus clarithromycin
C. Fluconazole
D. Piperacillin/tazobactam
E. Vancomycin
55. A 68-year-old woman comes to the emergency
department with complaints of 3 days of fever,
malaise, cough with green sputum, dyspnea, and right
lower chest pain that is worse on inspiration. She is a
smokes 1 pack of cigarettes a day and works in a
retail store. Her only medication is hydrochloroth-
iazide for hypertension. She is alert but in mild res-
piratory distress. Her temperature is 39.2°C, respira-
tory rate 32 is breaths/min, blood pressure is
110/70 mmHg, heart rate is 105 bpm, and SaO2 on
room air is 91%. Her chemistry studies show a serum
glucose of 140 mg/dL and a blood urea nitrogen
(BUN) of 32 mg/dL. Her white blood cell (WBC)
count is 12,500/μL with a left shift. There are
bronchial breath sounds in the right lower lobe, and
chest radiography shows consolidation in the right
and left lower lobes. Which of the following is the
most appropriate antibiotic therapy?
A. Azithromycin
B. Ceftriaxone plus clarithromycin
C. Fluconazole
D. Piperacillin/tazobactam
E. Vancomycin
56. A 45-year-old woman with HIV is admitted to the
intensive care unit with pneumonia secondary to
Pneumocystis jiroveci. She requires mechanical ventila-
tory support. The ventilator settings are: PC mode;
inspiratory pressure, 30 cmH2O; FIO2, 1.0; and posi-
tive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP), 10 cmH2O. An
arterial blood gas measured on these settings shows
pH, 7.32; PaCO2, 46 mmHg; and PaO2, 62 mmHg.All
of the following are important supportive measures
for this patient except
A. Frequent ventilator circuit changes
B. Gastric acid suppression
C. Nutritional support
D. Prophylaxis against deep venous thrombosis
E. Sedation and analgesia to maintain patient comfort
57. A 68-year-old woman is brought to the emergency
department for fever and lethargy. She ﬁrst felt ill 
57. (Continued)
yesterday and experienced generalized body aches.
Overnight, she developed a fever of 39.6°C and had
shaking chills. By this morning, she was feeling very
fatigued. Her son believes that she has had periods of
waxing and waning mental status. She denies cough,
nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and abdominal pain. She
has a past medical history of rheumatoid arthritis. She
takes prednisone 5 mg daily, and methotrexate,
15 mg weekly. On examination, she is lethargic but
appropriate. Her vital signs are blood pressure,
85/50 mmHg; heart rate, 122 bpm; temperature,
39.1°C; respiratory rate, 24 breaths/min; and SaO2,
97% on room air. Physical examination shows clear
lung ﬁelds and a regular tachycardia without mur-
mur. There is no abdominal tenderness or masses.
Stool is negative for occult blood. There are no
rashes. Hematologic studies show a white blood cell
count of 24,200/μL with a differential of 82% poly-
morphonuclear leukocytes, 8% band forms, 6% lym-
phocytes, 3% monocytes. Hemoglobin is 8.2 g/dL.A
urinalysis has numerous white blood cells with gram-
negative bacteria on Gram stain. Chemistries reveal
the following: bicarbonate, 16 meq/L; blood urea
nitrogen, 60 mg/dL; and creatinine, 2.4 mg/dL.After
fluid administration of 2 L, the patient has a
blood pressure of 88/54 mmHg and a heart rate
of 112 bpm with a central venous pressure of 
18 cmH2O. There is 25 mL of urine output in the
ﬁrst hour. The patient has been initiated on antibi-
otics with ciproﬂoxacin. What should be done next
for the treatment of this patient’s hypotension?
A. Dopamine, 3 μg/kg per minute IV
B. Hydrocortisone, 50 mg IV every 6 h
C. Norepinephrine, 2 μg/min IV
D. Ongoing colloid administration at 500–1000 mL/h
E. Transfusion of 2 units packed red blood cells
58. All of the following statements about the epidemiol-
ogy and pathogenesis of sepsis and septic shock are
true except
A. Blood cultures are positive in only 20–40% of cases
of severe sepsis.
B. Microbial invasion of the bloodstream is not necessary
for the development of severe sepsis.
C. The hallmark of septic shock is a marked decrease
in peripheral vascular resistance that occurs despite
increased plasma levels of catecholamines.
D. The incidence and mortality from septic shock have
declined over the past 20 years.
E. Widespread vascular endothelial injury is present in
severe sepsis and is mediated by cytokines and proco-
agulant factors that stimulate intravascular thrombosis.
Review and Self-Assessment
523
59. All of the following statements about the physiol-
ogy of mechanical ventilation are true except
A. Application of positive end-expiratory pressure
(PEEP) decreases preload and afterload.
B. High inspired tidal volumes contribute to the devel-
opment of acute lung injury because of overdisten-
tion of alveoli with resultant alveolar damage.
C. Increasing the inspiratory ﬂow rate increases the ratio
of inspiration to expiration (I:E) and allows more
time for expiration.
D. Mechanical ventilation provides assistance with inspi-
ration and expiration.
E. PEEP helps prevent alveolar collapse at end-expiration.
60. A 64-year-old man requires endotracheal intuba-
tion and mechanical ventilation for chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). He was
paralyzed with rocuronium for intubation. His ini-
tial ventilator settings were AC mode; respiratory
rate, 10 breaths/min; FIO2, 1.0; Vt (tidal volume),
550 mL; and positive end-expiratory pressure
(PEEP), 0 cmH2O. On admission to the intensive
care unit, the patient remains paralyzed; arterial
blood gas is pH 7.22, PaCO2 is 78 mmHg, and PaO2
is 394 mmHg.The FIO2 is decreased to 0.6.Thirty
minutes later, you are called to the bedside to eval-
uate the patient for hypotension. Current vital
signs are blood pressure, 80/40 mmHg; heart rate,
133 bpm; respiratory rate, 24 breaths/min; and
SaO2, 92%. Physical examination shows prolonged
expiration with wheezing continuing until the ini-
tiation of the next breath. Breath sounds are heard
in both lung ﬁelds.The high-pressure alarm on the
ventilator is triggering. What should be done ﬁrst
in treating this patient’s hypotension?
A. Administer a ﬂuid bolus of 500 mL.
B. Disconnect the patient from the ventilator.
C. Initiate a continuous IV infusion of midazolam.
D. Initiate a continuous IV infusion of norepinephrine.
E. Perform tube thoracostomy on the right side.
61. A 32-year-old man with a history of morbid obe-
sity, active tobacco use, and hypertension is referred
for a sleep study by his primary physician. The
patient describes falling asleep at work almost every
afternoon and is frequently drowsy when driving
his car. His girlfriend notes that he snores heavily
throughout the night and seems to have intermit-
tent episodes when he is not breathing at all. He
undergoes the study, which reveals six to seven
hypopneic events and two to three apneic events
each hour.Which of the following is true regarding
obstructive sleep apnea (OSA)?
61. (Continued)
A. 85% of patients with OSA have a body mass index
(BMI) >30 kg/m2.
B. Irregular breathing during sleep without daytime
sleepiness qualiﬁes as OSA.
C. The male-to-female ratio is roughly equal in OSA.
D. This patient does not meet criteria for OSA based on
having too few apneic events per hour.
E. This patient should be screened for diabetes mellitus.
62. A 53-year-old man is seen in the emergency
department with sudden-onset fever, chills, malaise,
and shortness of breath but no wheezing. He has
no significant past medical history and is a farmer.
Of note, he worked earlier in the day stacking
hay. Posteroanterior (PA) and lateral chest radiog-
raphy show bilateral upper lobe infiltrates. Which
organism is most likely to be responsible for this
presentation?
A. Nocardia asteroides
B. Histoplasma capsulatum
C. Cryptococcus neoformans
D. Actinomyces
E. Aspergillus fumigatus
63. You are evaluating a patient with a chronic respira-
tory acidosis. Which of the following tests will be
helpful in distinguishing a central nervous system
cause of chronic hypoventilation from a pulmonary
airway or pulmonary parenchymal cause?
A. Alveolar–arterial (A–a) oxygen gradient
B. Diaphragmatic electromyography (EMG)
C. Maximal expiratory pressure
D. PaCO2
E. PaO2
64. A 45-year-old woman with known rheumatoid
arthritis complains of a 1-week history of dyspnea on
exertion and dry cough. She had been taking
hydroxychloroquine and prednisone 7.5 mg until 
3 months ago, when low-dose weekly methotrexate
was added because of active synovitis. The patient’s
temperature is 37.8°C (100°F), and her room air
oxygen saturation decreases from 95 to 87% with
ambulation. Chest x-ray shows new bilateral alveolar
inﬁltrates.
Pulmonary function tests reveal the following:
Forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1), 3.1 L (70%
of predicted)
Total lung capacity (TLC), 5.3 L (60% of predicted)
Forced vital capacity (FVC), 3.9 L (68% of predicted)
Vital capacity (VC), 3.9 L (58% of predicted)
524
Review and Self-Assessment
64. (Continued)
FEV1/FVC ratio, 79%
Diffusion capacity for carbon monoxide (DLCO),
62% of predicted
She had a normal pulmonary function test (PFT) 
1 year ago.All but which of the following would
be an appropriate next step?
A. Start broad-spectrum antibiotics.
B. Increase the methotrexate dose.
C. Perform bronchoalveolar lavage with transbronchial
lavage.
D. Increase prednisone to 60 mg/d.
E. Discontinue methotrexate.
65. Which of the following treatments has not been
shown to improve mortality in septic shock?
A. Activated protein C (drotrecogin α)
B. Administration of antibiotics within 1 h of presentation
C. Bicarbonate therapy for severe acidosis
D. Early goal-directed therapy
66. A 68-year-old man is seen in the clinic for evaluation
of chronic cough that has lasted 4 months. He reports
that the cough is dry and occurs at any time of the
day. He denies hemoptysis and associated constitu-
tional symptoms. Furthermore, he does not have
wheezing, acid reﬂux symptoms, or postnasal drip. His
past medical history is notable for a well-compensated
ischemic cardiomyopathy that was diagnosed 
6 months ago. His current medications include
aspirin, carvedilol, furosemide, ramipril, amlodipine,
and digoxin. He has no history of tobacco or alcohol
abuse and denies occupational exposure. Physical
examination shows a normal upper airway, clear
lungs, and a normal cardiac examination with the
exception of an enlarged point of maximal impulse.
Plain radiography of the chest is normal with the
exception of cardiomegaly.Which of the following is
the most appropriate next step in his management?
A. Bronchoscopy
B. Changing furosemide to bumetanide
C. Discontinuing digoxin
D. Changing ramipril to valsartan
E. Giving azithromycin for 5 days
67. Which of the following is true regarding inﬂuenza
prophylaxis?
A. Patients receiving an intramuscular inﬂuenza vaccine
should be warned of the increased risk of Guillain-
Barré syndrome.
B. Patients with hypersensitivity to eggs should not
receive the intramuscular vaccine.
67. (Continued)
C. The intramuscular inﬂuenza vaccine is a live, attenu-
ated strain of inﬂuenza that is based on isolates from
the previous year’s strains of inﬂuenza A and B.
D. The intramuscular inﬂuenza vaccine should not be
given to immunocompromised hosts.
E. The intranasal spray,“Flu-mist,” is an inactivated virus
preparation based on the previous year’s strains of
inﬂuenza A and B.
68. A 17-year-old woman with a medical history of
mild intermittent asthma presents to your clinic in
February with several days of cough, fever, malaise,
and myalgias. She notes that her symptoms started
3 days earlier with a headache and fatigue and that
several students and teachers at her high school
have been diagnosed recently with “the ﬂu.” She
did not receive a ﬂu shot this year. Which of the
following medication treatment plans is the best
option for this patient?
A. Aspirin and a cough suppressant with codeine
B. Oseltamivir, 75 mg PO bid for 5 days
C. Rimantadine, 100 mg PO bid for 1 week
D. Symptom-based therapy with over-the-counter agents
E. Zanamivir, 10 mg inhaled bid for 5 days
69. Which of the following represents a rare but serious
extrapulmonary complication of inﬂuenza infection?
A. Diffuse eczematous rash
B. Myositis
C. Oligoarthritis
D. Purulent conjunctivitis
E. Secondary bacterial pneumonia caused by Staphylo-
coccus aureus
70. Regarding the epidemiology of inﬂuenza viruses,
which of the following is true?
A. Antigenic drift requires a change in both hemagglu-
tinin (H) and neuraminidase (N) antigens.
B. Antigenic shift is deﬁned by an exchange of H and N
antigens between inﬂuenza A and inﬂuenza B viruses.
C. Avian inﬂuenza outbreaks in humans occur when
human inﬂuenza A viruses undergo antigenic shifts
with inﬂuenza A from poultry.
D. Inﬂuenza C virus infections, although uncommon,
are more virulent on a population basis because of
their increased ability to undergo antigenic shift.
E. The lethality associated with avian inﬂuenza is related
to its ability to spread via person-to-person contact.
71. A 52-year-old man is brought to the emergency
department (ED) complaining of shortness of 
Review and Self-Assessment
525
71. (Continued)
breath, chest pain, and dizziness. The chest pain
began acutely about 90 min ago. He had been
working in the yard at that time and thought he
might have strained a muscle in his chest. He took
an aspirin and lay down, but the symptoms wors-
ened. He soon developed dizziness and shortness of
breath. He called 911, and upon arrival to the ED,
he was found to be hypotensive and tachycardic.
His vital signs on presentation were blood pressure,
75/44 mmHg; heart rate, 132 bpm; respiratory rate,
24 breaths/min; and SaO2, 88% on room air. On
physical examination, he appears in distress and is
diaphoretic. He is unable to speak in full sentences.
His neck veins appear distended.There are crackles
throughout both lung ﬁelds. The heart sounds are
regular and tachycardic. There is no edema. The
extremities are cool, and the pulses are thready. An
electrocardiogram shows ST elevations in lead
V2–V6. The chest radiograph shows diffuse pul-
monary edema. Emergency cardiac catheterization
is scheduled, and it is estimated that the catheteri-
zation laboratory will be available in ~45 min.The
patient remains hypotensive with a blood pressure
that is now 68/38 mmHg, and the oxygen satura-
tion has decreased to 82% on room air.What is the
best management for the patient’s hypotension?
A. Aortic counterpulsation
B. Dobutamine, 2.5 μg/kg per min IV
C. Furosemide, 40 mg IV
D. Metoprolol, 5 mg IV
E. Norepinephrine, 4 μg/min IV
72. A 64-year-old woman is admitted to the emer-
gency department (ED) with hypotension and
chest pain. Her symptoms began 30 min ago, awak-
ening the patient from sleep. She vomited twice
and has felt dizzy and lightheaded. Upon arrival in
the ED, her blood pressure was 80/40 mmHg, with
a heart rate of 64 bpm. She appears in distress and
has another episode of emesis in the ED.The lungs
are clear to auscultation. Pulses are thready. An
electrocardiogram demonstrates elevations in leads
II, III, and aVF.There are ST depressions in V1 and
V2.The rhythm is sinus with occasional premature
ventricular contractions.A chest radiograph is clear.
An echocardiogram shows normal left ventricular
function and right ventricular dilatation. What is
the best immediate treatment for this patient’s
hypotension?
A. Aortic counterpulsation
B. Dobutamine, 5 μg/kg per min
72. (Continued)
C. Dopamine, 5 μg/kg per min
D. Normal saline bolus, 500 mL
E. Transvenous pacemaker placement
73. All of the following statements regarding sudden car-
diac death (SCD) in the United States are true except
A. A strong parental history of SCD as a presenting his-
tory of coronary artery disease increases the likeli-
hood of a similar presentation in an offspring.
B. An estimated 50% of all cardiac deaths are sudden
and unexpected.
C. As many as 70–75% of men who die of SCD have
evidence of acute myocardial infarction (MI); only
20–30% have preexisting healed MIs.
D. By 5 min after sudden cardiac arrest, the estimated
survival rates are no better than 25–30% in the out-
of-hospital setting.
74. A 64-year-old man suddenly collapses while playing
the sousaphone with his alumni band during half-
time of a football game. Emergency medical ser-
vices with training in advanced cardiac life support
are present within 2 min of collapse. Initial rhythm
on cardiac monitor is ventricular ﬁbrillation. What
is the ﬁrst step in the treatment of this patient?
A. Continue cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) for a
full 5 min before attempting deﬁbrillation
B. Endotracheal intubation followed by rapid defibril-
lation
C. Immediate deﬁbrillation at 300–360 J once followed
by CPR for 60–90 s before additional deﬁbrillation
D. Obtain IV access and administer amiodarone, 150 mg
E. Obtain IV access and administer epinephrine, 1 mg
75. Which of the following therapies has been demon-
strated to improve survival to hospital discharge with
favorable neurologic outcome in out-of-hospital
cardiac arrest?
A. Amiodarone
B. Epinephrine
C. Hypothermia
D. Time to initial deﬁbrillation <10 min
E. Vasopressin
76. All the following may cause elevation of serum tro-
ponin except
A. Congestive heart failure
B. Myocarditis
C. Myocardial infarction
D. Pneumonia
E. Pulmonary embolism
526
Review and Self-Assessment
77. A 54-year-old man presents to the emergency
department (ED) with chest pain. He has had three
episodes of chest pain in the past 24 h with exer-
tion. Each has lasted 20–30 min and resolved with
rest. His past medical history is signiﬁcant for
hypertension, hyperlipidemia, asthma, and chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. He currently smokes
one pack a day of cigarettes. His family history is
remarkable for early coronary artery disease in a
sibling. Home medications include chlorthalidone,
simvastatin, aspirin, albuterol, and home oxygen. In
the ED, he becomes chest pain free after receiving
three sublingual nitroglycerin tablets and IV heparin.
Electrocardiography shows 0.8-mm ST-segment
depression in V5, V6, lead I and aVL. Cardiac bio-
markers are negative. An exercise stress test shows
inducible ischemia. Which aspects of this patient’s
history add to the likelihood that he might have
death, myocardial infarction (MI), or urgent revascu-
larization in the next 14 days?
A. Age
B. Aspirin usage
C. β-Agonist usage
D. Diuretic usage
78. When treating a patient with a non–ST-segment ele-
vation myocardial infarction (NSTEMI), risk stratiﬁ-
cation and timely administration of anti-ischemic and
antithrombotic therapies are paramount.For a patient
with unstable angina with negative biomarkers,
which medication regimen is most appropriate as
initial treatment?
A. Aspirin, β-blocker, spironolactone, HMG-CoA
reductase inhibitor (statin)
B. Aspirin, clopidogrel, nitroglycerin, β-blocker, heparin
C. Aspirin, nitroglycerin, β-blocker, heparin, glycoprotein
(GP) IIB/IIIa inhibitor
D. Aspirin, morphine, oxygen, nitrates
79. A 52-year-old man with a history of stable angina
presents to the hospital with 30 minutes of chest
pain. He reports that over the past 2 weeks, he has
developed his typical anginal symptoms of chest
pressure radiating to his jaw and left arm with
progressively less exertion. He has been using sub-
lingual nitroglycerin more frequently. His other
medications include a β-blocker, aspirin, and
lovastatin. On the day of admission, he developed
pain at rest that was not relieved with three nitro-
glycerin tablets. On examination, he is anxious
and short of breath. His vital signs are notable for
a blood pressure of 140/88 mmHg, a heart rate of 
79. (Continued)
110/min, and a respiratory rate of 25/min. He has
bilateral crackles halfway up both lung fields and
has a 3/6 systolic murmur that radiates to his
axilla. His electrocardiogram shows 3-mm ST-
segment depression in leads V3–V5. In addition to his
outpatient medications, all of the following addi-
tional therapies are indicated except
A. Cardiac catheterization
B. Clopidogrel
C. Enoxaparin
D. Eptiﬁbatide
E. Tissue plasminogen activator
80. A 73-year-old woman develops substernal chest
pain, severe nausea, and vomiting while mowing
the lawn. In the emergency department, she has
cool extremities, right arm and left arm blood
pressure of 85/70 mmHg, heart rate of 65 bpm,
clear lungs, and no murmurs. She has no urine
output.A Swan-Ganz catheter is placed and reveals
cardiac index of 1.1 L/min per mm2, pulmonary
artery (PA) pressure of 20/14 mmHg, pulmonary
capillary wedge pressure of 6 mmHg, and right
atrial (RA) pressure of 24 mmHg. The patient
most likely has
A. Gram-negative sepsis
B. Occlusion of the left main coronary artery
C. Occlusion of the right coronary artery
D. Perforated duodenal ulcer
E. Ruptured aortic aneurysm
81. A 62-year-old woman with a history of chronic left
bundle branch block is admitted to the coronary
care unit with 4 hours of substernal chest pain and
shortness of breath. She has elevation of serum tro-
ponin-T. She receives urgent catheterization with
angioplasty and stent placement of a left anterior
descending (LAD) artery lesion. Three days after
admission, she develops recurrent chest pain.Which
of the following studies is most useful for detecting
new myocardial damage since the initial infarction?
A. Echocardiogram
B. Electrocardiogram
C. Serum myoglobin
D. Serum troponin-I
E. Serum troponin-T
82. A patient is brought to the emergency room after a
head-on motor vehicle collision. The patient is
unresponsive even to painful stimuli and is apneic;
Review and Self-Assessment
527
82. (Continued)
however, he does have a pulse.Which of the follow-
ing clinical ﬁndings would exclude a diagnosis of
brain death?
A. Bilateral positive Babinski signs
B. Constricted pupils
C. Invariant pulse rate
D. Positive deep tendon reﬂexes
E. Presence of diabetes insipidus
83. Which of the following neurologic phenomena is
classically associated with herniation of the brain
through the foramen magnum?
A. Third-nerve compression and ipsilateral papillary
dilation
B. Catatonia
C. “Locked-in” state
D. Miotic pupils
E. Respiratory arrest
84. A 56-year-old man is admitted to the intensive care
unit with a hypertensive crisis after cocaine use. His
initial blood pressure is 245/132 mmHg. On physi-
cal examination, the patient is unresponsive except
to painful stimuli. He has been intubated for airway
protection and is being mechanically ventilated,
with a respiratory rate of 14 breaths/min. His pupils
are reactive to light, and he has normal corneal,
cough, and gag reﬂexes.The patient has a dense left
hemiparesis. When presented with painful stimuli,
the patient responds with ﬂexure posturing on the
right side. CT reveals a large area of intracranial
bleeding in the right frontoparietal area. Over the
next several hours, the patient deteriorates. The
most recent examination reveals a blood pressure of
189/100 mmHg. The patient now has a dilated
pupil on the right side. The patient continues to
have corneal reﬂexes.You suspect increasing intracra-
nial pressure (ICP) related to the intracranial bleed.
All but which of the following can be done to
decrease the patient’s ICP?
A. Administer IV mannitol at a dose of 1 g/kg body
weight.
B. Administer hypertonic ﬂuids to achieve a goal
sodium level of 155 to 160 meq/L.
C. Consult neurosurgery for an urgent ventriculostomy.
D. Initiate IV nitroprusside to decrease the mean arterial
pressure (MAP) to a goal of 100 mmHg.
E. Increase the respiratory rate to 30 breaths/min.
85. Preoperative assessment of a 55-year-old man
going for coronary angiography shows an estimated 
85. (Continued)
glomerular ﬁltration rate (GFR) of 33 mL/min per
1.73 m2 and poorly controlled diabetes. He is cur-
rently taking no nephrotoxic medications, and the
nephrologist assures you that the patient does not
currently have acute renal failure.The case is due to
begin in 4 h, and you would like to prevent contrast
nephropathy.Which agent will deﬁnitely reduce the
risk of contrast nephropathy?
A. Dopamine
B. Fenoldopam
C. Indomethacin
D. N-acetylcysteine
E. Sodium bicarbonate
86. You are consulting to advise on another antihyper-
tensive agent for a patient with difﬁcult-to-control
hypertension. Despite high doses of a β-blocker,
the patient remains hypertensive. The estimated
glomerular ﬁltration rate (GFR) is 75 mL/min per
1.73 m2. On physical examination, there is no
exophthalmos and no thyroid bruit.The great ves-
sels are without bruit as well. Abdominal examina-
tion reveals bruits loudest in the bilateral ﬂanks as
well as a left femoral bruit. Peripheral pulses are
intact. Ultrasonography conﬁrms the presence of
bilateral renal artery stenosis. Which medication
class would not be a good choice to add to this
patient’s regimen?
A. Thiazide diuretic
B. Calcium channel blocker
C. Angiotensin II receptor blocker (ARB)
D. Central acting α blocker
87. Which of the following patients in need of dialysis
would receive the greatest beneﬁt from placing a
peritoneal dialysis catheter rather than a hemodial-
ysis catheter?
A. High-peritoneal transporters
B. Patients in developing countries
C. Patients older than 65 years of age
D. Patients with no residual kidney function
E. Patients with prior abdominal surgery
88. Your patient with end-stage renal disease on
hemodialysis has persistent hyperkalemia. He has
a history of total bilateral renal artery stenosis,
which is why he is on hemodialysis. He only has
electrocardiogram changes when his potassium
increases >6.0 meq/L, which occurs a few times
a week.You admit him to the hospital for further 
528
Review and Self-Assessment
88. (Continued)
evaluation. Your laboratory evaluation, nutrition
counseling, and medication adjustments have
not impacted his serum potassium level. What is
the next reasonable step to undertake for this
patient?
A. Adjust the dialysate.
B. Administer a daily dose of furosemide.
C. Perform “sodium modeling.”
D. Implant an automatic deﬁbrillator.
E. Perform bilateral nephrectomy.
89. It is hospital day 5 for a 65-year-old patient with
prerenal azotemia secondary to dehydration. His
creatinine was initially 3.6 mg/dL on admission,
but it has improved today to 2.1 mg/dL. He
complains of mild lower back pain, and you pre-
scribe naproxen to be taken intermittently. By
what mechanism might this drug further impair
his renal function?
A. Afferent arteriolar vasoconstriction
B. Afferent arteriolar vasodilatation
C. Efferent arteriolar vasoconstriction
D. Proximal tubular toxicity
E. Ureteral obstruction
90. A 63-year-old man with a history of diabetes mel-
litus is found to have a lung nodule on chest radi-
ography.To stage the disease further, he undergoes
a contrast-enhanced CT scan of the chest. One
week before the CT scan, his blood urea nitrogen
(BUN) is 26 mg/dL, and his creatinine is 1.8 mg/dL.
Three days after the study, he complains of dyspnea,
pedal edema, and decreased urinary output. Repeat
BUN is 86 mg/dL, and creatinine is 4.4 mg/dL.
The most likely mechanism of the acute renal
failure is
A. Acute tubular necrosis
B. Allergic hypersensitivity
C. Cholesterol emboli
D. Immune-complex glomerulonephritis
E. Ureteral outﬂow obstruction
91. In the patient in Question 90, the urinalysis is most
likely to show
A. Granular casts
B. Red blood cell (RBC) casts
C. Urinary eosinophils
D. Urinary neutrophils
E. White blood cell (WBC) casts
92. Which of the following is the most potent stimu-
lus for hypothalamic production of arginine vaso-
pressin?
A. Hypertonicity
B. Hyperkalemia
C. Hypokalemia
D. Hypotonicity
E. Intravascular volume depletion
93. A 57-year-old man is admitted to the hospital for
dehydration and confusion. In the emergency
department, he complained of excessive thirst and
he was found to have a serum sodium of 162 meq/L
and a newly elevated creatinine of 2.2 mg/dL.
After receiving IV ﬂuid, his sensorium clears, and
he relays to you that he drinks large amounts of
ﬂuid each day and makes about 2 L of urine each
day. He has noticed that his urine output has no
relation to the amount of fluid he drinks. His
sodium remains elevated at 150 meq/L, and his
urine osmolality returns at 80 mosmol/kg. After
careful water restriction, you administer 10 μg of
desmopressin intranasally and remeasure his urine
osmolality. The osmolality is now 94 mosmol/kg.
What is the most likely cause of his hyperna-
tremia?
A. Chronic hyperventilation
B. Diabetes insipidus
C. Excessive solute intake
D. Gastrointestinal losses
E. Surreptitious use of diuretics
94. What is the correct long-term treatment for the
patient in the preceding scenario?
A. Arginine vasopressin (AVP) analogues
B. Brain imaging and, if indicated, resection
C. Lithium carbonate
D. Narcotics
E. Salt restriction and diuretics
95. A 52-year-old diabetic patient is referred to the
emergency department from the endoscopy suite.
The patient has diabetes and a history of colon
cancer that was removed 3 years ago. He also has
hyperlipidemia, which is well controlled on ator-
vastatin. He presented to the endoscopy suite for a
scheduled surveillance colonoscopy. Blood drawn
upon arrival to shows a sodium of 121 meq/L,
and the patient seemed disoriented. On physical
examination, the mucous membranes are dry, and
there is no axillary moisture. Serum osmolality is 
Review and Self-Assessment
529
--·
95. (Continued)
checked and is 270 mosmol/kg.What is the most
likely cause of this patient’s hyponatremia?
A. Diabetes insipidus
B. Hyperglycemia
C. Hyperlipidemia
D. Hypovolemia
E. Syndrome of inappropriate secretion of antidiuretic
hormone (SIADH)
96. An 84-year-old female nursing home resident is
brought to the emergency department because of
lethargy.At the nursing home, she was found to have
a blood pressure of 85/60 mmHg, a heart rate of
101 bpm, and a temperature of 37.8°C. Laboratory
data are obtained and show sodium, 137 meq/L;
potassium, 2.8 meq/L; HCO3
−, 8 meq/L; chloride,
117 meq/L; blood urea nitrogen, 17 mg/dL; and cre-
atinine 0.9 mg/dL. An arterial blood gas shows a
PaO2 of 80 mmHg, a PCO2 of 24 mmHg, and a pH of
7.29. Her urine analysis is clear and has a pH of 4.5.
What is the acid–base disorder?
A. Anion gap metabolic acidosis
B. Non–anion gap metabolic acidosis
C. Non–anion gap metabolic acidosis and respiratory
alkalosis
D. Respiratory acidosis
97. What is the most likely cause of the acid–base dis-
order of the patient in the preceding scenario?
A. Diarrhea
B. Diuretic use
C. Hyperacute renal failure
D. Hypoaldosteronism
E. Proximal renal tubular acidosis
98. A 53-year-old woman with long-standing depres-
sion and a history of rheumatoid arthritis is brought
in by her daughter, who states that she found an
empty bottle of acetylsalicylic acid by her mother’s
bedside. The patient is found to be confused and
lethargic and is unable to provide a deﬁnitive his-
tory.What is the most likely set of laboratory values?
99. A 34-year-old man is brought to the hospital with
altered mental status. He has a history of alco-
holism. He is somnolent and does not answer ques-
tions. Physical examination reveals blood pressure,
130/80 mmHg; heart rate, 105 bpm; respiratory rate,
24 breaths/min; and temperature; 37°C (98.6°F).The
remainder of the physical examination is unremark-
able. Microscopic analysis of urine is shown in
Fig. 99. Which of the following most likely will be
found on further diagnostic evaluation?
A. >10,000 bacterial colonies on urine culture
B. Anion gap metabolic acidosis
C. Hydronephrosis on ultrasound
D. Nephrolithiasis on CT scan
E. Positive antinuclear antibodies (ANA)
530
Review and Self-Assessment
Na+
K+
Cl−
HCO3
−
ROOM AIR ABG
(SERUM, meq/L)
PO2
PCO2
pH
A
140
3.9
85
26
141 (1.6)
100
40
7.40
B
140
3.9
85
16
141 (1.6)
100
20
7.40
C
140
5.8
100
20
141 (1.6)
100
34
7.38
D
150
2.9
100
36
141 (1.6)
80
46
7.50
E
116
3.7
85
22
141 (1.6)
80
46
7.50
100. A 52-year-old man is found at home hypotensive and
confused. In the emergency department, his blood
pressure is 82/60 mmHg, and his heart rate is 115
bpm. He is confused and lethargic. Laboratory data
show sodium, 133 meq/L; potassium, 2.4 meq/L;
chloride, 70 meq/L; HCO3
−, 50 meq/L; blood urea
nitrogen, 44 mg/dL; and creatinine, 1.7 mg/dL. An
arterial blood gas shows a PO2 of 62 mmHg, a PCO2
SERUM CREATININE
μmol/L (mg/dL)
FIGURE 99
100. (Continued)
of 49 mmHg, and a pH of 7.66. What acid–base
disorder is present?
A. Anion gap metabolic acidosis
B. Metabolic alkalosis
C. Metabolic alkalosis plus respiratory acidosis
D. Respiratory acidosis
E. Respiratory alkalosis
101. What is the most likely cause of the acid–base dis-
order for the patient in the preceding scenario?
A. Acute myocardial infarction
B. Bartter syndrome
C. Cushing’s disease
D. Mineralocorticoid excess
E. Vomiting
102. All the following are vitamin K–dependent coagu-
lation factors except
A. Factor X
B. Factor VII
C. Protein C
D. Protein S
E. Factor VIII
103. A 31-year-old man with hemophilia A is admitted
to the hospital with persistent gross hematuria. He
denies recent trauma or any history of genitouri-
nary pathology. The examination is unremarkable.
The hematocrit is 28%. All the following are treat-
ments for hemophilia A except
A. Desmopressin (DDAVP)
B. Fresh-frozen plasma (FFP)
C. Cryoprecipitate
D. Recombinant factor VIII
E. Plasmapheresis
104. All but which of the following statements about
the lupus anticoagulant (LA) are true?
A. Lupus anticoagulants typically prolong the activated
partial thromboplastin time (aPTT).
B. A 1:1 mixing study will not correct in the presence
of LAs.
C. Bleeding episodes in patients with LAs may be severe
and life threatening.
D. Female patients may experience recurrent
midtrimester abortions.
E. LAs may occur in the absence of other signs of sys-
temic lupus erythematosus (SLE).
105. The most common inherited prothrombotic dis-
order is
A. Activated protein C resistance
B. Prothrombin gene mutation
C. Protein C deﬁciency
D. Protein S deﬁciency
E. Antithrombin deﬁciency
106. All the following cause prolongation of the activated
partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) that does not
correct with a 1:1 mixture with pooled plasma except
A. Lupus anticoagulant
B. Factor VIII inhibitor
C. Heparin
D. Factor VII inhibitor
E. Factor IX inhibitor
107. What is the most common side effect of oral rib-
avirin when used with pegylated interferon for the
treatment of hepatitis C?
A. Drug-associated lupus
B. Hemolytic anemia
C. Hyperthyroidism
D. Leukopenia
E. Rash
108. When given as a ﬁrst-line agent for invasive
Aspergillus infection, voriconazole commonly causes
all of the following side effects except
A. Drug–drug interactions
B. Hepatotoxicity
C. Photosensitivity skin rashes
D. Renal toxicity
E. Visual disturbances
109. Caspofungin is a ﬁrst-line agent for which of the
following conditions?
A. Candidemia
B. Histoplasmosis
C. Invasive aspergillosis
D. Mucormycosis
E. Paracoccidiomycosis
110. Sensitive and speciﬁc serum or urine diagnostic
tests exist for all of the following invasive fungal
infections except
A. Blastomycosis
B. Coccidioidomycosis
C. Cryptococcosis
D. Histoplasmosis
Review and Self-Assessment
531
111. A 65-year-old man seeks evaluation for nasal conges-
tion, headaches, and dysphagia, most notably when
he lies supine for sleeping. These symptoms have
been slowly worsening for the past month. He has
no nasal discharge or fevers. On review of systems, he
reports recent hoarseness and dizziness. His past med-
ical history is signiﬁcant only for mild hypertension.
He worked as a rooﬁng contractor and smoked one
pack a day of cigarettes since age 16 years. On physi-
cal examination, you note facial edema. His orophar-
ynx is also mildly edematous, and his tonsils are unre-
markable. His external and internal jugular veins are
engorged bilaterally, and there are prominent veins
on his anterior chest. Chest percussion reveals dull-
ness in the right base with decreased tactile fremitus.
A chest radiograph shows a right upper lung mass
that on biopsy is consistent with non–small cell lung
cancer.All of the following treatments may help this
patient’s symptoms except
A. Chemotherapy
B. Diuretics
C. Glucocorticoids
D. Radiation therapy
E. Venous stenting
112. Which of the following statements regarding malig-
nant spinal cord compression (MSCC) is true?
A. Fewer than 50% of patients who are treated while
ambulatory will remain ambulatory.
B. Neurologic abnormalities on physical examination
are sufﬁcient to initiate high-dose glucocorticoids.
C. Neurologic ﬁndings often appear before pain.
D. Renal cell carcinoma is the most common cause of
MSCC.
112. (Continued)
E. The lumbosacral spine is the most commonly
affected site.
113. You are called to the bedside to see a patient with
Prinzmetal’s angina who is having chest pain. The
patient had a cardiac catheterization 2 days earlier
showing a 60% stenosis of the right coronary artery
with associated spasm during coronary angiogram.
At the patient’s bedside, which ﬁnding is consistent
with the diagnosis of Prinzmetal’s angina?
A. Chest pain reproduced by palpation of the chest wall
B. Nonspeciﬁc ST-T-wave abnormalities
C. Relief of pain with drinking cold water
D. ST-segment elevation in II, III, and aVF
E. ST-segment depression in I, aVL, and V6
114. You are managing a patient with suspected dissem-
inated intravascular coagulopathy (DIC). The
patient has end-stage liver disease awaiting liver
transplantation and was recently in the intensive
care unit with Escherichia coli bacterial peritonitis.
You suspect DIC based on a new upper gastroin-
testinal bleed in the setting of oozing from
venipuncture sites.The platelet count is 43000/μL,
the International Normalized Ratio (INR) is 2.5,
hemoglobin is 6 mg/dL, and D-dimer is elevated to
4.5. What is the best way to distinguish between
new-onset DIC and chronic liver disease?
A. Blood culture
B. Elevated ﬁbrinogen degradation products
C. Prolonged activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT)
D. Reduced platelet count
E. Serial laboratory analysis
532
Review and Self-Assessment
ANSWERS
1. The answer is C.
(Chap. 4) In the evaluation of cyanosis, the ﬁrst step is to
differentiate central from peripheral cyanosis. In central
cyanosis, because the cause is either reduced oxygen satu-
ration or abnormal hemoglobin, the physical ﬁndings
include bluish discoloration of both mucous membranes
and skin. In contrast, peripheral cyanosis is associated with
normal oxygen saturation but slowing of blood ﬂow and
an increased fraction of oxygen extraction from blood;
subsequently, the physical ﬁndings are present only in the
skin and extremities.The mucous membranes are spared.
Peripheral cyanosis is commonly caused by cold exposure
with vasoconstriction in the digits. Similar physiology is
found in Raynaud’s phenomenon. Peripheral vascular
disease and deep venous thrombosis result in slowed
blood ﬂow and increased oxygen extraction with subse-
quent cyanosis. Methemoglobinemia causes abnormal
hemoglobin that circulates systemically. Consequently, the
cyanosis associated with this disorder is systemic. Other
common causes of central cyanosis include severe lung
disease with hypoxemia, right-to-left intracardiac shunting,
and pulmonary arteriovenous malformations.
2. The answer is D.
(Chap. 11) Aspiration can lead to anaerobic infection and
chemical pneumonitis.The etiologic differential diagnosis
of CAP in a patient with a history of recent travel to the
southwestern United States should include Coccidioides spp.
Aspergillus spp., has a worldwide distribution and is not a
cause of CAP syndrome. Alcohol use predisposes patients
to anaerobic infection, likely caused by aspiration, as well
as S. pneumoniae. Klebsiella spp. is classically associated with
CAP in alcoholic patients, but in reality, it is rarely seen.
Patients with structural lung disease, such as cystic ﬁbrosis
or bronchiectasis, are at risk for a unique group of organ-
isms that includes P. aeruginosa and S. aureus. Poor dental
hygiene is associated with anaerobic infections.
3. The answer is A.
(Chap. 19) A variety of autoimmune diseases may cause
pulmonary or renal disease, including Wegener’s granulo-
matosis, microscopic polyangiitis, systemic lupus erythe-
matosus, and cryoglobulinemia. Goodpasture’s syndrome
is characterized by the presence of anti–glomerular base-
ment antibodies that cause glomerulonephritis with con-
current diffuse alveolar hemorrhage.The disease typically
presents in patients older than age 40 years with a history
of cigarette smoking. These patients usually do not have
fevers or joint symptoms.Among the listed options, anti-
bodies to glutamic acid decarboxylase are seen in patients
with type 1 diabetes or stiff-man syndrome, anti–smooth
muscle antibodies in patients with autoimmune hepatitis,
and anti–U1 RNP in those with mixed connective tissue
disease. Antiphospholipid antibody syndrome may cause
renal disease and alveolar hemorrhage, but this usually
occurs in the context of a systemic illness with prominent
thrombosis in other organ systems (extremities, central
nervous system.
4. The answer is E.
(Chap. 9) Multiple drugs have been associated with
eosinophilic pulmonary reactions.They include nitrofu-
rantoin, sulfonamides, NSAIDs, penicillins, thiazides, tri-
cyclic antidepressants, hydralazine, and chlorpropamide,
among others. Amiodarone can cause an acute respira-
tory distress syndrome with the initiation of the drug as
well as a syndrome of pulmonary ﬁbrosis. Eosinophilic
pneumonia is not caused by amiodarone.
5. The answer is A.
(Chap. 21) Primary spontaneous pneumothorax is usu-
ally secondary to the rupture of small apical blebs that
lie near the pleural surface.The typical patient is a thin
young man who smokes. The presenting symptoms are
chest pain and dyspnea. The recommended initial
approach to treatment is needle aspiration of the pneu-
mothorax. If this fails to fully expand the lung, placement
of a small apical tube thoracostomy can be used to con-
tinue to drain the air. Large-bore chest tubes are not nec-
essary to drain the air present in a pneumothorax. If
ongoing air leak is present after ∼5 days, then the patient
should be referred for thoracoscopy to staple the blebs
and perform pleural abrasion.This procedure is also rec-
ommended for individuals who develop recurrent pneu-
mothoraces, which occurs in ∼50% of individuals with a
primary spontaneous pneumothorax. If the pneumotho-
rax is small (<15%), observation and administration of
100% oxygen is an option for treatment. Use of 100%
oxygen speeds reabsorption of the pneumothorax by
promoting diffusion of air that is composed of a nitro-
gen and oxygen mixture back into the lungs.
6. The answer is E.
(Chap. 20) This patient is presenting with massive pul-
monary embolus with ongoing hypotension, right ven-
tricular dysfunction, and profound hypoxemia requiring
100% oxygen. In this setting, continuing with anticoagu-
lation alone is inadequate, and the patient should receive
circulatory support with ﬁbrinolysis if there are no con-
traindications to therapy. The major contraindications
to ﬁbrinolysis include hypertension >180/110 mmHg,
known intracranial disease or prior hemorrhagic stroke,
recent surgery, or trauma.The recommended ﬁbrinolytic
regimen is recombinant tissue plasminogen activator
(rTPA), 100 mg IV over 2 h. Heparin should be contin-
ued with the ﬁbrinolytic to prevent a rebound hyperco-
agulable state with dissolution of the clot.There is a 10%
risk of major bleeding with ﬁbrinolytic therapy with a
1–3% risk of intracranial hemorrhage.The only indication
approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for
ﬁbrinolysis in pulmonary embolus (PE) is for massive PE
presenting with life-threatening hypotension, right ven-
tricular dysfunction, and refractory hypoxemia. In sub-
massive PE presenting with preserved blood pressure and
evidence of right ventricular dysfunction on echocardio-
gram, the decision to pursue ﬁbrinolysis is made on a
case-by-case basis. In addition to ﬁbrinolysis, the patient
should also receive circulatory support with vasopressors.
Dopamine and dobutamine are the vasopressors of choice
for the treatment of shock in patients with PE. Caution
should be taken with ongoing high-volume ﬂuid admin-
istration because a poorly functioning right ventricle may
be poorly tolerant of additional ﬂuids. Ongoing ﬂuids
may worsen right ventricular ischemia and further dilate
the right ventricle, displacing the interventricular septum
to the left to worsen cardiac output and hypotension. If
the patient had contraindications to ﬁbrinolysis and was
unable to be stabilized with vasopressor support, referral
for surgical embolectomy should be considered. Referral
for inferior vena cava ﬁlter placement is not indicated at
this time.The patient should be stabilized hemodynami-
cally as a ﬁrst priority. The indications for inferior vena
cava ﬁlter placement are active bleeding, precluding anti-
coagulation, and recurrent deep venous thrombosis on
adequate anticoagulation.
7, 8, 9, and 10. The answers are C, B, D, and A,
respectively.
(Chap. 5) Ventilatory function can be easily measured
with lung volume measurement and the FEV1/FVC ratio.
Review and Self-Assessment
533
A decreased FEV1/FVC ratio diagnoses obstructive lung
disease. Alternatively, low lung volumes, speciﬁcally
decreased TLC, and occasionally decreased RV diagnose
restrictive lung disease. With extensive air trapping in
obstructive lung disease,TLC is often increased, and RV
may also be increased. VC is proportionally decreased.
MIP measures respiratory muscle strength and is
decreased in patients with neuromuscular disease. Thus,
whereas myasthenia gravis produces low lung volumes
and decreased MIP, patients with idiopathic pulmonary
ﬁbrosis have normal muscle strength and subsequently a
normal MIP but decreased TLC and RV. In some cases
of pulmonary parenchymal restrictive lung disease, the
increase in elastic recoil results in an increased
FEV1/FVC ratio. The hallmark of obstructive lung dis-
ease is a decreased FEV1/FVC ratio; thus, the correct
answer for Q VI-13 is A.
11. The answer is D.
(Chap. 21) Thoracentesis is indicated for any patient pre-
senting with pneumonia and a pleural effusion >10 mm
thick on lateral decubitus imaging because a significant
percentage of these patients will show evidence of bac-
terial invasion and require further intervention. Other
indications for thoracentesis for pleural effusions that
complicate pneumonias include loculation of the
pleural fluid and evidence of thickened parietal pleura
on chest CT. The pleural fluid should be sent for cell
count, differential, pH, protein, LDH, glucose, and cul-
ture with Gram stain.This will allow one to differentiate
a simple parapneumonic effusion from a complicated one
or from empyema.All effusions complicating pneumonia
should be exudative, meeting at least one of Light’s crite-
ria:(1) pleural ﬂuid protein/serum protein >0.5,(2) pleural
ﬂuid LDH/serum LDH >0.6, and (3) pleural ﬂuid LDH
>two-thirds of the normal upper limit for serum. Factors
that increase the likelihood that tube thoracostomy will
have to be performed include loculated pleural ﬂuid, pH
<7.20, pleural ﬂuid glucose <60 mg/dL, positive Gram
stain or culture of pleural ﬂuid, and presence of gross pus
on aspiration.
12. The answer is C.
(Chap. 18) The only therapy that has been proved to
improve survival in patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) is oxygen in the subset of
patients with resting hypoxemia. This patient probably
has resting hypoxemia resulting from the presence of an
elevated jugular venous pulse, pedal edema, and an ele-
vated hematocrit. Theophylline has been shown to
increase exercise tolerance in patients with COPD
through a mechanism other than bronchodilation. Glu-
cocorticoids are not indicated in the absence of an acute
exacerbation and may lead to complications if they are
used indiscriminately. Atenolol and enalapril have no
speciﬁc role in therapy for patients with COPD but are
often used when there is concomitant illness.
13. and 14.The answers are E and E, respectively.
(Chap. 2) The mountain climber is at risk for two well-
described altitude-related conditions: high-altitude cere-
bral edema and high-altitude pulmonary edema. High-
altitude pulmonary edema is a well-described subset of
pulmonary edema. Other causes of pulmonary edema
include cardiogenic, neurogenic, and noncardiogenic (as
seen in acute respiratory distress syndrome) factors.
Although the exact mechanism of this disorder is unclear,
one commonly accepted hypothesis suggests that
increased cardiac output and hypoxic vasoconstriction
with resultant pulmonary hypertension combine to cause
high-pressure pulmonary edema. Persons younger than
25 years old are more likely than older persons to develop
this condition, probably because hypoxic vasoconstriction
of the pulmonary arteries is more pronounced in this
population. Persons who regularly live at high altitudes
are still at risk for high-altitude pulmonary edema when
they descend to a lower altitude and then return to higher
areas. Prevention can be achieved by means of prophylac-
tic administration of acetazolamide and gradual ascent to
higher altitudes. After this condition develops, the most
important therapy is to descend to a lower altitude. Other
therapies include oxygen to decrease hypoxic pulmonary
vasoconstriction and diuretic therapy as needed.
15. The answer is D.
(Chap. 16) The combination of infertility and recurrent
sinopulmonary infections should prompt consideration of
an underlying disorder of ciliary dysfunction called primary
ciliary dyskinesia.These disorders account for approximately
5–10% of cases of bronchiectasis.A number of deﬁciencies
have been described, including malfunction of dynein
arms, radial spokes, and microtubules. All organ systems
that require ciliary function are affected.The lungs rely on
cilia to beat respiratory secretions proximally and subse-
quently to remove inspired particles, especially bacteria. In
the absence of this normal host defense, recurrent bacterial
respiratory infections occur and can lead to bronchiectasis.
Otitis media and sinusitis are common for the same rea-
son. In the genitourinary tract, sperm require cilia to pro-
vide motility. Kartagener’s syndrome is a combination of
sinusitis, bronchiectasis, and situs inversus. It accounts for
approximately 50% of patients with primary ciliary dyski-
nesia. Cystic ﬁbrosis is associated with infertility and bilat-
eral upper lobe inﬁltrates; it causes a decreased number of
sperm or absent sperm on analysis because of the congeni-
tal absence of the vas deferens. Sarcoidosis, which is often
associated with bihilar adenopathy, is not generally a cause
of infertility. A water balloon–shaped heart is found in
those with pericardial effusions, which one would not
expect in this patient.
16. The answer is C.
(Chap. 21) This patient is presenting with a large unilat-
eral pleural effusion. By Light’s criteria, the effusion is
exudative in nature. Light’s criteria are (1) pleural ﬂuid
534
Review and Self-Assessment
protein/serum 
protein 
>0.5,
(2) 
pleural 
ﬂuid
LDH/serum LDH >0.6, and (3) pleural ﬂuid LDH
>two-thirds of the upper limits of normal. In addition,
the pleural ﬂuid has a lymphocytic predominance. In
this patient who is a smoker with abnormal lymph
nodes in the mediastinum, the most likely cause of an
exudative effusion with excess lymphocytes is malig-
nancy, likely caused by lung cancer. Of the choices
listed, sending the pleural ﬂuid for cytology is the best
test to determine the cause of the pleural effusion. If
this is unsuccessful, consideration of thoracoscopic
biopsy of the pleura or bronchoscopic biopsy of the
mediastinal lymph nodes should be considered. Medi-
astinoscopy could also be considered. The patient
should receive screening mammography yearly as indi-
cated by her age, but this is not the best choice for
diagnosis of the pleural effusion. The patient has no
symptoms to suggest an infection, and lymphocytic pre-
dominance in the pleural ﬂuid is not consistent with a
parapneumonic effusion. Thus, pleural ﬂuid culture is
unlikely to yield the diagnosis.
17. The answer is C.
(Chap. 5) The RV of the lung is the amount of gas that
remains in the lung after a maximal expiratory effort. It
is determined by airway closure. RV is elevated in con-
ditions that result in premature airway closure with
expiration or caused by an o inability to fully exhale
because of muscle weakness or chest wall stiffness. Of
the choices listed, only emphysema is associated with an
increased RV. In emphysema, there is destruction of
alveoli usually related to the effects of cigarette smoking.
The destruction of alveoli leads to decreased traction on
small airways and allows them to collapse at higher lung
volumes, resulting in an increased RV. When emphy-
sema occurs concomitantly with chronic bronchitis, the
airway inﬂammation characteristic of chronic bronchitis
also leads to increased RV because of decreased airway
diameter. Other disorders that lead to increased RV
include asthma, diaphragmatic weakness, and kyphosco-
liosis. Idiopathic pulmonary ﬁbrosis usually causes a
decrease in RV because of airway stiffness. Obesity
should not affect the RV.
18. The answers are 1-C; 2-B; 3-D; 4-A.
(Chap. 28) A variety of vasopressor agents are available
for hemodynamic support.The effects of these medica-
tions depend on their effects on the sympathetic ner-
vous system to produce changes in heart rate, cardiac
contractility, and peripheral vascular tone. Stimulation of
α-1 adrenergic receptors in the peripheral vasculature
causes vasoconstriction and improves mean arterial pres-
sure by increasing systemic vascular resistance. The β1
receptors are located primarily in the heart and cause
increased cardiac contractility and heart rate. The β2
receptors are found in the peripheral circulation and
cause vasodilatation and bronchodilation. Phenylephrine
acts solely as an α-adrenergic agonist. It is considered a
second-line agent in septic shock and is often used in
anesthesia to correct hypotension after induction of
anesthesia. Phenylephrine is also useful for spinal shock.
The action of dopamine depends on the dosage used.At
high doses, dopamine has a high afﬁnity for the α recep-
tor, but at lower doses (<5 μg/kg per min), it does not.
In addition, dopamine acts at β1 receptors and dopamin-
ergic receptors.The effect on these receptors is greatest
at lower doses. Norepinephrine and epinephrine affect
both α and β1 receptors to increase peripheral vascular
resistance, heart rate, and contractility. Norepinephrine
has less β1 activity than epinephrine or dopamine and
thus has less associated tachycardia. Norepinephrine and
dopamine are the recommended ﬁrst-line therapies for
septic shock. Epinephrine is the drug of choice for ana-
phylactic shock. Dobutamine is primarily a β1 agonist
with lesser effects at the β2 receptor. Dobutamine
increases cardiac output through improving cardiac con-
tractility and heart rate. Dobutamine may be associated
with development of hypotension because of its effects
at the β2 receptor, causing vasodilatation and decreased
systemic vascular resistance.
19. The answer is C.
(Chap. 23) Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is a common
sleep disorder affecting up to 20% of the population, and
the incidence of OSA is expected to increase because
the incidence of obesity has increased over the past 
30 years. OSA is characterized by repetitive events dur-
ing which the posterior oropharynx collapses with a
marked decrease or absence of airﬂow despite ongoing
respiratory effort. Obstructive events are often associated
with marked disruptions in sleep continuity with fre-
quent arousals. Recurrent oxygen desaturations, which
may be very severe, also occur concurrently with OSA
events.The ﬁgure illustrates a typical OSA event. In this
ﬁgure, the nasal/oral airﬂow channel demonstrates a
near absence of airﬂow despite ongoing respiratory
effort. Each obstructive event depicted in this illustration
is associated with a concomitant decrease in oxygen sat-
uration from a baseline of 98% to 86–91% and lasts for
about 20–30 s. Central sleep apnea is diagnosed when
there is an absence of airﬂow in association with an
absence of respiratory effort lasting for at least 10 s.
Cheyne-Stokes respiration is a type of central sleep
apnea characterized by a crescendo–decrescendo pattern
of respiratory effort and airﬂow. A period of apnea is ter-
minated by a period of hyperpnea. Unlike OSA, arousals
during Cheyne-Stokes respiration occur during the hyper-
pneic phase of respiration rather than at the termination of
the apnea. Cheyne-Stokes respiration is frequently seen in
congestive heart failure and after cerebrovascular events.
Periodic limb movement disorder of sleep is characterized
by recurrent leg movements during sleep. The typical
periodic limb movement is dorsiﬂexion of the great toe
and ankle. Periodic limb movements become increasingly
Review and Self-Assessment
535
frequent with age, and most are not associated with sig-
niﬁcant sleep disruption or arousals.
20. and 21.The answers are E and D, respectively.
(Chap. 19) Pulmonary alveolar proteinosis (PAP) is a rare
disorder with an incidence of approximately one in 
1 million. The disease usually presents between ages 30
and 50 years and is slightly more common in men.Three
distinct subtypes have been described:
congenital,
acquired, and secondary (most frequently caused by acute
silicosis or hematologic malignancies). Interestingly, the
pathogenesis of the disease has been associated with anti-
bodies to granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating
factor (GM-CSF) in most cases of acquired disease in
adults.The pathobiology of the disease is failure of clear-
ance of pulmonary surfactant.These patients typically pre-
sent with subacute dyspnea on exertion with fatigue and
low-grade fevers. Associated laboratory abnormalities
include polycythemia, hypergammaglobulinemia, and
increased lactate dehydrogenase levels. Classically, the CT
appearance is described as “crazy pavement” with ground-
glass alveolar inﬁltrates in a perihilar distribution and
intervening areas of normal lung. Bronchoalveolar lavage
is diagnostic, with large amounts of amorphous proteina-
ceous material seen. Macrophages ﬁlled with PAS-positive
material are also frequently seen.The treatment of choice
is whole-lung lavage through a double-lumen endotra-
cheal tube. Survival at 5 years is higher than 95%, although
some patients will need a repeat whole-lung lavage. Sec-
ondary infection, especially with Nocardia spp., is common,
and these patients should be followed closely.
22. and 23.The answers are B and C, respectively.
(Chap. 28) Hypovolemic shock is the most common form
of shock and occurs either because of hemorrhage or loss
of plasma volume in the form of gastrointestinal, urinary,
or insensible losses. Symptoms of hemorrhagic and non-
hemorrhagic shock are indistinguishable. Mild hypov-
olemia is considered to be a loss of <20% of the blood
volume and usually presents with few clinical signs except
for mild tachycardia. Loss of 20–40% of the blood volume
typically induces orthostasis. Loss of >40% of the blood
volume leads to the classic manifestations of shock—
marked tachycardia, hypotension, oliguria, and ﬁnally
obtundation. Central nervous system perfusion is main-
tained until shock becomes severe. Oliguria is a very
important clinical parameter that should help guide vol-
ume resuscitation.
After assessing for an adequate airway and spontaneous
breathing, initial resuscitation aims at reexpanding the
intravascular volume and controlling ongoing losses. Vol-
ume resuscitation should be initiated with rapid IV infu-
sion of isotonic saline or Ringer’s lactate. In head-to-head
trials, colloidal solutions have not added any beneﬁt com-
pared with crystalloid and in fact appeared to increase mor-
tality for trauma patients. Patients in hemorrhagic shock
with ongoing blood losses and a hemoglobin ≤10 g/dL
should be treated with transfusion of pRBCs. After the
hemorrhage has been controlled, transfusion of pRBCs
should be performed only for hemoglobin ≤7 g/dL.
Patients who remain hypotensive after volume resuscitation
have a very poor prognosis. Inotropic support and intensive
monitoring should be initiated in these patients.
24. The answer is B.
(Chap. 5) The patient in this presentation is presenting after
a narcotic overdose, which leads to hypoxia because of
hypoventilation. The major causes of hypoxemia are
hypoventilation, shunt, and V˙/Q˙ mismatch. Diffusing
defects can also cause hypoxemia but are a much less fre-
quent cause. A ﬁnal cause of hypoxemia to consider is
decreased concentration of oxygen in inspired air, which is
only present at altitude or in the setting of medical equip-
ment malfunction.When evaluating a patient with hypoxia,
it is important to consider whether the A–a oxygen gradi-
ent is normal or elevated. Of the causes of hypoxia, only
hypoventilation and decreased fraction of inspired oxygen
will cause hypoxia with a normal A–a gradient. The for-
mula for calculating the alveolar oxygen concentration is
PAO2 = ((Patm −PH2O) ∗(FIO2)) −(PaCO2/R)
where
Patm = atmospheric pressure
PH2O = water vapor pressure
FIO2 = fraction of inspired oxygen
R = respiratory quotient
When values are substituted assuming usual conditions
at sea level and with the patient breathing room air, the
equation is simpliﬁed to
PAO2 = (760 −47)(0.21) −(PaCO2/0.8) = 150 −PaCO2/0.8
In this patient, the calculated PAO2 is 50. Thus, the A–a
gradient is 8 mmHg (normal value <15 mmHg) and is
normal.Thus, the correct answer is B.
25. The answer is D.
(Chap. 22) Respiratory muscular disorders rarely cause
chronic hypoventilation unless there is significant
diaphragmatic weakness. Myasthenia gravis, muscular dys-
trophy, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, and other chronic
myopathies that involve peripheral musculature as well as
the diaphragm should be considered when a patient has
signs or symptoms of diaphragmatic weakness. Upright
chest radiographs may show diaphragm elevation but are
usually normal. When diaphragm weakness is present,
forced vital capacity will be >10–15% lower in the supine
position than in the upright position, and maximal inspi-
ratory and expiratory pressures will be reduced. Transdi-
aphragmatic pressure gradients (esophageal minus gastric
pressures) can also be measured as a conﬁrmatory test.
Diffusing capacity has little diagnostic value; it is mostly
536
Review and Self-Assessment
useful as a physiologic measure and a predictor of oxygen
desaturation with exercise.The results are usually normal
in patients with muscle weakness. A normal perfusion
scan result has a high negative predictive value for ruling
out pulmonary embolism; an angiogram is not indicated.
CT scan of the head would not be useful in diagnosing
myasthenia gravis or other motor neuron diseases.
26. The answer is B.
(Chap. 21) The most common cause of pleural effusion
is left ventricular failure. Pleural effusions occur in heart
failure when increased hydrostatic forces are increasing
the pulmonary interstitial ﬂuid and the lymphatic
drainage is inadequate to remove the ﬂuid. Right-sided
effusions are more common than left-sided effusions in
heart failure. Thoracentesis would show a transudative
ﬂuid. Pneumonia can be associated with a parapneu-
monic effusion or empyema. Parapneumonic effusions
are the most common cause of exudative pleural effu-
sions and are second only to heart failure as a cause of
pleural effusions. Empyema refers to a grossly purulent
pleural effusion. Malignancy is the second most com-
mon cause of exudative pleural effusion. Breast and lung
cancers and lymphoma cause 75% of all malignant
pleural effusions. On thoracentesis, the effusion is exuda-
tive. Cirrhosis and pulmonary embolus are far less com-
mon causes of pleural effusions.
27. The answer is D.
(Chap. 28) The patient is in cardiogenic shock from an
ST-elevation myocardial infarction. Shock is a clinical syn-
drome in which vital organs do not receive adequate per-
fusion. Understanding the physiology underlying shock is
a crucial factor in determining appropriate management.
Cardiac output is the major determinant of tissue perfu-
sion and is the product of stroke volume and heart rate. In
turn, stroke volume is determined by preload, or ventric-
ular ﬁlling, afterload, or resistance to ventricular ejection,
and contractility of the myocardium. In this patient, the
hypoxic and damaged myocardium has suddenly lost
much of its contractile function, and stroke volume will
therefore decrease rapidly, decreasing cardiac output. Sys-
temic vascular resistance will increase to improve return
of blood to the heart and increase stroke volume. Central
venous pressure is elevated as a consequence of increased
vascular resistance, decreased cardiac output and poor for-
ward ﬂow, and neuroendocrine-mediated vasoconstriction.
The pathophysiology of other forms of shock is shown as
a comparison.
28. The answer is A.
(Chap. 20; Ridker P et al, 1995) Many patients who
develop pulmonary thromboembolism have an underly-
ing inherited predisposition that remains clinically silent
until they are subjected to an additional stress, such as
the use of oral contraceptive pills, surgery, or pregnancy.
The most frequently inherited predisposition to throm-
bosis is so-called activated protein C resistance. The
inability of a normal protein C to carry out its anticoag-
ulant function is caused by a missense mutation in the
gene coding for factor V in the coagulation cascade.This
mutation, which results in the substitution of a gluta-
mine for an arginine residue in position 506 of the fac-
tor V molecule, is termed the factor V Leiden gene.
Based on the Physicians Health Study, about 3% of
healthy male physicians carry this particular missense
mutation. Carriers are clearly at an increased risk for
deep venous thrombosis and for recurrence after the dis-
continuation of warfarin.The allelic frequency of factor V
Leiden is higher than that of all other identiﬁed inherited
hypercoagulable states combined, including deﬁciencies
of protein C, protein S, and antithrombin III and disor-
ders of plasminogen.
29. The answer is B.
(Chap. 24) The optimal timing for lung transplantation is
critical to improve survival and add quality-adjusted life
years. Individuals with cystic ﬁbrosis should be considered
for lung transplantation when the FEV1 is <30% predicted
values or is rapidly decreasing. Other indications for referral
in cystic ﬁbrosis include PaO2 <50 mmHg on room air,PaCO2
>50 mmHg, pulmonary arterial hypertension, increasing
hospitalization,and recurrent hemoptysis.
30. The answer is E.
(Chap. 20) Warfarin should not be used alone as initial
therapy for the treatment of venous thromboembolic dis-
ease (VTE) for two reasons. First, warfarin does not
achieve full anticoagulation for at least 5 days because its
mechanism of action is to decrease the production of vita-
min K–dependent coagulation factors in the liver. Sec-
ondly, a paradoxical reaction that promotes coagulation
may also occur upon initiation of warfarin because it also
decreases the production of the vitamin K–dependent
anticoagulants protein C and protein S, which have shorter
half-lives than the procoagulant factors. For many years,
UFH delivered IV was the treatment of choice for VTE.
However, it requires frequent monitoring of aPTT levels
and hospitalization until therapeutic International Nor-
malized Ratio (INR) is achieved with warfarin.There are
now several safe and effective alternatives to UFH that
can be delivered SC. Low-molecular-weight heparins
(LMWHs; enoxaparin, tinzaparin) are fragments of UFH
with a lower molecular weight.These compounds have a
greater bioavailability, longer half-life, and more predictable
onset of action. Their use in patients with renal insufﬁ-
ciency should be considered with caution because
LMWHs are renally cleared. Fondaparinux is a direct fac-
tor Xa inhibitor that, similar to LMWHs, requires no
monitoring of anticoagulant effects and has been demon-
strated to be safe and effective in treating patients with
both deep venous thrombosis and pulmonary embolism.
Review and Self-Assessment
537
31. The answer is B.
(Chap. 12) M. tuberculosis is spread by droplet nuclei that
are aerosolized by coughing, sneezing, or speaking. The
droplets dry quickly and may stay airborne and be sub-
ject to inhalation for hours.The probability of acquiring
tuberculosis is related to the degree of infectiousness and
the intimacy and duration of contact. Smear-positive
patients have the greatest infectivity. Patients with cavi-
tary, laryngeal, or endobronchial disease produce the
most infectious organisms. Patients with smear-negative,
culture-positive or disseminated disease are less infec-
tious. Patients with culture-negative (treated) or extra-
pulmonary tuberculosis are essentially noninfectious.
Patients with tuberculosis who are HIV infected also
appear to be less infectious because of the lower fre-
quency of cavitary disease. These factors emphasize the
importance of public health measures to control the
transmission of tuberculosis.
32. The answer is D.
(Chap. 19) This patient’s presentation is typical of pul-
monary Langerhans cell histiocytosis (eosinophilic gran-
ulomas). Cigarette smoking is virtually universal among
these patients.The disease may be found incidentally on
radiograms or may present with respiratory and systemic
complaints. Spontaneous pneumothorax is a common
presentation and occurs in approximately 25% of these
patients.The radiographic combination of small reticular
or nodular opacities in the bases (with sparing of the
costophrenic angle) and apical cysts is characteristic and
virtually diagnostic. Pulmonary function testing will
show a reduced DLCO (carbon monoxide diffusing
capacity). Lung volumes may be normal or reduced,
depending on the severity. Approximately 33% of these
patients improve with smoking cessation, but most
develop progressive interstitial disease. Immunosuppres-
sive agents do not appear to inﬂuence the course of disease.
IV α1 antitrypsin may beneﬁt patients with deﬁciency,
who will present with lower lobe emphysema. Miliary
tuberculosis radiographically appears with multiple small
nodules, but cysts are not typical. Pneumocystic carinii
pneumonia (PCP) may present with spontaneous pneu-
mothorax in patients with HIV infection; however, this
patient has no apparent risk factors, and the small nod-
ules on CT are not typical.
33. The answer is E.
(Chap. 19) This patient’s clinical presentation and CT
imaging are consistent with the diagnosis of idiopathic
pulmonary ﬁbrosis (IPF), which is manifested histologi-
cally as usual interstitial pneumonitis (UIP). On micro-
scopic examination, UIP is characterized by a heteroge-
neous 
appearance 
on 
low 
magniﬁcation 
with
normal-appearing alveoli adjacent to severely ﬁbrotic
alveoli.There is lymphocytic inﬁltrate and scattered foci
of ﬁbroblasts within the alveolar septae. End-stage
ﬁbrosis results in honeycombing with loss of all alveolar
structure. The typical clinical presentation of IPF/UIP
is slowly progressive exertional dyspnea with a nonpro-
ductive cough. The clinical examination reveals dry
crackles and digital clubbing. Patients with IPF are usu-
ally older than age 50 years, and more than two-thirds
have a history of current or former tobacco use. A
high-resolution CT scan of the chest can be diagnostic
in the typical clinical situation of an older individual
and shows subpleural pulmonary ﬁbrosis that is greatest
at the lung bases. As disease progresses, traction
bronchiectasis and honeycombing are characteristic on
CT scan.The cause of UIP is unknown, and no thera-
pies have been shown to improve survival in patients
with this disease with the exception of lung transplan-
tation. Mortality is 50% within 3 years of diagnosis.The
presence of a dense periodic acid-Schiff–positive amor-
phous material in alveolar spaces is characteristic of
pulmonary alveolar proteinosis. Pulmonary alveolar
proteinosis is an interstitial lung disease that presents
with progressive dyspnea, and CT imaging shows char-
acteristic “crazy paving” with ground-glass inﬁltrates
and thickened alveolar septae. Fibrosis is not present.
Alveolar destruction with emphysematous changes
would be seen in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD).The presence of crackles without wheezing or
hyperinﬂation on examination does not suggest COPD.
Furthermore, clubbing is not seen in COPD. Diffuse
alveolar damage is seen in acute interstitial pneumonitis
and acute respiratory distress syndrome.These disorders
present with a rapid acute course that is not present in
this case. The formation of noncaseating granulomas is
typical of sarcoidosis, a systemic disease that usually pre-
sents in younger individuals. It is more common in
African Americans. A typical CT in sarcoidosis would
show interstitial inﬁltrates and hilar lymphadenopathy.
End-stage disease may result in pulmonary ﬁbrosis, but
it is greatest in the upper lobes.
34. The answer is D.
(Chap. 27) Determining when an individual is an appro-
priate candidate for a spontaneous breathing trial is
important for the care of mechanically ventilated
patients. An important initial step in determining if a
patient is likely to be successfully extubated is to evaluate
the mental status of the patient. This can be difﬁcult if
the patient is receiving sedation, and it is recommended
that sedation be interrupted on a daily basis for a short
period to allow assessment of mental status. Daily inter-
ruption of sedation has been shown to decrease the dura-
tion of mechanical ventilation. If the patient is unable to
respond to any commands or is completely obtunded, he
or she is at high risk for aspiration and unlikely to be
successfully extubated. In addition, the patient’s underly-
ing medical condition should be stable, and the patient
should be off vasopressor support. If these conditions are
538
Review and Self-Assessment
met, the patient should be on minimal ventilatory sup-
port. This includes the ability to maintain the pH
between 7.35 and 7.40 and an SaO2 of >90% while
receiving an FIO2 ≤ 0.5 and a PEEP ≤ 5 cmH2O.
35. The answer is B.
(Chap. 3) B. pertussis is becoming an increasingly com-
mon cause of cough in adolescents and adults. Some
studies have shown that pertussis is associated with
12–30% of prolonged coughing illnesses lasting >2 weeks.
The clinical manifestations of pertussis infection are clas-
sically described by a catarrhal phase followed by a
paroxysmal phase. The catarrhal phase begins after a 
7- to 10-day incubation period and lasts 1–2 weeks.This
phase is marked by an upper respiratory illness that is
similar in symptoms to the common cold, with low-
grade fever, rhinitis, mild cough, and lacrimation.This is
followed by a prolonged paroxysmal coughing phase
during which coughing can become quite severe. The
term whooping cough as a synonym for pertussis is derived
from the spasms of coughing that occur during the
paroxysmal phase that are often terminated by an audible
whoop. Posttussive emesis is frequent. Between parox-
ysms of cough, the patient is otherwise well. Sleep is
often disturbed because the cough tends to be worse at
night. This phase usually lasts from 2 to 4 weeks, with
cough waning in severity after this point.The convales-
cent phase marks recovery from the illness and lasts from
1 to 3 months, during which time the cough gradually
lessens in severity. Intercurrent viral illnesses that occur
over the next year may cause a recurrence of paroxysmal
cough. Diagnosis of pertussis in the paroxysmal phase of
the illness relies on serologic testing of IgG and IgA anti-
bodies to pertussis with evidence of a two- to fourfold
increase in levels suggestive of recent infection. Increas-
ingly, a single specimen for serology can be obtained and
compared with established population values.Therapy is
not indicated because it does not substantially alter the
course of disease except in the catarrhal phase. Other
common causes of chronic cough include asthma, aller-
gic rhinitis with postnasal drip, and gastroesophageal
reﬂux disease. Occasionally, asthma may present with
cough alone. In these patients, a methacholine challenge
test is used to conﬁrm the diagnosis, especially in the set-
ting of normal spirometry. Peak expiratory ﬂow moni-
toring in the workplace is useful when an occupational
cause of asthma or chronic cough is suggested. Typical
clinical features include symptoms that increase over the
work week and wane signiﬁcantly during time off work.
Individuals with allergic rhinitis often develop cough as a
result of postnasal drip, which can become more severe
after upper respiratory illnesses. However, the severity of
the cough without prior history of chronic rhinitis in
this case argues against allergic rhinitis.Thus skin testing
for allergens is not indicated. Finally, gastroesophageal
reﬂux disease may also be associated with chronic cough
and would be diagnosed with a 24-h pH probe.The pre-
ceding illness and abrupt onset of severe symptoms, how-
ever, are inconsistent with this diagnosis.
36. The answer is B.
(Chap. 10) The patient presents with typical asthma symp-
toms; however, the symptoms are escalating and now
require nearly constant use of oral steroids. It is of note
that the symptoms are worse during weekdays and better
on weekends.This ﬁnding suggests that there is an expo-
sure during the week that may be triggering the patient’s
asthma. Often textile workers have asthma resulting from
the inhalation of particles. The ﬁrst step in diagnosing a
work-related asthma trigger is to check the FEV1 before
and after the ﬁrst shift of the workweek. A decrease in
FEV1 would suggest an occupational exposure. Skin test-
ing for allergies would not be likely to pinpoint the
work-related exposure.Although A. fumigatus can be asso-
ciated with worsening asthma from allergic bronchopul-
monary aspergillosis, this would not have a ﬂuctuation in
symptoms throughout the week. The patient does not
require further testing to diagnose that he has asthma;
therefore, a methacholine challenge is not indicated.
Finally, the exercise physiology test is generally used to
differentiate between cardiac and pulmonary causes or
deconditioning as causes for shortness of breath.
37. The answer is E.
(Chap. 23) Although the clinical history can suggest a
diagnosis of OSA and can be strengthened by the use of
objective sleep questionnaires such as the Epworth Sleepi-
ness Score, evidence of recurrent breathing disruptions
during sleep is necessary to make the diagnosis. OSA is a
condition that requires lifelong therapy; diagnosis should
be based on objective ﬁndings such as those obtained
from polysomnography. Limited sleep studies that mea-
sure one or two parameters may be cost effective when
interpreted by experts; however, their predictive capacity
does not compare favorably to polysomnography. Unfor-
tunately, there are at present no satisfactory pharmacologic
options for patients with OSA. Modaﬁnil has shown mar-
ginal improvement in patients also using CPAP. It is
expensive and not currently recommended as a ﬁrst-line
agent. CPAP ventilation has been shown in double-blind,
randomized clinical trials to improve virtually all aspects of
disease in patients with OSA, including number of apneas
and hypopneas, sleep quality, blood pressure, driving ability,
mood, and quality of life. CPAP is often burdensome and
uncomfortable at ﬁrst.The beneﬁts as well as the down-
sides of CPAP should be covered with patients. Another
treatment option is the mandibular repositioning splint,
which holds the tongue and lower jaw forward to widen
the pharyngeal airway. These can also be difﬁcult to use,
and long-term compliance is poor. Several surgical options
for patients with narrowed airways are available that are
effective in carefully selected patients.
Review and Self-Assessment
539
38. The answers is C.
(Chap. 9) The patient has a subacute presentation of
hypersensitivity pneumonitis related to exposure to bird
droppings and feathers at work. Hypersensitivity pneu-
monitis is a delayed-type hypersensitivity reaction that
has a variety of presentations. Some people develop acute
onset of shortness of breath, fevers, chills, and dyspnea
within 6–8 h of antigen exposure. Others may present
subacutely with worsening dyspnea on exertion and dry
cough over weeks to months. Chronic hypersensitivity
pneumonitis presents with more severe and persistent
symptoms with clubbing. Progressive worsening is com-
mon with the development of chronic hypoxemia, pul-
monary hypertension, and respiratory failure. The diag-
nosis relies on a variety of tests. Peripheral eosinophilia is
not a feature of this disease, although neutrophilia and
lymphopenia are frequently present. Other nonspeciﬁc
markers of inﬂammation may be elevated, including the
erythrocyte sedimentation rate,
C-reactive protein,
rheumatoid factor, and serum immunoglobulins. If a spe-
ciﬁc antigen is suspected, serum precipitins directed
toward that antigen may be demonstrated. Chest radiog-
raphy may be normal or show a diffuse reticulonodular
inﬁltrate. High-resolution chest CT is the imaging
modality of choice and shows ground-glass inﬁltrates in
the lower lobes. Centrilobular inﬁltrates are often seen as
well. In the chronic stages, patchy emphysema is the most
common ﬁnding. Histopathologically, interstitial alveolar
inﬁltrates predominate, with a variety of lymphocytes,
plasma cells, and occasional eosinophils and neutrophils
seen. Loose, noncaseating granulomas are typical.
39. The answers is D.
(Chap. 9) Treatment depends on removing the individual
from exposure to the antigen. If this is not possible, the
patient should wear a mask that prevents small-particle
inhalation during exposure. In patients with mild dis-
ease, removal from antigen exposure alone may be sufﬁ-
cient to treat the disease. More severe symptoms require
therapy with glucocorticoids at an equivalent prednisone
dosage of 1 mg/kg daily for 7–14 days.The steroids are
then gradually tapered over 2– 6 weeks.
40. The answer is D.
(Chap. 16) Bronchiectasis is deﬁned as an abnormal and
permanent dilatation of the bronchi. It can be focal or
widespread in the lung.It typically affects older patients and
is found more commonly in women than men. Bronchiec-
tasis results from inﬂammation and destruction of the
bronchial wall and is usually triggered by infection.Bacteria
such as Staphylococcus aureus and Klebsiella spp. are common
causes.Adenovirus and inﬂuenza virus are the main viruses
that can cause bronchiectasis. Mycobacteria, including
tuberculosis, are major causes worldwide. Patients with
impaired immunity to pulmonary infections, such as those
with cystic ﬁbrosis or ciliary dysfunction, are highly suscep-
tible to bronchiectasis. Patients frequently complain of
recurrent cough and purulent sputum. Frequent lung
infections should raise suspicion of this diagnosis. Physical
examination ﬁndings can be varied and are not sufﬁcient
alone for diagnosis. Rhonchi and wheezes can be heard
over the affected area; severe cases may present with right-
heart failure. Chest radiography often shows nonspeciﬁc
ﬁndings. Honeycomb lung is characteristic of end-stage
interstitial lung disease. High-resolution CT of the chest is
considered the standard technique to conﬁrm diagnosis of
bronchiectasis. It will show the dilated airways beyond the
central airways. If focal, it has most likely been caused by
prior necrotizing infection; however, mycobacterial infec-
tion (M. tuberculosis, mycobacteria other than tuberculosis)
should be considered. Diffuse bronchiectasis may be caused
by cystic ﬁbrosis, immunoglobulin deﬁciency, ciliary dys-
function syndromes,α1 antitrypsin deﬁciency,allergic bron-
chopulmonary aspergillosis, collagen vascular disease, or
HIV infection.
41. The answer is B.
(Chap. 19) Pulmonary complications are common in
patients with SLE. The most common manifestation is
pleuritis with or without effusion. Other possible manifes-
tations include pulmonary hemorrhage, diaphragmatic dys-
function with loss of lung volumes (the so-called shrinking
lung syndrome), pulmonary vascular disease, acute interstitial
pneumonitis, and bronchiolitis obliterans organizing pneu-
monia. Other systemic complications of SLE also cause
pulmonary complications, including uremic pulmonary
edema and infectious complications. Chronic progressive
pulmonary ﬁbrosis is not a complication of SLE.
42. The answer is C.
(Chap. 11) The radiograph describes a lung abscess that
most likely is caused by an anaerobic infection.The anaer-
obes involved are most likely oral, but Bacteroides fragilis is
isolated in ≤10% of cases.Vancomycin, ciproﬂoxacin, and
cephalexin have no signiﬁcant activity against anaerobes.
Most oral anaerobic strains have the capacity to produce
β-lactamase. For many years, penicillin was considered the
standard treatment for patients with anaerobic lung infec-
tions. However, clinical studies have demonstrated the
superiority of clindamycin over penicillin in the treat-
ment of lung abscess.When there are contraindications to
clindamycin, penicillin plus metronidazole is likely to be
as effective as clindamycin.
43. The answer is C.
(Chap. 24) Compared with other solid organ transplants,
lung transplants have the highest mortality, with only a
50% survival after 5 years.The leading causes of death in
the early posttransplant period are infectious complica-
tions. Primary graft failure occurs immediately after the
transplant and is sometimes called ischemia-reperfusion
injury.This can be fatal but can be treated with supportive
540
Review and Self-Assessment
care. Acute rejection occurs in ∼50% of lung transplant
patients within the ﬁrst year but is rarely fatal. Posttrans-
plant lymphoproliferative disorder is a B cell lymphoma
associated with Epstein-Barr virus and is related to the
degree of immunosuppression. It is a rare complication
of transplant. Bronchiolitis obliterans syndrome denotes
chronic rejection and is the leading cause of late mortality
in lung transplant.
44. The answer is D.
(Chap. 16) This patient presents with a lung abscess in the
setting of pneumonia. Lung abscess is deﬁned as a pul-
monary cavitation caused by infection. Aspiration is the
predominant means of acquiring infection. The most
common anatomic sites of aspiration (when people are
lying on their back) and therefore lung abscess include
the superior segment of the right lower lobe, posterior
segment of the right upper lobe, and superior segment of
the left lower lobe. Anaerobic bacteria are the most
prevalent isolates from lung abscesses because these are
the most common bacteria aspirated from the mouth.
Alcoholism is a known risk factor for aspiration. Necro-
tizing aerobic bacteria such as Staphylococcus aureus, Klebsiella
pneumoniae, and Nocardia spp. can cause lung abscesses but
do so with much less frequency than do anaerobic bacte-
ria. Peptostreptococcus spp., an anaerobic organism that is
part of normal mouth ﬂora, has been shown to be the
most common organism isolated from lung abscesses.
Polymicrobial culture results are not uncommon. Man-
agement includes antibiotics aimed at treating anaerobes,
such as clindamycin.
45. The answer is C.
(Chap. 17) This patient has a history suggestive of cystic
ﬁbrosis, with the exception of her age. The persistent
asthma, airﬂow obstruction, and sputum cultures growing
P. aeruginosa and S. aureus coupled with bilateral upper
lobe inﬁltrates should prompt further investigation for this
disease.The diagnosis of cystic ﬁbrosis is based on clinical
criteria plus laboratory evidence. The laboratory test of
choice remains analysis of sweat chloride values. Patients
with mutations in the cystic ﬁbrosis transmembrane regu-
lator (CFTR) have increased amounts of chloride in their
sweat, and a chloride value >70 meq/L is generally found
in these patients. Approximately 1–2% of patients with
cystic ﬁbrosis have normal results of sweat chloride test-
ing, and in these cases, the nasal transepithelial potential
difference has been used for diagnosis. Although the
ΔF508 mutation accounts for the majority of patients
with cystic ﬁbrosis, more than 1000 other mutations that
can cause this disorder have been described. Thus, the
absence of this mutation does not rule out cystic ﬁbrosis.
Bronchoscopy with transbronchial biopsy will probably
show bronchiectasis and chronic airway inﬂammation but
will not be diagnostic. Similar ﬁndings probably will be
found on a chest CT but also are not diagnostic.
46. The answer is A.
(Chap. 12) This patient has evidence of recent tuberculo-
sis infection with the change from a negative to a posi-
tive PPD. A chest radiogram should be performed to
rule out active disease and the presence of latent disease.
If there is no abnormality, isoniazid should be prescribed
to prevent subsequent development of active disease.
The optimal duration of therapy is 6–12 months, with
most recommending 9 months to achieve maximal pro-
tection from active disease. The major complication of
this therapy is hepatitis. Isoniazid should not be given to
patients with active liver disease. All of these patients
should be educated about the signs and symptoms of
hepatitis and should be instructed to discontinue the
medication if those symptoms develop. Patients should
be questioned about symptoms monthly. Baseline liver
function tests need be obtained only in patients with a
history of liver disease or daily alcohol use. Serial mea-
surement of liver function is not necessary in the
absence of a history of liver disease and alcohol use.
47. The answer is B.
(Chap. 1) This patient presents with subacute-onset dysp-
nea and an examination consistent with pleural effusion.
Dullness to percussion can be seen with consolidation,
atelectasis, and pleural effusion. With consolidation,
voice transmission is increased during expiration so that
one may hear whispered pectoriloquy or egophony.
However, in both pleural effusion and atelectasis, breath
sounds are diminished, and there is no augmentation of
voice transmission. Although this patient could have
either atelectasis or pleural effusion, the lack of tracheal
deviation points to pleural effusion. Atelectasis would
have to be of many segments to account for these ﬁnd-
ings, and such signiﬁcant airway collapse would gener-
ally cause ipsilateral tracheal deviation. The clinician
would expect to ﬁnd pleural effusion on chest ﬁlm, and
the most appropriate next management step would be
thoracentesis to aid in the diagnosis of the cause and for
symptomatic relief.With a lack of symptoms to suggest
infection, antibiotics are not indicated. Similarly, in the
absence of wheezing or signiﬁcant sputum production,
bronchodilators and deep suctioning are unlikely to be
helpful. Bronchoscopy may be indicated ultimately in
the management of this patient, particularly if malig-
nancy is suspected; however, the most appropriate ﬁrst
attempt at diagnosis is by means of thoracentesis.
48. The answer is A.
(Chap. 24) Lung transplantation has been successfully used
in the treatment of patients with end-stage lung disease
since the early 1990s. Currently, ~1700 lung transplants
are performed yearly worldwide.The most common rea-
son for lung transplant is COPD, accounting for 38.5% of
all lung transplants performed between 1995 and 2004. In
addition, another 8.6% of lung transplants were performed
Review and Self-Assessment
541
because of emphysema caused by α1 antitrypsin deﬁ-
ciency. IPF and cystic ﬁbrosis are the second and third
most common reasons for lung transplantation, respec-
tively. Pulmonary hypertension and sarcoidosis each
account for <5% of all lung transplants. Single-lung trans-
plantation is an option for patients with COPD, IPF, and
sarcoidosis. Patients with cystic ﬁbrosis and pulmonary
hypertension receive double-lung transplants.
49. The answer is D.
(Chap. 11; LA Mandell et al: Clin Infect Dis 44[Suppl 2]:S27,
2007) The Infectious Diseases Society of America and
the American Thoracic Society state that in the proper
clinical context, a new inﬁltrate on chest imaging should
be present to diagnose CAP. An accurate history is
important because the differential diagnosis of CAP
includes heart disease, chronic bronchitis, pulmonary
embolism, and acute bronchitis. At least two clinical
symptoms consistent with acute pulmonary infection
(any combination of fever, cough, chest pain, or dysp-
nea) should be present for diagnosis. Cough is the most
common symptom in patients presenting with CAP.
Physical ﬁndings have a sensitivity and speciﬁcity of
60–70%, so radiology is recommended to make the
diagnosis. Similarly, laboratory studies, including a WBC
count and measures of inﬂammation, are neither sensi-
tive nor speciﬁc enough to make a diagnosis.Antibiotics
are not recommended for acute bronchitis. In some
cases, follow-up radiograph or empirical therapy for
CAP should be considered if the clinical suspicion is
high and the original chest x-ray results are negative.
The microbiologic basis of CAP can usually not be
deﬁnitively determined on a clinical and radiographic
basis. Except for the small minority of patients who are
admitted to the intensive care unit, no data exist to show
that speciﬁc pathogen-directed therapy is superior to
empirical therapy. Microbiologic data are not compo-
nents of the clinical diagnosis of CAP.
50. The answer is E.
(Chap. 25) Patients with lung transplants have the highest
risk of pneumonia among all recipients of solid organ
transplants. The pathogens causing pulmonary infections
vary with the time after transplantation. The most com-
mon pathogens in the ﬁrst 2 weeks (early period) after
surgery are the gram-negative bacteria, particularly Enter-
obacteriaceae and Pseudomonas, Staphylococcus, Aspergillus,
and Candida spp. Between 1 and 6 months (middle
period), most infections are caused by either primary acti-
vation or reactivation of CMV. CMV pneumonia is often
difﬁcult to distinguish from acute transplant rejection.
More than 6 months after a transplant (late period), the
chronic suppression of cell-mediated immunity places
patients at risk of infection from Pneumocystis, Nocardia,
and Listeria spp.; other fungi; and intracellular pathogens.
Pretransplant lung donor cultures often guide posttrans-
plant empirical antibiotic choices. Prophylaxis against
CMV in seropositive donors or recipients and Pneumocystis
spp. is routine after lung transplantation.
51. The answer is B.
(Chap. 22) The physiologic effects of hypoventilation are
typically magniﬁed during sleep because of a further
reduction in central respiratory drive. Hypercapnia causes
cerebral vasodilation, which manifests as headache upon
wakening. The headache typically resolves soon after
awakening as the PaCO2 decreases with increased ventila-
tion and cerebral vascular tone returns to normal. Patients
with frequent arousals from sleep and hypoventilation
commonly complain of daytime somnolence and may
also exhibit confusion and fatigue. Hypoventilation causes
an increase in PaCO2 and an obligatory decrease in PAO2.The
hypoxemia can stimulate erythropoiesis and result in
polycythemia. With central hypoventilation disorders,
patients may also have impaired cranial nerve reﬂexes or
muscular function, causing aspiration.
52. The answer is E.
(Chap. 10) Passive cigarette smoking, or secondhand smok-
ing, has been associated in the past 15 years with many
adverse outcomes. A correlation has been demonstrated
between the number of smokers in a house and the con-
centration of respirable particulate load. Furthermore,
meta-analyses of the best data have shown that persons
who receive passive cigarette smoke have a 25% increase in
mortality associated with lung cancer, respiratory illness,
and cardiac disease compared with persons without such
an exposure. Children with smoking parents have been
shown to have an increased prevalence of respiratory ill-
ness and decreased lung function compared with nonex-
posed children.
53. The answer is C.
(Chap. 29) The annual incidence of sepsis has increased to
>700,000 individuals yearly in the United States, and sep-
sis accounts for >200,000 deaths yearly. Approximately
two-thirds of the cases of sepsis occur in individuals with
other signiﬁcant comorbidities, and the incidence of sepsis
increases with age and preexisting comorbidities. In addi-
tion, the incidence of sepsis is thought to be increasing as
a result of several other factors. These include increased
longevity of individuals with chronic disease, including
AIDS, and an increased risk for sepsis in individuals with
AIDS. The practice of medicine has also inﬂuenced the
risk of sepsis, with an increased risk of sepsis related to the
increased use of antimicrobial drugs, immunosuppressive
agents, mechanical ventilation, and indwelling catheters
and other hardware.
54. and 55.The answers are A and B, respectively.
(Chap. 11) The ﬁrst patient is a candidate for outpatient
therapy because of his CURB-65 score of 0. As shown
542
Review and Self-Assessment
below, an oral macrolide (azithromycin, clarithromycin)
is the best choice. Respiratory ﬂuoroquinolones may be
used in the presence of comorbidities or recent antibi-
otics. The second patient has a CURB-65 score of 3
(age, respiratory rate, BUN) and merits consideration
for inpatient therapy. Of the listed choices, a β-lactam
(ceftriaxone) plus a macrolide (clarithromycin) is best.
A respiratory fluoroquinolone may also be used as a
single agent unless the patient goes to the intensive
care unit, when a β-lactam should also be used. Flu-
conazole does not have a role for community-acquired
pneumonia (CAP); rather, it is used to treat candidal
infections. Piperacillin/tazobactam is a consideration
when Pseudomonas infection is considered likely, such
as in patients with cystic fibrosis or bronchiectasis.
Vancomycin is only a consideration for CAP when epi-
demiologic considerations make methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus a likely pathogen.
56. The answer is A.
(Chap. 27) Patients initiated on mechanical ventilation
require a variety of supportive measures. Sedation and
analgesia with a combination of benzodiazepines and
narcotics are commonly used to maintain patient com-
fort and safety while they are mechanically ventilated. In
addition, patients are immobilized and are thus at high
risk for development of deep venous thrombosis and
pulmonary embolus. Prophylaxis with unfractionated
heparin or low-molecular-weight heparin SC should be
administered. Prophylaxis against diffuse gastrointestinal
mucosal injury is also indicated, particularly in individuals
with neurologic insult and those with severe respiratory
failure and adult respiratory distress syndrome. Gastric
acid suppression can be managed with H2-receptor antag-
onists, proton pump inhibitors, and Carafate. It is also
recommended that individuals who are expected to be
intubated for >72 h receive nutritional support. Proki-
netic agents are often required. A ﬁnal supportive mea-
sure that should be instituted in all intensive care units is
to maintain a protocol that includes frequent positional
changes and surveillance for prevention of decubitus
ulcers. In the past, frequent ventilator circuit changes
had been studied as a measure for prevention of ventila-
tor-associated pneumonia, but they were ineffective and
may even have increased the risk of ventilator-associated
pneumonia.
57. The answer is B.
(Chap. 29; Dellinger RP et al: Crit Care Med 32 858,
2004) Sepsis is a systemic inﬂammatory response that
develops in response to a microbial source. To diagnose
the systemic inﬂammatory response syndrome (SIRS), a
patient should have two or more of the following condi-
tions: (1) fever or hypothermia; (2) tachypnea; (3) tachy-
cardia; or (4) leukocytosis, leukopenia, or >10% band
forms.This patient fulﬁlls the criteria for sepsis with septic
shock because she meets the above criteria for SIRS
with the presence of organ dysfunction and ongoing
hypotension despite ﬂuid resuscitation. The patient has
received 2 L of IV colloid and now has a central venous
pressure of 18 cmH2O. Ongoing large-volume ﬂuid
administration may result in pulmonary edema because
the central venous pressure is quite high. At this point,
ﬂuid administration should continue but at a lower infu-
sion rate. In this patient, who is receiving chronic gluco-
corticoids for an underlying inﬂammatory condition,
stress-dose steroids should be administered because
adrenal suppression will prevent the patient from devel-
oping the normal stress response in the face of SIRS.
Glucocorticoids may be given while waiting for results of
the cosyntropin stimulation test. If the patient fails to
respond to glucocorticoids, she should be started on
vasopressor therapy. A single small study has suggested
that norepinephrine may be preferred over dopamine for
septic shock, but these data have not been conﬁrmed in
other trials. The “Surviving Sepsis” guidelines state that
either norepinephrine or dopamine should be considered
as ﬁrst-line agent for the treatment of septic shock.Trans-
fusion of red blood cells in critically ill patients has been
associated with a higher risk for development of acute
lung injury, sepsis, and death. A threshold hemoglobin
value of 7 g/dL has been shown to be as safe as a value of
10 g/dL and is associated with fewer complications. In
this patient, a blood transfusion is not currently indicated
but may be considered if the central venous oxygen satu-
ration is <70% to improve oxygen delivery to tissues.An
alternative to blood transfusion in this setting is the use
of dobutamine to improve cardiac output.
58. The answer is D.
(Chap. 29) Sepsis is responsible for >200,000 deaths yearly
in the United States, and the incidence of sepsis has been
increasing over the past 20 years.Approximately two-thirds
of patients have underlying comorbidities, and the
incidence of sepsis increases markedly with age. Patho-
physiologically,sepsis occurs as a result of the inﬂammatory
reaction that develops in response to an infection. Micro-
bial invasion of the bloodstream is not necessary for the
development of severe sepsis. In fact, blood cultures are
positive in only 20–40% of cases of severe sepsis and in
only 40–70% of septic shock. The systemic response to
infection classically has been demonstrated by the response
to lipopolysaccharide (LPS), which is also called endotoxin.
LPS binds to receptors on the surfaces of monocytes,
macrophages, and neutrophils, causing activation of these
cells to produce a variety of inﬂammatory mediators,
including tumor necrosis factor α. This process ampliﬁes
the LPS signal, stimulating a process of inﬂammation that
leads to complement activation, increase in procoagulant
factors, and cellular injury. The end result of this sys-
temic inﬂammatory process is widespread intravascular
thrombosis. This process is meant to wall off invading
Review and Self-Assessment
543
microorganisms to prevent infection from spreading to
other tissues, but in cases of severe sepsis, this leads to tissue
hypoxia and ongoing cellular injury. In addition, systemic
hypotension develops as a reaction to inﬂammatory medi-
ators and occurs despite increased levels of plasma cate-
cholamines. Physiologically, this is manifested as a marked
decrease in systemic vascular resistance despite evidence of
increased sympathetic activation. Survival in patients with
sepsis has improved in the past decades largely because of
advances in supportive care in the intensive care unit.Acti-
vated protein C is the only medication currently approved
for treatment of patients with sepsis and has been demon-
strated to cause a 33% relative risk mortality reduction.
59. The answer is D.
(Chap. 27) Mechanical ventilation is frequently used to
support ventilation in individuals with both hypoxemic
and hypercarbic respiratory failure. Mechanical ventila-
tors provide warm, humidiﬁed gas to the airways in
accordance with preset ventilator settings.The ventilator
serves as the energy source for inspiration, but expiration
is a passive process driven by the elastic recoil of the
lungs and chest wall. PEEP may be used to prevent alve-
olar collapse on expiration. The physiologic conse-
quences of PEEP include decreased preload and
decreased afterload. Decreased preload occurs because
PEEP decreases venous return to the right atrium and
may manifest as hypotension, especially in a volume-
depleted individual. In addition, PEEP is transmitted to
the heart and great vessels. This complicated interaction
leads to a decrease in afterload and may be beneﬁcial to
individuals with depressed cardiac function.When using
mechanical ventilation, the physician should also be cog-
nizant of other potential physiologic consequences of the
ventilator settings. Initial settings chosen by the physician
include mode of ventilation, respiratory rate, fraction of
inspired oxygen, and tidal volume if volume-cycled ven-
tilation is used or maximum pressure if pressure-cycled
ventilation is chosen. The respiratory therapist also has
the ability to alter the inspiratory ﬂow rate and waveform
for delivery of the chosen mode of ventilation. These
choices can have important physiologic consequences for
the patient. In individuals with obstructive lung disease, it
is important to maximize the time for exhalation. This
can be done by decreasing the respiratory rate or
decreasing the inspiratory time (increase the I:E ratio,
prolong expiration), which is accomplished by increasing
the inspiratory ﬂow rate. Care must also be taken in
choosing the inspired tidal volume in volume-cycled
ventilatory modes because high inspired tidal volumes
can contribute to development of acute lung injury
because of overdistention of alveoli.
60. The answer is B.
(Chap. 27) Patients intubated for respiratory failure
because of obstructive lung disease (asthma or COPD)
are at risk for the development of intrinsic positive end-
expiratory pressure (auto-PEEP). Because these condi-
tions are characterized by expiratory ﬂow limitation, a
long expiratory time is required to allow a full exhala-
tion. If the patient is unable to exhale fully, auto-PEEP
develops. With repeated breaths, the pressure generated
from auto-PEEP continues to increase and impedes
venous return to the right ventricle. This results in
hypotension and increases the risk for pneumothorax.
Both of these conditions should be considered when
evaluating this patient. However, because breath sounds
are heard bilaterally, pneumothorax is less likely, and tube
thoracostomy is not indicated at this time.
Development of auto-PEEP has most likely occurred
in this patient because the patient is currently agitated
and hyperventilating as the effects of the paralytic agent
wear off. In AC mode ventilation, each respiratory effort
will deliver the full tidal volume of 550 mL, and there is
a decreased time for exhalation, allowing auto-PEEP to
occur. Immediate management of this patient should
include disconnecting the patient from the ventilator to
allow him to fully exhale and decrease the auto-PEEP.A
ﬂuid bolus may temporarily increase the blood pressure
but would not eliminate the underlying cause of the
hypotension. After treatment of the auto-PEEP by dis-
connecting the patient from the ventilator, sedation is
important to prevent further occurrence of auto-PEEP
by decreasing the respiratory rate to the set rate of the
ventilator. Sedation can be accomplished with a combi-
nation of benzodiazepines and narcotics or propofol. Ini-
tiation of vasopressor support is not indicated unless
other measures fail to treat the hypotension and it is sus-
pected that sepsis is the cause of hypotension.
61. The answer is E.
(Chap. 23) OSA is deﬁned by excessive daytime sleepi-
ness and at least ﬁve obstructed breathing events (hypop-
nea or apnea) per hour of sleep.Apneic events are pauses
in breathing that last ≥10 s. Hypopneic events occur
when ventilation is reduced by 50% for ≥10 s. It should
be stressed that there are two components to diagnosis:
symptoms of daytime sleepiness combined with obstruc-
tive breathing while asleep. Patients with disordered
breathing at night who are asymptomatic while awake do
not have OSA.The central pathogenesis of sleep apnea is
pharyngeal narrowing that leads to airway obstruction
when somnolent. Risk factors include male gender, obe-
sity, and a shortened mandible or maxilla. It remains
unclear whether smoking is an independent risk factor.
The disorder is twice as common in men as in women.
About 50% of patients with OSA have BMIs >30 kg/m2.
There appears to be an association between diabetes
mellitus and OSA that is independent of obesity. Insulin
resistance has been shown to be related to increasing fre-
quency of apneas and hypopneas. Based on his other
cardiac risk factors, including smoking, obesity, and
544
Review and Self-Assessment
hypertension, as well as his new diagnosis of OSA, this
patient should be screened for diabetes mellitus.
62. The answer is D.
(Chap. 10) The patient presents with acute-onset pul-
monary symptoms, including wheezing, with no other
medical problems. He is a farmer and was recently han-
dling hay. The clinical presentation and radiogram are
consistent with farmer’s lung, a hypersensitivity pneu-
monitis caused by Actinomyces spp. In this disorder, moldy
hay with spores of actinomycetes are inhaled and produce
a hypersensitivity pneumonitis.The disorder is seen most
commonly in rainy periods, when the spores multiply.
Patients present generally 4–8 h after exposure with fever,
cough, and shortness of breath without wheezing. Chest
radiograms often show patchy bilateral, often upper lobe
inﬁltrates.The exposure history will differentiate this dis-
order from other types of pneumonia.
63. The answer is A.
(Chap. 22) Disorders of the respiratory drive, respiratory
muscular system, some chest wall disorders, and upper
airways obstruction may produce an elevated PaCO2
despite having normal pulmonary function. In this set-
ting, the A–a oxygen gradient is normal but the minute
ventilation is low, producing respiratory acidosis. In pul-
monary parenchymal or airways diseases associated with
respiratory acidosis (pulmonary ﬁbrosis, chronic obstruc-
tive pulmonary disease), the PaCO2 is elevated, the A–a
gradient is commonly increased, and minute ventilation
is either elevated or normal. Any cause of respiratory
acidosis may produce an obligatory decrease in PaO2.
Diaphragmatic dysfunction and maximal inspiratory or
expiratory pressures are commonly impaired with respi-
ratory neuromuscular dysfunction but may be normal in
other disorders of central hypoventilation such as stroke.
64. The answer is B.
(Chap. 19) This patient’s clinical-radiologic presentation, in
addition to the lung function information, which revealed
a moderate restrictive defect and a moderate gas transfer
defect, suggests an acute pneumonitis. The differential
diagnosis includes various causes of diffuse alveolar hemor-
rhage, idiopathic bronchiolitis obliterans organizing pneu-
monia, acute eosinophilic pneumonia, interstitial lung
disease secondary to connective tissue disorders (systemic
lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis, polymyositis),
and diffuse alveolar damage secondary to other causes
(e.g., sepsis, drugs, toxins, infections). Methotrexate has
been associated with an idiosyncratic drug reaction, with
particular risk in elderly patients and in patients with
decreased creatinine clearance. Discontinuing the medicine
and in some cases adding high-dose steroids constitute the
initial management. Initiating empirical broad-spectrum
antibiotics until a more deﬁnite result could be obtained
via a bronchoscopy would be a reasonable approach.
65. The answer is C.
(Chap. 29) As the mortality from sepsis has increased
over the past 20 years, more research has been per-
formed to attempt to limit mortality. Specific therapies
have been developed to target the inflammatory
response to sepsis, particularly the effect of the inflam-
matory response on the coagulation system. Activated
protein C was the first drug approved by the U.S. Food
and Drug Administration for the treatment of patients
with septic shock. This drug is an anticoagulant that
may also have antiapoptotic and anti-inflammatory
properties. In a randomized, controlled trial, activated
protein C was associated with an absolute reduction in
mortality of 6.1%, and the effect of the drug on mor-
tality was greatest in those who were most critically ill.
However, in individuals who are less severely ill, acti-
vated protein C may increase mortality. Although it is
unethical to randomize individuals to a trial assessing
the appropriate timing of antibiotic delivery, retrospec-
tive analyses have demonstrated an increased risk of
death if antibiotics are not given within 1 h of presen-
tation. A single-center trial of early goal-directed ther-
apy in septic shock showed a survival advantage when
this approach was taken. Early goal-directed therapy
developed a protocol for fluid administration, institu-
tion of vasopressors, and blood transfusion based on
physiologic parameters, including mean arterial pres-
sure, central venous oxygen saturation, and presence of
acidosis, among others. Bicarbonate therapy is com-
monly used when severe metabolic acidosis (pH <7.2)
is present in septic shock. However, there is no evi-
dence that bicarbonate improves hemodynamics,
response to vasopressors, or outcomes in septic shock.
66. The answer is D.
(Chap. 3) The patient presents with chronic cough
because it has lasted for more than 3 weeks. He denies
symptoms of the most common causes of chronic
cough, such as asthma, gastroesophageal reflux disease,
and postnasal drip.
However,
he does take an
angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor, which
is known to cause chronic cough in 5–20% of the
patients who take this class of medications. Cough that
is caused by use of ACE inhibitors generally begins
between 1 week and 6 months after medication initia-
tion. The most appropriate diagnostic and therapeutic
step at this point is to discontinue the ramipril.
Angiotensin receptor blockers can be used instead of
the ACE inhibitor to improve cardiac outcomes but are
generally not recommended as first-line therapy. In
light of this patient’s lack of risk factors for malignancy
and lack of sputum production, bronchoscopy would
not be helpful in this case. Furosemide and digoxin are
not associated with cough. Because the patient denies
having infectious or constitutional symptoms, empirical
courses of antibiotics are not warranted.
Review and Self-Assessment
545
67. The answer is B.
(Chap. 13) There are inactivated and live, attenuated
forms of inﬂuenza vaccine. The intranasal spray, mar-
keted as “Flu-mist,” is a live, attenuated virus and is not
recommended for elderly or immunocompromised
patients. This vaccine has similar efﬁcacy to the intra-
muscular vaccine, which is an inactivated, or “killed,”
preparation of the previous year’s strains of inﬂuenza A
and B.The intramuscular vaccine is manufactured using
egg products; patients with true egg hypersensitivity
should not receive it. It is safe for elderly and immuno-
compromised patients. In the past, inﬂuenza vaccines
have been associated with Guillain-Barré syndrome.This
association has not been demonstrated in the past
decade despite close surveillance. Patients do not need to
be warned of this side effect.
68. The answer is D.
(Chap. 13) The majority of inﬂuenza infections are clini-
cally mild and self-limited. Treatment with over-the-
counter cough suppressants and analgesics such as aceta-
minophen is often adequate. Patients who are younger
than age 18 years are at risk of developing Reye’s syn-
drome if they are exposed to salicylates such as aspirin.
The neuraminidase inhibitors oseltamivir and zanamivir
have activity against inﬂuenza A and B.They can be used
within 2 days of symptom onset and have been shown
to reduce the duration of symptoms by a day or two.
This patient has had symptoms for >48 h, so neither
drug is likely to be effective. The patient’s history of
asthma is an additional contraindication to zanamivir
because this drug can precipitate bronchospasm.The M2
inhibitors amantadine and rimantadine have activity
against inﬂuenza A only. However, in 2005, >90% of
A/H3N2 viral isolates demonstrated resistance to aman-
tadine, and these drugs are no longer recommended for
use in patients with inﬂuenza A.
69. The answer is B.
(Chap. 13) Myositis and subsequent rhabdomyolysis and
myoglobinuria represent a rare but severe complication
of inﬂuenza infection. Renal failure may occur. Myalgias
are a prominent symptom of inﬂuenza infection, but
myositis characterized by elevated creatine phosphoki-
nase and marked tenderness of the muscles is very infre-
quent.The pathogenesis of this complication is unknown.
Other extrapulmonary complications of inﬂuenza, includ-
ing encephalitis, transverse myelitis, and Guillain-Barré
syndrome, have been reported, although the etiologic
relationship to inﬂuenza virus infection is uncertain.
Myocarditis and pericarditis were reported during the
1918–1919 inﬂuenza pandemic.The most serious compli-
cation of inﬂuenza is secondary bacterial pneumonia,
such as that caused by S. aureus. Arthritis, conjunctivitis,
and eczematous rashes have not been described as com-
plications of inﬂuenza infection.
70. The answer is C.
(Chap. 14) Avian inﬂuenza epidemics occur when
human inﬂuenza A undergoes an antigenic exchange
with inﬂuenza found in poultry.Recent outbreaks have not
been associated with effective human-to-human spread;
nearly all patients reported exposure to infected poultry.
Past inﬂuenza pandemics, including the 1918–1919
pandemic, appear to have originated from antigenic
exchange between human and avian inﬂuenza viruses.
Antigenic shifts are deﬁned as major changes in the
hemagglutinin (H) and neuraminidase (N) antigens and
occur only with inﬂuenza A. Minor antigenic changes
are known as antigenic drift and can occur with hemag-
glutinin alone or with both hemagglutinin (H) and neu-
raminidase (N). Although inﬂuenza A and B are geneti-
cally and morphologically similar, the latter virus’
inability to undergo antigenic shifts lessens its virulence
and involvement in pandemic ﬂu. Inﬂuenza C is a rare
cause of disease in humans and is typically a clinically
mild, self-limited infection.
71. The answer is A.
(Chap. 31) This patient is presenting in pulmonary edema
and cardiogenic shock caused by acute myocardial infarc-
tion (MI). Given the distribution of ST-segment eleva-
tion, the left anterior descending artery is the most
likely artery occluded. Initial management should
include high-dose aspirin, heparin, and stabilization of
blood pressure. Initial management of acute MI also
includes use of nitroglycerin and β-blockers such as
metoprolol in most individuals, but these are con-
traindicated in this individual because of his profound
hypotension. In addition, use of furosemide for the
treatment of pulmonary edema is also contraindicated
because of this patient’s degree of hypotension. IV flu-
ids should be used with caution because the patient
also has evidence of pulmonary edema.The best choice
for treatment of this patient’s hypotension is aortic
counterpulsation.
Aortic counterpulsation requires
placement of an intraaortic balloon pump percuta-
neously into the femoral artery. The sausage-shaped
balloon inflates during early diastole, augmenting coro-
nary blood flow, and collapses during early systole,
markedly decreasing afterload. In contrast to vasopressors
and inotropic agents, aortic counterpulsation decreases
myocardial oxygen consumption. Both dobutamine and
norepinephrine can increase myocardial oxygen demand
and worsen ischemia.
72. The answer is D.
(Chap. 31) This patient is presenting with right ventricu-
lar (RV) myocardial infarction.The usual clinical features
of RV infarction are hypotension, elevated right heart ﬁll-
ing pressures, absence of pulmonary congestion, and evi-
dence of RV dilatation and dysfunction. In most cases of
RV infarction, the vessel involved is the right coronary
546
Review and Self-Assessment
artery, which manifests as ST elevation in leads II, III, and
aVF. When RV infarction occurs, ST depression is com-
monly seen in V1 and V2. An electrocardiogram with the
precordial leads placed on the right side of the chest
demonstrates ST elevation in RV4.The initial treatment of
hypotension of RV infarction is IV ﬂuids to increase the
central venous pressure to 10–15 mmHg. If ﬂuid adminis-
tration fails to alleviate the hypotension, sympathomimetic
agents or aortic counterpulsation can be used. However,
care must be taken to avoid excess ﬂuid administration,
which would shift the interventricle septum to the left and
further impede cardiac output. A transvenous pacemaker
would be useful if the hypotension were related to heart
block or profound bradycardia, which can be associated
with right coronary artery ischemia.
73. The answer is C.
(Chap. 32) SCD is deﬁned as death from cardiac causes
heralded by the abrupt loss of consciousness within 
1 h of onset of acute symptoms. SCD accounts for about
50% of all cardiac deaths, and of these, two-thirds are
initial cardiac events or occur in populations with previ-
ously known heart disease who are considered to be rel-
atively low risk. The most common electrical mecha-
nism of SCD is ventricular ﬁbrillation, accounting for
50–80% of cardiac arrests. The risk of SCD rises with
age and is greater in men and individuals with a history
of coronary artery disease. In addition, several inherited
conditions increase the risk of SCD, including hyper-
trophic cardiomyopathy, right ventricular dysplasia, and
long-QT syndromes, among others. A strong parental
history of SCD as a presenting history of coronary
artery disease increases the likelihood of a similar pre-
sentation in an offspring. Interestingly, 70–80% of men
who die from SCD have preexisting healed MIs, but
only 20–30% have had recent acute MI. On autopsy,
individuals who die of SCD most commonly show
long-standing atherosclerotic disease as well as evidence
of an unstable coronary lesion. When this is considered
with the fact that most individuals do not have patho-
logic evidence of an acute MI by pathology, this suggests
that transient ischemia is the mechanism of onset of the
fatal arrhythmia. Rapid intervention and restoration of
circulation are important for survival in SCD. Within
5 min, the likelihood of surviving SCD is only 25–30%
for out-of-hospital arrests.
74. The answer is C.
(Chap. 32) Immediate deﬁbrillation should be the initial
choice of action in the treatment of sudden cardiac
arrest caused by ventricular ﬁbrillation (VF) or ventricu-
lar tachycardia (VT). Deﬁbrillation should occur before
endotracheal intubation or placement of IV access. If the
time to potential deﬁbrillation is <5 min, the medical
team should proceed immediately to deﬁbrillation at
300–360 J if a monophasic deﬁbrillator is used (150 J if
a biphasic deﬁbrillator is used). If there is >5-min delay
to deﬁbrillation, then brief cardiopulmonary resuscita-
tion (CPR) should be given before deﬁbrillation.A sin-
gle shock should be given with immediate resumption
of CPR for 60–90 s before delivering additional shocks.
After each shock, CPR should be given without delay.
Even if there is return of a perfusable rhythm, there is
often a delayed return of pulse because of myocardial
stunning. If the patient remains in VF or pulseless VT
after initial deﬁbrillation, the patient should be intubated
and have IV access attained while CPR is performed.
After IV access has been obtained, the initial drug of
choice is either 1 mg of or 40 units of vasopressin.
Amiodarone is a second-line agent.
75. The answer is C.
(Chap. 32; Nolan J et al: Circulation 108:118, 2003) In
2002, two studies conducted in Europe and Australia
conﬁrmed the beneﬁt of therapeutic hypothermia after
out-of-hospital cardiac arrest. In these trials, patients
were rapidly cooled to 32–34°C and maintained at these
temperatures for the initial 12–24 h. Individuals who
received therapeutic hypothermia were 40–85% more
likely to have good neurologic outcomes upon hospital
discharge. In addition, therapeutic hypothermia also
decreased in-hospital morality rates. Time to initial
deﬁbrillation of >5 min is associated with no more than
a 25–30% survival rate, and survival continues to
decrease linearly from 1 to 10 min. Deﬁbrillation within
5 min has the greatest likelihood for good neurologic
outcomes. Of the medications used in treatment of car-
diac arrest caused by ventricular ﬁbrillation or pulseless
ventricular tachycardia, none have been demonstrated to
have any effects on neurologic outcome.
76. The answer is D.
(Chap. 33) Although troponin is a commonly used bio-
marker for myocardial necrosis in the setting of acute
myocardial infarction, it is also associated with and
caused by a number of other clinical entities, including
pulmonary embolism, myocarditis, and congestive heart
failure.Troponin elevations are not known to be caused
by pneumonia in the absence of myocardial necrosis.
77. The answer is B.
(Chap. 33) Patients with unstable angina/non–ST-
segment elevation myocardial infarction (UA/NSTEMI)
exhibit a wide spectrum of risk of death, MI, or urgent
revascularization. Risk stratiﬁcation tools such as the
TIMI risk score are useful for identifying patients who
beneﬁt from an early invasive strategy and those who are
better suited for a more conservative approach. The
TIMI risk score is composed of seven independent risk
factors: age ≥65, three or more cardiovascular risk fac-
tors, prior stenosis >50%, ST-segment deviation ≥0.5 mm,
two or more anginal events in <24 h, aspirin usage in
Review and Self-Assessment
547
the past 7 days, and elevated cardiac markers. Aspirin
resistance can occur in 5–10% of patients and is more
common among those taking lower doses of aspirin.
Having unstable angina despite aspirin usage suggests
aspirin resistance. Use of a β-agonist and a diuretic does
not confer an independent risk for death, MI, or need
for urgent revascularization.
78. The answer is B.
(Chap. 33) Unstable angina is deﬁned as angina or
ischemic discomfort with at least one of three factors:
pain at rest lasting >10 min, severe recent pain (within
4–6 weeks), or crescendo angina. NSTEMI is diagnosed
when a patient with unstable angina has positive cardiac
biomarkers.Anti-ischemic therapy (nitrates, β-blockers) is
important for symptom relief and to prevent recurrence
of chest pain. Antithrombotic therapy is directed against
the platelet aggregation at the site of the ruptured plaque.
Initially, this therapy should consist of aspirin.Addition of
clopidogrel confers an additional 20% risk reduction in
both low- and high-risk NSTEMI patients, as demon-
strated in the CURE trial. Continuation of treatment for
≤12 months confers additional beneﬁt in patients treated
conservatively and among those who underwent percuta-
neous coronary intervention. The GP IIb/IIIa inhibitors
are usually reserved for high-risk (i.e., troponin-positive)
patients and may not be beneﬁcial for patients treated
conservatively. Statin therapy is important for secondary
prevention; however, spironolactone is not a ﬁrst-line
therapy for NSTEMI.
79. The answer is E.
(Chap. 33) Standard therapy for a patient with unstable
angina or non–ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction
(NSTEMI) includes aspirin and clopidogrel. If an antico-
agulant is added, enoxaparin has been shown to be supe-
rior to unfractionated heparin in reducing recurrent car-
diac events. Glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors have also been
shown to be beneﬁcial in treating unstable angina/
NSTEMI. Eptiﬁbatide, tiroﬁban, and abciximab are bene-
ﬁcial for patients likely to receive percutaneous interven-
tion. Clinical trials have shown beneﬁt of early invasive
strategy in the presence of high-risk factors such as recur-
rent rest angina, elevated troponin, new ST-segment
depression, congestive heart failure symptoms, rales, mitral
regurgitation, positive stress test, ejection fraction <0.40,
decreased blood pressure, sustained ventricular tachycardia,
or recent coronary intervention. The presence of ST
depressions, rales, and mitral regurgitation puts this patient
at high risk.Tissue plasminogen factor is beneﬁcial in ST-
segment elevation myocardial infarction,not NSTEMI.
80. The answer is C.
(Chap. 34) This patient has a right ventricular (RV)
infarction. The combination of ﬁndings consistent with
bradycardia, cardiogenic shock, low-normal left ventricular
and PA pressures, and markedly elevated right atrial pres-
sure is consistent with acute RV failure. An acute pul-
monary embolus may also cause acute RV failure, but the
PA pressure is usually elevated. RV infarction is usually
caused by occlusion of the right coronary artery; the
bradycardia is caused by sinus or atrioventricular node
ischemia. Right-sided precordial electrocardiography will
show ST-segment elevation. Occlusion of the left main
artery will cause cardiogenic shock, but the PCW pressure
will be elevated. Perforated duodenal ulcer and ruptured
aortic aneurysm will cause hypovolemic shock with low
RA and PCW pressures. Patients with gram-negative sep-
sis will generally have a normal or increased cardiac index
with normal ﬁlling pressures and low blood pressure.
81. The answer is C.
(Chap. 34) Myoglobin is released from ischemic myocar-
dial cells and appears in serum within hours. It has a very
short half-life in serum because it is excreted rapidly in
the urine. Serum myoglobin returns to normal within 
24 h after an infarction. Therefore, in this patient, a new
elevation of myoglobin would be helpful in distinguishing
new myocardial necrosis. Troponin-I and troponin-T are
more speciﬁc markers of myocardial necrosis but have long
half-lives in the circulation.They may remain elevated for
more than 1 week after an acute MI.Therefore, they are
not as useful for detecting new or recurrent injury. In the
presence of a preexisting left bundle branch, ECG is of
limited utility in detecting new ischemia. Serial echocar-
diograms may detect new wall motion abnormalities that
suggest new ischemia or infarction, but in the absence of a
prior study, a single echocardiogram would have limited
utility in this patient.
82. The answer is B.
(Chap. 35) Brain death is deﬁned by the cessation of cere-
bral function while somatic function is maintained by arti-
ﬁcial means and the heart continues to pump.It is the only
type of brain damage that is considered equivalent to
death.The diagnosis of brain death should be conﬁrmed
with the following clinical ﬁndings: unresponsiveness to
any stimuli, indicating widespread cortical destruction;
brainstem damage, as evidenced by enlarged or mid-sized
pupils without light reaction;
absent corneal and
oculovestibular reﬂexes; and apnea, indicating medullary
destruction. The heart rate should be invariant. Because
the spinal cord is intact, spinal reﬂexes may be present.The
presence or absence of the Babinski sign does not con-
tribute to the diagnosis of brain death. Central diabetes
insipidus occurs with dysfunction of the hypothalamus or
posterior pituitary. It has been described in patients with
brain death but is not a component of the diagnosis.
83. The answer is E.
(Chap. 35) Foraminal herniation, which forces the cerebel-
lar tonsils into the foramen magnum, leads to compression
548
Review and Self-Assessment
of the medulla and subsequent respiratory arrest. Central
transtentorial herniation occurs when the medial thalamus
compresses the midbrain as it moves through the tentorial
opening; miotic pupils and drowsiness are the classic clini-
cal signs. A locked-in state is usually caused by infarction
or hemorrhage of the ventral pons; other causes include
Guillain-Barré syndrome and certain neuromuscular
blocking agents. Catatonia is a semi-awake state seen most
frequently as a manifestation of psychotic disorders such as
schizophrenia. Third-nerve palsies arise from an uncal
transtentorial herniation where the anterior medial tem-
poral gyrus herniates into the anterior portion of the ten-
torial opening anterior to the adjacent midbrain. Coma
may occur because of compression of the midbrain.
84. The answer is D.
(Chap. 36) This patient has evidence of increased ICP
and needs to be managed urgently. A variety of maneu-
vers may decrease ICP acutely. Hyperventilation causes
vasoconstriction, reducing cerebral blood volume and
decreasing ICP. However, this can be used only for a
short period because the decrease in cerebral blood ﬂow
is of limited duration. Mannitol, an osmotic diuretic, is
recommended in cases of increased ICP resulting from
cytotoxic edema. Hypotonic ﬂuids should be avoided.
Instead, hypertonic saline is given to elevate sodium lev-
els and prevent worsening of edema. A more deﬁnitive
treatment to decrease ICP is to have a ventriculostomy
placed by which excessive pressure can be relieved by
draining cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF). Further decreases in
mean arterial pressure may worsen the patient’s clinical
status. The patient already has had more than a 20%
reduction in MAP, which is the recommended reduction
in cases of hypertensive emergency. In addition, the
patient is exhibiting signs of increased ICP, which indi-
cates that cerebral perfusion pressure (MAP–ICP) has
been lowered. Paradoxically, the patient may need a vaso-
pressor agent to increase MAP and thus improve cerebral
perfusion. Finally, in cases of increased ICP, nitroprusside
is not a recommended IV antihypertensive agent because
it causes arterial vasodilation and may decrease cerebral
perfusion pressure and worsen neurologic function.
85. The answer is E.
(Chap. 37) Radiocontrast agents cause renal injury
through intrarenal vasoconstriction and through gener-
ation of oxygen radicals, causing acute tubular necrosis.
These medications cause an acute decrease in renal
blood flow and GFR. Patients with chronic kidney dis-
ease, diabetes mellitus, heart failure, multiple myeloma,
and volume depletion are at highest risk of contrast
nephropathy. It is clear that hydration with normal
saline is an effective measure to prevent contrast
nephropathy. Of the other measures mentioned here,
only sodium bicarbonate or N-acetylcysteine could be
recommended for clinical use to reduce the risk of
contrast nephropathy. Dopamine has been proven an
ineffective agent to prevent contrast nephropathy.
Fenoldopam, a D1-receptor agonist, has been tested in
several clinical trials and does not appear to reduce the
incidence of contrast nephropathy. Although several
small clinical studies have suggested a clinical benefit to
the use of N-acetylcysteine, a meta-analysis has been
inconclusive, and the medication should be adminis-
tered well in advance of the procedure. Sodium bicar-
bonate begun within 1 h of the procedure has shown a
significant benefit in a single-center, randomized, con-
trolled trial. Because of the time limitations and based
on the evidence, only sodium bicarbonate would be
helpful in this patient.
86. The answer is C.
(Chap. 37) In bilateral renal artery stenosis (or unilateral
stenosis in a patient with a single kidney), GFR is pre-
served by the actions of angiotensin II: afferent arteriolar
vasodilatation and efferent arteriolar vasoconstriction.
Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors and ARBs
blunt these responses and can precipitate acute renal failure
in this setting.Thiazide diuretics, calcium channel blockers,
and centrally acting α blockers are better choices for an
antihypertensive agent in a patient with bilateral renal
artery stenosis.
87. The answer is B.
(Chap. 38) In peritoneal dialysis, 1.5–3.0 L of dextrose-
containing ﬂuid is allowed to dwell in the peritoneum to
remove toxic materials and volume. Factors such as infec-
tion, drugs, position, and exercise impact solute and water
clearance. In the developed world, hemodialysis is often
the preferred method for renal replacement for patients.
However, in poorer countries where access to hemodial-
ysis centers is limited, peritoneal dialysis is used more
commonly. Residual renal function alters the dose of
dialysis but does not impact the mode of dialysis. More-
over, patients with no residual renal function who receive
peritoneal dialysis are at higher risk of uremia than
patients on hemodialysis. High transporters through the
peritoneum require more frequent doses of peritoneal
dialysis, potentially negating the beneﬁt of this modality.
In the developed world, the patient’s age does not impact
the mode of dialysis. Patients with prior abdominal surg-
eries often have difﬁculty with peritoneal dialysis
catheter placement and dialysate delivery.
88. The answer is A.
(Chap. 38) The potassium concentration of dialysate is
usually 2.5 meq/L but may be varied depending on the
predialysis serum potassium. This patient may need a
lower dialysate potassium concentration. Sodium model-
ing is an adjustment of the dialysate sodium that may
lessen the incidence of hypotension at the end of a dial-
ysis session. Aldosterone defects, if present, are not likely
Review and Self-Assessment
549
to play a role in this patient because his kidneys are not
being perfused. Therefore, nephrectomy is not likely to
control his potassium. Similarly, because the patient is
likely anuric, there is no efﬁcacy in using loop diuretics
to effect kaluresis. This patient has no approved indica-
tions for implantation of a deﬁbrillator.
89. The answer is A.
(Chap.
38) 
Nonsteroidal 
anti-inﬂammatory 
drugs
(NSAIDs) do not alter glomerular ﬁltration rate in nor-
mal individuals. However, in states of mild to moderate
hypoperfusion (as in prerenal azotemia) or in the presence
of chronic kidney disease, glomerular perfusion and ﬁltra-
tion fraction are preserved through several compensatory
mechanisms. In response to a reduction in perfusion pres-
sures, stretch receptors in afferent arterioles trigger a cas-
cade of events that lead to afferent arteriolar dilatation and
efferent arteriolar vasoconstriction, thereby preserving
glomerular ﬁltration fraction.These mechanisms are partly
mediated by the vasodilators prostaglandin E2 and prosta-
cyclin. NSAIDs can impair the kidney’s ability to com-
pensate for a low perfusion pressure by interfering with
local prostaglandin synthesis and inhibiting these protec-
tive responses. Ureteral obstruction is not the mechanism
by which NSAID impairs renal function in this scenario.
NSAIDs are not known to be proximal tubule toxins.
90. and 91.The answers are A and A, respectively.
(Chap. 38; Solomon R: Kidney Int 53:230, 1998) Radio-
contrast agents are a common cause of acute renal failure
and may result in acute tubular necrosis (contrast
nephropathy). It is common for patients receiving IV
contrast to develop a transient increase in serum creati-
nine. These agents cause renal failure by inducing
intrarenal vasoconstriction and reducing renal blood
ﬂow, mimicking prerenal azotemia, and directly causing
tubular injury. The risk of contrast nephropathy may be
reduced by initiating newer iso-osmolar agents and mini-
mizing the dose of contrast.When the reduction in renal
blood ﬂow is severe or prolonged, tubular injury devel-
ops, causing acute renal failure. Patients with intravascular
volume depletion, diabetes, congestive heart failure, mul-
tiple myeloma, or chronic renal failure have an increased
risk of contrast nephropathy.The urine sediment is bland
in mild cases, but with acute tubular necrosis, muddy
brown granular casts may be seen. Saline hydration plus
N-acetylcysteine may decrease the risk and severity of
contrast nephropathy. RBC casts indicate glomerular dis-
ease, and WBC casts suggest upper urinary tract infec-
tion. Urinary eosinophils are seen in allergic interstitial
disease caused by many drugs (Tables 90 and 91).
92. The answer is A.
(Chap. 39) Excretion of water is tightly regulated at the
collecting duct by arginine vasopressin (AVP, formerly
antidiuretic hormone). An increase in plasma tonicity is
sensed by hypothalamic osmoreceptors, causing AVP
secretion from the posterior pituitary.AVP binding to the
collecting duct leads to insertion of water channels
(aquaporin-2) into the luminal membrane, promoting
water reabsorption. Serum sodium is the principal extra-
cellular solute, and so effective osmolality is determined
predominantly by the plasma sodium concentration.
Plasma osmolality normally is regulated within 1–2% of
normal (280–290 mosmol/kg). The sensitivity of the
baroreceptors for AVP release is far less than that of the
osmoreceptors. Depletion of intravascular volume sufﬁ-
cient to decrease mean arterial pressure is necessary to
stimulate AVP secretion.
93. The answer is B.
(Chap. 40) The differential diagnosis for hypernatremia is
fairly narrow because it results in a relative loss of water.
Water is lost via renal or nonrenal mechanisms.The urine
osmolality is a key historic piece of data. If the patient is
excreting the minimum amount of maximally concen-
trated urine, gastrointestinal (osmotic diarrhea), insensible
(skin or respiratory loss), or remote renal losses (diabetes
mellitus) are the cause. This patient is excreting a large
amount of dilute urine. He is not excreting >750 mosm
in his urine daily, which would suggest diuretic use.
Either central or nephrogenic diabetes insipidus must be
the cause. In this patient, the lack of response to desmo-
pressin indicates nephrogenic diabetes insipidus.
94. The answer is E.
(Chap. 39) The patient in the preceding scenario has
nephrogenic diabetes insipidus (NDI). Causes of NDI
include drugs (particularly lithium carbonate), hypercal-
cemia, hypokalemia, papillary necrosis, or congenital disor-
ders. Patients with symptomatic polyuria caused by NDI
can be treated with a low-sodium diet and thiazide diuret-
ics, which induce mild volume depletion and enhanced
proximal reabsorption of salt and water. Narcotics may be
useful in patients with gastrointestinal hypermotility and
550
Review and Self-Assessment
TABLE 90, 91
GUIDELINES FOR USE OF INTRAVENOUS CONTRAST
IN PATIENTS WITH IMPAIRED RENAL FUNCTION
SERUM CREATININE, 
μmol/L (mg/dL)a
RECOMMENDATION
<133 (<1.5)
Use either ionic or nonionic at 
2 mL/kg to 150 mL total
133–177 (1.5–2.0)
Nonionic; hydrate diabetics 
1 mL/kg/h × 10 h
>177 (>2.0)
Consider noncontrast CT or MRI; 
nonionic contrast if required
177–221 (2.0–2.5)
Nonionic only if required (as above); 
contraindicated in diabetics
>265 (>3.0)
Nonionic IV contrast given only 
to patients undergoing dialysis 
within 24 h
a The risk is greatest in patients with increasing creatinine levels.
water loss as a result thereof. AVP analogues are used to
treat central diabetes insipidus (CDI) and would have no
impact on NDI. If a patient is found to have CDI, brain
imaging should be obtained to rule out destruction of the
neurohypophysis. Lithium carbonate is a cause of NDI and
should be discontinued if causing symptomatic NDI.
95. The answer is D.
(Chap. 39) This patient is most likely hypovolemic from
the osmotic preparation for his colonoscopy. Physical
examination supports hypovolemic hyponatremia. Hyper-
glycemia and hyperlipidemia can cause hyponatremia, but
these conditions would be associated with a high and
normal plasma osmolality, respectively. SIADH is unlikely
to be causing the hyponatremia if the extracellular vol-
ume status is decreased. Diabetes insipidus is a hyperna-
tremic disorder caused by excess water loss.
96. The answer is B.
(Chap. 40) The pH is <7.35, so the primary process is an
acidosis. The HCO3
−and PCO2 are low, excluding a pri-
mary respiratory acidosis.The anion gap is normal at 12.
The expected PCO2 is between 24 and 16 mmHg for
appropriate respiratory compensation. The PCO2 in this
example represents normal respiratory compensation for
metabolic acidosis.
97. The answer is A.
(Chap. 40) Metabolic acidosis occurs because of endoge-
nous acid production or loss of bicarbonate.The anion gap
is elevated in the presence of unmeasured anions (or, less
commonly, a loss of unmeasured cations) and is normal
with bicarbonate loss.A decrease in the serum albumin of
1 g/dL from normal lowers the expected anion gap by
2.5 meq/L.The differential diagnosis for a non–anion gap
metabolic acidosis includes gastrointestinal losses, renal aci-
dosis, and drug-induced and other less common causes.
Nursing home residents are at risk for institutionally
acquired diarrheas, which are often infectious. The urine
pH is usually high in proximal renal tubular acidosis, and
the patient is usually younger. Defects in the renin-
angiotensin system, such as hypoaldosteronism, cause
hyperkalemia, not hypokalemia. This patient has no evi-
dence of renal failure. Diuretic use usually causes a meta-
bolic alkalosis.
98. The answer is B.
(Chap. 40; Adrogué HJ, Madias NE: Management of life-
threatening acid-base disorders. First of two parts. N Engl J Med
338:26–34, 1998.) A respiratory alkalosis with a com-
bined metabolic acidosis is typical of salicylate toxicity.
Salicylate intoxication can result in respiratory alkalosis,
mixed respiratory alkalosis and metabolic acidosis, or (less
commonly) a simple metabolic acidosis. Respiratory alka-
losis is caused by direct stimulation of the respiratory
center by salicylate.The accumulation of lactic acid and
ketoacids leads to the concomitant metabolic acidosis.
The severity of the neurologic manifestations largely
depends on the concentration of salicylate in the central
nervous system (CNS). Therapy is directed at limiting
further drug absorption by administering activated char-
coal and promoting the exit of salicylate from the CNS.
This can be accomplished by alkalinizing the serum, typ-
ically by means of the addition of IV ﬂuids with sodium
bicarbonate, with the goal of increasing the serum pH to
between 7.45 and 7.50. Increasing the glomerular ﬁltra-
tion rate will also enhance salicylate excretion. Hemodial-
ysis is reserved for severe cases, especially those involving
fulminant renal failure.
99. The answer is B.
(Chap. 40) The octahedral, or envelope-shaped, crystals
are caused by the presence of calcium oxalate in the
urine. Calcium oxalate crystals are classically seen in eth-
ylene glycol ingestion, which also causes a high anion
gap metabolic acidosis.White blood cell casts indicate an
upper urinary tract infection associated with a positive
urine culture. Uric acid (rhomboid-shaped) or struvite
(“cofﬁn lid”) crystals may be seen in cases of nephrolithi-
asis that causes hydronephrosis. Red blood cell casts are
indicative of glomerular disease, often associated with a
positive ANA.
100. The answer is B.
(Chap. 40) The pH the plasma bicarbonate are high.This is
indicative of a metabolic alkalosis, not a primary acidosis.A
respiratory alkalosis is not consistent with an elevated
PCO2. Similarly, the PCO2 is elevated appropriately to com-
pensate for the metabolic alkalosis, excluding a primary
respiratory acidosis. The respiratory compensation for a
metabolic alkalosis is limited by the hypoxic drive.When
the PCO2 increases into the 40s and 50s, the hypoxic drive
maintains a PaO2 of >55–60 mmHg, preventing further
hypoventilation to additionally increase PCO2.
101. The answer is E.
(Chap. 40) The differential diagnosis for metabolic alkalo-
sis can be divided into those disorders with extracellular
ﬂuid contraction and normotension (or hypotension) and
those with extracellular ﬂuid expansion and hypertension
(see Table 41-6). Cushing’s disease and mineralocorticoid
excess cause a metabolic alkalosis with hypertension.
Patients with Bartter syndrome are normotensive. This
patient has evidence of hypovolemia with altered mental
status, hypotension, and tachycardia. Myocardial infarction
causing cardiogenic shock would result in an anion gap
metabolic acidosis because of lactate accumulation.
102. The answer is E.
(Chap. 41)Vitamin K is a fat-soluble vitamin that plays an
essential role in hemostasis. It is absorbed in the small
intestine and stored in the liver. It serves as a cofactor in
the enzymatic carboxylation of glutamic acid residues on
prothrombin-complex proteins.The three major causes of
Review and Self-Assessment
551
vitamin K deﬁciency are poor dietary intake, intestinal
malabsorption, and liver disease.The prothrombin com-
plex proteins (factors II,VII, IX, and X and protein C
and protein S) all decrease with vitamin K deﬁciency.
Factor VII and protein C have the shortest half-lives of
these factors and therefore decrease ﬁrst.Therefore, vita-
min K deﬁciency manifests with prolongation of the
prothrombin time ﬁrst.With severe deﬁciency, the aPTT
is prolonged as well. Factor VIII is not inﬂuenced by
vitamin K.
103. The answer is E.
(Chaps. 41) Hemophilia A results from a deﬁciency of
factor VIII. Replacement of factor VIII is the centerpiece
of treatment. Cessation of aspirin or nonsteroidal anti-
inﬂammatory drugs (NSAIDs) is highly recommended.
FFP contains pooled plasma from human sources. Cryo-
precipitate refers to FFP that is cooled, resulting in the
precipitation of material at the bottom of the plasma.This
product contains about half the factor VIII activity of FFP
in a tenth of the volume. Both agents are therefore rea-
sonable treatment options. DDAVP causes the release of a
number of factors and von Willebrand factor from the
liver and endothelial cells.This may be useful for patients
with mild hemophilia. Recombinant or puriﬁed factor
VIII (i.e., Humate P) is indicated in patients with more
severe bleeding.Therapy may be required for weeks, with
levels of factor VIII kept at 50%, for postsurgical or severe
bleeding. Plasmapheresis has no role in the treatment of
patients with hemophilia A.
104. The answer is C.
(Chap. 41) LAs cause prolongation of coagulation tests
by binding to phospholipids. Although most often
encountered in patients with SLE, they may develop in
normal individuals. The diagnosis is ﬁrst suggested by
prolongation of coagulation tests. Failure to correct with
incubation with normal plasma conﬁrms the presence of
a circulating inhibitor. Contrary to the name, patients
with LA activity have normal hemostasis and are not
predisposed to bleeding. Instead, they are at risk for
venous and arterial thromboembolisms. Patients with a
history of recurrent unplanned abortions or thrombosis
should undergo lifelong anticoagulation. The presence
of LAs or anticardiolipin antibodies without a history of
thrombosis may be observed because many of these
patients will not go on to develop a thrombotic event.
105. The answer is A.
(Chap. 41) Factor V Leiden refers to a point mutation in
the factor V gene (arginine to glutamine at position 506).
This makes the molecule resistant to degradation by acti-
vated protein C. This disorder alone may account for
≤25% of inherited prothrombotic states, making it the
most common of these disorders. Heterozygosity for this
mutation increases an individual’s lifetime risk of venous
thromboembolism sevenfold.A homozygote has a 20-fold
increased risk of thrombosis. Prothrombin gene mutation
is probably the second most common condition that
causes “hypercoagulability.” Antithrombin, protein C, and
protein S deﬁciencies are rarer. Antithrombin complexes
with activated coagulation proteins and blocks their bio-
logic activity. Deﬁciency in antithrombin therefore pro-
motes prolonged activity of coagulation proteins, resulting
in thrombosis. Similarly, protein C and protein S are
involved in the proteolysis of factors Va and VIIIa, which
shuts off ﬁbrin formation. Because proteins C and S are
dependent on vitamin K for carboxylation, administration
of warfarin anticoagulants may lower the level of proteins
C and S more quickly relative to factors II, VII, IX, and
X, thereby promoting coagulation. Patients with protein
C deﬁciency may develop warfarin-related skin necrosis.
106. The answer is D.
(Chap. 41) The aPTT involves the factors of the intrinsic
pathway of coagulation. Prolongation of the aPTT
reﬂects either a deﬁciency of one of these factors (e.g.,
factor VIII, IX, XI, XII) or inhibition of the activity of
one of the factors or components of the aPTT assay (i.e.,
phospholipids).This may be further characterized by the
“mixing study,” in which the patient’s plasma is mixed
with pooled plasma. Correction of the aPTT reﬂects a
deﬁciency of factors that are replaced by the pooled sam-
ple. Failure to correct the aPTT reﬂects the presence of a
factor inhibitor or phospholipid inhibitor. Common
causes of a failure to correct include the presence of
heparin in the sample, factor inhibitors (factor VIII
inhibitor being the most common), and the presence of
antiphospholipid antibodies. Factor VII is involved in the
extrinsic pathway of coagulation. Inhibitors to factor VII
would result in prolongation of the prothrombin time.
107. The answer is B.
(Chap. 43) Oral ribavirin combined with pegylated
interferon appears to be the most effective regimen for
treating patients with hepatitis C. Ribavirin does not
exert antiviral effect but may be an immune modulator
in combination with the interferon. Hemolytic anemia
occurs in nearly 25% of patients receiving this therapy.
Common approaches to this problem are dose reduc-
tion, cessation of ribavirin therapy, or use of red blood
cell growth factors. Rash can occur but is less common.
Interferon has common side effects as well, including
ﬂulike symptoms, depression, sleep disturbances, person-
ality change, leukopenia, and thrombocytopenia.
108. The answer is D.
(Chap. 44) Voriconazole is an azole antifungal with a
broader spectrum of activity than ﬂuconazole against
Candida spp. (including Candida glabrata and Candida
krusei) and has activity against Aspergillus spp. It is avail-
able in oral and parenteral forms. Voriconazole’s visual
552
Review and Self-Assessment
disturbances are common, transient, and harmless, but
patients should be warned to expect them.Voriconazole
interacts signiﬁcantly with many other medications,
including immunosuppressive agents, such as tacrolimus,
that are often used in patients at risk for systemic fungal
infections.Voriconazole may also cause liver toxicity and
photosensitivity. Renal toxicity is an issue with ampho-
tericin B products rather than the azoles.
109. The answer is A.
(Chap. 44) Caspofungin and the other echinocandins
(anidulafungin, micafungin) inhibit fungal synthesis of
B-1,3-glucan synthase, a necessary enzyme for fungal
cell wall synthesis that does not have a human correlate.
These agents are available only parentally, not orally.
They are fungicidal for Candida spp. and fungistatic
against Aspergillus spp. Caspofungin is as at least equiva-
lently effective as amphotericin B for disseminated can-
didiasis and is as effective as ﬂuconazole for candidal
esophagitis. It is not a ﬁrst-line therapy for Aspergillus
infection but may be used as salvage therapy. The
echinocandins, including caspofungin, have an extremely
high safety proﬁle. They do not have activity against
mucormycosis, paracoccidiomycosis, or histoplasmosis.
110. The answer is A.
(Chap. 44) The deﬁnitive diagnosis of an invasive fungal
infection generally requires histologic demonstration of
fungus invading tissue along with an inﬂammatory
response. However, Coccidioides serum complement ﬁxa-
tion, cryptococcal serum and cerebrospinal ﬂuid antigen,
and urine or serum histoplasma antigen are all tests with
good performance characteristics, occasionally allowing
for presumptive diagnoses before pathologic tissue sec-
tions can be examined or cultures of blood or tissue
turn positive.There is no such widely used serologic test
for blastomycosis. Serum testing for galactomannan is
approved for the diagnosis of Aspergillus infection. How-
ever, false-negative test results may occur, and further
studies of the validity are necessary.
111. The answer is C.
(Chap. 45) Superior vena cava (SVC) syndrome is the
clinical manifestation of SVC obstruction with severe
reduction in venous return from the head, neck, and
upper extremities. Small cell and squamous cell lung
cancer account for 85% of all cases of malignant supe-
rior vena cava obstruction. Common complaints include
neck and facial swelling with dyspnea. Other symptoms
include hoarseness, tongue swelling, headaches, nasal
congestion, epistaxis, hemoptysis, dysphagia, pain, dizzi-
ness, syncope, and lethargy. Temporizing measures
include diuretics, a low-salt diet, oxygen, and head eleva-
tion. Glucocorticoids may be effective at shrinking the
size of lymphomatous masses, but they are of no beneﬁt
in patients with primary lung cancer. Radiation therapy
is the primary treatment for SVC syndrome caused by
non–small cell lung cancer. Chemotherapy is most effec-
tive for small cell lung cancer, lymphoma, or germ cell
tumors. Some non–small cell lung tumors are responsive
to novel chemotherapy agents. Intravascular stenting is
effective for palliation and may be considered to prevent
recurrence.
112. The answer is B.
(Chap. 45) MSCC syndrome is deﬁned as compression of
the spinal cord, cauda equina, or both by an extradural
tumor mass. The minimum radiologic evidence for cord
compression is compression of the theca at the level of
clinical features. However, radiologic conﬁrmation is not
necessary in a patient whose physical examination suggests
spinal cord compression. These patients should receive
immediate high-dose dexamethasone (24 mg IV every
6 h). Cancers that most commonly cause the MSCC syn-
drome include prostate, lung, and breast. Renal cell carci-
noma, lymphomas, and melanomas may also cause spinal
cord compression.The most commonly affected site is the
thoracic spine (70% of cases) followed by the sacral spine
(20%). Pain is usually present for days or months before
the neurologic defects manifest. About 75% percent of
patients who are ambulatory at the time of diagnosis will
remain ambulatory, but <10% of patients who present with
paraplegia will regain the ability to walk despite treatment.
113. The answer is D.
(Chap. 33) Prinzmetal and colleagues described a syn-
drome of angina that occurs at rest but not usually with
exertion associated with transient ST-segment eleva-
tion. The pathophysiology is attributable to coronary
artery vasospasm. Proximal nonobstructive coronary
plaques are usually present. The vasospasm usually
occurs within 1 cm of a coronary plaque and is associ-
ated with ST-segment elevations on the 12-lead surface
electrocardiogram. Because of further vasospasm, cold
water ingestion may exacerbate the patient’s symptoms.
Costochondritis or muscular strain can reproduce the
patient’s pain. By deﬁnition, Prinzmetal’s angina is asso-
ciated with ST-segment elevation, not depression, dur-
ing the anginal episode.
114. The answer is E.
(Chap. 41) The differentiation between DIC and severe
liver disease is challenging. Both entities may manifest
with similar laboratory ﬁndings: elevated ﬁbrinogen
degradation products, prolonged aPTT and prothrombin
time, anemia, and thrombocytopenia. When suspecting
DIC, these tests should be repeated over a period of 6–8 h
because abnormalities may change dramatically in patients
with severe DIC. In contrast, the test results should not
ﬂuctuate as much in patients with severe liver disease.
Bacterial sepsis with positive blood cultures is a common
cause of DIC but is not diagnostic.
Review and Self-Assessment
553
This page intentionally left blank 
555
A. fumigatus, 85, 519, 539
Abciximab, 319, 527, 548
“ABCs,” traumatic shock and, 274
Abdominal distension, pain and, 478
ABG. See Arterial blood gas
Abortions, recurrent mid-trimester, 531, 552
ABPA. See Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis
Abscesses, 447
Abulia, 343
Accelerated idioventricular rhythm (AIVR), 339
Accelerated junctional rhythm, 339
ACE inhibitors. See Angiotensin-converting
enzyme inhibitors
Acetaminophen, 414, 486
asthma and, 63
inﬂuenza, 145
Acetazolamide
CSA and, 232
metabolic alkalosis, 421
Acetest, 415
Acid aerosol levels, 96
Acid amines, 95
Acid anhydride-exposed workers, 95
Acid base status, 382
Acid-base disorders, 410–411, 530, 551
approach to patient, 412–413
nomogram, 412f
Acid-base homeostasis, 410
Acidemia, chemoreceptors and, 7
Acid-fast bacilli (AFB), 115, 116f
Acid-fast bacilli microscopy, tuberculosis and, 127
Acidosis, 410
Acinetobacter spp, antibiotic resistance, 111
ACMV. See Assist control mode ventilation
Acquired drug resistance, 133
Acquired inhibitors, of coagulation factors, 433
Acrocyanosis, 283
Acrylonitrile, 95
ACTH. See Adrenocorticotropic hormone
Actinomyces, 524, 545
Activated charcoal, salicylate-induced acidosis
and, 415
Activated partial prothrombin time (aPTT), 424
prolongation of, 531, 552
Activated protein C resistance, 531, 552
Acute asthma, 2
Acute brain illness, hypotonic solutions and, 352
Acute coronary syndromes, 304, 314, 316, 325f
Acute cough, 15
Acute deep venous thrombosis (DVT), 208t
Acute epiglottitis, 158
Acute fulminant myocarditis, 303
Acute gastroenteritis, 283
Acute glomerulonephritis, 382
Acute hydrocephalus, 368
Acute hypercapnia, 7, 422
Acute hypercarbic respiratory failure, 258
Acute hyperkalemia, 314
Acute hypersensitivity pneumonitis (HP), 81
Acute hypoxemia, 9
Acute hypoxemic respiratory failure, 250
Acute hypoxia, 20
Acute interstitial pneumonia, 198, 198f
Acute ischemic stroke, 255, 356
Acute kidney injury (AKI), 372
Acute leukemia, 488
Acute lung injury (ALI), 269, 290
diagnostic criteria, 291t
hypoxic respiratory failure and, 263
Acute mediastinitis, 220
Acute myeloid leukemia (AML), 482
Acute myocardial infarctions, 312, 324, 526, 547
cardiogenic shock and
diagnosis, 299–300
management, 299f
patient proﬁle, 298
timing, 299
prognosis, 302
treatment, 300
aortic counterpulsation, 301
general measures, 300, 301t
reperfusion-revascularization, 301–302
vasopressors, 300–301
Acute plaque rupture, 324
Acute pneumonitis, differential diagnosis, 525, 545
Acute postoperative hyponatremia, 397
Acute pulmonary edema, 303
Acute quadriplegic myopathy, 363
Acute rejection, lung transplantation and, 236–237
Acute renal failure (ARF), 370, 370, 376t–378t
classiﬁcation and causes, 371t
clinical features and differential diagnosis, 375,
379–380
complications of, 380–385
etiology and pathophysiology, 370–375
ICU and, 255
laboratory ﬁndings, 379–380
prevention, 381
radiologic ﬁndings, 380
renal biopsy, 380
shock and, 269
treatment, 381–385
Acute respiratory distress, treatment of
clinical trials, 294
ﬂuid management, 294
general principles, 293
glucocorticoids, 294
mechanical ventilation management, 293–294
Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), 100,
122, 153, 198, 253, 258, 269, 283, 284,
290
clinical course and pathophysiology
exudative phase, 290–293, 291f, 293f
ﬁbrotic phase, 293
proliferative phase, 293
clinical disorders associated, 291t
clinical trials, 295, 295f, 295t
CT scan of, 50f
diagnostic criteria, 291t
etiology of, 290
ground glass inﬁltrates with, 51f
initial management, 295, 295f, 295t
pressure volume relationship, of lungs, 250f
prognosis, 295–296
time course, 290f
treatment, 158
Acute respiratory illness, 149
Acute severe asthma, 75
Acute shortness of breath, 2
Acute silicosis, 90, 91f
Acute tubular injury, 372
Acute tubular necrosis (ATN), 269, 370, 375,
529, 550
etiology and pathophysiology of, 372–373
phases of, 372–373, 373f
Acute urate nephropathy, 381
Acutely appearing masses, 344f355
Acyclovir, 374, 463
mucocutaneous HSV infections, 464
transplantation and, 243
Acyclovir-resistant HSV, 467
Acyclovir-resistant VZV, 467
ADA. See Adenosine deaminase
ADAM-33 gene, asthma and, 62
ADAMTS13, 487
Addison’s disease, 407
Additive activity, 447
Additive relationship, 447
Adefovir, 467
Adenoid cystic carcinoma, 56f
Adenosine deaminase (ADA), 123
Adenosine triphosphate (ATP)
hypoxia and, 20
shock and, 268
Adenovirus infection, 156, 158, 465
bronchiectasis and, 167
epidemiology and clinical manifestations, 159
etiologic agent, 158–159
laboratory ﬁndings and diagnosis, 159–160
prevention and treatment, 160
Adjunctive therapies, for shock, 275–276
Adjunctive ventilator therapies, 294
Adrenal insufﬁciency, 286–287
cancer and, 484–485
Adrenal tuberculosis, 126
β-adrenergic agonists, 319, 338, 403, 409
alveolar hyperventilation and, 226–227
CF and, 176
β2-adrenergic agonists, for asthma, 61
β-adrenergic blockers, 76
asthma and, 68
β-adrenoceptor blockers, STEMI and, 335
Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), 268
Adrenocorticotropic hormone stimulation test,
hypoadrenal shock and, 275
Adult-onset asthma, 61
Adult-type tuberculosis, 121–122
Advanced life support, 313–314
Adverse (drug) reactions, 450
AED. See Automated external deﬁbrillation
Aerobic disorders, 414
Aerosolized recombinant DNase, 169
AFB smear conversion, 131–132
Afferent arteriolar vasoconstriction, 529, 550
Afferent sensory input, 7, 8f
Afterload, shock and, 268
Afterload-reducing agents, 382
Age
lung transplantation and, 233
primary tuberculosis and, 118
SCD and, 307, 309f
sepsis-related, incidence and mortality rates,
278, 280
β agonists, COPD and, 186
β2-adrenergic receptors, 71
INDEX
Bold number indicates the start of the main discussion of the topic; numbers with “f ” and “t” refer to ﬁgure and table pages.
β2-agonists, 71, 72
airways and, 71, 71t
mode of action, 71
side effects, 71
A/H1N1 viral strains, 141–142
A/H5N1. See Avian inﬂuenza viruses
AHR. See Airway hyperresponsiveness
AIDS, 3, 16, 464, 472, 522, 542
adenovirus infections and, 159
cidofovir and, 465
exudative pleural effusions and, 218
ﬂuconazole and, 472
ganciclovir prophylaxis and, 466
neoplastic meningitis, 481–482
severe sepsis and, 280
Air contaminants, particle size of, 87
Air pollution
asthma and, 62
asthma triggers, 69
Air trapping, 82
Airborne transmission, Pneumocystis infection, 161
Airﬂow obstruction, 253
COPD and, 181
Airway
anaphylactic reaction of, brittle asthma and, 76
asthma and, 63
β2-agonists and, 71, 71t
chronic inﬂammatory response, 66–67
complications, lung transplantation and, 236
disorder, breathing and, 9
edema, asthma and, 67
epithelia, in cystic ﬁbrosis, 173–174, 174f
epithelial shedding,AHR and, 67
epithelium, inﬂammation and, 67
establishing/maintaining, 259
inﬂammation
asthma and, 64, 64f
bronchiectasis and, 166
cough and, 14
lesions, ﬂexible ﬁberoptic bronchoscopy and, 39
mucosa, asthma and, 63
obstruction, 483
remodeling, 67–68
responsiveness, in COPD, 179
responsiveness studies, 70
sensory nerves, neurotrophins and, 67
Airway hyperresponsiveness (AHR), 69
airway epithelial shedding and, 67
asthma and, 64, 64f
Airway smooth muscle, asthmatic airways and, 67
Airway smooth muscle cells
of asthmatics, 65, 66f
inﬂammation and, 67
Airway wall
bronchiectasis and, 166
epithelium of, asthma and, 63
AIVR. See Accelerated idioventricular rhythm
AKA. See Alcoholic ketoacidosis
AKI. See Acute kidney injury
Akinetic mutism, 343
Albumin, 11–12
Albuterol, 71
Alcohol(s), 416
tuberculosis treatment and, 132
Alcoholic ketoacidosis (AKA), 412, 415
Alcoholics, 361
Alcoholism, 400
Aldosterone, 396
shock and, 268
synthesis, 407
Aldosterone-resistant hyperkalemia. See
Transtubular K concentration gradient
Alemtuzumab, 489
Alfentanil, 259
ALI. See Acute lung injury
Alkalemia, 226
Alkali
administration, 419
therapy, 409, 414–415
Alkalosis, 410
Allelic polymorphisms, 289
Allergens, 68
asthma and, 61, 62–63
Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (ABPA),
83, 84, 167
diagnostic features of, 84t
Allergic interstitial nephritis, 380
Allergic reactions, to streptokinase, 333
Allergic rhinitis, asthma and, 61
Allopurinol, 485
renal injury and, 381
Alpha activity, on EEG, 350
Alpha coma ﬁx, 349
Alternative therapies, asthma and, 74
Alveolar collapse, 294
Alveolar diseases, categories of, 191t
Alveolar edema, 35, 293f
Alveolar edema, atelectasis, intrinsic positive
end-expiratory pressure. See Auto-PEEP
Alveolar ﬂuid clearance, 304
Alveolar gas equation, 31
Alveolar hemorrhage, 292
Alveolar hyperventilation, 205
deﬁnition and etiology, 225–226
diagnosis of, 226–227
mechanisms involved, 226f
physiologic and clinical features, 226
treatment, 227
Alveolar hypoventilation syndromes
laboratory test results, 223f
physiologic and clinical features, 222f
Alveolar inﬁltrates, 50f
Alveolar leak, 100
Alveolar macrophages
pathogens and, 100
silica and, 90
Alveolar neutrophilia, 82
Alveolar ventilation
gas exchange and, 30
respiratory acidosis and, 422
ventilator weaning and, 264
Alveolar-arterial O2 difference, equation for, 32
Alveolar-arterial oxygen gradient, 524, 545
Alveoli
normal v. injured, 292f
repair, COPD and, 184
Amantadine, 462, 463
inﬂuenza and, 145, 146, 146t, 147
AmB. See Amphotericin B
Ambient air pollution, COPD and, 179
Amikacin, 133
tuberculosis and, 129
Amiloride, 402
Aminocaproic acid (EACA), for hemophilia, 427
Aminoglutethimide, 485
Aminoglycoside antibiotics, 285, 363, 438
ATN and, 374
bronchiectasis and, 169
CF lung and, 176
renal injury and, 381
tuberculosis and, 129
Aminoglycoside-resistant bacteria, 441
Aminophylline, contrast nephropathy and, 381
Aminotransferases levels, tuberculosis treatment
and, 132
Amiodarone, 313, 314, 513, 533
Amithiozone
HIV-associated tuberculosis, 134
tuberculosis and, 129–130
AML. See Acute myeloid leukemia
Ammoniagenesis, 418
Amnesia, mechanical ventilation and, 252
Amoxicillin
bioavailability of, 442
bronchiectasis and, 169
Amoxicillin/clavulanic acid, tuberculosis and, 130
Amphotericin B (AmB), 374, 471
Anaerobes, aspiration and, 101
Anaerobic bacteria, lung abscess, 169–170
Anaerobic glycolysis, 20
Anaerobic infection, clindamycin and, 520–521,
540
Anal wink reﬂex, 479
Analgesics
mechanical ventilation and, 251
withdrawing care, 256
Anaphylactoid reactions, to dialyzer, 390
Anatomic dead space, 30
Anemia, 375, 384
ARF and, 380–381
ICU and, 255
Anemic hypoxia, 21
Anesthetics
OSAHS and, 230
PAH and, 224
Aneurysmal bleeding, 364
Aneurysmal rupture, 364
Aneurysms, 256
asymptomatic, 364
repair, 367
Angina, recurrent, 340
Angiography, UA/STEMI, 317
Angiotensin II, 371, 372
shock and, 267
Angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs), 336, 341,
371, 375, 381, 528, 549
Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACE
inhibitors), 15, 304, 319, 321, 341, 371,
375, 382, 407, 418, 545
renal injury and, 381
STEMI and, 335, 336
Anidulafungin, 473
Anion gap calculation, 413
Anion-gap metabolic acidosis, 530, 551
causes, 414t
Anoxic cerebral injury, cardiac arrest and, 255
Anoxic encephalopathy, 312
Antagonists of chemokine receptors, 74
β2-agonists, brittle asthma, 76
Anterior mediastinum, 219
Antiarrhythmics, 313, 382
Antibacterial agents, 448, 448t–449t, 450. See also
Antibiotics
acute inﬂuenza and, 146, 146t
adverse reactions to, 451t
bacterial intrinsic resistance, 440–442
distribution of, 443
inhibition of protein synthesis and, 438–439
interactions, other drugs, 452t
mechanisms of action, 434–435, 435f, 436t–437t,
437–442
metabolism and elimination of, 443
pharmacodynamics of, susceptibility and,
444–445, 445f
in pregnancy, 445, 446t
speciﬁc, infections for, 448t–449t
Antibacterial chemotherapy
acquired resistance and, 440–442
principles of, 443–448
556
Index
Antibacterial drugs. See Antibacterial agents
Antibacterial prophylaxis, 453–454, 453t
Antibiotic-coated vascular catheters, 254
Antibiotic-induced allergic interstitial
nephritis, 379
Antibiotics
absorption, 442
acute severe asthma and, 75
ATN and, 374
bronchiectasis and, 169
CF lung and, 176
COPD and, acute exacerbations of, 189
intramuscular administration, 443
intravenous administration, 443
lung abscess and, 170
oral administration of, 442–443
pharmacokinetics of, 442–443
quantitative-culture methods and, 110
VAP, 113
Anticholinergics, 71
acute severe asthma and, 75
COPD and, 186
Anticholinergic-type overdose, 352
Anticoagulants, 287, 288, 340, 527, 548
complications of, 211
Anticoagulation, 319
duration of, 212
PE and, 210, 210t
Anticyclic depressants, eosinophilic pneumonias
and, 84
Antidepressants, COPD and, 11
Antidiuretic hormone, 394
Antiﬁbrinolytic agents, 367, 428, 433
for hemophilia, 427
Antifungal agents, topical, 473
Antigen exposure, 81
HP and, 83
Antigen groups, Pneumocystis infection, 161
Antigen removal, 520, 540
Antigen tests, CAP and, 104
Antigenic drifts
inﬂuenza A virus and, 140
RNA segment and, 141
Antigenic shifts, inﬂuenza A virus and, 140
Antihistamines, rhinoviruses and, 152
Anti-IgE, 77
asthma and, 74
Anti-inﬂammatory cytokines, infection and, 281
Anti-inﬂammatory drugs, rhinoviruses and, 152
Anti-ischemic treatment, 319, 321
Antileukemic therapy, 483
Antileukotriene, 73, 75, 77
Antimetabolites, 439
Antimicrobial(s)
agents, 285, 289
chemotherapy, 285
classes, pharmacodynamic indices of, 445f
optimizing, mechanisms for, 454–455
resistance, CAP treatment and, 104–107
stewardship, 454–455
Antimicrobial regimens (IV therapy), 286t
Antineoplastic drugs, hypersensitivity reactions
and, 489
Antineuraminidase antibody assay, 142
Antioxidants
asthma and, 62
traumatic shock, 274
Antiphospholipid antibody syndrome, 533
Antiplatelet therapy, 321, 334, 341
Antiplatelet Trialists’ Collaboration, 334
Anti-pneumocystosis drugs, 164
Antiretroviral therapy, HIV-associated
tuberculosis, 134
Antiseizure medications, CNS metastases and, 482
Antithrombotic therapies, 318, 319, 321t, 341
STEMI and, 334
Antithrombin therapy, 334–335
Anti-TNF therapy, refractory asthma, 77
Anti-TNF-α monoclonal antibody, 84
α1-antitrypsin, 518, 538
α1-antitrypsin deﬁciency
bronchiectasis and, 167
COPD and, 180
Antituberculosis treatment regimens, 131t
Antiviral chemotherapy, 456
and chemoprophylaxis, 457t–461t
interferons, 468–469
Antiviral drugs
for hepatitis viruses, 467–468
for herpesviruses, 463–467
HIV-associated tuberculosis, 134
inﬂuenza and, 145, 146t
as prophylaxis, for inﬂuenza, 147
for respiratory infections, 461–463
Anxiety, dyspnea and, 7–8
Anxiety hyperventilation, 226
Anxiolysis, withdrawing care, 256
Anxiolytics, COPD and, 11
Aortic arch, chest tomogram of, normal, 42f
Aortic counterpulsation, 526, 546
MI and, 301
Aortic dissection, 332
Aortic knob, normal, 41f
APACHE II scoring system, 247, 248t, 288, 290,
295
survival curve, 247, 249f
APACHE III scoring system, 247
APACHE scores, 247, 248t
pneumocystosis and, 164
aPC. See Recombinant activated protein C
Apical scarring, 43f
Apnea, 222, 351
testing, 351
Apoptotic death, 282
Apoptosis, 184, 354
aPTT. See Activated partial prothrombin time
Aquaponin-2 gene, 394
ARBs. See Angiotensin receptor blockers
ARDS. See Acute respiratory distress syndrome
ARF. See Acute renal failure
Arginine vasopressin (AVP), 275, 370, 394
Aromatic amines, 95
Arousal level, 347
Arrhythmias, 338
Arsenic compounds, 95
Arsenic trioxide, 483
Arterial blood gas (ABG), 31–32, 252
acute severe asthma and, 75
alveolar hyperventilation, 226
COPD and, 185
ILDs and, 195
mixed acid-base disorders, 412t
PAH and, 224
Arterial embolism, 340
Arterial hypoxemia, 21
Arteriolar vascular smooth muscle, shock
and, 267
Arteriovenous ﬁstulas, 389, 390
Arteriovenous grafts, 389
Arteriovenous malformation, 363
Arthralgias, 375
Asbestos, 88–89
Asbestosis, 54f, 87, 89, 89f, 90
Asbestos-related diseases, 88
bystander exposure, 89
Ascending aorta, chest tomogram of, normal, 42f
Ascites
ﬂuid management and, 382
pleural effusions and, 216
Asparaginase, 489
Aspergillus fumigatus, 83, 202, 470
lung transplant recipients and, 240
Aspergillus infection, 531, 552–553
Aspergillus spp., 78, 472, 533
Aspiration, 532–533
Aspirin, 77, 318, 321, 334, 336, 341, 426, 527, 531,
547–548, 552
Aspirin-sensitive asthma, 68, 77
Assist control mode ventilation (ACMV), 259,
261, 261f
Assisted ventilation, 107
Asthma, 3, 14–15, 60, 461
allergens and, 61, 62–63
clinical features and diagnosis, 69–70
deaths, risk factors, 61
differential diagnosis for, 70
education, 75
elderly and, 77
environmental factors, 62–63
etiology, 61–63
future therapies, 74
gold for, 74
medications, breastfeeding with, 77
mortality, 61
Mycoplasma and, 62
nitrogen oxides and, 62
pathogenesis of, 63
pathology of, 63
pathophysiology of, 65f, 69
pharmacologic agents and, 68
prevalence of, 60–61
risk factors, 61t
small airway with, histopathology of, 63f
therapy, 70–75, 70t
treatment, 70–75
triggers, 60, 61t, 68–69
physical factors for, 68
Atelectasis, 176
Atherosclerosis, 342
Atherosclerotic plaques, 323
ATN. See Acute tubular necrosis
Atopy, 61
Atovaquone, 163, 163t
Atovaquone resistance, pneumocystosis
and, 164, 164t
ATP. See Adenosine triphosphate
Atrial ﬁbrillation, 304
Atrial natriuretic peptide, 365
Atrial pressure measurements, 253
Atrial ventricular resynchronization, 304
Atrioventricular conduction disturbances, 339–340
Atropine, 330
pulse rate and, 351
sinus bradycardia and, 339
Attention-seeking hysterical conversion
syndrome, 76
Attenuated inﬂuenza vaccine, 546
Auscultation of lungs, 4
Autoimmune connective tissue disorders, 90
Autoimmune diseases, 533
Autolysins, 437
Automated external deﬁbrillation (AED), 313
Autonomic neural control, 67
Auto-PEEP (Alveolar edema, atelectasis, intrinsic
positive end-expiratory pressure), 251,
253, 253f, 524, 544
Autoregulation, 354
shock and, 267
Avian inﬂuenza viruses, 141
Index
557
Avian inﬂuenza viruses (A/H5N1), 525, 546
epidemiology, 140–142
with pneumonia, 145
AVM. See Pulmonary arteriovenous malformations
AVP. See Arginine vasopressin
Awake coma, 343
Azathioprine, asthma and, 74
Azithromycin, 107, 438
CF lung and, 176
Azithromycin resistance, 441
Azoles, 472
B. pertussis, 519, 539
B adrenoceptor blockers, 341
Bacille Calmette-Guérin vaccination, 135
Bacitracin, 437
Back pain, with cancer, 480–481
Bacteremia, 280, 283
Bacteremic pneumococcal pneumonia,
management of, 106
Bacteria. See also Bacterial pathogens; speciﬁc bacteria
and bacterial diseases
donor kidneys and, 239
mechanisms of resistance, 440–442
severe sepsis and, 278, 280
thermophilic, 85
Bacterial bronchitis, lung transplantation and, 237
Bacterial cell death, 439
Bacterial cell wall synthesis, inhibition of, 437
Bacterial cell-wall glycolipid lipoarabinomannan,
tuberculosis and, 119
Bacterial endocarditis, 446
Bacterial infections, 434
prophylaxis of, 453–454, 453t
therapy duration for, 454t
transplanted stem cells and, 239
Bacterial metabolism, antibacterial compounds
and, 439
Bacterial pathogens, in sputum sample, 38
Bacterial pneumonia, 488
Bactericidal drugs, 435
Bacteriologic evaluation, tuberculosis and, 131
Bacteristatic drugs, 435
Baker’s cyst, 208
BAL. See Bronchoalveolar lavage
Balloon catheter, massive hemoptysis, 18
Barbiturates
endotracheal intubation and, 250
ICP and, 357
Barotrauma, 264
Bartter’s syndrome, 404, 419, 531, 551
Basal ganglia hemorrhage, 351
Baseline Dyspnea Index, 8
Basic life support, initial response to, 312
Basilar pneumothorax, 53f
BCG vaccination. See Calmette-Guérin vaccination
Beclomethasone dipropionate, 75
Beer potomania, 398
Beijing/W genotype family, of M. tuberculosis, 119
BeLPT. See Beryllium lymphocyte proliferation
testing
Benzene, 97
Benzodiazepines, 259
endotracheal intubation and, 250
mechanical ventilation and, 252, 263
withdrawing care, 256
“Berry” aneurysm, 363
Beryllium, 92
Beryllium lymphocyte proliferation testing
(BeLPT), 92
nuclear workers and, 87
Beryllium-speciﬁc CD4+T cells, on lung biopsy, 92
Betaconazole, 473
Bevacizumab, 489
BG. See Bronchocentric granulomatosis
Bicarbonate, 287, 524–525, 545
Bicarbonate dialysate, 416
Bicarbonate-containing dialysate, 390
Bilirubinuria, 379
Biomass smoke, 97, 97f
Biomass smoke-induced interstitial lung
disease, 97, 97f
Biopsy
for chronic beryllium disease, 87
of distal lung parenchyma, 39
genitourinary tuberculosis and, 123
lymph nodes and, 40
refractory asthma and, 76
specimens, rhinoviruses and, 151
Bird fancier’s lung, 79
Birds, 85
Bivalirudin, 211, 319
Bladder catheter, 382
Bladder neck obstruction, 375, 382
Blastomycosis, 531
Bleeding, 426–427. See also Hemophilia
from warfarin, cryoprecipitate and, 211
Bleeding disorders, 428
Bleeding time, 380
Bleomycin, 487
β blockade, 319, 321
β blockers, 323, 340, 363
ventricular rate and, 339
β-blockers, pain relief and, 330
Blood, from tracheobronchial tree, 17
Blood cell transfusions, immunosuppression
and, 109
Blood cultures
CAP and, 103
severe sepsis and, 278, 280
Blood delivery system, dialysis and, 388
Blood glucose levels, 287
Blood lactate levels, 283
Blood pressure, 367
Blood transfusion, hypovolemic shock and, 274
Blood urea nitrogen (BUN), 375, 396
Blood-brain barrier, 353, 446
toxic substances and, 345
Blood-CSF barrier, 446
Bloody pleural ﬂuid, 218
BMT. See Bone marrow transplantation
BNP. See Brain natriuretic peptide
Body ﬂuids, laboratory test values, 512t
Body mass data, laboratory test values, 512t
Body plethysmograph, 27
Bohr effect, 422
Bolus ﬁbrinolytics, 331
Bone and joint tuberculosis, 134
Bone density, ICSs and, 73
Bone marrow aspirates, differential nucleated cell
counts of, laboratory test values, 507t
Bone marrow suppression, ganciclovir prophylaxis
and, 466
Bone marrow transplantation (BMT), 85, 486, 489
ﬂuconazole and, 472
BOOP. See Bronchiolitis obliterans with organizing
pneumonia
Borg scale, dyspnea and. See Chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease
BOS. See Bronchiolitis obliterans syndrome
Bowels, STEMI and, 334
Boyle’s law, 27
BPA. See Bronchopulmonary aspergillosis
Bradyarrhythmias, 307
SCD and, 340
Brain, sodium/water balance in, 345
Brain cell volume, 400, 401
Brain death, 256, 527–528, 548
criteria for, 351
Brain dysfunction, EEG and, 356
Brain edema, 353, 398
Brain injury, 255
Brain ischemia, 353, 367
Brain leukostasis, 483
Brain natriuretic peptide (BNP), 365–366
shock and, 268
Brainstem, intact, 358
Brainstem damage, 351
Brainstem ischemia, 351
Brainstem reﬂexes, coma and, 347–348
Brainstem signs, 345
Breast cancer, 481
Breastfeeding
asthma medications with, 77
tuberculosis treatment and, 134
Breathing, 10, 249
airway disorder and, 9
discomfort, 8
disorders of ventilatory pump and, 7
inspection, 4
mineral dusts and, 87
Brittle asthma, 76
Bronchial asthma, eosinophilic pneumonia
and, 84
Bronchial breath sounds, 4
Bronchial circulation, asthma and, 67
Bronchial wall, 166–167
Bronchiectasis, 14, 17, 52f, 78, 166, 169, 534
deﬁnition and pathology of, 166
infectious v. noninfectious causes, 167
diagnostic approach to, 169f
etiology and pathogenesis of, 166–168
HRCT scan and, 520, 540
radiographic and laboratory ﬁndings,
168–169, 168f
“tree in bud” opacities and, 53f
Bronchiolitis, 53f, 194
HP and, 82
Bronchiolitis obliterans, 541
diacetyl exposure and, 95
Bronchiolitis obliterans syndrome (BOS), lung
transplantation and, 237
Bronchiolitis obliterans with organizing pneumonia
(BOOP), HP and, 82
Bronchitis, 18
Bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL), 39
HP and, 81, 82
ILDs and, 195, 196t
miliary tuberculosis and, 126
Pneumocystis infection, 161, 163
pulmonary inﬁltrates and, 488
Bronchocentric granulomatosis (BG), 202
Bronchoconstriction, 69
Bronchodilators, 68, 70–71, 70t
for asthma, 61
bronchiectasis and, 169
COPD and, 186
acute exacerbations of, 189
respiratory tract infections and, 16
Bronchogenic carcinoma, 15
Bronchograms, on chest CT, 51f
Bronchophony, 4
Bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (BPA), 78
Bronchoscope, 39
Bronchoscopy, 39
asthma and, 63
bronchiectasis and, 168
with brushings, M. tuberculosis and, 128
lung abscess with, 170
558
Index
Brushing
ﬂexible ﬁberoptic bronchoscopy and, 39
M. tuberculosis and, 128
B-type antibiotics, 105
B-type natriuretic peptide, 318
Bullous emphysema, 44f
Bullous lesion, 283
Burkholderia cepacia, antibiotic resistance, 111
Burkitt’s lymphoma, 485
Busulfan, 482, 487
Bypass membrane oxygenators, 146
Byssinosis, 92
C. difﬁcile colitis, 489
C. glabrata, 472
C. krusei, 472
C reactive protein, HP and, 81
CABG. See Coronary artery bypass graft
Cachectic myopathy, 363
CAD. See Coronary artery disease
Cadmium, 97
Calciﬁed lymphadenopathy, 48f
Calcium antagonists, 323, 330, 336
Calcium channel blockers, 367
Prinzmetal’s variant angina and, 323
Calcium gluconate, 314
hyperkalemia and, 408–409
Calcium homeostasis, shock and, 268
Calcium inﬂux, hypoxia and, 20
Calmette-Guérin (BCG) vaccination, 129
CAM. See Confusion Assessment Method
CA-MRSA. See Community-acquired MRSA
Cancer, 14. See also speciﬁc cancers
adrenal insufﬁciency and, 484–485
airway obstruction and, 483, 484f
chemotherapy for, renal injury and, 381
drugs,ATN and, 374
hypoglycemia and, 484
hyponatremia and, 484
ICP and, 481
intestinal obstruction and, 478
lactic acid acidosis and, 484
lactic acidosis and, 484
patients
with back pain, 479–481, 480f
with biliary obstruction, 478
with intestinal obstruction, 478
with pericardial effusion, 476–477
with spinal cord compression, 479
with SVCS, 475–476
with urinary obstruction, 478
pulmonary inﬁltrates and, 487–488
seizures and, 482
uranium miners and, 95
Candida spp., 84, 470, 471, 472, 531–532, 552–553
lung transplant recipients and, 240
Candidemia, 531, 553
CAP. See Community-acquired pneumonia
CAPD. See Continuous ambulatory
peritoneal dialysis
Capillary leak, 100
Caplan’s syndrome, 92
Carafate, mechanical ventilation and, 264
Carbamazepine, 256
Carbapenem, 169, 437
Carbon disulﬁde, 97
Carbon monoxide intoxication, 21, 95, 359, 360
Carboplatin, 374
Carcinoma, 404. See also Neoplasm
Cardiac arrest, 307, 307t, 358
anoxic cerebral injury and, 255
causes, 308t
clinical characteristics, 311–312
Cardiac arrest (Cont.):
outcome after, 311
out-of-hospital, 526, 547
survival of, 314
prediction and prevention, 308–309
sudden collapse with, 312
survivors, 314–315
treatment, 312–315
Cardiac arrhythmias, 422
Cardiac biomarkers, UA/NSTEMI and, 317
Cardiac catheterization, 333, 341
Cardiac disorders, 306
Cardiac dysfunction, hypereosinophilic syndrome
and, 85
Cardiac examination, 11
Cardiac failure, 382
Cardiac imaging, STEMI and, 328
Cardiac markers, 317, 318
Cardiac output, 29
hypoxia and, 14
pulse oximetry and, 32
shock and, 268, 271
Cardiac rehabilitation program, 341
Cardiac toxicity, 407t
Cardiac-speciﬁc troponin I (cTnI), 327
Cardiac-speciﬁc troponin T (cTnT), 327
Cardiogenic pulmonary edema, 12, 292
causes of, 298t
noncardiogenic pulmonary edema v., 12, 12t
Cardiogenic shock (CS), 247, 297, 337, 537
causes, 297, 298t
incidence, 297
pathophysiology, 297–298, 298f
patient proﬁle, 298–300, 299f
treatment, 337
Cardiomyopathies, SCD and, 311
Cardiopulmonary exercise test, 11
ILDs and, 195
Cardiopulmonary function, lung transplantation
and, 235
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR), 311, 312
comatose survivors, 359f
Cardiorespiratory function, restoration of, 359
Cardiorespiratory symptoms at rest, 476
Cardiovascular beriberi, 361
Cardiovascular collapse, 307t
forms of, 307
Cardiovascular disease
ESRD and, 390
respiratory system dyspnea v., 11
Cardiovascular events, OSAHS and, 229
Cardiovascular function, 381
Cardiovascular system
alternations in, 8, 9f
vasopressors and, 515–516, 535
Cardiovascular system dyspnea, 8, 9
Carina, normal, 41f
Case-fatality rates, pericardial tuberculosis and, 125
Caseous necrosis, 120
Caspofungin, 473, 531, 553
Catabolic myopathy, 363
Catalepsy, 343
Catatonia, 343
Catheterization, right ventricular infarction and,
337–338
Catheters, dialysis and, 388–389
Cauda equina syndrome, 480
CAVHD. See Continuous arteriovenous hemodialysis
CAVHDF. See Continuous arteriovenous
hemodiaﬁltration
Cavitary disease, 131–132
Cavities (in lungs), 45f
tuberculosis and, 121–122, 122f
Cavity lesions, lung abscess with, 170, 170f
CBD. See Chronic beryllium disease
CBF. See Cerebral blood ﬂow
CCPD. See Continuous cyclic peritoneal dialysis
CD4+T cells, Mycobacterium tuberculosis and, 120
CD8+T cells, Mycobacterium tuberculosis and, 120
Cefotaxime, 443
Ceftriaxone plus clarithromycin, 522–523, 542–543
Cell death, COPD and, 184
Cell membranes, shock and, 268
Cell necrosis, 20
Cell-free hemoglobin, 374
Cell-mediated immunity (CMI), 142
CBD and, 92
HRSV and, 155
lung transplant recipients and, 240
Mycobacterium tuberculosis and, 118
Cell-membrane permeability, alteration of,
antibacterial compounds and, 440
Cellular examination, 195–196
Cellular injury, 353
Central cyanosis, 23, 532
Central diabetes insipidus (NDI), 395
Central fever, 347
Central nervous system (CNS), 345
critical care disorders of, 358–362
diseases, inﬂuenza and, 144–145
drive to breath, diminished, 250
hypoxia and, 20–21
metastasis, 482
neoplastic meningitis, 481–482
respiratory system and, 25
Central pontine myelinolysis, 361, 361f, 368
Central sleep apnea (CSA), 226, 232, 516, 535
Central transtentorial herniation, 345, 549
Central venous catheter, 476
Central venous pressure, 337
Centrilobular inﬁltrates, 540
Cephalosporins, 111, 374, 437, 441
bronchiectasis and, 169
CF lung and, 176
Cerebellar hemorrhage, 351
Cerebral anoxic injury, 400
Cerebral blood ﬂow (CBF), 354
autoregulation of, 354, 355f
respiratory alkalosis and, 422
Cerebral edema, 476
Cerebral hemisphere damage, 345
Cerebral hemispheres, 344f
Cerebral hemorrhage, 351–352
Cerebral herniation, 344f
Cerebral mass herniations, 344–345
Cerebral mass lesions, 344–345
Cerebral neurons, 345
Cerebral perfusion, 354, 355f
Cerebral perfusion pressure (CPP), 354, 355f
Cerebral salt-wasting syndrome, 366
Cerebral vasodilation, 522, 542
Cerebral vasospasm, 256, 368
Cerebral venous sinus thrombosis, 356
Cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF), 355
examination, tuberculous meningitis and, 125
laboratory test values, 505t
malignant cells in, 482
Cerebrovascular diseases, coma diagnosis and, 351
Cerebrovascular events, OSAHS and, 229
Cerebrovascular hemorrhage, 332
Cervical pain, 364
Cervical spine injuries, 352
Cetuximab, 489
CF. See Cystic ﬁbrosis
CFTR gene, genetic mutations in, 173
CFTR mutation analysis, 175
Index
559
CFTR protein, 172–173
Chamberlain procedure, 40
Chemical chemistry, laboratory test values,
494t–500t
Chemical worker’s lung, 79
Chemicals, asthma and, 63
Chemokines, 100
Chemoprophylaxis
for antiviral chemotherapy, 457t–461t
for inﬂuenza, 147
LTBI and, 135
Chemoreceptors, 7, 9
Chemotherapeutic agents, 437
Chemotherapy, 447, 553
genitourinary tuberculosis and, 123
HUS and, 486
MSCC and, 481
neutropenic enterocolitis and, 488f
tuberculous meningitis and, 125
Chest
compression, 312
compressive cardiogenic shock and, 274
discomfort, recurrent, 340
examination, 10
imaging
atlas of, 41–57
CBD and, 92
environmental lung disease and, 87
roentgenography, PE and, 208
tightness, 7
Chest pain, 299, 326, 526, 527, 546, 547–548
respiratory system diseases and, 3
UA/NSTEMI and, 317
Chest radiography, 4–5, 11, 41–57
ARDS and, 292
asbestosis diagnosis, 89–90
cough and, 15
environmental toxins and, 87
hemoptysis and, 18
HP and, 81
ILDs and, 194
inﬁltrate on, 522, 542
malignant pericardial disease and, 476
MI and, CS caused by, 300
normal, 41f
parainﬂuenza virus and, 158
Pneumocystis infection, 162, 162f
respiratory diagnosis with, 6t
tuberculosis and, 521, 541
Chest wall, 26f
compliance, 251
Chest x-ray. See Chest radiography
Cheyne-Stokes respiration, 516, 535
CHF. See Congestive heart failure
Chickenpox, 464
Childhood brain tumors, 485
Children
amantadine and, 462
antibacterial prophylaxis in, 454
asthma in, 60–61, 62
biomass smoke and, 97, 97f
bone and joint tuberculosis, 134
coma and, 352
hemophilia in, 426
HMPV and, 157
HRSV and, 155
inﬂuenza complications for, 143
M. tuberculosis and, 128
oseltamivir and, 462
pandemics and, 141
parainﬂuenza virus and, 157–158
passive cigarette smoke, 542
Pneumocystis infection, 161
Children (Cont.):
primary tuberculosis and, 118, 122
rhinoviruses and, 151–152
rimantadine and, 462
SARS-CoV and, 153
of smoking parents, 96–97
TST and, 136
Chlamydia pneumoniae, COPD and, 189
Chlamydia spp., 15
asthma and, 62
Chlorambucil, 482
Chloramphenicol, 439, 441, 446–447
Chlorpropamide, 84, 533
Cholestasis, mechanical ventilation, 264
Cholestatic jaundice, 283
Cholestatic liver disease, 177
Cholesterol crystals, 374
Chronic asthma, 74–75
Chronic beryllium disease (CBD), 92
biopsy for, 87
sarcoidosis v., 92
Chronic bronchitis, biomass smoke and, 97, 97f
Chronic cardiac disease, 2
Chronic cough, 15, 525, 545
Chronic disseminated intravascular coagulation,
differential diagnosis, 431
Chronic eosinophilic pneumonia, 85
Chronic hepatitis B, 469
Chronic hepatitis C, 463, 469
Chronic hepatitis D, 469
Chronic hyperkalemia, 406–407
Chronic hypernatremia, 401
Chronic hypersensitivity pneumonitis (HP), 81
Chronic hypocapnia, 423
Chronic hyponatremia, 393
Chronic hypoventilation
diagnosis of, 222–223
disease entities and, 221, 222t
Chronic hypoventilation syndromes, 221, 222t,
522, 542
Chronic infection, lung transplantation and, 233
Chronic inﬂammatory response, airways and, 66–67
Chronic interstitial lung disease, 2
Chronic kidney disease, 375, 386
Chronic mediastinitis, 220
Chronic mountain sickness, 14
Chronic obstruction pulmonary disease (COPD),
General medical care, 187
Chronic obstructive lung disease, 2
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), 8,
10, 86, 92, 178, 518–519, 524, 538, 544
acute exacerbations of, 189–189
biomass smoke and, 97, 97f
clinical presentation
history, 184
laboratory ﬁndings, 185–186
physical ﬁndings, 184–185
with concomitant asthma, 76
exacerbations of, 188–189
pathogenesis of, 183–184
pathology of, with cigarette smoke, 182–183
pathophysiology of, 181
pulmonary function and, cigarette smoking and,
180–181
risk factors, 178–182
severity of, GOLD criteria for, 185t
treatment, 11, 186–189
acute exacerbations, 189
nonpharmacologic therapies, 187–189
pharmacotherapies, 186–187
stable phase, 186
Chronic rejection, lung transplantation and, 237
Chronic respiratory acidosis, 224
Chronic respiratory alkalosis, 423
Chronic Respiratory Disease Questionnaire, 8
Chronic respiratory failure, NIV and, 262
Chronic silicosis, 91f
Chylothorax, 218
Ciclopirox, 473
Cidofovir, 465
adenovirus infections, 160
Cigarette smoke, 16, 92, 93, 96, 108, 309, 325, 514,
533, 534, 538. See also Maternal smoking
asthma and, 77–78
coal dust, 91–92
COPD and, 178–179, 179f, 182–183
ILDs and, 193
lung transplantation and, 233
Cigarette smoke, passive, 522, 542
asthma and, 62
COPD and, 180
Cigarette smoking
associated ILDs, 198
Goodpasture’s syndrome and, 193
pulmonary function and, 180–181
Cigarette smoking-associated interstitial
lung disease, 198
Ciliary dysfunction, 167
Ciproﬂoxacin
CF lung and, 176
pneumococcal resistance to, 105
Circulation, PE and, 212
Circulatory function tests, laboratory test
values, 508t
Circulatory hypoxia, 21
Cirrhosis
ﬂuid management and, 382
pleural effusions and, 216
Cisplatin, 374
CKMB (MB isoenzyme of creatine
phosphokinase), 327, 327f
Clarithromycin, 438, 443
resistance, 441
Clindamycin
anaerobic infection and, 520–521, 540
bioavailability of, 442
Clindamycin plus primaquine, pneumocystosis
and, 164, 164t
Clindamycin resistance, 441
Clinical Pulmonary Infection Score (CPIS),
110–111, 111t
Clofazimine, 130
Clonazepam, 360
Clopidogrel, 321, 341, 527, 548
STEMI and, 335f
Clostridium difﬁcile disease, 455, 488
Clotrimazole, 473
Clotting, 281
Clotting factor
activity, 424, 425f
deﬁciency, coagulation cascade and, 425f
Clubbing of digits, 4, 11, 24, 24
CMI. See Cell-mediated immunity
CMV. See Cytomegalovirus
CNS. See Central nervous system
CO2, pulmonary circulation and, 30
Coagulation
cascade, 325
activation of, 269
clotting factor deﬁciency, 425f
disorders, 424
genetic and laboratory characteristics, 425t
liver failure and, 432–433, 432t
factors, host defense and, 281
laboratory test values, 492t–494t
tests, 431
560
Index
Coagulation inhibitor replacement, 431–432
Coagulation plasma proteins, 424
Coagulopathy, severe sepsis and, 284
Coal worker’s pneumoconiosis (CWP), 87, 91
Cobalt, 92
Cobalt-induced giant cell interstitial pneumonitis,
92
Cocaine use, 528, 549
Coccidioidal meningitis, ﬂuconazole and, 472
Coccidioides immitis, 471
Cockcroft-Gault formula, 381
Coiled aneurysm, 368
Colchicine, ILDs and, 196
Cold abscess, skeletal tuberculosis, 124
Cold air, asthma and, 68
Cold-induced vasospasm, peripheral cyanosis and,
23–24
Collagen, COPD and, 183, 184
Collagen deposition, asthma and, 63
Collagen vascular disease, 11, 83
Collapse, 526, 547
Coma, 343, 549
anatomy and physiology of, 344–349
approach to patient, 346
arousal level, 347
brainstem reﬂexes, 347–348
history, 346
neurologic examination, 347
physical examination, 346–347
differential diagnosis, 350–351, 350t
funduscopic examination and, 347
neurologic examination and, 347
prognosis, 352
respiratory patterns, 348
toxic drug-induced, 345
treatment, 351–352
Comatose survivors, of cardiopulmonary
resuscitation, 359
Combination inhaler, 71
Combination therapy
antithrombotic, 341
chemotherapy, 447
HRSV and, 156
Combined FV and FVIII deﬁciency, 429
Common cold, 149, 150, 153
rhinoviruses and, 151–152
Community-acquired infections, 447–448
lung allograft and, 237
Community-acquired MRSA (CA-MRSA), 101
epidemiology, 102
treatment, 105
Community-acquired pneumonia (CAP), 99,
101, 101–108, 514–515, 522, 532, 534,
542, 543
antibiotic management, initial, 105–107, 106t
clinical manifestations, 102
complications, 107
diagnosis of, clinical and etiologic, 103–104
differential diagnosis of, 103
epidemiology, 101–102, 102t
etiology, 101
failure to improve, 107
microbial causes of, by site, 101t
prognosis and prevention, 108
treatment, 104–107
Compliance
asthma medications and, 76
treatment regimens, for tuberculosis, 130
Complicated silicosis, 90
Compressive cardiogenic shock, 274
Computed tomography (CT), 41–57
bronchiectasis and, 168, 168f
of bullous emphysema, 44f
Computed tomography (CT) (Cont.):
chest, PE and, 208, 208f
COPD and, 185, 186f
ILDs and, 194–195
of left upper lobe collapse, 42f
lung abscess on, 170, 170f
mediastinal masses, 220
metastatic brain cancer, 481
neurologic assessment and, 356
pulmonary inﬁltrates and, 488
for respiratory diseases, 36–37
SAH and, 366
Computed tomography angiography, vasospasm
and, 365
Confusion, 360, 529, 550–551
Confusion Assessment Method (CAM), 255
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia, 404
Congenital heart disease, central cyanosis and, 23
Congenital nephrogenic diabetes insipidus
(NDI), 401
Congenital tuberculosis, 126
Congestive heart failure (CHF), 46f, 337
Congo-Crimean hemorrhagic fever, 463
Connective tissue diseases (CTDs), 190
Conn’s syndrome, 404
Constipation, 334
intestinal obstruction and, 478
“Consumption,” 121–122
Continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis
(CAPD), 387, 390, 391
Continuous arteriovenous hemodiaﬁltration
(CAVHDF), 384
Continuous arteriovenous hemodialysis
(CAVHD), 384
Continuous arteriovenous hemoﬁltration
(CAVH), 384
Continuous arteriovenous modalities, 384
Continuous cyclic peritoneal dialysis (CCPD),
387, 390, 391
Continuous infusion heparin, 431
Continuous renal replacement therapy (CRRT),
384, 385, 386
Continuous-positive airway pressure (CPAP),
261–262, 519–520, 539
CSA and, 232
obstructive sleep apnea and, 230
weaning, 264–265
Contrast nephropathy, 373–374, 528, 549
preventive measures, 381
Contrast phlebography, DVT and, 209
Contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging,
PE and, 209
Controlled hyperventilation, 259
Controller, respiratory system dyspnea and, 8, 9
Controller therapies, asthma and, 72
Convulsions, 345
fever and, 347
COPD. See Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
cor Pulmonale, CF lung and, 176
Cork workers pneumonitis, 85
Corneal reﬂexes, 358
Coronary angiography, 300, 333
Coronary artery bypass graft (CABG), 301–302,
319, 333
Coronary artery disease (CAD), 317
risk proﬁling, 310
Coronary artery occlusion, 325
Coronary care unit, STEMI and, 333
Coronary plaque, 325
Coronary revascularization, 323
Coronaviruses, 150, 152
clinical manifestations, 153
epidemiology of, 152–153
Coronaviruses (Cont.):
etiologic agent, 152
laboratory ﬁndings and diagnosis, 153–154
pathogenesis of, 153
prevention, 154–155
treatment, 154
Cortical damage, 349
Cortical laminar necrosis, in hypoxic-ischemic
encephalopathy, 359, 359f
Corticosteroid-resistant asthma, 76
Corticosteroids
histone acetylation and, 76
surgery and, 78
Cortisone dependent asthma, 76
Cost, lung transplantation and, 236
Costochondritis, 553
Cosyntropin, 287
Cotton dust, 92
Cough, 2, 3, 14, 519, 522, 539, 542
adenovirus infections and, 159
bronchiectasis and, 168
complications of, 16
diagnostic algorithm, 16f
etiology of, 14–16
HP and, 81
mechanism of, 14
treatment of, 16–17
Cough syncope, 16
Cough variant asthma, 15
COX inhibitors (Cyclooxygenase inhibitors), 76
COX-2 inhibitors (Cyclooxygenase-2
inhibitors), 77
CPAP. See Continuous-positive airway pressure
CPIS. See Clinical Pulmonary Infection Score
CPP. See Cerebral perfusion pressure
CPR. See Cardiopulmonary resuscitation
Crackles, 4, 194
Cranial cavity, 344–345
“Crazy paving,” acute silicosis, 90
C-reactive protein, 280, 281
levels, 309
Creatine phosphokinase, 327, 379
Creatinine levels, 381
Critical care disorders, of peripheral nervous
system, 362–363
Critical care medicine, 246
Critical illness
complications of, 254–255
multiorgan system failure syndrome and, 252
neurologic disorders in, 354t
neurologic dysfunction and, 255–256
of peripheral nervous system, disorders of,
362–363
Critical illness myopathy, 363
Critical illness polyneuropathy, 362–363
Cromolyn sodium, 74
Cromones, 74
Croup, 149, 150, 158
CRP, 318
CRRT. See Continuous renal replacement therapy
Cryoprecipitate, warfarin and, 211
Cryptic miliary tuberculosis, 126
Cryptococcus spp., 470
lung transplant recipients and, 240
Cryptogenic organizing pneumonia, 198
CS. See Cardiogenic shock
CSA. See Central sleep apnea
CT. See Computed tomography
CTDs. See Connective tissue diseases
cTnI. See Cardiac-speciﬁc troponin I
cTnT. See Cardiac-speciﬁc troponin T
CURB-65 criteria, 104, 543
CURE trial, 319
Index
561
Curvularia, 84
Cushing’s disease, 531, 551
Cutaneous perfusion, 32
Cutaneous petechiae, 283, 347
CWP. See Coal worker’s pneumoconiosis
Cyanide intoxication, 360
Cyanosis, 22, 194
acute severe asthma and, 75
approach to patient, 24
causes of, 23t
differential diagnosis, 23–24
impaired pulmonary function and, 23
polycythemia and, 22–23
Cyanotic blue bloaters, 185
Cyanotic congenital heart disease, 34
Cycling, ventilator and, 259
Cyclooxygenase inhibitors. See COX inhibitors
Cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitors. See COX-2 inhibitors
Cyclophosphamide
and azathioprine, 195–196
hemorrhagic cystitis and, 489
Cycloserine, 129
Cyclosporine, 473
asthma and, 74
ILDs and, 196
kidney injury and, 373
nephrotoxicity, 407
renal injury and, 381
Cylindrical bronchiectasis, 166
Cylindroma, 56f
CYP450, theophylline and, 72
Cysteinyl-leukotrienes, 65–66, 66f
Cystic bronchiectasis, 52f
Cystic ﬁbrosis (CF), 172, 521, 534, 541
with bronchiectasis, 52f
CFTR protein, 172–173
clinical features of
gastrointestinal tract and, 174–175
genitourinary system and, 175
respiratory tract, 174–175
diagnosis, 175–176
epithelial dysfunction in, 173
pathogenesis of, genetic considerations, 172
pathophysiology, organ-speciﬁc, 173–174
treatment, 176–177
Cysts, thin-walled, 45f
Cytarabine, 482
Cytokines, 291–292, 360
asthma and, 66, 66f
sepsis and, 280–281
Cytomegalovirus (CMV), 465
acyclovir for, 463
lung allograft and, 237
lung transplant recipients, 240
lung transplantation and, 235
transplantation and, 239
Cytomegalovirus retinitis, 465, 467
Cytomegalovirus-associated disease, ganciclovir
prophylaxis, 466
Cytosine arabinoside, pulmonary edema and, 487
Cytotoxic agents, 482, 487
Cytotoxic edema, 353
D-alanine, 437
Dalfopristin, 438
Damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs),270
Daptomycin, 440
DDAVP, for hemophilia, 427
D-dimer test, 431
Death, 307t. See also In-hospital death; Sudden
cardiac death
arrhythmias and, 338
biologic, cardiac arrest and, 312
Death (Cont.):
HRSV pneumonia and, 156
thromboembolism, 340
tuberculosis-related, 117f
Deaths, out-of-hospital, STEMI, 328
Decerebrate rigidity, 347
Decompressive hemicraniectomy, 357
Decortication, 123, 347
Decubitus ulcers, 263–264
Deep leg veins, ultrasonography of, 208t
Deep organ fungal infections, 471
Deep venous thrombosis (DVT), 204, 287
anticoagulation for, 210
clinical decision rules for, 206t
diagnosis of, 205–206
diagnostic imaging for, 206, 206f
differential diagnosis, clinical syndromes and,
206, 206t
ICU and, 254
mechanical ventilation and, 263
primary therapy v. secondary prevention, 209f
treatment, 209–214
Deﬁbrillation, 313
Deﬁbrillator, 313, 328, 526, 547
Deﬁciencies of coagulation factors, 424
Dehydration, 177, 529, 550
Delayed postanoxic encephalopathy, 360
Delayed-type hypersensitivity reaction (DTH reaction),
Mycobacterium tuberculosis and, 119, 120
Delirium, 255, 360
Dendritic cells, asthma and, 64
Dermatophagoides spp., 68
Desalination, 397
Descending aorta, chest tomogram of, normal, 42f
Desquamative interstitial pneumonia, 198
Developing countries, 528, 549
asthma in, 60–61
Dexamethasone, 481, 532, 553
cord compression and, 480
Dexamethasone sodium phosphate, hypoadrenal
shock and, 275
Dextrose-containing solution, 390
Diabetes insipidus, 529, 550
Diabetes mellitus, 524, 544–545
OSAHS and, 229–230
sepsis and, 284
Diabetic ketoacidosis, 403, 415
Diacetyl exposure, bronchiolitis obliterans
and, 95
Dialysate, 387, 528–529, 549–550
Dialysate calcium concentration, 388
Dialysate sodium concentration, 388
Dialysis
goals of, 389
indications and modalities of, 384–385
muscle cramps and, 390
renal failure and, 386–392
Dialysis access, 388
Dialysis solution delivery system, 388
Dialysis-associated hypotension, 389–390
Dialyzer, 387
Diaphragm, 517, 536–537
Diarrhea, 530, 551
Diastolic dysfunction, 9
Diastolic failure, 336
Diazepam, 334
mechanical ventilation and, 263
DIC. See Disseminated intravascular coagulation
Diesel particulates, asthma and, 62
Diet
asthma and, 62
STEMI and, 333–334
Diffuse bronchiectasis, 540
Diffuse pneumonia, 292
Diffusing capacity, 31, 34, 35, 195
Digital clubbing, 4
Digitalis glycosides, 304, 337
Digoxin, 338, 545
Diltiazem, ventricular rate and, 339
Dilutional hyponatremia, 397
Dimorphic fungi, 470–471
Dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate, 334
Diphenhydramine, 486
Diphenylhydantoin, CNS metastases and, 482
Direct smear examination, pericardial tuberculosis
and, 125
Disability assessment, occupational lung disease,
95–96
Disability rating scheme, 95–96
Diseases of airways, 3
Disorders of neuromuscular apparatus, 5
Disorders of respiratory pump, 5
Disorders of ventilatory pump, 7
Disorders of water homeostasis, 394
Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC), 429,
552, 553
clinical causes of, 430t
pathophysiology of, 430, 430f
treatment, 431–432
hemorrhagic symptoms, 431
Distal intestinal obstruction syndrome, 177
Diuresis, 72, 382
Diuretic abuse, 405
Diuretic-induced hyponatremia, 397
Diuretics, 303, 305, 337, 375, 382, 419
ECFV and, 420
K+ removal, 409
renal injury and, 381
D-Lactic acid acidosis, 414
DNA
analysis, 175
in sputum sample, 38
vaccination, 74
viruses, 158–159
Dobutamine
hypovolemic shock and, 274
pulmonary thromboembolism-related shock, 212
for shock, 275
Doll’s eyes, 358
Donor kidneys, 239
Dopamine, 382, 513–514, 533, 535, 549
contrast nephropathy, 381
hypovolemic shock and, 274
pulmonary thromboembolism-related shock, 212
for shock, 275
Doppler echocardiographic measurements, normal
values of, laboratory test values, 510t
Doppler imaging, venous ﬂow dynamics, 208
DOTS strategy, tuberculosis control, 136, 137
Doxycycline, bioavailability of, 442
DPP-10 gene, asthma and, 62
Drotrecogin alfa, for CAP patients, 107
Drowsiness, 343, 357
Drug(s). See also Pharmacotherapy
endotracheal intubation and, 250
ILDs and, 195–196
interactions, 450
obstructive sleep apnea and, 230
overdoses, 345
regimen, latent tuberculosis infection and, 137t
resistance, tuberculosis treatment and, 132
safety
LABA, 71
SABA, 71
susceptibility testing, tuberculosis and, 127–128
tolerance, 71
562
Index
Drug(s) (Cont.):
toxicity, 112
pregnancy and, 445, 446t
tuberculosis treatment and, 131–132
Drug holiday, 271
Drug-drug interactions, 452t
Drug-induced acidosis, 415
Drug-induced delirium, 334
Drug-induced eosinophilic pneumonias, 84t
Drug-induced hepatitis, 132
Drug-induced interstitial lung disease, 200
Drug-induced lung disease, 83
Drug-resistant tuberculosis, treatment, 132–134
DTH reaction. See Delayed-type hypersensitivity
reaction
Dual platelet therapy, 341
Dural arterial-venous ﬁstula, 363
Dust exposure plus smoking, 92
Dust mites, asthma and, 61, 63
DVT. See Deep venous thrombosis
Dynamic hyperinﬂation. See Auto-PEEP
Dynamic obstruction, 316
Dysﬁbrinogenemia, 432
Dyskinesis, 340–341
Dysphonia, 73
Dyspnea, 2, 7, 11, 194, 217, 291–292, 299
affective dimension of, 8
approach to patient, 9–11, 10f
assessing, 7–8
differential diagnosis, 8–11
mechanisms of, 7–8
pathophysiology of, 9f
sensory inputs in, hypothetical model of, 7, 8f
treatment, 11
Dyspnea at rest, alveolar hyperventilation, 226
E. coli, ﬂuoroquinolone resistance, 105
EACA. See Aminocaproic acid
Early goal-directed therapy (EGDT), 249f, 286
Early invasive strategy, UA/STEMI, 322t
EBV. See Epstein-Barr virus
ECF. See Extracellular ﬂuid
ECFV. See Extracellular ﬂuid volume
12-lead ECG, 330
Echinocandins, 473
Echocardiography, 300, 303, 328
PE and, 209
ECMO. See Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation
Econazole, 473
Eczema, 61
Edema, classic pneumonia and, 100
EEG. See Electroencephalogram
Effective circulating arterial volume, 394
Effective osmolality, 393
Efferent sensory input, 7, 8f
Efferent-reafferent mismatch, 7–8
Effusions, 11
EIA. See Exercise-induced asthma
Eicosanoids, 269
Elastase antielastase hypothesis, 183–184
Elastin, 183
Elderly, 336
amantadine and, 462, 463
asthma in, 77
ﬁbrinolytic therapy in, 332
hypovolemic shock in, 272
intravascular volume and, 381
lung biopsy in, 196
pericardial tuberculosis and, 125
primary tuberculosis and, 118
rimantadine and, 462
STEMI and, 324
VAP and, 112
Elective PCI, 333
Electrocardiography (ECG), 317, 326, 328, 367
malignant pericardial disease and, 476
MI and, 300
SAH and, 367
STEMI and, 333
UA/NSTEMI and, 317
Electroencephalogram (EEG), 345
brain dysfunction and, 356
Electrolyte disturbances, 393
Electrolyte transport, in cystic ﬁbrosis, 173
Electrolytes, hyponatremia and, 367
Electromechanical dissociation, 307
Electrophrenic stimulation, 224
Electrophysiologic study, 338, 341
critical illness polyneuropathy, 362
Electroshock, 338
ELISA. See Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
Embolization, 205
Emotional support,VTE, 213
Emphysema, 35, 44f, 53f, 360, 515, 535
HP and, 82
pathogenesis of, 183–184, 183f
Empirical antibiotic treatment, of HCAP, 111t
Empirical therapy, 447
Encephalopathy, 345
of renal failure, 345
of unknown cause, 356
Endemic fungi, 470
Endemic mycoses, 470
Endobronchial biopsy, 16
Endobronchial metastasis, hemoptysis and, 483
Endobronchial tumor, 17
sputum and, blood in, 16
Endobronchial ultrasonography, 38
Endometrium, genitourinary tuberculosis
and, 123
End-organ ischemia, 396
Endothelial injury, multiorgan dysfunction, 282
Endothelin 1, shock and, 267
Endothelin antagonists, 382
Endotoxin, 280, 543
Endotoxin-neutralizing proteins, 287
Endotracheal intubation, 259, 264, 524, 544
drugs used for, 250
VAT and, 113
Endotracheal tube (ET)
contamination, 109
ventilators and, 259
Endovascular treatment, 367
End-stage liver disease, CF and, 177
End-stage renal disease (ESRD), 386, 528–529,
549–550
dialysis, dosing, 389
global perspective, 392
treatment options, 387
ENOX. See Enoxaparin
Enoxaparin (ENOX), 211, 319, 334, 527, 548
DVT and, 254
STEMI and, 335f
Entecavir, 468
Entecavir-resistant strains, 468
Enteral feeding, 255
Enterococcus faecium, vancomycin-resistant, 441
Enterotoxin B, 105
Enterotoxin C, 105
Environment control, acute HP and, 83
Environment sampling data, 87
Environmental allergens, 3
Environmental contaminates, 85
Environmental dust,World Trade Center
disaster, 95
Environmental exposures, 202
asthma and, 62–63, 68
general, 96–97
ILD and, 193
measurement of, 87–90
Environmental lung disease, 86
chest imaging and, 87
exposure, measurement of, 87–88
patient history and, physical examination and,
86–87
pulmonary function tests and, 87
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 96
Environmental respiratory carcinogens, 95
Environmental toxins, global considerations, 97, 97f
Environment-induced lung disease. See Chronic
beryllium disease
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), 142
adenovirus infections and, 160
coronaviruses and, 153, 154
HMPV and, 157
HRSV and, 156
parainﬂuenza virus and, 158
Eosinophilic bronchitis, 16, 63
Eosinophilic pneumonia, 83, 84, 513, 533
Eosinophilic pulmonary reactions, 513, 533
Eosinophils, asthma and, 63, 64–65
Eotaxin, asthma and, 66, 66f
EPA. See Environmental Protection Agency
Epidemic disease, inﬂuenza A viruses and, 140f
Epidural venous plexus obstruction, 479
Epileptic coma, 345
Epinephrine, 313, 535
Epithelial cells, of asthmatics, 65, 66f
Epithelial dysfunction, in cystic ﬁbrosis, 173
Epithelial-derived relaxant factor, 67
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), 541
lung transplant recipients and, 240
transplantation and, 239
types I and II, acyclovir for, 463
Eptiﬁbatide, 319, 527, 548
Epworth sleepiness score, 230t, 231
Erlotinib, 487
ermB gene, 105
ERV. See Expiratory reserve volume
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate, 327
HP and, 81
Erythrocyte transfusion, 287
Erythrocyte transit time, exercise and, 31
Erythromycin, 438
Erythromycin resistance, 441
Erythropoietin, 384
ESBLs. See Extended-spectrum β-lactamases
Esmolol, 367
Esophagus, chest tomogram of, normal, 42f
Essential hypernatremia, 400
Ethambutol, 127, 129, 130t, 133
Ethionamide, 129
Ethylene glycol-induced acidosis, 416
Etomidate, 259
Etoposide, 482
Eucapnia. See Open lung ventilation
Eukaryotic cells, 471
Europe, tuberculosis and, 117
European CORTICUS trial, 287
Exercise
alveolar hyperventilation and, 226–227
erythrocyte transit time and, 31
tissue O2 and, 22
Exercise testing
lung transplantation and, 235–236
post-exercise bronchoconstriction and, 70
Exercise tolerance, 341
Exercise-induced asthma (EIA), 67, 68
Index
563
Exertional dyspnea, 11, 12
Expiration, 28
Expiratory curve, 28, 28f
Expiratory ﬂow rates, plotting, 27
Expiratory reserve volume (ERV), 26f, 27
Extended-spectrum β-lactamases (ESBLs), 105, 440
Extensive drug-resistant strains, 133
Extracellular bacteria, lung transplant recipients, 240
Extracellular ﬂuid (ECF), 393, 398–399
Extracellular ﬂuid volume (ECFV), 418
ARF and, 380
Extracellular ﬂuid volume contraction, 396, 397, 401
diuretics and, 420
Extracellular matrix proteolysis, COPD and, 184
Extracellular osmolarity, 267
Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO),
263, 294
Extraparenchymal disease, 28, 29t
Extrapulmonary shunting, hypoxia secondary to, 21
Extrapulmonary tuberculosis, 122
bacteriologic evaluation for, 132
invasive diagnostic procedures and, 128
Extravascular spaces, 393
Extubation, 264, 265
VAP risk and, 113
Exudative pleural effusions, 215
differential diagnosis of, 218t
Eye examination, miliary tuberculosis and, 126
Eye signs, 351
Factor replacement therapy, hemophilia and, 426
Factor V Leiden, 517, 531, 537, 552
VTE and, 212
Factor VII inhibitor, 531, 552
Factor XI deﬁciency, 428
Factors VIII, 531, 551–552
Factors IX, 426–427
complications, 427–428
dosing, 426–427
Fallopian tubes, genitourinary tuberculosis and, 123
False localizing signs, 344, 344f
Famciclovir, 466
Familial multiple coagulation deﬁciencies, 429
Fanconi syndrome, 374
Farmer’s lung, 79, 85, 93
Fat density, CT scanning and, 36–37, 37f
Fatigue, 194
FDC. See Fixed drug-combination products
FEc1. See Fractional excretion of chloride
FEF. See Forced expiratory ﬂow
FEn2. See Fractional excretion of sodium
Fenoldopam, 549
contrast nephropathy and, 381
Fentanyl, 259
mechanical ventilation and, 263
Fetal development, anti-asthma medications and, 77
Fetal liver, prednisolone and, 77
FEV (Forced expiratory volume), 25
FEV1. See Forced expiratory volume in 1 s
FEV1/FVC ratio, 514, 533–534
Fever, 100
convulsions and, 347
tuberculosis and, 122
FFP. See Fresh frozen plasma
Fiberoptic bronchoscopy, 16
hemoptysis and, 18
ILDs and, 195
Pneumocystis infection, 163
Fibrinolysis, 212, 330–332
contraindications to, 212–213
prehospital setting, 328
Fibrinolysis inhibitor replacement, 431–432
Fibrinolytic agents, 334
contraindications and complications, 332–333
Fibrin-speciﬁc ﬁbrinolytic agents, 334
Fibroblasts, of asthmatics, 65, 66f
Fibrosis, 191, 192, 192t, 197
inﬂammation and, 67
Fibrotic lung disease, 89, 89f
gene cluster analysis and, 83
Fine-needle aspiration biopsy, mediastinal masses,
220
Fissures, 49f
“Fistula ﬁrst” initiative, 389
Fixed drug-combination products (FDC), for
tuberculosis, 130, 131
Flank pain, 375
Flexible ﬁberoptic bronchoscopy, 39
Flow cycling, 259
Flow-directed pulmonary artery catheter, 271
Flowing blood, MRI and, 37
Flow-volume curves, 27–28, 28f
Flow-volume loop, 28
“Flu mist,” 525, 546
Fluconazole, 472, 473
Flucytosine, 473
Fluid(s)
accumulation, mechanisms of, 11–12
drainage, pericardial tamponade and, 476
management, 294, 382
neurogenic shock and, 275
Fluid disturbances, 393
Fluid replacement solutions, 382, 396
Fluorescence bronchoscopy, 39
Fluoropolymers, 95
Fluoroquinolones, 101, 106, 107
adverse reactions, 452
CAP and, 103
pneumococcal resistance, 105
tuberculosis and, 129
Focal cerebral ischemia, 354, 355f
Folic acid synthesis, 163
Fomivirsen, 465
Fondaparinux, 211, 319
DVT and, 254
Food, asthma triggers, 68
Foraminal herniation, 528, 548–549
Forced expiration, 26f
Forced expiratory ﬂow (FEF), 25
Forced expiratory volume (FEV), 69
Forced expiratory volume in 1 s. (FEV1),
519, 539
COPD and, 179, 181, 181f
smokers and, 178–179, 179f
Forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1), 517, 537
Forced vital capacity (FVC), 517, 536–537
Forced vital capacity (FVC) ratio, 69
Foreign born patients, primary multidrug-resistant
tuberculosis and, 133, 133f
Formaldehyde, 95
Foscarnet, 374, 466
Fractional excretion of chloride (FEc1), 379
Fractional excretion of sodium (FEn2), 379
Fractionated low-molecular- weight heparin,
mechanical ventilation and, 263
FRC. See Functional residual capacity
Free silica, 90, 91
Free wall rupture, 302
Free water restriction
cerebral ischemia and, 368
cerebral salt-wasting syndrome and,
366, 366f
Fresh frozen plasma (FFP), 425, 433, 531, 552
warfarin and, 211
Fulminant hepatitis, 433
Functional residual capacity (FRC), 26, 26f
Fungal amylase, asthma and, 63
Fungal ball, 56
Fungal infections, 470
diagnosis of, 471
lung allograft and, 237
serum testing for, 531, 553
terminology and microbiology, 470–471
treatment, 471–473
Fungal pathogens,VAP and, 108
Fungal spores, 79
Fungi, severe sepsis and, 278, 280
Furosemide, 303, 417
Fusarium spp., 472
FVC ratio. See Forced vital capacity ratio
FXIa (Active serum protease), 428
Gabapentin, seizures, 256
Gag reﬂex, 99–100
Gait ataxia, 361
Galactomannan test, 471
Gamma globulin, asthma and, 74
Ganciclovir, 465, 465
Ganciclovir-resistant CMV infections, 467
Ganciclovir-resistant isolates, 466
Gas exchange, 205
COPD and, 182
disturbances in
clinical correlations with, 34–35
measurement of, 31–34
physiologic features, 30–31
hemoptysis and, 18
Gas exchanger, respiratory system dyspnea and, 8, 9
Gastroesophageal reﬂux
asthma triggers and, 69
cough and, 14
Gastrointestinal bleeding, 341
Gastrointestinal discomfort, 461
Gastrointestinal disease, CF and, treatment for, 177
Gastrointestinal tests, laboratory test values, 509t
Gastrointestinal tract
blood from, 17
clinical features of, cystic ﬁbrosis, 174, 175
mechanical ventilation and, 264
Gastrointestinal tuberculosis, 125
Gatiﬂoxacin, 129
Gaucher’s disease, 201
Geﬁtinib, 482, 487
Gender, SCD and, 307
Gene cluster analysis, ﬁbrotic lung disease and, 83
Gene-environmental interactions, in cystic
ﬁbrosis, 173
General physical examination, respiratory system
disorders and, 4
Genetic diseases, family history and, 3
Genetic polymorphisms, asthma and, 62
Genetics
asthma and, 62
maternal smoking and, COPD and, 180
SCD and, 307
Genital herpes virus infections, 464
Genital warts, IFNs for, 468
Genitourinary system, cystic ﬁbrosis and, 175
Genitourinary tuberculosis, 123
Genome scan linkage analysis, COPD and, 180
GFR. See Glomerular ﬁltration rate
Giant aneurysms, 364
Gitelman’s syndrome, 419
Glasgow Coma Scale, 352, 356, 356t
Global LV function, abnormal, 337
Global tissue perfusion, 254
Glomerular basement membrane, 513, 533
Glomerular ﬁltration rate (GFR), 370, 372, 373,
381, 387, 395, 418
Glomerular proteinuria, 379
Glottis, 14
β-glucan test, 471
564
Index
Glucocorticoid-remediable hyperaldosteronism, 404
Glucocorticoids, 16, 281, 287, 289, 294, 330, 367,
382, 476, 520, 532, 540, 543, 553
acute recurrent HP, 83
airway obstruction and, 483
ARDS and, 158
COPD and, acute exacerbations of, 189
coronaviruses and, 154
farmer’s lung and, 83
high-dose, 532, 553
hypereosinophilic syndrome and, 85
ILDs and, 195
inhaled, COPD and, 186–187
oral, COPD and, 187
pericardial tuberculosis and, 125
tuberculous meningitis and, 125
Glucose infusion, 415
Glucose solution, 362
Glutamate, 362
Glycemic control, 254–255
Glycocalyx bioﬁlm, on ET, 109
Glycopeptides, bacterial cell wall synthesis and, 437
Glycoprotein IIb/IIIa receptor, 325
Goblet cell metaplasia, 182
GOLD criteria, COPD and, 185t
Gold salts, 84
Gomori methenamine silver, 471
Goodpasture’s syndrome, 3, 17, 18, 35, 196,
201, 533
cigarette smoking and, 193
Gordon’s syndrome, 407
Gp IIb/IIIa receptor inhibitors, 334
GPRA gene, asthma and, 62
Graft dysfunction, lung transplantation and, 236
Graft-versus-host disease, 243
SOT and, 241
Grain dust, 93
Grain dust-induced chronic bronchitis, 93
Grain dust-induced COPD, 93
Gramicidin A, 440
Gram-negative bacilli, 105
Gram-negative bacteremia, 285
Gram-negative bacteria, host response and, 280
Gram’s stain, 103
Granular casts, 529, 550
Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor, 100
Granuloma formation, Mycobacterium tuberculosis
and, 119–120
Granulomas, miliary tuberculosis and, 126
Granulomatous disease, transplantation and, 239
Granulomatous lung disease, 191
Granulomatous vasculitides, 202
Gray hepatization, classic pneumonia and, 101
Griseofulvin, 473
Ground glass inﬁltrates, 82, 82f, 518–519, 538, 540
ARDS with, 51f
CT scan of, 50f
HP and, 82, 82f
Pneumocystis infection, 162, 162f
Group A viruses, HRSV and, 155
Group B viruses, HRSV and, 155
Guillain-Barré syndrome, 9, 343, 362, 546, 549
swine inﬂuenza vaccine and, 147
Gynecologic malignancies, 478
H. inﬂuenzae, 167
H. inﬂuenzae vaccine, transplantation and, 243
H antigens, 139, 141
H1N1 viruses, 141
HACE. See High-altitude cerebral edema
Haemophilus inﬂuenzae type b conjugate vaccines,
HSCT recipients and, 242
Half -isotonic NaCI, 400
Haloprogin, 473
Hamman-Rich syndrome, 198
Hand washing, rhinoviruses and, 152
Hantavirus pulmonary syndrome, 463
HAP. See Hospital acquired pneumonia
HAPE. See High-altitude pulmonary edema
Hashimoto encephalopathy, 347
Hay, moldy, 93
HBV DNA markers, 468
HBV DNA polymerase, 468
HCAP. See Health care-associated pneumonia
Head injury, Glasgow Coma Scale, 356, 356t
Head trauma, 358
Headache, 351
generalized, 364
Health care workers, SARS and, 154–155
Health care-associated pneumonia (HCAP), 99,
108–113
antibiotic treatment of, 111t
pathogens in, 100t
Heart, chest tomogram of, normal, 42f
Heart failure, effusion from, 216
Heart pressures, elevated, 11
Heart sounds, 326
Heavy metal concentrations, in urine, 87
Heimlich maneuver, 314
Helical CT scanning, 36–37
Heliox, airway obstruction and, 483
Helminthosporium spp., 84
Hemagglutination, parainﬂuenza virus and, 158
Hemagglutination inhibition (HI), 142
Hemagglutinin, 139
inﬂuenza A virus and, 140
Hematologic tests, for asthma, 70
Hematology laboratory test values, 492t–494t
Hematoma, 355
Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT),
recipients, 240, 242t
Hematuria, 379
Hemiplegia, 351
HEMO study, 389
Hemodialysis, 387, 409, 486
complications during, 389–390
components of, 387
schema for, 388f
vascular access for, 384
Hemodynamic assessment, STEMI and, 336–337
Hemodynamic impairment, 336
Hemodynamic parameters
hypovolemic shock and, 274
normal, 271, 271t
Hemodynamic support, 285–286
Hemoglobin concentration, 255
arterial blood gases and, 31–32
hypoxia and, 14
Hemoglobin-oxygen dissociation curve, 422
Hemolysis, 374
Hemolytic anemia, 531, 552
Hemolytic-uremic syndrome (HUS), 486
Hemophilia, 425
hepatitis and, 426
hepatitis C and, 428
inhibitor formation and, 427
nontransfusion therapy, 427
treatment of, 426–427
complications to, 427–428
Hemophilia A, 425, 531, 552
Hemophilia B, 425
Hemoptysis, 3, 14, 17, 122, 483, 513, 533
approach to patient, 18
BPA and, 78
bronchiectasis and, 168, 169
chest radiography and, 18
classiﬁcation of, 17
differential diagnosis of, 17t
Hemoptysis (Cont.):
endobronchial metastasis, 483
etiology of, 14
non massive, evaluation algorithm, 19f
treatment, 15
Hemorrhage, 211, 255, 333
PASG and, 276
symptoms, management of, 431
Hemorrhagic cystitis, 489
Hemorrhagic effusion, pericardial tuberculosis
and, 125
Hemorrhagic telangiectasia, 35
Hemothorax, 218
Henderson-Hasselbalch equation, 410
Heparin, 407
acute ischemic stroke and, 255
DVT and, 254
indications for, DIC and, 431
mechanical ventilation and, 263
PE and, 210
Hepatic coma, 345
Hepatic encephalopathy, 360
Hepatic failure, 225, 345
Hepatic hydrothorax, 216
Hepatic toxicity, 472
Hepatitis B virus, 466
drugs for, 467–468
lung transplantation and, 233
Hepatitis C, 531, 552
hemophilia and, 428
lung transplantation and, 233
Hepatitis vaccines, transplantation and, 242–243
Hepatitis viruses, antiviral drugs against, 467–468
Hepatopulmonary syndrome, 10
Hepatorenal syndrome, 372
Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome, 201
Herniation, 344, 344f
Herpes simplex virus (HSV), 466
types I and II, acyclovir for, 463
Herpes simplex virus keratitis, 467
Herpes viruses, 150
antiviral drugs against, 463–467
transplantation and, 239
Herpes zoster, with valacyclovir, 464
Herpes zoster ophthalmicus, 464
HFOV. See High-frequency oscillatory ventilation
HFV. See High-frequency ventilation
HHV. See Human herpesvirus
HI. See Hemagglutination inhibition
High-altitude cerebral edema (HACE), 20–21
High-altitude illness, 20
High-altitude pulmonary edema (HAPE), 20, 305
High-anion-gap metabolic acidosis, 414
approach to patient, 414
causes, 414t
lactic acidosis and, 414
High-density lipoprotein, classiﬁcation of,
laboratory test values, 504t
High-frequency oscillatory ventilation (HFOV),
263
High-frequency ventilation (HFV), 294
High-output hypotension, 247
High-resolution cardiac MRI, 328
High-resolution computed tomography (HRCT)
asbestos exposure and, 89
bronchiectasis and, 520, 540
HP and, 81–82
idiopathic pulmonary ﬁbrosis, 37, 37f, 197
ILDs and, 191
lung disease and, 16
NSIP and, 198, 198f
silicotic nodules, 90
toxic exposure and, 87
Hippocampus, 359
Index
565
Histamine, 65–66, 66f, 69
Histamine challenge, 70
Histamine receptor antagonists
mechanical ventilation and, 264
stress ulcer prophylaxis and, 287
Histamine-2 antagonists, stress ulcers and, 254
Histone acetylation, corticosteroids and, 76
Histone deacetylase-2, 71, 72
Histoplasma capsulatum, 471
Histotoxic hypoxia, 358
HIV infection, 15, 39, 102, 118, 193, 457, 466, 468,
484, 485, 538
amithiozone and, 129–130
Bacille Calmette-Guérin vaccination and, 135
bronchiectasis and, 167
extrapulmonary tuberculosis and, 122, 127
hemophilia and, 426
lung transplantation and, 233–234
lymph node tuberculosis with, 123
miliary tuberculosis and, 126
Mycobacterium tuberculosis and, 120
pericardial tuberculosis and, 125
Pneumocystis infection, 161, 162
pneumocystosis and, 164
primary multidrug-resistant tuberculosis and,
133, 133f
primary tuberculosis, 122
tuberculosis and, 117
HIV-associated nephropathy, 375
HIV-associated tuberculosis, 117, 126, 128
antiretroviral therapy, 134
treatment of, 134
HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors, 319
HMPV. See Human metapneumovirus
Home infusion therapy, hemophilia and, 426
Honeycombing, 47f, 81, 197
Hormonal level, hyponatremia and, 398
Hormones
asthma triggers and, 69
shock and, 268
Hospital
admissions, HRSV and, 155
CAP and, 104
discharge, UA/NSTEMI and, 321
stay
DVT and, 211–212
PE and, 211–212
STEMI, 341
Hospital acquired pneumonia (HAP), 99, 113
Hospital-acquired ARF, 374–375
Host, human, tuberculosis and, 119
Host cell kinases, 463
Host defense, 99–100, 280, 456
bronchiectasis and, 167
HRSV and, 155
virus shedding cessation and, 143
Host immunoinﬂammatory response, to shock,
269–270, 270f
Host inﬂammatory response, 100
Pneumocystis infection, 161
Host ligands, 280
Host pattern-recognition proteins, 280
Host protein, 280
Host response
to inﬂuenza, 142
local, 280–281
local control mechanisms, 281
to M. tuberculosis, 119
systemic, 280–281
systemic control mechanisms, 281
Host status, antibacterial chemotherapy and,
445–446
Host-antibacterial immune function, 445–446
Host-bacterium interaction, 119
HP. See Hypersensitivity pneumonitis
HRCT. See High-resolution computed tomography
HRSV. See Human respiratory syncytial virus
infection
HSCT. See Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation
HSRs. See Hypersensitivity reactions
HSV. See Herpes simplex virus
Human antibody infusion, reactions, 486
Human herpesvirus (HHV), 239, 465
Human metapneumovirus (HMPV), 157
Human respiratory syncytial virus infection
(HRSV), 155
epidemiology and pathogenesis, 155–156
etiologic agent, 155
laboratory ﬁndings and diagnosis, 156
prevention, 156
treatment of, 156
Human simplex virus (HSV), 465
Human T cell lymphotropic virus type 1,
transplantation and, 239
Humoral mediators, shock and, 269
Hunt-Hess classiﬁcation scale, 365, 365t
HUS. See Hemolytic-uremic syndrome
Hyaline casts, 379
Hydralazine, 84, 533
Hydration, 367
CAP and, 107
Hydrocephalus, 256, 343, 365, 367, 481
Hydrocortisone, 287, 523, 543
Hydronephrosis, 478
Hydrostatic pressure, 11–12
Hygiene hypothesis, asthma and, 62
Hyperammonemia, 345
Hyperbaric oxygen, 360
Hypercalcemia, 484
Hypercapnia, 9, 34, 345, 354
Hypercapnic central sleep apnea (CSAs), 232
Hypercarbic encephalopathy, 360
Hypercarbic respiratory failure, 258
Hyperchloremic acidosis, 414
in renal failure, 417
Hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis, 417
approach to patient, 417–418
Hypereosinophilic syndrome, 85
Hyperglycemia, 109, 392, 409, 551
CF and, 177
Hyperinﬂation (of lungs), 7, 9
COPD and, 181
Hyperkalemia, 406
ARF and, 380
causes, 407t
clinical approach to, 408t
clinical features, 407–408
diagnosis, 408
etiology, 406–407
treatment, 408–409
Hyperkalemic distal RTA, 407
Hyperkalemic periodic paralysis, 406
Hyperleukocytosis, 482
Hypernatremia, 360, 393, 400
clinical approach to, 401f
clinical features and diagnosis, 401–402
etiology of, 400–401
treatment, 402
Hyperosmolarity, 345
Hyperoxaluria, 374
Hyperphosphatemia, 485
ARF and, 380
treatment, 383–384
Hyperplasia, of airway smooth muscle, 67
Hyperreﬂexia signs, 360–361
Hyperreninemia, 404
Hypersensitivity pneumonitis (HP), 79, 92, 93, 191,
193, 520, 540
clinical presentation and diagnosis, 81–83
differential diagnosis, 83
etiology and pathogenesis of, 79, 81
examples of, 80t
global picture of, 85
subacute form of, 81
treatment, 83
Hypersensitivity reactions (HSRs), 485
antineoplastic drugs and, 489
tuberculosis treatment and, 132
Hypertension, 332, 347
Hypertensive hypervolemic therapy, cerebral
vasospasm and, 256
Hyperthermia, ICP and, 357
Hypertonic saline, ODS and, 400
Hypertonicity, 401, 529, 550
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, 308, 311
Hypertrophic osteoarthropathy, 24
Hypertrophy, of airway smooth muscle, 67
Hyperuricemia, 485
Hyperventilation, 283, 323
asthma and, 68
cerebral ischemia and, 357
Hyperventilation syndrome, 225–227, 226t, 423
Hypoadrenal shock, 275
Hypoalbuminemia, 11–12
Hypoaldosteronism, 395
Hypocalcemia, 314, 380, 381, 384
Hypocapnia, 226
Hypoglycemia, 287, 345, 416, 484
Hypokalemia, 338, 381, 403, 416
clinical approach, 405f
clinical features, 404–405
diagnosis, 405–406
etiology of, 403–404
treatment of, 406
Hypokalemic alkalosis, 420
Hypokalemic periodic paralysis, 403
Hypomagnesemia, 338, 381
Hyponatremia, 345, 360, 365, 368, 380, 393, 394,
397, 484, 551
causes of, 397t
clinical approach to, 398f
clinical features, 398
diagnosis, 398–399
differential diagnosis, 399
electrolytes and, 367
etiology of, 397–398
treatment, 399–400
Hypo-osmolality, 380
Hypoperfusion (of respiratory muscles), 251
Hypophosphatemia, 381, 415
Hypoproteinemia, 392
Hyporeninemic hypoaldosteronism, 418
Hyporeninemic hypoaldosteronism syndrome, 407
Hypotension, 278, 283, 347, 358, 396
endotracheal intubation and, 250
mechanical ventilation, 264
shock and, 268
Hypotensive molecules, 282
Hypotensive patients, shock and, 247
Hypothermia, 347
complications of, 359–360
shock and, 276
Hypotonic ﬂuid replacement, 397
Hypotonic solutions, 382
acute brain illness and, 352
Hypoventilation, 21, 221, 517, 536
hypoxemia and, 34, 34f
physiologic and clinical features, 221–222, 222f
treatment, 223–224
566
Index
Hypoventilation syndromes, 224–225, 360
Hypovolemia, 272, 370, 382–383, 395, 530, 551
causes, 395t
clinical features and diagnosis, 396
endotracheal intubation and, 250
etiology of
extrarenal, 395–396
renal, 395
pathophysiology of, 396
shock and, 267, 268
STEMI and, 337
treatment, 396–397
Hypovolemic shock, 247, 271, 272t, 516, 536
diagnosis, 272–273
treatment, 273–274
Hypoxemia, 30, 201, 205, 225
chemoreceptors and, 7
diagnostic approach to, 34, 34f
oxygen for, 196
Hypoxemic respiratory failure, 258
NO and, 263
Hypoxia, 20, 21, 358
adaptation to, 22
causes of, 20–22
effects of, 20–21
secondary to extrapulmonary shunting, 21
secondary to high altitude, 21
Hypoxic respiratory failure,ALI and, 263
Hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy, 358
clinical manifestations, 358–359
cortical laminar necrosis in, 359, 359f
diagnosis and treatment, 359–360
IABP. See Intraaortic balloon pump
Iatrogenic cardiogenic shock, 304
Ibuprofen, 426
IC. See Inspiratory capacity
ICAM-1. See Intercellular adhesion molecule 1
ICD. See Internal cardioverter/deﬁbrillator
ICF. See Intracellular ﬂuid
ICP. See Increased intracranial pressure; Intracranial
pressure
ICSs. See Inhaled corticosteroids
ICU psychosis, 360
Idiopathic BOOP, 198
Idiopathic hypersomnolence, 230
Idiopathic pulmonary ﬁbrosis (IPF), 37, 37f, 46f, 83,
190, 194f, 195, 197, 518–519, 538
IFN-γ, Mycobacterium tuberculosis and, 120
Ifosfamide, 489
IgE antibody
asthma and, 61, 64
toxic exposure and, 87
IgM antibody titer, CAP and, 104
ILDs. See Interstitial lung diseases
ILs. See Interleukins
Imaging studies. See also Computed tomography;
Doppler echocardiographic measure-
ments; High-resolution cardiac MRI;
Magnetic resonance angiography
for asthma, 70
for DVT, 206, 206f
for respiratory diseases, 36–38
Imatinib, 482, 487
Immigration, tuberculosis and, 117
Immune reconstitution inﬂammatory syndrome
(IRIS), 134
Immune system, of asthmatics, 65
Immunity
community, inﬂuenza A outbreaks, 141–142
impaired, primary tuberculosis and, 122
parainﬂuenza virus and, 158
Immunocompromised patients, 470
Immunoglobulin, HRSV and, 156
Immunology, laboratory test values, 494t–500t
Immunomodulatory therapy, for CAP patients, 107
Immunoperfusion, 487
Immunosuppressed patients
adenovirus infections and, 159
transplant recipients and, 242–243, 242tt
Immunosuppression, 109
Immunosuppressive agents, 382, 538
Pneumocystis infection, 161
toxicity, 238
Immunosuppressive response, 269
Immunotherapy, asthma and, 74
In vitro susceptibility (MIC), antibacterial
drugs, 444
Increased intracranial pressure (ICP), 259
cancer and, 481
Indomethacin, eosinophilic pneumonias and, 84
Indwelling intravenous catheter infections, lung
transplant recipients and, 241
Indwelling vascular catheters, 289
Ineffective osmoles, 393
Infants
Bacille Calmette-Guérin vaccination and, 135
coronaviruses, 153
HRSV and, 156
RSV and, 463
TST and, 136
Infarct size, 330. See also Post-infarction
Infection(s), 442. See also speciﬁc infections
ARF and, 380
control practices, 113
in cystic ﬁbrosis, 173
with human host, tuberculosis and, 119
ICU and, 254
life-threatening, 447
lung allograft and, 237–238
secretory antibodies and, 142
source of, removal of, 285
systemic control mechanisms, 281
in transplant recipients, 239–243
Infection site, antimicrobial drug and,
446–447
Inferior vena caval ﬁlters, indications for, 212
Inﬁltrate, on chest radiography, 522, 542
Inﬂammation, 192, 192t
asthma and, 64
COPD and, 184
cough and, 14
effects of, airways and, 66–67
Inﬂammatory cells
asthma and, 64
shock and, 270
Inﬂammatory cytokines, 486
Inﬂammatory mediators
asthma and, 65–66, 66f
pneumonia and, 100
Inﬂammatory process
alveolar macrophages and, 100
ICSs and, 72
Inﬂuenza, 139
clinical manifestations, 143
complications of, 143
deﬁnition of, 139
differential diagnosis, 145
epidemiology, 140–142
etiologic agent, 139–140
extrapulmonary complications with, 144
laboratory ﬁndings and diagnosis, 145
pathogenesis and immunity, 142–143
prophylaxis for, 146–147
systemic symptoms, 143
treatment for, 145–146, 146t
Inﬂuenza A virus, 139, 140f, 461, 462, 546
amantadine and, 462
antigenic subtype of, 140f
antigenic variation of, epidemiology, 140–142
outbreaks of
epidemiology, 140–142
inception and termination of, 141–142
rimantadine, 462
Inﬂuenza AH3N2 viruses, 462
Inﬂuenza B virus, 139, 142, 461, 462
Inﬂuenza C virus, 139, 142
Inﬂuenza infection, 103, 525, 546
S. aureus pneumonia with, 101
Inﬂuenza prophylaxis, 525, 546
Inﬂuenza vaccination, 146–148, 147
Inﬂuenza vaccines, 108
Inﬂuenza virus
associated morbidity, 142
associated mortality, 142
bronchiectasis and, 167
with extrapulmonary complications, 144
Inhaled agents, 3
Inhaled bronchodilators, brittle asthma, 76
Inhaled corticosteroids (ICSs), 75–76
for asthma, 61
clinical use and side effects, 73
mode of action, 72
pharmacokinetics of, 73f
Inhaled environmental agents, 97
Inhaled hypertonic saline, CF lung and, 176
Inhaled nitric oxide therapy, 295
Inherited coagulation disorders, genetic and
laboratory characteristics, 425t
Inherited disorders-interstitial lung diseases,
201–202
Inhibitors, 424
In-hospital death, ﬁbrinolytic therapy and, 331
Innate immunity, 457
Inorganic dusts, in lungs, 92
iNOS (Isoform of NO synthase), 270
Inotropic drugs, 304, 382
Inspiration, 30
Inspiratory capacity (IC), 26f, 27
Inspiratory cycle, SIMV and, 261
Inspiratory squeaks, 194
Insulin resistance, 392
Insulin therapy, 287
Insulin-like growth factor II, tumors and, 484
Intensive care unit (ICU)
monitoring, 252–254
multiorgan system failure syndrome and, 252
respiratory failure and, 250
sepsis in, 254
withdrawing care, 256
Intensive care-acquired weakness, 255
Intensive insulin therapy, ICU and, 255
Intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM-1),
rhinoviruses and, 150–151
Interferon α, 468
Interferon α2a, 469
Interferon γ, 81
Interferon sprays, rhinoviruses, 152
Interferons, 463, 468. See also speciﬁc interferons
virus shedding and, 143
Interleukin 1, Mycobacterium tuberculosis and, 120
Interleukin 5, asthma and, 66, 66f
Interleukin 10, asthma and, 64
Interleukins (ILs), 100
of asthmatics, 65
shock and, 270
Internal cardioverter/deﬁbrillator (ICD),314,338,339f
International Hypersensitivity Pneumonitis Study
Group, 82
Index
567
International Liaison Committee on
Resuscitation, 360
International Subarachnoid Aneurysm
Trial (ISAT), 367
Interpandemic inﬂuenza A, 141–142
Interstitial edema, 11–12, 35
Interstitial ﬁbrosis, 293
Interstitial lung diseases (ILDs), 5, 35, 92, 190
associated connective tissue disorders, 199–200
BAL in, 195–196, 196t
cardiopulmonary exercise testing, 195
categories of, 191t
chest imaging studies, 194–195
cigarette smoking associated, 198
with diffuse alveolar hemorrhage,
syndromes of, 201
ﬁberoptic bronchoscopy and, 195
frequency of, 192t
global considerations, 202
with granulomatous response, 202
inherited disorders associated with, 201–202
laboratory workup, 194
pathogenesis of, 191–194
age, 192
cellular basis for, 193f
environmental history, 193
family history, 193
gender, 192
illness duration in, 192
smoking history, 193
physical examination for, 194
pulmonary function testing, 195
respiratory symptoms and signs, 194
tissue and cellular examination, 195–196
treatment for, 196–197
Interstitial pneumonitis (UIP), 46f, 81,
518–519, 538
Interstitial pulmonary ﬁbrosis, 11
Intestinal obstruction
cancer and, 478
treatment, 478
with malignancy, 478
Intestinal pseudoobstruction, 478
Intraabdominal malignancy, advanced, 478
Intraaortic balloon pump (IABP), 301, 302
Intraaortic counterpulsation, 304
Intraarterial vasodilators, 368
Intracellular ﬂuid (ICF), 393, 400
Intracellular pathogens, 443
Intracerebral leukocytotaxis, 482
Intracranial aneurysms, 363–364
Intracranial bleeding, 528, 549
Intracranial hematomas, 355
Intracranial hemorrhage, ﬁbrinolysis and, 213
Intracranial hypertension, 367
Intracranial pressure (ICP), 347, 353, 355, 355f
elevated
stepwise approach to, 357t
treatment of, 356–358
monitoring, 358
Intrapulmonary left-to-right shunting, 21
Intrathecal chemotherapy, 482
Intrathoracic airway, acute shortness of
breath and, 2
Intratubular casts, 374
Intravascular hemolysis, 406
Intravascular self-expanding stents, 476, 477f
Intravascular spaces, 393
Intravascular thrombus, 38, 281
Intraventricular conduction, disturbances,
339–340
Intrinsic ARF, 372, 374, 382
Intrinsic asthma, 61, 64
Intubation, 314
neuromuscular paralysis and, 259
Invasive diagnostic procedures, extrapulmonary
tuberculosis and, 128
Inverse inspiratory-to-expiratory ratio ventilation
(IRV), 262
Ion transport, in cystic ﬁbrosis, 174f
IPF. See Idiopathic pulmonary ﬁbrosis
Ipratropium bromide, 71
Irinotecan, 482
IRIS. See Immune reconstitution inﬂammatory
syndrome
Irreversible central nervous system damage. See
Sudden cardiac death
Irritant triggers, cough and, 14
IRV. See Inverse inspiratory-to-expiratory ratio
ventilation
ISAT. See International Subarachnoid Aneurysm
Trial
Ischemia, 337, 355, 355f
Ischemia-reperfusion injury, lung transplantation
and, 236
Ischemic acute renal failure, 383t
Ischemic acute tubular necrosis, 374, 375, 381
Ischemic cascade, 353, 358
Ischemic heart disease, 316
Isocyanates, 95
Isoform of NO synthase. See iNOS
Isolated pulmonary capillaritis, 201
Isoniazid, 136
eosinophilic pneumonias and, 84
LTBI and, 135
M. tuberculosis and, 127
toxicity, liver transplantation and, 241–242
tuberculosis and, 129, 130t
Isoniazid, rifampin, pyrazinamide and ethambutol,
followed by isoniazid and rifampin,
tuberculosis treatment and, 130,
131, 131t
Isoniazid-related neuropathy, 130
Isoniazid-resistant tuberculosis, 133, 133f
Isopropyl alcohol, 416
Isopropyl alcohol toxicity, 416
Isopropyl oil, 95
Isoproterenol, 339
Isosorbide dinitrate, CHF and, 337
Isotonic crystalloid solution, 516, 536
Isotonic saline, 382
hypovolemic shock and, 274
salicylate-induced acidosis and, 415
Itraconazole, 78, 472
J-receptors, 7
Jugular venous pressure, shock and, 247
Kanamycin, 129, 133
Kartagener’s syndrome, 167, 534
Kernohan-Woltman sign, 345
Ketamine, 259
Ketoacidosis, 415
treatment, 420
Ketoconazole, 473, 485
Ketolides, 438
drug interactions with, 450
resistant bacteria, 441
Kidney(s), 372, 410, 418
acyclovir and, 464
telbivudine and, 468
water load and, excretion of, 394
Kidney transplantation, 387
Killip classiﬁcation, 336–337
Kinins, 68
Klebsiella pneumoniae, 169
Klebsiella spp., 533
Korsakoff’s psychosis, 361
Kussmaul’s sign, 337
Kyphoscoliosis, 9
LA. See Lupus anticoagulant
LABAs. See Long-acting β2-agonists
Labetalol, 367
Laboratory test values, 491
β-lactam agents, 101, 106, 111, 285, 436t, 437, 440,
446, 543
bacterial resistance to, 440–441
CAP and, 103
classiﬁcation of, 438t
S. aureus pneumonia resistance, 105
β-lactam ring, 437
β-lactamases, 440
β-lactam/β-lactamase inhibitor combination, lung
abscess and, 170
Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), 391
pleural effusions and, 215–216
Lactic acid acidosis, 249
approach to patient, 414–415
cancer and, 484
treatment, 420
Laminectomy, MSCC and, 480
Lamivudine, 467
Lamivudine-resistant HBV, 468
Laplace’s law, 182
Large airway, cigarette smoke and, 182
Large-bore catheters, 389
Large-volume paracentesis, 382
Laryngeal edema, 2, 476
Laryngeal tuberculosis, 518, 538
Lassa fever, 463
Late enhancement, 328
Latent tuberculosis infection (LTBI), 118
diagnosis of, 128–129
revised drug regimen for, 137t
treatment, 135–136
tuberculin reaction, 135t
Lavage ﬂuid, polymorphonuclear leukocytes in, 81
Laxative abuse, 405
Left heart catheterization, 300
Left hemi-diaphragm, normal, 41f
Left hilum, normal, 41f
Left upper lobe
collapse, CT of, 42f
scarring, with hilar retraction, 43f
Left upper lobe bronchus, normal, 41f
Left ventricle, normal, 41f
Left ventricular aneurysm, 340–341
Left ventricular failure, 297
pleural effusion and, 517, 537
Left-to-right intracardiac shunts, 9
Leg
edematous, 206
pain, differential diagnosis for, 206, 206t
Legionella antigens, 104
Legionella pneumophila test, 104
Legionella spp, 488
Lesion biopsy, 40
Lethargy, 343
Leukemic cell lysis pneumopathy, 483
Leukostasis syndrome, 482
Level of consciousness, 355–356, 357
altered, 360
Levoﬂoxacin
bronchiectasis and, 169
pneumococcal resistance to, 105
tuberculosis and, 129
Liddle’s syndrome, 404
Lidocaine, 314, 338
568
Index
Light’s criteria, 534–535
Limiting factors, ventilation and, 259
Lincosamides, 438
Linear opacities, asbestos exposure and, 89
Linezolid, 439, 442
bioavailability of, 442
CA-MRSA ad, 107
drug interactions with, 450
tuberculosis and, 129–130
Lipid envelope, of inﬂuenza A virus, 139
Lipid formulations, 471
Live attenuated vaccine, 147
Liver
lactic acidosis and, 484
OSAHS and, 230
theophylline and, 72
Liver failure
coagulation disorders and, 432–433, 432t
pyrazinamide and, 134
Liver function, tuberculosis treatment and, 132
Liver transplantation, isoniazid toxicity and,
241–242
LMWH. See Low-molecular-weight heparin
Lobectomy, tuberculosis and, 132
Local antibacterial factors, 100
Local passive congestion, 23
Locked-in state, 343
Loefﬂer’s syndrome, 84–85
Long QT interval syndromes, 311
Long-acting β2-agonists (LABAs), 71, 75
Long-term aldosterone blockade. See Angiotensin
receptor blockers
Long-term therapy, UA/NSTEMI and, 321
Loop diuretics, 303, 337, 382, 399
contrast nephropathy and, 381
Lorazepam, 334
mechanical ventilation and, 252, 263
status epilepticus and, 256
Low-afﬁnity IgE receptors, 64
Low-density lipoprotein, classiﬁcation of, laboratory
test values, 504t
Low-dose heparin, 254
Lower airways, toxic agents in, 88
Lower lobe collapse, 42f
Lower respiratory tract, microorganisms in, 99
Lower respiratory tract defenses, 100, 109
Low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH), 210,
318, 319, 334, 407, 517–518, 537
DVT and, 254
Low-pressure pulmonary edema, 250
LTBI. See Latent tuberculosis infection
Lumbar puncture, 124, 350, 356
Lung(s)
alveoli repair and, COPD and, 184
collapse, 53f
expansion, 4
function
decortication and, 123
respiratory acidosis and, 422
hyperinﬂation, 69
inﬂammatory cells in, mechanisms for, 81
injury, 250
mass, 56f
left upper lobe, 55f
mechanoreceptors in, 7
pathophysiology, in cystic ﬁbrosis, 173–174
resection, radioisotope scan and, 38
scanning, PE and, 208–209
sections, Pneumocystis infection and, 162, 162f
Lung abscess, 169
clinical manifestations and diagnosis, 170, 170f
microbiology of, 169–170
treatment, 170
Lung apex, MRI and, 37
Lung atelectasis, 251
Lung biopsy
beryllium-speciﬁc CD4+T cells on, 92
HP and, 82
ILDs and, 195–196
Lung cancer, 55f, 481
asbestos exposure and, 90
CT and, 36–37
hemoptysis and, 483
neoplastic meningitis, 481–482
staging, bronchoscopy and, 39
SVCS and, 475
Lung carcinogen, silica as, 91
Lung compliance, 269
reduced, 251, 253
Lung disease
biologic specimens and, obtaining, 38–40
CF and, treatment for, 176–177
historic information and, 3
Lung function tests, 70
Lung parenchyma, COPD and, 182–183
Lung replacement therapy, 294
Lung transplantation, 233, 517, 521–522, 537,
541–542
CF and, 177
complications, 237t
COPD and, 188
cost of, 236
idiopathic pulmonary ﬁbrosis, 197
ILDs and, 196
indications, 233, 234t
infections in, miscellaneous, 241–242
organ allocation and, 234
outcomes, 235–238
procedure, 234–235
pulmonary eosinophilia and, 85
recipient selection, 233–234
recipients
infections
early, 240–241
late, 241
middle-period, 241
infections in, 240–241
selecting candidates for, disease-speciﬁc
guidelines, 235t
waiting list for, 234
Lung volume reduction surgery (LVRS), COPD
and, 187
Lung volumes, 15, 25, 26f
assessment of, 11
ILDs and, 195
mineral dusts, 87
Lung water, 12
Lupus anticoagulant (LA), 433,
531, 552
LVRS. See Lung volume reduction surgery
Lymph node tuberculosis (Tuberculous
lymphadenitis), 122–123
associated pulmonary disease and,
122–123
Lymph nodes
enlarged, 4
requiring biopsy, 40
Lymphangioleiomyomatosis, 45f
Lymphoblastoid, 469
Lymphocytic inﬁltrative disorders, 202
Lymphocytic interstitial pneumonitis, 202
Lymphomas, 220, 479
neoplastic meningitis, 481–482
Lymphomatoid granulomatosis, 202
Lymphopenia, 153
Lysis-centrifugation technique, 471
M. africanum, 115
M. avium complex (MAC), 128
M. bovis, 115
M. caprae, 115
Macrolide antibiotic, C. pneumoniae, 76
Macrolide-resistant bacteria, 441
Macrolides, 101, 106, 438
drug interactions with, 450
pneumococcal resistance to, 105
Macrophage invasion, tuberculosis and, 119
Macrophage-activating response, Mycobacterium
tuberculosis and, 119, 120
Macrophages
asthma and, 64
Mycobacterium tuberculosis and, 120
Magnesium deﬁciency, 420
Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA),ARF
and, 380
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
metastatic brain cancer, 481
MSCC and, 480
neoplastic meningitis, 482
respiratory system disease and, 37
Main pulmonary artery, chest tomogram of, nor-
mal, 42f
Malignancy, 537
hemoptysis and, 18
intestinal obstruction and, treatment, 478
lung transplantation and, 233
SVCS and, 475
Malignant biliary obstruction, 478
Malignant cells, in CSF, 482
Malignant lesions (in lung), PET scan, 38
Malignant obstruction, 478
Malignant pericardial disease, 476
Malignant pleural effusions, 217
Malignant spinal cord compression (MSCC), 479,
532, 553
treatment, 480–481
Malnourishment, Pneumocystis infection and, 162,
162f
Malnutrition, 361
Mammography, 535
Mandibular repositioning splint, obstructive sleep
apnea and, 230
Mannitol, 397
contrast nephropathy, 381
MAP. See Mean systemic arterial pressure;
Mitogen-activated protein
Mass, soft tissue, 56f
Massive hemoptysis, 17
treatment, 18
Massive pulmonary embolism, 206, 513–514, 533
anticoagulation for, 210
MAST. See Military antishock trousers
Mast cells
asthma and, 64
of asthmatics, 65
Mastadenovirus, 159
Material Safety Data Sheets, 86–87
Maternal smoking
asthma and, 62
COPD and, 180
Matrix protein antigens, 139
Maximal expiratory pressure (MEP), 28
Maximal inspiratory force (MIF), PNS disorders
and, 362
Maximal inspiratory pressure (MIP), 28, 28f
Maximal midexpiratory ﬂow rate (MMFR), 25, 26f
Maximum inspiratory pressure (MIP), 514,
533–534
MBC. See Minimal bactericidal concentration
MCA bifurcation aneurysms, 364
Index
569
MDR pathogens. See Multidrug-resistant pathogens
Mean aortic pressure, 29
Mean pulmonary arterial pressure (PAP), 29
measurement of, 30
Mean systemic arterial pressure (MAP), 354
Mechanical revascularization, 340
Mechanical ventilation, 112, 249, 258–265, 303,
422, 523, 524, 543, 544
cholestasis, 264
complications of, 264
pulmonary, 264
COPD and, acute exacerbations of, 189
failure to wean, 362
hypoventilation and, 223
idiopathic pulmonary ﬁbrosis, 197
indications for, 258–259
modes of, clinical characteristics of, 260t
patient, care of, 251–252
physiology of, 259
pneumonia and, 108
prone positioning during, 263
support during, 263–264
weaning from, 264–265
Mediastinal mass, of heterogeneous density, CT
scanning and, 36–37, 37f
Mediastinal masses, 219–220
Mediastinoscopy, 40, 535
Mediastinotomy, 40
specimens and, 40
Mediastinum, compartments of, 219
Mediastinum disorders, 215–220, 219
Medical history
cough and, 15
potassium depletion and, 405
Megalodiatrizoate, 177
Megestrol acetate, 485
Melanoma, 479, 481
neoplastic meningitis, 481–482
small bowel resection and, 478
Meningitis, 352, 446–447
Meniscus, clear, 54f
MEP. See Maximal expiratory pressure
Mesenchymal tumors, 484
Mesotheliomas, 217
asbestos exposure and, 90
Metabolic acidosis, 380, 383, 406, 413, 530–531, 551
differential diagnosis, 531, 551
high-anion-gap, causes, 414t
treatment, 414
Metabolic alkalosis, 418
causes of, 419t
differential diagnosis, 418–419
of gastrointestinal origin, 419
hypoventilation and, 223
pathogenesis of, 418
of renal origin, 419
treatment, 420–421
Metabolic disorders, causing coma, 345–346
Metabolic encephalopathies, 345, 355, 360
Metabolic support, 285–286
Metabolism, shock and, 269
Metal fume fever, 95
Metallic acidosis, alveolar hyperventilation, 225
Metallic mercury, 97
Metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9), COPD and, 184
Metapneumoviruses, 150
Metastatic brain cancer, 481
Metastatic disease, pleural effusions and, 217
Metastatic lung cancer, 24
Metastatic sarcoma, 55f
Metastatic tumor, vertebral column and, 479
Metastatic vertebral tumors, percutaneous
vertebroplasty and, 481
Metered dose inhaler, 71, 71t
Methacholine, 69
Methacholine challenge, 70, 96
Methanol, 416
Methanol-induced acidosis, 416
Methemoglobin, central cyanosis and, 23
Methemoglobinemia, 513, 532
Methenamine salts, 447
Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus. See
MRSA
Methotrexate, 381, 482, 487, 524–525, 545
asthma and, 74
ILDs and, 196
Methylprednisolone, 201
Methylxanthines
COPD and, acute exacerbations of, 189
hypoventilation and, 223
Metronidazole, 440
adverse reactions, 452
bioavailability of, 442
MIC. See Minimal inhibitory concentration
Miconazole, 473
Microaspiration, 109, 113
Microbes, sensing, host mechanisms for, 280
Microbial molecules, host defense and, 280
Microcirculation, shock and, 266–267
Microorganisms, severe sepsis and, 278, 279t
Midazolam, mechanical ventilation and,
252, 263
Midbrain, 344f, 345
Middle mediastinum, 219
MIF. See Maximal expiratory pressure
Mild hypoperfusion, 371
Mild hypovolemia, 272
Miliary tuberculosis, 126, 538
Military antishock trousers (MAST), 276
Mineral dusts, breathing and lung volumes, 87
Mineral ﬁber, 89
Mineralocorticoids, 407
Minimal bactericidal concentration
(MBC), 446
Minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC),
of penicillin, 104–105
Minimally conscious state, 343
Mining, 95
MIP. See Maximal inspiratory pressure
Mitogen-activated protein (MAP), 72
Mitotane, 485
Mitral regurgitation, 302
Mixed acid-base disorders, 412
examples, 412t
Mixed viral and bacterial pneumonia, with
inﬂuenza, 144
MMP-9. See Metalloproteinase-9
Modaﬁnil, 539
obstructive sleep apnea and, 230
Mode, ventilator, 259, 260t
Moderate hypovolemia, 272
Monday chest tightness, 93
Monitoring
ICP, 356, 358
of ICU, 252–254
shock and, 270–271
Monobactams, 437
Monocytes, Mycobacterium tuberculosis and, 120
Monotherapy, tuberculosis and, 129
Morbidity
acute respiratory illness and, 149
HRSV pneumonia and, 156
Morphine, 304
asthma and, 259
mechanical ventilation and, 263
STEMI and, 329–330
Mortality, 340
ARDS and, 295–296
lung transplantation and, 521, 540–541
septic shock and, 523–524, 543–544
severe sepsis, 288
VAP and, 113
Mortality rates
avian inﬂuenza viruses and, 141
for ESRD, 386–387
idiopathic pulmonary ﬁbrosis, 197
lung abscess and, 170
Motor efferents, 7
Mouth-to-mouth respiration, 312
Moxiﬂoxacin, 129
MRA. See Magnetic resonance angiography
MRI. See Magnetic resonance imaging
MRSA (Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus),
101, 108
vancomycin and, 112
MSCC. See Malignant spinal cord compression
Mucociliary clearance, 100
Mucocutaneous HSV infections, acyclovir and, 464
Mucocutaneous infections, 470
Mucosal blood ﬂow, asthma and, 67
Mucus
clearance
CF lung and, 176
in cystic ﬁbrosis, 173
hypersecretion, asthma and, 67
Multidetector-row spiral CT, chest images, 208
Multidrug-resistance tuberculosis cases, 133, 133f
Multidrug-resistant pathogens (MDR pathogens),
99, 111–112
ICU and, 254
Multiorgan dysfunction, endothelial injury and, 282
Multiorgan system failure syndrome, 252, 360–361
Multiple antibiotic resistance, 442
Multiple inﬂammatory genes, asthma and, 66, 66f
Multiple myeloma, 479
Multiple potential pathogens, therapy against, 447
Multiresistant bacterial isolates, 442
Multisystem organ failure, 266, 267f, 362
Multivessel coronary artery disease, 311
Mupirocin, 439, 441
Muscarinic receptor antagonists, 71
Muscle tremor, steroid responsiveness, 77
Muscle wasting, shock and, 269
Mushroom worker’s disease, 79
Mushrooms, HP and, 85
Myasthenia gravis, 9, 362, 363, 517, 536–537
Mycetoma, 56
Mycobacterial culture, 127
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, 103, 115, 120–121
from exposure to infection, 117–118
host response to, 119
infection, innate resistance to, 119
from infection to disease, 118
mycobacterial lipids, 120–121
transplantation and, 239
Mycoplasma, 15, 62, 488
Mycoplasma pneumoniae, 159
COPD and, acute exacerbations of, 189
Mycotic aneurysms, 364
Myocardial compliance, shock and, 268
Myocardial contractility, shock and, 268
Myocardial disease, 9
Myocardial dysfunction, 284
Myocardial infarctions (MI), 308, 310–311. See also
Acute myocardial infarctions
Myocardial perfusion imaging, 328
Myocardial rupture, 340
Myocarditis, inﬂuenza and, 144
Myoclonic status epilepticus, 360
570
Index
Myoglobin, 374, 527, 548
Myoglobinuria, 144
Myopathy, 363
Myositis, 144, 525, 546
Myxoma, 10
N antigen, 139
N-acetylcysteine, contrast nephropathy, 381
NaCI therapy, metabolic alkalosis, 420–421
Naftiﬁne, 473
NaHCO3 therapy, 415
Naive immune system, of asthmatics, 65
Naloxone, 351–352
Narcolepsy, 230
Narcotic overdose, 351–352, 517, 536
Nasal ipratropium spray, 16
Nasogastric decompression, 478
National Cooperative Dialysis Study, 389
National Emphysema Treatment trial, 187–188
Natural killer CD4+ T cells, 65, 66f
NDI. See Central diabetes insipidus; Nephrogenic
diabetes insipidus
nd-NMBAs. See Nondepolarizing neuromuscular
blocking agents
Nd:YAG laser, hemoptysis and, 483
Neck stiffness, 364
Necrotic cell death, 353–354
Necrotizing pneumonia, 112
Nedocromil sodium, 74
Needle aspiration, primary spontaneous
pneumothorax and, 513, 533
Neisseria meningitidis, 283
Neisseria meningitidis polysaccharide,
transplant recipients and, 242
Neoplasm
bleeding and, 17
CAP and, 107
cough and, 15
Neoplastic meningitis, 481–482
Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus (NDI), 395, 400,
401, 529, 550–551
Nephrotic syndrome, 11–12
Nephrotoxic acute renal failure, 375
etiology and pathophysiology of, 373–374
management of, 383t
prevention, 381
Nephrotoxic acute tubular necrosis, 374
Nephrotoxic drugs, 381
Nephrotoxicity, cidofovir and, 465
Nephrotoxin, 375
Neuraminidase inhibitors, resistance to, 462
Neurogenic bladder, 375
Neurogenic shock, 275
Neuroleptics, 360
Neurologic assessment, 355, 479
Neurologic critical care, 353
Neuromuscular blockade. See Nondepolarizing
neuromuscular blocking agents
Neuromuscular blocking agents, mechanical
ventilation and, 251
Neuromuscular disease, pulmonary
extraparenchymal disease with,
28–29, 29t
Neuromuscular paralysis, intubation and, 259
Neuromuscular transmission disorders, 363
Neuron-speciﬁc enolase (NSE), 358
Neuropathy, 130, 362
Neurotrophins, 67
Neutropenia, 289
Neutropenic enterocolitis, 488–489
chemotherapy and, 488f
Neutrophils, 65
NFκB. See Nuclear factor κB
Nicardipine, 367, 368
Niemann-Pick disease, 201
Night sweats, 122
Nimodipine, 367, 368
Nitrates, 303, 319, 329
Prinzmetal’s variant angina and, 323
Nitric oxide (NO)
asthma and, 66
cigarette smoking, 78
hypoxemic respiratory failure and, 263
shock and, 267
Nitrofurantoin, 439, 447
Nitrogen dioxide, environmental exposure to, 87
Nitroglycerin, 303–304, 329, 336
CHF and, 337
Nitroprusside, 528, 549
Nitrosoureas, 487
NIV. See Noninvasive ventilation
NO. See Nitric oxide
Nocardia spp., 169, 536
Nocturnal dyspnea, 10
Nocturnal nasal positive-pressure ventilation, CSA
and, 232
Nodular ﬁbrosis, 90
Nodular opacities, 46f
Nodular parenchymal inﬁltrates, 48f
Nodules, affecting one lobe, 6
Non-anion gap metabolic acidosis, 530, 551
Non-anion-gap acidosis, causes, 417t
Noncardiogenic pulmonary edema, cardiogenic
pulmonary edema v., 12, 12t
Noncaseating granulomas, in lung tissue, CBD
and, 92
Noncontrast CT scan, subarachnoid blood and, 366
Nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking agents
(nd-NMBAs), 363
Noninvasive ventilation (NIV), 251, 262–263, 362
Nonosmotic urinary waterloss, hypernatremia
secondary to, 400–401
Nonpositive pressure ventilation, lung atelectasis
and, 251
Non-Q-wave MI, 326
Nonreabsorbable anions, 420
Nonreactive miliary tuberculosis, 126
Nonrespiratory disease, respiratory system
complications and, 3
Nonspeciﬁc inﬂammatory responses, 143
Nonspeciﬁc interstitial pneumonia (NSIP), 197
Nonspeciﬁc reaction, to myocardial injury, 327
Nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs. See NSAIDs
Non-ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction.
See NSTEMI
Nontransmural MI, 326
Norepinephrine, 535
hypovolemic shock and, 274
neurogenic shock and, 275
for shock, 267, 275
NRAMP1 gene, mycobacteria and, 119
NSAIDs (Nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs),
330, 371, 374, 375, 402, 407, 418, 513,
531, 533, 552
allergic interstitial nephritis and, 379
renal injury and, 381
NSE. See Neuron-speciﬁc enolase
NSTEMI (Non-ST-segment elevation myocardial
infarction), 527, 548
Nuclear factor κB (NFκB), 66
Nuclear workers, beryllium lymphocyte
proliferation testing, 87
Nucleic acid ampliﬁcation test, tuberculosis
and, 127
Nucleic acid synthesis, antibacterial compounds
and, 439
Nucleoprotein antigens, 139
Nutrition, ICU and, 254–255
Nutritional management,ARF, 384
Nylon ﬂock exposure, 95
Nystatin, 473
Obesity, asthma and, 62
Obesity hypoventilation-sleep apnea syndrome, 30
Obesity-hypoventilation syndrome, 225
Obstructive lung disease, 27
Obstructive pattern (of ventilatory function), 28–29
Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA), 228, 516, 524, 535,
544–545
Obstructive sleep apnea/hypopnea syndrome
(OSAHS)
clinical features, 229–231
diagnosis of, 230–231
differential diagnosis, 230
epidemiology, 229
health resources, 232
mechanism of obstruction, 228–229
treatment, 231–232
choice of, 231–232
how to treat, 231
whom to treat, 231
when to refer, 230
Obtundation, 343
Occupational lung disease, 10
categories of, associated respiratory
conditions, 88t
disability assessment, 95–96
exposures, 3
asthma and, 63, 87, 179
asthma triggers and, 69
COPD and, 87, 179
pulmonary disease association, 88–93, 88t,
95–96
patient history and, physical examination and,
86–87
Octreotide, 478
Oculovestibular reﬂexes, 358
ODS. See Osmotic demyelination syndrome
ODTS. See Organic dust toxic syndrome
Olamine, 473
Oligonucleotides, 74
Oliguria, 516, 536
OLV. See Open lung ventilation
Omalizumab
asthma and, 74
refractory asthma, 77
Ommaya, 482
Oncologic emergencies, 475
metabolic, 484
structural-obstructive, 475–483
treatment-related, 485
Oncotic pressure, 11–12
Onset of clinical transition, to cardiac arrest,
311–312
Opacities, 197
OPAT. See Outpatient parenteral antibiotic therapy
Open lung biopsy, 40, 82, 82f
Open lung ventilation (OLV), 263
Opiates
endotracheal intubation and, 250
mechanical ventilation and, 251, 263
withdrawing care, 256
Oral alkali replacement, uremic acidosis and, 417
Oral candidiasis, 73
Oral corticosteroids, 73, 78
Oral therapy, 442––443
Ores, 95
Organ allocation, lung transplantation and, 234
Organ failure, 252
Index
571
Organ hypoperfusion, 286
Organ hypoxia, speciﬁc, 21
Organ injury, shock and, 269
Organ perfusion, 285–286
Organ transplantation, 239. See also Solid organ
transplantation
CF and, 177
pretransplantation evaluation, 239
Organic dust toxic syndrome (ODTS), 83
Organic dusts, 92
Oropharyngeal decontamination, 113
Oropharyngeal thrush, 473
Orthomyxoviridae, 139
Orthopnea, 9–11, 12
Orthostatic dizziness, 375
OSA. See Obstructive sleep apnea
OSAHS. See Obstructive sleep apnea/hypopnea
syndrome
Oseltamivir, 461, 546
CAP and, 108
inﬂuenza and, 145, 146, 146t
resistance to, 462
Osler-Rendu-Weber syndrome, 35
Osmolality, 393
Osmotic adaptation, 393
Osmotic demyelination syndrome (ODS), 399–400
Osmotic diuresis, 398
Osmotic water shifting, 398
Osteomyelitis, 446
Otitis media, 534
Outdoor air pollution, 96
Outpatient parenteral antibiotic therapy
(OPAT), 443
Over the counter agents, 525, 546
Oxazepam, 334
Oxiconazole, 473
Oxidative stress
asthma and, 66
HP and, 81
Oximetric studies, 22
Oxygen, 303, 514, 534
acute severe asthma and, 75
CAP and, 107
COPD and, 187
acute exacerbations of, 189
CSA and, 232
diffusion of, 31
humidiﬁed, airway obstruction and, 483
hypoventilation and, 223
for hypoxemia, 196
improper utilization, 22
increased requirement, hypoxia and, 21–22
pulmonary circulation and, 30
supplementation
dyspnea and, 11
hypovolemic shock and, 274
Oxygen delivery (QO2), 254
Oxygen tension, Mycobacterium tuberculosis and,
119–120
Oxygen transport calculations, 271, 272t
Oxygenation, 294
Oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve, 32–33
Ozone, 62, 96
P. aeruginosa, 107, 108, 283, 455, 533
antibiotic resistance, 111
P. jiroveci pneumonia, in sputum sample, 38
Pacing electrodes, sinus bradycardia and, 340
PAH. See Primary alveolar hypoventilation
Pain, 122, 375, 532, 553
back, with cancer, 480
β-blockers, 330
cervical, 364
chest, 299, 326, 526, 527, 546, 547–548
Pain (Cont.):
cord compression and, 479
intestinal obstruction and, 478
leg, differential diagnosis for, 206, 206t
mechanical ventilation and, 251
palliation, 481
shock and, 268
from STEMI, 326
Palatal weakness, 362
Palivizumab, 156
Palliative urinary diversion, 479
Palpation, 4
PAMPs. See Pathogen-associated molecular patterns
Pancreatic enzyme replacement, 177
Pancreatic islet cell tumors, 484
Pancytopenia, 126
Pandemic strains, avian inﬂuenza viruses and, 141
Pandemics, inﬂuenza A virus, 140, 140f, 141–142
Panton-Valentine leukocidin, 105
PAP. See Mean pulmonary arterial pressure;
Pulmonary alveolar proteinosis
Papanicolaou method, sputum staining and, 38
Para-aminosalicylic acid (PAS), 129
Paracentesis, 382
tuberculous peritonitis and, 125
Parahippocampal gyrus, 345, 345f
Parainﬂuenza virus, 150, 157
epidemiology of, 157–158
laboratory ﬁndings and diagnosis, 158
pathogenesis and clinical manifestations, 158
treatment of, 158
Paraneoplastic neuropathy, 478
Parapneumonic effusion, 216
Parasitic infections, 193, 239
Parenchyma (of lung), 190
bronchiectasis and, 166
Parenchymal cavity, 46f
Parenchymal infection, 2
Parenchymal lung diseases, 3, 15, 37, 40
Parenchymal spinal cord metastasis, 479
Parenteral antibiotic therapy, 391
Paresis of cranial nerves, 124
Parkinsonian syndrome, 360
Partial liquid ventilation (PLV), 294
Particles, characteristics of, 87, 88
Particulate exposures, 96
PAS. See Para-aminosalicylic acid
PASG. See Pneumatic antishock garment
Patchy ﬁbrosis, 93
Pathogen resistance, 111
Pathogen-associated molecular patterns
(PAMPs), 270
Pathogens
alveolar macrophages and, 100
in HCAP, 100t
Patient history
ILDs and, 192
UA/NSTEMI and, 317
Patient illness, severity of, assessment of, 246–247
Patient positioning
for shock, 275–276
ventilation and, 294
Patient-ventilatory dyssynchrony, 253
PBPs. See Penicillin-binding proteins
PCI. See Percutaneous coronary intervention
PcP. See Pneumocystis pneumonia
PCR. See Polymerase chain reaction
PCV. See Pressure-control ventilation
PDD. See Tuberculin puriﬁed protein derivative
PE. See Pulmonary embolism
PEA. See Pulseless electrical activity
Peak airway pressure, mechanical ventilation
and, 252
Peak expiratory ﬂow (PEF), 69
PEEP (Positive end-expiratory pressure), 259,
294, 296
PEF. See Peak expiratory ﬂow
Pegylated interferon, 531, 552
Penciclovir, 466
Penicillin, 105, 106, 374, 437, 513, 533
CAP and, 103
CF lung and, 176
eosinophilic pneumonias and, 84
ILDs and, 196
minimal inhibitory concentration of,
pneumococcal resistance and, 104
plus metronidazole, 540
Penicillin-binding proteins (PBPs), 437
Penicillium, 84
Pentamidine, 164, 164t, 374, 418
Penumbra, 354
Peptide macrolactones, 438–439
Peptidoglycan, 437
Peptostreptococcus spp., 521, 541
Percussion assessment, 4
Percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI), 301,
302f, 316
Percutaneous needle aspiration, lung disease and,
38–39
Percutaneous transluminal angioplasty, 368
Percutaneous vertebroplasty, metastatic vertebral
tumors and, 481
Perﬂuorocarbon, 294
Pericardia tamponade, compressive cardiogenic
shock and, 274
Pericardial effusion, 476
Pericardial ﬂuid, pericardial tuberculosis and, 125
Pericardial metastasis, 476
Pericardial tamponade, 476
Pericardial tuberculosis (Tuberculous
pericarditis), 125
treatment for, 126
Pericardiocentesis, 476, 477
Pericarditis, 144, 340
Pericardium, chest tomogram of, normal, 42f
Periodic acid-Schiff, 471
Periodic limb movement disorder of sleep, 516,
535–536
Perioperative mortality, 235
Perioperative respiratory failure, 251
Peripheral cyanosis, 23–24, 513
Peripheral eosinophilia, 83
Peripheral leukocytosis, 100
Peripheral nerve stimulator, 363
Peripheral nervous system (PNS), critical care
disorders of, 362–363
Peripheral vascular resistance, 282
Peritoneal cavity, 390–391
Peritoneal dialysis, 384, 390, 528, 549
complications during, 391–392
forms of, 390–391
Peritoneal dialysis solutions, additives to, 391
Peritoneal ﬂuid leukocyte count, 391
Peritoneal solute transport, 390
Peritonitis, 391, 396
Permissive hypercapnia, 258–259, 422
Persistent vegetative state, 343
prognosis, 352
Pertussis infection, 14–15
Pets, asthma and, 63
pH, 412, 514, 534
Mycobacterium tuberculosis and, 119–120
Phagocytosis, 119
Pharmacokinetic proﬁle, of antibacterial agent, 442
Pharmacotherapy
COPD, 186–187
for STEMI, 334–336
572
Index
Pharyngeal surgery, obstructive sleep apnea
and, 230
Phase alteration syndromes, 230
Phenobarbital, 256
Phenylephrine, 535
neurogenic shock and, 275
Phenytoin
CNS metastases and, 482
seizures, 256
Phosgene, environmental exposure to, 87
Phosphodiesterase inhibition, 72
Physical examination
dyspnea and, 10
hemoptysis and, 18
UA/NSTEMI and, 317
Physiologic dead space, 205
Pigeon breeder’s disease, 193
Piperacillin, 441
Plaque rupture, 316
Plasma HCO3, regulation of, 410
Plasma osmolality, 394, 397
Plasma potassium concentration, 408
Plasma sodium concentrations, 399
Plasmapheresis, 487, 531, 552
Plateau pressure, mechanical ventilation and, 252
Platelet adhesion, 322f
Platinum compounds, 489
Platypnea, 10
PLCH. See Pulmonary Langerhans cell histiocytosis
Pleural disorders, 215–220
Pleural effusion(s), 6, 12, 54f, 215, 514, 515,
521–522, 534–535, 541
algorithm, 216f
asbestos exposure and, 89
diagnostic approach, 215–216
etiology, 215
left, with clear meniscus, 54f
left ventricular failure and, 517, 537
miscellaneous causes, 218–219, 218t
pleural tuberculosis v., 123
secondary to viral infection, 217–218
Pleural effusions, protein levels and, 215–216
Pleural ﬂuid, 217
Pleural friction rub, 4
Pleural liquid, ultrasonography, 38
Pleural plaques, asbestos exposure and, 89
Pleural thickening, 54f
Pleural tuberculosis, 123
Pleural tumor, asbestos exposure and, 90
Pleuritic chest pain, 122
Pluses paradoxus, 274
PLV. See Partial liquid ventilation
PM/DM. See Polymyositis/dermatomyositis
PMF. See Progressive massive ﬁbrosis
Pneumatic antishock garment (PASG), 276
Pneumatic compression stockings, 263, 368
Pneumatosis intestinalis, 488
Pneumococcal pneumonia, 101
Pneumococcal resistance, 104
to ﬂuoroquinolones, 105
to macrolides, 105
Pneumococcal urine antigen test, 104
Pneumococcal vaccines, 108, 242
Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia, 407, 488, 522,
538, 542
Pneumocystis infection, 161
clinical features and diagnosis, 162–163
course and prognosis of, 163
deﬁnition and description, 161
developmental stages, 161
epidemiology of, 161
lung transplant recipients and, 240
pathogenesis and pathology, 161–162
treatment, 163, 163t
Pneumocystis pneumonia (PcP), 161
Pneumocystosis
prophylaxis of, 164t
treatment, 163, 163t
Pneumonectomy, 132
Pneumonia, 35, 99, 488, 526, 547
central cyanosis and, 23
community-acquired, 101–108
deﬁnition of, 99
health care-associated, 108–113
hospital acquired, 113–114
inﬂuenza and, 143–144
lung allograft and, 237
lung transplant recipients and, 240
pathology of, 100–101
pathophysiology of, 99–100
right lower lobe, 50f
Pneumonia Severity Index (PSI), 104
Pneumothorax, 6, 53f, 219, 264
bronchoscopy and, 39
right-sided, 53f
PNS. See Peripheral nervous system
Poliomyelitis vaccine, 242–243
Pollutants
indoor exposures, 96–97
outdoor air, 96
Polyclonal immunoglobulins, 287
Polycythemia vera, 22
Polydipsia, 401
Polymer fume fever, 95
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
ampliﬁcation, in sputum sample, 38
CAP and, 104
HMPV and, 157
P. carinii and, 488
Pneumocystis infection, 162
rhinoviruses and, 151
tuberculous meningitis and, 125
Polymyositis, 200
Polymyositis/dermatomyositis (PM/DM), 200
Polymyxins, 440
Polyneuropathy, 361
Polypeptide capreomycin, 129
Polyuria, 401
Pontine hemorrhage, 351
Porins, 440–441
Posaconazole, 473
Positive end-expiratory pressure. See PEEP
Positive pressure ventilation, 224, 264, 303
Post nasal drip, 15
Post renal ARF, 375
Posterior mediastinum, 219
Posthypercapnia, 420
Postictal state, 345
Post-infarction, 315
risk stratiﬁcation and management, 341
Postphlebitic syndrome, 206
prevention, 213
Postprimary tuberculosis, clinical manifestations of,
122–123
Postrenal ARF, 374–375
treatment, 382
Postresuscitation care, 314
Posttransplant lymphoproliferative disorder, 541
Potassium, 402
depletion, metabolic alkalosis and, 420
nonrenal loss of, 404
renal loss of, 404
supplementation, 406
Potassium bicarbonate, 406
Potassium channels, 20
Potassium excretion, 402
impaired, 408
Pott’s disease, 124, 124f, 128
Prazosin, 323
Prednisolone, fetal liver and, 77
Prednisone
lung disease and, 83
pericardial tuberculosis and, 125
Pregnancy
acyclovir and, 464
antibacterial agents and, 445, 446t
asthmatics in, 77
drug toxicity and, 445, 446t
pyrazinamide and, 134
ribavirin and, 463
warfarin and, 211
Preload
reduction of, 303
shock and, 268
Preload reduction, 305
Preloading agents, 382
Preload-reducing agents, 304
Premature ventricular contractions, 311
Prerenal acute renal failure (Prerenal ARF),
375, 379
symptoms of, 375
therapies, 381–382
Prerenal ARF. See Prerenal acute renal failure
Prerenal azotemia, 370, 372–373, 373f, 529, 550
Pressure cycling, 259
Pressure-control ventilation (PCV), 262, 262f
Pressure-support ventilation (PSV), 262
weaning from, 265
Pressure-volume curves, 26, 26f
Prevention
ARF and, 381
CAP and, 514–515, 534
of VAP, 109t, 113
Primary adrenal insufﬁciency, 407
Primary airway tumors, 483
Primary alveolar hypoventilation (PAH), 224
Primary biliary cirrhosis, 432
Primary brain tumors, 482
Primary ciliary dyskinesia, 167, 534
Primary drug resistance, 133
Primary graft failure, 540
Primary hyperaldosteronism, 404
Primary hypodipsia, 400
Primary infection, 283
Primary inﬂuenza viral pneumonia, 143–144
Primary multidrug-resistant tuberculosis, 133
Primary percutaneous intervention (PCI), 330, 331
Primary spontaneous pneumothorax, 219
needle aspiration of, 513, 533
Primary tuberculosis, 118, 122
Primary ventricular ﬁbrillation, 338
Prinzmetal’s variant angina, 322, 323, 532, 553
Prodromal complaints, 311–312
Prodromal symptoms, 364
Progesterone, hypoventilation and, 223
Progressive lung injury, 293f
Progressive massive ﬁbrosis (PMF), 90
Progressive mechanical obstruction, 316
Progressive primary tuberculosis, 121
Progressive systemic sclerosis, 199
Prophylactic antiarrhythmic drugs, 338
Prophylactic intubation, acute severe asthma and, 75
Propofol, 252, 259
Propoxyphene, 426
Propylene glycol, 414
Prostaglandin, 267
Prostaglandin analogues, 382
Prostaglandins, 65–66
Prostate cancer, 481
Prostatic disease, 375
Prostatic malignancies, 478
Protamine sulfate, for intracranial hemorrhage, 211
Index
573
Protease inhibitor, 180, 282
Proteinuria, 379
Proton pump inhibitors, metabolic alkalosis,
420–421
Provocative stress testing, 317
Provoked proximal leg DVT, 212
Pruritic erythematous rash, 375
Pseudoaneurysm, 340
Pseudohyperkalemia, 406, 408, 485
Pseudohypoaldosteronism, 407
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, 167, 264, 532
in cystic ﬁbrosis, 173
lung allograft and, 237
Pseudomonas infection, 112, 113
Pseudomonas spp., 240, 447
PSI. See Pneumonia Severity Index
PSV. See Pressure-support ventilation
Psychogenic hyperventilation, 226
Psychogenic polydipsia, 398
Public health resources, SARS and, 154
Pulmonary alveolar proteinosis (PAP), 193, 200,
516, 518–519, 536, 538
Pulmonary angiography, 38
PE and, 209
Pulmonary arteries, enlarged, 57f
Pulmonary arteriovenous ﬁstulae, central cyanosis
and, 23
Pulmonary arteriovenous malformations (AVM),
56f, 532
Pulmonary artery catheter, 253
Pulmonary artery catheterization, 303
MI and, CS caused by, 300
Pulmonary artery hypertension, 11
Pulmonary blood volume, 35
Pulmonary capillary pressures, 9
Pulmonary capillary wedge pressure, measurement
of, 30
Pulmonary circulation, disturbances in, 29–30
Pulmonary compliance, 205
Pulmonary complications, inﬂuenza and, 143–145
Pulmonary congestion, 336
Pulmonary dead space, 293
Pulmonary defense mechanisms, 167
Pulmonary disease, occupational exposures and,
88–93, 95–96
Pulmonary edema, 7, 11, 34–35, 46f, 303
central cyanosis and, 23
cytosine arabinoside and, 487
early signs, 12
types of, 304–305
Pulmonary embolectomy, 213
Pulmonary embolism (PE), 57f, 204, 205, 368
effusion secondary to, 217
integrated diagnostic modalities, 206f, 209
invasive diagnostic modalities, 209
nonthrombotic, 206–207
scintigraphic imaging of, 37
treatment, risk stratiﬁcation for, 210
Pulmonary embolus, 367
Pulmonary eosinophilia, 85
Pulmonary ﬁbrosis, 190, 201
ARDS and, 293
HP and, 81
pathogenesis of, 192f
Pulmonary function testing, 15, 524–525,
538, 545
bronchiectasis and, 168
byssinosis and, 93
CBD and, 92
COPD and, 181
environmental lung disease and, 87
HP and, 82
ILDs and, 195
Pulmonary hemorrhage
hemoptysis and, 483
necrotizing pneumonia and, 112
Pulmonary hypertension, 30, 194
Pulmonary infarction, PE with, 206t
Pulmonary inﬁltrates with eosinophilia,
84–85, 84t
Pulmonary inﬂammation, 294
Pulmonary Langerhans cell histiocytosis (PLCH),
3, 199
Pulmonary lymphangioleiomyomatosis, 200
Pulmonary lymphangitic carcinomatosis, 487
Pulmonary mycotoxicosis, 83
Pulmonary nodules, 36
Pulmonary parenchyma, 5
blood from, 17
examination, 11
MRI and, 37
Pulmonary parenchymal disease, 28–29
Pulmonary physiology, laboratory test values, 511t
Pulmonary receptors, 9
Pulmonary rehabilitation programs, 11, 187
Pulmonary sarcoidosis, 6
Pulmonary secretions, CF lung and, 176
Pulmonary tests, results, 514, 533–534
Pulmonary thromboembolism (PE)
acute management of, 210f
imaging and, 38
Pulmonary thromboembolism-related shock, 212
Pulmonary thromboendarterectomy, 213
Pulmonary vascular disease, 226
Pulmonary vascular malformations, secondary to
hepatic cirrhosis, 35
Pulmonary vascular pressures, measurement of,
methods of, 29–30
Pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR), 29, 205
abnormal function, 30
Pulmonary vasculature, 29
function of, clinical correlations with, 30
Pulmonary venous obstruction, lung transplantation
and, 236
Pulmonary vessels, diseases affecting, 30
Pulse oximetry, 32–33, 252
Pulse rate, atropine and, 351
Pulseless electrical activity (PEA), 307, 311
Pulseless sustained ventricular tachycardia, 307
Pulseless ventricular tachycardia, algorithm of, 313
Pulsus paradoxus, 75
Pupillary changes, 357
Pupillary constriction, 527–528, 548
Pupillary reactions, 347–348
Pupillary reactivity, 344
Puriﬁed protein derivative skin testing, 239
Purple toes, 375
Purpura fulminans, 432, 433
Pyogenic bacterial osteomyelitis, 124
Pyrazinamide
chronic renal failure and, 134
recommended dosage, 130t
tuberculosis and, 129
Pyridoxine, vitamin B6 and, 130
Pyroglutamic acidemia, 414
Pyuria, 379
QO2. See Oxygen delivery
Quality of life, lung transplantation and, 235–236
Quantitative-culture methods, 110
Quinidine, 338
Quinolones, 169, 374, 439, 442
Quinupristin, 438
Quinupristin/dalfopristin, drug interactions of, 450
Q-wave MI, 326
Q-waves, 326
Radiation injury, 487
Radiation pneumonitis, 487–488
Radiation therapy, 476
airway obstruction and, 483
Radiation therapy plus glucocorticoids, MSCC
and, 480–481
Radiation-derived units, laboratory test values, 512t
Radiation-induced lung toxicity, 487
Radicular pain, 479
Radiocontrast agents, kidney injury and, 373
Radiography
COPD and, 185
M. tuberculosis and, 128
for respiratory diseases, 36
Radioisotope scan, lung resection and, 38
Radiolabeled xenon gas, 37–38
Radionuclide imaging techniques, 328, 351
Radon gas, lung cancer and, 96–97
Rales, 4, 100, 336
Ramipril, 545
Randomized SHOCK, 301, 302f
Rapid shallow breathing index, 519, 538–539
RAS. See Reticular activating system
Rasburicase, 485
Rasmussen’s aneurysm, 122
RAST, for asthma, 70
Raynaud’s disease, 11, 23–24, 513, 532
Reactivation tuberculosis, 121–122
Reactive oxygen species, 270
Rebleeding, 367
Rebound thromboembolism, 211
β1-receptor, 535
H2-receptor antagonists, mechanical ventilation
and, 264
β receptors, 67
Recombinant activated protein C (aPC), 287–288
Recombinant factor VIII, 531, 552
Recombinant human DNAse, 176
Recombinant tissue plasminogen activator, 514, 533
Rectal examination, STEMI and, 334
Rectal tuberculosis, 125
Red hepatization phase, classic pneumonia and, 100
Reference values, laboratory tests, 491–512
Refractory ascites, 382
Refractory asthma, 75
differential diagnosis of, 75
mechanisms of, 75
treatment for, 77
Refractory hypotension, 286–287
Regional hydrocephalus, 345, 345f
Reimplantation response, lung transplantation
and, 236
Reinfection, HRSV and, 155
Relapse, 454
Renal biopsy, 380
Renal failure, 345
dialysis and, 386–392
hyperchloremic acidosis and, 417
Renal failure indices, 379
Renal function tests, laboratory test values, 508t
Renal hypoperfusion, 370
Renal prostaglandin biosynthesis inhibitors, 371
Renal salt retention, 371
Renal tuberculosis, 124f
Renal water excretion, 395
Renal water retention, 371
Renal-free water excretion, impairment of, 397
Renin, 268, 404, 408
Renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system, 370
inhibition of, 336
Reperfusion, cardiogenic shock, 337
Reperfusion edema, lung transplantation
and, 236
574
Index
Reperfusion therapy, 297, 328, 330
STEMI and, 331f
Rerupture, SAH and, 365
Rescue PCI, 333
Resent osmostat, 398
Residual volume (RV), 25
Resistant mutants, 447
Resistant nosocomial organisms, 447
Respirator, brain death and, 351
Respiratory acid-base disorders, 421t
Respiratory acidosis, 421, 524, 545
treatment of, 422
Respiratory alkalosis, 14, 422, 530, 551
Respiratory arrest, 528, 548–549
Respiratory bronchiolitis, 193
Respiratory diseases
by diagnostic categories, 29t
diagnostic procedures in, 36–40
Respiratory distress, 253, 258
Respiratory drive, 225, 226
SIMV and, 261
ventilator weaning and, 264
Respiratory epithelium, inﬂuenza and, 142–143
Respiratory failure, 21, 250, 259
CF lung and, 176
ICU and, 252–254
impending, NIV and, 262
type II, 250
type III, 251
type IV, 251
Respiratory function, 25
disturbances of, 25–35
Respiratory function screening, mechanical
ventilation and, 251
Respiratory hypoxia, 21
Respiratory infections
antiviral drugs against, 461–463
in COPD, 179
Respiratory muscular disorders, 517, 536–537
Respiratory neuromuscular disorders, 224
Respiratory neuromuscular system, defects in, 223
Respiratory response, occupational exposures and,
categories of, 88t
Respiratory support, 285–286
Respiratory symptoms, 3
Respiratory syncytial virus (RSVs), 62, 101, 150
ribavirin for, 463
Respiratory system, 25
compliance, 253
functions of, 30
mechanics, 252–253
Respiratory system disease, 2, 37
approach to patient with, 2–6
clinical presentation
chest radiography, 4–5, 5f
diagnostic evaluation, 14
patient history, 2–3
physical examination, 3–4
common types, 4, 5t
diagnostic studies and, clinical presentation
with, 5–6
Respiratory system dyspnea, 9
cardiovascular disease v., 11
Respiratory tract, cystic ﬁbrosis and, 174–175
Respiratory tract infections, bronchodilators
and, 16
Respiratory viruses, 101
illnesses associated with, 150, 150t
Respiratory-bronchiolitis-associated interstitial lung
disease (RB-ILD), 199
Rest ischemia, 317
Resting hypoxemia, 31
Resting volume, 26, 26f
Restrictive lung disease, 258
Restrictive pattern (of ventilatory function), 28–29
Reticular activating system (RAS), 344
Retroperitoneal hemorrhages, 433
Retrosternal clear space, normal, 41f
Revascularization, 301–302, 302f
Reversible hematopoietic toxicity, 463
Review and self-assessment
answers, 532–554
questions, 513–532
Rewarming, shock and, 276
Reye’s syndrome, 144, 145
Rhabdomyolysis, 144, 374, 381, 405, 406, 415
Rheumatoid arthritis, 199
Rheumatoid factor, HP and, 81
Rheumatoid factors, ILDs and, 194
Rhinoviruses, 150, 150, 468–469
clinical manifestations of, 151
diagnosis and treatment, 152
epidemiology of, 151
etiologic agent, 150–151
pathogenesis of, 151
prevention, 152
Rhizopus spp., 470
Rhonchi, 4, 12
Ribavirin, 463
adenovirus infections, 160
HRSV and, 156
SARS-CoV and, 154
Rifabutin, 134
Rifampin, 374, 439, 442, 443
adverse reactions, 452
M. tuberculosis and, 127
recommended dosage, tuberculosis and, 130t
SOT and, 242
tuberculosis and, 129
Rifampin-resistant organisms, 134
Right atrium, normal, 41f
Right coronary artery occlusion, 527, 548
Right hemi-diaphragm, normal, 41f
Right mainstream bronchus, chest tomogram of,
normal, 42f
Right middle lobe opacity, 49f
Right upper lobe collapse, chest x-ray, 43f
Right ventricle, normal, 41f
Right ventricular dysfunction, PE and, 205
Right ventricular infarction
shock secondary to, 302
treatment, 337–338
Right-to-left shunts, central cyanosis and, 23
Rimantadine, 462
inﬂuenza and, 146, 146t
Ringer’s lactate, hypovolemic shock and, 274
Rituximab, 428, 489
RNA segment, 141
RSVIg, HRSV and, 156
Ruptured aneurysm, 364
RV. See Residual volume
S. aureus, 169, 533
S. aureus pneumonia
inﬂuenza infection and, 101
methicillin resistance in, 105
S. pneumoniae, 103, 455, 533
S. pneumoniae resistance, 104–105
S. apiospermum infection, 472
SABAs. See Short-acting β2-agonists
Saccular aneurysms, 363–364
clinical manifestations, 364–365
pathophysiology of, 364
Saccular bronchiectasis, 166
SAH. See Subarachnoid hemorrhage
Salicylate-induced acidosis, 415, 551
Salicylates, inﬂuenza and, 145
Saline, 526, 546–547
Salt restriction with diuretics, 529, 550–551
Salt-wasting syndrome, 379, 382, 397
Sandblasting, silicosis and, 90
SAPS scoring system, 247
Sarcoid, 47f
stage I of, 47f
stage II of, 48f
stage III of, 48f
stage IV of, 49f
Sarcoidosis, 190, 191
CBD v., 92
SARS. See Severe acute respiratory syndrome
SARS-CoV. See Severe acute respiratory
syndrome-associated coronavirus
SCD. See Sudden cardiac death
Scedosporium, 472
Scleroderma, 90
Sclerotherapy, pericardial tamponade and, 476
Scrofula, 122
Secondary brain injury, 358
Secondary brain insults, 354, 355
Secondary hyperaldosteronism, metabolic alkalosis
and, 420
Secondary inﬂuenza viral pneumonia, 144
Secondary pneumothorax, 219
Secondary tuberculosis, 118, 121–122
Secretory antibodies, infection and, 142
Sedatives
acute severe asthma and, 75
mechanical ventilation and, 251
PAH and, 224
Seizures, 256, 345, 356, 367, 462
cancer and, 482
Self-expanding metal stents, 478
Self-extubation, 113
Self-inoculation, HRSV and, 155
Semicoma, 343
Sensory afferents, 7
Sensory loss, 479
Sentinel bleeds, 364–365
Sepsis, 109, 252, 360–361, 362, 363, 522, 523, 542,
543. See also Severe sepsis
in critical care unit, 254
deﬁnitions, 278, 279t
genetic factors in, 283
Sepsis-induced hypotension, 284
Sepsis-related incidence and mortality rates, age
and, 278, 280
Septic encephalopathy, 360
diagnosis of, 360–361
Septic myopathy, 363
Septic response, 278, 280, 284
Septic shock, 249, 278
deﬁnitions, 278
mortality and, 523–524, 543–544
treatment, 285–288
Serial laboratory analysis, 552, 553
Serology, CAP and, 104
Serum albumin levels, 283
Serum antibody responses, measurement
of, 142
Serum brain injury biomarker, 361
Serum cardiac biomarkers, 327
Serum creatinine measurements, 379
Serum immunoglobulins, 81
Serum magnesium, 336
Serum potassium levels, 382
Serum precipitins, 81
Serum testing, for fungal infection, 531, 553
Serum troponin, 526, 547
Serum uric acid, 379
Index
575
Severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS), 101,
150, 153, 154f
Severe acute respiratory syndrome-associated
coronavirus (SARS-CoV), 152, 152f, 153
diagnosis, 154
prevention, 155
Severe anemia, 22
Severe central nervous system dysfunction,
approach to patient, 355–356
Severe cerebral edema, 365
Severe inﬂammatory conditions, 252
Severe interstitial lung disease, 95
Severe liver disease, 552, 553
Severe lung disease, 532
Severe obstructive lung disease, 258
Severe pulmonary hypertension, 57f
Severe rhinosinusitis, 76
Severe sepsis, 278
cardiopulmonary complications, 283–284
clinical manifestations of, 283
deﬁnitions, 278, 279t
diagnosis, 284–285
epidemiology, 278, 280
etiology, 278
general support in, 287
laboratory ﬁndings, 284
microorganisms involved, 278, 279t
neurologic complications, 284
pathophysiology of, 280–283
prevention of, 289
prognosis, 288
renal complications, 284
single pathogenesis to, 282–283
treatment, 285–288
Severity-of-illness scoring systems, 247
Shallow breathing, 292
Shock, 247, 252, 537
adjunctive therapies, 275–276
approach to patient, 270–271
cardiovascular response, 268–269
cellular responses to, 268
classiﬁcation of, 267t
EGDT and, 249f
forms of, 271–275
physiologic characteristics of, 272t
hypoperfusion in, 251
inﬂammatory responses, 269–270
initial evaluation of, 247, 248
mechanical ventilation and, 249
metabolic derangements, 269
neuroendocrine response to, 268
organ dysfunction and, 282
pathogenesis and organ response to, 266–271
patient in, approach to, 266–276
patient monitoring, 270–271
patient resuscitation from, 273f
pulmonary response, 269
renal response, 269
right ventricular infarction and, 302
Shock-induced tachypnea, 269
Shock-induced vicious circle, 266, 267f
Shohl’s solution, 417
Short-acting β2-agonists (SABAs), 71, 72
acute severe asthma and, 75
Short-course chemotherapy, tuberculosis control, 136
Short-course therapy, antibiotics, 455
Shortness of breath, 8t
subacute v. chronic, 2
Shunting (of blood), hypoxemia and, 34, 34f
SI. See System of international units
Signal transduction pathways, 74
Silhouette sign, 49f
Silica, 90
Silicates, 91
Silicosis, 90
Silicotic nodules, 90
Silicotuberculosis, 134
Simple acid-base disorders, 411
compensatory responses in, 411t
Simple Coal worker’s pneumoconiosis (CWP), 91
Simple silicosis, 90
SIMV. See Synchronized intermittent mandatory
ventilation
Sinus bradycardia, 339, 340
Sinus tachycardia, 304
SIRS. See Systemic inﬂammatory response
syndrome
Situs inversus, 515, 534
Sjögren’s syndrome, 200
Skeletal tuberculosis, 124, 124f
Skin lesions, 283
Skin prick tests
for allergens, 70
BPA and, 78
toxic exposure and, 87
Skin testing. See also Tuberculin skin test
for asthma, 70
reactivity, Mycobacterium tuberculosis and, 121
SOT and, 241
SLE. See Systemic lupus erythematosus
SLED (Slow, low-efﬁciency dialysis), 386
Sleep
hypoventilation and, 222
sleep apnea and, 230
small-volume aspiration in, 99
Sleep apnea, 228, 262
Sleep disturbance, cough and, 17
Sleepy patient, clinical indicators in, 229t
Small airway
COPD and, 182
fatal asthma and, histopathology of, 63f
Small bowel resection, melanoma and, 478
Small-cell lung cancer, 56f, 478, 532, 553
Small-particle aerosol, 142
Small-volume aspiration, 99
Smoke inhalation, 95
Smoking, 3, 15. See also Cigarette smoke
asthma and, 61
Smoking cessation, COPD and, 186
Smooth muscle cells, β2-agonists and, 71
Smooth muscle hyperplasia, 197
Sodium
excretion, 395
intake, 394–395
modeling, 388
Sodium balance, 394
Sodium bicarbonate, 381, 383, 486, 528, 549
lactic acidosis and, 484
Sodium citrate, 417
Sodium polystyrene sulfonate, 409
Sodium/water balance, in brain, 345
Solid organ transplantation (SOT)
recipients, vaccination for, 242t
tuberculosis and, 241–242
Solitary pulmonary nodules, 38, 55f, 128
Somatosensory evoked potentials (SSEPs), 358
Sorbitol-induced colonic necrosis, 409
SOT. See Solid organ transplantation
Speech therapy, 76
Spider hemangiomas, 35
Spinal tuberculosis, 124, 124f
Spine sign, 50f
Spirometry, 28–29, 195
ARDS and, 296
Spontaneous breathing trials, 251, 519,
538–539
Spontaneous central sleep syndrome, 232
Spontaneous expectoration, 38
Spontaneous pneumothorax, 3
Spontaneous reperfusion of coronary artery, 330
Sputum, 15, 17
blood in, 16
collection, 38
culture, 103
tuberculosis and, 130
induction, 38
M. tuberculosis and, 117–118, 128
production, primary inﬂuenza viral pneumonia,
143–144
purulent, 15–16, 122
sample, squamous epithelial cells in, 38
smear
HIV-associated tuberculosis, 126
miliary tuberculosis and, 126
Squamous cell carcinoma, 55f
Squamous epithelial cells, in sputum
sample, 38
SSEPs. See Somatosensory evoked potentials
ST elevation MI. See STEMI
Staphylococcal chromosomal cassette types, 105
Staphylococcus aureus, 264, 391
in cystic ﬁbrosis, 173
lung allograft and, 237
vancomycin and, 441
Staphylococcus epidermidis, vancomycin-resistant, 441
Starling’s law of capillary-interstitial liquid
exchange, 267, 393
Static lung volumes, 28–29
Statins, 321
Status epilepticus, 256
STEMI (ST elevation MI), 297, 302, 324, 329f,
333, 335f
ACE inhibitors and, 335, 336
arrhythmias after, 338
clinical presentation, 325–326
complications of, management, 336–341
elderly, 324
emergency department, 328–329
hospital phase management, 333–334
initial management, 328–333
discomfort control, 329–330
laboratory ﬁndings, 326
pathophysiology of, acute plaque rupture and,
324–325
patient transportation options, 331f
pharmacotherapy, 334–336
physical ﬁndings, 326
pre-hospital care, 328
reinfarction and death, preventing, 341
reperfusion therapy, 331f
return to work, 341
secondary prevention, 341–342
sedation and, 334
Stenotrophomonas maltophilia, antibiotic resistance,
111
Stepwise therapy, chronic asthma, 74–75, 74f
Stereotactic radiosurgery, 481
Steroid-sparing therapies
asthma and, 74
refractory asthma, 77
Stiff lungs, 249
Stiff-man syndrome, 533
Stimulant drugs, sleep apnea and, 230
Stool analysis, laboratory test values, 507t
Streptococcus pneumoniae, 101
COPD and, acute exacerbations of, 189
macrolide resistant, 441
Streptogramins, 438
resistant bacteria, 441
576
Index
Streptokinase, 331, 332, 334
allergic reactions to, 333
Streptomycin, tuberculosis and, 129
Stress, asthma triggers and, 69
Stress ulcer prophylaxis, 287
histamine receptor antagonists and, 287
Stress ulcers, 283
ICU and, 254
mechanical ventilation, 264
Stridor, asthma and, 76
Stroke, 255, 351
Stroke volume, shock and, 268
Structural cells, asthma and, 65
Structural lesion, 355, 356
Structural lung disease, 533
ST-segment elevation, 330, 552, 553
Stupor, 343, 345f
Subacute hypersensitivity pneumonitis (HP), 81
Subarachnoid blood, 368
Subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH), 256, 356, 363
delayed neurologic deﬁcits of, 365–366
laboratory evaluation and imaging, 366–367, 366f
treatment, 367–368
Subcutaneous emphysema, 53f
Subcutaneous nodules, 375
Sublingual nitroglycerin, 329
Subpleural atelectasis, 54f
Subxiphoid pericardiotomy, 476
Succinylcholine chloride, 406
neuromuscular paralysis and, 259
Sudden cardiac death (SCD), 306, 526, 547
age factors, 307, 309f
bradyarrhythmias and, 340
causes, 308t
etiology, initiating events, clinical epidemiology,
307–308
forms of, 307
pathology, 308
population subsets/risk predictors, 310f
prediction of, 308–309
prevention of, 309, 315
Sudden collapse, 312
Sudden coma, 350–351
Sudden deaths, 306
Sudden infant death syndrome, 307
Sudden loss of consciousness, 364
Sudden natural death, 307
Sudden nocturnal deaths, OSAHS and, 229–230
Sufentanil, 259
Sulconazole, 473
Sulfhemoglobin, central cyanosis and, 23
Sulfonamides, 374, 439, 442
adverse reactions, 451
eosinophilic pneumonias and, 84
resistance, 164, 164t
Sulfur dioxide, asthma and, 62
Superior vena cava, normal, 42f
Superior vena cava syndrome (SVCS), 475,
532, 553
treatment, 476
Supportive therapy
adenovirus infections, 160
bronchiectasis and, 169
coronaviruses and, 154
Suppressive therapy, with valacyclovir, 464
Suprapubic cystostomy, 478
Suprasternal mediastinoscopy, 40
Supraventricular arrhythmias, 339
Surfactant replacement therapy, 294–295
Surgery
asthma and, 77–78
lung abscess and, 170
obstructive sleep apnea and, 230
Surgery, oral, hemophilia and, 426
Surgical repair, SAH, 367
Survival
ARDs, 296
lung transplantation and, 235
malignant pericardial disease and, 477
of out-of-hospital cardiac arrest, long-term
management, 314–315
primary ventricular ﬁbrillation and, 338
recipient, by pretransplantation diagnosis, 236t
Survival after sudden death. See Sudden
cardiac death
Surviving sepsis guidelines, 543
Survivors, tuberculosis, 118
Susceptibility, infecting organism, 444
SVCS. See Superior vena cava syndrome
SVR. See Systemic vascular resistance
Swan-Ganz catheter, 303, 337
Sweat acinus, 174
Sweat chloride test, 521, 541
Sweat gland, in cystic ﬁbrosis, 174
Sweat test, CF and, 175
Sweating, 404
Swine inﬂuenza vaccine, Guillain-Barré syndrome
and, 147
Sympathetic nervous system, 370
Synchronized intermittent mandatory ventilation
(SIMV), 261
weaning by, 265
Syndrome of acute hydrocephalus, 351
Syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone
secretion (SIADH), 397, 484, 551
causes, 397–398
subtypes, 398
Syndromes of interstitial lung disease with diffuse
alveolar hemorrhage, 201
Synercid, 438
Synergistic activity, 447
System of international units (SI), 491
Systemic anticoagulation, 368
Systemic arterial pH, 410
Systemic corticosteroids, 73
Systemic diseases, 325
pulmonary complications with, 4
Systemic host response, 281
Systemic inﬂammatory response syndrome (SIRS),
100, 278, 360, 362, 363, 523, 543
multiorgan system failure syndrome and, 252
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), 199–200,
520, 540
Systemic vascular resistance (SVR), 266–267, 284,
300
Systemic wasting, COPD and, 185
T cell lymphoma, 85
T cell-mediated hypersensitivity reaction, 81
T helper 2 cells, asthma and, 62
T lymphocytes, 81
asthma and, 63, 65
Mycobacterium tuberculosis and, 120
Tachyarrhythmias, 304
Tachycardia, acute severe asthma and, 75
Tachypnea, 194, 292
ACMV and, 261
Tacrolimus
kidney injury and, 373
renal injury and, 381
TACTICS-TIMI, 318
Talc dusts, 91, 95
TARC. See Thymus and activation-regulated
chemokine
Target-site modiﬁcation, macrolides and, 105
Task Force on Ethics, withdrawing care and, 256
Taxanes, 482, 489
TBI. See Traumatic brain injury
T-cell mediated immunity, parainﬂuenza
virus and, 158
Teicoplanin, 437
Telbivudine, 468
Telithromycin, 441
pneumococci resistance and, 106
Temporary electrical pacing, 339–340
Tenecteplase (TNK), 331
Tenofovir, 468
Tension pneumothorax, 219
Teratomatous neoplasms, 220
Terbinaﬁne, 473, 473
Terbutaline, 71
Terconazole, 473
Tetanus/diphtheria/pertussis vaccine, transplant
recipients and, 242
Tetracyclines, 101, 441
drug interactions with, 450–450
TFPI. See Tissue factor pathway inhibitor
Thalamic hemorrhage, 351
Theophylline, 72, 75
clearance of, 72t
contrast nephropathy, 381
COPD and, 187
plasma concentrations of, 72
refractory asthma and, 77
side effects, 72
Therapeutic drug monitoring, laboratory test
values, 501t–503t
Therapy duration, for bacterial infections, 454t
Thermodilution technique, cardiac output and, 271
Thermophilic actinomycetes, 93
Thermophilic antigens, 79
Thermophilic bacteria, 85
Thermoregulation, 395
Thiamine, 361, 362
Wernicke disease and, 351
Thiazides, 84, 402, 513, 533
Thienopyridine clopidogrel, 319
Thiotepa, 482
Third nerve palsy, 345f, 549
Third space, ﬂuid sequestration in, 396
Thirst, 375, 394, 395–396, 400
Thoracentesis, 39, 521–522, 534, 537, 541
for parapneumonic effusion, 216
pleural effusions and, 216
Thoracic radiation therapy, 487
Thoracoscopy, metastatic disease and, 217
Thoracotomy, 40
Thorax infections, digital clubbing and, 4
Thrombin, 325
Thrombocytopenia, 284, 432
Thromboembolism, 340
Thrombolysis in Myocardial Infarction Risk
Score (TIMI risk score), 318, 318f,
331–332
Thrombosis, 322f
Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura
(TTP), 486
Thromboxane A2, 267
Thunderclap headache, 364
Thymus and activation-regulated chemokine
(TARC), 66, 66f
Thyroid masses, 220
Tigecycline, 441
Time cycling, 259
Time to initial deﬁbrillation, 526, 547
TIMI risk score. See Thrombolysis in Myocardial
Infarction Risk Score
Tinzaparin, 211
Tioconazole, 473
Index
577
Tipifarnib, 482
Tiroﬁban, 319, 527, 548
Tissue
examination, ILDs and, 195–196
oxygenation, 282
perfusion, 414
samples, ﬂexible ﬁberoptic bronchoscopy and, 39
Tissue factor pathway inhibitor (TFPI), 288f
Tissue plasminogen activator (tPA), 255, 331
TLC. See Total lung capacity
TLRs. See Toll-like receptors
TLS. See Tumor lysis syndrome
TMP-SMX. See Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
TNF-α. See Tumor necrosis factor-α
TNK. See Tenecteplase
Tobacco smoke, 96–97, 521–522, 541
secondhand, 522, 542
Tobramycin, 176
Toll-like receptors (TLRs), 280
shock and, 270
Tolnaftate, 473
Topical acyclovir, 464
Topical antifungal agents, 473
Torsades des pointes, 338
Torsemide, 303
Total body sodium, 393
Total body water, 393, 399
Total dead space ventilation, 30
Total disability, 95–96
Total lipoprotein cholesterol, classiﬁcation of,
laboratory test values, 504t
Total lung capacity (TLC), 25, 514, 533–534
Toxic agents, 86–87, 93, 94t, 95
portal of entry, 97
Toxic chemicals, 93
Toxic drug-induced coma, 345
Toxic gas, bronchiectasis and, 167
Toxic injury, shock and, 269
Toxic substances
blood-brain barrier and, 345
bronchiectasis and, 167
Toxicology, laboratory test values, 501t–503t
Toxin-induced acidosis, 415
Toxoplasma gondii, transplantation and, 239
tPA. See Tissue plasminogen activator
T-piece weaning, 264–265
Trace minerals, laboratory test values, 504t
Trachea
chest tomogram of, normal, 42f
cough and, 14
normal, 41f
Tracheal intubation, 351–352
Tracheal obstruction, 476
Tracheobronchial tree, blood from, 17
Tracheostomy
obstructive sleep apnea and, 230
in ventilated patients, 259
Traction bronchiectasis, 47f
Transbronchial biopsy, 39
Transcription factors, asthma and, 66
Transesophageal echocardiography, PE and, 209
Transforming growth factor β (TGFβ), 81
Transgenic knockout mice, Mycobacterium tuberculosis
and, 120
Transient ischemia, 308
Transmural myocardial infarction, 326
Transpeptidation, 437
Transplant recipients, infections in, 239–243
Transplantation. See Organ transplantation
Transplanted stem cells, bacterial infection of, 239
Transpulmonary pressure, 25, 26f
Transtentorial herniations, 344, 344f
coma v., 344f, 355
Transthoracic echocardiography, PE and, 209
Transtracheal aspiration, lung abscess with, 170
Transtubular K concentration gradient
(TTKG), 408
Transudative pleural effusions, 215
differential diagnosis of, 218t
Trauma patients, 113, 353
Trauma-induced hypovolemia, 274
Traumatic brain injury (TBI), 354, 355
Traumatic pneumothorax, 219
Traumatic shock, 274
Treatment failure, therapy duration and, 454
“Tree in bud” opacities, and bronchiectasis, 53f
Trendelburg position, for shock, 275–276
Tretinoin, 483
Tricyclic antidepressants, 513, 533
Triﬂuridine, 467
Trigger-induced asthma, 74
Trimethoprim, 439, 442
Trimethoprim-plus dapsone and clindamycin
plus primaquine, pneumocystosis and,
163, 163t
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMX), 488
bioavailability of, 442
bronchiectasis and, 169
pneumocystosis and, 163, 163t
“Triple H,” 368
Triple-drug regimen, 111t, 112
Tropical eosinophilia, 84
Troponin elevation, 367
Trypanosoma cruzi, transplantation and, 239
TST. See Tuberculin skin test
TTKG. See Transtubular K concentration gradient
TTP. See Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura
Tube thoracostomy
metastatic disease and, 217
secondary pneumothorax, 219
Tuberculin puriﬁed protein derivative (PDD), 128,
129
Tuberculin skin test (TST), 118
Bacille Calmette-Guérin vaccination and, 135
HIV-associated tuberculosis, 126
latent M. tuberculosis infection, diagnosis of,
128–129
LTBI and, 135–136
miliary tuberculosis and, 126
Tuberculoma, 124, 125, 167
Tuberculosis, 17, 43f, 90, 115, 518, 538. See also
Tuberculosis treatment
alternative treatment regimens, 131, 131t
cavities (in lungs), 121–122, 122f
chest radiography and, 521, 541
clinical manifestations of, 122–127
control, 136–138
cutaneous forms, 126
death from, 117f
diagnosis of, 127–129
diseases and conditions favoring, 118, 118t
epidemiology of, 116–117, 116f, 117f
ethambutol, 129, 130t
ethionamide, 129
as etiologic agent, 115–116
Europe and, 117
extrapulmonary, 118
HIV co-infection and, 118
incidence rates, 116f
natural history of, 118
pathogenesis and immunity, 119–121
prevention, 134–135
serologic tests, 128
SOT and, 241–242
spontaneous remission, 118
Tuberculosis of central nervous system, 124
Tuberculosis of upper airways, 123
Tuberculosis resistant to ﬁrst line drugs, second-line
drugs, 129–130
Tuberculosis treatment, 129–134, 131–131t
breastfeeding and, 134
clinical situations, 134
drug toxicity, monitoring, 131–132
drug-resistant strains, 132
drugs, 129–130
failure and relapse, 132
regimens, 130–131
response, monitoring, 131–132
Tuberculous empyema, 123
Tuberculous lymphadenitis. See Lymph
node tuberculosis
Tuberculous meningitis, 124, 124–125
Tuberculous otitis, 126
Tuberculous pericarditis. See Pericardial tuberculosis
Tuberculous peritonitis, 125
Tuberculous pleuritis, 217
Tubuloglomerular feedback, 373
Tumor(s), 355, 404, 478
airway obstruction and, 483, 484f
DIC and, 429
insulin-like growth factor II and, 484
masses, pain and, 478
SVCS and, 475
Tumor lysis syndrome (TLS), 374, 406, 485
treatment, 485–486, 486f
Tumor necrosis factor (TNF), 100, 280
Tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α), 76, 282, 486
asthma and, 64, 66, 66f
CBD and, 92
COPD and, 184, 185
host defense and, 281
Mycobacterium tuberculosis and, 120
shock and, 270
Tungsten carbide exposures, 92
Tunnel infections, 391
Tunneled dialysis catheter, 389
Two-dimensional echocardiography
left ventricular aneurysm, 340
right ventricular infarction and, 337
Type 1 brittle asthma, 76
Type 2 brittle asthma, 76
Type II ﬁber atrophy, 363
Tyrosine kinases, 487
UA/NSTEMI (Unstable angina/non-ST-elevation
myocardial infarction), 316, 527,
547–548
clinical presentation, 317
deﬁnitions, 316
diagnostic evaluation and, 317–318, 318f
long-term management, 321
pathophysiology, 316–317
risk stratiﬁcation and prognosis, 318
treatment, 319–321
drugs in, 319, 320t, 321t
invasive v. conservative, 321
UFH. See Unfractionated heparin
UIP. See Interstitial pneumonitis
Ultraﬁltration, 388, 389
Ultrasonography, lung disease and, 38
Ultraviolet radiation, tuberculosis control, 136
Uncal transtentorial herniation, 344, 344f, 549
Undecylenic acid, 473
Unfractionated heparin (UFH), 210, 319,
334, 368, 517–518, 537
UNICEF, 128
United States, tuberculosis and, 117
Unstable angina, 527, 548
with myocardial oxygen demand, 316–317
578
Index
Upper airway
function, ventilator weaning and, 264
obstruction, 476
secretions, cough and, 14
Upper airway cough syndrome, 15
Upper respiratory infection, 15
Uranium miners, cancers and, 95
Urate oxidase, 485
Uremic acidosis, 418
oral alkali replacement and, 417
Uremic bleeding, 384
Uremic syndrome, 380
Ureteral stents, 478
Uretic obstruction, 382
Urgent PCI, 333
Uric acid, 381
Uric acid crystals, 379, 381
Uricosuria, 374
Urinalysis, 375
genitourinary tuberculosis and, 123
HUS and, 486
Urinary tract imaging, 380
Urinary tract infections (UTIs), 446
Urinary tract obstruction, 374, 375, 478
Urine
electrolytes, 419
gap, 418
heavy metal concentrations in, 87
osmolality, 401
output, hyponatremia and, 399
sediment, 379
Urine sodium concentration. See Fractional
excretion of chloride
Urine to plasma osmolality ratio, 406
Urine analysis, laboratory test values, 506t
Ursodeoxycholic acid, cholestatic liver disease
and, 177
Usual interstitial pneumonitis, CT scan of, 47f
UTIs. See Urinary tract infections
Vaccination
CAP and, 108
transplant recipients and, 242–243, 242t
Vaccines, 434
adenovirus infections, 160
inﬂuenza, 146–147
SARS and, 155
Vaginal candidiasis, 473
Valacyclovir, 463, 463
suppressive therapy with, 464
Valganciclovir, 465
Valproate, 360
Valsartan, 525, 545–546
Vancomycin, 437, 523, 543
CA-MRSA ad, 107
MRSA and, 112
Vancomycin-resistant bacteria, 441
Vancomycin-resistant enterococci
(VRE), 441
VAP. SeeVentilator-associated pneumonia
Varicella-zoster (VZV), 466
acyclovir and, 464
Varicella-zoster immune globulin, 243
Varicella-zoster virus, 144, 239
Vascular responses, asthma and, 67
Vascular structures, CT scanning and, 36–37
Vasoconstrictors, 414–415
Vasodepressor syncope, 307
Vasodilation, shock and, 267
Vasodilators, 337
circulating, shock and, 267
renal injury and, 381
Vasogenic edema, 353
Vasopressin, 313
hypovolemic shock and, 274
shock and, 267
Vasopressin infusion, 286
Vasopressors
cardiovascular system and, 515–516, 535
MI and, 300–301
Vasospasm, 365, 366, 367
Vasospastic disorder, 322
VATS. SeeVideo-assisted thoracic surgery
VC. SeeVital capacity
Vegetative state, 343
Venous obstruction, peripheral cyanosis and, 23–24
Venous oxygen saturation, 254
Venous system, shock and, 268
Venous thromboembolism (VTE), 204,
517–518, 537
diagnosis of, 205–206
epidemiology of, 204–205
pathophysiology of, 205
prevention, 213–214, 231t
Ventilation, 25, 30
acute severe asthma and, 75
interventions used with, 263
nonconventional strategies, 263
Ventilation disorders, 221
Ventilation scans, 208
Ventilation-perfusion lung scanning, 37
Ventilation-perfusion matching, 30, 31
Ventilation-perfusion mismatch, 12, 12t, 21
hypoxemia and, 35
severe sepsis, 283
Ventilation-perfusion (V/Q) ratios, 31
Ventilator, 524, 544–545
ET and, 259
management principles, 263
operation, terminology for, 259, 261–263
weaning, 264
Ventilator-associated pneumonia (VAP),
99, 108, 264
clinical manifestations of, 109–110
complications of, 112
diagnosis, 110–111
clinical approach, 110–111
differential diagnosis of, 110
empirical therapy, 111–112, 111t
epidemiology of, 108–109
etiology of, 108
failure to improve, 112
follow-up, 112–113
microbiologic causes of, 108t
pathogenic mechanisms for, 109t
prevention strategies for, 109t, 113
prognosis, 113
treatment, 111–112
Ventilator-dependent respiratory failure, lung
transplantation and, 233
Ventilator-induced lung injury, 293–294, 293f
Ventilator-induced volutrauma, 250
Ventilatory function, 25
abnormal, patterns of, 28–29
alterations in, 29t
disturbances in, 25–29
physiologic features, 25–27
measurement of, 27–28
Ventilatory pump, respiratory system dyspnea
and, 8, 9
Ventricular dysfunction, 326, 336
Ventricular ﬁbrillation (VF), 307, 338
Ventricular pacing, 339–340
Ventricular premature beats, 338
Ventricular remodeling, 336
Ventricular septal rupture, 302
Ventricular tachycardia, 338
Ventricular tachycardia and ﬁbrillation, STEMI
and, 338–339
Ventriculostomy, 367, 481
Verapamil, 339, 368
Vertebral column, metastatic tumor and, 479
VF. SeeVentricular ﬁbrillation
Vidarabine, 467
Video-assisted thoracic surgery (VATS),
parenchymal lung disease and, 40
Video-assisted thoracoscopy, mediastinal masses
and, 220
Vigorous diuresis, 381
Viral bronchitis, 14
Viral DNA, 465
acyclovir and, 463
Viral infections
asthma and, 62
exudative pleural effusions, 217–218
inﬂammatory reaction and, 68
Viral neuraminidase enzyme, 461
Viral pathogens, 108
Viral respiratory infections, 149, 155–156
adenovirus, 158–160
coronavirus, 152–155
general considerations, 149–150
human metapneumovirus, 156
parainﬂuenza virus, 156–158
rhinovirus, 150–152
Viral RNA, HRSV and, 155
Virtual bronchoscopy, 37
Virus load, 456
Virus shedding, interferons and, 143
Virus-coded thymidine kinase, 463
Viruses, 456
acute respiratory illness and, 149
Virus-like particle vaccines (VLP vaccines),
transplantation and, 243
Vital capacity (VC), 25, 26f, 514, 533–534
PNS disorders and, 362
Vitamin B6, pyridoxine and, 130
Vitamin K
CF lung and, 176
cycle, 429, 429f
deﬁciency, 432
Vitamin K-dependent coagulation factors, 531,
551–552
multiple deﬁciencies of, 429
Vitamins, laboratory test values, 504t
VLP vaccines. SeeVirus-like particle vaccines
Vocal cord dysfunction, 76
Vole bacillus, 115
Volume depletion, 417
Volume resuscitation, hypoadrenal shock and, 275
Volume-controlled ventilation, 252
Volume-cycled ventilation, 259
Vomiting, 364, 396, 405, 419, 461, 531, 551
intestinal obstruction and, 478
Voriconazole, 472, 531, 552–553
VRE. SeeVancomycin-resistant enterococci
VTE. SeeVenous thromboembolism
VZV. SeeVaricella-zoster
Waiting list, for lung transplantation, 234
Warfarin, 211, 335, 341, 517–518, 537
Warfarin dosing, 211
Warfarin-induced skin necrosis, 211
Warning arrhythmias, 338
Washing, ﬂexible ﬁberoptic bronchoscopy and, 39
Water, 393
dialysis and, 388
replacement, 402
transport, in cystic ﬁbrosis, 173
Index
579
Water balance, 394
Water balloon-shaped
heart, 534
Water excretion, 394
Water intake, 394
Water loss, 400
correction of, 402
renal v. nonrenal, 400
Watershed infarcts, 359
Water-soluble gases, environmental
exposure to, 87–90
Watery diarrhea, 488
Wegener’s granulomatosis, 18,
201, 533
Weight gain, 392
Weight loss, 122, 194, 396
Wernicke’s disease, 360, 361
pathogenesis of, 362
pathology of, 361–362
thiamine and, 351
treatment of, 362
West Nile virus, transplantation
and, 239
Wheezes, 4, 12
Whispered pectoriloquy, 4
White blood cell casts, 379
WHO (World Health Organization), 128
tuberculosis and, 116, 117f
tuberculosis control, 136–137
Whole-brain radiation therapy, 481, 483
Whole-lung saline lavage, 516, 536
Winking owl sign, 480
Withdrawing care, 256
Withholding care, 256
Work of breathing, 259
Workers’ compensation systems, 95–96
World Federation of Neurosurgical Societies Scale,
365, 365t
World Health Organization. See WHO
World Trade Center (WTC) disaster, environmental
dust and, 95
Wuchereria bancrofti, 84
Yellow nail syndrome, 167
Zanamivir, 108, 461, 546
inﬂuenza and, 145, 146, 146t, 147
resistance to, 462
580
Index
