Contents
 I 
Instrumentation and Operating Room Setup
Cristiana Barbosa and Luca Mencaglia  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
7
 II 
Use of Electricity in Laparoscopy
Paulo Ayroza and Elizabet Abdalla  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
39
 III 
Ergonomics in Laparoscopy
Arnaud Wattiez. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
47
 IV 
Gynecologic Laparoscopic Surgical Anatomy
Cristiana Barbosa, Arnaud Wattiez and Luca Mencaglia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
57
 V 
Suturing Techniques in Gynecologic Laparoscopy
Daiana Tonellotto, Paulo Ayroza, Arnaud Wattiez and Luca Mencaglia  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
73
 VI 
The Role of Diagnostic Laparoscopy and Transvaginal Endoscopy (TVE) in Infertility
and Assisted Reproduction Technology (ART)
Emmanuel Lugo, Carlo Tantini and Luca Mencaglia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
87
 VII 
Techniques of Laparoscopic Tubal Sterilization
Emmanuel Lugo and Luca Mencaglia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
97
 VIII 
Laparoscopic Tubal Surgery
Emmanuel Lugo and Luca Mencaglia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
103
 IX 
Laparoscopic Management of Ectopic Pregnancy
Cristiana Barbosa and Luca Mencaglia   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
115
 X 
Laparoscopic Surgery for Symptomatic Endometriosis
Luca Mencaglia, Arnaud Wattiez and Sabina Consigli  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
123
 XI 
Laparoscopic Management of Deep Endometriosis
Luca Minelli and Stefano Landi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
129
 XII 
Technique of Laparoscopic Myomectomy
Stefano Landi and Luca Minelli . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
139
 XIII 
Laparoscopic Treatment of Adnexal Masses
Mario Malzoni and Fabio Imperato  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
151
 XIV 
Laparoscopic Management of Borderline Ovarian Tumors
Paulo Ayroza and Elizabet Abdalla  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
165
 XV 
Laparoscopic Hysterectomy
Arnaud Wattiez. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
173
 XVI 
Laparoscopic Surgery of the Pelvic Floor
Arnaud Wattiez. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
187
 XVII 
Laparoscopic Surgical Staging of Endometrial Carcinoma
Fabrizio Barbieri and Luca Minelli  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
201
 XVIII Laparoscopic Pelvic and Lumbo-aortic Lymphadenectomy
Fabrizio Barbieri and Luca Minelli . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
207
 XIX 
Complications in Laparoscopic Surgery
Leopoldo Carlos Videla Rivero and Beatrice Videla Rivero   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
213
  
Recommended Set for Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
227
operation theater 
operation theater 
operation theater 
operation theater 
operation theater 
operation theater 
operation theater 
operation theater 
operation theater 
operation theater 
operation theater 
operation theater 
operation theater 
operation theater 
operation theater 
operation theater 
operation theater 
operation theater 
operation theater 
operation theater 
operation theater 
operation theater 
operation theater 
operation theater 
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
30
The AUTOCON® II 400 is a versatile, state-of-the-art high 
frequency electrosurgical unit designed for both unipolar 
and bipolar electrosurgical applications. The opera tional 
parameters of various cutting and coagulation settings can 
be preselected on the frontpanel display, thus providing 
the user with a highly accurate and reproducible method 
to obtain good results. Exact ﬁ ne-tuning in 1 W-steps is 
enabled for procedures that require maximum precision at 
very low power. Up to 8 hemostatic effects for unipolar and 
bipolar cutting, each with up to 370 W output, permit  optimal 
control of coagulation and the intended surgical effect. In 
the  bipolar coagulation mode, the autostart function auto-
matically  activates the coagulation current as soon as the 
electrode has touched the tissue with both branches. The 
various safety  circuits of the unit provide a very high level of 
safety for both the patient and staff. Software- supported test 
programs ensure easy and rapid servicing. The color touch-
screen with its modern and user-friendly design allows for 
easy  operability, maintenance and cleaning (Fig. 47).
12.0  High Frequency
Electrosurgical Units
The most commonly used type of laser is the CO2 laser, which 
is also considered to be the most precise which causes the 
least thermal injury. Even though the CO2 laser is considered 
to be highly efﬁ cient in terms of tissue vaporization, cutting or 
excision, but has only minimal coagulating properties. Lasers 
with a short wavelength such as Argon, Neodymium:Yttrium-
Aluminum Garnet (Nd:YAG) and KTP 532 lasers (Potassium 
Titanyl Phosphate; KTiOPO4, KTP) have good coagulating 
properties but are less efﬁ cient in terms of vaporization. The 
degree and extent of thermal damage produced by laser 
irradiation depends on the structure, water content, pigmen-
tation and the state of tissue perfusion. In addition, user-
determined operational parameters can have a considerable 
impact on the outcome of the laser treatment, such as the 
inherent absorption characteristics / wavelength of the laser 
system speciﬁ cally selected for the intended application, spot 
size, power density, mode of delivery (contact/ no contact) 
and exposure time (intermittent or continuous).
In summary, each of the various laser systems available on 
the market has a speciﬁ c clinical application. Laser  generators 
are much more expensive than electrosurgical systems, and 
there are many safety aspects, such as the potential risk of 
cumulative thermal effects, burns due to inappropriate expo-
sure and retinal damage, that speak against the widespread 
use of laser technology. 
13.0 Laser Systems
The use of ultrasonic energy for cutting and coagulation is an 
alternative to electrosurgery. Ultrasound is the unique energy 
form that allows both cutting and coagulation of tissues 
without exposing the patient to the risks associated with the 
application of  high frequency current. The major beneﬁ t of 
this alternative technique is that only a minor degree of lateral 
heat-induced tissue damage occurs. Ultrasonic systems that 
are operated at low power settings cleave water-containing 
tissues through cavitation sparing organized structures of low 
water content without coagulating vessels (frequently applied 
in liver surgery). High power settings can be applied to cleave 
the loose surrounding tissues by frictional heat while simulta-
neously coagulating the wound margins (frequently applied in 
colon surgery). High-power ultrasonic dissection can cause 
collateral damage by excessive generation of heat. However, 
in view of the high level of operational reliability and safety 
feasible with this alternative technology, the anticipated 
advances in the further development will certainly make it a 
valuable tool in the future.
14.0 Ultrasonic Dissection and Coagulation Systems
Fig. 47
The high frequency electrosurgical unit AUTOCON® II 400,
(KARL STORZ Tuttlingen, Germany).
operation theater 
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
32
Advanced laparoscopic procedures can be performed safely 
and effectively only if the surgeon or gynecologist has gone 
through the initial stages of surgical training and has gained 
an adequate level of proﬁ ciency in intracorporeal suturing and 
knot tying techniques. Laparoscopic suturing and knot tying 
should be practiced on a good quality endotrainer with an 
experienced tutor. There are two suturing methods: the intra-
corporeal and the extracorporeal technique. The major steps 
of the intracorporeal technique are: introduction of the needle 
and intraabdominal suturing, placement of suture ligatures, 
knot tying, either extracorporeal or intracorporeal.
Intracorporeal suturing techniques involve that each knot 
is formed and tied inside the cavity with the aid of needle 
holders. There are many different types of needle holders 
that essentially vary in handle design and tip conﬁ guration 
(Figs. 51–52). In our opinion, intracorporeal knots should 
be reserved to experienced surgeons, because advanced 
procedures require a good command of microsurgical suture 
techniques. Once an adequate level of proﬁ ciency in intracor-
poreal suture and ligature has been achieved, the surgeon’s 
conversion rate will certainly decrease. 
16.0 Suture Techniques
Fig. 52a
Various needle holders with curved jaws.
Fig. 52b
The KOH Macro Needle Holder with curved jaws, ergonomic 
pistol handle and disengageable ratchet.
Fig. 51
The SZABO-BERCI Needle Holder PARROT-JAW® with straight 
handle and adjust able ratchet.
b
a
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
33
As the term denotes, extracorporeal suturing and knot tying 
is performed outside the body cavity. Once the  tissue is 
sutured, the needle is removed through the trocar  cannula 
and the suture is completed extracorporeally. In this case, a 
knot tier is required. Even though pre-tied loops are  available 
in the market, surgeons-in-training should learn the basic 
skills of extracorporeal knot tying. For extracorporeal knotting 
various types of knot pushers can be used. Knot pushers 
are of either closed-jaw or of open-jaw type (Fig. 53). For 
a trainee who has strong convictions to pursue a surgic al 
career it is  essential to make every effort to perfect his/her 
skills to achieve an  adequate level of proﬁ ciency in  suturing 
techniques. The  correct extracorporeal Roeder knot is very 
useful. For major or safety sutures, e.g., for ligature of a uterine 
vascular pedicle in  hysterectomy, the extracorporeal Roeder 
knot is necessary. To push the knot, a  speciﬁ c open-jaw knot 
pusher is used. The endoloop is the oldest device used for 
laparoscopic-guided ligature; it is a loop with a  pre-formed 
slipknot that can be positioned around the  structure that 
needs to be removed.
In some cases, a laparoscopic clip applicator may be neces-
sary. In minimally invasive surgery, surgical clips are used for 
tissue approximation. Most of them are made of pure titanium 
or of titanium alloys. Surgical clips are easy to apply and can 
be left inside the abdominal cavity. After a few weeks, the 
clip is covered by ﬁ brous tissue. The jaw of the clip appli-
cator should be located perpendicular to the wound site 
before deploying the clip, the surgeon should take care that 
both jaws are in view. Two clips are usually deployed over 
the structure that needs to be secured. One clip is deployed 
over the tissue which the surgeon wants to remove to prevent 
spillage of ﬂ uid. The clips should not be applied very close to 
each other.
Disposable extraction bags are very important to prevent 
contamination of the abdominal wall during extraction of 
specimens from the abdominal cavity (Fig. 54).  Extraction 
protected by an endoscopic bag is mandatory to  obviate the 
risk of benign dissemination (e.g., in the case of  endometriosis, 
ectopic pregnancy, and benign ovarian cysts),  spillage during 
removal of a benign teratoma, risks of infection (pyosalpinx), 
and risks of malignant dissemination (suspected cysts). The 
extraction bag must be very strong so that it can resist the 
force that is exerted by the surgeon while pulling it through a 
small opening.
Fig. 53
Knot tier for extracorporeal knotting. The close-up views show the 
various types of open-end, and closed-end tip design.
Fig. 54
Disposable extraction bag.
17.0 Extraction Bag
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
34
An electronic or manual morcellator can be used for 
piecemeal removal of large specimens, such as ﬁ broids or the 
uterus  during laparoscopic hysterectomy, and  particularly, 
supracervical hysterectomy (Figs. 55a, b). The fully 
auto clavable ROTOCUT G1 morcellator is an efﬁ cient and 
time- saving  alternative to previous systems. Rapid removal 
of large  tissue segments is facilitated by the highly efﬁ cient 
cutting performance of the disposable cutting blades, which 
can be changed intraoperatively. The blades are available 
in sizes of 12-mm or 15-mm. Optimal weight distribution 
and direct activation ensure a straight-forward and smooth 
operation. A specially designed trocar sleeve protects  tissue 
from  inadvertent blade contact. The  powerful ROTOCUT G1
has a direct drive motor that produces a  maximum speed 
of 1200 rpm, minimizing the amount of effort required of 
surgeons and reducing procedure times. The  control unit 
that  optimizes Rotocut’s performance is the UNIDRIVE®
S III, which is  compatible with all previous generations of 
KARL STORZ morcellators.
The removal of large portions of tissue may also be accom-
plished with the aid of endoscopic cold knives introduced 
through a minimal abdominal incision or vaginal puncture. 
These shielded blade carriers permit endoscopic insertion 
and application of cold knives in the abdominal cavity. There 
is a great variety of extraction devices on the market. One, 
that should be mentioned is the vaginal extractor. It allows 
intra-abdominal specimens to be retrieved via the vagina, 
while maintaining the integrity of the pneumoperitoneum 
and, therefore, endoscopic-assisted retrieval under optimal 
viewing conditions. During laparoscopic myomectomy, it is 
essential to have a screw- or spiral-tipped instrument that 
allows for proper ﬁ xation and removal of subserous or intra-
mural ﬁ broids (Fig. 56).
18.0 Morcellator Systems
Fig. 55 a
The morcellator system ROTOCUT G1, laparoscopy set.
Fig. 55 b
The hollow shaft motor of the ROTOCUT G1 mocellator is used in 
conjunction with the control unit UNIDRIVE® S III.
Fig. 56
Myoma ﬁ xation instrument with screw-shaped tip.
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
35
Various instruments and auxiliary devices may be used for 
mobilizing or stabilizing the uterus and adnexae during both 
diagnostic and operative laparoscopic surgery.
A uterine manipulator is used in the majority of advanced 
laparoscopic-assisted gynecological procedures, be it for 
diagnostic assessment or surgical interventions. The  uterine 
manipulator is of crucial importance because it facilitates 
visualization of the pelvic organs and permits endoscopic ally-
controlled injection of methylene blue in the case of chro mo -
pertubation for assessment of tubal patency (Figs. 57–59).
19.0 Uterine Manipulators
Fig. 57
The TINTARA uterine manipulator (KARL STORZ Tuttlingen, 
Germany).
Fig. 59
The CLERMONT-FERRAND uterine manipulator
(KARL STORZ  Tuttlingen,  Germany).
Fig. 58
Proper placement of the uterine manipulator.
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
36
20.0 Operating Room Setup and Preparation of the Patient
Fig. 60
Schematic drawing of the room setup illustrating the optimal arrangement of the surgical team and equipment during gynecological
laparoscopic procedures. ! – operating surgeon; @ – ﬁ rst assistant; # – second assistant; $ – scrub nurse; % – anaesthesiologist. 
Endoscopic surgery requires a perfect technological environ-
ment. Knowledge of the instruments and operating room 
setup is essential for optimizing the workﬂ ow of endoscopic 
procedures and the facilitating the interaction between 
surgeons, medical personnel, and all areas inside and outside 
of the hospital. A well organized operating room is not only 
an essential prerequisite for the successful outcome of lapa-
roscopy, but also reduces costs. The operat ing room should 
be large enough to accommodate the necessary equipment. 
Before starting surgery, it is necessary to check the instru-
mentation, particularly the insufﬂ ation unit, as well as the 
high frequency surgery unit and the suction-irrigation system. 
The number of persons forming the surgical team depends 
on the surgical indication. As a rule, one assistant and one 
surgical nurse are sufﬁ cient. Certain procedures require an 
additional assistant (Fig. 60). It is essential that all members 
of the  surgical team (including the surgeon) be trained and 
capable of solving all technical problems which could occur 
before and during the intervention.
Patients must be informed of the therapeutic beneﬁ ts and 
all potential risks (informed consent). The possibility that 
a laparotomy may be required must always be mentioned. 
Intestinal preparation is often useful. Bowel preparation can 
minimize the need for an accessory port to retract the bowel. 
Its  purpose is to empty the small intestine and  facilitate vision 
by ﬂ attening the intestinal loops and pushing them out of the 
way. In all cases associated with an increased inherent risk of 
intestinal injury is (endometriosis of the rectovaginal  septum or 
major adhesiolysis), preoperative bowel preparation is more 
complete and resembles the preparatory  measures applied 
prior to bowel surgery. Before being admitted to the  operating 
room, the patient should always void. The full  urinary  bladder 
may be inadvertantly perforated  during  insertion of the  Veress 
needle or trocar. If gynecological surgery or any general 
lower abdominal surgery is planned (such as hernia repair or 
adhesiolysis) it is advisable to insert a Foley catheter. If any 
upper abdominal procedure has been scheduled, it is good 
practice to have a nasogastric tube in place.
#
$
!
@
%
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
37
21.0 Patient Positioning
Fig. 61
Correct preoperative placement of the patient on the operating table 
in low dorsolithotomic position.
Fig. 62
The legs are gently placed in well-padded boot-type stirrups for
routine deep vein thrombosis prophylaxis.
Fig. 63
Placement of the patient in low dorsolithotomic 
position enables proper manipulation of the
laparoscopic instruments via the accessory ports.
Positioning of the patient is also important for the  successful 
outcome of surgery. The patient is placed in a low dorso-
lithotomic position (gynecological position) with her legs 
positioned to provide vaginal access (Fig. 61). The patient’s 
legs should be comfortably supported by padded obstetric 
knee braces or Allen stirrups to minimize the risk of deep vein 
thrombosis (Fig. 62). The Trendelenburg position should be 
used only after the main trocar has been inserted, because 
the Trendelenburg position brings the sacral promontory, and 
therefore the major vessels (bifurcation of the aorta and left 
common iliac vein) into the axis of trocar insertion. In gyneco-
logical laparoscopic procedures or if laparoscopy is to be 
performed together with hysteroscopy, the patient should be 
positioned in the lithotomy position which enables an assis-
tant to stand between the patient’s legs allowing for free 
access to the lower abdomen (Fig. 63). In these procedures, 
the surgeon needs to use a uterine manipulator for proper 
visualization of the female reproductive organs.
The assistant seated between the legs of the patient watches 
the hand movements of the surgeon on the monitor and 
should maintain traction in the appropriate direction with the 
handle of the uterine manipulator.
Proper make-up assignement of the surgical team is also a 
basic prerequisite for the successful outcome of any laparo-
scopic operation. In the majority of cases, the surgeon stands 
on the left side of the patient. A surgeon who is left handed, 
should stand to the right of the patient  during  creation of 
the primary port. This facilitates inserting the Veress nee-
dle or primary trocar towards the pelvis with the dominant 
hand. The camera assistant should be positioned opposite 
to the surgeon, but it is always recommended to have two 
video monitors, one for the surgeon, and one for the camera 
assistant and other members of the surgical team. If only one 
monitor is available, it should be located between the legs of 
the patient.
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
38
Professionals in charge of cleaning, decontamination,  sterili -
zation, and inspection of surgical instruments, devices, 
and implants should be adequately trained so that they 
are fully aware of the delicacy and cost of endoscopic 
equipment. Setting up the operating room prior to surgery 
includes testing the camera equipment, the light source, the 
insufﬂ ation unit and CO2 tanks, the suction-irrigation system 
and – taking great care – the bipolar and unipolar electro-
coagulation system.
Because of the importance of having optimized  instrument 
management quality and economy, KARL STORZ has 
de veloped the EndoProtect1™ service, consisting of modular 
services that ensure the optimal deployment of instruments 
sets in the hospital, the replacement of instruments and their 
proper and careful handling by personnel. Also a database-
supported management and monitoring system is offered 
for the entire range of instruments in ofﬁ ces and hospitals. 
This new system is the KARL STORZ instrument manage-
ment platform, which enables each individual instrument to 
be accurately registered using a special data matrix code and 
rapid, error-free identiﬁ cation with a scan camera.
Disposable instruments shall not be resterilized for reuse in 
laparoscopic surgery because such practice is associated 
with an elevated risk of pathogen transmission compared 
to the effectiveness of cleaning and sterilization procedures 
applied to reusable instruments. 
Disposable instruments are not designed to be cleaned in a 
similar way as their reusable counterparts, e.g., the c 
series of dismantling instruments. Reusable surgic al instru-
ments must be safely cleaned and sterilized immediately after 
surgery. Instruments must be dismantled prior to cleaning. 
After decontamination, every small piece and recess must be 
cleaned and dried with water and compressed air. For lenses 
and telescopes, alcohol or special soap should be used. The 
majority of up-to-date instruments are designed for steam 
heat sterilization (autoclaving). Other validated sterilization 
procedures currently in use:
•  Sterilization via autoclave is the most widely used and 
inexpensive method. In the case of endoscopes and instru-
ments expressly manufactured and sold as autoclavable, 
sterilization cycles of 121°C for 20 minutes, or 134°C for
7 minutes are used.
•  Gas sterilization with ethylene oxide is generally considered 
to be the ideal method of sterilization, because it acts at a 
relatively low temperature and is not detrimental to endo-
scopic instrumentation. Unfortunately, the technique is 
relatively expensive and time-consuming (72 hours prior 
to reuse of instruments). Therefore, only a few centers use 
gas sterilization, because multiple sets of laparoscopic 
instruments should always be held available.
22.0 Maintenance and Sterilization
Recommended Literature:
MENCAGLIA L, WATTIEZ A: Manual of Gynaecological
Laparoscopic Surgery. (2000); Endo-Press® Tuttlingen,
Germany
HULKA J, REICH H: Textbook of laparoscopy,
Third edition (USA). (2002); 53–56, 69–81, 276–283
operation theater 
Chapter II
Use of Electricity in Laparoscopy
Paulo Ayroza and Elizabet Abdalla
Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, 
Medical School of the Santa Casa University of São Paulo, Brazil 
Return plate
Electrosurgical unit
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
40
1.0 History
The therapeutic use of heat in the treatment of human beings 
has been known for a very long time. The Egyptians used 
 cauterization to treat tumors three thousand years B.C. 
Four hundred years before the Christian era, Hippocrates 
discussed the use of heat to treat diseases. In this context, 
he described the use of cauterization to treat joint problems 
and haemorrhoids. He also recommended applying seven or 
eight little pieces of heated iron to the hemorrhoid to arrest 
bleeding. However, it was only at the start of the 20th  century 
that Koch described cauterization using electricity. In this 
technique, an electric current heated the tip of a forceps and 
the hot metal was applied to the tissue to cauterize it. In 1878, 
Koch also described the ﬁ rst tubal sterilization by means of 
cauterization with a wire heated by an electric current.
In fact, there is a great difference between electrocautery and 
electrosurgery. In the former, electricity heats a metal instru-
ment, which is then applied to the tissue. In electrosurgery, 
the opposite occurs, with the current producing heat as it 
passes through the tissue.
Electrosurgery developed in the 20th century. It causes the 
electric current to pass through the body, producing heat 
due to tissue impedance. Unlike cauterization, during electro-
surgery the forceps does not heat to the point of burning but 
is limited to transmitting the electric current to the tissues. 
The development of electrosurgery passed through  various 
 periods and various discoveries were made. It is worth 
 recalling how a few concepts that are today regarded as very 
simple were established.
O  Experiments with static electricity, which began in 1786, 
used direct current, also known as galvanic current, which 
produced muscle contractions.
O  The specific current induction developed by Faraday 
and Henry was integrated in 1891 by D’Arsonval, who 
described the use of high frequency current to counteract 
muscle  contractions.
O  An electrosurgical generator was used for the ﬁ rst time in 
the operating room by Cushing in 1926. Although he was 
not the ﬁ rst to try it, William Bovie was the one responsible 
for developing the modern concept of electro surgery.
O  In 1934, Werner described tissue coagulation using high 
frequency electrical energy. This concept represented an 
important step forward in surgery and is still used widely 
today.
The use of electrosurgical energy in laparoscopy dates from 
the 1960s when gynecologists were the ﬁ rst to use laparos-
copy for minor surgical procedures such as tubal sterilization. 
At the start, there were some mishaps, which discouraged the 
use of the monopolar modality of electrosurgery for the next 
two decades. Technical developments led to the  production 
of new electrosurgical generators and laparoscopic instru-
ments specially designed for this modality. Thus, at the end of 
the 1980s, electrosurgery came back to ﬁ ll an indispensable 
space in gynecological endoscopy.
Electrosurgery is the most frequently used form of energy in 
all branches of surgery. In 1995, Odell demonstrated how the 
use of electrosurgery in laparoscopy optimizes the proce-
dures, reducing operation time and blood loss.
Over the years, some doubts have emerged regarding  possible
injuries caused by heat in healthy tissue. In 1982, Riedel and 
Semm described the risks of inappropriate use of electro-
surgery and they emphasized the need for appropriate 
 monitoring of this technique.
Various studies have analyzed injuries caused to the  tissues 
by monopolar and bipolar electrocoagulation. In 1995, with 
different devices, Baggish and Tucker evaluated  histologically 
the extent of necrosis caused by monopolar and bipolar 
 electrocoagulation.
2.0 Principles of Electrosurgery 
Several properties of electricity must be understood in order 
to understand electrosurgery. Electrons orbit the nucleus of 
an atom. When the electrons ﬂ ow from one atom to the orbit 
of an adjacent atom, there is a ﬂ ow of current.  Voltage is the 
“force” or “push” that provides electrons with the  ability to 
travel from atom to atom. If the electrons  encounter resis-
tance, heat is produced. The resistance to the ﬂ ow of  electrons 
is called impedance. A complete (or closed)  electrical circuit 
is required to make electrons to ﬂ ow through. In other words, 
only an un interrupted pathway allows electrons to circulate.
The common terms used to describe the principles of electro-
surgery include:
O  Current: flow of electrons in a certain period of time, 
 measured in amperes.
O  Voltage: the force that drives the current or flow of 
 electrons, measured in volts.
O  Resistance: obstacle to the ﬂ ow of current, measured in 
ohms (resistance = impedance).
The following principles apply speciﬁ cally in electrosurgery:
O  The electrosurgical generator (ESG) is the source of the 
electron ﬂ ow and voltage. 
O  A monopolar circuit consists of the generator, an active 
electrode, the patient and the patient return electrode.
O  There are numerous pathways to ground for leakage 
 current and these may include the OR table, stirrups, staff 
members and equipment.
O  The patient’s tissues provide the impedance, producing 
heat when the electrons overcome the impedance.
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
41
2.1 Various Forms of Electric Current
Various forms of electric current are associated with surgic al 
applications.
O Direct current (DC): the electron exchange occurs 
continuously in a single direction. This type of current can 
be used in medicine for therapeutic purposes (for example, 
acupuncture and pain electrotherapy).
O Pulsed current: a relatively high amount of energy is 
discharged at short intervals. This is useful for nerve 
stimulation, for example, in electromyography.
O Alternating current (AC): the electron exchange between 
the two electrodes is bidirectional. This is the electric 
current used in electrosurgery.
When an electric current ﬂ ows through biological tissue, the 
following effects can be observed:
O Thermal effect: as electricity passes through the tissue it 
generates heat, which is the only effect desired in electro-
surgery. The amount of heat generated depends on the 
intensity of the electric current, the resistance of the tissue 
and the duration of current ﬂ ow.
O Electrolytic effect: when a direct electric current passes 
through a tissue with a high electrolyte concentration, it 
can cause polarization of the electrolytic compounds. The 
ions can ﬂ ow in the direction corresponding to their polarity 
and in this way the concentration of ions can increase in 
direct relation with the intensity and duration of the electric 
current. To avoid the electrolytic effect, electrosurgery uses 
alternating current, where the constant reversal of polarity 
reduces the potential damage caused by polarization.
O Faradic effect: when passing through the tissue, the 
electric current can stimulate the nerve endings,  inducing 
reactions such as muscle contraction and pain. This is 
caused by the frequency of the electrical current; low 
frequencies in particular stimulate nerve endings.
The modern concept of electrosurgery involves using a 
high frequency electric current to avoid the negative effects 
of  neuromuscular stimulation. Since nerve and muscle 
stimu lation ceases at 10,000 cycles/second (10 kHz), electro-
surgery can be performed safely at “radio”  frequencies above 
100 kHz. An electrosurgical  generator produces a 60-cycle 
current and increases the frequency to over 300,000 cycles 
per second. At this frequency, electrosurgic al energy 
can pass through the patient with  minimal neuromuscular 
stimulation and no risk of  electrocution.
Monopolar electric current reaches the human body through 
an active electrode and leaves it through a neutral electrode.
2.2 Waveform
An electrical wave has a sine form that can be modiﬁ ed, 
resulting in waves with different forms and different effects. 
Two types of electrical wave are normally used in electro-
surgery:
O Non-modulated (Fig. 1), also called pure wave, obtained 
using a free alternating current of continuous form, which 
is responsible for the cutting effect. It can also be used for 
coagulation.
O Modulated (Fig. 2), so called because this waveform 
produces some modiﬁ cations in frequency and amplitude. 
This waveform is used especially for coagulation.
O A third waveform, the so-called “blended current“, can 
be used. This is not a mixture of cutting and coagulation 
currents but rather a variation of the duty cycle.  Moving from 
blend 1 to blend 3, the duty cycle is reduced  progressively. 
A lower duty cycle produces less heat.  Consequently, 
blend 1 is able to vaporize tissue with minimal  hemostasis 
whereas blend 3 is less effective at cutting but provides 
maximum hemostasis.
The only variable that determines whether a waveform vapo-
rizes tissue or causes coagulation is the rate at which heat is 
produced. A high amount of thermal energy released rapidly 
induces vaporization, whereas a low amount released more 
slowly induces coagulation. Any one of the ﬁ ve waveforms 
(non-modulated, modulated and the 3 blends) can accom-
plish both tasks by modifying the variables that inﬂ uence the 
tissue effect.
Fig. 1
Pure or unmodulated wave form.
Fig. 2
Modulated electrical wave.
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
42
High frequency surgery uses the thermal effect caused by the 
passage of an electric current through the tissue. There are 
two basic methods of thermal tissue destruction: cutting and 
coagulation.
Cutting
When a high current density is applied to a tissue, the heating 
of the intracellular ﬂ uid from 37° to 100° C is so fast that there 
is no time for the water to evaporate. The resulting vapor 
pressure leads to explosion of the cellular membranes. This 
phenomenon is called vaporization. The separation of tissues 
by means of heat can be used to cut and has many advan-
tages compared to mechanical cutting (for example, minor 
bleeding and minimal coagulation effect at the incision). This 
modality is more powerful and generally less  penetrating. 
When used with ﬁ ne electrodes, it allows precise cutting with 
minimal coagulation. It can also reduce operating times. With 
thicker or wider electrodes the contact area and also the 
potential for thermal injury are increased.
To obtain a suitable cutting effect, the generator must be 
activated before the electrode touches the tissue. A layer 
of vapor and carbon particles is created between the 
electrode and the tissue to create a current pathway. The 
electrosurgical cutting effect is similar to dissection  without 
touching the  tissue. If the electrode is used slowly or is 
held stationary, the risk of thermal damage to the tissue is 
increased. 
The electrosurgical cutting effect is used on vascular tissue 
such as in adhesiolysis and also for peritoneal endometriosis 
resection.
Coagulation
For coagulation a low current density is usually applied so 
that the tissue temperature increases slowly giving the water 
enough time to evaporate. Meanwhile, the tissue undergoes 
thermal coagulation. In this process, the heat ﬁ rst causes 
coagulation of the connective tissue, denaturing proteins 
but preserving cellular architecture. After that an amorphous 
coagulum is formed when disintegration is complete. This is 
indicated by the visual effect of carbonization. The gradual 
cellular retraction that occurs during thermal hemostasis 
allows the closure of small vessels. The result is creation of 
a coagulum rather than cellular vaporization. In order to over-
come the high impedance of air, the coagulation waveform 
has signiﬁ cantly higher voltage than the cutting current. Use 
of a high voltage coagulation current has implications during 
minimally invasive surgery.
Electrosurgical desiccation occurs when the electrode is in 
direct contact with the tissue. Desiccation is achieved most 
efﬁ ciently with the cutting current. By touching the tissue with 
the electrode, the current density is reduced. Less heat is 
generated and no cutting action occurs. The cells dry out and 
form a coagulum rather than vaporize and explode.
Some surgeons cut with the coagulation current. Likewise, it 
is possible to coagulate with the cutting current by  holding the 
electrode in direct contact with the tissue. It may be  necessary 
to adjust power settings and electrode size to achieve the 
desired surgical effect. The advantage of  coa gulating with the 
cutting current is that a much lower voltage is used. 
2.3 Use of the thermal effect in electrosurgery 
By modalities of electrosurgery is meant the way the 
electric al current is applied to the tissue. High frequency 
electrical  current can traditionally be applied with two  different 
modalities: monopolar or bipolar. While tissue separation is 
obtained mostly with the monopolar technique, coagulation 
can be obtained with both modalities.
Monopolar: monopolar is the most commonly used electro-
surgical modality due to its versatility and clinical effective-
ness. In monopolar electrosurgery, the active electrode is at 
the surgical site. The patient return electrode is elsewhere on 
the patient’s body. The current passes through the patient 
as it completes the circuit from the active electrode to the 
patient return electrode (Fig. 3).
2.4 Different Electrosurgery Modalities 
Fig. 3
Monopolar modality.
Return plate
Electrosurgical unit
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
43
Bipolar: in bipolar electrosurgery, the two tines of the  forceps 
perform the functions of both the active electrode and 
the return electrode at the site of surgery. Only the tissue 
grasped by the forceps is included in the electrical circuit. 
Because the return function is performed by one tip of the 
forceps, a patient return electrode is not needed. The current 
passes through the tissue held by the forceps and returns 
directly to the electrosurgical unit without getting into  contact 
with other tissues. In this case, the damage produced in 
the tissues is limited and the risk of thermal injury in distant 
tissues is  inﬁ nitely lower (Fig. 4).
The bipolar modality presents some advantages compared to 
the monopolar:
O The current ﬂ ow through tissue is restricted to the area 
between the two jaws of the electrode, which is under 
the direct vision of the surgeon. In the monopolar tech-
nique, the current passes through many tissues outside the 
surgeon’s visual control before it can return to the electro-
surgical generator.
O The risk of thermal injuries in distant tissues due to direct 
contact of instruments, faulty insulation or diffusion of the 
electrical current is reduced in the bipolar technique.
O The risk of interference with other electronic equipment, 
(ECG, pacemakers and others) connected to the patient at 
the same time, is lower.
When it is understood that the electrical current is essentially 
a continuous ﬂ ow of electrons with an entry and exit site, it 
is easy to understand that the current must return to some 
place along some pathway. The place is the unit and the 
pathway is the return plate. Through the phenomenon known 
as  current division, the current can split and follow more 
than one path to ground. The circuit to ground is completed 
whether it  travels the intended electrosurgical circuit to the 
patient return electrode or to an alternative ground.
This would put patients at risk of burns at an alternative site 
because: 
O the current follows the easiest and most conductive path,
O any grounded object can complete the circuit, not just the 
electrosurgical generator,
O the surgical environment offers many alternative routes to 
ground,
O if the resistance of the alternative path is sufﬁ ciently low 
and the current ﬂ owing to ground in that path is sufﬁ ciently 
concentrated, an accidental burn may occur at the alter-
native grounding site.
3.0 Electrosurgery: General Safety Aspects
3.1 Grounded Electrosurgical Systems 
3.2 Isolated Electrosurgical Systems
If the circuit to the patient return electrode is interrupted, an 
isolated generator will deactivate the system because the 
current cannot return to its source. Generators with insulated 
circuits reduce the risk of burns at alternative sites but do not 
protect the patient from burns caused by the return electrode. 
Historically, patient return electrode burns have accounted for 
70% of the injuries reported during the use of electro surgery. 
Patient return electrodes are not “inactive” or  “passive”. 
The only differences between the “active” electrode and the 
patient return electrode are their size and re lative  conductivity. 
The quality of the conductivity and contact area at the plate/
patient interface must be maintained to prevent injury at the 
return electrode site.
Fig. 4
Bipolar modality.
Electrosurgical unit
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
44
3.3 Patient Return Electrodes 
O Function of the patient return electrode.
The function of the patient return electrode is to collect 
and remove current from the patient safely. A return elec-
trode burn occurs when the heat produced over time is 
not safely dissipated by the size or conductivity of the 
patient return electrode.
O Ideal return electrode contact with current dispersion.
The ideal patient return electrode safely collects current 
delivered to the patient during electrosurgery and carries 
that current away. To eliminate the risk of current  density, 
the plate should present a large contact area to the 
patient associated with low impedance (Fig. 5). It should 
be placed on conductive tissue as close as possible to the 
operative site.
It should be recalled that the only difference between the 
“active” electrode and the patient return electrode is their 
relative size and conductivity. If the electrons are concen-
trated at the active electrode, a lot of heat is produced. If 
this current is dispersed over a comparatively large patient 
return electrode, little heat is produced.
If the surface contact area between the patient and the return 
electrode is reduced or if the impedance of that  contact is 
increased, a dangerous condition can develop. In the case 
of a reduced contact area, the current ﬂ ow is  concentrated 
in a smaller area (Fig. 6). This causes an increase in the 
temperature of the return electrode. If the temperature of 
the return electrode increases sufﬁ ciently, the patient may 
sustain a burn. Many factors can cause an increase in 
impedance, including excessive hair on the contact surface, 
adipose tissue, bony prominences, the presence of liquid, 
poor adhesion and scar tissue.
Fig. 5
The return electrode plate provides an adequate contact area. 
Fig. 6
If the plate contact is faulty, the density of the return current 
increases dangerously and with it the risk of local burns.
O Check the plate site, which should be a well vascularized 
muscle mass. Avoid irregular bony contours and bony 
prominences. The incision site, patient positioning and any 
other equipment connected to the patient should also be 
considered.
O Patient electrode plate monitoring.
Contact quality monitoring was developed to protect 
patients from burns due to inadequate contact of the return 
electrode. Plate site burns are caused by a decreased 
contact area at the return electrode site. New generators 
are equipped with patient plate monitoring, which actively 
monitors the amount of impedance at the patient/plate 
interface because there is a direct relationship between this 
impedance and the contact area. The system is designed 
to deactivate the generator before an injury can occur if 
it detects a dangerously high level of impedance at the 
patient/plate interface.
In order to work properly, such generators must use a patient 
return electrode that is compatible. This type of electrode is 
divided into two separate areas.
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
45
Many surgeons routinely use the coagulation current. This 
waveform has a relatively high voltage. This voltage or 
“push” can spark across an area of compromised insulation. 
Moreover, high voltage can “blow holes” in weak insulation. 
Breaks in insulation can create an alternative route for the 
current to ﬂ ow. If this current is concentrated, it can cause 
signiﬁ cant injury.
The surgeon can obtain the desired coagulation effect 
without high voltage, simply by using the “cutting” current 
while  holding the electrode in direct contact with tissue. This 
technique will reduce the likelihood of insulation  failure. Recall 
that coagulation can be obtained with the cutting current by 
holding the electrode in direct contact with tissue, thereby 
lowering the current density. By lowering current density the 
rate at which heat is produced is reduced, allowing effective 
coagulation with the cutting current.
3.5 Insulation Failure
3.4 Direct Coupling 
Direct coupling occurs when the user accidentally activates 
the generator while the active electrode is near another metal 
instrument. The secondary instrument will become energized. 
This energy will seek a pathway to complete the circuit to the 
patient return electrode. There is a potential risk of signiﬁ cant 
patient injury. The generator should not be activated while the 
active electrode is touching or in close proximity to another 
metal object.
3.6 Capacitative Coupling during Laparoscopy 
Metal trocar system
A capacitor is not a part labeled “capacitor” in an electrical 
device. It occurs whenever a nonconductor separates two 
conductors. During laparoscopy an “inadvertent capacitor” 
may be created by the surgical instruments. The conductive 
active electrode is surrounded by nonconductive insulation. 
This, in turn, is surrounded by a conductive metal trocar. 
A capacitor creates an electrostatic ﬁ eld between the two 
conductors and, as a result, a current in one conductor can, 
through the electrostatic ﬁ eld, induce a current in the second 
conductor. In laparoscopy a capacitor may be created by the 
composition and placement of the surgical instruments.
Plastic trocar system
Capacitance cannot be entirely eliminated with an  all-plastic 
cannula. The patient’s conductive tissue completes the 
deﬁ nition of a capacitor. Capacitance is reduced, but is not 
eliminated.
Hybrid trocar system
The worst case occurs when a metal cannula is held in 
place by a plastic anchor (hybrid cannula system). The metal 
cannula still creates a capacitor with the active electrode. 
However, the plastic abdominal wall anchor prevents the 
current from dissipating through the abdominal wall. The 
capacitative coupled current may exit from adjacent tissue on 
its way to the patient return electrode. This can cause signi-
ﬁ cant injury.
The majority of potential problems can be avoided by following these simple guidelines:
4.0  Recommendations for Avoiding Electrosurgical Complications 
in the Patient During Operations
O Inspect all the insulation carefully
O Use the lowest possible power setting
O Use a low voltage waveform (cutting)
O Use brief intermittent activation rather than
prolonged activation
O Do not activate in an open circuit
O Do not activate in close proximity to or direct contact 
with another instrument
O Use bipolar electrosurgery where possible
O Select an all-metal trocar system as the safest option 
and do not use hybrid trocar systems that combine 
metal with plastic.
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
46
Recommended Reading
1. 
BAGGISH MS: Is it necessary to repeat history?
J Gynecol Surg 1989; 5: 323
2. 
BAGGISH MS, TUCKER RD: Tissue actions of bipolar 
scissors compared with monopolar devices. 
Fertil Steril 1995; 63: 422–6
3. 
BERGDAHL B, VÄLLFORS B: Studies on coagulation 
and the development of an automatic computerized 
bipolar coagulation. J Neurosurg 1991; 75: 148–51
4. 
BÜHLER K, KATO K, KLESSEN C, KOCH R, et al.: 
Die temperatur-geregelte bipolare Elektrokoagulation 
Zent bl Gynäkol,1991; 113: 713–22
5. 
CORSON SL: Electrosurgical hazards in laparoscopy. 
JAMA 1974; 227: 1261–3 
6. 
CUSHING H: Electrosurgery as an aid to the removal 
of intracranial tumors. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1928; 47: 
751–84
7. 
CURCIE DJ, CRAELIUS W: The role of thermal feedback 
in electrosurgical tissue heating. Tech Health Care 1995; 
i 3: 111–6
8. 
Di GIOVANNI M, VASILENKO P, BELSKY D: 
Laparoscopic tubal sterilization. The potential for 
thermal bowel injury. J Reprod Med 1990; 35: 951–4
9. 
FARNWORTH TK, BEALS SP, MANWARING KH, 
TREPETA RW: Comparison of skin necrosis in rats by 
using a new microneedle electrocautery, standard-size 
needle electrocautery and the shaw hemostatic scalpel. 
Ann Plast Surg 1993; 31: 164–7
10. GIORDANO BP: Don’t be a victim of surgical smoke. 
AORN J 1996; 63: 520–22
11. GOLDWYN RM: Bovie. The man and the machine. 
Annals Plast Surg 1979; 2: 135–53
12. GROSSKINSKY CM, RYDER RM, PENDERGRASS HM, 
HULKA JF: Laparoscopic capacitance: A mystery
measured. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1993; 169: 1632–5
13. HOGLAN M: Potential Hazards from electrosurgery 
plume. Recomendations for surgical smoke evacuation. 
Can Oper Room Nurs J 1995; 13: 10–6
14. HUKKI J, LIPASTI J, CASTREN M, PUOLAKKAINEN P, 
et al: Lactate dehydrogenase in laser incisions. Laser 
Surg Med 1989; 9: 589–94
15. KAPLUN A, ARONSON M, HALPERIN B, GRIFFEL B: 
Cellular events in adhesion formation due to Thermal 
Trauma. Eur Surg Res 1984a; 16: 136–40
16. KAPLUN A, GRIFFEL B, HALPERIN B, ARONSON M: 
A model for adhesion formation by thermal injury in the 
abdominal cavity of the mouse. Eur Surg Res 1984b; 
16: 131–5
17. KOCKS J: Eine neue Methode der Sterilisation der Frau. 
ZBL Gynäk 1878; 2: 617
18. LEVY BS, SODERSTROM RM, DAIL DH: Bowel injuries 
during laparoscopy. Gross anatomy and histology. J 
Reprod Med 1985; 30: 168–72
19. LUCIANO AA, WHITMAN G, MAIER DB, RANDOLPH J, 
et al: A comparison of thermal injury, healing
patterns, and postoperative adhesion formation 
following CO2 laser and electromicrosurgery. 
Fert Steril 1987 48: 1025–9 1987
20. LUCIANO AA: Power sources. Obstet Gynecol Clin N 
Am 1995; 22: 423–43
21. MECKE H, SCHÜNKE M, SCHULZ S, SEMM K:
Incidence of adhesions following thermal tissue
damage. Res Exp Med 1991; 191: 405–11
22. NIELSEN PH, NYLAND MH, ISTRE O, MAIGAARD S,
et al: Acute tissue effects during transcervical
endometrial resection. Gynecol Obstet Invest 1993; 36: 
119–23
23. O ‘CONNOR JL, BLOOM DA: William T. Bovie and
electrosurgery. Surgery 1996; 119: 390–6
24. ODELL RC: Electrosurgery: principles and safety issues. 
Clin Obstet Gynecol 1995; 38: 610–2
25. PEREIRA FEL: Degenerações. Morte celular. Alterações 
do interstício. In: BRASILEIRO FILHO, G.; 
PITTELLA, J.E.H.; PEREIRA, F.E.L.; BAMBIRRA, E.A; 
BARBOSA, A.J.A – Bogliolo Patologia. 5ª ed. Rio de 
Janeiro, Guanabara Koogan 1996,. p.46–81.
26. RAPPAPORT WD, HUNTER GC, ALLEN R, LICK S,
et al.: Effect of eletrocautery on wound healing in midline 
laparotomy incisions. Am J Surg 1990; 160: 618–20
27. RIEDEL HH, SEMM K: An initial comparison of
coagulation techniques of sterilization. J Reprod Med 
1982; 27: 26 1–7
28. RIEDEL HH, LEHMANN-WILLENBROCK E, MECKE H, 
AHMELS E: Histologische und enzymhistochemische
Untersuchungen am Kaninchenuterushorn nach 
anwendung unterschiedlicher Koagulationsmethoden. 
Zent bl Gynäkol 1990; 112: 189–205
29. RYDER RM, HULKA JF: Bladder and Bowel injury after 
electrodesiccation with Kleppinger Bipolar forceps.
J Reprod Med 1993; 38: 595–8
30. SODERSTROM RM: Principles of Eletrosurgery During 
Endoscopy. In:Sammarco MJ, Stovall TG, Steege JF. 
Gynecologic Endoscopy. Baltimore, 1996,
Williams & Wilkins, p. 179–92.
31. SEMM K: Endocoagulation: A new and completely safe 
medical current for sterilization. Int J Fertil 1977; 22: 238
32. SIGEL B, DUNN MR: The mechanism of blood vessel
closure by high frequency electrocoagulation.
Surg Gynecol Obstet 1965; October: 823–31
33. TUCKER RD, STASZ PS, KRAMOLOWSKY EV: A simple 
and inexpensive method for measuring electrosurgical 
variables. Biomed Instrum Tech 1989; 23: 54–7
34. TUCKER RD, KRAMOLOWSKY EV, PLATZ CE: In vivo 
effect of 5 french bipolar and mono polar electrosurgic al 
probles on the porcine bladder. Urol Res 1990;
18: 29 1–4
35. TUCKER RD, BENDA JA, MARDAN A, ENGEL T:
The interaction of electrosurgical bipolar forceps and 
generators on an animal model of fallopian tube
sterilization. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1991; 165: 443–9
36. VECK S: An introduction to the principles and safety of 
electrosurgery. Br J Hosp Med 1996; 55: 27–30
37. VOYLES CR, TUCKER RD: Education and engineering 
solutions for potencial problem with laparoscopic
monopolar electrosurgery Am J Surg 1992; 164: 57–62
38.  WERNER R: Sterilisierung der Frau durch
Tubenverkochung. Chirurg 1934; 6: 843–5
operation theater 
Chapter III
Ergonomics in Laparoscopy
Arnaud Wattiez
Strasbourg University Hospital
Strasbourg, France
operation theater 
operation theater 
operation theater 
Fig. 5
The position of the two monitors allows the surgical team and the nurse to see the screen.
! – operating surgeon; @ – ﬁ rst assistant; # – second assistant; $ – scrub nurse; % – anaesthesiologist. 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
50
Fig. 4
Position of the patient on the operating table.
#
$
!
@
%
The operating column should be arranged in such a way 
that the surgeon can see the insufﬂ ator and electrosurgical 
generator while the suction/irrigation unit, video equipment 
etc. do not have to be in sight.
The operating room must be well-illuminated for safety 
reasons. This will help in ﬁ nding the instruments faster or 
performing unusual tasks. A good video system is of  crucial 
importance.
Once the patient is positioned, the movability of all members 
of the operating team should be assessed. The patient should 
be placed relatively far down on the operating table to allow 
the full range of movements for the manipulator. The legs 
should be ﬂ exed and abducted enough to give the  second 
assistant enough room but not so much as to interfere with 
the other surgeons (Fig. 4). The arms should be alongside 
the body. For obvious reasons, this is often disputed by the 
anesthetists, who prefer to have easy intravenous access, 
continuous blood pressure and oxygen saturation  monitoring 
etc. We believe, that there should be no compromise such 
as having the arm on the surgeon’s side alongside the 
patient and the other at a right angle to the body because 
the  ergonomics and comfort of the assistant are fundamental.
Great attention must be paid to make sure that cables and 
tubes are not intertwined behind the surgeons in order to 
avoid wasting time in disconnecting them every time the 
surgeons change places. Letting the assistant perform some 
of the operating steps is an alternative to changing places, 
which can be used in small operating rooms. 
The number, position and quality of the screens are extremely 
important. A clear view will enhance the pre cision and 
speed of surgery. A clear image of appropriate size reduces 
eyestrain if the screen is placed at a distance of 0.6 to 6 times 
the screen’s diameter. The screens should not be  situated 
so high as to necessitate acrobatic neck movements, but 
not so low that the view of the screen is impeded.  Ideally, 
laparoscopic pelvic surgery requires that there be two 
screens close to the patient’s legs (Fig. 5).
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
51
Fig. 6a, b
Trocar ports in the case of a bulky uterus.
Hysterectomy
Myomectomy
1 Trocar  10 mm, 2–3–4 Trocar  5 mm
1–3 Trocar  10 mm, 2–4 Trocar  5 mm
a
b
3.1 Position of the Primary Trocar
Virtuality has the great advantage that the image can be 
assessed and changed, if the visual ﬁ eld is inadequate. For 
example, during hysterectomy, after inserting the primary 
trocar, a mass blocking the view from side to side may be 
found in the case of a bulky uterus. There are three solutions 
to this situation. The ﬁ rst is to give a GnRH analogue for 3 
months and then re-operate. The second is to convert to 
laparotomy. The third solution is to change the position of the 
trocar. If the trocar is in sub-xyphoid position, the uterus will 
look smaller and vital structures (such as the  uterine arteries) 
will appear in a better position to allow vision (Fig. 6). Another 
option is to change from a 0°-straight forward laparoscope to 
a 30°-forward-oblique scope to enable surgery on the  uterine 
arteries or the utero-sacral ligaments. By virtualizing the 
difﬁ culties, operating times can be reduced.
The number of trocars: four hands are usually available for 
surgery (if optic robots are not used) so the time de dicated to 
placing more than four trocars is wasted time. The surgeon 
involved in the pre-operative planning must carefully consider 
and set up the points of trocar insertion. We normally use 
four trocars for all laparoscopic procedures including adnexal 
surgery (Fig. 7). Using this method systematically is helpful 
in anticipating the procedure and reducing operating times. 
On the other hand, adding a ﬁ fth trocar can be justiﬁ ed if this 
facilitates or shortens the operation.
The position of the trocars: did you ever stop to think 
why laparoscopic instruments are 43 cm in length? The 
abdominal wall acts as a lever for the trocar. The balance 
between force (= fatigue) and precision depends on the ratio 
between the intra-abdominal and the extra abdominal part of 
the instrument: the more the ratio is shifted in favor of the 
extraabdominal part, the more precision will be gained, but 
the greater length means larger movements of the hands, 
which brings on fatigue more rapidly. Unfortun ately, many 
consider this ratio to be constant although it is not. 
3.2 Accessory Trocars
Fig. 7
Positioning the trocars for 4 hands.
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
52
The afore-mentioned ratio can be altered easily by shifting the 
point of trocar insertion away from the operating ﬁ eld (e.g. 
cranially in the midline during pelvic operations).
Consequently, the trocar site must be different for delicate 
procedures such as tubal surgery and for those requiring 
force such as myomectomy or Burch’s operation. The most 
efﬁ cient balance is achieved when the ratio is 1:1, because 
the hand can feel the pressure of the tissue and the force 
exerted. With any other ratio, this feeling is lost. This is why 
it is important to take your time to plan each point of trocar 
insertion; this time is not wasted. Symmetrical insertion is not 
important.
Other ergonomic rules, which may shorten operating times, 
are: placing two lateral trocars in a triangle with the primary 
trocar, never introducing more than one trocar parallel to the 
primary trocar, taking into account the axis of work and angles 
of approach (especially while suturing), etc.  Remember, 
that the right lower quadrant trocar is usually controlled by 
the assistant, so the assistant’s parameters as well as the 
anticipated function and level of the port must be considered 
during pre-operative planning. Letting the assistant perform 
some tasks that are better performed from his side (e.g. right 
uterine artery coagulation during hysterectomy) eliminates 
the need for the  surgeon to change sides.
Fig. 8
Introduction of the accessory trocar. 
Fig. 9
Topographical anatomy of vessels and organs relative to the trocar’s 
angle of insertion.
3.4 Trocar Size
Using 5 mm-instruments in a 11-mm trocar with a reducer 
will impair precision of handling. When an instrument of 
appropriate size is used, the contact point between the  trocar 
and the abdominal wall corresponds with the pivot point, 
whereas the use of an instrument of smaller diameter involves 
that there are two contact points with the trocar (in the 
reducer and at the trocar tip). A third contact point is located 
between the trocar and the abdominal wall, and between the 
trocar and the reducer. As a result, there are two pivot points, 
one between the trocar and abdominal wall, and the other 
between the trocar and the reducer. This  con dition  inherently 
entails imprecision. It is better to begin the  operation with 
5 mm-trocars and change to 11 mm-trocars when a 10 
mm-instrument is needed. Changing the  trocar to 11 mm 
for suturing is not done automatically and depends on the 
number of sutures. If the need arises to make four or less 
sutures, it is preferable to maintain the small incisions for 
faster  suturing although it is essential to change the trocar if a 
greater  number of sutures is required.
3.3 Type of Trocar and Mode of Insertion
There are many trocar types available today; each surgeon 
must be familiar with those that best answer his needs. A very 
important property that is often forgotten is being able to 
introduce instruments into the trocar without looking away 
from the screen. For this to happen, the trocar must be at 
a right angle to the skin when there is no instrument inside 
it and it must have a wide opening. This means that trocars 
should be inserted not in the direction of the pelvis but at a 
right angle to the skin, the muscles and the aponeurosis, as 
shown in Figs. 8 and 9. We use disposable trocars with valves 
that permit suturing without CO2 leakage. Other  surgeons, 
who frequently apply monopolar electrosurgery during which 
a lot of smoke is generated, prefer a trocar with a valve that 
allows to connect a smoke evacuation system.
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
53
4.1 Multifunctional Instruments
4.0 Instrumentation
The three basic actions are dissection, hemostasis and 
cutting. All of these actions can be performed easily when 
multifunctional instruments are used (such as bipolar forceps 
or monopolar scissors) in the following order:
The surgeon holds the bipolar forceps in one hand and 
curved scissors, connected to the monopolar  electrosurgical 
generator, in the other. In this way, the dominant hand is 
able to dissect, grasp, apply traction and coagulate while 
the  non-dominant hand can cut (mechanically or electri-
cally), coagulate by use of monopolar technique,  lateralize 
and dissect. Thus, the surgeon is able to perform nine 
different actions and rarely needs to change instruments 
so as to enable performing a specific action. There are 
other  acceptable ways of holding laparoscopic instruments 
provided this is done logically.
4.2 Maintenance of Instruments
Appropriate, fully functioning instruments shorten opera ting 
times and prevent complications. Scissors must always cut 
properly and bipolar forceps must always be kept clean. 
Having a second bipolar forceps readily available allows the 
clean instrument to be used at all times without delay. Every 
surgeon must be responsible for checking the condition of 
the instruments in use to ensure their effective function.
Surgical strategy must be logical and strict but always modi-
ﬁ able. It should be decided upon during the ﬁ rst few minutes 
of the operation immediately after examining the operating 
ﬁ eld. It is not rare to see surgeons start on one side and then 
change sides when faced with an obstacle that  frequently 
needs to be overcome, and probably could have been antici-
pated through careful strategy planning. An operation with 
a lot of stops, changes and pauses is much slower than a 
planned operation. Because of its special nature, laparos-
copy requires that a few basic rules be observed.
5.0 Surgical Strategy
5.1 Strict Hemostasis
Bleeding interferes with surgical maneuvers. In laparotomy 
and vaginal surgery the management of minor bleedings 
without hemodynamic signiﬁ cance may be delayed with the 
temporary placement of a suction tube nearby. This is not 
the case in laparoscopy, because the technique depends 
completely on boundary conditions such as video  camera 
and lighting system, confined working space, the few 
operating ports and the inherent difﬁ culty associated with the 
need for changing instruments. 
This is why strict and meticulous hemostasis is essential in 
laparoscopy. Meticulous dissection and coagulation, anato-
mical cleavage planes, perfect knowledge of anatomy 
and good proﬁ ciency in bipolar coagulation are the basic 
competences needed to translate the appropriate laparo-
scopic strategy into practice.
5.2 Do not Irrigate (Apply Only Suction) !
This statement may sound strange to many laparoscopic 
surgeons because lavage has been used extensively for over 
20 years. It is clear, that there are situations which require 
lavage, such as in the event of extensive hemorrhage or at the 
end of the surgery, but lavage also has dis advantages:
O loss of exposure: the operating space is reduced when 
it is filled with liquid and pneumoperitoneum pressure 
decreases when it is suctioned out. Light is absorbed and 
reﬂ ected by the liquid
O loss of anatomical planes due to tissue edema 
O loss of electrical efﬁ ciency when an electrolyte solution is 
used 
O spread of the liquid throughout the abdominal cavity, which 
is particularly hazardous in the presence of  malignancy, 
infection and dermoid cysts.
Finally, suction and lavage are time-consuming procedures.
To avoid lavage, the surgeon must follow a surgical stra tegy 
that allows to avoid situations where the use of irrigation is 
indispensable.
operation theater 
5.3 Correct Position of the Laparoscope
5.4 Optimal Use of Accessory Trocars
6.0 Selecting Information
The lack of a third dimension becomes more obvious when 
the image is distant and at the periphery of the screen. The 
tip of the instrument must be kept as close as possible to the 
center of the screen. When suturing distant structures such 
as the levator ani, one should try to keep the needle holder 
close to the distal lens of the laparoscope in order to align the 
needle correctly.
Since red absorbs colors, blood should be aspirated as soon 
as possible as it reduces brightness.
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
54
Trocars should never be used to mobilize an organ that 
obscures vision. This can be the case with the sigmoid  during 
prolapse surgery, with the adnexa during excision of a recto-
vaginal nodule and may also occur during uterovagin al 
prolapse surgery afterr subtotal hysterectomy. If a trocar is 
used to mobilize these organs, it is lost for surgery along with 
the aid of the assistant who assumes a static role and may 
lose his/her concentration. It also constitutes a source of risk 
and harm when it is outside the operating ﬁ eld.
Alternative strategies include:
O tilting the operating table, 
O suspension to the abdominal wall
O the use of an uterine manipulator.
These measures, applied at the beginning of the  operation, 
take a few seconds and can save precious time during 
surgery.
During laparoscopy the surgeon should select the  essential 
information required for the work and ignore what is not  useful 
as it may interfere with the concentration. By doing so the 
surgeon is able to anticipate difﬁ culties, as will be explained 
below.
For methodological reasons, information is divided into
on-screen and off-screen information.
7.0 Surgeon’s Ergonomics and Convenience 
During lengthy operations the surgeon suffers from muscul ar 
strain and fatigue. This can cause errors and slowness. 
Research has shown that muscles can work for hours if they 
employ 15% of their maximum strength but they will fatigue if 
they use more power. In a recent study, we demonstrated that 
highly proﬁ cient surgeons, aware of surgical  ergonomics, use 
about 15% of the muscle strength of their arms and shoulders 
while less experien ced surgeons use a higher  percentage of 
their muscular strength. Application of ergonomic principles 
reduces the amount of muscle power applied during surgery, 
which will reduce fatigue and enhance safety and operating 
times. 
The operating table position and height are of great impor-
tance in laparoscopic surgery. The table should be low 
enough for the surgeon and allow a proper working position 
to reduce fatigue. The correct arm position should be with the 
arm lying alongside the chest with the elbow at an angle of 90 
degrees or more. The height of the abdomen should also be 
considered. Since most operating tables are manufactured 
for laparotomy, it is often necessary to use a foot support, 
which must be wide enough for the surgeon’s feet and the 
pedals.
In laparoscopy as in laparotomy, the hands must be in the 
middle of the operating ﬁ eld. In other words, the screen must 
be aligned in the same visual direction as the  operating ﬁ eld. If 
this is not the case, the surgeon will be operating at a  different 
angle from the one shown on the screen. This will impair 
orientation and can result in protracted, clumsy  movements, 
and prolonged duration of surgery. 
The axis between the screen, the surgeon’s hands and the 
surgeon’s eyes should be kept as straight as possible. The 
greater the shift, the greater is the distortion of the  movements. 
We can draw two lines, one between the  surgeon’s eyes and 
the screen, and one between his eyes and hands. The greater 
the angle between those lines, the more distorted are the 
directions. The distortion is very noticeable at angles greater 
then 60 degrees. In case of a right angle (90°), e.g., from the 
patient’s right, the instrument must be pushed in order to 
achieve a movement to the left. This lack of orientation makes 
the surgeon’s movements slow and imprecise. 
To sum up, two screens positioned nearby the patient’s legs 
should be used during pelvic operations, as shown in Figs. 
10 and 11.
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
55
8.0 Quality of the Image
To obtain good quality information from the video screen, 
the best possible video technology should be used. In short, 
we use IMAGE1™ (KARL STORZ Tuttlingen, Germany) or a 
3-CCD video camera connected to a xenon cold light source 
and a 21-inch ﬂ atscreen monitor. The screen must be  coupled 
directly to the video camera via the best available connection 
(RGB, YC or PAL/NTSC). If RGB is not available, the cables 
should be as short as possible.
9.0 Staff Training 
Staff training and regular equipment checks are obvious 
though often overlooked measures for speeding up surgery.
To reduce operating times, it is very important to have an 
active and well-trained theater nurse who holds the trocar 
straight while instruments are changed, who puts the right 
instrument in the right trocar opening at the right time, who is 
always ready for the next step and who has the needle  holders 
loaded inside a trocar before suturing begins,  allowing the 
surgeon to keep his eyes on the screen.
10.0 Preoperative Preparation
O Bowel preparation: a low ﬁ ber diet for 7 days prior to 
surgery will assist good exposure of the operative ﬁ eld. 
Properly prepared bowels take up less space, are easier 
to retract and slide into the pelvis less. On the other hand, 
preparation with liquids the evening before surgery ﬁ lls 
the bowel with liquid and has the opposite effect. For this 
reason, we do not recommend this type of preparation if 
opening the intestine is unlikely, as in the case of simple 
hysterectomy.
O All of the equipment used for laparoscopic surgery, 
including more rarely used instruments such as cysto-
scopes, ureter catheters and instruments for intestinal 
surgery, should be readily available within a short time. 
Special procedures and personnel, such as needed, e.g., 
for the frozen section technique, must be available on 
standby.
Fig. 10
Operating room set up.
Main table
Vaginal tray
Instrument tray
Anesthesia unit
Instrument 
pockets
Second 
Assistant
Scrub nurse
Operating surgeon
First Assistant 
Anesthesiologist
Screen
Videocamera
Cold light source
CO2 insufﬂ ator
Irrigation-suction 
system for 
ISC and LPS
2nd monitor
2nd camera
2nd light source
myoma
morcellator 
1st coagulator
2nd coagulator
L
R
Fig. 11
Alternative operating room setup.
Instrument tray 
Anesthesia unit 
Instrument 
pockets
Second 
Assistant
Scrub nurse
Operating surgeon
First Assistant
Anesthesiologist
Screen
Videocamera
Cold light
source
CO2 insufﬂ ator
Irrigation-suction 
system for
ISC and LPS
2nd Screen
2nd Videocamera
2nd Cold light source
Myoma morcellator 
1st Coagulator
2nd Coagulator
L
R
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
56
operation theater 
Chapter IV
Gynecologic Laparoscopic
Surgical Anatomy
Cristiana Barbosa1, Arnaud Wattiez2
and Luca Mencaglia1
1Centro Oncologico Fiorentino, Florence, Italy
2Strasbourg University Hospital
Strasbourg, France
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
58
1.0 Introduction
2.0 Anterior Abdominal Wall
2.1 Anatomical Area
2.2 Layers of the Anterior Abdominal Wall
2.3 The Umbilicus
Laparoscopy allows a highly magniﬁ ed and close-up view of 
the abdominal and pelvic cavity, making it possible to  visualize 
and study the anatomical structures and pelvic spaces that in 
the past were difﬁ cult to visualize at laparotomy. 
The anterior abdominal wall is the entrance to the abdominal 
cavity. The anterior abdominal wall is usually traversed blindly 
so knowledge of the anatomy is crucial to avoid any compli-
cations while doing so.
The anterior abdominal wall is bounded superiorly by the 
xiphoid process medially and by the inferior margin of the 
intercostal cartilages of the 7th to 10th ribs. Inferiorly, it is 
limited by the pubic symphysis and laterally by the inguinal 
ligament and the anterior superior iliac spine.
The anterolateral abdominal wall consists of muscle and 
fascia. From the skin to the peritoneal cavity, there are  various 
layers: the skin, subcutaneous fat, the anterior layer of fascia 
covering the rectus abdominis muscles medially, the external 
oblique muscles laterally and the internal oblique and trans-
versus abdominis laterally.
The external oblique is the most superﬁ cial of the  muscles 
and the transversus is the deepest in the anterolateral 
abdominal wall.
Transversalis fascia: covers the posterior layer of the rectus 
sheath and the transversus abdominis muscle.
The preperitoneal space: contains connective tissue and fat.
Peritoneum: The internal part of the parietal peritoneum is 
in contact with the internal organs thanks to the negative 
pressure inside the abdominal cavity.
Fig. 1
Drawing of the various anatomical layers of the anterior abdomin al 
wall. 
Cutis
Subcutaneous fat
Peritoneum
Fascia
Rectus
abdominis muscle
Fig. 2
Drawing of the abdominal wall at the level of the umbilicus. 
Umbilicus
Peritoneum
Fascia
Rectus
abdominis muscle
The umbilicus is located in the midline, usually 2 to 2.5 cm
below the level of the tubercles of the iliac crests. The 
umbilicus is at the level of the intervertebral discs of L3 and 
L4.
The bifurcation of the abdominal aorta into the right and left 
common iliac arteries is located a few centimetres below 
the umbilicus. The left common iliac vein crosses in front of 
the body of the ﬁ fth lumbar vertebra and behind the aortic 
bifurcation.
In slim patients, the distance between the anterior  abdominal 
wall and the large vessels is short so attention must be 
redoubled when the principal trocar is being introduced. 
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
59
It is also necessary to pay attention to the superﬁ cial blood 
supply of the umbilicus, which is usually in the form of a circle 
to the right of the umbilicus. Because of this, the umbilical 
incision is preferably made on the left.
The difference between the fascia above and below the 
umbilicus must be recalled. In the upper part, the posterior 
layer of the internal oblique fascia and the aponeurosis of 
the transversus abdominis muscle pass behind the rectus 
abdominis muscles, while the anterior layer of the  internal 
oblique fascia passes in front. Below the umbilicus, all the 
fasciae pass together anterior to the rectus abdominis 
muscles (Figs. 1, 2). These anatomical relations are important 
when the Veress needle is introduced during laparoscopy. In 
fact, if it is introduced in or below the umbilicus, a distinct 
tactile sensation is felt when the fascia and peritoneum is 
crossed. If it is introduced above the umbilicus, lateral to the 
midline, passage through the anterior fascia, posterior fascia 
and peritoneum can be felt distinctly.
The umbilicus is the most suitable site for introducing the 
primary trocar and the Veress needle because the anterior 
abdominal wall here contains less subcutaneous tissue and 
does not contain any muscle, and the distance between the 
skin and peritoneum is shortest.
However, the umbilicus, entered through its upper part, is 
the location of choice for “open laparoscopy”, a technique 
preferred by some and favoured by general surgeons.
The peritoneal layer is adherent with the layers above so 
once the fascia has been identiﬁ ed, clamped and incised, it 
is easy to open the serosa bluntly and enter the abdominal 
cavity using a round-tipped Hasson trocar.
This technique is indicated in patients who have previously 
undergone pelvic and/or abdominal surgery or where post-
inﬂ ammatory adhesions are suspected because it allows 
direct inspection of the structures beneath the trocar’s entry 
site.
The rectus abdominis muscles can be identified in the 
muscle wall. They are located lateral to the midline from the 
xiphoid process to the border of the pubic symphysis. They 
are divided centrally by the linea alba, which is a tendinous 
raphe forming a central groove between the rectus muscles. 
The lateral angle of the rectus abdominis muscle is called the 
semilunar line. The rectus abdominis muscles have tendinous 
intersections, which divide the rectus muscles into segments 
at the level of the xiphoid process, the umbilicus and between 
these two points.
The external oblique muscle is located lateral to the rectus 
abdominis muscle between the lateral part of the lower ribs 
and the iliac crest. The inferior margin of its fascia forms the 
inguinal ligament.
2.4 Muscle Wall 
Fig. 3
View of the superﬁ cial blood supply of the abdominal wall by
transillumination (insert picture showing the external view).
Fig. 4
Drawing of the superﬁ cial blood supply of the abdominal wall which 
can be visualized by transillumination.
The anterior abdominal wall has a deep and superficial 
blood supply. The superﬁ cial vascular network is formed 
by the superﬁ cial epigastric artery, the superﬁ cial  cirumﬂ ex 
iliac artery and the corresponding veins. These vessels are 
branches of the femoral artery, which emerge caudal to 
the inguinal ligament. The epigastric artery runs medial to 
the  rectus abdominis muscles, while the circumﬂ ex artery 
is  lateral. These vessels can be seen by transillumination, 
especially in thin patients (Figs. 3–4).
The deep vascular system is formed by the superior 
epigastric artery, the inferior epigastric artery and by the deep 
circumﬂ ex iliac arteries and their corresponding veins. The 
superior  epigastric artery is a branch of the internal thoracic 
artery while the inferior epigastric artery is a branch of the 
external iliac. They are found beneath the rectus abdominis 
muscles.
2.5 Blood Supply of the Anterior Abdominal Wall 
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
60
The uterus is located deep in the pelvic cavity. It is pear-
shaped and divided into two parts: the upper part, the body, 
is bulkier and the lower part consists of the cervix (Fig. 5). 
Between these two parts, a transitional zone known as the 
uterine isthmus is identiﬁ ed; this corresponds to the internal 
os of the cervix.
The long axis of the uterus corresponds to the axis of the 
pelvic wall. Since the organ is mobile, its position varies with 
the possible alterations in the distension of contiguous organs 
such as the bladder and rectum. There is usually an angle of 
100° to 120° between the body and cervix. If this is anterior, 
it is deﬁ ned as uterine anteversion, while it is described as 
retroversion when it is posterior.
The uterus is about 7.5 cm in length, 5 cm in its transverse 
diameter and about 2.5 cm thick. It weighs about 30–40 gr 
in nulliparous and 70 gr in multiparous women. It is located 
between the bladder anteriorly and the rectosigmoid poste-
riorly. Its upper part is suspended from the round ligaments, 
while the inferior part is held by the vesicouterine ligaments, 
the parametria and the uterosacral ligaments bilaterally, 
which form the “retinaculum uteri” or paracervical ring.
The shape, size, weight and position of the uterus vary 
according to the different periods of the woman’s life.
3.1 The Uterine Corpus
3.0 The Uterus
The body of the uterus becomes gradually smaller from the 
fundus toward the isthmus, The anterior wall is covered by 
the visceral peritoneum, which is continuous with the vesic al 
peritoneum anteriorly, forming the vesicouterine space.
The posterior wall is convex and covered by the visceral 
peritoneum which continues inferiorly to cover the cervix and 
upper vagina. The tubes and round ligaments, which ﬁ x the 
uterus to the wall of the pelvis, emerge bilaterally from the 
upper and lateral ends of the uterine body. The  utero-ovarian 
ligaments emerge posteriorly. These three structures are 
covered by a layer of peritoneum, which passes from the 
lateral margin of the uterine wall to the wall of the pelvis and is 
called the broad ligament (Fig. 6).
Fig. 5
Uterus, view of the fundus.
Fig. 6
Broad ligament of the uterus. 
operation theater 
operation theater 
4.1 The Uterine Artery
4.0 Vessels and Nerves
The uterine artery arises from the anterior trunk of the  internal 
iliac (or hypogastric) artery. It crosses the medial part of the 
levator ani muscle and enters the uterus at the level of the 
cervix. It provides the blood supply to all of the uterus. It 
has a wavy course. In the cervix, it is located 2 cm above 
and  anterior to the ureter to which it supplies a small branch
(Fig. 10).
From its cervical insertion, it ascends tortuously along the 
lateral wall of the uterus between the two layers of the broad 
ligament as far as the tubes. It then extends as far as the 
ovarian hilum where it terminates in an anastomosis with the 
ovarian artery. It gives descending branches to the cervix 
and vagina, which anastomose with branches of the vaginal 
artery. 
Anatomical variations of the uterine artery are uncommon. 
Just 1% of patients have two uterine arteries on one side 
while the presence of two uterine veins for each artery is a 
constant ﬁ nding. Pelage et al. in 1999 demonstrated that the 
blood supply to the uterus could originate from the ovarian 
artery or from the artery of the round ligament. On the other 
hand, it is more common for the blood supply to the ovary 
to originate from the uterine artery in about 2–4% of woman. 
The uterine artery usually arises from the hypogastric artery, 
but it may also arise from the vaginal artery or middle rectal 
artery.
Fig. 10
Uterine artery.
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
62
Fig. 9
Right anterior broad ligament.
The tubes, the round ligaments, the utero-ovarian ligaments, 
vessels and nerves are located between the anterior and 
posterior leaves of peritoneum of the broad ligament (Fig. 9). 
The portion of the broad ligament below the tube is called 
the mesosalpinx. The insertion of the broad ligament on the 
lateral wall of the pelvis has a concave border, known as the 
pelvic infundibulum, traversed by the ovarian  vessels and 
nerves.
The round ligaments arise from the lateral part of the uterus 
and pass through the broad ligaments below and anterior 
to the tubes above the iliac vessels, then course through 
the internal inguinal ring to traverse the inguinal canal and 
terminate in the labia majora. They are about 10–12 cm in 
length and are formed by muscle ﬁ bers mixed with ﬁ brous 
tissue arising from the uterus. Vessels and nerves run in the 
round ligaments.
operation theater 
operation theater 
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
65
To prevent injury to the ureter during hysterectomy, the 
following is advisable:
O Use of a uterine manipulator sturdy enough to elevate and 
lateralize the uterus with the aim of exposing the angle 
where it meets the uterine artery. Incorrect ex posure of 
the uterine artery can easily lead to injuries to the ureter 
when the artery is divided, ligated or coagulated by use of 
bipolar electrosurgery.
O Fenestration of the broad ligament, which allows the ureter
to be moved, which is located very close to the posterior 
leaf of the peritoneum.
O Adequate dissection of the posterior leaf of the broad 
ligament is essential to better visualize and localize the 
uterine artery and vein.
O The uterine artery is coagulated at the level of the isthmus
and at the point where it passes between the cervix and 
the body of the uterus.
O Knowledge of the principles of electrosurgery is  essential 
for preventing the potential risk of ureter injuries. In 
particular, the use of bipolar electrosurgery with suitable 
instruments is recommended.
O The anatomical proximity of the ureter to the pelvic infun-
dibulum requires great care during adnexectomy when 
ligating or coagulating this ligament, especially in the case 
of adhesions or pelvic endometriosis.
O Where possible, always visualize the ureter by trans-
illumination, as described above.
6.0 The Pelvic Vessels
For the pelvic surgeon, knowledge about the anatomy of the 
pelvic vessels is crucial regarding the proportions of pelvic 
organs and the caliber of these vessels. Surgical compli-
cations involving these vessels inevitably produce major 
hemorrhage.
The aorta descends in the retroperitoneal space to the left of 
the midline. At the level of the fourth lumbar vertebra, it divides 
into three branches: two large lateral ones, the  common iliac 
arteries, and medially a smaller terminal branch, the middle 
sacral artery.
The ovarian artery arises directly from the anterolateral part 
of the aorta at the level of the vertebral bodies of L2 and L3, 
caudal to the origin of the renal arteries. The ovarian artery 
has an oblique and lateral retroperitoneal course. On the left it 
traverses the psoas muscle and on the right the inferior vena 
cava. The ovarian artery crosses the external iliac vessels
2 cm inferior to the ureter. The smaller branches supply the 
ureter and uterine tubes and ﬁ nally anastomose with the 
uterine artery at the level of the  uterine body.
The ovarian vessels, lymphatics and related nerve endings 
are located in the pelvic infundibulum (Fig. 18).
6.1 Aorta, Inferior Vena cava and Bifurcation
Fig. 18
Right ovarian artery and right pelvic infundibulum.
Another important artery that originates directly from the aorta 
is the inferior mesenteric artery, which supplies the left half of 
the transverse colon, all the descending colon, the sigmoid 
and part of the rectum. The mesenteric artery  originates from 
the aorta 3–4 cm superior to the bifurcation of the common 
iliac arteries. It then crosses the left common iliac artery and 
continues in the pelvis as superior hemorrhoidal artery, which 
descends between the layers of the  sigmoid and terminates 
in the superior part of the rectum.
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
66
The abdominal aorta divides into two branches, the  common 
iliac arteries, to the left of the body of the fourth lumbar 
vertebra. They are about 5 cm long and divide in turn into the 
external and internal iliac arteries bilaterally.
The right common iliac artery is retroperitoneal with the 
small intestine, sympathetic nerves and the ureter anterior 
to it. Posteriorly are the bodies or the fourth and ﬁ fth lumbar 
vertebrae, the terminal part of the two common iliac veins and 
the start of the inferior vena cava. Laterally, the right common 
iliac vein and the psoas major muscle can be identiﬁ ed. The 
left common iliac vein passes medially.
The left common iliac artery is retroperitoneal with the small 
intestine, sympathetic nerves and superior hemorrhoidal 
artery in front of it, and at this point it is crossed by the 
ureter. The bodies of the fourth and ﬁ fth lumbar vertebrae are 
posterior. The left common iliac vein runs medial to the psoas 
major muscle (Fig. 21).
The branches of the common iliac arteries provide the blood 
supply to the ureter, psoas muscle, lymph nodes and perito-
neum.
Fig. 20
Principal vessels at the level of the sacral promontory.
Fig. 21
The iliac vessels and psoas muscle.
6.3 The Iliac Arteries
Fig. 19
Common iliac arteries and inferior vena cava.
The inferior vena cava is a large venous trunk, which drains 
the subdiaphragmatic part of the human body as far as the 
right atrium. The abdominal portion of the inferior vena cava 
has a caliber of 22 mm and is 20 cm long (Fig. 19).
The inferior vena cava is located to the right of the lumbar 
spine. It is formed by the union of the right and left common 
iliac veins at the level of the ﬁ fth lumbar vertebra. The left of 
the two branches of the common iliac vein is of major impor-
tance to the pelvic surgeon because this crosses the midline 
very close to the sacral promontory (Fig. 20). Injury to this 
vein can occur when the primary trocar is introduced through 
the umbilicus or during surgical maneuvers at the level of the 
sacral promontory.
Perforation or injury of the large vessels during introduction 
of the Veress needle or primary trocar is of low incidence, 
but nonetheless one of the most feared and dangerous 
complications of laparoscopic surgery. The major risk factors
contributing to the occurence of this complication are low 
intra-abdominal pressure, insufﬁ cient pneumoperitoneum, 
rapid or uncontrolled entry, incorrect position of the operating 
table or a patient with a very large abdominal girth. It must be 
recalled how important close attention is during this phase as 
a good third of complications of laparoscopic surgery occur 
during introduction of the Veress needle or primary trocar.
6.2 The Inferior Vena cava
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
67
This artery arises from the posterior part of the aorta, a  little 
above its bifurcation. It courses in the midline anterior to 
the lumbar vertebræ, sacrum and coccyx. It supplies small 
branches to the rectum. In front of the sacrum it  anastomoses 
with the lateral sacral arteries. It is crossed by the left  common 
iliac vein.
The median sacral artery and the left common iliac vein may 
be accidently injured by surgical maneuvers at the level of the 
sacral promontory. In the case of promonto-sacral surgery, 
it is advisable to make a true and proper fenestration of the 
retroperitoneum. A small retroperitoneal incision is made and 
after a short time, distension with CO2 allows these vessels to 
be visualized better and identiﬁ ed (Fig. 22).
The common iliac artery divides into internal and external. The 
external iliac artery is bigger and passes obliquely and lateral 
to the border of the psoas muscle (Fig. 23). It then enters the 
inguinal canal where it tapers and is called the femoral artery. 
At its origin it is crossed by the ovarian vessels and, in some 
cases, by the ureter. The round ligament crosses it at the end 
of its course before it enters the inguinal canal. The  external 
iliac vein runs below the artery together with numerous 
vessels and lymph nodes that are located along its course.
Apart from the small branches to the psoas muscle, it divides 
into two large branches, the inferior epigastric artery and the 
deep circumﬂ ex iliac artery.
The inferior epigastric artery arises from the medial part of the 
external iliac artery, 1 cm above the inguinal  ligament. It forms 
a curve anterior to the subperitoneal tissue of the medial 
border of the internal inguinal ring, crosses the  transversalis 
fascia and runs upward towards the rectus  abdominis 
muscles and posterior fascia, ﬁ nally dividing into  numerous 
branches. Below the umbilicus, it anastomoses with the 
superior epigastric artery, a branch of the internal mammary 
artery, and with the inferior intercostal arteries (Fig. 24). This 
artery produces a prominence in the parietal  peritoneum, 
known as the lateral umbilical fold. It supplies the rectus 
abdominis muscle and the anterior abdominal wall and gives 
a branch to the round ligament.
6.4 The Median Sacral Artery
6.5 The External Iliac Artery
6.6 The Branches of the External Iliac Artery
Fig. 22
The sacral vessels at the level of the promontory.
Fig. 23
Left external iliac artery.
Fig. 24
Inferior epigastric artery.
operation theater 
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
69
The obturator artery is an important anatomical boundary 
during lymphadenectomy along the external iliac artery. It is 
accompanied by the obturator nerve and vein. It is located 
deeply and laterally in the pelvis toward the upper part of 
the obturator foramen on both sides. Inside the  obturator 
foramen, the nerve runs more laterally compared to the artery 
(Fig. 27). The artery passes through the obturator  foramen and 
divides into an anterior and posterior branch. The  obturator 
artery is related laterally to the obturator fascia and medially 
to the ureter. Anatomic variants of this vessel are common 
and to identify it the umbilical artery and external iliac artery 
are used as reference points as the obturator artery is located 
between these two  vessels.
The middle rectal (or hemorrhoidal) artery descends lateral to 
the rectum in the pararectal space. It supplies the rectum and 
anastomoses with the superior and inferior rectal arteries.
The internal pudendal artery is the smallest of the  terminal 
branches of the internal iliac and supplies the external 
genitalia and perineum. It passes downward and external 
to the inferior part of the greater sciatic foramen, behind the 
sciatic spines, and leaves the pelvis through the coccygeus 
and piriformis muscles. It then crosses the sciatic spine and 
inferior pubic ramus to terminate in the middle of the fascia 
of the urogenital diaphragm and the area of the clitoris. In its 
course it is accompanied medially by the pudendal nerve, 
the inferior rectal nerve and the inferior gluteal vessels and 
laterally by the sciatic nerve, the inferior gluteal nerve and the 
internal obturator nerve.
The inferior gluteal artery is the most important of the  terminal 
branches of the internal iliac (hypogastric) artery. It descends 
anterior to the nerves of the sacral plexus and  piriformis 
muscle, posterior to the internal pudendal artery and passes 
toward the lower part of the greater sciatic foramen. It 
supplies the piriformis muscle, the coccygeus and levator ani 
with the rectal vessels.
The vaginal artery arises from the internal iliac artery in a 
common trunk with the uterine artery and middle rectal artery. 
The ureter crosses it posteriorly and from this point the artery 
descends in the direction of the vagina medial to the ureter. It 
ends in the middle third of the vagina in small anastomosing 
branches and supplies all of the vagina.
The superior vesical artery arises from the proximal part of the 
anterior trunk of the internal iliac artery and supplies  numerous 
branches to the upper part of the bladder and  ureter.
The middle vesical artery is a branch of the superior vesical 
artery and supplies the base of the bladder (Fig. 28).
The inferior vesical artery normally arises in common with the 
middle hemorrhoidal artery or the vaginal artery. It supplies 
the base and inferior part of the bladder and the trigone.
The posterior branches of the internal iliac or hypogastric 
artery:
The iliolumbar artery is a branch of the posterior trunk and 
passes behind the obturator nerve and external iliac vessels 
toward the medial border of the psoas major muscle, where it 
divides into a lumbar branch and an iliac branch.
The lateral sacral arteries are branches of the posterior trunk, 
normally two in number, one superior and one inferior, which 
descend to the lateral border of the sacrum.
The superior gluteal artery goes to the gluteal area, running 
behind the lumbosacral trunk at the level of the ﬁ rst sacral 
nerve and leaving the pelvis through the piriformis, dividing 
into a superﬁ cial and deep branch.
Fig. 27
Obturator fossa.
Fig. 28
Superior vesical artery.
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
70
Fig. 30  
Paravesical space.
Fig. 31  
Lateral view of the paravesical space: the internal obturator muscle, 
puborectalis muscle and the two tendinous arches can be seen.
Fig. 32
Space of Retzius.
The space of Retzius or retropubic space is located between 
the posterior part of the pubic bone and Cooper’s  ligament, 
which is its anterior boundary. The anterior part of the 
bladder is the posterior boundary of this space. The lateral 
boundary is formed by the internal obturator muscle and it 
is  continuous posteriorly with the vesicovaginal space. The 
ﬂ oor of the space of Retzius is the pubocervical (paravaginal) 
fascia, which is inserted into the tendinous arch (connective 
tissue located medial to the insertion of the iliococcygeus 
muscle) in the internal obturator fascia (Fig. 32).
7.2 The Paravesical Space
7.3 Space of Retzius
The pararectal spaces are lateral to the rectum bilaterally. 
They are located posterior to the base of the broad  ligament, 
which forms the anterior boundary of these spaces. The 
lateral boundary is formed by the ureter and internal iliac 
artery. The base consists of the puborectalis muscle (part of 
the levator ani). This space contains the uterosacral  ligament 
laterally, which passes posteriorly in the direction of the 
sacrum (Fig. 29). 
Laparoscopic operations for uterine prolapse or  endo-
metriosis of the rectovaginal septum are procedures require 
a solid knowledge of the anatomy of these spaces. Correct 
dissection of the pararectal space is of crucial importance 
to prevent iatrogenic injury to the vesical and rectal nerve 
plexuses, which cross this space.
The paravesical space is located anteriorly at the base of 
the broad ligaments bilaterally. The medial boundary is the 
bladder, the lateral boundary is the internal obturator fascia 
while its inferior boundary consists of the ﬁ bres of the iliococ-
cygeus muscle, which terminate in the tendinous arch of the 
levator ani.
This space contains, from medial to lateral, the  obliterated 
umbilical artery, the obturator artery and vein and the 
obturator nerve, together with lymph nodes and lymphatic 
vessels (Figs. 30–31). The paravesical space is particularly 
important in pelvic lymphadenectomy.
Fig. 29  Pararectal space.
7.0 The Pelvic Spaces
7.1 The Pararectal Space
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
71
This space is found between the anterior part of the vagina 
and the posterior part of the bladder. It contains the 
bladder trigone and the vesicovaginal fascia. It is bounded 
laterally by the vesicouterine ligaments or vesical pillars
(Fig. 33). The inferior vesical arteries and veins and ureters 
pass beneath the pillars toward the bladder neck.
This space is also virtual and it is dissected during 
hysterectomy to free the bladder; the surgeon must avoid 
lateral dissection because of the risk of ureter injury.
7.4 The Vesicovaginal Space
Fig. 33
Vesicovaginal space.
7.5 The Rectovaginal Space
The recto-vaginal space is another virtual space located 
between the posterior part of the vagina and the anterior part 
of the rectum. It begins at the medial junction of the utero-
sacral ligaments and the pouch of Douglas. It is bounded 
laterally by the iliococcygeus muscles of the  levator ani.
Fig. 34
Presacral space.
7.6 The Presacral Space
This is located posterior to the parietal peritoneum in front of 
the vertebral column at sacral level. It is bounded posteriorly 
by the anterior longitudinal ligament, the sacral promon tory 
and the sacrum (Fig. 34). The right lateral boundary is the 
right common iliac artery and the right ureter. On the left are 
found the left common iliac artery, left ureter and the inferior 
mesenteric artery and vein. It contains fat and the presacral 
nerves, which receive multiple afferent and efferent connec-
tions from the sympathetic, parasympathetic and somatic 
system of the sacral nerves. Dissection of this space is 
necessary when presacral neurectomy is performed.
Recommended Reading
1. 
DUBREUIL-CHAMBARDEL, L: (1925) Traité des 
Variations du System Artériel Variations des Artères du 
Pelvis et du Membre Inferieur, Masson et Cie., Paris
2. 
GASPARRI F, MASSI GB: (1976) Trattato italiano di 
ginecologia
3. 
PELAGE JP, LE DREF O, JACOB D, SOYER P, 
ROSSIGNOL M, TRUC J, PAYEN D, RYMER R: 
Uterine artery embolization: anatomical and technical 
con siderations, indications, results, and complications
J Radiol. 200 Dec;81 (12 Suppl): 1863–72.
4. 
PELAGE JP, LE DREF O, SOYER P, JACOB D, 
KARDACHE M, DAHAN H, LASSAU JP, RYMER R: 
Arterial anatomy of the female genital tract: veriations 
and relevance to trascatheter embolization of the uterus. 
AJR Am J Roentgenol.1999 Apr;172(4): 989–94.
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
72
operation theater 
Chapter V
Suturing Techniques in
Gynecologic Laparoscopy 
Daiana Tonellotto1, Paulo Ayroza2,
Arnaud Wattiez3 and Luca Mencaglia4
1Barra D’Or Hospital, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
2Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, 
Medical School of the Santa Casa University of São Paulo, Brazil
3Strasbourg University Hospital, Strasbourg, France
4Centro Oncologico Fiorentino, Florence, Italy
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
74
1.0 Ergonomics
To make suturing easier it is important for the surgeon to 
adopt as ergonomic a position as possible.
The surgeon must be at a height where the angle between 
his upper arm and forearm is > 90 degrees. It must be borne 
in mind that the patient’s abdominal wall is distended by the 
pneumoperitoneum and is further elevated by the Trendelen-
burg position and also that the surgeon’s hands are situated 
about 20 cm higher because of the presence of the trocars 
and instruments. If the operating table cannot be lowered 
sufﬁ ciently, the surgeon may use a footrest to assume the 
correct position.
Suturing techniques in laparoscopy do not require large 
movements of the trunk and arms but only control of the 
instruments by the hands and ﬁ ngers. The arms must be 
relaxed and the elbows beside the trunk. 
It is extremely important that all of the surgical team is 
arranged correctly around the table and that the surgeon’s 
line of vision (eye-monitor) always passes between the 
surgeon’s hands.
Moreover, for correct ergonomics during laparoscopic 
suturing, the trocar ports should be positioned relative to the 
tissue to be sutured to take into account as far as possible 
the hand holding the needle holder, the plane of suturing and 
the angle of incidence between needle and tissue.
2.0 Suturing
Suturing is deﬁ ned as any surgical step intended to approxi-
mate the edges of a tissue that is discontinuous with its 
anatomical planes. Its function can be mechanical (opposing 
the forces that tend to separate the wound edges), joining 
different anatomical planes together or isolation (preventing 
bacterial contamination).
Essentially there are two traditional suturing techniques:
O interrupted
O continuous
Interrupted (noncontinuous) sutures are placed to approxi-
mate the wound edges, placing individual sutures equidistant 
from each other. 
The interrupted suture can be simple, when the purpose 
is simply to approximate the tissue, double (two simple 
sutures without breaking the continuity of the thread) when 
hemostasis is also desired or inverting when it is necessary to 
invaginate the tissue more deeply. 
This type of suture has certain advantages: if a knot comes 
undone, this is not enough to cause suture dehiscence, it is 
well tolerated by the tissues because less foreign material is 
present and, in the event of infection, it prevents this from 
spreading to the entire wound following the course of the 
suture. At the same time, however, it must be borne in mind 
that it takes longer compared to a continuous suture, is less 
hemostatic and provides relatively lower resistance.
Continuous suture allows approximation of the edges with 
an uninterrupted series of stitches using one thread. It can 
be a straight line, and in this case the suture is stopped by a 
knot at either end, or circular (also called purse-string), where 
the knot is tied with the two ends of the suture. For this type 
of suture, it is preferable to use a smooth and ﬂ exible thread. 
The advantage of the continuous suture is that it is fast and 
provides optimal tensile strength retention but the disadvan-
tage is that if a suture gives way, this is more likely to produce 
dehiscence of the entire suture and in the event of infection, it 
favors spread along the suture.
Fig. 1
Types of suture needles.
3.0 Materials
The materials used in the traditional suturing technique are 
needles and suture threads.
3.1 Surgical Needles
Surgical needles are available in six different geometric forms: 
straight, ½ curve, ½ circle, ¼ circle, 3/8 circle, 5/8 circle and 
they are distinguished by the type of point: rounded, conic al, 
diamond point and by the body: circular, oval, triangular, 
lancet, hexagonal (Figs. 1–2).
1/4 circle
Ophthalmic (surgery of the 
eyes and muscles
Skin suture
Skin and muscles
Suture of the skin and 
intestine
General, gynecologic and 
vascular surgery
Urology
3/8 circle
1/2 circle
1/2 curve
straight
5/8 circle
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
75
In general, semicircular round-bodied surgical needles with a 
conic al tip with a length varying according to the tissue being 
sutured are used almost exclusively (Fig. 3).
In the case of tissues with a ﬁ rm consistency, some surgeons 
prefer to use needles with all three edges of the tip cutting but 
round-bodied (taper cut) which penetrate more easily without 
causing excessive trauma. 
Straight surgical needles can be used transparietally to 
suspend tissues such as the intestine, ovaries and vaginal 
vault with the aim of improving exposure of the operative ﬁ eld 
(Figs. 4–6).
Fig. 5
The intestine is anchored to the abdominal wall by means of a 
suspensory suture. The abdominal wall is transﬁ xed.
Fig. 6
The intestine is anchored to the abdominal wall for the duration of 
the operation by means of a suspensory suture.
Fig. 4
The intestine is anchored to the abdominal wall by means of a
suspensory suture. The peri-intestinal fat is transﬁ xed with a straight 
needle.
Fig. 2a
Needles with a cylindrical cross section
(tissue with little resistance).
Tissue trauma
Cross section
Fig. 3
The maximum length of needles used in 
laparoscopy is the size of the arc, which
can vary from 27 to 36 mm.
Angle
subtended
Length of chord
Needle
length
Needle 
point
Needle 
diameter
Radius
Body of 
needle
Fig. 2b
And triangular cross section (two cutting 
edges for highly resistant tissue. 
Cross section
Tissue trauma
operation theater 
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
77
The most important physical properties of a suture material 
are: 
O tensile strength retention: ability of a thread to oppose 
traction
O smoothness: force necessary to make a suture glide in a 
tissue. Strictly correlated with the friction coefﬁ cient of the 
suture material
O elasticity: capacity of a suture to elongate under traction
O capillarity: physical property by which molecules of liquid 
are induced to move inside a tube independently of gravity
O hydrophilia: chemical phenomenon denoting the greater 
or lesser afﬁ nity for water of various materials
O flexibility: property by which a suture is capable of 
supporting acute angulation without breaking or opposing 
excessive resistance
O plasticity: this is the lack of recovery of the initial dimen-
sions of the suture after forced lengthening
O handling: this is a property that cannot be measured 
with instruments but is a special and subjective quality 
assessed only by the surgeon’s hand; it is the resultant of 
all the physical properties described above.
The sutures most commonly used in laparoscopy are:
Vicryl (Polyglactin 910). Braided absorbable synthetic suture. 
Also produced in a form coated with calcium stearate to 
make it water-repellent and more rigid. 
Advantages:  
optimal handling
 
good knot retention
 
predictable absorption  
 
very versatile
 
minimal tissue reaction
Disadvantages: braided and capillary
 
retention reduced in the presence of urine
Vicryl is the most commonly used suture in gynecologic 
laparoscopy because of its optimal handling and versatility.
Polyester (Dacron). Commercial names: Ethibond  (polyester 
coated with polybutylate), Mersilene (polyester), Micron 
(polyester covered with silicone). Non-absorbable synthetic 
monoﬁ lament suture.
Advantages:  
optimal tensile strength retention
 
low reactivity
 
good ﬂ exibility
 
optimal smoothness
Disadvantages: asepsis of the tissue
 
removal of the sutures if infected
Polyester, because of its smoothness and non-absorbability, 
ﬁ nds its greatest use in surgery of the pelvic ﬂ oor.
Monocryl (polyglecaprone 25). Absorbable synthetic mono-
ﬁ lament suture.
Advantages: 
high tensile strength retention
 
absorbable
Disadvantages: low knot retention
 
50% absorbed in 7 days
Particularly indicated for suturing delicate tissues such as the 
tube and ovary as it produces less tissue reaction.
Polypropylene Commercial names: Prolene, Surgilene.
Non-absorbable synthetic monoﬁ lament suture.
Advantages:  
good knot retention
 
optimal smoothness
 
low tissue reaction
 
optimal tissue resistance
 
versatile applicability
Disadvantages: memory
 
low ﬂ exibility
knot tying difﬁ cult with bigger suture
diameters
Small-diameter material is used for vascular sutures while 
larger diameters are used for temporary suspension of the 
ovaries or sigmoid.
4.1 Trocars
The trocar allows various types of laparoscopic devices to be 
passed into and used in the abdominal cavity.
The 6-mm trocars allow finer and more precise move-
ments so 5-mm instruments are usually employed; however, 
needles are introduced and removed more easily through
11-mm trocars. It is therefore possible to use a 11-mm 
trocar with reducer although 11–13 mm trocars are 
currently available that do not require reduction from 13 to 
6 mm because they come with a special valve, though this 
is extremely fragile and easily damaged when needles are 
passed through it. When suturing delicate small structures 
such as the ureter or tube, where it is preferable to use
3-mm instruments, 3.9-mm trocars can be used.
The trocars have different types of valves:
O multifunctional valve: this is opened by pressure exert ed 
by an external plunger
O automatic valve ﬂ aps: this opens automatically when the 
instrument is pushed against it
O silicone leaflet valve: with a membrane, bicuspid or 
tricuspid shape
When suturing, attention should be paid to the type of 
trocar valve; the silicone leaﬂ et valve remains open when 
two sutures are passed inside it, causing gas to leak. When 
using extracorporeal knots, trocars with a tricuspid valve are 
therefore preferable.
4.0 Instrumentation
To speed up and facilitate as much as possible the  suturing 
process, perfect knowledge of the required laparoscopic 
instruments is essential.
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
78
4.2 Needle holders
The needle holder is the fundamental instrument for laparo-
scopic suturing as it must carry the needle, place the stitch 
and tie the intracorporeal knot (Fig. 8).
There are different versions depending on the handle design 
(curved, straight), opening and closing ratchet mechanism 
(central position, right, left), stitch (straight, curved, single 
or double) and jaws but in general, they must all be easy to 
handle, lightweight and sturdy at the same time. They must 
allow the needle to be grasped ﬁ rmly but also to scale the 
force while the suture is being manipulated.
There are needle holders capable of straightening the needle 
but they have the disadvantage of not allowing any variation 
of the angle of impact on the tissue being sutured.
The assistant needle holder is the instrument that assists the 
needle holder in placing the suture (Figs. 9–10).
In general, a second needle holder is used to allow good 
control of the needle and at the same time allow both hands 
to be used equally. Any forceps can be chosen as assistant 
needle holder, preferably with ﬂ at jaws that allow both the 
suture and the tissues to be grasped securely.
Figs. 8a, b
Needle holders with straight and curved handles.
a
b
4.3 Assistant Needle Holder
Fig. 9
Needle holder and assistant needle holder.
Figs. 10a–c
Jaws of different needle holders.
a
b
c
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
79
4.4 Knot Pusher
4.5 Scissors
The knot pusher is an instrument that allows a previously 
tied extracorporeal knot to be introduced into the abdominal 
cavity. There are different knot pushers (Fig. 11) depending 
on the type of knot: simple half hitch, Roeder.
The scissors used to cut suture material must not be the same 
as those used for dissection because they are extremely 
deli cate.
Using dissecting scissors to cut suture material can result in 
a dramatic decrease of their cutting performance. This effect 
becomes even more evident at an earlier stage if the scissors 
are used in combination with electrosurgical instruments.
Scissors vary according to the design of the blades: straight, 
curved, hooked. Hooked scissors are preferable for cutting 
sutures (Fig. 12).
Fig. 11
Knot pusher.
Fig. 12
Different types of laparoscopic scissors.
5.0 Insertion and Removal of the Needle from the Abdominal Cavity
Figs. 13a–c
The sequence demonstrates how the  needle 
holder is inserted in the cannula (a)
and ﬁ nally protrudes from the distal
opening of the 13-mm trocar (c).
a
b
c
The insertion and removal of the needle depend on its shape 
and size, and not least, on the trocar size.
Straight needles can be inserted in any type of trocar or even 
directly through the abdominal wall, while curved needles 
can be introduced in 6-mm trocars up to 12 mm in length, in 
11-mm trocars up to 28 mm, in 13-mm trocars up to 34 mm 
and in 15-mm trocars up to 40 mm in length (Figs. 13–15).
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
80
Figs. 14a–c
Sequence demonstrating loading of the 
suture and thus of the needle inside the 
cannula. 
Figs. 15a–d  
Sequence demonstrating the subsequent 
insertion of the cannula loaded with suture 
and needle inside the trocar. 
Figs. 16a, b  
When the length of the needle exceeds the 
inner diameter of the cannula, this can pose 
problems of its own, such as the needle 
becoming impacted inside the cannula. 
During insertion and removal of the needle from the 
abdominal cavity, constant videoendosopic monitoring of the 
port in use is mandatory, because there is always a risk of the 
needle becoming impacted in the valve and dropping into the 
abdominal cavity (Fig. 16). 
The ideal would be to use trocars with an automatic valve. 
There are specific introducers on the market, which are 
inserted in the trocars and allow the needle to be passed 
through safely. 
The needles can be introduced directly through the cutan eous 
ports but with the risk of iatrogenic injury to the  abdominal 
wall, bleeding and subcutaneous emphysema. To do this, it 
is necessary to remove the trocar from the abdominal wall, 
introduce the needle holder in the trocar and pick up the end 
of the suture, then withdraw the  needle holder from the trocar 
until the needle is located about 10 cm from the distal end of 
the trocar; at this point, the needle holder is reinserted in the 
trocar and the suture is grasped about 3 cm from the swage 
of the needle. The needle holder, needle, suture and trocar 
can then be introduced into the abdominal wall, seeking to 
ﬁ nd the correct route.
To remove the needle, apart from the methods described 
above, taking care not to mount the needle in the needle 
holder but handling it by the suture to provide it with some 
freedom of motion, it is possible to straighten the needle in 
the abdominal cavity using two needle holders so that it can 
be removed directly through the 6-mm trocar but with the risk 
of breakage of the needle itself or of the needle  holders.
b
c
a
d
b
c
b
a
a
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
81
Fig. 17
Coordinates of the suture plane.
Fig. 18
Suture angles.
6.0 The Stitch
The stitch is one of the most difﬁ cult steps in laparoscopic 
suturing. 
It is always necessary to refer to the “ideal stitch” which is 
obtained when the angles between the wound, needle and 
needle holder are each 90 degrees and the suture line is 
parallel to the needle holder. To come as close as possible to 
this situation, there are three variables:
O choice of principal needle holder (central or lateral trocar)
O straight or reverse mounting of the needle in the needle 
holder
O angle between the needle and needle holder
Once the needle has been introduced into the abdomen and 
the principal needle holder has been adjusted relative to the 
suture plane, the needle is mounted in the needle holder 
without locking at the level of its maximum curve. At this 
point the assistant needle holder, grasping the suture 2 cm 
from the needle swage, causes the needle to rotate forward 
or backward through 180 degrees, in this way allowing the 
orientation of the needle to be changed from forward to back 
or vice versa.
The assistant needle holder will be able to perfect the angle 
between needle and needle holder with traction on the suture 
close to the swage or small pushes on the tip of the needle. 
The same maneuver may be performed by the same needle 
holder supporting the needle on sufﬁ ciently rigid tissue.
After locking the needle by closing the needle holder, it is 
then possible to place the stitch. The movement transmitted 
to the needle holder and needle must consist of rotation only 
(Figs. 17–23).
If it is desired to place the suture more deeply it is possible 
to externally rotate the wrist or move the grip of the needle 
holder as far as possible toward the swage. 
When the needle is extracted from the tissue, one should 
attempt to grasp the needle with the needle holder imme-
diately, avoiding letting it drop and losing time required for 
repositioning.
P is the axis of rotation of the needle holder
F is the central axis of the opening in the tissue
T is the plane of the needle
Fig. 19
Ideal suture angles.
Fig. 20
Modiﬁ cations of the suture angle: tip opened 110°.
A = ALPHA = 90°
B = BETA = 0°
G = GAMMA = 90°
A = ALPHA = 90°
B = BETA = 0°
G = GAMMA = 90°
operation theater 
operation theater 
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
84
Fig. 29
The margins are approximated by the knot.
Fig. 30
Suture placed at the infundibulum.
Fig. 28
The stitch is placed in sequence.
Fig. 31
Final outcome of the suture.
The Roeder knot is tied as follows:
O A ﬁ rst half knot is tied,
O the active strand of the suture makes three turns around 
both strands of the previously formed loop,
O the active strand makes a second half knot on the  passive 
strand of the loop,
O the knot is tightened.
It is important to avoid crossing the two strands of the knot by 
asking the assistant to place a ﬁ nger on the trocar to separate 
the two ends of the suture.
This knot is secure and easy to tie with a good sliding  capacity 
and at the same time optimal holding strength so it provides 
a high level of safety when ligating vascular  pedicles (Figs. 
28–31).
The Weston knot is made with
O an initial half knot
O the active strand is ﬁ rst wrapped around the passive strand 
of the previously formed loop 
O then twisted around both strands of the loop, making the 
active strand pass through the loop that has just been 
made 
O and finally the active strand passes from anterior to 
posterior in the loop closest to the surgeon’s hands
It is pushed into the abdomen by simply pulling the passive 
strand and locked pulling the two ends in opposite directions.
As with the Roeder knot, it is important to keep the two ends 
of the suture separate. This is a knot with optimal  smoothness 
but the holding strength of the knot is not optimal especially 
with suture sizes less than zero.
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
85
To tie an intracorporeal knot, it is important to perform the 
following steps in order:
O the needle holder picks up the suture 2 cm from the swage 
and moves it from the opposite side with respect to the 
needle’s exit point, passing above the suture hole 
O the assistant needle holder wraps twice around the suture 
after which it grasps the end of the suture 
O the two ends are then pulled in opposite directions with the 
two needle holders to pull the ﬁ rst square knot taut.
O the maneuver can be repeated with a single turn each time 
until the surgical knot is complete (Figs. 32, 33).
The result should be a surgical knot deﬁ ned classically as 
a succession of half knots and/or half hitches in which the 
last should be the reverse of the previous one. However, the 
ﬁ rst must be a double half knot, that is, a half knot made by 
passing the end of the suture twice through the same loop; 
this prevents the knot from becoming slack while the next is 
being tied.
In this step it is very important never to mount the needle in 
the needle holder because this is associated with the risk of 
iatrogenic injure to adjacent organs.
8.0 Intracorporeal Knots
Fig. 32
Preparation of the knot.
Fig. 33
Preparation of the knot.
Fig. 34
Intracorporeal knot-tying depends on correct preparation.
Fig. 35
The line of the suture (green line) allows the knot to be tied rapidly.
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
86
There are ready-made loops that can be used in  laparoscopy 
for hemostasis of vascular pedicles and pedunculated 
ﬁ bromas.
They are available in Vicryl, Prolene and PDS and usually 
employ the Roeder knot. The guiding aid in which the suture 
runs also acts as knot pusher.
The endoloop, used for ligatures, is a variation of the Roeder 
knot suitable for tonsillectomy operations. This is a  preformed 
loop for making a ﬁ sherman’s knot. The free end is mounted 
in a plastic guide tube and caught at the detachable proximal 
end of the guiding tube. If it is not possible to use a trocar with 
a silicone leaﬂ et valve, an adaptor must be used to  prevent 
gas leakage. After placing the loop around the tissue that is to 
be ligated, the proximal end of the guiding tube is broken off 
and used to exert traction on the free end of the thread while 
the distal part of the tube is used to push the knot.
1.  AL FALLOUJI M: Making loops in laparoscopic surgery: 
state of art. Surg Laparosc Endosc 1993; 3(6):477–81
2.  BABETTY Z, SUMER A, ALTINTAS S: Knot properties 
of alternating sliding knots. J Am Coll Surg 1998;186 
(4):485–9
3.  BONARDINI L, ROSATO S: Suture e ﬁ li chirurgici,
Ed Mediche Italiane, 1989
4.  BROWN RP: Knotting technique and suture materials, 
Br J Surg 1992;79(5):399–400
5.  DORSEY JH, SHARP HT, CHOVAN JD, HOLTZ PM: 
Laparoscopic knot strength: a comparison with
conventional knots. Obstet Gynecol. 1995 Oct;86
(4 Pt 1):536–40.
6.  EMAM TA, HANNA GB, KIMBER C, DUNKLEY  P,
CUSCHIERI A: Effect of intracorporeal-extracorporeal 
instrument length ratio on endoscopic task performance 
and surgeon movements. Arch Surg 2000; 135(1):62–5
7.  FREDE T, STOCK C, RENNER C, BUDAIR Z,
ABDEL-SALAM Y, RASSWEILER J: Geometry of 
laparo scopic suturing and knotting techniques.
J Endourol 1999; 13(3):191–8
8.  GOMEL V, TAYLOR PJ: Laparoscopia ginecologica. 
Diagnostica e chirurgia, UTET, 1998
9.  HANNA GB, SHIMI S, CUSCHIERI A: Optimal port 
locations for endoscopic intracorporeal knotting. 
Surg Endosc 1997; 11(4):397–401
10. HANNA GB, FRANK TG, CUSCHIERI A: Objective 
assessment of endoscopic  knot quality. Am J Surg 
1997; 174(4):410–3
11. KADIRKAMANATHAN SS, SHELTON JC, HEPWORTH 
CC, LAUFER JC, SWAIN CP: A comparison of the 
strength of knots tied by hand and at laparoscopy. 
J Am Coll Surg 1996;182(1):46–54
12. LUKS FI, DEPREST J, BROSENS I, LERUT T: 
Extracorporeal surgical knot. J Am Coll Surg 1994;
179(2) :220–2
13. MEDINA M: Analysis and physics of laparoscopic
intracorporeal square-knot tying. JSLS 2005;9(1):
113–21.
14. ROMEO A, MINELLI L: Manuale dei nodi e delle
tecniche d’annodamento in laparoscopia, EGES 
Edizioni, Verona, 2006
15. SHARP HT, DORSEY JH, CHIVAN JD, HOLTZ PM: The 
effect of knot geometry on the strength of laparo scopic 
slip knots. Obstet Gynecol 1996;88(3):408–11
16. TRIMBOS JB, RIJSSEL EJ, KLOPPER PJ: Per formance 
of sliding knots in monoﬁ lament and multi ﬁ lament 
suture material. Obstet Gynecol 1986; 68(3): 425–30
17. VAN RIJSSEL EJ, TRIMBOS JB, BOOSTER MH: 
Mechanical performance of square knots and sliding 
knots in surgery: comparative study, Am J Obstet 
Gynecol 1990;162(1):93–7
9.0 Endoloop
Recommended Reading
operation theater 
Chapter VI
The Role of Diagnostic Laparoscopy and 
Transvaginal Endoscopy (TVE) in Infertility and 
Assisted Reproduction Technology (ART)
Emmanuel Lugo1, Carlo Tantini2 and Luca Mencaglia1
Centro Oncologico Fiorentino, Florence, Italy
2Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics,
Hospital of Cecina, Italy
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
88
1.0 Introduction
Exploring the peritoneal cavity and visualizing its organs 
is essential in the diagnosis of female pelvic pathology, 
especially in the case of infertility or pelvic pain of  non- speciﬁ c 
etiology.
The pelvis can be visualized endoscopically by diagnostic 
laparoscopy or transvaginal endoscopy.
Both techniques have beneﬁ ts and drawbacks so that it is not 
possible to choose deﬁ nitively between them. In summary, 
it can be stated that both are minimally invasive endoscopic 
techniques that require general anesthesia in the vast  majority 
of cases (even if performed as day surgery) and the use of a 
fully equipped operating room. Although many authors have 
suggested the use of local anesthesia for these outpatient 
procedures applying either technique, general anesthesia is 
nearly always necessary in our experience.
Diagnostic laparoscopy provides a panoramic view of the 
pelvis – not feasible by transvaginal endoscopy (TVE) –  and 
facilitates switching to endoscopic  surgery in the event 
of pelvic pathology. From the surgical point of view, trans-
vaginal endoscopy has certain limitations.  With the aid of 
a 30°- hysteroscope and ﬂ uid medium for distension of the 
peritoneal cavity, the transvaginal approach undisputably 
provides some absolutely unique angles of vision and types 
of images. Nonetheless, it must be said, that TVE allows 
salpingoscopy of the distal tubal segment to be  performed 
only in selected cases.”
2.0 Laparoscopic Diagnosis
Diagnostic laparoscopy is indicated in infertile patients if tubo-
peritoneal pathology is suspected to be the  primary cause 
of inhibited female reproduction. Among the most  common 
indications are suspected tubal defects or  irregularities on the 
hysterosalpingogram, previous  abdominal surgery  suggesting 
the tentative diagnosis of adhesions, and signs of endome-
triosis or hydrosalpinx on ultrasound.  Diagnostic  laparoscopy 
allows conversion to open surgery and  immediate  surgical 
treatment of any unexpected pelvic pathology prior to  initiating 
Assisted Reproductive  Technology (ART)  procedures.
Laparoscopy combined with diagnostic hysteroscopy is 
therefore considered the gold standard for the assessment of 
the pelvis and female reproductive tract. Even in the case of 
Mullerian malformation, the combined use of laparoscopy and 
hysteroscopy is ideal for a deﬁ nite diagnosis since it allows 
assessment of the exterior contour of the uterine  corpus. 
In fact, hysteroscopy on its own does not allow  differential 
diagnosis between a septate uterus and bicornuate uterus so 
it must always be supplemented by diagnostic laparoscopy 
or transvaginal ultrasound.
Diagnostic laparoscopy is also indicated in infertile patients to 
exclude the presence of pelvic pathology when 1st level ART 
procedures for a period of 6–8 months did not yield a  positive 
result. Laparoscopy must be scheduled during ovulation or 
the second phase of the cycle and must always be combined 
with diagnostic hysteroscopy to evaluate the condition of 
the uterine cavity and allow endometrial biopsy sampling, if 
needed.
The diagnostic measures above must be performed with 
utmost care and precision to prevent iatrogenic trauma to the 
tissue being examined. Modern technology allows  minimally
invasive diagnostic laparoscopy by use of miniaturized 
tele scopes, instruments and trocars. 
Figs. 1a, b
Laparoscopes with diameters of 1 mm, 2 mm, 5 mm and 10 mm.
a
b
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
89
Fig. 2
Panoramic view of the pelvis.
Fig. 3
Endoscopic view of the tube and ovary.
Fig. 4
Endoscopic view of the ovary.
Fig. 5
The left tube is positioned prior to
chromopertubation.
Fig. 6
Injection of methylene blue dye.
Fig. 7
Abnormal dilatation of the tube,
sactosalpinx or hydrosalpinx.
Fig. 8
Salpingitis of the isthmus.
Fig. 9
Appendix.
However, the surgeon must be readily prepared for endoscopic-
guided surgical treatment of any pathology encountered 
during the diagnostic session.
Diagnostic laparoscopy is normally performed as day surgery 
with the patient being discharged on the same day (Figs. 1–9).
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
90
2.1 Patient Positioning
3.0 Anesthesia
Diagnostic laparoscopy can be performed under both local 
and general anesthesia.
Various authors have suggested using local anesthesia with 
periumbilical skin inﬁ ltration and intravenous sedation. In this 
case it is vitally important to keep abdominal distension very 
low with insufﬂ ation of 1–2 liters of CO2 at the most to avoid 
pain caused by abdominal distension and problems related 
to spontaneous respiration.
In the case of general anesthesia, agents that guarantee rapid 
recovery can be used so that the patient can be  discharged 
a few hours after the procedure. In this case, too, local 
inﬁ ltration anesthesia applied to the trocar insertion area has 
proven to be useful to reduce postoperative pain.
O 5 mm-laparoscope and videocamera
O Insufﬂ ation system
O Xenon cold light source
O 6 mm-trocar
O Veress needle
O Atraumatic grasping forceps
O Suction / irrigation system
O Uterus manipulator
4.0 Instrumentation
Pelvic endoscopy allows visual inspection of the peritoneal 
cavity and the female genital tract involved in the  reproductive 
process.
An extensive diagnostic laparoscopy must include full 
visualization of the entire peritoneal cavity, a panoramic view 
of the pelvis and pouch of Douglas, the peritoneal liquid, the 
uterosacral ligaments, thorough inspection of the ovarian and 
tubal surfaces (including the ﬁ mbriae) and  chromopertubation.
Various types of instruments can be used for laparoscopy in 
infertile patients:
O Traditional laparoscopy, performed by using 5 mm- or
10 mm-laparoscopes, provides optimal visibility at 
relatively low expenditures. The second port is a 5 mm-
trocar through which an atraumatic grasping forceps can 
be used.
O Minilaparoscopy is performed with a laparoscope, 3 mm 
or even 1.2 mm in diameter. The laparoscope may be 
introduced through the Veress needle; the atraumatic 
grasping forceps (diameter 3 mm) may be used through 
a second port. The principal technical problem in this 
particular case is related to the extremely reduced  diameter 
of the  laparoscope which provides only low-level lighting 
conditions in the operative ﬁ eld, even given the use of a 
xenon light source. It is therefore necessary to keep the 
laparoscope close to the area to be inspected to obtain 
enough light. In addition, this type of laparoscope is 
particularly fragile and delicate (Figs. 10–12).
5.0 Technique
Positioning on the operating table involves the cooperation 
of the awake patient. The patient must be placed in gyneco-
logical position with her arms close to the body and her 
legs placed in stirrups, avoiding positions that might cause 
compression of the plexuses or peripheral nerves. In  addition, 
the legs must be positioned low to prevent interference with 
the surgeon’s maneuvers conducted through the lateral 
ports. It is preferable to use a uterine manipulator to facilitate 
viewing the pelvic organs and for injecting methylene blue 
dye for chromopertubation.
Normally, diagnostic laparoscopy is performed through a 
double access:
O periumbilical port for the laparoscope and videocamera;
O along the midline of the lower abdomen for the atraumatic 
forceps needed to manipulate the pelvic organs.
The diameter of the trocars varies according to the  diameter 
of the chosen instruments and laparoscope.
operation theater 
operation theater 
9.0 Anesthesia
10.0 Technique
Various authors have reported that this technique can be 
performed under local anesthesia, suggesting a routine 
outpatient setting. Unfortunately, this is possible only in 
selected cases with a particularly high pain threshold since 
the maneuvers to visualize the pelvic organs are quite  painful 
demanding for general anesthesia in the vast majority of 
cases.
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
92
8.0 Patient Selection Criteria
This method is indicated mainly for infertile patients or those 
with pelvic pain.
Potential indications for diagnostic TVE:
O Diagnostic assessment of infertility
O Visualization of the pelvis after conservative medical 
therapy or surgical treatment.
O Pain mapping
O Diagnostic assessment of patients with pelvic 
endo metriosis
O Study of tubal and ovarian physiology
O Early diagnosis of extrauterine pregnancy
O Visualization of the appendix
Initially, bimanual vaginal examination and transvaginal ultra-
sound are performed to assess the position of the uterus 
and to exclude the presence of pathology in the pouch of 
Douglas. The purpose of the technique is to visualize and 
assess the relationships between the tubes and ovaries, the 
mucosa of the ﬁ mbria and ampulla, presence of adhesions or 
pelvic endometriosis and tubal patency (Figs. 14–16).
The contraindications to this technique are an intact hymen, 
a particularly narrow vagina, vaginal infection, obliteration of 
the pouch of Douglas or the presence of prolapsed structures 
in the pouch of Douglas, retroverted uterus and hemoperito-
neum.
Emergency situations, such as acute pelvic inﬂ ammation 
or ectopic pregnancy with hemoperitoneum are not indica-
tions for TVE because the presence of adhesions or hemor-
rhage can severely impede visibility. Undoubtedly, TVE and, 
in  particular, transvaginal salpingoscopy are useful modalities 
for diagnostic purposes.
Fig. 15
Microadhesions.
Fig. 16
Microadhesions.
Fig. 14
Tubo-ovarian adhesion.
Transvaginal endoscopy is usually performed from the 
seventh day of the cycle onwards. After placing the patient 
in dorsal lithotomy position and vaginal disinfection with 
aqueous chlorhexidine solution, the procedure commences 
with a diagnostic hysteroscopy. A 30°-hystero scope (diam.
2.7 mm with a 3.5 mm-sheath) is introduced into the vagina. 
The vaginal walls are gently expanded by continuous inﬂ ow 
of normal saline solution up to a maxi mum pressure of
120 mmHg. After identiﬁ cation of the cervix, the  hysteroscope 
is introduced into the cervical canal and a  traditional 
diagnostic hysteroscopy is performed.
To carry out TVE, after insertion of a Collin speculum in the 
vagina, the posterior vaginal fornix and the posterior lip of the 
cervix are inﬁ ltrated with 1.8 ml of local anesthetic (articaine 
40 mg with epinephrine 0.006 mg/ml), and the  posterior lip is 
then grasped with a Pozzi forceps and placed under traction. 
At this point, a trocar needle system designed particularly for 
this technique is used; the device consists of a type of Veress 
needle (length 25 cm) (Fig. 17), a dilator and an external  trocar 
of diameter 3.9 mm, which are put together before starting the 
procedure. The system is positioned in the midline 10–15 mm
below the insertion of the posterior vaginal wall on the  cervix. 
The release button of a trigger mechanism is actuated which 
causes the Veress needle to penetrate the vaginal wall. This 
modality reduces pain and allows the vagina to be  perforated 
without traction. Finally, the distal tip of the needle and 
dilating sheath are located in the pouch of Douglas. 
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
93
The Veress needle and dilating sheath are then removed 
and the same endoscope used for diagnostic hystero scopy 
is introduced through the trocar. Once, the correct intra-
abdominal position of the hysteroscope’s distal tip has been 
visually confirmed, continuous flow of prewarmed saline 
solution (37° C) can be started.
Unlike traditional laparoscopy, it is not possible to obtain a 
panoramic view, so it is appropriate to proceed with  imaging in 
the standard manner. The examination begins with  localizing 
the posterior surface of the uterine corpus. The adnexae are 
then visualized by on-axis rotation of the hyst eroscope and 
movements to the right and left. Once, the ovary and utero-
ovarian ligament have been identiﬁ ed, the tubal isthmus and 
ampulla are identiﬁ ed and inspected gradually advancing 
toward the ﬁ mbrial tubal portion. The posterior surface of the 
uterine corpus serves as a guide for moving the endoscope to 
the contralateral side where the same procedure is repeated. 
Finally, the pouch of  Douglas and uterosacral ligaments are 
thoroughly inspected (Figs. 18–20).
Tubal patency is assessed similarly to traditional laparo scopy 
by injection of methylene blue dye via a no. 14 Foley catheter 
previously placed in the uterine cavity (Fig. 21).
Fig. 17
Preparation of instrumentation used for transvaginal endoscopy.
Fig. 19
Ovarian fossa.
Fig. 20
Surface of the ovary.
Fig. 18
Posterior surface of the uterine corpus.
Figs. 21a-c
Chromopertubation.
a
b
c
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
94
With sufﬁ cient experience in the technique, it is  possible 
to perform salpingoscopy of a few centimeters of the 
distal tubal segment. The ampulla and the proximal tubal 
ostium are  identiﬁ ed and the endoscope is then inserted. 
The  infundibulum is easily identified by its characteristic 
concentric folds. The endoscope is gradually advanced and, 
as a result of the reduced inﬂ ow of saline, the ampulla is 
distended until the longitudinal folds come into view. Visuali-
zation of the folds and intra-tubal microanatomy is con tinued 
while the endoscope is withdrawn slowly. Canalization of the 
abdominal tubal ostium is easier in the post-ovulatory phase 
when the ﬁ mbriae are more congested and stiff (Figs. 22–24).
Inﬂ ow of saline is continued throughout the procedure as 
this allows the intestine and tubo-ovarian structures to 
remain ﬂ oating. The volume of liquid required for  distension 
varies from 200 to 400 ml depending on the duration of 
the  examination (average time 45 min). At the end of the 
procedure, the liquid is evacuated via the trocar. The point of 
trocar insertion in the vaginal fornix rarely requires suturing, 
unless there is bleeding.
11.0 Salpingoscopy
12.0 Complications
Fig. 23
Infundibulum of the Fallopian tube.
Fig. 24
Major and minor folds.
Fig. 22
Fimbriae.
The needle-dilator-trocar system used for TVE has been 
specially designed to reduce to the minimum accidental 
injuries which may occur during insertion of the instrument. 
Moreover, the use of this special TVE instrumentation set is 
capable to prevent iatrogenically-induced sequelae, such 
as pelvic infections, rectal or intestinal perforation, bleeding 
of the vaginal fornix or injury of the posterior surface of the 
uterine corpus.
To keep to a minimum the potential risk of bleeding in the 
vagina, it is advisable not to incise the vaginal mucosa but 
to insert the appropriate-sized needle directly,  dilating the 
vagina a second time and using a vasoconstricting agent 
in  combination with the local anesthetic. In fact,  minimal 
bleeding can give rise to serious problems in terms of 
unimpeded vision, hence it follows that this complication 
should be avoided.
13.0 Post-operative Follow-up
The patient is informed of the possibility of watery or bloody 
vaginal discharge and is advised not to use intra vaginal 
tampons and to abstain from sexual intercourse for one day. 
Prophylactic antibiotic medication is administered (azithro-
mycin 500 mg/day for 3 days). The patient can be discharged 
at the end of the procedure or when she has adequately 
recovered from general anesthesia.  
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
95
Recommended Reading
1.  DURRUTY G, VERA C, MACAYA R, BIANCHI M, 
MANZUR A: Resultados de la salpingoneostomìa 
laparoscòpica en infertilidad por hidrosalpinx.
Departamento de Obstetricia y Ginecología, Unidad de 
Reproducción Humana, Hospital Clinico Pontiﬁ cio. 
Universidad Catòlica de Chile.Revista chilena de
obstetricia y ginecologìa. Santiago (Chile). 2002. 67(6): 
488–493
2.  GOMEL V: Reproductive surgery. Departament of 
Obstetrics and Ginecology. Faculty of Medicine.
University of British Columbia. Vancouver (Canada). 
2005. Minerva. 57:21–8
3.  GOMEL V, ZOUVES C: Laparoscopìa quirùrgica en las 
enfermedades de las trompas. Cirugìa Laparoscòpica 
en Ginecologìa. Soderstrom. Segunda ediciòn Marban. 
(Philadelphia) 1999. (1):87–95.
4.  GORDON AG: Tubal Endoscopy. Consultant 
Gynaecologist, BUPA Hospital Hull and East Riding, 
Lowﬁ eld Road, Anlaby,Hull HU10 7AZ. 2004
5.  GORDTS S, CAMPO R, BROSENS I: Microcirugìa 
endoscòpica en medicina reproductiva. Cuadernos de 
medicina reproductiva. Pellicer Antonio. Primera ediciòn. 
Madrid (España). 2002. 8 (1): 55–72
6.  HULKA and REICH: Textbook of laparoscopy. (USA). 
2002. (1): 285–300
7.  LEVINE R: Laparoscopic tubal Sterilization. A practical 
manual of Laparoscopy. A clinical Cook book. Kentucky 
(USA). 2002. (1): 107–114
8.  MARCONI G., VILELA M., GOMEZ RN, BUZZI J., 
De ZUNIGA I, QUINTANA R: Salpingoscopia. 
Cuadernos de medicina reproductiva. Pellicer Antonio. 
Primera ediciòn. Madrid (Espana). 2002. 8 (1): 213–237
9.  YOUNG E, VAN TRILLO: Hidrosalpinx e Infertilidad. 
Cuadernos de medicina reproductiva. Pellicer Antonio. 
Primera ediciòn. (Madrid) 2002. 8 (1): 89–100
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
96
operation theater 
Chapter VII
Techniques of Laparoscopic
Tubal Sterilization 
Emmanuel Lugo and Luca Mencaglia
Centro Oncologico Fiorentino, Florence, Italy
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
98
1.0 Introduction
Female surgical sterilization is the most widely employed 
method of family planning in the world and the laparo-
scopic technique is currently used the most. The  historical 
development of this technique dates from the 1970s with 
Rioux and Corson. After that came Kleppinger (bipolar), Lay
and Yoon (silastic rubber ring), Hulka and Clemens  (plastic 
clip), Semm (endocoagulator), up to Filshie who in 1996 
suggested the use of a titanium clip with a silicone  rubber 
lining and a kind of “memory function”. Basically, all the 
laparoscopic techniques are simple, they do not leave 
an external scar, the costs are lower compared to other 
methods, all of the abdominal cavity can be  visualized 
panoramically and the procedure is usually performed as 
day surgery. In most cases, the period of convalescence is 
short, which explains the widespread patient acceptance 
of laparoscopic techniques. Anesthesia is normally general, 
especially in industrialized countries. In a few cases, patients 
receive  spinal and/or epidural anesthesia. The best form of 
anesthesia is certainly local anesthesia since it is safer, more 
economical and without late effects, and can be combined 
with a sedative and antiemetic.
2.0 Patient Selection
Potential candidates for tubal sterilization are women who 
want an irreversible method of contraception or those for whom 
pregnancy itself constitutes a risk factor of  potential clinical 
signiﬁ cance. The sterilization procedure can be  performed 
during or outside the postnatal period. Today,  clinicians 
have the choice among a wide range of endoscopic tech-
niques and it is possible to choose the most  suitable time 
for sterilization. There are a few contraindications,  obviously 
apart from the presence of a  gynecologic malignancy or 
any other major gynecologic disease. According to the 
literature, the main contraindications relating to the  technique 
are  adhesions following multiple  laparotomies, severe 
obesity, previous  history of peritonitis or salpingitis and any 
other  pelvic disease. Ileus and large abdominal tumors are 
reported in association with a high rate of complications and 
failures. Severe cardiopulmonary disease or dysfunction can 
be generic contraindications to tubal sterilization and to the 
creation of a pneumoperitoneum.
3.0 Patient Positioning
The patient should be placed in gynecologic position with 
the legs positioned so as not to interfere with maneuvers 
performed through the lateral trocar ports. An uterine 
manipulator should be used to facilitate vision and ex posure 
of the fallo pian tubes. The Trendelenburg position makes 
the procedure easier.
Laparoscopic tubal sterilization is normally performed via 
the following three ports:
O periumbilical primary port, for laparoscope and video 
camera
O two other lateral ports in the lower quadrant of the 
ab domen, used for grasping forceps holding the tube and 
the instrument required for tubal sterilization. The trocar 
size  varies according to the instruments required.
4.0 Instrumentation
O 5 mm laparoscope and videocamera
O Insufﬂ ator
O Electrosurgical unit
O Xenon light source
O 6 mm trocar
O Veress needle
O 5 mm atraumatic grasping forceps
O 5 mm scissors
O Suction/irrigation system for irrigation and
hydrodissection
O Uterine manipulator
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
99
5.0 Technique
There are various techniques of tubal sterilization, which 
employ electricity, heat or mechanical devices. Surgical 
interruption of the tubes by transection via a laparotomy 
or laparoscopy approach has been found to account for 
recanalization in up to 4% of cases. For this reason, mere 
transection with scissors is not recommended.
5.1 Unipolar Electrocoagulation
This is probably the most widely employed method and has a 
very low failure rate. A panoramic view of the  operating ﬁ eld 
is imperative before proceeding to sterilization. A  distorted 
video image and the loss of overall vision that can occur if the 
distal lens of the laparoscope is too close to the  operating ﬁ eld 
can confuse even the most experienced  laparoscopist. After 
removing the intestine from the  operating ﬁ eld, the  junction 
zone between the proximal and midtubal  segments is grasped 
to dislodge it from the pelvic  cavity toward the  anterior 
abdominal wall. Once, the ﬁ mbriae have been  visualized 
and the forceps is in correct position, the electro surgical unit 
can be connected (Fig. 1) to the  grasping  forceps (Fig. 2), a 
precaution that prevents  inadvertent pedal  activation, which 
might cause electrical injury to a vital intra-abdominal organ. 
In general, a power of 50 W is sufﬁ cient to induce complete 
tubal occlusion by unipolar electro coagulation of the tubal 
tissue between the jaws of the  forceps. The tissue damage 
extends 0.5 – 1 cm laterally. The tube becomes whitish and 
the passage of electrons through the tissue leads to cellular 
vaporization and creates a clean cutting effect.
It is appropriate to coagulate about 3 cm of tube. Further 
applications are frequently required to achieve this effect; 
they should be toward the medial part of the tube, that is, in 
the direction of the uterine body to avoid electrical injury to 
the bowel close to the distal segment or tubal ﬁ mbriae.
The tube must be viewed from all sides to conﬁ rm that coagu-
lation is appropriate. “Missed spots” in the coagulated target 
area can be coagulated again. At least 0.5 cm of the adjacent 
mesosalpinx should also be coagulated, thus cutting off the 
vascular supply.
Fig. 1
The high frequency electrosurgical unit AUTOCON®  II 400,
(KARL STORZ Tuttlingen, Germany).
Fig. 2
Grasping forceps.
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
100
5.2 Bipolar Electrocoagulation
The Waters instrument is used for thermal sterilization or real 
cauterization. This is a thermal hook, which re sembles the 
resistance of a toaster, sheathed in a heat-resistant  plastic 
protector. The hook is used to grasp the tube and pull it 
inside the plastic protector where the energy can be activated 
to induce thermal damage to the tissue. However, the extent 
of tissue destruction is less than 1 cm.
Another instrument, suggested by Kurt Semm, is called 
the Semm Endotherm. This consists of a type of  forceps 
coated with Teflon, which produces a temperature of
120° C to 160° C and performs cauterization of the tubal 
segment during an exposure time of 60–90 seconds. The 
area of thermal injury is limit ed to the width of the forceps so 
repeated applications are required to achieve coagulation of 
2 to 3 cm of tube.
5.3 Thermal Sterilization
Tubal sterilization with Yoon rings
Inbae Yoon first published successful occlusion of the 
fallopian tubes using a silastic ring in 1974. This technique 
was then adapted to operative laparoscopy with an  applicator 
8 mm in diameter, which allows a tubal segment to be lifted 
up with a pronged forceps inside the applicator sheath and 
the silastic ring to be put on (Figs. 5–7).
Various complications have been reported with this technique, 
the majority associated with possible injury to the  posterior 
mesosalpinx and with hemorrhage. Rigid or large tubes can 
be divided by the applicator and bleed.  The  bleeding can be 
controlled with bipolar coagulation.
5.4 Mechanical Devices
The principles of the bipolar mode represent an extremely 
important element in techniques of female sterilization. Even if 
the macroscopic appearance of a tube coagulated by  bipolar 
energy can appear the same as that coagulated by means 
of unipolar energy, it must be considered that the depth of 
destruction and lateral extension of the thermal trauma is 
certainly reduced, so the maneuver has to be  performed 
for a longer time to achieve the same effect. In reality, the 
outcome of any method of electrocoagulation, unipolar or 
bipolar, depends more on the length of the tubal segment 
destroyed than on the number of applications. Most authors 
consider that coagulation of a tubal segment of at least 3 cm 
is  necessary. 
The isthmic tubal portion must be grasped with the bipolar 
forceps (Fig. 3) approximately 2 cm from the uterine cornu 
(Fig. 4) so as not to cause injury to the uterine corpus. The 
HF electrosurgical unit should be set to a power no greater 
than 25 W using direct current. 2 or 3 applications are often 
required to achieve coagulation of a 3 cm tubal segment. 
In the literature there is still controversy whether or not to 
transect the tube following coagulation.
Fig. 3
Various types of bipolar forceps.
Fig. 4
Point where sterilization is performed using bipolar high frequency 
current.
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
101
Fig. 5
Tubal sterilization with Yoon rings.
Fig. 6
Detailed view of the site of tubal
sterilization with Yoon rings.
Fig. 7
Methylene blue test following tubal
sterilization.
Sterilization with Clips
This method offers the greatest reversibility since only a 
few millimeters (Fig. 8) of the tube are damaged, if properly 
applied in the isthmic portion. Therefore, the technique can 
be recommended in women under 30 years who request 
sterilization. The clips that have proven effective are Filshie 
and Hulka-Clemens clips. The Filshie clips are made of 
titanium coated on the inside with silicone, while the Hulka-
Clemens clips are made of 3 mm Lexan plastic with jaws 
articulated by a small metal spring.
An operative laparoscope designed for clip application is 
available although the clip can be applied through a second 
port using an applicator. Application through a second port 
also facilitates exposure, rotating from one side to the other. 
The clip must be applied at an angle of 90° in the isthmic 
tubal segment 2 or 3 cm from the uterine cornu. Application 
of the clip to a different part of the tube can be  ineffective 
due to the diameter of the tubal lumen which may not be 
occluded completely while pinched between the jaws of the 
clip. Following application, the clip remains closed owing 
to a spring mechanism. It is always necessary to reconﬁ rm 
proper placement of the clip. If residual tubal patency is 
suspected, a second clip should be applied.
6.0 Postoperative Care
The patients are usually discharged 2 to 6 hours after the 
surgical procedure. It is advisable to give postoperative 
analgesia to prevent pain due to acute necrosis of the  tissue 
following ring / clip application.
Recommended Reading
1.  HULKA AND REICH: Textbook of laparoscopy. (USA). 
2002. (1): 285–300
2.  LEVINE RONALD: Laparoscopic tubal Sterilization. A 
practical manual of Laparoscopy. A clinical Cook book. 
Kentucky (USA). 2002. (1): 107–114
3.  SODERSTROM M. RICHARD, RIOUX JACQUES:
Esterilizaciòn laparoscòpica. Cirugìa laparoscòpica en 
ginecologìa. Philadelphia (USA).1999. (1): 183–196
Fig. 8
Hulka-Clemens clip.
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
102
operation theater 
Chapter VIII
Laparoscopic Tubal Surgery
Emmanuel Lugo and Luca Mencaglia
Centro Oncologico Fiorentino, Florence, Italy
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecologic Laparoscopic Surgery
104
4.0 Instrumentation
1.0 Introduction
The most recent technical developments provide surgeons 
working in the ﬁ eld of infertility with ever more sophisti-
cated and effective methods of surgical reconstruction 
including endoscopic procedures. On the other hand, 
it should be borne in mind that the outcomes of assisted 
reproduction technology (ART) procedures are improving 
constantly,  raising the question of whether surgical repair of 
a tubal defect may be useful. In practice, if tubal damage is 
suspected or conﬁ rmed, it is necessary to decide whether to 
directly proceed to ART procedures or to diagnostic laparos-
copy and endoscopic surgical treatment of conﬁ rmed tubal 
infertility. This decision is inﬂ uenced by a range of  secondary 
factors, such as the patient’s age, presence of other 
pathology or changes in semen quality. Younger patients with 
distal tubal occlusion should consider surgery ﬁ rst and then 
ART, whereas ART procedures should start directly in women 
between 37 and 43 years. Moreover, the indication for laparos-
copic tubal reconstructive surgery is inversely proportional to 
the extent and severity of the tubal damage. In other words, 
the “typical” patient for surgical laparoscopy will be young, 
with tubal damage of modest degree and preferably located 
distally. However, it should be noted that adequate decision-
making often calls for diagnostic laparoscopy in view of the 
inherent limitations of other diagnostic techniques such as 
hysterosalpingography or transvaginal ultrasound, which 
do not allow deﬁ nitive assessment in the majority of cases. 
Another crucial factor inﬂ uencing the choice between recon-
structive tubal surgery and ART procedures is the logistical 
and economic factor, since the latter requires the patient to 
be close to specialized and highly reliable  centers, where the 
costs are usually high.
2.0 Preoperative Assessment
The diagnostic follow-up in couples with infertility problems
must be performed within a short time and should be 
as non-invasive as possible for emotional reasons. They 
should include a complete clinical history, transvaginal 
ultrasound with sonohysterosalpingography and diagnostic 
hysteroscopy with the goal of assessing the uterine cavity 
accurately. 
The possible presence of pelvic inflammatory disease (PID) 
should be considered; this can lead to tubal infertility in 
more than 20% of cases. In all infertile women, cervical 
and vaginal swabs are advisable to detect the presence of 
micro-organisms commonly responsible for pelvic inflam-
matory disease such as Chlamydia trachomatis, Neisseria 
gonorrheae and Mycoplasma hominis.
Diagnostic laparoscopy should be performed in all patients 
with a high probability of pelvic or tubal pathology.
3.0 Patient Positioning
The classical position for gynecologic laparoscopy is 
lithotomy with uterine manipulator, including the option to 
change to the Trendelenburg position if required by the 
surgeon. Two accessory 6-mm trocar ports are usually 
required, one in each lower abdominal quadrant.
O 5-mm or 10-mm laparoscope and video camera
O Laparoinsufﬂ ator
O Electrosurgical unit
O Xenon light source
O 6-mm or 11-mm trocars
O Veress needle
O 5-mm atraumatic grasping forceps
O 5-mm scissors
O Suction/irrigation system for irrigation and
hydrodissection 
O Bipolar forceps
O Laparoscopic suturing instruments
O Uterine manipulator
operation theater 
operation theater 
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
107
Fig. 3
Hydrosalpinx and ovarian cyst.
Fig. 2
Dense pelvic adhesions.  
Fig. 4
Large hydrosalpinx.
Fig. 6
Preparation for chromopertubation.
Fig. 5
Lysis of uterine adhesions can cause bleeding.
Fig. 7
Chromopertubation.
operation theater 
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
109
7.0 Reconstructive Laparoscopic Tubal Surgery
The fallopian tubes can be occluded proximally or  distally, 
i.e., at the fimbrial ends. The condition can coexist with 
peri-adnexal adhesions. Tubal blockage can also be 
correlated with an inﬂ ammatory process or a medical  history 
of surgical interruption. Reconstructive surgery is feasible 
only in cases of a minor, circumscribed damage, and if 
possible, not bilateral. Some pathological ﬁ ndings, such as 
salpingitis  isthmica nodosa and/or genital tuberculosis, which 
by deﬁ nition is associated with severe tubal damage,  rule 
out the option of reconstructive laparosco pic surgery, mainly 
because they are considered to have a poor prognosis 
regarding the predictable degree of functional recovery (Figs. 
14–15).
Fig. 13
Adhesiolysis by use of scissors.
Fig. 12
Periovarian adhesions. 
Fig. 14
Salpingitis isthmica nodosa.
Fig. 15
Uterine tuberculosis.
Following complete lysis of adhesions, the tubo-ovarian 
abscess must be aspirated and drained (Figs. 12–13). 
Aspiration is performed with a laparoscopic suction tube or 
by introducing a 5–10 mm trocar through the abdominal wall, 
perforating the wall of the abscess and aspirating it through 
the trocar. Once the purulent liquid has been  completely 
evacuated, copious lavage is performed with Ringer lactate 
through the trocar cannula which is left in place until the 
aspirated liquid is completely clear. Assessment of the tube 
will permit a decision on whether or not removal is indicated. 
At the end of the procedure, it is important to introduce a 
drain (e.g., Jackson-Pratt) into the pelvis. The drain should be 
removed 24 to 48 h after the operation.
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecologic Laparoscopic Surgery
110
7.1 Fimbrioplasty
Fimbrial phimosis (agglutination of the ﬁ mbriae) often  coexists 
with peri-adnexal adhesions and is repaired by  laparoscopy. 
The intrauterine pregnancy rate after laparoscopic 
ﬁ mbrioplasty varies between 40% and 48%  depending on 
its  severity and extent, with an extrauterine pregnancy rate 
ranging between 5% and 6%. In cases where the mucosal 
folds are densely adherent or in the presence of ampullary 
mucosal adhesions, the prognosis is very poor.
The principle of ﬁ mbrioplasty is anatomical and functional 
repair of the infundibulum. To visualize the phimotic region, 
it is often necessary to perform perioperative chromo-
pertubation to distend the tube. Surgical repair can be 
achieved with a ﬁ ne atraumatic grasping forceps, introducing 
the closed tip into the area of phimosis extremely careful and 
gradually opening the jaws. The maneuver must be repeated 
several times, changing the direction in which the forceps is 
opened. Manipulation of the tissues must be very gentle to 
avoid bleeding (Figs. 16–22).
Rarely, even though the ﬁ mbrial ends appear normal,  proxi mal 
stenosis can be found at the abdominal opening of the tube 
(preﬁ mbrial phimosis). This stenosis can be diagnosed by 
chromopertubation only. The surgical management involves 
dissecting along the antimesenteric border of the tube from 
the ﬁ mbriae as far as the distal ampulla, traversing the area 
of stenosis. Dissection is performed by use of electrosurgery. 
As a ﬁ nal step, the site of repair is sutured with a very ﬁ ne 
suture (6/0). 
Fig. 16
Introduction of forceps into the phimotic 
ostium of the tube.
Fig. 17
Opening the jaws of the forceps.
Fig. 18
Normal appearance of the abdominal tubal 
ostium at the end of the procedure.
Fig. 19
Hydrosalpinx with ﬁ mbrial phimosis.
Fig. 20
Methylene blue injection for perioperative chromopertubation.
operation theater 
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecologic Laparoscopic Surgery
112
The management of hydrosalpinx is based essentially on the 
quality of the tubal mucosa: 
O For thin-walled hydrosalpinx with normal mucosa and 
without mucosal adhesions, salpingostomy via the laparo-
scopic approach is indicated. The majority of pregnancies 
occur within the ﬁ rst year post-operatively.  
O For thin-walled hydrosalpinx with focal adhesions, either 
reconstructive surgery or ART procedures are indicated. 
Reconstructive surgery in these cases is associated with an 
increase in the risk of extrauterine pregnancy.
O For thin-walled hydrosalpinx with extensive mucosal 
adhesions (> 50% of the mucosal folds), ART procedures 
only are indicated, more speciﬁ cally in vitro fertilization. 
Many authors, including ourselves, regard it as  appropriate 
in these cases to perform laparoscopic  salpingectomy 
because this has been found to considera bly improve the 
outcomes of ART.
In the presence of adnexal adhesions, diagnostic laparo-
scopy is followed by adhesiolysis with gentle maneuvers 
using closed atraumatic forceps in the case of ﬁ lmy and 
avascular adhesions; if they are dense and vascular, it is 
advisable to use bipolar coagulation and scissors. The 
tubo-ovarian  liga ments must be exposed to conﬁ rm patency 
of the  ﬁ mbriated tubal portion. If the tube is ﬁ xed to the ovary, 
the two structures must be separated.
Once adnexal adhesiolysis has been completed, the tube 
should be distended by transcervical instillation of  methy lene 
blue dye using the uterine manipulator. In the area of 
occlusion, scar tissue can frequently be found. The target site 
of the cross- or star-shaped neo-ostium should be located at 
the thinnest and most avascular area possible, which  usually 
corresponds to the original site of the ostium. The cruciate 
incision at this level is made using scissors, electro surgery 
or by laser application with the aim of creating eversion of 
the mucosa of the distal tubal portion. Closed atraumatic 
grasping forceps can be introduced in the opening to  gently 
incise the margins of the neo-ostium. To make the  margins 
evert properly, ﬁ ne bi polar forceps may be used at low  current 
setting; this is performed by touching the serosa at the base 
of the margins previously creat ed to induce  shrinking and 
simultaneous eversion. If the tubal wall is thick, sero-serous 
sutures can be placed alternatively with atraumatic sutures 
(Vicryl 5–7/0). 
In conclusion, the surgical procedure to create a  neo-ostium 
involves two steps, incision and eversion:
O To create the neo-ostium, two to four 1–2 cm incisions 
are made parallel to the longitudinal mucosal folds, in an 
avascular area.
O Eversion is obtained with various techniques, such as 
bipolar coagulation of the serosa or placement of a few 
sutures.
True pathological occlusion of the proximal tube  necessitates 
a microsurgical procedure with tubo-cornual re-anasto-
mosis, which can be performed laparoscopically. Laparo-
scopic  techniques of tubal anastomosis have recently been 
described in patients who had a previous history of tubal 
sterilization. The image magniﬁ cation properties of video-
endoscopy and the unique angles of vision offered by  modern 
laparoscopes, together with the option of bringing the video 
image close to the operating field, provides advantages 
superior to traditional microsurgery. 
The major application of laparoscopic microsurgery is 
tubo-tubal anastomosis regardless of its site and  regardless 
of whether it is done because of the presence of  occlusion or 
to reverse previous tubal sterilization. The surgic al  technique 
of tubo-tubal anastomosis does not vary from the  laparotomy 
approach with a traditional microscope. In the case of 
adhesions, salpingo-ovariolysis is ﬁ rst performed. This is 
followed by inﬁ ltration of the mesosalpinx in the area chosen 
for the anastomosis with 1 or 2 ml of a solution of  vasopressin 
to reduce bleeding and facilitate accurate  hemostasis. 
The proximal end of the tube is distended by means of 
transcervical injection of methylene blue, which facilitates 
localization of the occluded segment of the proximal tube. At 
this point, a cut is made at the level of the occlusion using 
laparoscopic scissors. It is very important to avoid damage 
to meso salingeal vessels. The tubal segment is separated 
from the mesosalpinx by electrosurgery. Hemostasis of the 
tubal segment of tube is accomplished by  electrocoagulation 
(microelectrode) of the most important bleeding points.
Continuous irrigation allows even small bleeding points to 
be visualized rapidly. The distal tubal segment is prepared 
in a similar way so that there is no difference or asymmetry 
between the two stumps to be anastomosed. In this case, 
too, transcervical instillation of methylene blue can be used 
to facilitate delineating the margins. The two stumps are then 
approximated and sutured in two layers. The ﬁ rst layer joins 
the endotubal epithelium and muscle and the second joins 
the serosa. The distal suture must be placed at the antimes-
enteric border, and can be placed perfectly on the other 
stump also.
7.3 Tubo-tubal Anastomosis
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
113
Recommended Reading
1. 
DURRUTY G, VERA C, MACAYA R, BIANCHI M, 
MANZUR A: Resultados de la salpingoneostomìa 
laparoscòpica en infertilidad por hidrosalpinx.
Departamento de Obstetricia y Ginecología, Unidad de 
Reproducción Humana, Hospital Clinico Pontiﬁ cio.
Universidad Catòlica de Chile. Revista chilena de 
obstetricia y ginecologìa. Santiago (Chile). 2002. 67(6): 
488–493
2. 
GOMEL V: Reproductive surgery. Departament of 
Obstetrics and Ginecology. Faculty of Medicine. 
University of British Columbia. Vancouver (Canada). 
2005. Minerva. 57:21–8
3. 
GOMEL V, ZOUVES CG: Laparoscopìa quirùrgica en las 
enfermedades de las trompas. Cirugìa Laparoscòpica 
en Ginecologìa. Soderstrom. Segunda ediciòn Marban. 
(Philadelphia) 1999. (1):87–95.
4. 
GORDON A G: Tubal Endoscopy. Consultant
Gynaecologist, BUPA Hospital Hull and East Riding, 
Lowﬁ eld Road, Anlaby, Hull HU10 7AZ. 2004
5. 
HULKA and REICH: Textbook of laparoscopy. (USA). 
2002. (1): 285–300
6. 
MARCONI G, VILELA M, GOMEZ RUEDA N, BUZZI J, 
DE ZUNIGA I, QUINTANA R: Salpingoscopia.
Cuadernos de medicina reproductiva. Pellicer Antonio. 
Primera ediciòn. Madrid (Espana). 2002. 8 (1): 213–237
7. 
YOUNG E, VAN TRILLO: Hidrosalpinx e Infertilidad. 
Cuadernos de medicina reproductiva. Pellicer Antonio. 
Primera ediciòn. (Madrid) 2002. 8 (1): 89–100
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecologic Laparoscopic Surgery
114
operation theater 
Chapter IX
Laparoscopic Management
of Ectopic Pregnancy
Cristiana Barbosa and Luca Mencaglia
Centro Oncologico Fiorentino, Florence, Italy
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
116
1.0 Introduction
Implantation of the zygote outside the uterus occurs in 
approximately 1 in 200 pregnancies and the incidence 
appears to be increasing. This increase in ectopic pregnancy 
correlates with the high incidence of sexually transmitted 
disease, delayed median age of ﬁ rst pregnancy and improved 
accuracy of diagnosis.
The most common site of ectopic pregnancy is at the 
ampullary tubal portion where fertilization normally occurs 
(Fig. 1) and then, less frequently, other parts of the tube, the 
cervix, the ovary and the abdominal cavity. 
All variants of extrauterine pregnancy can be treated by 
a  minimally invasive approach in the majority of cases. In 
the last decade, laparoscopic surgery has become very 
widespread in both gynecology and general surgery. The 
main advantages of the minimally invasive approach are 
reduced postoperative morbidity, less postoperative pain, 
and  accordingly, less analgesic medication, early  resumption 
of intestinal activity, reduced length of hospital stay and a 
rapid return to normal activity.
2.0 Preoperative Assessment
The clinical picture includes nausea, amenorrhea, lower 
abdominal pain, cramps and abnormal uterine bleeding. 
Pain in the shoulder raises the suspicion of tubal rupture with 
hemoperitoneum. Diagnostic preoperative assessment must 
include the history and bimanual gynecologic  examination 
(which is able to diagnose an adnexal mass in 50% of 
cases). However, early diagnosis of ectopic pregnancy can 
be made with the combination of transvaginal ultrasound 
and measurement of the serum beta-HCG. The sensitivity 
of  beta-HCG allows the diagnosis to be made only 10–15 
days after  ovulation. The growth curve of this hormone is 
abnormal in 46% of patients. A delayed increase in beta-HCG 
should raise the suspicion of extrauterine pregnancy. The 
most recent generation of ultrasound allows visualization 
and localization of the gestational sac before the sixth week 
in 98% of cases. The pre sence or absence of a gestational 
sac on transvaginal ultrasound should be correlated with the 
pregnancy week and the serum levels of beta-HCG.
Other useful tests in diagnosing ectopic pregnancy are: 
endometrial thickness (cut off < 8mm), sonohysterography, 
color Doppler and blood progesterone level (cut off 17.5 ng/
ml). Unfortunately, progesterone is not of use in patients who 
have undergone induction of ovulation.
3.0 Positioning of the Patient
The patient is positioned on the table in the classic gyneco-
logic position. An intrauterine manipulator and Foley bladder 
catheter can be used.
5 mm-or 10 mm-laparoscope with the primary trocar  intro-
duced at the umbilicus. Two accessory 6 mm-ports in the 
right and left iliac fossa and a 6 mm suprapubic port for the 
grasping forceps, bipolar forceps and suction cannula.
4.0 Instrumentation
Laparoscope, diameter 5 mm or 10 mm
Videocamera
Microprocessor-controlled insufﬂ ation system
Electrosurgical unit
Xenon cold light source
Trocars, diameter 6 mm or 11 mm
Veress needle
Atraumatic grasping forceps
Scissors
Suction and irrigation system
Monopolar hook electrode
Bipolar forceps
Disposable extraction bag
Uterine manipulator
Fig. 1
Ectopic gestation in the ampullary tubal segment.
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
117
A 5 mm suction cannula is usually sufﬁ cient for evacuating 
the hemoperitoneum. If the tube has ruptured and/or the 
patient is in shock with a large hemoperitoneum, an 11 mm-
trocar may be used to introduce the suction tube.
The surgical management essentially involves partial or total 
sal pingectomy, however, depending on each individual case, 
preservation of the organ may well be the approach of choice.
5.0 Surgical Technique
5.1 Evacuation of the Hemoperitoneum
5.2 Salpingectomy
Extensive tubal dilatation is not necessarily an absolute 
contraindication to laparoscopic treatment. Unilateral or 
bilateral adhesiolysis is often performed in the same setting.
Salpingectomy is the method of choice in women who 
abandoned the desire for future pregnancies or in the case 
of tubal rupture. Other indications for salpingectomy are 
extrauterine pregnancy following failed sterilization, in a 
blocked tube, in a previously reconstructed tube, in a woman 
requesting sterilization, in the case of persistent bleeding 
after salpingotomy, when the beta HCG > 100,000 mU/ml, in 
the case of recurrent tubal pregnancy and in the case of tubal 
pregnancy > 5 cm.
Following evacuation of the hemoperitoneum, the bipolar 
forceps and scissors are introduced into the abdominal  cavity 
to coagulate and dissect the tube and mesosalpinx (Figs.
2, 3).
Fig. 2
Electrocoagulation of the tube and mesosalpinx.
Fig. 3
Electrosurgical dissection of the mesosalpinx.
The tube containing the gestational sac is then removed from 
the peritoneal cavity through the 11 mm-umbilical port with 
the aid of forceps located in the suprapubic port.  However, 
it is preferable to use an endobag for removing the tube 
and product of conception (Fig. 10). After reinsertion of 
the  laparoscope, ﬁ nal inspection of the abdominal cavity is 
recommended because in some cases, while grasping the 
tube for removal, the product of conception may slip out 
unnoticed which requires either aspiration with a suction tube 
or  extraction by use of forceps.
operation theater 
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
119
Fig. 9
Linear incision.
Because of its high metabolic rate, the trophoblast requires 
oxygen and the cells cannot withstand anoxia. It is most 
probable that vasopressin, by reducing the oxygen supply 
for about an hour, has fatal consequences for the tropho blast 
that has inadvertently left behind, reducing by a factor of ﬁ ve 
the 15% risk of persistence of ectopic pregnancy in the case 
of conservative salpingotomy. Use of vasopressin is contrain-
dicated in patients with ischemic heart disease.
Incision and evacuation: with an unipolar knife electrode 
introduced through the 6 mm port, a 1–2 cm incision is 
made in the antimesenteric tubal wall at the site of maximum 
distension, using a cutting or blended current (20 or 70 W). 
In general, it is possible to identify the different  layers of the 
tubal wall: serosa, muscularis externa and mucosa.
If the product of conception cannot be localized when the 
serosa is incised at the point of maximum dilation, it will 
be necessary to incise the still intact muscularis externa 
and mucosa to advance to the lumen of the tube. Once the 
ectopic pregnancy, which is usually of very friable consis-
tency, has been identiﬁ ed, it can be evacuated by aspiration. 
If a mass surrounded by clot is encountered, the product of 
conception must be delivered through the tubal incision with 
the aid of pressurized irrigation or with grasping or biopsy 
forceps (Figs. 4–10).
The site of implantation and the tubal incision are then 
irrigated, making sure that the liquid introduced through the 
salpingotomy incision drains from the ﬁ mbrial end and vice 
versa.
Transcervical instillation of methylene blue will allow demon-
stration of tubal patency. 
It should be borne in mind that when the ectopic pregnancy is 
located in the extraluminal space, it is possible that the tubal 
surface exhibits dilation without intraluminal  involvement. It 
is often easier to make a small in cision for evacuation of a 
distinct, large-sized intraluminal ectopic pregnancy of  friable 
consistency, compared to one of small size and poorly 
visible in the thickness of the tubal wall. The preferred route 
for removing the product of conception with or without the 
tube is through the 11-mm umbilical port. Alternatively, it can 
be reduced piecemeal by use of a biopsy forceps or suction 
cannula. In a few cases, it is advisable to use an extraction 
bag for removing the pro duct of conception.
The salpingotomy incision usually does not require suturing. 
Seromuscular suturing will be necessary only if the incision is 
very large or in the case of mucosal eversion.
Hemostasis: if there is bleeding from the incision margins or 
site of implantation, hemostatic tamponade can be applied 
with grasping forceps prior to electrocoagulation, laser appli-
cation or placing a suture. Often, 5 minutes of compression 
are sufﬁ cient for hemostasis. Even elevating the adnexa out 
of the pelvis can produce the same result as by compressing 
the vessels of the mesosalpinx.
Arterial bleeding can be present after removal of blood clot. 
In this case, the best hemostatic effect can be achieved by 
selective and targeted use of bipolar coagulation forceps, 
particularly if combined with continuous irrigation. Diffuse 
venous bleeding, especially from the site of implantation in 
the muscle layer in the case of extraluminal location, can be 
controlled readily with electrocoagulation. The  super ﬁ cial 
eschar in the extra luminal space does not interfere with 
normal healing of the tubal epithelium.
Following removal of an ampullary pregnancy, uncontrollable 
bleeding can occur. In such cases, an endoloop may be used, 
which is removed after 5–10 minutes; this makes it possible 
to localize and coagulate the source of bleeding. In severe 
cases, the mesosalpingeal vessels can be ligat ed selectively.
Fig. 10
Removal of the product of conception.
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
120
Interstitial ectopic pregnancy can be treated laparoscopically 
by electrosurgical resection of the uterine cornu. This proce-
dure will allow the greater part of the tube to be  preserved 
on the one hand, but on the other hand, the complete 
destruction of the interstitial part will make it highly probable 
that any anastomosis will fail. Coagulation of the ascending 
branch of the uterine artery and utero-ovarian arteries can be 
necessary to achieve good hemostasis. Use of vasopressin is 
not considered in this case.
In both laparotomy and laparoscopy, the approach is 
piecemeal resection of the uterine cornu using cutting or 
blend  current (Figs. 10–14). The technique is very similar to 
myoma removal. Hemostasis must be obtained with bi polar 
coagulation and hydrodissection of the tissue planes using 
pressurized normal saline.
5.6 Extraluminal Ectopic Pregnancy
5.7 Interstitial or Cornual Ectopic Pregnancy
This occurs when the ectopic gestation while growing  rapidly 
inﬁ ltrates the tubal wall until occupying the space between 
the muscularis externa and serosa. In the majority of cases, 
as soon as the serosa is incised at the point of maximum 
distension, the gestational sac slips out without the need to 
enlarge the opening. Irrigation in this case will not produce 
a ﬂ ow of liquid from the distal part of the tube. Rarely, the 
surgeon will be faced with the dilemma of having to enter the 
tubal lumen which should be avoided as much as possible.
Occasionally, it is possible to inﬁ ltrate 360° of the space 
between serosa and muscularis. In this case, after  remo ving 
the trophoblast and achieving hemostasis with the aid of 
compression or electrocoagulation, the surgeon can conclude 
the operation and follow the patient carefully with serial beta 
HCG measurements. Methotrexate can be considered as 
possible adjuvant treatment.
5.4 Partial Salpingectomy 
5.5 Extirpation of Tubal Pregnancy through the Fimbrial End
Partial laparoscopic salpingectomy can be attempted to 
preserve the tube in the case of failed salpingotomy, tubal 
rupture, isthmic pregnancy, distal interstitial pregnancy or 
recurrent tubal pregnancy.
The procedure involves coagulation with bipolar forceps 
followed by division of both ends of the distended part of 
the tube and corresponding mesosalpinx with subsequent 
removal of the tubal segment through the umbilical port. 
Alternatively, to avoid thermal (but not ischemic) injury, 
two endoloops, and if required, bipolar coagulation can be 
applied to complete hemostasis.
Extirpation of the tubal pregnancy through the ﬁ mbrial end, 
tubal aspiration or tubal abortion without salpingotomy are 
procedures that involve removal of the product of  conception 
located at the fimbrial end or distal tubal segment. This 
is accomplished by aspiration or use of grasping forceps 
operating from inside or outside, gently pushing the  product 
of conception until it is extruded. In certain cases tubal 
abortion has already occurred. 
Since many ectopic pregnancies have actually not implanted 
in the intraluminal tubal portion, this type of procedure is often 
associated with incomplete removal of the trophoblast and 
damage to the tubal wall. For this reason, even though some 
authors have reported excellent results when the  pregnancy 
is located in the ﬁ mbrial portion, these techniques are not 
commonly recommended, neither by way of laparoscopy nor 
by laparotomy.
The technique may be applied in selected cases of intra-
luminal ectopic pregnancy not yet visible (invasion of the 
muscularis and serosa has not yet occurred) by  introducing 
the suction tip into the tube from the distal ostium and 
instillation of  liquid, that acts mechanically to dislodge and 
expel the product of conception into the peritoneal cavity 
eliminating the need for making an incision in the tubal wall.
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
121
Rupture of a tubal pregnancy has always been  considered a 
contraindication to the laparoscopic approach even though 
removal of a ruptured tube can be accomplished  easily 
with bipolar coagulation. There is controversy about the 
management of patients with hemodynamic instability. In 
this case, hemorrhage must be arrested at once and the tube 
removed as quickly as possible. The majority of  surgeons 
prefer to  manage the situation by emergency laparotomy.
The  laparoscopic bipolar forceps is capable of  coagulating 
even large uterine or ovarian vessels. Alternatively,  ligature 
with an endoloop may be employed. After achieving 
hemostasis, the tube or part of it is removed. Rupture of 
an interstitial  pregnancy may also be treated with simple 
coagulation of the uterine and ovarian vessels but this 
approach is  associated with a higher risk of persistent and 
recurrent ectopic  pregnancy.
Fig. 11
Laparoscopic view of cornual pregnancy.
Fig. 12
The cornual pregnancy is incised with an unipolar needle electrode.
Fig. 13
Expressing a cornual pregnancy with two forceps.
Fig. 14
Appearance after removal of the cornual pregnancy.
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
122
5.8 Ectopic Ovarian Pregnancy
5.9 Ectopic Abdominal Pregnancy
6.0 Methotrexate
7.0 Postoperative Follow-up Care
Ectopic ovarian pregnancy, when diagnosed, must be treated 
like any ovarian cyst of unknown origin and must therefore 
be enucleated intact through a small incision in the  ovarian 
cortex. Ovarian function usually remains unchanged. An 
ovarian pregnancy should be suspected when the serum 
levels of beta HCG exceed 6000 mU/ml, ultrasound shows an 
empty endometrial cavity and tubal pregnancy is not found 
on laparoscopy. With monopolar forceps, the ovarian surface 
is incised along its major axis at the point where the neofor-
mation appears most super ﬁ cial. The  trophoblastic material 
can then be dissected and removed, using a suction/irrigation 
system. The gestational sac is usually removed as a whole 
and suturing of the ovarian parenchyma is not necessary.
Patients may be discharged a few hours after the surgery. 
The bladder catheter is removed at the end of the  operation. 
Antibiotic medication should be administered post operatively. 
The ﬁ rst serum beta-HCG test is performed on the second 
day and the reduction compared to the preoperative value 
should be at least 70%. The test is repeated after seven days 
to exclude the persistence of trophoblastic tissue. If the level 
is not below 20 mU/ml, the test is repeated two weeks later 
and if it is still positive, the patient should undergo further 
medical or surgical treatment. Persistent trophoblastic tissue 
can be treated successfully with methotrexate, ensuring that 
any anemia present is treated preventively.
In selected cases, medical treatment with methotrexate 
can be as effective as laparoscopic surgery. However, the 
possible side effects associated with methotrexate therapy 
can adversely affect patient compliance to a higher degree 
than the surgical treatment option. As regards  infertility, 
the prognosis after ectopic pregnancy does not appear 
to  correlate with the characteristics of the extrauterine 
pregnancy but rather with the patient’s age and medical 
history. Medical treatment is to be preferred in patients with
pre vious surgery, diffuse adhesions, contraindications to 
anesthesia, cornual pregnancy or failure of surgical  treatment. 
Medical treatment is indicated if the levels of beta HCG are 
between 5000 and 10000 mU/ml and the diameter of the 
adnexal swelling is less than 4 cm. Methotrexate should be 
administered locally or systemically by intra muscular injection 
of 1 mg/kg or 50 mg/m2. Patients with a hematocrit < 35% 
should take ferrous sulfate 325 mg twice daily.
Ectopic abdominal pregnancy is a rare event and accounts 
for 1.1% of all ectopic pregnancies. Since it is a condition 
with high maternal and fetal morbidity and mortality, early 
diagnosis using transvaginal ultrasound, magnetic resonance 
imaging and laparoscopy is essential. It is a condition that 
can be treated readily by laparoscopy if this is done early and 
if the pregnancy does not involve vascular  structures that 
can cause uncontrollable bleeding. In the case of  abdominal 
pregnancy with a live fetus, the approach must be by 
laparotomy.
operation theater 
Chapter X
Laparoscopic Surgery for
Symptomatic Endometriosis 
Luca Mencaglia1, Arnaud Wattiez2 and Sabina Consigli1
1Centro Oncologico Fiorentino, Florence, Italy
2Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics,
Strasbourg University Hospital, Strasbourg, France
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
124
3.0 Patient Positioning
1.0 Laparoscopic Surgery for Symptomatic Endometriosis
Endometriosis is the presence of endometrial glands and 
stroma in an heterotopic location. Endometriosis is a 
progressive, debilitating disease that affects 10–15% of 
women during their reproductive years. Among gyneco -
lo gical disorders, endometriosis is second only after 
uterine myomas in frequency, and accounts for 25% of all 
laparotomies  performed by gynecologists. In the planning of 
treatment, many variables must be considered, such as age 
of the patients, extent of disease, degree of symptoms, and 
desire for immediate or deferred fertility. In most instances the 
indications for therapy include pain or infertility or both, and 
the treatment may be surgical or medical, or a  combination 
of both.
2.0 Preoperative Assessment
The diagnosis of endometrioma is revealed by the  presence 
of ovarian cyst ﬂ uid that can be suspected by  trans vaginal 
and transabdominal ultrasound (TU) and  physical 
examination. The most common symptoms are  infertility 
and/or pelvic pain which should facilitate  establishing 
the final  diagnosis.  However, the diagnosis of peritoneal 
endometriosis is  conﬁ rmed only by direct visualization with 
the aid of  laparoscopy and histological examination of biopsy 
specimens. Unfortunately, blood serum levels of anti-endo-
metrial  antibodies, placental proteins PP 14 and CA 125 
marker do not have sufﬁ cient sensibility or speciﬁ city to be 
routinely used for diagnostic evaluation. Diagnostic preope-
rative  examination must include in all patients a thorough 
history-taking,  physical examination and TU.
Classical gynecological laparoscopic position, with intra-
uterine manipulator. Two accessory 6 mm trocars should 
be used, one in either quadrant, medial to the umbilical 
artery ligament. If a third accessory trocar is needed, this is 
placed in the midline, suprapubically.
4.0 Instrumentation
The surgical treatment options for endometriosis are radical 
or conservative surgery. The aims of conservative surgery 
are: 
O removal of both typical and atypical endometriotic
implants;
O complete removal of endometriotic cysts
(endometrioma)
O complete adhesiolysis, with restoration of normal
tubo ovarian relationship to enhance fertility potential;
O relief of pain;
O minimize the risk of disease recurrence.
5.0 Technique
Introduction
O Laparoscope and video camera
O 5 mm grasping forceps
O Scissors
O Bipolar or unipolar HF electrosurgery unit or laser 
system
O 6 mm trocars
O Suction-irrigation system for hydrodissection
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
125
6.0 Laparoscopy
6.1 Diagnostic Laparoscopy
The ﬁ rst stage of the procedure involves exploring the  pelvic 
anatomy and mapping out the extent of disease and the 
location and boundaries of the bladder, ureter, colon, rectum, 
utero sacral ligaments and major blood vessels.
6.2 Operative Laparoscopy
Peritoneal implants may be coagulated using unipolar or 
bipolar electrosurgery, vaporized by laser application or may 
be excised (Figs. 1–2).
The hydrodissection technique permits treatment of endo-
metriotic implants on the ureter or major vessels without 
causing any damage to these structures (Figs. 3–5).
Fig. 1
Typical red spot of peritoneal endometriosis.
Fig. 4
Atypical peritoneal endometriosis.
Fig. 2
Black spots of peritoneal endometriosis.
Fig. 5
Atypical peritoneal endometriosis.
Fig. 3
Atypical peritoneal endometriosis.
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
126
Initially, a small port is made into the retroperitoneum using 
either the laser or scissors. Ringer‘s lactate or saline solution 
is injected next to the lesion to create a protective cushion 
of ﬂ uid between the lesion to be excised and the  underlying 
ureter, bladder or blood vessels. Excision of large endo-
metriotic implants is superior to coagulation or  vaporization 
because the technique is not associated with problems 
related to contamination by smoke and combustion residues. 
An additional advantage is, that it allows for the collection of 
specimen for histological diagnosis.
Ovarian Endometriosis
Ovarian implants of endometriosis or small endometrioma of 
less than 2 cm in diameter may be cauterized, resected by 
laser application or excised using scissors, biopsy forceps or 
electrodes (Figs. 6–7).
For endometrioma larger than 2 cm in diameter, the ﬁ rst step 
of the procedure involves adhesiolysis of the ovary on the 
posterior leaf of the broad ligament. In most cases, the cyst 
is ruptured during this step, which requires that the  liquid be 
aspirated immediately to prevent pelvic contamination.
The cystic cavity is repeatedly irrigated with a suction-
irri gation tube (Figs. 8–9).
Fig. 6
Ovarian implants of endometriosis.
Fig. 7
Small ovarian endometrioma.
Fig. 8
Large ovarian endometrioma.
Fig. 9
Aspiration of ovarian endometrioma.
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
127
Fig. 10
Bilateral ovarian endometriomas.
Examine the cystic wall for malignant lesions. Drainage of the 
cyst must be followed by removal of the capsule to prevent 
recurrences. The capsule of the cyst must be separated from 
the surrounding ovarian stroma and removed by grasping 
its base with forceps and pulling it away from and out of the 
ovarian capsule (Figs. 10–13).
Exposure of the right plane will permit blunt dissection 
by applying contralateral traction with two 5 mm-forceps. 
If  stripping of the capsule is incomplete or difficult to 
accomplish, the residual part must be eradicated by laser 
application or electrocoagulation.
Presurgical treatment with GnRH analogues is useless in 
ovarian endometriomas, because it is not effective in  reducing 
the size and volume of cysts and not even in facili tating the 
surgery.
Adnexectomy 
Adnexectomy could be necessary even in fertile patients 
when endometriosis has inﬁ ltrated most of the  parenchyma. 
After coagulation with a bipolar forceps, the proximal 
portion of the tube and of the uteroovarian ligament must be 
dissected with scissors. In addition, the infundibulo-pelvic 
ligament is coagulated and dissected applying traction to 
the ovary with grasping forceps. Therefore, the mesosalpinx 
should be completely dissected, after coagulation, to liberate 
the adnexa and to extract it by use of a disposable bag.
Fig. 11
Right ovarian endometrioma.
Fig. 12
Stripping of the endometriotic capsule.
Fig. 13
Blunt dissection of the endometriotic capsule.
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
128
7.0 Postoperative Care
Adhesiolysis
Adhesiolysis may be performed using hydrodissection, 
scissors, CO2 laser or atraumatic forceps. Before cutting 
the tissue it is important to mobilize and identify the relevant 
anatomical structures. Mechanical dissection with forceps 
or hydrodissection is not associated with any thermal effect, 
therefore this technique should be preferred.
Cul-de-sac obliteration is an important problem. It suggests 
rectovaginal involvement, with deep endometriosis and dense 
adhesions, and signiﬁ cant distortion of the regional anatomy 
involving bowel, vaginal apex, posterior cervix, ureter, and 
major blood vessels (Fig. 14).
To facilitate localization of anatomic landmarks and identi-
ﬁ cation of tissue planes, we usually place a loaded sponge 
forceps in the posterior fornix, and, if necessary, insert a 
rectal probe. In difﬁ cult cases, ureteral probes can be placed 
preoperatively (Figs. 15–16).
According to the difﬁ culties encountered during surgery, 
patients should be discharged 24 to 48 hours after  surgery. 
Mild narcotic analgetics are usually sufficient to control 
postoperative pain. Postoperative therapy may include 
administration of GnRH analogues, Danazol or Gestrinone to 
prevent recurrences, to reduce pelvic pain and to facilitate 
subsequent induction of ovulation in infertile patients.
Fig. 14
Severe endometriosis with adhesions.
Fig. 16
Intestinal endometriotic nodule with stenosis.
Fig. 15
Intestinal endometriotic nodule.
operation theater 
Chapter XI
Laparoscopic Management of
Deep Endometriosis
Luca Minelli and Stefano Landi
Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics
“Sacro Cuore” General Hospital, Negrar, Italy
operation theater 
O 10-mm laparoscope with 3 CCD videocamera
O One 11-mm trocar
O Two 6-mm trocars
O One 11/6 mm reducer
O Bipolar forceps
O Bipolar scissors with electrosurgical unit
O Suction and irrigation system
O Dissecting forceps (Schnaider)
O Grasping forceps (Dorsey)
O Maxon sutures with straight needle
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
130
Endometriosis is a highly debilitating disease that affects
mainly women of childbearing age, characterized by
symptoms such as pelvic pain, dysmenorrhea, painful
defecation, dysuria and infertility. To date, all medical treat-
ment options directed toward suppression of the disease
and the pain associated with endometriosis have had similar
effects in terms of symptom alleviation. None of them have 
proven long-term efficacy. Interruption of medical treat-
ment is associated with a high risk of recurrence. However, 
evidence-based data suggest that complete laparoscopic
ex cision of the endometriosis offers good long-term results 
with regard to the degree of regression, especially in those 
patients with severe and debilitating symptoms. “The surgic al
treatment of endometriosis should aim at removing all visible
areas of endometriosis …. with margins free from disease as
is the case in oncologic surgery … better with excision en 
bloc” (Redwine) and restoration of the anatomy, removal of 
adhesions.
Although it is difﬁcult to know the real incidence of deeply 
inﬁltrating endometriosis, in a study on 132 patients, cover ing
the predeﬁned depth of endometriotic inﬁltration, we found 
deeply inﬁltrating lesions in 33%. Involvement of the gastro-
intestinal tract is present in about 3–36% of women affected
by endometriosis and 50% of these are affected by severe 
disease. The gastro intestinal predilection sites are the rectum
and sigmoid, accounting for 72–85% of cases. This means 
that to ensure complete removal of the disease and thus
improve the outcome in terms of quality of life, surgery on 
the bowel with or without bowel resection can be necessary.
1.0 Introduction
2.0 Instrumentation
3.0 Preoperative Assessment
Pre-operative assessment of endometrial implants plays
a key role in the decision-making on the most  effective
strate gy planning, possibly with the assistance of a  general 
surgeon or urologist. Our pre-operative assessment
comprises a  questionnaire, physical work-up, instrumen -
taided  investigations and serum markers. Particular  attention
is paid to the patient’s history and symptoms, such as
dysmenorrhea,  pelvic pain, dyspareunia, painful  defecation, 
covered by a speciﬁc questionnaire and assessed on a 10–
point analog scale: 0 = absent 10 = unbearable. In  addition,
rect al and  vaginal examinations are performed. Rectal
examination allows the physician to reach 2.5 cm into the 
pelvis and assess a good portion of the rectal mucosa (about
7–8 cm of the rectum’s length of 11 cm), palpate any masses
and assess the thickness of the recto-vaginal septum and 
the nodular structure of the uterosacral ligaments. Rectal
examination has a failure rate of 17–64% and is not sufﬁ cient
on its own to diagnose deep  endometriosis. Factors that can
inﬂuence the  diagnosis are the type of lesion, the depth of 
inﬁltration, the dimensions and the site of the lesion. Even if
the examination is performed under general anesthesia, the 
sensitivity remains very low; its function as a screening test 
is limited and always requires another test for conﬁ rmation. 
Accurate data  regarding  co-involvement of the bladder and 
bowel cannot be obtained with a simple rectal and vaginal 
examination and a negative examination does not rule out 
involvement of these organs. The validity of the examination
may be improved if performed during menstruation.
Instrument-aided investigations are essential: transvaginal
ultrasound, ultrasound of the bladder and ureters, double-
contrast enema, CA 125 and CA 199. As an alternative to the
contrast enema, transrectal ultrasound can be performed but
this requires speciﬁ c instruments.
All patients should have stopped treatment with  progestogens,
GnRH agonists or the contraceptive pill 3–4 months before 
surgery. If intestinal involvement is suspected,  specific
preoperative preparation is necessary.
Preparation begins 24 hours beforehand. When  intestinal
surgery is highly likely, the patient must take 40 ml of
Phosfo-Lax orally, diluted in a glass of water, followed by 
1 liter of water at 2 p.m. and then at 4 p.m., or else 2 liters of
Selg-Esse 1000 in the morning and 2 liters in the  afternoon 
and 40 Mylicon tablets at once. Antibiotic prophylaxis  consists
of 2g of cefazoline at induction of anesthesia  followed by 1g
3 times a day and metronidazole 500 mg 3 times a day for 
3 days. If intestinal involvement and thus intestinal surgery 
are ruled out, an enema is administered on the day prior to 
surgery and 2g of cefazoline are given with induction of anes-
thesia as antibiotic prophylaxis. A Foley catheter is left in the
bladder throughout surgery and until the patient is able to 
reach the toilet independently (usually on day 1 after  surgery).
After spontaneous urination, the post-voiding residual urine 
is measured until it is less than 100 cc in two successive
measurements. If the post-voiding residual urine remains
signiﬁcant for more than 3–4 days after surgery, the patient is
discharged after being instructed in self-catheterization.
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
131
Before starting the operation, the patient usually has a  second 
vaginal and rectal examination under anesthetia.
Laparoscopy begins with the creation of a pneumoperito-
neum using a Veress needle through the umbilicus,  insertion 
of the 11-mm umbilical trocar for the laparoscope and 
placement of two accessory 6-mm ports lateral to the in ferior 
epigastric vessels bilaterally and a third 6-mm suprapubic 
port. Complete resection of endometriotic lesions is achieved 
by use of bipolar scissors. In general, if bowel surgery is 
required, this is performed by a general surgeon specialist 
assisted by one of the two gynecological surgeons. At the 
end of the  operation, copious lavage of the peritoneal  cavity 
is  performed with 500–1000 ml of Ringer’s lactate solution 
and 4%  icodextrin solution is left in the abdomen for  adhesion 
prevention. In these cases, a drain is left in place close to the 
anastomosis for 8–12 hours. The drain is usally removed after 
the ﬁ rst bowel movement. In general, a nasogastric tube is 
not required. During post operative day 1, the patient is given 
continuous epidural analgesia through an elastomeric pump, 
after which analgesia is replaced by 100 mg of ketoprofen 
and 100 mg of tramadol i.m. or 0.3 mg of buprenorphine 
s.c., as required. Intravenous  ﬂ uids are administered on the 
day of the opera tion and the next day patients can start to 
take food orally with a gradual increase in diet. The patients 
are  discharged without a special diet. Prior to surgery, the 
patients are informed of the potential risks and beneﬁ ts of the 
procedure by a written informed consent form.
4.0 The Surgical Technique
The type of surgery depends on the depth of invasion and 
the topographic distribution of endometriosis. The “classic al” 
steps of the technique are as follows:
The laparoscopic procedure begins with laparoscopic 
inspection of the pelvic anatomy and systematic mapping of 
the endometriotic lesions (Figs. 1–3).
Fig. 1 
Mapping of adhesions and endometriotic lesions.
Fig. 2 
Endometrioma with diffuse adhesions and lesions.
Fig. 3 
Endometriotic lesions on the peritoneum.
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
132
Fig. 4 
Adhesions involving the ovary and the tube.
Fig. 5 
Adhesions to the pelvic wall.
Fig. 6 
Adhesions between the abdominal wall and 
intestine.
The caecum must always be inspected for the presence of 
endometriotic implants which could not be conﬁ rmed by 
preoperative double-contrast enema.
The operation proceeds with adhesiolysis, drainage and 
stripping of endometriomas, excision of endometriotic 
implants and other parietal implants, making sure that 
adequate healthy margins of retroperitoneal tissue are 
included. Our standard method is to remove  endometrio mas 
completely without coagulating or vaporizing super ficial 
peritoneal implants to be sure that there is no deep endo-
metriosis. 
Adhesions can be removed with various techniques but 
we prefer to use mechanical dissection with cold or bipolar 
scissors (Figs. 4–6).
Traction and blunt dissection can assist greatly in  mobilizing 
and localizing structures that must be separated. We 
re commend avoiding hydrodissection and use of liquids 
because lavage of the peritoneum is much more difﬁ cult when 
distended with CO2. In case of hermorrhage, application of a 
suction tube or a dry gauze pledget is recommended.
Very small endometriomas can be coagulated but in general, 
the “stripping” technique is preferred to avoid recurrence 
(Figs. 7–11).
Fig. 9 
Ovarian endometrioma with adhesions.
Fig. 7 
Bilateral endometrioma.
Fig. 8 
Endometrioma of multilobular appearance.
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
133
Fig. 10 
Giant endometrioma. 
Fig. 11 
Giant endometrioma of the right ovary.
Fig. 12 
Appearance of the endometrioma capsule. 
Fig. 13 
Following incision, the contents are aspirated and the cavity of the 
cyst is irrigated. 
Fig. 14 
The adjacent cyst capsule is removed by stripping.
The ﬁ rst step is to mobilize the ovary from the posterior leaf 
of the broad ligament to which it frequently forms dense 
adhesions. In the majority of cases, the cyst ruptures during 
this maneuver, which requires, that the chocolate-colored 
ﬂ uid be aspirated promptly. Ensuingly, the cavity of the cyst 
is irrigated several times. The cyst capsule is removed by 
grasping the margin of the fenestration and stripped off from 
the ovarian stroma to which counter-traction is applied with 
a 5-mm forceps. The correct plane of dissection is chosen 
when the capsule appears white or slightly yellow without 
red streaks; this allows bloodless dissection without any 
hemorrhage (Figs. 12–14).
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
134
Following stripping, meticulous and highly selective coagu-
lation is required, holding the ovary with a forceps and 
visualizing each bleeding site by dripping saline on the base 
of the cyst. The capsule is extracted by use of a disposable 
bag. Very often, the ovary adheres to the pelvic wall and the 
peritoneum underneath can obscure additional endome triotic 
implants. These lesions must also be excised. It must be 
taken into account that the retroperitoneal ﬁ brosis caused by 
the overlying adhesions frequently involves the ureter which 
often necessitates careful ureterolysis. Many endometriotic 
cysts are ﬁ xed to the ipsilateral uterosacral ligament by dense 
adhesions so the entire adhesion area between the cyst wall 
and the uterosacral ligament is removed en bloc.
In rare cases, adnexectomy is required. It is usually possible 
to maintain to some extent the ovarian follicular reserve and 
function. When surgery is performed on the ovaries, they 
are suspended temporarily at the end of the operation using 
non-absorbable 2/0 polypropylene sutures that are removed 
on the third postoperative day, as described by Abuzeid. This 
procedure allows better access to the pouch of Douglas and 
prevents formation of adnexal adhesions to sites of the pelvic 
cavity that were denuded of peritoneum (Fig. 15).
Starting from the pelvic area, the ureters and large vessels are 
localized and the ureter is then exposed down to the  muscle 
wall following its course in the pelvis until healthy  tissue is 
reached. If endometriosis extends deeply and  laterally in 
the uterosacral cardinal ligament, it is sometimes  necessary 
to sacriﬁ ce branches of the internal iliac artery, usually the 
uterine artery, or expose it as far as the intersection with 
the ureter. In extreme cases, the ureteric muscularis can be 
invaded by endometriosis, leading to partial constriction. In 
these cases, resection of the involved segment of the ureter 
may become necessary, followed by reanastomosis.
The basic principle is to liberate the obliterated cul-de-sac by 
en-bloc excision of the deep pelvic endometriosis.
The line of resection in healthy non-fibrosed peritoneum 
starts laterally and runs parallel to the base of the  uterosacral 
ligament. The area is then exposed by blunt dissection. A 
transverse incision is made at the uterine isthmus  superior to 
the point of adherence to the bowel, and is carried down-
wards along the posterior cervical wall with intrafascial 
dissection. The plane of dissection is continued caudally 
as far as the rectovaginal septum so that the healthy rectal 
wall can be  liberated from the endometriotic nodule. The 
uterosacral  ligaments are resected at the site of insertion in 
the cervix. As it is often difﬁ cult to ﬁ nd the correct planes 
of  dissection, it is necessary to operate behind the nodule. 
Fig. 15 
At the end of the surgery, the pelvic cavity is completely denuded of 
peritoneum. 
Every adhesion of ﬁ brous or fat tissue between the rectum 
and the lateral pelvic wall is gradually divided until the bowel 
has been sufﬁ ciently mobilized.
In this way, the entire endometriotic nodule remains adherent 
to the anterior wall of the bowel forming a single mass with 
the uterosacral ligaments and obliterated cul-de-sac. Where 
the disease invades the posterior vaginal fornix, the vagina is 
opened. In the case of endometriotic inﬁ ltration of the vaginal 
mucosa itself, a vaginal approach can be useful to delineate 
and mobilize the nodule by digital dissection prior to initiating 
laparoscopic dissection; this follows the posterior lip of the 
cervix ﬁ rst and then the vaginal incision, making sure that all 
of the vaginal lesion is included in the mass adherent to the 
bowel.
Bowel surgery is performed at this point and can involve 
superficial, partial thickness, full thickness or segmental 
resection. Given the frequent involvement of the submucosal 
layer, to ensure complete excision of the endometriosis we 
recommend full thickness or segmental intestinal resection. 
We consider superﬁ cial “peeling” or peeling of the mucosa 
only in selected cases.
Even if full thickness bowel resection can be performed 
stepwise while the nodule is excised from the bowel and 
sutured in double layers, we consider the use of a  linear  stapler 
positioned perpendicular to the bowel axis is extremely safe 
and, beyond that, not expensive (Figs. 16–20).
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
135
Fig. 16 
The rectum is densely adherent to the uterine corpus obliterating the 
cul-de-sac.
Fig. 17 
Adhesiolysis and exposure of the deep rectovaginal endometriotic 
nodule. 
Fig. 18 
The nodule is completely excised.
Fig. 19 
En bloc excision of the endometriotic lesion.
Fig. 20 
Bowel resection with introduction of a transanal stapler. 
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
136
4.1  Protection of the Sympathetic Mesorectum Nerve Fibers; Superior Hypogastric Plexus, 
Hypogastric Nerves and Lumbosacral Sympathetic Trunk 
The bowel segment invaded by the endometriotic  nodule 
is grasped with a forceps while positioning a linear  stapler 
and firing precisely below the nodule. The technique is 
limit ed in that it can be used only for small-sized lesions
(< 3 cm) and if the reduction in bowel lumen is less than 50%. 
To completely remove an anterior rectal lesion smaller than 
3 cm, which would require an ultralow resection (up to 6 cm 
from the anal sphincter), we suggest the use of a circular 
stapler (CEEA) as described by H. Reich. The nodule is trans-
ﬁ xed perpendicular to the bowel axis in such a way that it 
can be pushed between the anvil and the  body of the circular 
stapler which has been inserted through the anal canal.
When transanal resection is planned, after placing a fourth 
trocar in the right upper outer quadrant, the bowel is  mobilized 
laparoscopically using an ultrasonic scalpel (Ultra cision). 
The involved bowel segment is exposed, safeguarding the 
mesentery and the vessels close to the intestinal wall. The fat is 
stripped away from the healthy distal bowel segment, exposing 
the intact muscularis propria through 360 degrees so that the 
sutures for colorectal anastomosis can be placed very safely 
with the circular stapler using the Knight-Griffen technique. A 
linear endoscopic stapler is then applied with a safety margin 
of 1 cm away from the nodule in the healthy distal bowel. 
Then, the proximal segment of rectosigmoid colon with the 
endometriotic nodule at its stapled end is extracted through 
the suprapubic port, which is prophylactically extended. The 
bowel segment involved is transected at about 1 cm  proximal 
to the endometriotic mass. The anvil of the circular stapler 
is secured with a purse string suture to the distal bowel 
opening and reintroduced into the abdominal cavity. Next, a
28 or 32 mm circular end-to-end anastomosis (CEEA)  stapling 
device is introduced transanally to complete the procedure. 
Occasionally, for rectosigmoid lesions, a segmental bowel 
resection through a Pfannenstiel minilaparotomy with end-to-
end hand-sewn anastomosis is performed under direct visual 
control.
Alternatively, the proximal bowel segment can be  exteriorized 
transvaginally, resected and placed in the anvil of the  circular 
stapler. After completing the end-to-end anastomosis the 
vagina is closed laparoscopically and an omental flap is 
created and interposed between vagina and colon to prevent 
the two sutures from getting into contact. The integrity of the 
anastomosis is tested by ﬁ lling the pelvic cavity with saline 
and insufﬂ ating air into the rectum while the more proximal 
part of the sigmoid is occluded mechanically with forceps.
In our experience of 600 cases of complete excision of 
advanced endometriosis, we have found negative effects 
on the bladder, rectum and sexual activity. In this respect, 
the results of studies recently published by Thomassin and 
Darai, do not correspond with our own. There may be various 
rationales for this inconsistency. However, all authors agree 
on the signiﬁ cance of sparing the pelvic nerve plexuses.
The autonomic pelvic nerves in fact provide neurogenic 
control of the rectum, bladder and sexual area (vaginal 
lubrication and sweating). Among position-related  iatrogenic 
nerve injuries, the inferior hypogastric plexus is most often 
affected during excision of endometriotic nodules from 
the uterosacral ligaments and the lateral adjacent area. To 
reduce to a minimum the risk of inadvertent nerve injury at 
this level the best safeguard is to observe certain rules that 
will be described below.
The superior hypogastric plexus is formed by sympathetic 
nerve ﬁ bers lying in the presacral space at the level of the 
promontory, covered by peritoneum and by the anterior layer 
of the visceral pelvic fascia. The right and left  hypogastric 
nerves originate from this plexus and descend 8–10 cm  lateral 
to the mesorectum in the visceral pelvic fascia  following the 
cranio-caudal course of the ureter. These nerves can be 
localized by opening the peritoneum at the level of the sacral 
promontory to gain access to the  presacral space. Blunt 
dissection of the loose adipose tissue in the rectosacral 
space as far as the rectosacral fascia allows identiﬁ cation of 
the superior hypogastric plexus and the hypogastric nerves 
close to the sacrum and distant from the  mesorectum, which 
is drawn ventrally and caudally with the rectum. If this is done, 
innervation is preserved completely during  dissection of the 
upper part of the meso rectum. To mobilize the  rectosigmoid 
fully and reach the inferior part of the mesorectum as far as 
the rectal wings, the pararectal fossae must be uniﬁ ed in 
the  retrorectal space by blunt dissection as far as the space 
known as “The Holy Plane of Heald” located in the  midline; 
when this has been identified, the posterior and lateral 
mesorectal fascia is preserved by dissecting the loose and 
relatively avascular connective tissue between the visceral 
meso rectal fascia and the parietal endopelvic fascia. The 
medial and distal segments of the hypogastric nerves adhere 
to the mesorectum fascia at this level and can be injured if 
they are not exposed. Dissection is continued as far as the 
ﬂ oor of the pararectal spaces, always staying close to the 
rectum to preserve the superior hypogastric plexus and the 
hypogastric nerves medially and cranially, and the ganglia 
and lumbosacral sympathetic trunks laterally and dorsally, 
close to the sacrum.
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
137
4.2  Protection of the Sympathetic Fibers of the Inferior Mesorectum:
the Inferior-most Aspect of the Hypogastric Nerves and
the Proximal Aspect of the Inferior Hypogastric Plexus 
It is extremely important to localize and lateralize the 
hypogastric nerves and their connections to the proximal 
part of the inferior hypogastric plexus. After opening the 
retroperitoneum of the presacral space and prior to  initiating 
dissection of the uterosacral ligaments and rectal  pillars, 
the thin and delicate lateral part of the visceral presacral 
pelvic fascia between the prerectal space and the pararectal 
space is mobilized and lateralized carefully. This lateral part 
is crossed by the hypogastric nerves, the  anterior branches 
of the sacral sympathetic trunks, the para sympathetic 
pelvic splanchnic nerves and more ventrally and caudally 
by the proximal aspect of the inferior hypogastric plexus. 
It is not always easy to identify the hypogastric nerves in 
the  presacral space because their thickness varies greatly
(4–7 mm), they are completely surrounded by fatty tissue and 
they sometimes give off multiple nerve ﬁ bers.  However, clear 
identiﬁ cation, exposure and preservation of these nerves 
are feasible through laparoscopy and should always be 
attempted.
At this level, they run from lateral to medial in a cranio-
caudal direction approximately 20 mm to 5 mm inferior to the 
ureter.
4.3  Protection of the Splanchnic Nerves and of the Medial and Inferior Aspects
of the Hypogastric Plexus in the Inferior Mesorectal Spaces 
The parasympathetic innervation of the pelvic organs, 
recto sigmoid and anal canal is provided by the  splanchnic 
nerves which originate from the S2–S4 sacral roots.
3–5 branches originate from the pelvic splanchnic nerves 3–4 
and 1–2 cm laterally and inferior to the pouch of  Douglas; 
they perforate the endopelvic fascia, cross the ventral 
aspect of the piriformis muscle and then converge with the 
terminal branches of the ipsilateral hypogastric nerve about 
1 cm  ventral to the inferior hypogastric plexus. The plexus is 
located bilaterally in the presacral aspect of the  endopelvic 
fascia between the posterior vaginal fornix and the rectum 
in the ventral part of the lateral rectal ligaments. When the 
inferior-most aspect of the posterolateral parametrium is 
involved by endometriosis, it is resected sparing the dense 
connective tissue and the fatty tissue surrounding the 
nerve ﬁ bers of the cranial and medial aspect of the inferior 
hypogastric plexus. Ideally, the plane of dissection should not 
enter the space, similar to the keel of a boat, which is located 
between the anterolateral planes of the mesorectum and the 
rectal wings. A surgical anatomical reference point that we 
use to separate the lateral parametrium and the vascular part 
(ventral and cranial) of the nerve (dorsal and caudal) is the 
deep uterine vein.
The lateral ligaments of the rectum run close to the  splanchnic 
nerves in 30% of cases, cross the pelvic plexus and then 
continue with the medial efferent bundle of the pelvic plexus 
up to the lateral or anterolateral surface of the rectum. In a 
recent study, Ercoli showed, that the pelvic splanchnic nerves 
are at high position-related risk of iatrogenic injury because 
they are in close proximity to these ligaments in 70% of 
cases. Proper identiﬁ cation of the splanchnic nerves at their 
origin from the sacral roots allows safe dissection of the rectal 
wings and the inferior mesorectal planes.
Always keeping the parasympathetic nerves under vision 
allows the nerve ﬁ bers to be kept distant from the debulking 
planes.
Moreover, by following their course until they converge with 
the hypogastric nerves it is possible to localize the  origin of 
the pelvic plexus, caudal to the course of the deep  uterine 
vein, particularly the efferent branches and the  visceral 
afferent branches of the uterus, vagina and bladder.  During 
bowel resection, after excision of the meso sigmoid with 
sparing of the innervation described above, only selective 
neuroablation of a small quantity of nerve ﬁ bers of the medial 
efferent bundle of the pelvic plexus is performed, directed 
medially towards the rectum and  traversing the meso rectum. 
In fact, only the rectal ﬁ bers of the resected segment of bowel 
are transected, minimizing rectal denervation.
4.4 Protection of the Caudal Aspect of the Inferior Hypogastric Plexus 
The distal aspect of the inferior hypogastric plexus is located 
in the posterior part of the vesico-uterine ligament, lateral and 
caudal to the distal ureter. To preserve it, after preparing the 
ureteric tunnel and the so-called space of Morrow medial 
and central to the ureter, the lateral aspect of the nerves and 
the medial vascular part of the vesico-uterine ligament are 
dissected. It is necessary to divide the pubocervical fascia 
consisting of the cranial and caudal part of the vesico-uterine 
and vesico-vaginal ligaments at the point where its reﬂ ection 
will form the ureteric tunnel. In this way, the surgeon gains 
safe access to the paravaginal space.
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
138
operation theater 
Chapter XII
Technique of Laparoscopic Myomectomy
Stefano Landi and Luca Minelli
Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics
“Sacro Cuore” General Hospital, Negrar, Italy
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
140
The traditional criteria for the surgical management of  uterine
fibroids are infertility, recurrent abortions, obstetric 
 complications, abnormal contour of the abdominal wall, 
abdominal and pelvic pain, abnormal uterine bleeding and 
menorrhagia attributable to ﬁ broids. In addition, women who 
reject hysterectomy because they wish to maintain fertility 
potential can choose this type of surgery.
There are still no clear indications with regard to the 
 laparoscopic approach but laparoscopic myomectomy (LM) 
has been broadly accepted recently.
The technique of LM does not differ from that of laparotomy.
As regards its beneﬁ ts and the low risk of complications, LM 
can be considered a valid alternative to myomectomy via 
laparotomy even though it remains a challenging technique. 
In expert hands, LM appears to provide the same results as 
myomectomy via a laparotomy approach in terms of fertility 
and pregnancy and has a deﬁ nite advantage with regard to 
the risk of postoperative adhesions. Regarding recurrence 
evaluation, the results are unclear but it is probably similar 
with both techniques.
Certainly, there are technical limitations in LM so preoperative 
assessment of the patients is extremely important.
1.0 Introduction
2.0 Patient Selection Criteria
3.0 Preoperative Use of GnRH Analogs
Analysis of the largest series published in the literature so far 
shows that LM is used in cases of one or two myomas about 
5 cm in diameter. The controversy about the number and 
size of myomas that can be managed by laparoscopy has 
not yet been resolved. The generally considered limits are 3 
myomas and a diameter of 8 cm or a uterus corresponding in 
size to a 16 weeks gestation and a myoma measuring 12 cm. 
In the literature, Nezhat reported on a myomectomy 15 cm in 
diameter. In our view, patient selection largely depends on 
the experience of the surgical team. As a matter of course, we 
decide not to perform LM in the pre sence of a large number 
of myomas (more than 5–10) because the procedure would 
become extremely long, small myomas may be missed and 
there may not be sufﬁ cient space for suturing the uterine 
walls if the organ has been subjected to multiple incisions. In 
our experience, the size is secondary to the number of myo-
mas when deciding on whether a patient meets the selection 
criteria of LM.
In a retrospective study of 426 women, four independent 
 factors were found to correlate with the risk of conversion to 
an open procedure: myoma size larger than 5 cm,  intramural 
myoma, anterior location and preoperative use of GnRH 
 agonists. No mention was made on the number of myomas 
which could represent a bias in the selection of patients. 
Although this predictive model, which uses ultrasound for 
three of the four criteria, has not been validated, it allows us 
to state that preoperative ultrasound assessment can be of 
instrumental value. In our department, patients are accepted 
for LM only after detailed ultrasound examination in the early 
proliferative phase.
It has been suggested that intramural ﬁ broids that reach the 
uterine cavity can be a contraindication to LM because of 
intra- and postoperative bleeding and inadequate multilayer 
closure of the endometrium/myometrium. However, other 
studies have demonstrated the safety of this procedure even 
in the case of intramural myomas.
There are many reasons for avoiding the preoperative use of 
GnRH analogs:
O possible delay in the diagnosis of leiomyosarcoma
O increase in hyalinization phenomena
O prolongation of operation times
O difﬁ culty in localizing the cleavage planes
O obliteration of the myoma-myometrium boundary
O increased incidence of conversions
However, there is a prospective study by Zullo in 1998, which 
found that the use of analogs for two months prior to surgery 
produced low blood loss, shorter operating time, an increase 
in red blood cells, hemoglobin and postoperative iron in all 
cases except markedly hypo-echogenic ﬁ broids where there 
was an increase in operating times. The same author states 
that use of tibolone as add-back therapy does not change 
the efﬁ cacy in terms of operation times and rate of blood loss 
compared to the GnRH analog alone.
Preoperative use of GnRH analogs in patients undergoing 
myomectomy would appear to increase the risk of  recurrence 
and a recent study by Rossetti conﬁ rms the negative effect on 
recurrence. A possible explanation was given by Fedele who 
reported an increase in recurrence rate for small  myomas
(< 1.5 cm) after GnRH analog treatment, stating that the 
 reason is probably to be found in the simple fact that they 
were missed during myomectomy rather than recurrence as 
such.
A reduction in the size of the myomas has also been reported 
with preoperative administration of GnRH antagonists and of 
mifepristone (progesterone antagonist).
operation theater 
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
142
5.1  Injection of up to 40 ml of 9-arginine Vasopressin at a Concentration of 0.6 U/ml
in Saline into the Pedicle or Body of Each Myoma 
Fig. 2 
Injection of up to 40 ml of 9-arginine vasopressin at a concentration
of 0.6 U/ml in saline into the myoma pedicle. Remember always to
aspirate prior to administration of the vasoconstrictive agent to make
sure that it is not injected in a blood vessel. 
Fig. 3 
Injection of up to 40 ml of 9-arginine vasopressin at a concentration
of 0.6 U/ml in saline into the body of a myoma.
The use of vasoconstrictive agents has been shown to be 
as effective in laparoscopy as in laparotomy. They allow 
faster and easier enucleation with occasional use of bipolar 
electro surgery for hemostasis, and above all, they reduce 
blood loss and thus the need for transfusions. In our 
experience, the real advantage is that they provide a clear 
view of the  operative ﬁ eld. Unfortunately, the use of vaso-
constrictors is not  permitted in many European countries. 
Traditionally, Por-8 (8-ornithine vasopressin), a synthetic 
derivative of  vasopressin, a strong vasoconstrictor with 
weak antidiuretic effects, has been used for many years but 
is no  longer  commercially available. Subsequently, some 
authors  suggested using  glypressin (triglycyl-lysine vaso-
pressin, triglycyl- vasopressin), which is usually employed 
to treat bleeding esophageal varices. It is an analog of 
antidiuretic hormone with about 3% of the antidiuretic 
effect of  vasopressin. The theoretical advantage is that it 
does not cause constriction of the coronary arteries as it is 
a  pharmacologically inactive drug precursor that must be 
biotransformed to lysopressin (40–60 minutes) by endo- and 
exopeptidases in the liver and kidney.
Pitressin (8-arginine vasopressin), a derivative of vaso-
pressin, is used widely in the United States. In the past, it 
was used in different concentrations, even up to 20 U in
20 ml of saline. Its period of activity is 20–30 minutes and 
should be metabolized before the end of surgery. Use of 
the vasoconstrictor is often not well tolerated and cases of 
bronchoconstriction, urticaria, anaphylactic reaction and 
myocardial infarction have been reported. When used, this 
must be under the strict control of the anesthetists.
During laparoscopic myomectomy, one case of hyper tension 
followed by hypotension after 3–5 ml at 0.6 U/ml, one case 
of pulmonary edema after 10 ml at 0.5 U/ml and one case of 
transitory hypertension after 70 ml at 0.05 U/l of Por-8 have 
been reported.
Recently, use of bupivacaine hydrochloride 0.25% + 0.5 ml 
of epinephrine (1/2 ampoule of 1 mg/ml) has been shown 
to be effective and safe in reducing hemorrhage, operating 
time and time required for myoma enucleation. The problem 
is that the constrictive effect lasts for 5–6 hours so there is 
a hypothetical risk of not obtaining accurate hemostasis 
with delayed postoperative bleeding and tissue damage 
due to the  prolonged hypo-oxygenation. The hypothesis 
that  bupivacaine produces compensatory vasodilatation has 
yet to be demonstrated. Methyl ergometrine maleate and 
sulprostone should be used only in study protocols as their 
safety and efﬁ cacy in gynecologic surgery have yet to be 
demonstrated.
One to three injections per myoma may be necessary 
(Figs. 2, 3). A few seconds after injection, the myometrium 
begins to turn pale. If excessive resistance is encountered 
during  injection it is better to draw back the needle until 
the  resistance disappears, which signiﬁ es that the needle is 
between the myoma and pseudocapsule; hydrodissection 
can also be useful. If the liquid escapes through a previously 
made needle opening, this conﬁ rms that the hydrodissection 
cannula is in the proper cleavage plane.
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
143
5.2 Myometrial Incision with Unipolar Hook Electrode or Scissors
Using Pure High-Power Cutting Current 
Fig. 4 
Elliptical incision in a pedunculated myoma by use of a unipolar 
hook electrode (60-watt cutting current). An elliptical incision is 
advantageous because the very thin myometrium would be too
difﬁ cult to suture.
Fig. 5 
Myometrial incision at the level of the most prominent part of
the myometrium with a unipolar hook electrode using a 60-watt
cutting current. The assistant is using a suction cannula to
aspirate and maintain clear vision of the operating ﬁ eld.
Fig. 6 
Anterior myoma: the line of incision should be aligned on-axis with 
the needle holder placed in the lateral port.
Fig. 7 
Anterior myoma (lateral view): the incision cannot be aligned
on-axis with the needle holder in the suprapubic port because
the needle would not be able to penetrate deeply into the
myo metrium. 
A linear or elliptical incision (Fig. 4) for very large or peduncu-
lated myomas should be made over the myoma. The standard 
incision is vertical (oblique in the case of an anterior myoma) 
at the level of the most prominent part of the  myometrium 
and is carried down to the surrounding pseudocapsule until 
the pearly structure of the myoma is exposed (Fig. 5). Even if 
the arteries and arterioles of the myometrium have a trans-
verse course, a vertical incision is preferred because suturing 
is more effective and easier to accomplish. Reduced blood 
loss has been reported with transverse incision of the uterus. 
Koh suggests ultra lateral placement of the ports with two 
working trocars, both on the right side. With the traditional 
set-up of the sites of trocar insertion, the incision should be 
oblique in the case of anterior myoma in line with the  needle 
holder located in the lateral port. In the case of fundal or 
posterior myoma, the incision must be vertical in line with 
the needle holder, which in this case will be in the suprapubic 
port so that the needle can be passed deeply in the myome-
trium (Figs. 6–7).
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
144
When placing the myometrial incision, the surgeon must 
limit the use of electrocautery. Many cases of uterine  rupture 
after leiomyoma coagulation or simple unipolar  cauterization 
have been reported. Bipolar electrosurery may be applied 
selectively to the blood vessels. Hemostasis must be 
achieved preferably by means of endoscopic suture and the 
use of vasoconstrictive agents. The ultrasonic scalpel is used 
by some surgeons. Stringer was the ﬁ rst to use it for LM and 
its use for uterine incision appears to be as effective as the 
knife electrode; however, it appears to produce greater tissue 
damage compared to the unipolar mode using 35 watt for 
cutting and 30 watt for coagulation. We prefer to use a 30–60 
watt unipolar hook electrode with unblended cutting current 
producing a sharp and clean cut with minimal lateral diffusion 
of energy. In theory, the ideal choice would be a cold  surgical 
knife. In the case of intraligamentary myomas, the ﬁ rst step 
is to incise the broad ligament to assist in  spontaneous 
protrusion.
Pedunculated myomas are resected with unipolar scissors 
and then sutured like intramural or subserous myomas. An 
endoloop positioned around the myoma pedicle can help to 
reduce bleeding before starting to suture.
However, we advise against only using two endoloops 
because they slip off the pedicle easily, producing major 
secondary bleeding.
5.3 Enucleation of the Myoma
Fig. 8 
Enucleation of the myoma. The myoma is enucleated by pulling and 
rotating the ﬁ broid with a spiral-tipped ﬁ xation instrument inserted 
through the suprapubic port, applying countertraction and using 
blunt dissection with a strong forceps and a suction cannula. In the 
case of major bleeding, the surgeon may use the bipolar forceps.
Fig. 9 
The handle of the spiral-tipped ﬁ xation instrument is pulled towards 
the patient’s feet along an imaginary arc so as to apply traction to 
the myoma.
After identification of the cleavage plane, the myoma is 
enucleat ed, pulling it with a 10 mm tenaculum or spiral-tipped 
ﬁ xation instrument inserted through the suprapubic port, 
exerting countertraction and performing dissection with a 
sturdy forceps and with a suction cannula (Figs. 8, 9). Given 
proper identiﬁ cation and exposure of the cleavage planes, 
the myoma can be removed without any bleeding vessels. 
Traction should allow the myoma to be rotated toward the 
anterior abdominal wall (in the case of anterior myoma) so 
that the point of insertion of the ﬁ xation instrument should be 
as low as possible in the ﬁ broid. Only signiﬁ cant  bleeding is 
coagulated with the bipolar forceps; hemostasis should be 
achieved by suture and vasoconstrictive agents. An effort 
must be made not to enter the endometrial cavity to avoid 
the formation of synechiae or iatrogenic adenomyosis. We do 
not recommend suture of the endometrial cavity to prevent 
adenomyosis as reported by Koh, but antibiotic prophylactic 
cover for two days and diagnostic hysteroscopy at the end 
of the operation are worthwhile. Small adjacent myomas can 
be enucleated by tunnelling through the previous incision 
(Figs. 10, 11) making sure that formation of hematomas is not 
facilitated.
operation theater 
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
146
Fig. 12 
Schematic drawing of a ﬁ gure-of-eight zigzag suture that has proven 
effective and safe in our series. The suture line is usually placed with 
an intracorporeal knot.
13
14 
15 
16 
Figs. 13–16 
Interrupted ﬁ gure of eight sutures with Seraﬁ t 0 are used to
obliterate the bed of the myoma and ensure hemostasis.
As shown, each individual suture requires four steps starting from 
the right side and is then tied intracorporeally.
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
147
We use interrupted ﬁ gure of eight sutures to approximate 
the bed of the myoma and ensure correct hemostasis (Figs. 
13–16). The serosa is closed with a continuous inverting suture 
(Figs. 17–19) or interrupted inverting sutures. The sutures are 
placed with a 36 needle slightly straightened (maximum size 
of needle that can be introduced through a 15 mm trocar) or 
with a size 27 curved needle. If there is  abundant  myometrium, 
it is possible before closure to trim the excess to allow  normal 
reconstruction of the uterus.  However, since involution of 
the hypertrophic myometrium takes place  spontaneously 
in the ﬁ rst weeks post  myomectomy it is advisable to avoid 
removing myometrial tissue as much as possible.
17 
18
19 
Figs. 17–19 
The superﬁ cial layer is approximated with a continuous inverting 
PDS 0 or 2/0 suture.
O inverting suture on the right side of the incision
O inverting suture on the left side
O ﬁ nal result
The assistant cuts the suture and the surgeon can remove the
needle from the abdomen via the 15 mm subprapubic trocar.
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
148
5.5 Morcellation
Fig. 20 
Activation of the blade of the morcellator inside a trocar with an 
oblique end: the myoma is rotated and “peeled” like an orange
without the aid of the assistant and with the production of very 
few fragments.
Fig. 21 
Correct position of the blade relative to the end of the trocar:
the blade must be in about the middle of the oblique part of the 
trocar.
Use of an electromechanical morcellator to remove the 
myomas is obligatory. We recommend activating the 
blade of the morcellator inside a trocar with an oblique end
(Figs. 20, 21). In this way, with simple traction the myoma 
is “peeled” like an orange into a few or even no fragments. 
This technique should prevent the “Swiss cheese“ effect of 
perforating the myoma with a number of holes, loss of the 
fragments in the pelvis, repeated grasping of the myoma with 
forceps and thus loss of time.
5.6 End of the Procedure
The peritoneal cavity must be irrigated copiously with 
Ringer lactate to obtain correct hemostasis and remove all 
the  fragments; leaving a small piece of myoma can cause 
intestinal obstruction following formation of adhesions. A 
device to avoid the formation of adhesions is to suture the 
suprapubic fascial defect under vision.
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
149
1.  ACIEN P, QUEREDA F: Abdominal myomectomy: 
Results of a simple operative technique. Fertil Steril 
65:41-51, 1996
2.  ARCANGELI S, PASQUARETTE MM.: Gravid uterine
rupture after myolysis. Obstet Gynecol. May;89
(5 Pt 2):857, 1997.
3.  BEYTH Y: Gonadotropin-releasing hormone analog 
treatment should not precede conservative
myomectomy. Fertil Steril 53:187-188, 1990
4.  BULLETTI C, POLLI V, NEGRINI V, GIACOMUCCI E, 
FLAMIGNI C: Adhesion formation after laparoscopic 
myomectomy. J Am Assoc Gynecol Laparosc. Aug;3(4): 
533-6, 1996. 
5.  CAMPO S, GARCEA N: Laparoscopic myomectomy in 
premenopausal women with and without preoperative 
treatment using gonadotrophin-releasing hormone 
analogues. Hum Reprod 14(1):44-48, 1999
6.  COHEN D, MAZUR MT, JOZEFCZYK MA, et al: 
Hyalinization and cellular changes in uterine 
leiomyo mata after gonadotropin-releasing hormone 
against therapy. J Reprod Med 39:377-380, 1994
7.  DARAI E, DECHAUD H, BENIFLA JL, ET AL: Fertility 
after laparoscopic myomectomy: Preliminary results
Hum Reprod 12(9):1931-1934, 1997
8.  DELIGDISCH L, HIRSCHMANN S, ALTCHEK A: 
Pathologic changes in gonadotropin releasing hormone 
agonist analogue treated uterine leiomyomata.
Fertil Steril 67:837-841, 1997
9.  DUBUISSON JB, CHAPRON C, CHAVET X, et al:
Fertility after laparoscopic myomectomy of large 
intramural myomas, preliminary results. Hum Reprod 
11(3):518-522, 1996
10. DUBUISSON JB, CHAVET X, CHAPRON C, et al:
Uterine rupture during pregnancy after laparoscopic 
myomectomy. Hum Reprod 10:1475-1477, 1995
11. DUBUISSON JB, FAUCONNIER A, CHAPRON C, 
KREIKER G, NORGAARD C.: Second look after 
laparoscopic myomectomy. Hum Reprod. Aug;
13 (8):2102-6, 1998. 
12. DUNNIHOO DR, OTTERSON WN, MAILHES JB, LEWIS 
DF JR, GRAFTON WD, BROWN CC.: An evaluation of 
uterine scar integrity after cesarean section in rabbits. 
Obstet Gynecol. Mar;73(3 Pt 1):390-4, 1989. 
13. FELBERBAUM RE, KUPKER W, KRAPP M, GEHL B, 
LUDWIG M, DIEDRICH K: Preoperative reduction of 
uterine ﬁ broids in only 16 days by administration of a 
gonadotrophin-releasing hormone antagonist
(Cetrotide). Reprod Biomed Online.;3(1):14-18, 2001.
14. FREDERICK J, FLETCHER H, SIMEON D, MULLINGS A, 
HARDIE M: Intramyometrial vasopressin as a
haemostatic agent during myomectomy. Br J Obstet 
Gynaecol. May;101(5):435-7, 1994. 
15. FRIEDMAN W, MAIER RF, LUTTKUS A, et al: Uterine 
rupture after laparoscopic myomectomy. Acta Obstet 
Gynecol Scand 75:683-684, 1996
16. GEORGAKOPULOS PA, BERCI G: Sigmoido-uterine 
rupture in pregnancy after multiple myomectomy.
Int Surg 66:367-368, 1981
17. HARRIS WJ: Uterine dehiscence following laparoscopic 
myomectomy. Obstet Gynecol 80:545-546, 1992
18. HASSON HM, ROTMAN C, RANA N, SISTOS F, 
DMOWSKI WP: Laparoscopic myomectomy. Obstet 
Gynecol. Nov;80(5):884-8, 1992. 
19. IGARASHI M: Value of myomectomy in the treatment
of infertility. Fertil Steril. Jun;59(6):1331-2, 1993
20. KIMURA T, KUSUI C, MATSUMURA Y, OGITA K,
ISAKA S, NAKAJIMA A, OHASHI K, KOYAMA M, 
AZUMA C, MURATA Y: Effectiveness of hormonal
tourniquet by vasopressin during myomectomy through 
vasopressin V1a receptor ubiquitously expressed in 
myometrium. Gynecol Obstet Invest. 54(3):125-31, 
2002.
21. KOH C, JANIK G: Laparoscopic myomectomy: the
current status Curr Opin Obstet Gynecol, 15:295-301, 
2003
22. KWOK A, NEVELL D, FERRIER A, GRAF N, LAM A, 
FORD R: Comparison of tissue injury between
laparosonic coagulating shears and electrosurgical
scissors in the sheep model. J Am Assoc Gynecol 
Laparosc. Aug;8(3):378-84, 2001.
23. LETHABY A, VOLLENHOVEN B, SOWTER M:
Pre-operative GnRH analogue therapy before
hysterectomy or myomectomy for uterine ﬁ broids. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. (2):CD000547, 2000.
24. LIN PC, THYER A, SOULES MR.: Intraoperative
ultrasound during a laparoscopic myomectomy. 
Fertil Steril Jun;81(6):1671-4, 2004.
25. LOONG EPL, WONG FWS: Uterine leiomyosarcoma 
diagnosed during treatment with an agonist of 
luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone for presumed 
uterine ﬁ broid. Fertil Steril 54:530-531, 1990
26. MAIS V, AJOSSA S, GUERRIERO S, et al: Laparoscopic 
versus abdominal myomectomy: A prospective,
randomized trial to evaluate beneﬁ ts in early outcome. 
Am J Obstet Gynecol 174:654-658, 1996
27. NEZHAT C, NEZHAT F, SILFEN SL, SCHAFFER N, 
EVANS D: Laparoscopic myomectomy. Int J Fertil 
36:275-280, 1991
28. NEZHAT CH, NEZHAT F, ROEMISCH M, et al:
Pregnancy following laparoscopic myomectomy:
Preliminary results. Hum Reprod 14(5):1219-1221, 1999
29. NEZHAT F, ROEMISCH M, NEZHAT CH, et al:
Recurrence rate after laparoscopic myomectomy.
J Am Assoc Gynecol Laparosc 5(3):237-240, 1998
30. NEZHAT F, SEIDMAN DS, NEZHAT C, et al: 
Laparoscopic myomectomy today: Why, when and for 
whom? Hum Reprod 11(5):933-937, 1996
Recommended Reading
operation theater 
31. NKEMAYIM DC, HAMMADEH ME, HIPPACH M,
MINK D, SCHMIDT W: Uterine rupture in pregnancy 
sub sequent to previous laparoscopic electromyolysis. 
Case report and review of the literature. Arch Gynecol 
Obstet.  Nov;264(3):154-6, 2000.
32. OSTRZENSKI A.: Uterine leiomyoma particle growing in 
an abdominal-wall incision after laparoscopic re trieval. 
Obstet Gynecol. May;89(5 Pt 2):853-4, 1997. 
33. OU CS, HARPER A, LIU YH, ROWBOTHAM R:
Laparoscopic myomectomy technique. Use of
colpotomy and the harmonic scalpel. J Reprod Med. 
Oct;47(10):849-53, 2002. 
34. PALOMBA S, PELLICANO M, AFFINITO P, DI CARLO C, 
ZULLO F, NAPPI C: Effectiveness of short-term
administration of tibolone plus gonadotropin-releasing 
hormone analogue on the surgical outcome of
laparoscopic myomectomy. Fertil Steril. Feb;75(2):
429-33, 2001. 
35. PELERME GR, FRIEDMAN EA: Rupture of the gravid 
uterus in the third trimester. Am J Obstet Gynecol 
94:571-576, 1996
36. PELOSI MAIII, PELOSI MA: Spontaneous uterine rupture 
at thirty-three weeks subsequent to previous superﬁ cial
laparoscopic myomectomy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 
177:1547-1549, 1997
37. RIBEIRO SC, REICH H, ROSENBERG J, 
 GUGLIELMINETTI E, VIDALI A.: Laparoscopic
myomectomy and pregnancy outcome in infertile 
patients. Fertil Steril. 1999 Mar;71(3):571-4. 
38. ROSSETTI A, PACCOSI M, SIZZI O, ZULLI S, MANCUSO S, 
LANZONE A: Dilute ornitin vasopressin and a myoma 
drill for laparoscopic myomectomy. J Am Assoc
Gynecol Laparosc. May;6(2):189-93, 1999.
39. ROSSETTI A, SIZZI O, SORANNA L, CUCINELLI F, 
MANCUSO S, LANZONE A: Long-term results of 
laparoscopic myomectomy: recurrence rate in
comparison with abdominal myomectomy.
Hum Reprod. Apr;16(4):770-4, 2001.
40. ROSSETTI A, SIZZI O, SORANNA L, MANCUSO S, 
LANZONE A: Fertility outcome: long-term results after 
laparoscopic myomectomy. Gynecol Endocrinol. 
Apr;15(2):129-34, 2001
41. LANDI S, FIACCAVENTO A, ZACCOLETTI R, BARBIERI F,
SYED R, MINELLI L: Pregnancy Outcomes and
Deliveries after Laparoscopic Myomectomy. J Am Assoc 
Gynecol Laparosc 10(2):177–181, 2003
42. S. LANDI, R. ZACCOLETTI, L. FERRARI, L. MINELLI: 
Laparoscopic Myomectomy: Technique, Complications, 
and Ultrasound Scan Evaluations. J Am Assoc Gynecol 
Laparosc 8(2):231–240, 2001
43. SEINERA P, ARISIO R, DECKO A, et al: Laparoscopic 
myomectomy: Indications, surgical technique and 
complications. Hum Reprod 12:1927-1930, 1997
44. SEINERA P, GAGLIOTI P, VOLPI E, et al: Ultrasound 
evaluation of uterine wound healing following
laparoscopic myomectomy: Preliminary results. 
Hum Reprod 14(10):2460-2463, 1999
45. SERACCHIOLI R, ROSSI S, GOVONI F, ROSSI E, 
 VENTUROLI S, BULLETTI C, FLAMIGNI C: Fertility and 
obstetric outcome after laparoscopic myomectomy of 
large myomata: a randomized comparison with
abdominal myomectomy. Hum Reprod. Dec; 15(12): 
2663-8, 2000.
46. SORIANO D, DESSOLLE L, PONCELET C, BENIFLA 
JL, MADELENAT P, DARAI E: Pregnancy outcome after 
laparoscopic and laparoconverted myomectomy. 
Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol. Jun 10; 108(2):
194-8, 2003.
47. STEINAUER J, PRITTS E, JACKSON R, JACOBY A: 
Systematic review of Mifeprisone for the treatment of 
uterine myoma. Obstet Gynecol, 10: 1331-6, 2004
48. STRINGER NH, WALKER JC, MEYER PM:
Comparison of 49 laparoscopic myomectomies with 49 
open myomectomies. J Am Assoc Gynecol Laparosc. 
Aug; 4(4):457-64, 1997.
49. SWEETEN KM, GRAVES WK, ATHANASSIOU A.:
Spontaneous rupture of the unscarred uterus. Am J 
Obstet Gynecol. Jun;172(6):1851-5, 1995
50. TAKEUCHI H, KINOSHITA K: Evaluation of adhesion 
formation after laparoscopic myomectomy by
systematic second-look microlaparoscopy. 
J Am Assoc Gynecol Laparosc 9:442-446, 2002
51. TULANDI T, BEIQUE F, KIMIA M: Pulmonary edema:
A complication of local injection of vasopressin at
laparoscopy. Fertil Steril 66:478-480, 1996
52. VILOS GA, DALY LJ, TSE BM: Pregnancy outcome 
after laparoscopic electromyolisis. J Am Assoc Gynecol 
Laparosc 5: 289-292, 1998
53. ZIMBRIS L, HEDON B, LAFRARGUE F: Myomectomie 
par coelioscopie. J Obstet Gynecol 2:219-223, 1994
54. ZULLO F, PALOMBA S, COREA D, PELLICANO 
M, RUSSO T, FALBO A, BARLETTA E, SARACO P, 
DOLDO P, ZUPI E: Bupivacaine plus epinephrine for 
laparoscopic myomectomy: a randomized placebo-
controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol. Aug;104(2):243-9, 2004
55. ZULLO F, PELLICANO M, DE STEFANO R, et al: A 
prospective randomized study to evaluate leuprolide 
acetate treatment before laparoscopic myomectomy: 
Efﬁ cacy and ultrasonographic predictors. Am J Obste 
Gynecol 178:108-112, 1998
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
150
operation theater 
Chapter XIII
Laparoscopic Treatment 
of Adnexal Masses
Mario Malzoni and Fabio Imperato 
Malzoni Medical Center “Villa dei Platani”
Avellino, Italy
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecologic Laparoscopic Surgery
152
In recent years, minimally invasive laparoscopic surgery has 
changed the therapeutic management of adnexal masses 
to such an extent, that it can be considered the standard 
therapeutic option.
Despite several very promising publications suggesting the 
increasing diagnostic value of ultrasonography and color 
Doppler, the preoperative diagnosis of malignant lesions 
provides too many false-positive results. Laparoscopy is of 
signiﬁ cant value in the diagnostic assessment of adnexal 
masses in that it allows for elective biopsy and histopatho-
logic evaluation including the option of ovarian tumor removal. 
However, the rate of conﬁ rmed malignancy in patients with 
adnexal masses ranges from 0.3 to 1.2% (Tab. 1) and the 
publication of case histories describing undetected ovarian 
cancers treated via laparoscopy has given rise to criticism 
of this type of procedure. In fact, accidental rupture of the 
thin ovarian cyst capsule in patients with missed diagnosis 
of proven malignancy can involve intraoperative spillage of 
tumor cells. The objection to laparoscopic surgery for ovarian 
tumors is based on the hypothesis, that a missed stage IA 
ovarian cancer could transform into a stage IC tumor (FIGO 
classiﬁ cation) which would require adjunctive chemo therapy.
However, does the incidence of intraoperative spillage 
constitute a prognostic risk factor that could adversely 
affect the patient’s survival? In patients with stage I  ovarian 
cancer, some authors consider that this risk factor is not 
signiﬁ cant compared to others, e.g., the histological tumor 
type.  According to other authors, spiallage does not seem 
to adversely affect the patient’s prognosis provided that 
copious lavage is performed and the patient is treated by 
surgery within a week of the laparoscopy.
1.0 Introduction
Tab. 1
Diagram showing the experience of the authors with laparoscopic 
management of adnexal masses.
It is very difﬁ cult to deﬁ ne the limits of laparoscopic surgery. A 
few authors state that laparoscopic management is  indicated 
only for adnexal masses that present without any signs of 
malignancy, while for other study groups, this can include 
ovarian cancer at an early stage.  An expert laparoscopist, 
after diagnosing that the lesion is malignant, could stage the 
tumor laparoscopically completely without compromising the 
extent (Tab. 2). 
In our experience, nearly all adnexal masses can be treated 
laparoscopically. This is because of the method’s dual role: 
diagnostic and therapeutic.
2.0 Indications
Tab. 2
Laparoscopic management of ovarian cancer.
Functional ovarian cysts tend to undergo spontaneous or 
drug-induced remission (suppressive hormonal therapy) 
within 8 weeks. Persistence of the cysts is an indication for 
laparoscopy.
Follicular Cysts
These develop because of accumulation of follicular liquid 
following distention of a Graaﬁ an follicle. They vary in size up 
to a diameter of 5–6 cm (< 10 cm) and are unilateral,  unilocular 
and thin-walled. They are characterized by a smooth outer 
surface, which is translucent and whitish-gray in color (Fig. 1). 
The contents are lemon yellow in color. The internal surface is 
smooth and shiny and greyish in color.
Corpus luteum Cysts 
These are due to ﬂ uid collection inside the corpus luteum 
at the end of ovulation (Fig. 2). They are roundish  cystic 
swellings, which rarely exceed 4 cm in diameter. The outer 
surface is yellowish in color. The serous-hemorrhagic  contents 
vary in color from brownish red, if recent, to serous when 
they are older. The internal surface is smooth,  sometimes 
with  remnants of adherent ﬁ brous blood clots. They nearly 
always undergo spontaneous regression. In these cases, a 
corpus albicans cyst can be seen on the surface of the ovary, 
consisting of ﬁ brous collagen.
2.1 Functional Ovarian Cysts
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecologic Laparoscopic Surgery
153
Fig. 1
Functional ovarian cyst.
Fig. 2
Corpus luteum.
Serous Cysts
These are the most frequent of all benign ovarian cysts, and 
are predominantly unilateral and unilocular with thin, smooth 
walls. Their diameter is usually less than 15 cm. The outer 
translucent surface is covered with a ﬁ ne vascular network 
(Fig. 3). The internal surface can appear smooth and shiny 
(simple cystadenoma) or projecting as papillary structure 
(papillary cystadenoma). Sometimes, the outer surface also 
has numerous papillary proliferations (surface papilloma of 
the ovary). If the serous epithelium has an abundant stromal 
component, that is, at least a quarter of the tumor mass is 
solid and ﬁ bromatous, this is called a cystadenoﬁ broma. 
Mucinous Cysts
Less frequent than the previous ones, they are usually 
unilateral, pedunculated and thus very mobile with a  diameter 
that can reach 30–50 cm or even more (giant  cystadenomas). 
They are usually multilocular with cystic cavities of  varying 
sizes, separated by fine fibrous septa, complete and 
incomplete (Fig. 4). The contents are usually ﬂ uid, mucinous, 
clear and ﬁ brous.
2.2 Epithelial Cysts  
Fig. 3
Serous ovarian cyst.
Fig. 4
Mucinous ovarian cyst.
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecologic Laparoscopic Surgery
154
Fig. 5
Endometrioma.
Fig. 6
Ovarian dermoid cyst or mature teratoma.
Fig. 7
Parovarian cyst.
Endometriomas
These are due to endometriosis located on the ovary; 
please refer to the speciﬁ c chapter regarding manage-
ment. The outer surface is irregular and yellowish white 
with numerous areas of dark brown (Fig. 5). The bloody 
contents make them difﬁ cult to distinguish from functional 
hemorrhagic cysts.
2.3 Germinal Cysts
Dermoid Cysts 
Typically, they are found with a higher frequency in young 
women presenting as cystic swellings with a doughy 
consistency, yellowish white in color and opaque. They are 
ﬁ lled with fatty, semisolid, sebaceous material  mingled with 
hairs and/or skin, bone, cartilage, and all tissues  deriving 
from the three embryonic (ectodermal,  mesodermal and 
endodermal) layers can be present. They are usually 
thick-walled and 6–10 cm in diameter, but can reach 15 cm 
(Fig. 6). Dissection of dermoid cysts is usually attempted 
while preserving the integrity of the cystic  capsule. If 
accidental rupture and ensuing spillage of the cyst  contents 
into the peritoneal cavity occurs, it is necessary to remove 
the spilled material carefully (sebum, hairs, etc.) to prevent 
the incidence of chemical peritonitis.
Ovarian Struma
These are usually unilateral and multilocular, with a 
diameter of 6–8 cm. The contents are colloidal. They 
consist of highly specialized mature thyroid tissue.
2.4 Inclusion Cysts
Parovarian / Tubal Cysts
These intraligamentous cysts, which develop between the 
leaves of the broad ligament, can reach a  considerable size 
and can deform the adjacent tube. On the other hand, the 
ovary appears healthy. They usually arise from  embryonic 
remnants of the mesonephric or wolfﬁ an system  (primitive 
kidney), present in the thickness of the broad ligament. 
More speciﬁ cally, they derive in the majority of cases from 
the cranial part of the mesonephric system close to the 
ovarian hilum (epoophoron or parovarium), rarely from 
the caudal part of the mesonephric system  immediately 
below the point of insertion of the utero-ovarian  ligament 
(paroophoron). They appear as cystic unilateral and 
unilocul ar thin-walled swellings, ovoid or roundish in shape, 
sometimes of considerable size, containing clear ﬂ uid (Fig. 7). 
Their removal requires careful dissection to avoid iatrogenic 
injuries to the ureter and uterine pedicle, which may have 
been displaced by the cyst and have an atypical course. It is 
therefore advisable to identify both structures.
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecologic Laparoscopic Surgery
155
Fig. 8
Visualization of the peritoneum to be incised for removal of the 
paratubal cyst.
The peritoneum is incised with Metzenbaum scissors in an
area distant from the tube (Fig. 8). The margin of the  peritoneal 
incision is grasped with a ﬁ ne grasping forceps and the layer 
of cleavage between the peritoneum and the cyst is  identiﬁ ed. 
Then, the cyst is dissected bluntly from the loose connective 
tissue with the scissors by opening and closing the blades.
2.5 Inﬂ ammatory Cysts
Pyosalpinx
This is a collection of purulent exudate in the lumen of the 
uterine tube due to complete occlusion of its ostium as a 
result of purulent salpingitis. The tube appears considerably 
distended, full of a thick creamy exudate that is greenish 
yellow in color. The tubal wall is usually thickened and closely 
adherent to adjacent organs.
Hydrosalpinx
This is a collection of serous ﬂ uid in the lumen of the uterine 
tube because of complete occlusion of its distal ostium as a 
result of a weak and/or chronic inﬂ ammatory tubal process. 
The tube appears distended and full of clear ﬂ uid, 2–5 cm 
in diameter, with a smooth pinkish white surface and thin, 
transparent walls (Fig. 9). In the presence of hydrosalpinx, 
the  outcomes of reconstructive surgery performed by laparo-
scopic approach are not encouraging in terms of pregnancy 
rate. Therefore, in these cases, an assisted reproduction 
technology (ART) program is the method of choice. In fact, 
in the decision-making process, whether or not to refer the 
patient to an ART program, some authors suggest  removing 
the affected tube as a prophylactic measure, performing 
salpingectomy (Fig. 10) or alternatively, cauterizing the intra-
mural and isthmic tubal portion.
Tubo-Ovarian Abscess (TOA)
The infectious process presents with a collection of purulent 
exudate involving the tube and nearby ovary as a result of 
salpingo-oophoritis. It usually originates from chronic and 
advanced stages of salpingitis. In patients with TOA, the 
adnexae assume the appearance of a complex mass, in 
which it is no longer possible to distinguish the two adjacent 
organs, which is why a single swelling, irregularly elongated 
and red-brown in color (Fig. 11) is visible at laparoscopy.
Fig. 9
Hydrosalpinx.
Fig. 10
Left salpingectomy.
Fig. 11
Tubo-ovarian abscess.
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecologic Laparoscopic Surgery
156
Laparoscopic management of TOA involves aspiration and 
drainage of all purulent collections of the mass. A sample 
of the material is sent for bacteriological work-up. Next, the 
abdominal and pelvic cavities are carefully irrigated with 
saline. Adhesiolysis is performed to release the  reproductive 
organs from the inﬂ ammatory process. At this point, the 
case is evaluated clinically and a decision is made on how 
to proceed. At times, it is sufﬁ cient simply to eliminate the 
source of infection, but other times an organ-preserving 
approach is not feasible. In this case, it is mandatory that 
adnexectomy be performed. Finally, intraperitoneal tube 
drains are placed.
Ovarian Torsion
Torsion of the adnexa at the site of its pedicle is a  surgical 
emergency. It is more frequently found in an ovary with 
concomitant cyst formation. In patients with suspected 
ovarian torsion, and if diagnostic confirmation can be 
provided promptly, the immediate therapeutic management 
involves detorsion of the pedicle for restoration of normal 
anatomical conditions. After surgical detorsion, the ovary is 
inspected to conﬁ rm that blood ﬂ ow has been re-established 
and the organ has regained its normal color.
Ovarian Fibroma
This is the most frequent connective-tissue tumor (5%) 
growing from the ovarian cortex. It affects mainly women over 
40 years of age, with a mean of 55 years. Generally unilateral, 
it appears as a solid or mixed solid-cystic mass and is mobile 
and sometimes pedunculated. The outer surface can be both 
smooth and nodular and appears brownish white in color. It is 
often associated with ascites or ascites and pleural  effusion 
(Demons-Meigs syndrome) which regresses after surgical 
removal.
Benign Brenner Tumor
This surface epithelial-stromal tumor of transitional cells 
(resembling urinary bladder epithelium) is of very rare 
occurrence; it affects mainly women in the ﬁ fth and sixth 
decade. Usually unilateral, it appears as a solid, hard and 
encapsulated mass. The outer surface is greyish white in 
color. Complete surgical excision of the benign Brenner 
tumor appears to be curative.
2.6 Solid Ovarian Masses
Before a patient undergoes laparoscopic surgical treatment 
of an adnexal mass, it is necessary to exclude the presence 
of cancer. Nonetheless, laparoscopic inspection alone of the 
adnexae often allows the surgeon to make a benign-malig-
nant differentiation (Fig. 12).
3.0 Diagnosis
Fig. 12
Multilocular ovarian cyst.
The physician must ask the woman about any menstrual 
irregularities and the presence of any urinary or bowel 
disturbances.   
Pelvic pain is the most frequent symptom although asymp-
tomatic patients are not rare. In fact, it is only when the cysts 
reach a considerable size and produce pain in the ipsilateral 
iliac fossa that they become apparent and spur the patient to 
consult a doctor. 
Rarely, the pelvic pain can present as an acute abdomen, 
secondary to rupture of a cyst or ovarian torsion.
3.1 History
Before the procedure, a local physical examination is carried 
out. The adnexa or adnexae may be tender to both  superﬁ cial 
and deep palpation. Deep palpation reveals the outline, 
consistency, increased volume and mobility of the adnexal 
mass.
Benign Adnexal Mass
It can be considered benign when a unilateral, mobile swell-
ing with a smooth surface is found on examination.
Adnexal Mass Suspicious for Malignancy
A ﬁ xed mass with irregular margins, possibly bilateral, raises 
the suspicion of a malignant ovarian neoplasm.
3.2 Clinical Examination 
Transvaginal ultrasound contributes greatly to the  preoperative
assessment of an adnexal mass.
Benign Adnexal Mass
The ultrasonic characteristics that suggest a benign nature 
of the lesion include: size < 6 cm, unilocular structure, homo-
geneous contents, absence of internal proliferations and 
3.3 Transvaginal Ultrasound 
In advanced malignant disease, patients complain of abdo-
minal distension, swelling, constipation, nausea and anorexia. 
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecologic Laparoscopic Surgery
157
septa (possibly thin ones, < 2-3 mm), presence of smooth 
walls and well-deﬁ ned margins. Dermoid cysts can  contain 
hyperechogenic structures such as bone and cartilage. 
Hemorrhagic cysts can contain internal echoes of variable 
intensity, both focal and diffuse.
Adnexal Mass Suspicious for Malignancy
The presence of bilateral masses with irregular margins, 
multiple thick intracyst septa (> 4 mm), papillary projections, 
solid areas and the presence of ascites raise the suspicion of 
a malignant ovarian neoplasm.
3.4 Color Doppler 
Recently, use of color Doppler has made it possible to 
visualize the vascular patterns of adnexal masses based 
on the pathophysiological reasoning that malignant tumors 
are characterized by rapid growth and contain new vessels. 
The muscle layer of the walls of these vessels is reduced 
so  resistance to blood flow is low. Quantification of the 
blood ﬂ ow impedance and the presence, distribution and 
architecture of neovascularization inside the adnexal mass 
can be utilized in the differential diagnosis of these lesions. 
However, color Doppler studies can give false-negative 
results due, for example, to areas of avascular necrosis in 
malignant tumors. Conversely, complex adnexal masses with 
a solid and vascularized part (dermoid cysts, Brenner tumors) 
can give false-positive results. 
Benign Adnexal Mass
Benign lesions tend to be less vascularized, with isolated 
vessels, mainly located peripherally, which have an increased 
blood ﬂ ow impedance (RI >0.55).
Adnexal Mass Suspicious for Malignancy
A lesion can be considered malignant when there is a new 
vasculature network centrally at the level of the septa, and 
proliferations, arranged anarchically and abnormal in form 
(dilated vessels, arteriovenous shunts) with reduced ﬂ ow 
impedance (RI <0.45). 
Prior to the surgical procedure, speciﬁ c tumor markers should 
be measured: CEA, CA 19-9, CA 125, aFP. Because of their 
low speciﬁ city and sensitivity, the tumor markers may only be 
used as an adjunct measure for predictive purposes that can 
help to differentiate benign from malignant adnexal masses. 
The most widely available tumor marker test is measurement 
of CA 125. Levels greater than 35 U/ml are arbitrarily regarded 
as positive. However, speciﬁ city is lower in women of child-
bearing age, since some adnexal or peritoneal  conditions 
(PID, endometriosis) and menstruation increase the levels.
3.5 Tumor Markers
3.6 CT and MRI  
Adjunctive imaging modalities are often used in an attempt 
to improve diagnosis. However, measurement of CA 125 
serum levels, transvaginal ultrasound and color Doppler have 
an acceptable sensitivity and speciﬁ city, so that additional 
instrumental investigations are not necessary. Sometimes, 
MRI is indicated to assess tumor inﬁ ltration and abdomino-
pelvic CT for lymph node assessment.
3.7 Intra-operative Assessment
Laparoscopic findings suspicious for malignancy are 
papillary and/or solid lesions on the outer surface of the 
ovary (Fig. 13) and the presence of suspicious peritoneal 
implants (Fig. 14).
Fig. 13
Laparoscopic appearance of ovarian cancer on intra-operative 
inspection.
Fig. 14
Peritoneal implants suspicious for malignancy.
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecologic Laparoscopic Surgery
158
Faced with this type of disease, the choice must not be 
between laparoscopy and laparotomy but between conser-
vative and non-conservative treatment. Surgical therapy must 
thus be tailored to the individual case, applying the basic 
principle of preserving as much ovarian tissue as possible. 
The advantages of laparoscopy are obvious when applied to 
establish a differential diagnosis in terms of the benign/malig-
nant nature of the adnexal mass. In young women who wish 
to preserve their fertility, laparoscopy allows intraoperative 
biopsies to be taken from the ovarian surface without  causing 
rupture of the cyst. The histologic al result will decide the 
deﬁ nite surgical therapy. 
In the presence of a suspicious adnexal mass, intraopera-
tive laparoscopic assessment may assist in choosing the 
type of abdominal incision, which should extend from the 
xiphoid process to the pubic symphysis in the presence of 
a malignant neoplasm. Both accurate tumor staging and 
debulking  surgery (Tab. 3) require a midline incision.  , this 
pathology should be treated only in tertiary centers where 
oncologic  surgery is performed as a matter of routine, and 
where  adequate treatment can be ensured. In fact, two thirds 
of ovarian  cancers are stage III and IV when diagnosed 
and require conversion to laparotomy to allow adequate 
debulking.
4.0 Surgical Therapy
Tab. 3
Surgical management of ovarian cancer.
Fig. 15
Prophylactic aspiration of a giant ovarian cyst.
Fig. 16
Grasping the ovarian ligament with an endoclinch forceps and 
exposure of the antimesenteric margin.
4.1 Aspiration
General Principles
Simple puncture and aspiration of the cyst should be avoided 
since this is associated with an increase in recurrence rate. 
Aspiration is re commended only for dysfunctional cysts.
Aspiration is often performed prior to cystectomy.  En-bloc 
enucleation of an endometrioma, a mucinous cyst or 
ovarian lesion larger than 10 cm is very difﬁ cult to manage 
laparoscopically. Under the aforementioned conditions, it 
is  preferable to perform controlled prophylactic aspiration 
rather than risk accidental spillage of the cyst contents due 
to rupture, which occurs frequently (Fig. 15). Above all, cyst 
aspiration facilitates cystectomy by reducing the tension of 
the cyst and allows inspection of its internal walls.
The suction cannula is introduced directly into the cyst on 
the antimesenteric side after immobilizing the ovary,  grasping 
the ovarian ligament with an endoclinch grasping forceps 
(Fig. 16). It is sometimes sufﬁ cient to compress the ovary 
against the uterus. After removing the cyst contents with a 
suction cannula, the cyst cavity is lavaged. It is then possible 
to  introduce the laparoscope through the opening to assess 
the inner surface.
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecologic Laparoscopic Surgery
159
Fig. 17
The utero-ovarian ligament is grasped, the ovary is elevated and the 
ovarian cortex is then incised. 
Fig. 18
Identiﬁ cation of the plane of cleavage by opening and closing the 
blades of the round-ended scissors. 
General Principles
Complete enucleation of the cyst with minor trauma to the 
residual ovarian parenchyma is advised in young patients 
of fertile age with epithelial, germinal and inclusion cysts. 
In addition, cystectomy allows full histological examination. 
It is surprising how often it is possible even with large cysts 
to preserve sufficient ovarian tissue around the hilum to 
restore ovarian anatomy satisfactorily. If an adequate blood 
supply can be ensured, full recovery of organ function can be 
anticipated. 
Technique in brief
To improve exposure of the adnexae, a uterine  manipulator 
must be applied. The ovary is then mobilized by lysis of the 
paraphysiological adhesions to the rectosigmoid. Using a 
suction-irrigation cannula, the ovary is released from the 
posterior leaf of the broad ligament (ovarian fossa). The utero-
ovarian ligament is then grasped with an endoclinch forceps 
to elevate and rotate the ovary. 
To enucleate the cyst with the capsule intact, a small  incision 
is made with unipolar scissors contralateral to the ovarian 
hilum until the wall of the cyst is reached (Fig. 17). From the 
incision margin, the ovarian cortex together with the very thin 
stroma is grasped using an atraumatic Dorsey or Matkowitz 
grasping forceps. The plane of cleavage between the  capsule 
and ovary is identiﬁ ed by opening and closing the blades 
of the round-ended curved scissors (Fig. 18). The ﬁ brous 
adhesions between the wall of the cyst and the  ovarian 
tissue are dissected (Fig. 19). The blood vessels  supplying 
the cyst are coagulated with bipolar forceps. Detachment is 
completed using the blunt tip of the suction/irrigation  cannula. 
The incision in the ovarian cortex is then extended to allow 
removal of the intact cyst (Fig. 20).
4.2 Cystectomy
Fig. 19
Dissection of ﬁ brous adhesions between the cyst capsule and the 
ovary.
Fig. 20
Adequate incision of the ovarian cortex allows removal of the intact 
cyst.
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecologic Laparoscopic Surgery
160
Fig. 21
Identiﬁ cation of the proper cleavage plane for enucleation of the 
endometrioma.
Fig. 22
Cystectomy with the stripping technique.
Fig. 23
Hemostasis of the ovarian bed using a bipolar coagulation electrode.
Fig. 24
Overlapping ovarian margins.
In other cases (endometrioma, mucinous cyst),  enucleation 
of the cyst is preceded by “controlled  prophylactic 
aspiration” of the cyst contents. After this step, it is  useful 
to incise the cyst capsule and ovarian cortex with cold 
scissors. Two atraumatic grasping forceps are used to 
exert traction and countertraction to the incision  margins. 
In this way it is possible to discriminate the proper  cleavage 
plane located between the aforementioned  structures 
(Fig. 21). The cyst capsule is then detached from the 
ovarian parenchyma by stripping (Fig. 22). This part of the 
operation is performed with the aid of two instruments, 
a Manhes  forceps for a deep ﬁ rm grip of the cyst and a 
toothed  atraumatic  forceps for the ovarian tissue, which 
must not be damaged.  Hemostasis of the ovarian bed is 
obtained with a bipolar coagulation electrode (Fig. 23).
Protruding ovarian tissue is coagulated with bipolar  forceps 
to invert the margins of the cortex and reduce the  potential 
risk of adhesion formation. If the ovarian margins  overlap, 
this is usually left to heal by primary intention  without the 
need for suturing so that it closes spontaneously. In this 
way, the incidence of postoperative adhesions can be 
limited (Fig. 24). If the ovarian cortex does not tend to 
reapproximate spontaneously, one or two absorbable 
monoﬁ lament sutures can be placed to reconstruct the 
cortex. The sutures are transﬁ xed and tied inside the ovary. 
This is followed by repeated irrigation with saline for full 
peritoneal toilet.
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecologic Laparoscopic Surgery
161
General Principles
Adnexectomy is reserved for postmenopausal patients. 
In addition, the decision to remove the tube together with 
the ovary is indicated where the tube is also inﬁ ltrated by 
the pathology. However, removal of the entire adnexa is 
frequently performed because it is easier. 
Technique in brief
The adnexa is elevated with a certain degree of traction. This 
avoids accidental injury to the lateral walls of the pelvis and to 
the underlying retroperitoneal structures. 
The course of the ureter should always be identiﬁ ed. The 
ovarian vessels and common iliac vessels cross the ureter at 
its junction with the superior pelvic aperture. Descending in 
the pelvis, it runs inside the broad ligament just beside the 
uterosacral ligament. If it is not possible to identify the ureter 
clearly through the peritoneum, it is necessary to incise the 
peritoneum to access the retroperitoneal space and expose 
it (Fig. 25).
The next step involves fenestration of the posterior leaf 
of the broad ligament to mobilize the ureter away from the 
infundibulo-pelvic ligament. Next, the infundibulo-pelvic 
ligament is coagulated with the aid of bipolar forceps and 
transected by use of a cold knife. This can be accomplished 
more effectively if preceded by adequate vascular pedicle 
skeletonization (Fig. 26). The utero-ovarian ligament and the 
tubal isthmus are then coagulated and divided (Fig. 27). 
The uterine vascular pedicles should always be inspected at 
the end of surgery as they can bleed when the hemostatic 
effect of positive intra-abdominal pressure has subsided. 
4.3 Oophorectomy
General Principles
Oophorectomy is indicated in young patients only if a 
conservative approach is not feasible due to insufficient 
residual ovarian tissue. 
Technique in brief
After mobilizing the ovary, the ovarian pedicle is first 
coa gulated and then divided. To achieve coagulation of larger 
vascular pedicles, it is preferable to use bipolar forceps with 
adequately wide jaws. The mesovarium and meso salpinx are 
then coagulated and divided starting at the uterine side and 
proceeding toward the ﬁ mbrial tubal portion. The tube, which 
should be preserved, must be protected from iatrogenic 
injury.
Fig. 25
Exposure of the ureter.
Fig. 26
Skeletonization of the infundibulo-pelvic ligament.
Fig. 27
Left adnexectomy.
4.4 Adnexectomy
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecologic Laparoscopic Surgery
162
The standard approach in the laparoscopic management 
of suspicious adnexal masses includes cytology testing of 
peritoneal ﬂ uid, inspection of the abdominal and pelvic  cavity 
combined with peritoneal biopsy, adnexectomy avoiding-
rupture of the capsule, extraction of the operative  specimen 
with the aid of an endobag without morcellation of solid 
areas, and frozen section.
General Principles
To distinguish benign from malignant lesions, cytology  testing 
of the peritoneal ﬂ uid is performed. The cytolgoy samples of 
peritoneal ﬂ uid are taken with a suction needle attached to 
a syringe at the start of the procedure when the peritoneal 
ﬂ uid is free from blood. If the peritoneal ﬂ uid is insufﬁ cient, 
washing is performed, that is, the pelvis and abdomen are 
irrigated with saline (Fig. 28).
Fig. 28
Intraperitoneal washing for cytology testing.
5.0  Guidelines for the Management
of Suspicious Adnexal Masses
5.1 Cytology Testing
General principles
Inspection of the abdominal and pelvic cavity (Fig. 29) to look 
for neoplastic lesions is completed with peritoneal biopsy 
of suspicious areas. When the peritoneal cavity appears 
normal (diaphragm, liver, intestine, omentum, peritoneum) 
random biopsies must be taken. On the other hand, if areas 
suspicious for malignant neoplastic lesions are detected (Fig. 
30), the diagnosis of ovarian carcinoma stage III can be made. 
The procedure is converted immediately to laparotomy. 
Technique in brief
The suspicious peritoneal area is grasped with forceps to 
obtain a sufﬁ cient amount for histological assessment. When 
this fold of tissue has been grasped, the peritoneal margin is 
incised. This gives access to the retroperitoneal space, which 
is dissected bluntly. Bleeding ceases spontan eously or can 
be controlled with bipolar coagulation.
5.2 Inspection of the Peritoneal Cavity
and Biopsy Sampling
Fig. 29
Inspection of the peritoneal cavity.
Fig. 30
Neoplastic lesions suspected for malignancy.
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecologic Laparoscopic Surgery
163
General Principles
In patients with ovarian tumors, even of low malignancy, 
extraction of the operative specimen can favor the dissemi-
nation of malignant cells, particularly implantation at the point 
of trocar insertion. To reduce this risk, endoscopic bags are 
used with the aim of protecting the abdominal wall (Fig. 31). 
During extraction of the specimen, morcellation to reduce 
the size of the solid tissue and facilitate the maneuver is not 
advisable because of the increased risk of dissemination of 
malignant cells. It follows that in the presence of suspicious 
adnexal masses with a diameter greater than about 7–8 cm, 
the laparoscopic approach is contra indicated. However, 
despite the use of these two precautions, cases of metastasis 
at the point of trocar insertion have been described (port-site 
recurrences, PSR).
Technique in brief
To introduce the endobag, the accessory trocar (6 mm) is 
removed, the accessory skin incision is extended to 10 mm 
and the bag cannula is introduced through the parietal port. 
After placing the extracted material in the bag, the edges of 
the endobag are pulled outside the wall and clamped with 
two Klemmer forceps. To allow passage of the bag with 
its  contents through the abdominal wall, it is sometimes 
necessary to aspirate the cyst contents.
Frozen Section
Frozen section has been reintroduced by laparoscopist to 
reduce the incidence of unnecessary conversions. 
However, frozen section diagnosis of ovarian tumors is 
difﬁ cult and has a false-negative rate of 5%, with the  majority 
due to inadequate sampling by the surgeon or  pathologist. 
Thus, in the presence of a laparoscopically suspicious 
ovarian lesion, frozen section should not be included in the 
criteria used for setting up the individual therapeutic  stra tegy, 
whether  conservative or ablative. In these cases, it is 
preferable to perform adnexectomy and thereby prevent the 
risk of  neoplastic dissemination because of a false-negative 
frozen section result. Young patients with an adnexal mass 
with a small solitary lesion are an exception; these can be 
biopsied.
On the other hand, biopsy with frozen section is essential in 
re-staging and avoids reoperation which is poorly acceptable 
for the patient.
Where frozen section is not available, any ovarian lesion 
suspected for malignancy at laparoscopy, must be removed 
intact by adnexectomy. The type of subsequent treatment will 
be decided after surgery.
5.3 Endobag
Fig. 31
Laparoscopic extraction bag.
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecologic Laparoscopic Surgery
164
operation theater 
Chapter XIV
Laparoscopic Management of 
Borderline Ovarian Tumors
Paulo Ayroza and Elizabet Abdalla
Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics,
Medical School of the Santa Casa University of
São Paulo, Brazil
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecologic Laparoscopic Surgery
166
Among all gynecologic diseases, the topic of ovarian 
tumors is perhaps one of the most controversial with regard 
to  diagnosis, classification, and treatment  modalities. 
Undoubtedly, this reflects the great significance of this 
disease among female patients. Whether benign or not, all 
ovarian tumors must be examined thoroughly.  Functional 
cysts may regress within months, whether or not any 
medication is used. On the other hand, nonfunctional tumors 
tend to persist and require an accurate workup. 
Since the advent of the laparoscopic technique many 
years ago, we have been able to identify benign cysts and 
subsequently treat them laparoscopically. Today, it is 
even possible to manage by laparoscopy some ovarian 
malignancies that required laparotomy until a few years back. 
Nevertheless, it is not at all unusual to ﬁ nd statements of 
authors in the literature advising against laparoscopic 
treatment of benign ovarian cysts such as endometriomas 
and dermoid cysts. 
There are numerous reports in the literature justifying the 
use of laparoscopy as a diagnostic and therapeutic tool for 
benign ovarian tumors. In the authors’ group, use a routine 
diagnostic protocol is used, which requires that all patients 
with ovarian tumors are submitted to clinical and laboratory 
work-up (clinical examination, transvaginal ultrasound, and 
serum marker levels), followed by laparoscopy.
1.0 Introduction
Fig. 1
Bilateral ovarian endometriotic cysts. 
Fig. 3
Large ovarian cyst and uterine myomas.
Fig. 4
Functional ovarian cyst.
Fig. 2
Ovarian endometriotic cyst.
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecologic Laparoscopic Surgery
167
During the laparoscopic procedure, we recommend that 
a strict protocol for the pelvic examination be observed 
to ensure the highest level of security. The laparoscopic 
appearance of ovarian cysts can be highly variable  depending 
on their nature (endometriosis, functional, teratoma, etc.), 
which is why visual inspection plays a vital role in establishing 
a deﬁ nitive diagnosis and differentiating between malignant 
or borderline lesions (Figs. 1–8).
Our routine use of this protocol over the past 15 years has 
resulted in a false-negative rate of 0.5%. This means, that 
in 99.5% of patients, the result of our clinical  investigation 
proved to be correct. The method of laparoscopic  visualization 
of ovarian cysts in conjunction with intraoperative histological 
examination has demonstrated to be effective in the  detection 
of all ovarian malignancies. 
Laparoscopic surgery has shown to be a safe and helpful 
modality for both ovarian cystectomy and oophorectomy 
or adnexectomy in that it provides all beneﬁ ts of mini mally 
invasive surgery while at the same time preserving patient 
safety and fertility.
Which steps should be taken when ovarian  malignancies 
or borderline tumors are detected is more controversial. 
The main question is whether these tumors may be treated 
laparoscopically. In this chapter, we will discuss only 
borderline ovarian tumors.
Fig. 5
Solid ovarian cyst.
Fig. 7
Surface proliferations of an ovarian borderline tumor.
Fig. 8
Surface proliferations of an ovarian borderline tumor.
Fig. 6
Bilateral ovarian teratoma. 
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecologic Laparoscopic Surgery
168
“Our goal is to perform laparoscopically a good oncologic 
procedure”
Paulo Ayroza Ribeiro
Borderline ovarian tumors are a subset of epithelial  ovarian 
tumors, which have a very favorable prognosis. The univer-
sally accepted treatment is surgical removal of the tumor 
and histological examination. However, the  postoperative 
management protocol is highly controversial. To date, 
no medical therapy has been shown to clearly improve 
outcomes. 
In 1929, Taylor ﬁ rst described a subset of ovarian tumors 
that he termed semi-malignant. Although these lesions had a 
more favorable prognosis than other ovarian cancers, it was 
not until the early 1970s that they were classiﬁ ed  separately 
as borderline tumors. 
One woman in 55 (1.8%) develops some form of ovarian 
cancer in her lifetime. Approximately 90% of these cancers 
are tumors of epithelial origin. If benign lesions are included, 
epithelial tumors account for 60% of all ovarian tumors.
Borderline tumors account for approximately 15% of all 
epithelial ovarian tumors. The mean age of occurrence is 
approximately 10 years below that of women with ovarian 
cancer of distinctly malignant nature. Predisposing factors 
believed to be associated with borderline tumors include oral 
contraceptive use, menarche, age at ﬁ rst pregnancy, age at 
ﬁ rst delivery, menstrual history, smoking and family history 
of ovarian cancer. None of these factors, however, has been 
shown to be statistically signiﬁ cant. 
Borderline ovarian cancer is staged according to the FIGO 
classiﬁ cation of ovarian cancer. Many clinicians combine 
stages II to IV when assessing prognosis. Another  common 
component of staging is the description of the type of 
implants as these have signiﬁ cant prognostic value.
2.0  Borderline Ovarian Tumors 
(Tumors of Low Malignant 
Potential)
Fig. 9
Ovarian borderline lesion. 
Fig. 10
Borderline tumor of cerebroid appearance.
Fig. 11
Multilobulated borderline ovarian cyst.
Fig. 12
Removal of a borderline tumor: coagulation of the mesovarium with 
a bipolar instrument.
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecologic Laparoscopic Surgery
169
Fig. 13
Removal of a borderline tumor: division of the mesovarium.
Fig. 16
Exposure and double ligature of the appendix before dividing it. 
Fig. 14
Removal of borderline tumor: transection of the round ligament and 
tube.
Fig. 15
Exposure of the appendix.
In contrast to epithelial ovarian carcinoma, its true malignant 
counterpart, borderline ovarian tumors are often detected at 
an early stage, and this is probably one of the factors that 
encourage the clinician to opt for conservative treatment 
and also to use laparoscopy as a therapeutic tool.
The etiology of the disease remains unclear because of the 
small number of cases and the lack of randomized controlled 
studies. The two major histologic tumor subtypes are serous 
and mucinous, with the serous subtype being more common. 
Other far less common tumors include clear cell and endo-
metrioid forms. Serous tumors are presumed to originate 
from the germinal epithelium. Mucinous tumors do not have a 
clearly deﬁ ned origin. Many authors consider that borderline 
tumors occupy an intermediate position between their benign 
and frankly malignant counterparts.
These tumors, like other ovarian tumors, are difficult to 
detect clinically until they are advanced in size or stage. The 
most common presenting symptoms are abdominal pain, 
abdominal distension and the presence of an abdomin al 
mass. Approximately 23% of patients are completely asymp-
tomatic.
Surgery is always indicated when a complex ovarian mass 
is discovered, except in special cases when the patient has 
clinical contraindications to surgery. Preoperative  diagnosis 
of borderline tumors is extremely rare, if not impossible, and 
they are nearly always believed to be benign or  malignant 
ovarian masses. The use of laparoscopy as an early  diagnostic 
tool is particularly re commended as it allows  differential 
diagnosis between benign, malignant and  borderline tumors 
(Figs. 9–11).
As mentioned above, preoperative diagnosis is very difﬁ cult, if 
not impossible. Measurement of certain parameters, such as 
cancer antigen 125 (CA125) is of little diagnostic value as they 
are not speciﬁ c for borderline tumors. Imaging studies using 
transvaginal color Doppler ultrasound have been suggested 
to assess the malignant potential of ovarian masses. The 
detection rate from intratumoral blood ﬂ ow characteristics in 
borderline tumors is similar to that of malignant neoplasms, 
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecologic Laparoscopic Surgery
170
Fig. 18
Removal of borderline tumor: extraction in plastic bag.
Fig. 19
Invasive peritoneal implants.
i.e. 90% and 92%, respectively. Doppler indices, such as the 
resistance (RI) and pulsatility indices (PI) are also signiﬁ cantly 
reduced in carcinoma and borderline ovarian tumors as 
compared to benign tumors. While useful in some  situations, 
this modality is not currently part of the standard work-up. 
In terms of speciﬁ ty and sensitivity its diagnostic value is not 
sufﬁ cient, i.e., it cannot be recommended as a screening 
tool in the normal patient population. CT  scanning and MRI 
studies may be also useful in the pre-operative work-up.
As with other malignant neoplasms, staging is performed 
surgically. Many sources recommend complete staging 
if a borderline tumor is found. Current guidelines include 
biopsy specimens of the pelvic peritoneum  (pouch of Doug-
las,  pelvic wall and bladder peritoneum) and  abdominal 
peritoneum (paracolic gutters and diaphragmatic  surfaces). 
Some authors also suggest biopsy of the omentum,  intestinal 
serosa and mesentery, and retroperitoneal lymph nodes 
(pelvic and para-aortic).
The histologic appearance of borderline tumors is quite 
complex because it is not always easy to differentiate them 
from benign lesions. The number of cell layers, percentage of 
mitoses and nuclear atypia are the criteria which are used to 
deﬁ ne these tumors. 
Approximately 25% of borderline tumors have cell 
proliferations on the outer surface of the lesion, with no 
evidence of growth from the inner surface. Of these, 
approximately 90% develop peritoneal implants. Only 
4% of cases with peritoneal implants do not have surface 
proliferation.  Peritoneal implants are described as invasive or 
noninvasive.  Noninvasive implants are glandular or papillary 
proliferations with cell detachments.
As regards surgical treatment, complete excision of the lesion 
must be achieved if at all possible. Secondary procedures, 
such as appendectomy, can be performed at the same 
surgery (Figs. 12–19). Comprehensive staging, as described 
above, should be a part of every operation of this type. Even 
though the stage may or may not affect future treatment, it 
is of signiﬁ cant prognostic value and, therefore, is of high 
relevance for both clinician and patient. In 77% of patients 
with invasive peritoneal implants, noninvasive implants 
are also found. Surgical excision and full staging decrease 
the risk of biopsy error, which could result in an inaccurate 
diagnosis and prognosis. Some authors have concluded that 
fertility-preserving surgery can be offered to patients with 
stage IA disease with serous or mucinous tumors.
The optimal treatment of early-stage borderline  ovarian tumors 
is controversial. Only a few randomized trials  evaluating 
adjuvant treatment for this disease have been  published. A 
Norwegian study concluded that stage I  borderline tumors 
should not receive any adjuvant treatment. 
Surgical laparoscopy can be used in cases where the tumor 
is limited to the ovary without any sign of  dissemination. 
In the past, various authors maintained that laparoscopic 
management of borderline ovarian tumors should be reserved 
for early-stage disease but that this was associated with a 
high risk of recurrence, especially due to an increased rate 
of cyst rupture with possible dissemination of potentially 
neoplastic cells.
Fig. 17
Removal of borderline tumor: the operating ﬁ eld at the end of the 
surgery.
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecologic Laparoscopic Surgery
171
In a recent study, a French group stated that conservative 
treatment and cyst rupture occurred more frequently in the 
laparoscopy group than in the laparotomy groups.  Staging 
was incomplete more often in the laparoscopy group than 
in the laparoconversion and laparotomy groups. They 
 concluded that the laparoscopic management of borderline 
ovarian tumors is associated with a higher rate of cyst  rupture 
and incomplete staging. It is known that recurrence is more 
frequent after conservative treatment or incomplete initial 
staging, whatever the surgical approach.
This study emphasizes the importance of FIGO staging in 
borderline tumors. The majority of laparoscopic surgeons 
are more conservative by nature and have a background 
in  infertility, and this may have a negative inﬂ uence on the 
 quality and radicality of surgery. In the case of borderline 
tumors, the surgeon must combine accurate knowledge of 
oncologic aspects with the reproductive concepts of fertility 
preservation. Bearing this in mind, it will be possible to offer 
all the beneﬁ ts of laparoscopic surgery even in the area of 
oncology.
As stated by our authors, surgeons still can provide repro-
ductive surgery solutions for these patients. Conservative 
laparoscopic management of borderline ovarian tumors is 
a potentially safe alternative for young women who want 
to retain their fertility potential. Fertility and pregnancy 
 outcomes remain excellent in these women. Preliminary data 
 suggest, that the recurrence rate following pregnancy was 
not  inﬂ uenced by this approach.
An important contribution to this topic was also offered by an 
Italian group suggesting that the laparoscopic management 
of borderline ovarian tumors should be reserved for masses 
not greater than 5 cm. When conservative therapy is desired, 
they recommend removal of the entire affected ovary. 
 Furthermore, they suggest that if the neoplasia is bilateral, 
cystectomy could be allowed in women who wish to preserve 
fertility, although they are at high risk of recurrence.
One of the most important complications of laparoscopic 
 surgery in oncologic situations is port-site metastasis. In 
a recent study, the authors concluded that unlike port-site 
metastasis in other gynecologic malignancies, the prognos is 
in patients with a port-site implant after laparoscopic 
 management of borderline ovarian tumors is excellent. The 
treatment of this complication is surgical resection.
It is important to emphasize that independent of the 
 technique employed in these cases, suspicious ovarian cysts 
should never be punctured. Extreme care must be taken to 
remove the tumor without any rupture. In these situations we 
 recommend the use of plastic extraction bags when  removing 
the cysts to prevent any spillage into the peritoneal  cavity 
or port site. Furthermore, in some instances, we  perform 
 enucleation of the entire tumor inside the bag.
Some groups maintain that conservative surgery remains a 
therapeutic option in selected patients with borderline ovarian 
tumors. Even if the rate of new lesions/recurrence is relatively 
high with laparoscopy, especially in patients treated with 
 simple ovarian cystectomy, mortality from cancer remains 
low. Many patients are able to conceive and carry a normal 
pregnancy to term after conservative surgery.
In most instances, laparoscopic surgery is curative for 
patients with stage I disease. If the tumor is unilateral and 
there is still some healthy ovarian tissue, unilateral  cystectomy 
can be performed with preservation of the healthy part of 
the ovary; however, inspection of the cyst capsule for signs 
of rupture should be performed before resection. If it is not 
feasible to preserve healthy ovarian tissue, oophorectomy or 
salpingo-oophorectomy should be performed.
Because of the possible association between borderline 
 ovarian tumors and peritoneal implants, the peritoneum 
should be explored carefully. Peritoneal assessment must 
be must be performed with great care. Any suspicious 
 peritoneal lesion detected at laparoscopy, should be  biopsied 
for  histology (invasive or noninvasive) and then removed 
 surgically. The histological type is of signiﬁ cant prognostic 
value.
Most of the complications of this disease are caused by the 
operation itself, adjunctive therapy and by recurrence. 
From the results in the literature, it is apparent that it is 
 difﬁ cult to give an accurate prognosis for an individual patient 
without full surgical staging. In one study of stage I disease, 
all  recurrences occurred in patients who were inadequately 
staged. Many, if not all, of these patients probably did not 
actually have stage I disease.
Pathologic diagnosis is difﬁ cult to conﬁ rm by frozen  section. 
Borderline tumors are correctly diagnosed by frozen 
 section in 58–86% of cases, depending on the experience 
of the  pathologist. In one very large study, frozen section 
 indicated probable malignancy in 94% of cases subsequently 
 diagnosed as borderline tumors. Thus, the proper operation 
and staging procedures should have been performed during 
the initial surgery in most cases, even though diagnosis by 
frozen section was not completely accurate.
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecologic Laparoscopic Surgery
172
1. ATALLAH D, MORICE P, CAMATTE S, et al: Place et 
résultats de l’examen extemporané dans la stratégie 
chirurgicale des tumeurs épithéliales malignes et à la 
limite de la malignité de l’ovaire. Gynecol Obstet Fertil 
2004;  32 651-6, 2004
2. CHARLES L, ALGARA A, RAMÍREZ P, FLORES C: 
Manejo Laparoscopico del Tumor Ovarico Limitrofe 
(Borderline). Analisis de la Literatura y Presentacion 
de un Caso. Ginecol Obstret Mex 2001; 69: 355-358 
3. DARAI E, TEBOUL J, FAUCONNIER A, SCOAZEC JY, 
et al: Management and outcome of borderline
ovarian tumors incidentally discovered at or after 
laparo scopy. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 1998; 
77: 451-7
4. 
FAUVET R, BOCCARA J, DUFOURNET C, PONCELET C, 
et al.: Laparoscopic management of borderline
ovarian tumors: results of a French multicenter study.
Ann Oncol 2005; 16: 403-10
5. GREEN AE, SOGOR L: Borderline Ovarian Tumor
e-medicine.com
6. KOERN J, TROPE CG, ABELER VM: A retrospective 
study of 370 borderline tumors of the ovary treated at 
the Norwegian Radium Hospital from 1970 to 1982. 
Cancer 1993; 71: 1810-1820
7. MANEO A, VIGNALI M, CHIARI S, COLOMBO A, et al: 
Are borderline tumors of the ovary safely treated by 
laparoscopy? Gynecol Oncol 2004; 94: 387-92 
8. MORICE P, CAMATTE S, LARREGAIN-FOURNIER D, 
THOURY A, et al: Port-Site implantation after
laparoscopic treatment of borderline ovarian tumors. 
Obstet & Gynecol 2004; 104: 1167-1170 
9. MORRIS RT, GERSHENSON DM, SILVA EG, FOLLEN 
M, et al: Outcome and reproductive function after 
conservative surgery for borderline ovarian tumors. 
Obstet & Gynecol 2000; 95: 541-547
10. TROPE C, KAERN J, VERGOTE IB, et al.
Are borderline tumors of the ovary overtreated both 
surgically and systematically? A review of four
prospective randomized trials including 253 patients 
with borderline tumors. Gynecol Oncol 1993; 51:
236-243, 
11. SERACCHIOLI R, VENTUROLI S, COLOMBO FM, 
GOVONI F, et al: Fertility and tumor recurrence rate 
after conservative laparoscopic management of 
young women with early-stage borderline ovarian 
tumors. Fertil Steril 2001; 76: 999-1004
Recommended Reading
operation theater 
Chapter XV
Laparoscopic Hysterectomy
Arnaud Wattiez
Strasbourg University Hospital
Strasbourg, France
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
174
Hysterectomy is currently the most frequently practised 
 surgery not related to pregnancy in women. In the United 
States alone about 600,000 operations are carried out per 
year. 
Historically, the ﬁ rst surgical approach for hysterectomy was 
abdominal, carried out in 1843 by Charles Clay in Manchester, 
England. The alternative to the abdominal route has always 
been the vaginal route: the ﬁ rst vaginal hysterectomy was 
reported by Soranus of Ephesus in 120 BC. Apart from this 
historical curiosity, the vaginal approach has certainly always 
been the route of choice, if possible with abdominal hysterec-
tomy being the alternative when the vaginal approach proves 
not feasible. 
This surgical approach remained unchanged until 1988 when 
Harry Reich, in Kingston, carried out the ﬁ rst laparoscopic 
hysterectomy. The ﬁ rst procedure described was laparos-
copic assisted vaginal hysterectomy (LAVH), followed by 
supracervical laparoscopic subtotal hysterectomy (SLH) and 
ﬁ nally total laparoscopic hysterectomy (TLH). Over recent 
years various types of instruments have been produced to 
facilitate TLH, in particular the uterine manipulator, which we 
introduced in 1995.
Today, there are many indications for laparoscopic hysterec-
tomy. In benign conditions, it has major advantages, for 
example in uterine fibromatosis and in the treatment of 
genital prolapse, as the ﬁ rst stage of promontory ﬁ xation. 
Malignant conditions now also beneﬁ t from the laparoscopic 
approach, particularly endometrial cancer and, in the hands 
of an  experienced surgeon, cancer of the uterine cervix. 
Nevertheless, even today in the United States, only 10–15% 
of hysterectomies are carried out by laparoscopy, and 
most are only laparoscopic-assisted vaginal hysterec tomies 
(LAVH). The ACOG (American College of Obstetrics and 
Gynecology) indications state that, in order to choose the 
approach, the anatomy of the patient and the surgeon’s 
experience of the  different techniques must be  considered. 
Indeed, most  surgeons still prefer the laparoscopic-assisted 
approach to a totally laparoscopic technique. However, 
there has been a significant increase in the numbers of 
laparoscopic hysterectomies over the past ten years; in the 
United States the  percentage was 0.3% in 1990 and 9.9% 
in 1997. Some authors report a high rate of complications 
during laparoscopic  hysterectomy: 5.8%–11.5% for all 
 complications taken together and a rate of 2.2%–2.7% for 
major  complications. These statistics have led certain schools 
of surgery to limit strictly the indication for the laparoscopic 
approach in hysterec tomy. The ﬁ gures are often distorted by 
incorrectly selecting patients who are obese or have a large 
uterus; moreover, the experience of the surgeon is of funda-
mental importance, particularly during the learning period. 
More recent studies have shown that after a period of  training 
of about thirty hysterectomies, the rate of complications 
is equivalent to that using other approaches. The  average 
 duration of surgery is also comparable to that required for the 
vaginal route in the hands of an expert  surgeon.
It is true to say, that nowadays there is no major contra-
indication to the laparoscopic approach in hysterectomy, 
not even the dimensions of the uterus; indeed, provided 
proper application of the technique, successful laparoscopic 
hysterec tomy of a very bulky uterus is possible using different 
types of morcellators and laparoscopic instruments.
A surgeon’s lack of experience and dexterity  nevertheless 
remain relative contraindications. It is evident, that  choosing 
the laparoscopic approach depends on the surgeon’s 
 experience and the level of difficulty of each individual 
case. Finally, it is incorrect to unduly extend the length of 
the  procedure, thus exposing the patient to excessively 
 prolonged anesthesia.
The only absolute contraindication is the size of the uterus in 
the case of endometrial carcinoma, as it is essential to remove 
the uterus intact in the presence of neoplasia.  However, this 
is of fairly rare occurence since endometrial carcinoma is 
mostly found in a uterus of normal dimensions. 
Finally, if general anesthesia is absolutely contraindicated, the 
vaginal route may be proposed as a suitable alternative. 
1.0 Introduction
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
175
Both arms are arranged alongside the body; this avoids the 
risk of brachial plexus injury due to the position of the  surgeon 
or assistant. The right arm must be well protected. The use 
of shoulder braces is advisable especially if an extreme 
Trendelenburg position is required. 
A bladder catheter should be in place throughout the proce-
dure.
The patient is placed at the edge of the table (ideally, the soft 
perineal parts will be off the table and the patient will lie on it 
only from the tip of the coccyx); this position is very  important 
since it facilitates manipulation of the uterus and, conse-
quently, exposure of the tissues.
Each leg will be semiﬂ exed to free a conical manipulation 
area. 
The operating ﬁ elds are disinfected and adequately draped 
for both a vaginal and abdominal approach, allowing the 
surgeon to perform uterine manipulations under strict aseptic 
conditions.
The surgeon is on the patient’s left; he/she operates with both 
hands and should stand upright with both elbows close to the 
body, the line of sight passing between both hands.
The ﬁ rst assistant will be to the right; he/she holds the  camera 
with the non-dominant hand and operates the instrument 
positioned in the pelvic port.
The second assistant will be positioned between the patient’s 
legs; his/her function is to assist in exposing the  operating 
field to the surgeon. He/she should be seated to avoid 
impeding the surgeon’s view and to ensure effective presen-
tation. 
A scrub nurse will be particularly useful when sutures are 
being placed; she is positioned on the surgeon’s left.
The table, ﬁ tted with stirrups, should be lowered as far as 
possible to allow the surgeon to adopt a correct ergonomic 
angle for his arms. One video screen should be positioned by 
the patient’s right foot for the surgeon and another  screen by 
the patient’s left foot for the ﬁ rst assistant.
2.0 Operating Room Setup
2.1 The Patient
2.2 The Surgical Team
The choice of trocars and their placement depends on the 
technique used, the size of the uterus, cost and availability.
Once the patient is anesthetized, the surgeon conducts a 
clinical examination. Vaginal inspection allows the size of the 
uterus to be determined. This inﬂ uences the position of the 
trocars. At the same time uterine mobility is assessed.
The distance betwenn umbilicus and symphysis pubis must 
measure at least 30 cm. If this distance is shorter or if the 
uterus is large, the central operating trocar will be inserted 
through the umbilical port and an 11 mm-trocar will be placed 
in the midline between the xiphoid process and the umbilicus 
for the laparoscope.
The primary trocar is usually inserted through the  umbilical 
port. Once the laparoscope with coupled video camera 
has been passed through this port, the operating surgeon 
visual ly determines the size of the uterus and conﬁ rms uterine 
mobility by use of the manipulator. Access to the adnexa and 
the pouch of Douglas is also assessed. The upper quadrants 
of the abdominal cavity should be systematically explored. 
Next, the lateral accessory ports are placed. Special attention 
must be paid to the following anatomical landmarks:
O the epigastric pedicle: a branch of the iliac pedicle, 
emanat ing from the parietal surface at the level of the deep 
inguinal ring. It continues upwards on the deep surface of 
the rectus abdominis muscle. At the level of the umbilicus, 
it penetrates deep into the muscle and anastomoses with 
the internal mammary artery. In most cases, this artery is 
clearly set off against the contour of the umbilical artery;
O the lateral edge of the rectus abdominis muscle: this 
border is essential, because the port must be placed 
outside the muscle;
O the area of the oblique muscles: a triangular-shaped area 
beyond the lateral edge of the rectus abdominis muscle. 
The thickness in this area is reduced, with only a few 
muscle ﬁ bres;
O the anterior superior iliac spine situated about 3 cm 
outside the oblique muscle area.
The lateral accessory ports are placed in the centre of 
the oblique muscle area. These two trocars are 6 mm in 
dia meter. We prefer to use lightweight plastic disposable 
trocars. They have the advantage of remaining straight in 
the abdominal wall, facilitating single-handed insertion of 
operating instruments. The trocar valve allows sutures to be 
placed with a minimum of gas loss. At this point, the use of 
a high ﬂ ow insufﬂ ation unit (20–30 L/min.; e.g., KARL STORZ 
THERMOFLATOR®) is especially recommended to maintain 
clear vision even in the case of gas loss (vaginal opening and 
sutures).
Once the lateral ports are in place, the third accessory port 
is created. This port does not need to be placed below 
3.0 Hysterectomy Technique
3.1 Positioning the Trocars
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
176
The role of the uterine manipulator must be completely under-
stood in the particular context of laparoscopic surgery. In 
laparoscopy the access routes are limited and therefore each 
time an operator handles an instrument to expose tissues an 
access route is lost. Correct use of the uterine manipulator 
allows tissues to be well exposed, thus leaving the operating 
trocars free during the procedure.
In detail the manipulator permits:
O mobilization of the uterus (pulsion, lateral movements, 
anteversion, retroversion, on-axis rotation);
O good visualization of the vaginal fornices (allowing their 
identiﬁ cation while keeping the ureter clear);
O sealing of the pelvic aperture while opening the vagina;
O possible help in morcellating a large uterus at the end of 
the procedure;
O visualization of the vaginal cuff and sealing to facilitate 
vaginal closure.
The uterine manipulator plays an even more essential role 
when the hysterectomy is difﬁ cult. This may be the case with 
a large uterus, when correct use of the uterine mani pulator 
will allow the procedure to be carried out with the best tissue 
exposure and a signiﬁ cant reduction in surgical risks.
Various uterine manipulators are available. We use a manipu-
lator with a threaded distal tip which is “screwed” into the 
uterus. The threaded tip is chosen depending on the size 
of the uterus. Non-threaded tips are used in the case of 
malignant disease and these are simply advanced into the 
uterus.
The distal tip of the manipulator insert can be deflected 
at varying angles (0° to 90° relative to the main axis of the 
device); deﬂ ection is controlled with the main handle. 
Inserting the manipulator into the uterus requires cervical 
dilatation up to bougie no. 9. The device is locked into the 
zero position and the manipulator insert is screwed in as far 
as the anatomical base guard. The anatomical base itself can 
be inserted into the cervical os, elevating the axis of ﬂ exion as 
far as the interior of the cervix. 
The second component of the manipulator is the  manipulator 
rod. For good visualization of the fornices the insert can be 
rotated through 360° exposing the whole circumference of 
the vagina. As it is made from a non-conductive material, it 
can be exposed to unipolar current without risk of an  electric 
arc. The manipulator insert is available in various lengths and 
widths ﬁ tting all kinds of vaginal shapes. The lockable handle 
at the proximal end of the longitudinal axis allows the mani-
pulator insert to be controlled precisely. The position of the 
proximal manipulator rod matches with the distal  orientation 
of the insert. In this way, the assistant maintains constant 
visual control of the position of the manipulator insert. The 
combination of active deﬂ ection of the manipulator tip and 
on-axis rotation via the manipulator rod helps in reducing 
iatrogenic injuries to the ureter during laparoscopic hysterec-
tomies.
Finally, the device has a sealing system consisting of 3 soft 
plastic discs; this has the advantage of not obstructing 
the vagina during ﬁ nal manipulations facilitating posterior 
opening of the vagina.
3.2 The Uterine Manipulator
The surgeon, located to the left of the patient, controls the 
instruments introduced through the central and left  operating 
ports. The ﬁ rst assistant located to the right controls the 
camera and the instrument placed in the right trocar. The 
second assistant situated between the legs of the patient 
is seated and mobilizes the uterus by operating the uterine 
manipulator.
The surgeon usually begins the procedure by inserting  bipolar 
forceps into the left trocar and scissors into the central  trocar. 
The scissors can be connected to the uni polar  electrosurgical 
unit. It is advisable to use grasping bipolar forceps which 
permit to combine as many functions as possible in the same 
instrument. The operating surgeon thus has various  functional 
options available to his two hands: on the left, manipulation, 
grasping and electrocoagulation; on the right, dissection, 
mechanical dissection and electrocoagulation.
The assistant inserts forceps, usually atraumatic forceps, in 
the right trocar.
3.3 The Role of the Operating Team
the horizontal line between the two lateral ports. Ideally, it 
should be slightly higher than this line giving the surgeon a 
more ergonomic working position and a greater variety of 
working angles for use of operating instruments. The distance 
between the operating trocar and the camera trocar must be 
as great as possible and should never be less than 8 cm. 
If the uterus is bulky or if the distance between the umbilicus 
and the pubis symphysis is short, the umbilical port is used 
for the operating instruments, and another port is placed 
superiorly. 
One ergonomic criterion that must be observed during 
laparoscopy is bringing together the eye-instrument axis; 
consequently, the size of the uterus becomes relatively less 
important during the procedure. In fact, if the ports are placed 
at a higher level and the operating ﬁ eld is limited during the 
different stages of the procedure, the laparoscopic technique 
may also be applied easily even in the case of a very large 
uterus.
The diameter of the central port varies depending on the 
technique applied. A 6 mm trocar is sufﬁ cient for techniques 
using solely electrosurgical coagulation and sutures. 
The use of atraumatic forceps, mechanical suturing devices 
or 10 mm-clip applicators requires the use of a 10/12 mm 
trocar. In this case, the umbilical entry site for the central 
trocar is advisable.
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
177
The ﬁ rst part of the procedure is the same for  hysterectomy 
both with and without adnexectomy. It consists of 
coagulation and division of the round ligaments, followed 
by  opening of the vesicouterine space with dissection of the 
bladder.
The second assistant mobilizes the uterus to the right  without 
anteﬂ exion, applying a well-measured thrust. The surgeon 
grasps the left round ligament at its origin anterolateral to 
the uterus and exerts traction to the right and upwards. This 
reveals a triangle bordered by the round ligament at the top, 
iliac vessels laterally, and adnexal vein medially. By placing 
the round ligament under tension, the center of this triangle 
3.4 The Round Ligaments
Fig. 1
Transection of the round ligament.
Fig. 2
Transection of the round ligament after bipolar coagulation.
Fig. 3
A fenestration is created in the leaf of the broad ligament. 
was exposed, made up of the juxtaposition of two  anterior 
and posterior peritoneal layers of the broad ligament. This 
area appears grey owing to the presence of CO2 and an 
empty space under the posterior leaf of the broad  ligament. 
The surgeon should coagulate the round ligament at the 
center of this triangle. In this way, the surgeon keeps a safe 
distance from the adnexal vein and limits the risks of  bleeding. 
The round ligament is divided in the midline by intermittent 
coagulation and section. It should be noted that an arteriole 
is sometimes present behind the ligament, and this must be 
carefully coagulated (Figs. 1–3).
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
178
Once the round ligament has been transected, the access to 
the vesicouterine space is open.
The ﬁ rst assistant now directs traction downwards to  provide 
a clear view and access to this space. The surgeon should 
then divide the vesicouterine peritoneum by simple  traction. 
He introduces his two instruments into the  prevesical 
space taking care to remain in contact with the peritoneum 
above; then, separating the instruments, he opens the 
space  progressing downwards and inwards. The  peritoneal 
capillaries are gradually coagulated. The peritoneum is 
divided using cold scissors or by coagulation and cutting in 
one step if the scissors are connected to the unipolar electro-
surgical unit. This dissection should stop about 1 cm from 
the midline.
At this point the second assistant moves the uterus towards 
the surgeon, while the first assistant grasps the round 
ligament as close as possible to the wall. Traction to this 
ligament applied outwards and upwards creates the triangle 
described above.
The same technique is employed to reach about 1 cm from 
the midline. At this point the uterus is pushed upwards 
and slightly retroverted while the ﬁ rst assistant grasps the 
prevesical peritoneum in the midline. It is grasped 1 cm 
below the junction of the peritoneum and the uterine serosa. 
It must be divided in a plane strictly perpendicular to the 
uterus while the latter is pushed ﬁ rmly upwards to avoid any 
iatrogenic visceral injury. Ideally, the bipolar forceps, resting 
on the  uterine isthmus, grasps the peritoneal falx and it is 
then divided with scissors in the same plane as far as the 
isthmus.
This action together with the momentum applied to the 
uterus automatically reveals the plane of vesicovaginal 
dissection once the incision has been made. When this plane 
is reached, blunt dissection of the bladder is carried down-
wards. The two internal bladder pillars are put under tension 
by upward traction on the bladder and are coagulated and 
dissected. 
This space must be dissected carefully especially in the case 
of previous surgery, in particular previous cesarean section. 
In these cases the ﬁ rst assistant must elevate the  prevesical 
peritoneum well while the second assistant pushes the 
uterus. The surgeon must create a plane which is strictly 
3.5 Dissection of the Vesicouterine Pouch
Fig. 4
Identiﬁ cation of the vesicouterine fold.
Fig. 6
Complete division of the vesicouterine peritoneum.
Fig. 7
Identiﬁ cation of the vesical pillars.
Fig. 5
The vesicouterine fold is elevated prior to being incised. 
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
179
perpendicular to the uterus. During dissection of the left 
vesicouterine peritoneum, care must be taken as the 
surgeon, on the patient’s left, has a tendency to dissect the 
peritoneum too close to the bladder. To prevent this error, 
the uterus must be well centred and pushed slightly down-
wards by the second assistant (Figs. 4–7).
The surgeon now fenestrates the broad ligaments on the 
right and left. The uterus is again elevated and mobilized to 
the right, putting the left adnexa under tension. The surgeon 
carefully coagulates the capillaries of the broad ligament to 
separate the posterior leaf of the broad ligament. This should 
appear grey, indicating that the intestine is not interposed 
behind it. The peritoneal leaf is opened by blunt dissection or 
is divided. Once the opening has been made, the surgeon’s 
two instruments are introduced into the fene stration which is 
enlarged by divergent traction.
3.6 Fenestration of the Broad Ligaments
Hysterectomy without Adnexectomy
The opening is extended towards the uterosacral ligaments. 
In a total hysterectomy, it is extended towards the suspen-
sory ligament of the ovary. Indeed, once the fenestration has 
been created, the ureter is found on the external side of the 
window (against the wall). Whatever technique is chosen to 
detach the adnexa or the suspensory ovarian ligament, the 
ureter is not endangered. 
In a hysterectomy without adnexectomy, the adnexa may be 
coagulated and divided where it merges with the uterus by a 
succession of bipolar coagulations followed by division. For 
effective coagulation, it is preferable to set the power at 35 
watts and to increase exposure time. 
In hysterectomy without adnexectomy linear cutting staplers 
are most appropriate. In this case, a blue cartridge should 
be used (closed staple size equal to 1.5 mm). The stapler is 
best introduced via a 12 mm trocar situated in a high central 
position. As a general rule, a single cartridge is sufﬁ cient for 
the adnexal transection. Often a residual peritoneal adhesion 
must be lysed to complete the transection.
Today other instruments are also available which  coagulate 
and cut simultaneously, either using ultrasound or 
radiofrequency. They can be helpful, especially in difﬁ cult 
hysterectomies, but using the bipolar modality is still the 
classic  technique of choice.
Hysterectomy with Adnexectomy
The ﬁ rst assistant should grasp the ovary and put the suspen-
sory ligament of the ovary under traction. The surgeon then 
coagulates and divides the ligament close to the ovary. Once 
the vascular pedicle has been divided and before  completing 
division of the ligament, the traction is slightly reduced and 
any hemostasis completed. Once division is complete and 
the ligament has retracted, absolute hemostasis must be 
conﬁ rmed. 
Adequate venous hemostasis must always be secured to 
order to avoid problems related to impeded vision, which can 
lengthen the duration of surgery.
3.7 Treatment of the Adnexae
Once the problem of the adnexa has been resolved, the 
uterine vascular pedicles are dissected. The objective is to 
produce an anatomical situation which separates the  ureter 
from the pedicle of the uterine artery. The ﬁ rst step is  posterior 
dissection. The uterus is ﬁ rst pushed upwards and to the 
right. The ﬁ rst assistant grasps the stump of the left round 
ligament and applies traction to it which is directed inwards. 
In a total hysterectomy it may be preferable to apply traction 
to the adnexa. The surgeon applies traction to the posterior 
peritoneum by introducing the bipolar forceps between the 
posterior peritoneum and the base of the parametrium. The 
forceps moves in contact with the peritoneum towards the 
left cardinal and uterosacral ligaments. The peritoneum is 
separated by back-and-forth movements, releasing the parts 
of the parametrium which are moved clear. The peritoneum is 
then coagulated and divided.
Progression continues towards the uterosacral ligament. 
In the process the cardinal ligament is coagulated and cut, 
releasing the arch of the uterine artery which is isolated. The 
uterosacral ligament is sectioned in its turn. This step can 
be made easier by anteﬂ exion of the uterus. The situation is 
then as follows: the uterine arteries can be seen with behind 
them the vaginal fornix freed from the cardinal ligament.
The surgeon then moves to the front of the uterine pedicle. 
The uterus is slightly retroverted and pushed ﬁ rmly upwards. 
Starting from the internal pillar of the bladder, all the tissue in 
front of the uterine pedicle is coagulated and divided.
At the end of this procedure the uterine pedicle stands out on 
the lateral surface of the uterine isthmus, between the  vaginal 
fornices to the front and rear. The dissection is complete 
apart from the pedicle and the ureter is clearly visible.
The same technique is used on the opposite side. The uterus 
is moved to the left and the ﬁ rst assistant pulls the uterus 
towards the left via the stump of the round ligament. On this 
side, the angle of approach of the surgeon‘s instruments is 
often inadequate and, consequently, a risk of injury to the 
ureter can arise. To avoid this risk, the arrangement of instru-
ments has to be changed: the bipolar forceps is given to the 
ﬁ rst assistant, the scissors are in the center and the forceps 
is moved to the left. The surgeon puts traction on the uterus 
via the stump of the right round ligament and the assistant 
carries out the same dissection as that carried out by the 
surgeon on the left. The surgeon retains control of the pedal.
3.8 Treatment of the Uterine Artery
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
180
Fig. 9
Identiﬁ cation by careful dissection of the site where the uterine 
artery crosses the ureter.
Fig. 11
Identiﬁ cation of the uterine artery and hemostatic suture.
Fig. 8
Anatomic view of the uterine artery and relations with the ureter.
Fig. 10
Identiﬁ cation of the relations between the ureter and uterine artery. 
In this way, the right and left uterine pedicles are treated. At 
the end of this step the ureters are at least 4 cm away from 
the ascending branch of the uterine artery where hemostasis 
will occur.
The uterine artery and vein can be dealt with using various 
techniques. The ﬁ rst hysterectomies were carried out using 
bipolar coagulation for the uterine vessels. The large number 
of cases treated successfully has demonstrated the efﬁ cacy 
of this technique. The only risk is electrical tissue damage 
extending to the ureter.
The rules to be observed to avoid injuries of the ureter are:
O issection as previously described so that the uterine  vessels 
are dissected clear in front, to the sides and behind;
O coagulation should be applied only to the ascending branch 
of the uterine artery;
O the time of exposure to coagulation should be as brief as 
possible. Short repeated coagulation is preferable to long 
sustained coagulation;
O since coagulation makes the tissue resistant to the passage 
of current, this tissue should be resected and  coagulation 
carried out again on non-coagulated tissue.
Technically, the assistant draws the uterus towards the right 
by means of the left arterial pedicle while the  manipulator is 
pushed ﬁ rmly upwards and to the right. Using the  bipolar 
forceps in the left lateral trocar, the surgeon grasps the 
mass of the uterine pedicle at the level of the ascending 
branch. After global coagulation, the surgeon concentrates 
on the superﬁ cial layers which are then incised using  little 
scissor cuts. The pedicle is thus incised gradually. This 
produces  perfect coagulation of the veins of the periarterial 
uterine plexus and the artery is more easily seen and in turn 
coagulated and transected.
Once the artery has been divided, the surgeon should 
continue with dissection in front and behind to lower the 
pedicle beyond the boundary of the vaginal fornix. This is 
thus a true interfascial hysterectomy. During this step the last 
parts of the cardinal ligament are coagulated and divided.
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
181
The same procedure is used for the right pedicle. For the 
safety of the ureter it is important that the assistant uses the 
bipolar forceps. He can approach the pedicle perpendicular 
to the ascending portion and thus decrease the risk of injury 
to the ureter. Naturally, the surgeon retains control of the 
pedal.
The uterine pedicles may also be dealt with using  ligatures 
or clips. Ligatures have the advantage of not requiring 
complete dissection of the artery. Once the dissection of 
the pedicle has been completed as described above, a
0 Vicryl suture attached to a curved 30 mm needle is passed 
through. It is simpler to pass from front to back of the pedicle 
on the left and from back to front on the right. The needle 
should penetrate from the dissected vaginal angle at the front 
and emerge in the posterior angle to avoid loading too much 
vagina behind the vessels. This would involve a risk of cutting 
the suture during subsequent interfascial dissection.
Figs. 15–16
Coagulation with bipolar forceps is an optimal alternative for
occluding the uterine artery. 
15
Fig. 12
Skeletonization of the uterine artery and extracorporeal laparoscopic 
suture.
Fig. 13
The suture is applied to the vascular pedicle.
Fig. 14
Laparoscopic suture is preferable to bipolar coagulation if the 
uterine artery cannot be skeletonized perfectly. 
16
operation theater 
182
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
At this point in the operation the uterus is no longer 
vascularised and becomes pale. The uterine manipulator rod, 
which is turned through 360°, shows that the uterine pedicles 
have been dissected lower than the vaginal fornices.
The sealing ceramic cylinder of the manipulator is advanced 
into the vagina, after being lubricated with gel or vaseline oil. 
The three silicone seals that can be mounted to the  cylinder 
should be inside the vagina. The surgeon must open the 
vagina through 360°. The more the vagina is open the more 
the second assistant loses control of the uterus with the 
manipulator. 
Usually the incision is started from the anterior vaginal wall. 
At the start the surgeon is equipped with the bipolar  forceps 
on the left and disposable scissors in the centre. For the 
incision the scissors are connected to the monopolar  current. 
The ﬁ rst assistant uses a suction cannula to aspirate blood 
and evacuate the smoke generated by the high frequency 
current. The second assistant manipulates the uterus using 
the rod to expose the various parts of the vagina to the 
surgeon for division.
He does this by rotating the rod in the same direction as the 
division. It is important that the rod should be rotated before 
3.9 Opening and Division of the Vagina
Fig. 18
Dividing the vagina with the high frequency unipolar electrode.
Fig. 19
The incision follows the porcelain margin of the uterine manipulator.  
In this case intracorporeal sutures seem to be contra indicated
and it is preferable to use extracorporeal sutures, either 
half-hitches or Roeder knots. However, after cutting and 
isolating the uterine pedicle it is sometimes necessary to 
place a second ligature using an endoloop.
The use of sutures for the uterine pedicles seems to be 
particularly indicated in the case of a bulky uterus both for 
controlling hemostasis better and for reducing the risk of 
injury to the ureter, which is a major risk when the uterus is 
very large.
The use of clips requires dissection of the whole surface of 
the artery. There are two possible solutions: remaining with 
the ascending branch or starting at the point where the artery 
moves away from the uterus.
For the ascending branch, repeated coagulation of the 
peripheral veins around the artery should be carried out; 
then, by dividing them successively, the artery is exposed 
and clipped. Away from the uterus, the artery and vein are 
more easily separated. Dissection should be carried out with 
as  little coagulation as possible due to the proximity of the 
ureter.
Fig. 17
In some cases, the openings of the uterine vessels can be 
identiﬁ ed perfectly.
In all cases the clip should be closed under visual control. The 
artery should be only partially blocked to conﬁ rm the efﬁ cacy 
of the clip (Figs. 8–17).
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
183
Fig. 20
After vaginal extraction of the uterus, the opening must be sutured. 
Fig. 21
Laparoscopic suture of the vaginal opening.
Figs. 22–23
The two uterosacral ligaments are anchored with the laparoscopic 
vaginal suture.
Once the uterus has been freed, if it is of normal size, it is 
easily extracted via the colpotomy. The second assistant 
draws the uterus into the vagina; in this way, the pneumoperi-
toneum seal is maintained and the edges of the vagina are 
presented for closure.
On the other hand, if the uterus is large, it must be  morcellated 
before extraction. Morcellation may be performed via the 
vaginal or laparoscopic routes, using a laparoscopic  scalpel 
with a retractable blade. The uterus is either hemisected or 
morcellated and can then be extracted through the vagina.
The vagina may be closed via the vaginal or laparoscopic 
approach. Normally the laparoscopic approach is  preferable 
because the vaginal approach requires the patient to be 
repositioned, which involves a loss of time. For laparo-
scopic  suturing, a glove ﬁ lled with gauze swabs placed in the 
vagina is the best means of maintaining the pneumoperito-
neum. Suturing is usually carried out with a no. 0 or 1 thread, 
attached to a curved 30–36 mm needle. The surgeon inserts 
the needle straight into the needle holder of the left trocar. 
He pierces the upper lip of the vagina in the centre of the 
colpotomy which is presented by the assistant. He then holds 
this lip by half rotating the needle upwards. The  assistant 
then presents the posterior edge of the vagina which is in 
turn pierced. It is essential to transﬁ x the vagina completely 
to produce total haemostasis. The surgeon repeats this 
3.10 Extraction of the Uterus and Vaginal Closure  
the surgeon has completed the division as far as the angle 
of the rod. If this is not the case, the rod will escape from the 
edge of the fornix and penetrate into the abdominal cavity. 
Correct repositioning of the manipulator rod may thus result 
in loss of the pneumoperitoneum.
During division, it may be necessary for the surgeon to move 
the scissors to the left trocar to gain better access for dividing 
the fornix (Figs. 18–20).
22
23
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
184
In general we prefer total hysterectomy, except where the 
hysterectomy is associated with the management of a uterine 
prolapse or a suprapubic suspension operation.
In any case, in a subtotal hysterectomy the cervix is divided 
at the isthmus after dealing with the uterine  arteries. This 
 division may be performed in various ways. We prefer to use a 
cold scalpel with an endoscopic blade holder. Closure of the 
 uterine cervix is carried out with interrupted Vicryl 0 stitches. 
4.0 Subtotal Hysterectomy
Antibiotic Treatment 
All patients receive a single dose of antibiotics during the 
operation. Postoperative treatment is not systematic in our 
experience. We only treat infections conﬁ rmed after taking 
samples and an antibiogram.
Prevention of Postoperative Thrombophlebitis
Our patients systematically receive prophylactic antithrom-
botic treatment. Low dosis heparin is started on the day of 
admittance prior to surgery and is continued for 15 days.
Period of Foley catheterization
This is continued only for the duration of the operation except 
in cases with associated subpubic suspension.
Length of hospital stay
This varies from 2 to 3 days.
Postoperative Hygiene
In the postoperative period, the patient should avoid effort, 
at least for the ﬁ rst month. Sexual activity should not recom-
mence until after the ﬁ rst postoperative check-up, one month 
after surgery.
5.0 Postoperative Care
We started to perform total laparoscopic hysterectomy in 
1989, but only in 1995, with the introduction of the uterine 
manipulator, did our technique become standardized and 
reproducible. The operating technique is now well estab-
lished and this surgical guide, in our opinion, should allow 
a laparoscopic hysterectomy to be carried out completely 
safely. A ﬁ nal consideration is that even if hysterectomy is 
regarded as a basic procedure for a gynecological surgeon, 
it should be considered an advanced procedure if performed 
through the laparoscopic approach. This does not indicate 
any real difﬁ culty in the procedure but rather a poor under-
standing of laparoscopic surgical technique which should 
nowadays be an integral part of the basic knowledge of the 
gynecological surgeon. 
6.0 Conclusions
 operation to produce an X suture. As a rule, extraction of the 
thread poses no problem. This suture is placed on the right 
and left. There are thus two X sutures taking in the center and 
then the angle of the colpotomy on either side.
In some cases a third central X stitch may be made which 
also includes the ends of the uterosacral ligaments to provide 
better support for the vaginal vault. Removal of the uterus or 
the intravaginal glove acts as a test of the seal.
We prefer to use extracorporeal sutures for closing the vagina, 
but intracorporeal sutures may also be used. In this case, it is 
advisable to use two semicontinuous sutures which will then 
be joined in the middle of the suture. It is also  advisable in this 
case, to strengthen the vaginal vault by including the end of 
the uterosacral ligaments in the suture.
A ﬁ nal lavage completes the operation. Bleeding of the  vaginal 
section is carefully dealt with using bipolar current. The 
 ureters can then be checked. Peristalsis is not a  guarantee of 
their integrity, but the combination of an absence of  dilatation 
and presence of peristalsis means that the risk of injury is 
unlikely (Figs. 21–23).
operation theater 
185
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
1.  WATTIEZ A, CANIS M, POULY JL, MAGE G, BRUHAT 
MA: Technique coelioscopique de l’hystérectomie. 
Journal de Coeliochirurgie. 1996 Sep; 19: 19-27.
2.  REICH H.: Laparoscopic hysterectomy. Surg Laparosc 
Endosc. 1992 Mar; 2(1): 85-8.
3.  WATTIEZ A, GOLDCHMIT R, DURRUTY G, MAGE G, 
CANIS M, CUCINELLA G, POULY JL, BRUHAT MA: 
Minilaparoscopic hysterectomy. J Am Assoc Gynecol 
Laparosc. 1999 Feb; 6(1):97-100.
4.  WATTIEZ A, SORIANO D, COHEN SB, NERVO P, 
CANIS M, BOTCHORISHVILI R, MAGE G, POULY JL, 
MILLE P, BRUHAT MA: The learning curve of total
laparoscopic hysterectomy: comparative analysis of 
1647 cases. J Am Assoc Gynecol Laparosc. 2002 Aug; 
9(3):339-45.
5.  WATTIEZ A, SORIANO D, FIACCAVENTO A, CANIS 
M, BOTCHORISHVILI R, POULY J, MAGE G, BRUHAT 
MA: Total laparoscopic hysterectomy for very enlarged 
uteri. J Am Assoc Gynecol Laparosc. 2002 May; 
9(2):125-30.
6.  WATTIEZ A, COHEN SB, SELVAGGI L: Laparoscopic 
hysterectomy. Curr Opin Obstet Gynecol. 2002 Aug; 
14(4):417-22. Review.
7.  CHAPRON C, DUBUISSON JB, ANSQUER Y: Total 
laparoscopic hysterectomy. Indications, results, 
and complications. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1997 Sep 26; 
828:341-51. Review.
8.  CHAPRON C, DUBUISSON JB: Total hysterectomy:
laparoscopy or vaginal route? Arguments in favor 
of laparoscopy Gynecol Obstet Fertil. 2000 Sep; 
28(9):672-8.
9.  CHAPRON C, DUBUISSON JB.: Ureteral injuries after 
laparoscopic hysterectomy. Hum Reprod. 2000 Mar; 
15(3):733-4.
10. COSSON M, LAMBAUDIE E, BOUKERROU M, QUERLEU 
D, CREPIN G.: Vaginal, laparoscopic, or abdominal 
hysterectomies for benign disorders: immediate and 
early postoperative complications. Eur J Obstet 
Gynecol Reprod Biol. 2001 Oct; 98(2):231-6.
11. DONNEZ J, SQUIFFLET J, JADOUL P, SMETS M: 
Results of evaluate study of hysterectomy techniques: 
high rate of complications needs explanation. BMJ. 
2004 Mar 13; 328(7440):643.
12. KOH CH.: A new technique and system for simplifying 
total laparoscopic hysterectomy. J Am Assoc Gynecol 
Laparosc. 1998 May; 5(2):187-92.
13. KOH LW, KOH PH, LIN LC, NG WJ, WONG E, HUANG 
MH: A simple procedure for the prevention of ureteral 
injury in laparoscopic-assisted vaginal hysterectomy. J 
Am Assoc Gynecol Laparosc. 2004 May; 11(2):167-9. 
14. KOVAC SR, BARHAN S, LISTER M, TUCKER L, 
BISHOP M, DAS A.: Guidelines for the selection of 
the route of hysterectomy: application in a resident 
clinic population. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2002 Dec; 
187(6):1521-7.
15. AL-JUBOURI MA.: Laparoscopic assisted vaginal
hysterectomy versus abdominal hysterectomy. 
Ann Clin Biochem. 1998 Jan; 35 ( Pt 1):156-7.
16. GARRY R, FOUNTAIN J, MASON S, NAPP V, et al: 
The eVALuate study: two parallel randomized trials, 
one comparing laparoscopic with abdominal
hysterectomy, the other comparing laparoscopic with 
vaginal hysterectomy. BMJ. 2004 Jan 17; 328 (7432): 
129.
17. SCULPHER M, MANCA A, ABBOTT J, FOUNTAIN J,
et al: Cost effectiveness analysis of laparoscopic 
hysterectomy compared with standard hysterectomy: 
results from a randomised trial. BMJ. 2004 Jan 17; 328 
(7432): 134.
18. LIU CY, REICH H.: Complications of total laparoscopic 
hysterectomy in 518 cases. Gynecol Endosc. 1994; 
2:203-8.
19. CANIS MJ, WATTIEZ A, MAGE G, BRUHAT MA.: 
Results of eVALuate study of hysterectomy techniques: 
laparoscopic hysterectomy may yet have a bright 
future. BMJ. 2004 Mar 13; 328(7440):642-3.
20. CHAPRON C, LAFOREST L, ANSQUER Y, 
FAUCONNIER A, FERNANDEZ B, BREART G, 
DUBUISSON JB: Hysterectomy techniques used for 
benign pathologies: results of a French multicentre 
study. Hum Reprod. 1999 Oct; 14(10):2464-70.
21. DAVIES A, HART R, MAGOS A, HADAD E, MORRIS R.: 
Hysterectomy: surgical route and complications. Eur J 
Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol. 2002 Sep 10; 104(2):
148-51.
22. HARKKI P, KURKI T, SJOBERG J, TIITINEN A.: Safety 
aspects of laparoscopic hysterectomy. Acta Obstet 
Gynecol Scand. 2001 May; 80(5):383-91. Review.
23. HERTEL H, KOHLER C, MICHELS W, POSSOVER M, 
TOZZI R, SCHNEIDER A.: Laparoscopic-assisted 
radical vaginal hysterectomy (LARVH): prospective 
evaluation of 200 patients with cervical cancer.
Gynecol Oncol. 2003 Sep; 90(3):505-11. 
24. LYONS TL.: Laparoscopic supracervical hysterectomy. 
Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am. 2000 Jun; 27(2):441-50. 
Review.
25. MALZONI M, PERNIOLA G, HANNUNA K, IUELE T, 
FRUSCELLA ML, BASILI R, EBANO V, MARZIANI R.:
A review of 445 cases of laparoscopic hysterectomy: 
beneﬁ ts and outcome Clin Ter. 2004 Jan; 155(1):9-12.
26. MEEKS GR, HARRIS RL.: Surgical approach to
hysterectomy: abdominal, laparoscopy-assisted, or 
vaginal. Clin Obstet Gynecol. 1997 Dec; 40(4):886-94. 
Review.
27. PARKER WH.: Total laparoscopic hysterectomy. 
Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am. 2000 Jun; 27(2):
431–40. Review.
28. POSSOVER M.: Options for laparoscopic surgery in 
cervical carcinomas. Eur J Gynaecol Oncol. 2003; 
24(6):471-2. Review.
29. WOOD C.: The AAGL classiﬁ cation system for
laparoscopic hysterectomy. J Am Assoc Gynecol
Laparosc. 2000 Feb;7(1):5-7.
Recommended Reading
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
186
operation theater 
Chapter XVI
Laparoscopic Surgery 
of the Pelvic Floor
Arnaud Wattiez 
Strasbourg University Hospital
Strasbourg, France
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
188
The laparoscopic management of uterine prolapse began 
in our department in 1991 and there has been  considerable 
development in the technique since then. It was initially 
limited to faithful reproduction of the techniques employed 
at laparotomy but numerous complementary features were 
added subsequently, allowing us to deal with any circum-
stances that arise during female prolapse surgery.
The common beneﬁ ts of the laparoscopic approach, such as 
rapid postoperative recovery and short hospitalization, were 
soon surpassed by the innovative aspect of this technique. 
Indeed, the combined effects of various factors – mainly, 
the outstanding quality of videoendoscopic images and the 
positive pressure of the pneumoperitoneum – have granted 
access to anatomical spaces that were hitherto very difﬁ cult 
to reach and allows surgical repair under direct visual control.
The results, which were encouraging overall, are now  excellent 
owing to repair surgery that is perfect from the  anatomical 
aspect and provides exceptional functional results.
The only issue that remains to be resolved is to simplify this 
technique so that it can be performed in acceptable  operating 
times.
1.0 Introduction
2.0 Preoperative Workup
2.1 Assessment of Uterine Prolapse
Preoperative workup must be particularly careful and  precise. 
Only a thorough evaluation of all defects that need to be 
treated will allow surgical repair in a single operative session 
and minimize the risks of postoperative functional sequelae 
and recurrences.
Diagnosis of all the defects is the crucial moment of the 
clinical workup. It is essential to stage the defects for each 
compartment. Standard clinical examination must attempt 
to define the degree of prolapse involving the uterus, 
bladder and rectum. Lateral cystocele with the vaginal rugae 
preserved must be distinguished from central cystoceles 
with  elimination of the vaginal rugae. The former is due to 
detachment of the vagina from the tendinous arc of the pelvic 
fascia while the latter is due to a break of the vesicovaginal 
fascia. A systematic exploration must make sure that any 
enterocele is detected. The muscular tonus of the levator ani 
muscles must be assessed in terms of quality and quantity.
3.0 Preparation of the Patient
3.1 Bowel Preparation
Preparation of the patient is essential to obtain optimum 
results from this type of surgery. Preparation of the vaginal 
tissues to promote healing and bowel preparation to optimize 
the endoscopic space are particularly useful.
The purpose of this preparation is to empty the bowel so that 
the loops of intestine can be better seen and to deﬂ ate and 
ﬂ atten them to increase intra-abdominal space. However, 
it can also be useful in the event of accidental bowel injury. 
Preparation begins with a classical low-ﬁ ber diet for the ﬁ ve 
days prior to surgery. Two evenings before the operation, a 
laxative Xprep® enema is administered. Finally, lavage of the 
lower bowel is performed the evening before surgery. This 
chronological order is particularly important in order to avoid 
anal leakage on the operating table during surgery, which 
exposes the patient to a greater risk of infection.
3.2 Vaginal Estrogens 
Administration of vaginal estrogens for at least a month prior 
to the operation is useful for improving vaginal nutrition. 
Improvement of vaginal nutrition will allow better and faster 
healing.
3.3 Vaginal disinfection
Vaginal disinfection is particularly important and must be 
carried out the evening before the operation by vaginal lavage 
with an antiseptic solution and administration of a Betadine 
vaginal ovule. The abdominal wall is also disinfected. After 
a shower, the evening before the operation, the patient’s 
pubic hair is shaved and the abdominal wall and inside the 
umbilicus are cleaned and disinfected with an antiseptic 
solution. Finally, immediately before surgery, a solution of 
Betadine is applied prior to sterile draping.
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecologic Laparoscopic Surgery
189
4.0 Positioning of the Patient
Laparoscopic surgery is often long and difﬁ cult.  Optimizing 
the surgical technique and reducing operating times require 
ergonomic management of the operation, and correct 
arrangement of the patient is fundamental.
4.1 Anesthesia
General anesthesia with endotracheal intubation is usually 
employed. Muscle relaxation is necessary only where it is not 
possible to obtain sufﬁ cient distension of the abdomin al wall 
with a pneumoperitoneum of 12 mmHg. General  anesthesia 
can be combined with locoregional epidural or spinal 
anesthesia to improve the postoperative course.
4.2 Patient Positioning
The patient is placed in dorsal decubitus with the legs apart 
and semi-ﬂ exed. This position allows three surgeons to take 
up position: The operating surgeon is situated on the left of 
the patient. The ﬁ rst assistant stands opposite to the surgeon 
on the right side of the patient, and the second assistant 
is positioned between the patient‘s legs. The patient’s two 
arms are placed alongside her body to avoid injuries of the 
brachial plexus. Shoulder braces are placed at the level of 
the  acromion prominence, avoiding compression of cervical 
muscles. Attention must also be paid to the position of the 
patient’s hands to avoid compression of the ﬁ ngers. In some 
cases, a warming system is used to prevent sudden drops in 
the patient’s body temperature.
The patient must be positioned well down the table the better 
to allow movements of the uterine manipulator. The greater 
the possibilities for moving the uterine manipulator, the better 
will be the exposure of the different organs during surgery.
The abdominal wall and vagina are disinfected carefully and 
the operation area is prepared prior to introduction of the 
Foley catheter and uterine manipulator. It is imperative that 
the perineal region is sterile and accessible to the surgeon, 
who should perform a vaginal or rectal examination during 
the operation and position the uterine manipulator.
4.3 Bladder Catheterization
An indwelling no. 18 Foley catheter is placed. The balloon is 
inﬂ ated with 15cc of saline and the catheter is placed under 
traction to make it easier to demonstrate the bladder neck. 
The catheter is connected to a collecting bag which is placed 
in visible position so that the urine can be monitored (volume, 
color, presence of air in the bag).
5.0 Preoperative Assessment
5.1 Clinical Examination
It is absolutely essential to reassess the uterine prolapse on 
the operating table as soon as the patient is anesthetized. This 
reassessment under anesthesia can provide new  information 
that may modify the operative strategy. The assessment 
is performed with the aid of vaginal dilators and will allow 
evaluation of the line of the vagina and better distinction of 
its upward and downward movements. This will also allow a 
better assessment of the retrovaginal space and its mobility.
In the event of hysterectomy, assessment of the size and 
mobility of the uterus will allow correct choice of trocar 
positions.
5.2 Appearance of the Abdomen
The patient’s general build and the appearance of the 
abdomen determine the organization of the surgical ﬁ eld and 
the placement of the trocars. The ergonomics of the operative 
maneuvers will depend on this.
Numerous aspects must be considered:
1 The patient’s build. The ﬁ rst thing to consider is the 
distance from the umbilicus to the pubic symphysis, 
which will determine the distance between the  umbilical 
and suprapubic trocars. The latter, in particular, must 
be placed sufﬁ ciently high up to allow access to the 
promontory and the space of Retzius and allow the vari-
ous sutures to be placed. If the patient is of short stature, 
the camera  trocar must be placed in supra umbilical posi-
tion and the  suprapubic trocar is placed at umbilical level.
2  The inter-iliac distance. Suturing is facilitated by the 
position of the trocars. A short patient will mean that the 
trocars are positioned higher to gain space.
3 The obesity of the abdominal wall must be assessed 
because the trocars are easier to position where the wall 
is thinner. However, more elastic areas should be avoided 
because of the difﬁ culty if they need to be reinserted. 
4 The laxity of the peritoneum will give an idea of the 
operation space and the positioning of the trocars will 
therefore depend on this.
5.3 Placement of Trocars
In general, 4 trocars are necessary, three suprapubic
(6 mm) and one umbilical (11 mm). The ﬁ rst trocar, 11 mm in 
diameter, is normally positioned at umbilical level.  Following 
internal inspection and comparison of the size of the uterus 
and the patient’s build, the ﬁ nal position of this trocar is 
deﬁ ned. If the size of the uterus is normal or below normal 
and the pubis-umbilicus distance is sufﬁ cient, this trocar will 
be used for the laparoscope; if, on the contrary, the uterus is 
large and the pubis-umbilicus line is short, this trocar will be 
the central operating port. In the great majority of cases, the 
position is therefore as follows: three suprapubic trocars and 
one umbilical trocar.
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
190
6.0 Organization of the Operating Field
6.1 Positioning of the Uterine Manipulator  
The CLERMONT-FERRAND uterine manipulator is  essential 
for demonstrating the uterus. It allows the uterus to be mobi-
lized in all its axes: advance motion, anteversion, retroversion, 
lateralization and ﬂ exion of the uterus forwards and laterally. 
It also permits:
O exposure of the vaginal cul de sac
O maintenance of the pneumoperitoneum
O sealing of the vagina after extraction of the uterus
The device comprises a series of concentric rods. The  cent ral 
rod is threaded at the distal end, which is inserted in the 
uterus. The manipulator inserts are available in various sizes 
to match the size of the uterus. The threaded distal end of 
the insert can be deﬂ ected by use of the mani pula tor handle. 
Outside this rod there is a sealing ceramic cylinder, which 
can rotate through 360 degrees to allow exposure of the 
cul-de-sac. This cylinder can be mounted with three  silicone 
seals. Once hysterectomy is complete, the  manipulator with 
its silicone seals is pushed toward the vaginal vault  preventing 
gas loss and making sure that pneumoperitoneum will be 
maintained.
The CLERMONT-FERRAND manipulator must be positioned 
when the patient is asleep and the operation area has been 
prepared because the surgeon must be able to manipulate 
under completely aseptic conditions.
After demonstrating the cervix, hysterometry gives the size 
of the uterus so that the appropriate manipulator insert can 
be selected. The cervix is dilated with Hegar dilators up to 
size 8. With the manipulator locked in zero position, a twisting 
motion is applied to push the device through the cervical os 
until the threaded part of the insert is completely within the 
cervical canal. At the end of this maneuver, the handle locking 
mechanism must be on the right.
Most of the time, the manipulation movement must be 
preceded by a pushing movement in the direction of the 
patient’s head. This is because anteversion of the uterus is 
achieved by a combination of two movements: pushing the 
uterus and anteversion by lowering the handle. In this way, 
the uterosacral ligaments are placed under tension and the 
cul-de-sac of the pouch of Douglas is exposed. The adnexae 
are exposed the same way with a movement of pushing and 
lateral deﬂ ection of the handle towards the patient’s legs, 
which are in gynecologic lithotomy position.
The dilator can be pushed any time and allows correct 
exposure of the vaginal cul-de-sac.
6.2 Fixation of the Intestine
At the start of the operation, organization of the operation 
ﬁ eld is highly important to achieve stability and exposure 
without the assistant’s intervention. The pouch of Douglas is 
exposed by ﬁ xing the sigmoid to the abdominal wall. For this 
maneuver, we use two different techniques. The ﬁ rst employs 
a nylon suture with a straight needle, which is introduced 
through the abdominal wall about 5 cm above the left lateral 
trocar. The needle then passes through the parasigmoid fat 
from one side of the sigmoid to the other and then comes 
out again through the abdominal wall through the same hole. 
The sigmoid is elevated with the aid of forceps and the suture 
is tied on the outside. The same can be done with a curved 
needle introduced into the abdomen; the sigmoid fat is trans-
ﬁ xed and the needle is then brought out again through the 
same trocar and the suture is then tied. A Reverden needle is 
then used to bring the sutures out transparietally always more 
or less 5 cm above the left lateral trocar and they are ﬁ xed 
using a forceps. In the same way, following hysterectomy, 
the vagina or remaining cervix can be suspended from the 
anterior wall using a Reverden needle.
1 Suprapubic trocars: we prefer to use mtp® disposable
6 mm trocars. They have the advantage of being light and 
transparent and being threaded on the outside, which 
ensures that they are stable in the abdominal wall; they 
have a star-shaped valve which prevents gas leakage 
even during suturing. Their cost is also acceptable. The 
lateral trocars are placed anterior to the anterior superior 
iliac spine, two ﬁ ngers medial to the spine and lateral to 
the outer border of the rectus abdominis muscle. They 
are passed through the oblique and transverse  abdominal 
muscles. At this level, the thickness of the abdominal wall 
is usually reduced which facilitates the maneuvers. The 
central trocar is positioned along the pubis-umbilicus 
line more or less in the middle. The minimum distance 
between the umbilical primary port and the central port 
is 6 cm. In any case, it should be positioned below a line 
joining the two outer trocars.
2 The umbilical trocar is a simple reusable trocar, which 
holds the laparoscope. In fact, this model has a valve, 
which can be lowered for introducing the laparoscope; this 
allows the distal lens to be kept clean during  introduction 
so it is an economic factor with regard to  efﬁ cient use of 
operating time. If the umbilical entry site is used as  central 
port for operating instruments, we prefer the use of a 
disposable trocar with a removable reducer attached to 
the proximal end of the trocar. 
In the classical situation (three suprapubic trocars and one 
umbilical trocar), we prefer to begin the operation with three
6 mm trocars for dissection and then replace the central 
trocar for suturing (after the hysterectomy is complete).
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
191
6.3  Division of the Insertion of
the Uterosacral Ligaments
The insertion of the uterosacral ligaments can be divided 
at the start of the operation. Culdoplasty commences from 
this point. They can be divided simply by touching them with 
bipolar coagulation or better with a suture.
7.0 Surgical Strategy Planning
The strategic order of the surgical steps is important and the 
phases of dissection must ﬁ rst be distinguished from the 
phases of ﬁ xation.
O Phases of Dissection. The chronological order is as 
follows: dissection of the promontory, right lateral peri-
toneal dissection, the rectovaginal space followed by 
hysterectomy, during which vesical dissection is pushed 
far downwards. This order is logical. Dissection of the 
promontory ﬁ rst is essential and to do this, an increased 
Trendelenburg position is important, which is often 
possible only at the start of the operation. Once this 
dissection is complete, the patient can be placed level 
if required by the anesthetist. Dissection of the spaces 
where the meshes will be placed is made easier by the 
presence of the manipulator, which assists access to 
the different spaces; this is therefore performed prior to 
hysterectomy.
O Phases of Fixation. The posterior mesh is fixed first 
and culdoplasty is performed before the mesh is ﬁ xed 
anteriorly. Low peritonization is then carried out until half 
of the right peritoneal opening is closed. At this point, the 
need for Burch colposuspension is assessed.
O If the classical technique is desired with suspension 
of the bladder neck before ﬁ xation of the mesh to the 
promontory, the meshs are left free until the Burch proce-
dure and any vaginal repair are performed. More often, it is 
ﬁ xed to the promontory; this is followed by  peritonization 
and cervical suspension is then performed in a further 
step.
7.1 Hysterectomy
Classically, the uterus is left in position to avoid opening the 
vagina with the risk of infecting the mesh. This  technique is 
possible by the laparoscopic route; the spaces are  dissected 
with sparing of the round ligaments and with the meshs 
crossed by the broad ligaments. The current trend is to 
perform total or subtotal hysterectomy. In our experience 
subtotal hysterectomy has proven better because the vagina 
is not opened. In the case of total hysterectomy, the vaginal 
vault is closed in two layers.
As stated above, the essential difference compared with 
a  simple hysterectomy is the chronology of the  operating 
phases. When treating a prolapse, dissection of the 
rectovaginal and vesicovaginal spaces needs to be  performed 
ﬁ rst, and the uterus is removed only after all these spaces 
have been dissected.
7.2 Preoperative Antibiotic Prophylaxis
Our patients usually receive preoperative antibiotic  prophy-
laxis consisting of an injection of a recent generation 
cephalosporin; this is repeated if the operation takes more than
4 hours.
8.0 Operative Technique
8.1 Dissection of the Sacral Promontory 
The surgical approach to the promontory is best made 
when the patient is in increased Trendelenburg position after 
displacing the loops of intestine and ﬁ xing the sigmoid to 
the abdominal wall. A position between L5-S1 or the upper 
part of S1 is identiﬁ ed, where the common anterior vertebral 
ligament can be viewed. The middle sacral artery and vein 
are exposed and coagulated if necessary. In obese patients 
or those with a low aortic bifurcation, dissection begins from 
the left common iliac vein. The promontory is  identiﬁ ed by 
instrumental palpation. After identifying the right ureter and 
the inferior border of the left common iliac vein, the  posterior 
prevertebral parietal peritoneum is drawn upwards by the 
assistant and incised vertically towards the right ureter  starting 
from the promontory. Once the peritoneum has been opened, 
Fig. 1 
Panoramic view of the pelvis.
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
192
Fig. 2 
Identiﬁ cation of the right ureter.
Fig. 4 
Identiﬁ cation of the various structures at the level of the sacral 
promontory.
Fig. 3 
Incision of the peritoneum at the level of the sacral promontory.
the pneumoperitoneum gas enters the  retroperitoneal space, 
providing an initial dissection. The organs adherent to the 
posterior plane remain ﬁ xed while movable structures are 
moved away from the promontory (Figs. 1–4).
8.2 Incision of the Right Lateral Peritoneum
The dissection follows a vertical axis as far as the cul-de-
sac of the Douglas pouch. In the course of this dissection, 
attention should be paid to the internal iliac vein, which is 
crossed, and to the area of the uterosacral ligament, which 
is usually difﬁ cult to dissect. This incision, which is made to 
enable peritonization of the mesh, must free the ureter. This is 
mobilized from the peritoneum to gain tissue so that the mesh 
can later be covered without stretching the ureter.
8.3 Dissection of the Rectovaginal Space 
The junction of the uterosacral ligaments with the uterus is 
divided. The rectum is elevated and at the same time stretched 
towards the sacrum by the assistant with the aid of intestinal 
forceps. The peritoneum is put under tension,  coagulated 
and then divided two centimeters above the  insertion in the 
uterus. Dissection continues as far as the  posterior vaginal 
wall which facilitates the access to the  rectovaginal junction. 
Dissection is carried downward remaining in contact with 
the vagina anteriorly until the perineal body is reached. At 
this point, dissection is directed laterally towards the pelvic 
wall where the subobturator area is reached. In this lateral 
area, the median rectal vessels will be found and can be left 
intact or coagulated depending on the space available. At this 
The technique of hysterectomy is as follows:
O Placement of the uterine manipulator
O The various phases of dissection are part of the preparation 
of the bed required for placing the mesh: the vesicovaginal 
and rectovaginal space.
O Coagulation and division of the round ligaments and 
dissection of the lateral vesical spaces. Fenestration of the 
posterior leaf of the broad ligament.
O Integrity of the adnexae may be preserved or not, 
depending on the patient‘s age. The utero-ovarian ligament, 
tube and adnexal vessels are coagulated and dissected if 
the adnexae are to be spared, whereas the lumbo-ovarian 
ligament is coagulated and dissected if the adnexae are to 
be removed.
O Bladder dissection is taken lower than normal to facilitate 
placement of the mesh.
8.4 Hysterectomy
point, the  surgeon turns again towards the rectum to identify 
the recto pubic bundles of the levator ani muscles. At the end 
of the dissection, it is important that the levator ani  musc les 
(pubococcygeus, puborectalis, and iliococcygeus) can be 
identiﬁ ed. The dissected space is bounded by:
O the levator ani muscles and the pelvic wall laterally
O the perineal body inferiorly
O the vagina anteriorly
O the rectum posteriorly (Figs. 5–8).
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
193
Fig. 5 
Dissection of the rectovaginal space.
Fig. 6 
Identiﬁ cation of the levator ani muscles.
Fig. 7 
Posterior dissection complete.
Fig. 8 
Left levator muscles.  
O Dissection of the posterior leaf of the broad ligament as far 
as the origin of the uterosacral ligaments. 
O Identiﬁ cation of the uterine pedicles, which are coagulated 
with bipolar forceps or ligated with 0 Vicryl®.
O Intrafascial dissection with coagulation of the cervico- 
vaginal vessels. If total hysterectomy is being performed, 
Halban’s fascia must be identiﬁ ed to allow closure in two 
planes.
O Opening of the vagina through 360° under the guidance of 
the uterine manipulator.
O Extraction of the uterus via the vagina
O Two-layer suture of the vagina: the ﬁ rst layer takes only 
the vaginal mucosa and the second approximates the 
pericervical fascia. A 0 Vicryl® suture is used. These 
two layers are essential to protect the mesh against 
contamination of vaginal origin.
O If a subtotal hysterectomy is being performed, the cervix 
is divided at the level of the isthmus after coagulating the 
uterine vessels. Division of the cervix can be performed 
in various ways. We prefer to use a cold knife held in an 
endoscopic blade holder.
The posterior portion of the mesh is ﬁ xed ﬁ rst.
Once the hysterectomy has been completed, it is  convenient 
to suspend the vagina to the anterior abdominal wall so 
that the assistant‘s instrument is more readily available for 
suturing.
Each of the levator ani muscles is included in the suture using 
Ethibond® 0 on a 30 mm-needle. The mesh is ﬁ xed on both 
lateral sides. At this point, myorrhaphy is performed; this 
should never be total but should rather be a partial  closure of 
the inter-levator hiatus. This closure is more or less  complete 
depending on the situation. It will constitute the low  support 
point where the vagina will be attached. Once the mesh 
has been stretched between the left-side and right-side 
puborectalis muscles, the hiatus between the mesh and the 
vagina is closed by suturing the mesh to the vaginal wall at 
the level of the perineal body.
8.5 Fixation of the Posterior Mesh
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
194
Fig. 9 
Placement of the suture in the right puborectalis muscle. 
Fig. 10 
The left levator muscle is picked up with the needle.  
Fig. 11 
Fixation of the mesh on the right.
Fig. 12 
Caudal and posterior ﬁ xation is complete.
Fig. 13 
Fixation of the posterior mesh to the cardinal ligaments and vagina.
Fig. 14 
Boundary of posterior ﬁ xation.
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
195
Fig. 15 
Fixation of the anterior mesh. 
Fig. 16 
High ﬁ xation of the anterior mesh.
Fig. 17 
Junction laterally of the anterior and posterior meshs. 
8.6 Culdoplasty
The aim of culdoplasty is to re-establish the normal  anatomical 
relationship between the rectum and vagina by  repositioning 
the rectum more superiorly and  restoring  tension for the 
vagina towards the back. This can be  performed with or 
without Douglasectomy and with one or two absorbable 
sutures (Ethibond® 0). The ﬁ rst step is to pick up the most 
cranial or posterior part of the uterosacral ligament with the 
needle and then, after identifying the ureter, the cardinal 
ligament is ﬁ xed particularly carefully, followed by the mesh 
and the vagina. The knot is tied when this is complete. The 
same steps are repeated on  the contralateral side. When this 
repair has been completed, the vagina resumes its  anatomical 
position so upward traction is no longer necessary.
The mesh will then be stretched on the posterior wall of the 
vagina and attached to the cardinal ligaments with non-ab-
sorbable sutures (Ethibond® 0). We avoid sutures in the 
posterior part of the vagina to minimize the risk of  transﬁ xing 
the vagina. Once the mesh has been ﬁ xed posteriorly, a
Mc Call culdoplasty is performed (Figs. 9–14).
8.7 Anterior Fixation of the Mesh 
The mesh is stretched in the anterior vesicovaginal cavity. If 
the uterus is spared, the two straps of the mesh are passed 
through the windows made in the posterior leaf of the broad 
ligament. These are ﬁ xed behind the isthmus with a ﬂ at knot 
in the deperitonized area at the start of the rectovaginal 
detachment.
The mesh is ﬁ xed to the anterior vaginal wall with absorbable 
sutures which must not transﬁ x the full thickness of the wall: 
Ethibond® 2/0 with 18 mm curved needle. The knots are tied 
with half-hitches made using the extracorporeal technique.
4 to 6 sutures will be needed (Figs. 15–17).
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
196
8.8 Low Peritonization 
At vaginal level the purpose of the peritonization is to exclude 
the mesh from the abdominal cavity, placing the bladder over 
the prosthesis. The surgeon begins with a 0 Vicryl® suture 
with 30 mm curved needle in the prevesical peritoneum, then 
the bladder pillar, the lateral vaginal peritoneum and then the 
inner margin of the lateral incision. Using the same suture, 
this procedure is repeated on the right side. A series of 
half-hitches tie the purse string to close the peritoneum and 
provide suspension of the bladder (Figs. 18–19).
8.10 High Peritonization 
The mesh must be completely retroperitoneal in position. 
A continuous suture joins the outer and inner layers of the 
lateral peritoneal incision. We use a 0 Monocryl suture with
30 mm curved needle. The smoothness of this suture makes 
for ease of suturing. An adequate number of half-hitches is 
used for closure.
These steps conclude the anterior part. It may also be 
necessary to open the space of Retzius (Figs. 22–23).
8.9 Sacral Colpopexy
Sacral colpopexy involves ﬁ xing the anterior and posterior 
portions of the mesh to the promontory or anterior vertebral 
ligament with two sutures of Ethibond® and a 30 mm-curved 
needle or with staples or Tacker®.
The needle must remain discernable by transparency 
including only the ﬁ brous layer of the aponeurosis to reduce 
to a minimum the risk of spondylodiscitis.
Once the sutures have been placed, slight traction is applied 
to conﬁ rm that they are anchored ﬁ rmly.
The mesh needs to be fixed in position. When all the 
corrections have been made, the mesh will be stretched 
on the promontory and ﬁ xed at this level. The surgeon’s 
experience is extremely important at this point (Figs. 20–21).
Fig. 18 
Start of low peritonization.
Fig. 19 
End of low peritonization.
Fig. 20 
Placement of the suture in the promontory.
Fig. 21 
Fixation of the mesh to the promontory.
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
197
8.11 Opening the Space of Retzius
In the case of a transperitoneal approach, the procedure 
begins with identiﬁ cation of the landmarks:
O Pubis
O Cooper’s ligament
O Superior margin of the bladder dome where the urachus 
originates
The peritoneum is incised above the bladder dome. The 
incision must be horizontal, from one umbilical artery to 
the other. The assistant applies downward traction to the 
peritoneum using forceps, while the surgeon draws the plane 
vertical with the right hand and incises it with monopolar 
scissors held in the left hand.
The urachus is coagulated and transected while the  surgeon 
proceeds along a vertical plane towards the abdomin al 
wall. The umbilico-prevesical aponeurosis must be passed 
to  penetrate the space of Retzius. This space is completely 
avascular and is dissected with simple divergent traction. The 
pneumoperitoneum aids in opening the space. Remaining in 
contact with the aponeurosis, a series of tissue layers must 
be passed until the fatty tissues  anterior to Cooper‘s ligament 
indicate that the superior boundary of the space of Retzius is 
reached.
Cooper’s ligament is localized bilaterally. At this point, the 
space of Retzius is easily opened down to the tendinous arc 
of the pelvic fascia. The dissection must reach the obturator 
foramina.
The vaginal walls are palpated with the aid of a finger 
placed in the vagina. The bladder margin is highlighted by 
the  presence of a vein running along it, which must then be 
carefully  separated from the vagina appearing pearly white 
(Figs. 24–25).
Fig. 22 
High peritonization.
Fig. 23 
Peritonization completed.
Fig. 24 
Identiﬁ cation of the upper border of the bladder.
Fig. 25 
Space of Retzius.
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
198
8.12 Paravaginal Repair 
The positive pressure of the pneumoperitoneum allows 
visualization of the paravaginal defect which is nearly always 
present with high-grade prolapse. It appears as a  herniation 
between the vaginal wall and the tendinous arc of the  pelvic 
fascia. If there is indeed a paravaginal hernia, the defect 
is closed using separate stitches or a running suture of 
Ethibond® 0 on a 18 mm-needle. This suture should run from 
the pubo-urethral ligaments anteriorly to the ischial spine 
posteriorly. Repair can be uni- or bilateral.
8.13 Burch Colposuspension 
Following this repair, colposuspension is performed. The 
suture employed is Ethibond® 3.5 (0) with a 26 mm needle. 
The suture passes through Cooper’s ligament from above 
downwards and then through the vagina from within 
outwards, ensuring that the full thickness of the wall is not 
transﬁ xed. Transﬁ xion of the vagina must be wide enough to 
preserve a certain degree of ﬁ rmness. In the event of  bleeding 
after the ﬁ rst passage, an X suture can be placed. In the case 
of promontory ﬁ xation, a single suture per side is placed and 
the tension is reduced. Where paravaginal repair has also 
been performed, this will necessitate hypercorrection of the 
cervical suspension.
8.14 Peritonization
This must always be performed in full. The aim is to  prevent 
loops of intestine from becoming trapped in the space 
of Retzius. We use Vicryl® 0 with a 46 mm curved needle. 
Closure is achieved with three passes from right to left and we 
join this to the high and low peritonization with half-hitches.
9.0 Final Procedures
9.1 Uterine Morcellation
10.0 Postoperative Care
10.1 Antibiotic Therapy
Morcellation is required in the case of subtotal  hysterectomy. 
We use the Rotocut Morcellator (KARL STORZ,  Tutt lingen, 
Germany). The uterus, which is normally small, is cut 
into strips 10 mm in diameter and removed and sent for 
histological examination.
9.2 Release of Fixation Sutures
The previously suspended intestine is released and  hemo-
stasis is ensured.
9.3 Peritoneal Toilet
This is best performed with Ringer lactate. Any blood clots 
are aspirated and careful hemostasis is performed. At the end 
of the procedure, the Ringer lactate must be completely clear.
9.4 Cystoscopy
The ureters are checked repeatedly during the procedure: 
after hysterectomy, after peritonization and after Burch 
suspension. These repeated controls make it possible that 
any iatrogenic injury caused by operating maneuvers can 
be immediately detected and thus allow for a more accurate 
repair. The color of the urine and air ﬁ lling the collecting bag 
are important checks if bladder or ureter injury is suspected.
The role of cystoscopy is controversial. Some authors 
perform it systematically and others only in case of doubt, but 
in all cases, the indications should be broad. It will conﬁ rm 
the patency of the ureter oriﬁ ces and thus ureter integrity.
We do not use this systematically but treat infections only as 
they are identiﬁ ed and according to the antibiogram.
10.2 Prevention of Postoperative phlebitis
All of our patients receive antithrombotic prophylaxis, which 
starts on the evening of the operation and continues for 15 
days postoperatively.
10.3 Foley Catheter
The catheter is left in for at least 24 hours depending on the 
patient’s age and mobilization. When it is removed,  urinalysis 
and urine culture are performed routinely and antibiotic 
therapy is started if necessary.
10.4 Duration of Hospital Stay
3 to 5 days
10.5 Postoperative Period
The postoperative period should be quiet, avoiding undue 
effort and excessive weights.
The diet is normal with plentiful hydration to reduce the 
constipation that is nearly always present in the first 
3 postoperative weeks. Sexual activity can be resumed after 
6 weeks.
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
199
11.0 Conclusions
Laparoscopy allows to combine the beneﬁ ts of prolapse 
repair via laparotomy with the low morbidity of the vaginal 
approach. Operating times are long initially but in the hands 
of expert surgeons, the duration is about 2 hours. Certainly, 
studies of long-term efﬁ cacy and reliability are still needed to 
fully assess the value of this technique.
1.  AMELINE A, HUGUIER J: La suspension postérieure du 
disque lombo-sacré : techniques de remplacement des 
ligaments utéro-sacrés par par voie abdominale.
Gynecol Obstet, 1957 ; 56 :94–98
2.  RANDALL C: Surgical treatment of vaginal inversion. 
Obstet Gynecol, 1971;38: 327–332
3.  NICHOLS D, MILLEY P: Signiﬁ cance of restauration 
of vaginal depth and axis. Obstet Gynecol, 1970; 36: 
251–255
4.  HOFF S, MANELFE A, PORTET R; GIROT C: Promonto-
ﬁ xation ou suspension par bandelettes trans versales ? 
Etude comparée de ces deux techniques dans le 
traitement des prolapsus génitaux. Ann Chir, 1984 ;
38 : 363–367.
5.  BAKER KR, BERESFORD JM, CAMPBELL C: 
Colposacropexy with Prolene Mesh. Gynecol Obstet, 
1990; 171: 51–54
6.  ROBERT HG: Nouveau traité de techniques 
chirurgicales gynécologiques. Masson et Cie, 1969, 
820 pages, p 128–130.
7.  ADDISON WA, LIVENGOOD CH, SUTTON GP, 
PARKER RT: Abdominal sacral colpopexy with
Mercilene mesh in the. retroperitoneal position in the 
management of posthysterectomy vaginal vault 
prolapse and enterocele. Am J Obstet Gynecol, 1985; 
15: 140–146
8.  SUTTON JP, ADDISON WA, LIVENGOOD CH, 
HAMMOND CB: Life threatening hemorrhage 
complicating sacral colpopexy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 
1981; 140 : 836–837
9.  CAUBEL P, LEFRANC JP, FOULKES H, PUI A,
BLONDON J: Traitement par voie vaginale des
prolapsus génitaux récidivés. J Chir, 1989 ; 126 :
446–470
10. ADDISON WA, TIMMONS C, WALL LL, 
LIVENGOOD CH: Failed abdominal sacral colpopexy: 
observations and recommendations. Gynecol Obstet, 
1989; 74: 480–842.
11. QUERLEU D, PARMENTIER D, DELODINANCE P:
Premiers essais de la coelio-chirurgie dans le traitement 
du prolapsus génital et de l’incontinence urinaire 
d’effort. In : Les troubles de la statiques pelviennes. 
Blanc., boubli, Baudrant E., D’Ercale C. : 219 pages, 
Arnette. Paris Ed p 155–158.
12. WATTIEZ A, BOUGHIZANE S, ALEXANDRE F, CANIS M,
MAGES G, POULY JL, BRUHAT MA: Laparsocopic
procedures for stress incontinence and prolapse.
Current Opinion in Obstetrics and Gynecology. A. 
DeCherney and Stuart Cambell Editors. 1995, Vol 7, 
n° 4, 317–21.
13. WATTIEZ A, AIMI G, FINKELTIN F, CANIS M, POULY 
JL, POMEL C, GERARD CH, MAGE G, BRUHAT MA: 
Cure chirurgicale des prolapsus velico-uterins par voie 
coelioscopie exclusive Gunaikeia, 1997, 2, 2, 50–5
14. WATTIEZ A, CUCINELLA G, GIAMBELLI F, MENCAGLIA L: 
Laparoscopic burch procedure for retropubic
colpo suspension. It J Gynecol Obstet 1997, 9, 3, 114–7.
15. WATTIEZ A, CANIS M, MAGE G, POULY JL, BRUHAT MA:
Promontoﬁ xation dans le traitement des prolapsus : 
intérêt et technique de la voie coelioscopique.
Le Journal de Coeliochirugie. 1999, 31, 7–11.
Recommended Reading
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
200
operation theater 
Chapter XVII
Laparoscopic Surgical Staging 
of Endometrial Carcinoma
Fabrizio Barbieri and Luca Minelli 
Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics
“Sacro Cuore” General Hospital, Negrar, Italy
operation theater 
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecologic Laparoscopic Surgery
203
extent. For instance, the extent of lymphadenectomy has 
not yet been deﬁ ned: biopsy of the pelvic and lumbo-aortic 
lymph nodes, systematic pelvic and lumbo-aortic lymph-
adenectomy or removal only of enlarged lymph nodes. If, on 
the one hand, pelvic and lumbo-aortic lymphadenectomy is 
essential for correct staging, on the other hand it does not 
appear to inﬂ uence overall survival (at present there is only 
one meaningful scientiﬁ c study published by Kilgore et al in 
1995 that supports the therapeutic value of LND).
As stated above, the operative staging procedure  usually
includes total extrafascial hysterectomy, bilateral  adnexec-
tomy, intraperitoneal exploration / cytological washing and 
lymphadenectomy. In the majority of cases, pelvic lymphade-
nectomy is sufﬁ cient; however, the lumbo-aortic lymph nodes 
would be removed in the following situations: positive pelvic 
lymph nodes, ovarian metastases and clear cell or serous 
papillary histological type. For many authors, intraoperative 
pathological assessment can provide guidance on whether 
to go ahead with lymphadenectomy particularly based on 
 inﬁ ltration of the myometrium.
During the past 10 years numerous studies have assessed 
the value of the laparoscopic approach as compared to 
 traditional laparotomy in the staging and treatment of endo-
metrial carcinoma. Laparoscopy has been shown to be 
 capable of implementing all steps of the surgical staging 
 system in accordance with the FIGO guidelines.
Numerous studies have shown that with laparoscopic 
 surgery the incidence of postoperative complications such as 
pyrexia, paralytic ileus and wound infection is reduced; the 
duration of hospitalization is also reduced with an early return 
to normal activity.
The ﬁ rst study of laparoscopic treatment of endometrial carci-
noma was published in 1990. In the following period, various 
authors demonstrated the feasibility of laparoscopic surgic al 
staging taking into account potential limiting factors related to 
patient (anatomy, body mass index, presence of adhesions) 
and surgeon (experience and training) factors. Subsequently, 
a single randomized study with a short follow-up period 
reported that laparotomy and laparoscopy were equivalent in 
terms of overall survival and disease-free survival.
In recent years, therefore, entirely laparoscopic or  vaginally 
assisted laparoscopic surgical staging has become more 
and more widespread for the first stages of  endometrial 
 carcinoma. Obviously, it is extremely important for the 
 surgeon to have a profound knowledge of both laparoscopy 
and gynecologic oncology.
2.0 Preoperative Management 
When endometrial carcinoma is suspected clinically, usually 
because of abnormal uterine bleeding, it must be conﬁ rmed 
by endometrial histology. Where endometrial biopsy cannot 
be performed in an outpatient setting because of stenosis 
of the cervical canal or poor patient compliance, it must be 
 carried out under general anesthesia.
Although they are insufﬁ cient for diagnosis, gynecological 
examination and transvaginal ultrasound must be performed 
to rule out concomitant adnexal pathology.
Cytological examination of the endocervix and ectocervix can 
exclude the presence of cervical pathology.
Given the conﬁ rmed diagnosis of endometrial carcinoma, 
the next step is to determine the extent of the disease so 
that the correct surgical management and any adjunctive 
therapy can be planned. In 80% of cases, there is no clinic al 
 evidence of extrauterine disease so the only tests needed are 
chest radiograph and routine preoperative labora tory tests. 
 However, transvaginal ultrasound and/or MRI scan are useful 
for assessing myometrial inﬁ ltration and can indicate cases at 
risk of metastatic spread. If the liver function tests are altered 
or advanced-stage disease is suspected,  imaging procedures 
such as MRI, computed tomography (CT) and  abdominal 
and pelvic ultrasound can be useful in tracing metastases. In 
patients with characteristic symptoms of disease in certain 
organs, cystoscopy, contrast enema, cerebral CT or bone 
scan may be necessary.
3.0 Surgical Technique
In the majority of cases, total laparoscopic extrafascial 
 hysterectomy with bilateral adnexectomy and pelvic lymph-
adenectomy is sufﬁ cient. In a few cases, radical laparoscopic 
hysterectomy may be indicated (Figs. 1–12 and Tab. 1).
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
204
Fig. 1 
Laparoscopic incision of the vaginal wall.
Fig. 2 
External iliac artery and vein. External iliac lymph nodes. 
Fig. 3 
Internal iliac lymph nodes located medial to the external iliac
vessels.
Fig. 4 
Sampling of an internal iliac lymph node.
Fig. 5 
The external iliac artery and vein, and the internal iliac lymph nodes. 
The internal iliac artery is visible.
Fig. 6 
After sampling the lymph nodes the external iliac artery and vein,
the uterine artery and internal iliac artery can be localized.
operation theater 
Diagram 1 
Exposure and occlusion of the uterine artery by coagulation at its 
origin, the anterior division of the internal iliac artery.
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
205
Fig. 7 
The uterine vessels are distinct anatomical landmarks that highlight 
the boundary between the paravesical space anteriorly and the 
pararectal space posteriorly. 
Fig. 8 
The ureter can be followed laterally as far as the pelvis where it 
crosses the uterine artery. 
Fig. 9 
The ureter can be skeletonized safely. 
Fig. 10 
Opening the rectovaginal space between the cul-de-sac and the 
uterosacral ligaments.
Fig. 11 
Coagulation of the origin of the uterine artery with bipolar forceps. 
Internal iliac artery
(hypogastric artery)
Ureter
Obturator vessels
Uterine artery
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
206
4.0 Conclusions
The problems emphasized most frequently with the laparo-
scopic approach are:
Peritoneal Dissemination
Thanks to the studies by Vergote and Possover, it has been 
demonstrated fully that there is no significant statistical 
difference between laparotomy and laparoscopy with regard 
to the incidence of positive peritoneal cytology. It should be 
stressed that in both series the uterine manipulator was not 
used and the tubes were coagulated at the start to avoid 
intraoperative dissemination. Finally, it has been shown that 
positive peritoneal cytology on its own is not an unfavorable 
prognostic factor.
Recurrence in the Vaginal Vault
Numerous studies have shown that there is no increase in 
vaginal vault recurrence in patients with laparoscopically 
staged endometrial cancer.
Laparoscopic Port-site Metastases
Recurrence at the port-site following laparoscopic surgery 
has been described for all types of gynecologic cancers, 
even in patients with early disease. The incidence has not 
yet been accurately assessed because surgeons often do 
not achieve long-term patient follow-up and this type of 
recurrence is often considered to be of little prognostic value 
in the  presene of concomitant distant metastases. In the 
literature, the  incidence is 2.3% with gynecologic  carcinomas 
and as regards endometrial cancer, a recent review reports 4 
cases of port-site metastasis in patients with  laparoscopically 
staged endometrial carcinoma. Numerous hypotheses 
about  promoting factors have been proposed: the pneu-
moperitoneum, carbonic anhydride, the “pathway effect”, 
the local immune system, the surgical technique and also 
trocar  contamination. It is essential to emphasize that there 
is  nothing at present to explain whether the cause of these 
metastases is linked to the particular aggressiveness of the 
tumor or to laparoscopic surgery per se.
Some authors report a reduced incidence of port-site metas-
tases with peritoneal closure and/or surgical repair of the 
incision site.
1.  BEREK J, HACKER NF: Practical gynecologic oncology. 
Third edition 2000. Ed Lippincott Williams and Wilkins. 
Philadelphia
2.  BENEDET JL, BENDER H, JONES H, NGAN HY, 
PECORELLI S: FIGO staging classiﬁ cations and clinical 
practise guidelines in the management of gynecologic 
cancer. Int J Gynecol Obstet 2000, 70:209–62
3.  RAMIREZ PT, FRUMOVITZ M, WOLF JK, LEVENBACK C: 
Laparoscopic port-site metastases in patients with 
gynecological malignancies. Int J gynecological
malignancies 2004, 14:1070–7
4.  VAISBUCH E, DGANI R, BEN-ARIE A, HAGAY Z: The role 
of laparoscopy in ovarian tumors of low malignant 
potential and early-stage ovarian cancer. Obstet Gynecol 
Surv. 2005 May;60(5):326–30
5.  AGOSTINI A, ROBIN F, JAIS JP, AGGERBECK M,
VILDE F, BLANC B, LECURU F: Peritoneal closure 
reduces port site metastases. Surg Endosc 2002,
16:289-91
6.  KILGORE LC, PARTRIDGE EE, ALVAREZ RD, et al:
Adenocarcinoma of the endometrium: Survival
comparisons of patients with and without pelvic node 
sampling. Gynecol Oncol 1995, 56:29-33 
Recommended Reading
operation theater 
Chapter XVIII
Laparoscopic Pelvic and 
Lumbo-aortic Lymphadenectomy 
Fabrizio Barbieri and Luca Minelli 
Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics
“Sacro Cuore” General Hospital, Negrar, Italy
operation theater 
operation theater 
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecologic Laparoscopic Surgery
210
Fig. 3 
The external iliac vessels are excised to the level of the deep
circumﬂ ex iliac vein. 
Fig. 4 
Identiﬁ cation of the origin of the uterine artery.
Fig. 5 
Dissection of the prevesical space.
Fig. 6 
Exposure of the external iliac vessels from the lateral pelvic wall.
Fig. 7 
En bloc removal of the external iliac lymph nodes.
Fig. 8 
Removal of the obturator lymph nodes. 
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecologic Laparoscopic Surgery
211
5.2 Lumbo-aortic Lymphadenectomy 
6.0 Sentinel Lymph Node
Surgical landmarks:
1. round ligament (antero-superﬁ cial)
2. infundibulo-pelvic ligament ( medial superﬁ cial)
3. genitofemoral nerve (lateral and medial)
4. external iliac vessels (lateral and medial)
5. obliterated or blind umbilical artery (caudal and medial)
6. Cooper’s ligament (deep caudal and lateral)
7. uterine artery (medial)
8. ureter (medial)
9. obturator muscle (dorsomedial)
10. internal iliac vessels (superﬁ cial dorsal)
11. lumbosacral plexus (deep dorsal)
A retroperitoneal approach has also been described. This 
would have certain advantages for exposure of the operative 
ﬁ eld because the bowel is within the peritoneum and because 
of the reduced incidence of adhesions (a major advantage 
especially in patients who must have radio therapy) but at the 
expense of a greater incidence of lympho cele, which can be 
reduced by opening the peritoneum of the paracolic gutters 
at the end of the operation.
The ﬁ rst surgeon is at the patient’s right to remove the left 
para-aortic lymph nodes, and at the left to remove the right-
sided and pelvic nodes.
Following creation of the CO2 pneumoperitoneum, an 11 mm 
umbilical port is placed, with three 6-mm ports in the right and 
left iliac and suprapubic regions, and another 11-mm port in 
the left hypochondrium, which is used to apply traction to the 
bowel and to extract the lymph nodes with an endobag.
Lymphadenectomy begins in the right para-aortic region by 
making an incision in the peritoneum covering the uppermost 
part of the ipsilateral iliac artery.
The video camera is orientated so that the aorta and inferior 
vena cava appear horizontal with the inferior vena cava above 
The sentinel lymph node is the ﬁ rst node in the lymphatic 
system draining lymph from the primary tumor. If this lymph 
node is not invaded by metastasis, all other lymph nodes 
should be tumor-negative. The sentinel lymph node can be 
identiﬁ ed by peritumor injection of blue dye, which  usually 
stains the first draining lymph node, or by a peri tumor 
injection of a radioactive tracer (e.g., techne tium 99), which 
diffuses and accumulates in the sentinel lymph node where it 
can be visualized with a gammacamera.
Sentinel lymph node sampling can be indicated in the case 
of malignant melanoma, breast cancer and carcinoma of 
the vulva. The procedure can be performed laparos copically 
for surgical staging of other gynaecologic tumors such as 
endometrial and cervical cancer. In early-stage  cervical 
carcinoma, in particular, biopsy sampling of the sentinel 
lymph node allows frozen section analysis for  determination 
of the lymph node status. The metastasic status of the SN 
can help to  triage patients between radiochemotherapy or 
radical hysterectomy, thus reducing morbidity and post-
operative hospitalization.
Left lumbar lymph nodes: 
  above, lateral to and below
the aorta
Intermediate lymph nodes: between the aorta and the
 
inferior vena cava
Right lumbar lymph nodes: above, lateral to and below
 
the inferior vena cava
the aorta. The ureter is localized and pushed laterally. The 
precaval and paracaval lymph nodes are dissected starting 
to the right of the common iliac artery and continuing as far 
as the right ovarian vein using bipolar forceps. If the lymph 
nodes are positive or there is right ovarian cancer, the lymph-
adenectomy is extended as far as the renal vessels. 
For dissection to the left of the aorta, the camera is rotated 
through 180° and the ﬁ rst surgeon stands at the patient’s 
right side. After identifying the ipsilateral ureter and inferior 
mesenteric artery and elevating the mesosigmoid – being 
careful to preserve the superior hypogastric plexus – the left 
para-aortic, presacral and common iliac lymph nodes are 
removed (inframesenteric lymphadenectomy). In the case of 
left ovarian carcinoma, the lymphadenectomy is extended 
as far as the left renal vein, removing the entire infundibulo- 
pelvic ligament as far as its origin but sparing the inferior 
mesenteric artery.
In patients at high risk of lymph node recurrence or with 
ovarian tumors, the lymphadenectomy is extended to the 
region between the aorta and the inferior vena cava as far as 
the renal vessels (infrarenal lymphadenectomy).
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecologic Laparoscopic Surgery
212
operation theater 
Chapter XIX
Complications in
Laparoscopic Surgery
Leopoldo Carlos Videla Rivero 
and Beatrice Videla Rivero
Callao Surgical Institute
Buenos Aires, Argentina
operation theater 
operation theater 
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
216
Fig. 3
Assessment of intra-abdominal pressure by applying cephalic traction
to the anterior abdominal wall.
Fig. 2
Safety test performed with syringe and normal saline.
Fig. 4
Introduction of the ﬁ rst intra-umbilical trocar. 
As in ablative laparoscopic surgery, it is essential to restore 
the anatomical conditions as much as possible and to place 
sutures appropriately. In surgery for infertility, the use of 
microsurgical techniques is highly important.
The ﬁ rst laparoscopic access merits a separate  paragraph. 
This is the step in laparoscopic surgery that requires 
particular care. Creation of the ﬁ rst port can be  accomplished 
by  establishing the pneumoperitoneum with the Veress 
needle and using the open laparoscopy technique, with 
direct  insertion of the abdominal trocar or by use of a speciﬁ c 
optical trocar that allows constant visual control. However, all 
of these techniques involve the inherent risk of complications. 
Those, associated with the ﬁ rst laparoscopic access are the 
risk of perforating or injuring vessels or organs during entry 
and the possibility of a viscus remaining incarcerated in the 
incision during removal which entails a postoperative wound 
hernia.
Although the ﬁ rst laparoscopic access route offers  various 
alternatives, the surgeon’s choice is often influenced by 
a few subjective aspects. There is no single answer to the 
question which of the given options in terms of technique 
could be “best” for the laparoscopic approach: the best 
surgical  technique is the one the surgeon is familiar with and 
the best surgical maneuver is the one that he controls best. 
The surgeon should have a good command of the technique 
to be applied. Besides, there are further aspects that should 
be considered: the way how the technique is performed, the 
surgeon’s experience with the technique, conviction of its 
surgical usefulness, its choice and safety in performing it, and 
ﬁ nally the personal competences and aspects of technical 
feasibility as related to the infrastructure available.
The technique that is most universally employed and 
accepted in gynecologic laparoscopic surgery, especially in 
Europe, is the one with the Veress needle, which is followed 
by the classical safety maneuvers, intra-umbilical incision and 
introduction of a trocar with a conical tip. Introduction of the 
accessory trocars for the instruments is carried out under 
visual control (Figs. 1–9).
Fig. 1
Introduction of the Veress needle.
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
217
Fig. 5
Removal of the conical trocar with the cannula left in place.
Fig. 6
Insertion of the laparoscope with coupled video camera.
a
b
Figs. 7a–c
Sequence showing the passage of the laparoscope through the ﬁ rst trocar under visual
control.
c
Figs. 8a–c
Sequence demonstrating the insertion of the second trocar. This is always performed under 
visual control. 
a
b
c
operation theater 
operation theater 
The Ibero-American Gynecologic Endoscopy Society SIAEGI 
in 2002 on the occasion of its IX Congress in Quito, Ecuador 
collected the Latin American records of laparoscopic compli-
cations in Argentina and Chile (Tab. 6).
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
219
As institutional and personal publications, we present a few 
case series with the percentage of complications. In some 
cases the complications that occurred are listed (Tab. 7–11).
copies performed by surgeons at different levels of  training/ 
stages of the learning curve, with an incidence of 381 
complications (2.06%) (Tab. 5), 54 of which were reported as 
potentially lethal (0.29%).
O Extraperitoneal insufflation 118
O Hematoma of the abdominal wall 80
O Vascular injury 72
O Infection 34
O Postoperative bleeding 21
O Connected with anesthesia 16
O Urologic injury 14
O Intestinal injury 10
O Transitory nerve paralysis 5
O Pericholecystitis 3
O Hematoma of the vaginal vault 3
O Hyperthermia (48 h) 2
O Chemical peritonitis (dextran) 2
O Hypothermia 1
Total complications 
 381 (2.06%)
Tab. 5
Argentine Laparoscopic Surgery Society.
Argentina
5,183 cases  42 complications 0.81% (LC Videla Rivero)
Chile
2,140 cases  16 complications 0.74% (C Miranda)
Tab. 6
Ibero-American Gynecologic Endoscopy Society SIAEGI.
O 1 injury of the aorta
O 1 injury of the ureter
O 1 injury of the bladder
O 1 postoperative hemorrhage +  brachial plexus
O 1 immunologic peritonitis (dextran)
O 1 nerve compression with paresis of the lower limb
O 1 pericholecystitis
O 1 injury of the ileum (fistula)
O 1 hematoma of the vault
Surgical laparoscopies   
2,401
Complications 
10 (0.42%)
Tab. 7
LC Videla Rivero Private Gynecology Service.
Surgical laparoscopies  
2,500
Total complications  
38 (1.5%)
Major complications  
0.25%
Death or serious consequences  
0
Tab. 11
Gynecology Service, Lagomaggiore Hospital, Mendoza, Argentina.
O 2 injuries of the aorta (first trocar)
O 3 injuries of the ureter or bladder
O 3 injuries of the intestine
O 1 related to anesthesia
O 1 intraoperative hemorrhage
O 1 epigastric artery hemorrhage
O 5 postoperative
Surgical laparoscopies  
2,140
Complications 
16 (0.74%)
Tab. 10
University of Chile Hospital Clinic, Santiago de Chile.
Surgical laparoscopies  
2.711
Complications 
28 (1.03%)
Tab. 8
Gynecology Service, University of Buenos Aires Hospital Clinic, 
Argentina.
3 postoperative hemorrhages
O 2 at the vaginal vault, hysterectomy
O 1 from the myomectomy bed
1 intestinal injury
O first trocar
3 injuries of the bladder
O 1 during Burch suspension
O 1 during hysterectomy
O 1 during myomectomy
2 vascular injuries
O 1 first trocar, mesenteric artery
O 1 epigastric vein, second port
1 fistola uretero-vaginale
O during radical hysterectomy
Surgical laparoscopies  
1,261
Complications 
10 (0.79%)
Tab. 9
Gynecology Service of Private Institute specializing in Endoscopic 
Surgery, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
operation theater 
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
221
Figs. 10 a–d
Sequence demonstrating iatrogenic injury 
of the aorta during introduction of the ﬁ rst 
trocar (immediate conversion) in 1995.
c
d
a
b
Figs. 11a–c  Sequence demonstrating accidental injury of the right ureter during endometrioma removal, 1987.
c
a
b
Figs. 12 a–c  Sequence demonstrating iatrogenic injury to the external iliac artery during surgery for deep endometriosis, 2004.
b
a
c
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
222
Q Intraoperative complications
O 3 injuries of the bladder in 1996, 1997 and 2004, the ﬁ rst 
during total hysterectomy, the second during a Burch 
suspension. Dealt with in all cases by laparoscopic 
suture and indwelling catheter in the postoperative 
period. Good recovery (Fig. 13).
O 1 uterine hemorrhage in 1993 during laparoscopic 
hysterectomy. Due to nonavailability of bipolar forceps, 
the injury was repaired laparoscopically by hemostatic 
suture of the left uterine artery. Good recovery (Fig. 14).
O 1 hypotension of anesthetic origin
Q Postoperative complications 
O 1 injury common peroneal nerve (lateral popliteal 
sciatic nerve) with paresis of the right lower limb for 3 
months. Occurred in 1990 following excision of a large 
myoma by colpotomy and consequent  compression. 
The patient made a full recovery (Fig. 15).
O 1 pericholecystitis in 1991 following rupture of a 
dermoid cyst and spillage of its contents in the 
peritoneal cavity. The patient presented with an 
acute abdomen in the right hypochondrium known 
as  pericholecystitis. The complication resolved with 
simple medical treatment (Fig. 16).
O 1 chemical peritonitis in 1998. In conservative adnexal 
surgery, it is customary to leave dextran in the peri-
toneal cavity to prevent the formation of adhesions. 
This high molecular weight polymer can provoke a 
peritoneal reaction known as chemical peritonitis. It 
was treated by laparoscopy with aspiration of 10 l 
ascitic fluid and lavage with saline. The patient made 
a good recovery (Figs. 17–18).
O 1 injury of the ileum in 2003 which turned into an ileal 
fistula on the second postoperative day. After laparo-
tomy, the patient made a good recovery.
O 1 umbilical herniation in 1994. A week after laparo-
scopy when the sutures were being removed, the 
patient had umbilical herniation with prolapse of the 
omentum. The umbilical hernia was repaired after 
resection of the omentum and the patient made a 
good recovery.
Figs. 13 a, b
Sequence demonstrating iatrogenic injury 
of the bladder, injection of methylene blue 
and suture, 1994.
a
Figs. 14 a, b
Sequence demonstrating bleeding from 
the left uterine artery during hysterectomy, 
1993.
a
b
b
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
223
Figs. 15 a, b
Sequence demonstrating iatrogenic injury of 
the sciatic nerve during extraction of myoma 
via colpotomy, 1993.
a
b
Figs. 16 a, b
Sequence demonstrating pericholecystitis 
after rupture of a dermoid cyst, 1993.
a
b
Figs. 17 a, b
Sequence demonstrating a patient with 
dextran in the peritoneal cavity, 1988.
a
b
Fig. 18
Second-look laparoscopy in the patient with 
chemical peritonitis due to dextran, 1988.
operation theater 
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
225
The following is a module which is used on the www.endo-
gin.net website to classify and document the complications 
that can occur in laparoscopic surgery. The speciﬁ c aim of 
the module is to simplify data collection. It can also form part 
of a multicenter project for collecting data via the  Internet, 
in which individuals, teams, institutions and  scientific 
associations can participate. When the data have been 
collected according to our module, it will be possible to have 
precise qualitative and quantitative consistency regarding the 
incidence of  complications according to time and place.
9.0  Module for Recording Data on Complications in
Gynecologic Endoscopic Surgery (endogin.net)
Diagnosis of the complication
Q During surgery
Q During hospitalization
Q After discharge
 Within 3 days
 After 3 days
Importance of the complication
Q major, potentially lethal
Q minor
Resolution of the complication
Q phase of resolution
 immediate
 deferred
Q route of resolution
 laparoscopy
 hysteroscopy
 laparotomy
 vaginal
Q surgical team
 same team
 with gynecologic consultation
 with multidisciplinary consultation
 with a different team
Q hospital admission
 in the same place as the surgery
 normal
 intensive therapy
 transferred to a different center
 of greater complexity
 immediate
 deferred
Q re-operation
 number
 route of operation
 laparoscopic
 hysteroscopic
 laparotomy
 vaginal
 radiologic
Q procedure performed
 description
 electrosurgery
 burns
 light source and laparoscope
 burns
 various
 CO2
 operating lamp
 electrical equipment
Type of complication
Site of the complication
Q Anesthesiological
 related to the anesthesia itself
 related to the surgical procedure
Q Related to the access route
 laparoscopic
 hysteroscopica
 THL
 laparotomy
 vaginal
Q Related to the surgical procedure
 hemorrhage
 without blood transfusion
 with blood transfusion
 infection
 general
O septicemia
O peritonitis
 local
O surgical wound
O urinary
 collection
O abdominal
O pelvic
O retroperitoneal
 mechanical injury
 ileus
 torsion
 adhesion
 obliteration
 traumatic injury
 perforation
 division
 laceration
 electrosurgical injury
Q Operating room and instruments
 operating table
 nerve compression
 joint injuries
 muscle injuries
 stretching of plexuses
Q Abdominal wall
 emphysema
 hematoma
 infection
 eventration
Q Urinary
 ureter
 bladder
Q Vascular
 small vessels
 large vessels
Q Neural
 plexuses
 motor
 sensory
 sympathetic
 parasympathetic
 nerves
Q Intestinal
 stomach
 intestine
 colon
Q Uterine
 perforation
 synechiae
 hematometra
 pyometra
 metrorrhagia
Q Tubes
 section
 removal
 unilateral
 bilateral
Q Ovary
 removal
 unilateral
 bilateral
Progress of the complication
Q without consequences
Q with consequences
 slight
 moderate, interfering with ordinary life
 disabling
 type of consequence
 description
Q lethal
Analysis of the complication
Q Description
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
226
Recommended Reading
To sum up, it can be concluded that complications exist 
and are inherent in surgical practice. In laparoscopic  surgery 
there are complications specific to this technique. The 
complications are usually due to a sum of factors, which 
should be analyzed and discussed even if this often appears 
to be difﬁ cult for surgeons. We must accept the idea that it 
is essential to communicate our complications in order to 
contribute to a better knowledge of them. Classiﬁ cation and 
an appropriate record of these events will improve under-
standing. The best way to prevent complications is surgical 
knowledge of how they can be avoided. However, the best 
treatment of complications is intraoperative.
From 1998 to 2005 in the gynecology service of the  Callao 
Surgical Institute in Buenos Aires, the complication rate 
was 10/1261 (0.79%) and the rate of major complications 
was 3/1261 (0.23%). In a French multicenter study, the 
percentages were similar, with 0.89% for complications in 
general and 0.22–0.34% for major ones. A few studies have 
reported higher percentages.
10.0 Conclusions
1. 
BARBOSA C: Manual Ilustrado de Cirurgia Videolapa-
roscopica em Ginecologia Texto e atlas. 1998; Cap 10, 
Livraria e Editora RevienteR Ltda.
2. 
BATEMAN BG, KOLP LA, HOEGER K: Complications of 
laparoscopy-operative and diagnostic. Fertility and
Sterility 1996; 66: 30–35.
3. 
BONGARD F, DUBECZ S, KLEIN S: Complications of 
therapeutic laparoscopy. Current Problems in Surgery 
1994: 862–924
4. 
CANDIANI M, CANIS M, LUCIANO A, MARANA R, 
MENCAGLIA L, WATTIEZ A, ZUPI E: Testo Atlante di 
Chirugia Laparoscopica in Ginecologia. 1997; Cap.7.1, 
Poli industria Chimica SpA. Edicione fuori commercio. 
Mosby Doyma Italia Srl. Milano, Italia
5. 
CHAPRON CM, PIERRE F, LACROIX S, QUERLEU D, 
LANSAC J, DUBUISSON J-B: Major vascular injuries 
during gynecologic laparoscopy. J Am Coll Surg 1997; 
185:461–65.
6. 
GARRY R, PHILLIPS G: How safe is the laparoscopic 
approach to hysterectomy? Gynaecological Endoscopy 
1995, 4:77–79.
7. 
GARRY R, PHILLIPS G: How safe is the laparoscopic 
approach to hysterectomy? Gynaecological Endoscopy. 
1995; 4:77–79.
8. 
HASSON HM: Open laparoscopy as a Method of 
Access in Laparoscopic Surgery. Gynaecological 
Endoscopy, 1999; 8:353–62
9. 
HASSON HM: Open laparoscopy: In Gynecology and 
Obstetrics, J.J. Sciarra, Ed., Harper & Row, Philadelphia, 
1992, Vol. 6, Ch.44, p.1–8.
10. HILL DJ: Complications of the laparoscopic approach.  
Bailliers Clin Obstet Gynaecol 1994; 8:865–79.
11. LEHEMANN-WILLENBROCK E, RIEDEL HH, MECKE H 
AND SEMM K: Pelviscopy/Laparoscopy and its Compli-
cations in Germany, 1949-1988; The Journal of Repro-
ductive Medicine 37(8): 671–677, Ref 10, Ago 1992.
12. LIU C.Y: Laparoscopic Hysterectomy and Pelvic Floor 
Reconstruction. 1996; Cap 15, Blackwell Science Inc.
13. MENEIRO M, MELOTTI G, MOURET PH: Cirugía
Laparoscopica. 1996; Cap2:34–38, Editorial Médica 
Panamericana.
14. MIRANDA CS, CARVAJAL A: Complication of operative 
Gynecological Laparoscopy. Journal Society
Laparoscopic Surgeons 2003 Jan-Mar; 7(1):53–8.
15. NEZHAT C, CHILDERS J, NEZHAT F, NEZHAT C.H, 
SEIDMAN D.S: Major retroperitoneal vascular injury 
during laparoscopic surgery. : Hum-Reprod. 1997 Mar; 
12(3): 480–3 
16. NORDESTGAARD AG, BODILY KC, OSBORNE RW, 
BUTTORFF JD: Mayor vascular injuries during 
laparoscopic procedures. The American Journal of 
Surgery 1995; 169: 543–545
17. PETERSON HB, HULKA JF, PHILLIPS JM: American 
Asociation of Gynecoligic Laparoscopists’ 1988 
Menbership Survey on Operative Laparoscopy. 
The Journal of Reproductive Medicine, 586–598.
18. Primera Cátedra de Ginecologia, Hospital de Clínicas 
Universidad de Buenos Aires: Memoria anual de 1994
19. QUERLEU D: y col. (conversiones) Gynecol. Endosc. 
2:3–6, 1993. 
20. QUERLEU D, CHAPRON C: Complications of
gynecologic laparoscopic surgery. Current Opinion in 
Obstetrics and Gynecology 1995, 7: 257–261
21. SADEGHI-NEJAD H, KAVOUSSI LR, PETERS CA: 
Bowel injury in open technique laparoscopic cannula 
placement. Urology 1996; 43:559–60.
22. SARROUF J: Complicaciones en Laparoscopia- 2002, 
XIV Congreso Peruano de Obstetricia y Ginecologia 
Lima, Perú en: Docencia, www.endogin.net.
23. SEMM K: Cutting versus conical tip designs 
Endosc-Surg-Allied-Technol. 1995 Feb; 3(1): 39–47
24. TERNAMIAN A M: Laparoscopy without trocars. 
Surg-Endosc. 1997 Aug; 11(8): 815–8 
25. VANCAILLIE TG: Active electrode monitoring. How to 
prevent unintentional thermal injury associated with 
monopolar electrosurgery at laparoscopy. Surg-Endosc. 
1998 Aug; 12(8): 1009–12 
26. VIDELA RIVERO LC. ORTIZ J: Encuesta sobre Compli-
caciones en Cirugía Laparoscopica. Revista de la Socie-
dad Argentina de Cirugía Laparoscopica. 1995, 2: 16–21
27. VIDELA RIVERO LC: Base de datos de Complicaciones 
en Endoscopia Ginecológica 2005, 
www.endogin.net.
operation theater 
Recommended Set
for Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
228
Basic Instrument Set for Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
26003 AA 
HOPKINS® II Straight Forward Telescope 0º, 
enlarged view, diameter|10|mm, length|31|cm,
autoclavable,  ﬁ ber|optic light transmission
incorporated, color code: green
26120 JL 
VERESS Pneumoperitoneum Needle,
with spring-loaded blunt stylet LUER-Lock,
autoclavable, diameter 2.1 mm, length 13|cm
30103 MC 
Trocar, with conical tip, insufﬂ ation stopcock,
multifunctional valve, 
size 11 cm, working length 10.5 cm,
color code: green,
 
 
including:
 
 
Trocar only, with conical tip
 
 
Cannula, without valve, with insufﬂ ation stopcock
 
 
Multifunctional Valve, size 11 mm
30160 MC 
3 x Trocar, with conical tip, insufﬂ ation stopcock,
multifunctional valve,
size 6 mm, working length 10.5 cm,
color code: black,
 
 
including:
 
 
Trocar only, with conical tip
 
 
Cannula, without valve, 
with insufﬂ ation stopcock
 
 
Multifunctional Valve, size 6 mm
30160 S 
3 x Thread Sleeve, for trocar size|6|mm, 
color code: black
33351 ME 
CLICKLINE® MANHES Grasping Forceps, rotating,
dismantling, insulated, with connector pin for
unipolar coagulation, with irrigation connection for 
cleaning, single action jaws, width of jaws 4.8 mm,
with multiple teeth, for atraumatic and accurate
grasping, size 5 mm, length 36 cm
33361 ON 
CLICKLINE® Grasping Forceps, rotating, dismantling, 
without connector pin for unipolar coagulation, 
single action jaws, with especially ﬁ ne serration, 
fenestrated, size 5 mm, length 36 cm
33351 SN 
CLICKLINE® SCHNEIDER Lymph Node Grasping
Forceps, rotating, dismantling, insulated,
with connector pin for unipolar coagulation, single
action jaws, atraumatic, size 5 mm, length 36 cm
33351 ML 
CLICKLINE® KELLY Dissecting and Grasping
Forceps, rotating, dismantling, insulated, 
with connector pin for unipolar coagulation,
double action jaws, size 5 mm, length 36 cm
34351 MA 
CLICKLINE® Scissors, rotating, dismantling, insulated, 
with connector pin for unipolar coagulation, 
double action jaws, length of blades 17 mm, 
serrated, curved, spoon-shaped blades, size 5 mm,
length 36 cm
38361 ML 
RoBi® KELLY Grasping Forceps, 
CLERMONT-FERRAND model, rotating, dismantling, 
with connector pin for bipolar coagulation, 
double action jaws, especially suitable for dissection, 
size 5 mm, length 36 cm
38361 ON 
RoBi® Grasping Forceps,
CLERMONT-FERRAND model, rotating, dismantling, 
with connector pin for bipolar coagulation,
double action jaws, fenestrated, 
with especially ﬁ ne atraumatic serration,
size 5 mm, length 36 cm
38361 MD 
RoBi® KELLY Grasping Forceps, 
CLERMONT-FERRAND model, rotating, dismantling, 
with connector pin for bipolar coagulation, 
double action jaws, especially suitable for dissection, 
size 5 mm, length 36 cm
26173 BN 
Suction and Irrigation Tube, anti-reﬂ ex surface,
with two-way stopcock, for single hand control,
size 5 mm, length 36 cm
30675 ND 
MANHES High Frequency Needle, for splitting
and  coagulation, insulated, with connector pin for 
unipolar coagulation, length 31 cm
26775 UF 
Coagulating and Dissecting Electrode,
L-shaped, with connector pin for unipolar 
coagulation, size 5 mm, length 36 cm
26775 UE 
Coagulating and Dissecting Electrode,
spatula-shaped, blunt with connector pin for
unipolar coagulation, size 5 mm,
working length 36 cm
26005 M 
Unipolar High Frequency Cord, with 5 mm plug for 
HF unit, models KARL|STORZ AUTOCON® system 
(50, 200, 350), AUTOCON® II 400 (111, 115) and Erbe 
type ICC, length 300 cm
26176 LE 
Bipolar High Frequency Cord, to KARL|STORZ 
 Coagulator 26021|B/C/D, 860021|B/C/D, 27810|B/C/D, 
28810|B/C/D, AUTOCON® system (50, 200, 350),
AUTOCON® II 400 system (111, 113, 115) and
Erbe-Coagulator, T- and ICC-row, length 300|cm
39301 C 
Plastic Container for Sterilizing and  Storage of
two Telescopes, perforated, with transparent lid,
with silicone  telescope holder, external dimensions 
(w|x|d|x|h): 520|x|90|x|45|mm
39301 CH 
Silicone Telescope Holder, for two  telescopes,
up to size 10 mm, i.|e. for use with  plastic containers 
39301 B to D
26173 SP 
2 x SZABO-BERCI Needle Holder “PARROT-JAW®”, 
with| diamond coated jaws, straight handle,
with ratchet, for use with trocars size 6|mm, 
 length|33|cm, for use with suture material
2/0 – 4/0, needle size SH (Ethicon), EN-S|(Ski),
V|20 (USSC)
26596 CL 
CICE Knot Tier, CLERMONT-FERRAND model,
for|extracorporeal knotting,  size|5|mm, length 36|cm 
26168 D 
Uterine Manipulator, CLERMONT-FERRAND model, 
complete 
26168 TN 
Uterine Manipulator, TINTARA model, complete
26175 BL 
Myoma Fixation Instrument, screw-shaped, 
size|5|mm
26713018 
ROTOCUT G1, diameter 12 mm/15 mm cutter, for 
laparoscopic application for use with UNIDRIVE® S III
495 NCS 
Fiber Optic Light Cable, extremely heat-resistant, 
diameter 4.8 mm, length 250 cm
operation theater 
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
230
30103 MC 
Trocar, with conical tip, insufﬂ ation stopcock,
multifunctional valve,
size 11 cm, working length 10.5 cm,
color code: green,
 
including:
 
Trocar only, with conical tip
 
Cannula, without valve,
with insufﬂ ation stopcock
 
Multifunctional Valve, size 11 mm
330160 MC Trocar, with conical tip, insufﬂ ation stopcock,
multifunctional valve,
size 6 mm, working length 10.5 cm,
color code: black,
 
including:
 
Trocar only, with conical tip
 
Cannula, without valve, 
with insufﬂ ation stopcock
 
Multifunctional Valve, size 6 mm
30160 S 
Thread Sleeve, for trocar size|6|mm, 
color code: black
Trocars and Accessories
Size 6 mm, 11 mm
operation theater 
operation theater 
operation theater 
operation theater 
operation theater 
operation theater 
operation theater 
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
238
Myoma Fixation Instrument
26175 BL 
Myoma Fixation Instrument, screw-shaped, 
size|5|mm
26175 BL
TINTARA Uterine Manipulator
26168 TN 
TINTARA Uterine Manipulator, complete
 
including:
 
Handle
 
Working Insert, size|4.0|mm,
length|50|mm
 
Working Insert, size|4.5|mm, 
length|50|mm
 
Working Insert, size|4.8|mm,
length|80|mm
 
Tube Support
26168 TN
26168 TNB
26168 TND
26168 TNF
26168 TNC
Optional Accessories:
26168 TNF Working Insert, size 4 mm, length 40 mm, 
for use with 26168 TN
26168 TNS Pertubation Tube, 
with LUER-Lock Tube Connector 600008
26168 V 
Uterine Tenaculum Forceps, length 22 cm
n
n
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
239
ROTOCUT G1 Morcellator
26 7130 18 ROTOCUT G1, diameter 12 mm/15 mm cutter,
for laparoscopic application, for use with UNIDRIVE® S III
 
including:
 
1x Hollow shaft motor
 
1x Obturator, with blunt tip, diameter 12 mm
1x Same, diameter 15 mm 
 
1x Trocarbush, askew, diameter 12 mm
1x Same, diameter 15 mm 
 
1x Handle, laparoscopic
 
1x Cutter, laparoscopic, diameter 12 mm
1x Same, diameter 15 mm
 
1x Protective cap, diameter 12 mm
1x Same, diameter 15 mm 
 
1x Motor valve, diameter 12 mm
1x Same, diameter 15 mm
 
1x Sealing cap, for single use, 10 pieces
 
1x CLICKLINE® Tenaculum Forceps, diameter 12 mm
1x Same, diameter 15 mm
 
1x Spacer, package of 5 pcs
Maintenance and care of the motor components (Rotocut G1, EC-motor),
must be carried out with the universal spray 280052 B+C).
Please order separately.
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
240
26 7130 80  Cleaning Adaptor with cone adaption for cleaning pistol 
for fast and easy manual rinsing or drying of hollow shaft motor 
ROTOCUT G1 26 7130 30
26 7130 81 Cleaning Adaptor with LUER-Lock connector for cleaning 
machine for fast and easy mechanically rinsing of hollow 
shaft motor ROTOCUT G1 26 7130|30
Manual Cleaning
Machine Cleaning
Accessories
Cleaning Adaptor for ROTOCUT G1 
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
241
39510 G  
Wire Tray System for ROTOCUT G1, 
for cleaning, sterilization and storage of 
one ROTOCUT G1 Morcellator system,
 
including:
Base Tray
Upper Tray
Lid
External dimensions (w x d x h): 
535 x 250 x 210 mm
(ROTOCUT G1 articles not included)
Accessories
Tray system for cleaning, sterilization and storage of ROTOCUT G1 Morcellator 
system for laparoscopic use.
39510 GA 
Bottom Level to wire tray system 39510 G
(forceps level), external dimensions 
(w x d x h): 535 x 250 x 100 mm
(ROTOCUT G1 articles not included)
39510 GB 
Upper Level to wire tray system 
39510 G (motor level), 
external dimensions (w x d x h): 
535 x 250 x 100 mm
(ROTOCUT G1 articles not included)
39510 GL 
Lid for wire tray system 39510 G,
with handles, 
external dimensions (w x d): 
530 x 250 mm
(can be mounted either on Base Tray 
or on Upper Tray)
Special features: 
 Ensures a suitable, validated reprocessing of the ROTOCUT G1 
morcellator system
 Combined or separate use of trays
 Lid with opening for cleaning adaptor 
 Mechanical cleaning and disinfection is facilitated by cleaning ports 
 Safe transport and handling during routine use in the OR and CSSD (Central Sterile Supply Department)
 Protection of the whole ROTOCUT G1 system during transportation, cleaning and storage
operation theater 
operation theater 
operation theater 
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
245
IMAGE 1 HUB™ HD
FULL HD Camera Heads
22 220055-3
222200 55-3 
 50 Hz
IMAGE 1 H3-Z
60 Hz 
Three-Chip FULL HD Camera Head
max. resolution 1920 x 1080 pixels, progressive scan, soakable,
gas- and plasma-sterilizable, with integrated Parfocal Zoom Lens,
focal length f = 15 – 31 mm (2x),
2 freely programmable camera head buttons
IMAGE 1 FULL HD Camera Heads
50 Hz
60 Hz
Image sensor
Pixel output signal H x V
Dimensions (w x h x l)
Weight
Optical interface
Min. sensitivity
Grip mechanism
Cable
Cable length
H3-Z
22 220055-3 (50/60 Hz)
–
3x 1/3" CCD chip
1920 x 1080
39 x 49 x 114 mm
270 g
integrated Parfocal Zoom Lens,
f = 15-31 mm (2x)
F 1.4/1.17 Lux
standard eyepiece adaptor
non-detachable
300 cm
Specifications:
IMAGE1 FULL HD Camera Heads
50/60 Hz
Image sensor
Pixel output signal H x V
Dimensions (w x h x l)
Weight
Optical interface
Min. sensitivity
Grip mechanism
Cable
Cable length
H3-P
22 220056-3 (PAL/NTSC)
3x 1/3" CCD chip
1920 x 1080
35 x 47 x 88 mm
226 g
pendulum system,
ﬁ xed focus f = 16 mm
F 1.4/1.17 Lux
standard eyepiece adaptor
non-detachable
300 cm
Specifications:
22 2200 56-3
222200 56-3 
 50 Hz
IMAGE 1 H3-P Three-Chip
60 Hz 
FULL HD Pendulum Camera Head
with pendulum system and ﬁ xed focus, max. resolution 1920 x 1080
pixels, progressive scan, soakable, gas- and plasma-sterilizable,
focal length f = 16 mm, 2 freely programmable camera head buttons, 
for use with color systems PAL/NTSC
For use with IMAGE 1 HUB™ HD Camera Control Unit SCB 22 2010 11U1xx and IMAGE1 HD 
Camera Control Unit SCB 22 2020 11U1xx
n
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
246
IMAGE 1 HUB™ HD
FULL HD Camera Heads – autoclavable
n
22 2200 61-3
22 2200 61-3 
 50 Hz
IMAGE 1 H3-ZA
60 Hz 
Three-Chip FULL HD Camera Head
autoclavable, max. resolution 1920 x 1080 pixels, progressive scan, 
soakable, gas- and plasma-sterilizable, with integrated Parfocal Zoom 
Lens, focal length f = 15 – 31 mm (2x), 2 freely programmable camera 
head buttons, for use with color systems PAL/NTSC
IMAGE 1 FULL HD Camera Heads
50 Hz
Image sensor
Pixels output signal H x V
Dimensions (w x h x l)
Weight
Optical interface
Min. sensitivity
Grip mechanism
Cable
Cable length
H3-ZA
22220061-3 (50/60 Hz)
3x 1/3" CCD chip
1920 x 1080
39 x 49 x 100 mm
299 g
integrated Parfocal Zoom Lens,
f = 15-31 mm
F 1.4/1.17 Lux
standard eyepiece adaptor
non-detachable
300 cm
H3-FA
22 220060-3 (50/60 Hz)
3x 1/3" CCD chip
1920 x 1080
39 x 49 x 93 mm
261 g
ﬁ xed focus f = 17 mm
F 1.4/1.17 Lux
standard eyepiece adaptor
non-detachable
300 cm
Specifications:
For use with IMAGE 1 HUB
TM HD Camera Control Unit SCB 22 2010 11-1xx and
IMAGE 1 HD Camera Control Unit SCB 22202011-1xx
22 2200 60-3 
 50 Hz
IMAGE 1 H3-FA
60 Hz 
Three-Chip FULL HD Camera Head
autoclavable, max. resolution 1920 x 1080 pixels, progressive scan, 
soakable, gas- and plasma- sterilizable, ﬁ xed focus,
focal length f = 17 mm, 2 freely programmable camera head buttons, 
for use with color systems PAL/NTSC
22 2200 60-3
39301 Z3TS
Plastic Container for Sterilization and Storage
of camera heads IMAGE1 H3-Z, H3-ZA and H3-FA, 
autoclavable, suitable for use with steam, gas and
hydrogen peroxide sterilization, Sterrad® compatible,
external dimensions (w x d x h): 385 x 255 x 75 mm
39301 PHTS Plastic Container for Sterilization and Storage
of camera heads IMAGE1 H3-P and H3-ZI,
autoclavable, suitable for use with steam, gas and 
hydrogen peroxide sterilization, Sterrad® compatible,
external dimensions (w x d x h): 385 x 255 x 75 mm
 
Please note: The instrument displayed is not
included in the plastic container.
 
Only camera heads marked “autoclave” can be
placed in the tray for steam sterilization.
 
Please note: The instrument displayed is not 
included in the plastic container.
 
Only camera heads marked “autoclave” can be
placed in the tray for steam sterilization.
n
operation theater 
operation theater 
operation theater 
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
250
Electronic CO2-ENDOFLATOR with KARL STORZ SCB
26 4305 08-1 Electronic CO2-ENDOFLATOR SCB
 
including:
 
Electronic CO2-ENDOFLATOR® 
with KARL STORZ SCB
power supply: 100 – 240 VAC, 50/60 Hz
 
Mains Cord
 
Silicone Tubing Set, sterilizable
 
Universal Wrench
 
SCB Connecting Cable, length 100 cm
 
*  CO2/N2O-Gas Filter, sterile, for single use, 
package of 10
 
Subject to the needs of the customer, 
additional accessories must be ordered 
and acquired separately.
Please note: For fully utilizing maximum insufﬂ ation capacity of
the Electronic ENDOFLATOR®  SCB the use of
KARL STORZ HiCap® Trocars is recommended.
For additional information see catalog LAPARO SCOPY.
*) This product is marketed by mtp.
For additional information, please apply to:
mtp medical technical promotion gmbh, 
Take-Off Gewerbepark 46,
D-78579 Neuhausen ob Eck
E-mail: info@mtp-tut.de
26 4305 20-1
operation theater 
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
252
20 53520x-12x AUTOCON® II 400
with KARL STORZ SCB
 
including:
 
Mains Cord
 
SCB Connecting Cable, length 100 cm
AUTOCON® II 400 SCB
20 535201-125 AUTOCON® II 400  High-End, Set SCB,
power supply 220 - 240 VAC, 50/60 Hz,
HF connecting sockets: Bipolar combination,
Multifunction, Unipolar 3-pin + Erbe,
Neutral electrode combination 6.3 mm,
jack and 2-pin, System requirements:
SCB R-UI Software, 
Release 20090001-43 or higher
 
including:
 
AUTOCON® II 400 with KARL STORZ SCB
 
Mains Cord
 
SCB Connecting Cable, length 100 cm
Cold Light Fountain XENON 300 SCB
20 133101-1 
Cold Light Fountain XENON 300  SCB
with built-in antifog air-pump, and integrated 
KARL STORZ Communication Bus System SCB
power supply:
100–125 VAC/220–240 VAC, 50/60 Hz
 
including:
 
Mains Cord
 
Silicone Tubing Set, autoclavable, length 250 cm
 
SCB Connecting Cable, length 100 cm
20133027 
Spare Lamp Module XENON
with heat sink, 300 watt, 15 volt
20133028 
XENON Spare Lamp, only,
300 watt, 15 volt
Fiber Optic Light Cable
495 NCS 
Fiber Optic Light Cable,
with straight connector, extremely heat-resistant,
diameter 4.8 mm, length 250 cm
operation theater 
operation theater 
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
255
Recommended Accessories for Equipment Cart
 29005 KKM Special Power Cord,
length 100 cm,
with IEC-plug and socket,
with UL-approval,
for usage with isolation transformer
29005 TBG and 29003 TBK
29005 KKM
29005 TBG Isolation Transformer, 
2000 VA, with 8 IEC-sockets, 
8 potential earth connectors,
230 VAC (50/60 Hz)
29005 TBG
29003 IW 
Earth Leakage Monitor,
for mounting at equipment cart,
for usage with isolation transformer
29005 TBG and 29003 TBK
29003 IW
 29005 MZD  Monitor Holding Arm,
height and side adjustable,
swiveling and tilting,
centrally mountable, swivel range 190°,
overhang 300 mm,
load capacity max. 15 kg, 
with monitor ﬁ xation VESA 75/100,
for usage with equipment cart 29005 DRB
29005 MZD
operation theater 
operation theater 
operation theater 
Manual of Gynecological Laparoscopic Surgery
258
Notes:
operation theater 
