Joanna Bouez, MD
Clinical Fellow 
Department of Anesthesiology 
Toronto Western Hospital, University Health Network
University of Toronto
Toronto, Ontario, Canada
Matthias R. Braehler, MD, PhD
Professor 
Department of Anesthesia and Perioperative Care
University of California, San Francisco
San Francisco, California
Kristine E.W. Breyer, MD
Associate Professor
Department of Anesthesia and Perioperative Care 
University of California, San Francisco
San Francisco, California
Richard Brull, MD, FRCPC
Professor 
Department of Anesthesia
University of Toronto;
Evelyn Bateman Cara Operations Chair in Ambulatory 
Anesthesia and Women's Health
Women's College Hospital;
Staff Anesthesiologist
Toronto Western Hospital and Women's College Hospital
Toronto, Ontario, Canada
Joyce Chang, MD
Associate Professor 
Department of Anesthesia and Perioperative Care
University of California, San Francisco
San Francisco, California
Tyler Seth Chernin, MD
Associate Professor 
Department of Anesthesia and Perioperative Care
University of California, San Francisco
San Francisco, California
Catherine Chiu, MD
Fellow
Department of Anesthesia and Perioperative Care
University of California, San Francisco
San Francisco, California
Frances Chung, MBBS, FRCPC
Professor 
Department of Anesthesiology 
Toronto Western Hospital, University Health Network
University of Toronto
Toronto, Ontario, Canada
Hemra Cil, MD
Assistant Professor
Department of Anesthesia and Perioperative Care
University of California, San Francisco
San Francisco, California
Neal H. Cohen, MD, MPH, MS
Professor Emeritus
Anesthesia and Perioperative Care and Medicine
UCSF School of Medicine;
Vice Dean
UCSF School of Medicine
San Francisco, California
Heather A. Columbano, MD
Assistant Professor
Department of Anesthesiology
Wake Forest Baptist Health
Winston-Salem, North Carolina
Daniel Charles Cook, MD
Assistant Professor of Anesthesiology
Weill Cornell Medicine
New York, New York
AL GRAWANY
Contributors
ix
Wilson Cui, MD, PhD
Associate Professor 
Department of Anesthesia and Perioperative Care
University of California, San Francisco
San Francisco, California
Ryan Paul Davis, MD
Clinical Assistant Professor
Department of Anesthesiology
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, Michigan
Andrew J. Deacon, B Biomed Sci (Hons), MBBS, 
FANZCA
Staff Specialist 
Department of Anaesthesia and Pain Medicine
The Canberra Hospital
Garran, Australia
Anne L. Donovan, MD
Associate Clinical Professor
Department of Anesthesia and Perioperative Care
Division of Critical Care Medicine
University of California, San Francisco
San Francisco, California
Talmage D. Egan, BA, MD
Professor and Chair
Anesthesiology
University of Utah School of Medicine
Salt Lake City, Utah
John Feiner, MD
Professor 
Department of Anesthesia and Perioperative Care
University of California, San Francisco
San Francisco, California
Alana Flexman, MD, MBA(C), FRCPC
Clinical Associate Professor
Department of Anesthesiology, Pharmacology and Therapeutics
The University of British Columbia
Vancouver, Canada
David Furgiuele, MD, FASA
Assistant Professor and Associate Director of Anesthesiology 
Service
New York University Langone Orthopedic Hospital
New York University Langone Health,
Department of Anesthesiology, Perioperative Care, and Pain 
Medicine
New York University Grossman School of Medicine
New York, New York
Seema Gandhi, MD
Clinical Professor
Department of Anesthesia and Perioperative Care
University of California, San Francisco
San Francisco, California
Steven Gayer, MD, MBA
Professor of Anesthesiology and Ophthalmology
Anesthesiology
University of Miami Miller School of Medicine
Miami, Florida
Sarah Gebauer, BA, MD
Anesthesiologist
Elk River Anesthesia Associates;
Chair, Perioperative Service Line
Yampa Valley Medical Center
Steamboat Springs, Colorado
David B. Glick, MD, MBA
Professor,
Section Chief, Multispecialty Adult Anesthesia
Anesthesia and Critical Care
University of Chicago
Chicago, Illinois
Erin A. Gottlieb, MD, MHCM
Associate Professor
Surgery and Perioperative Care
The University of Texas at Austin Dell Medical School;
Chief of Pediatric Cardiac Anesthesiology
Dell Children’s Medical Center
Austin, Texas
Contributors
x
Andrew T. Gray, MD, PhD
Professor
Department of Anesthesia and Perioperative Care
University of California, San Francisco
San Francisco, California
Hugh C. Hemmings, Jr., MD, PhD
Professor and Chair of Anesthesiology
Professor of Pharmacology
Senior Associate Dean for Research
Weill Cornell Medicine;
Anesthesiologist-in-Chief
NewYork-Presbyterian Hospital/Weill Cornell Medical Center
New York, New York
David W. Hewson, BSc (Hons), MBBS, PGCert Ed, 
FHEA, FRCA, PhD
Consultant Anaesthetist
Department of Anaesthesia and Critical Care
Nottingham University Hospitals NHS Trust;
Honorary Assistant Professor
Academic Unit of Injury, Inflammation and Recovery Science
University of Nottingham
Nottingham, United Kingdom
Lindsey L. Huddleston, MD
Associate Clinical Professor
Department of Anesthesia and Perioperative Care 
University of California, San Francisco
San Francisco, California
Robert W. Hurley, MD, PhD
Professor of Anesthesiology, Neurobiology and Anatomy 
Associate Dean
Wake Forest University School of Medicine;
Executive Director, Pain Shared Service Line
Atrium Health—Wake Forest Baptist
Winston Salem, North Carolina
Andrew Infosino, MD
Health Sciences Clinical Professor
Department of Anesthesia and Perioperative Care,
Health Sciences Clinical Professor
Department of Pediatrics
UCSF Benioff Children's Hospital
San Francisco, California
Ken B. Johnson, MD, MS
Professor
Department of Anesthesiology
University of Utah
Salt Lake City, Utah
Tae Kyun Kim, MD, PhD
Professor
Department of Anesthesia and Pain Medicine
Pusan National University Hospital
Seo-gu, Busan, South Korea
Anjali Koka, MD
Associate in Perioperative Anesthesia 
Department of Anesthesiology, Critical Care, and Pain Medicine
Boston Children's Hospital;
Instructor of Anesthesia
Harvard Medical School
Boston, Massachusetts
Benn Lancman, MBBS, MHumFac, FANZCA
Specialist Anaesthesiologist
Department of Anaesthesia and Perioperative Medicine,
Trauma Consultant
Department of Surgery
Alfred Health;
Specialist Anaesthetist
Department of Anaesthesia, Perioperative and Pain Medicine
Peter Mac Callum Cancer Centre
Melbourne, Victoria, Australia
AL GRAWANY
Contributors
xi
Chanhung Z. Lee, MD, PhD
Professor 
Department of Anesthesia and Perioperative Care
University of California, San Francisco
San Francisco, California
Matthieu Legrand, MD, PhD
Professor 
Department of Anesthesia and Perioperative Care
Division of Critical Care Medicine
University of California, San Francisco
San Francisco, California
Cynthia A. Lien, MD
Professor and Chair of Anesthesiology
Medical College of Wisconsin
Milwaukee, Wisconsin
Maytinee Lilaonitkul, MBBS, BSc, MRCP, FRCA
Assistant Clinical Professor 
Department of Anesthesia and Perioperative Care
University of California, San Francisco
San Francisco, California
Linda L. Liu, MD
Professor
Department of Anesthesia and Perioperative Care
University of California, San Francisco
San Francisco, California
Alan J.R. Macfarlane, BSc (Hons), MBChB, MRCP, 
FRCA
Consultant Anaesthetist
Department of Anaesthesia
Glasgow Royal Infirmary;
Honorary Professor
Anaesthesia, Critical Care and Pain Medicine
University of Glasgow
Glasgow, United Kingdom
Vinod Malhotra, MBBS, MD, FACA
Professor and Senior Executive Advisor to the Chair 
Anesthesiology,
Professor of Anesthesiology in Clinical Urology
Urology,
Weill Cornell Medicine–NewYork-Presbyterian Hospital
New York, New York
Solmaz Poorsattar Manuel, MD
Associate Clinical Professor 
Department of Anesthesia and Perioperative Care
University of California, San Francisco
San Francisco, California
Mitchell H. Marshall, MD, FASA
Clinical Professor
Department of Anesthesiology, Perioperative Care, and Pain 
Medicine
New York University Grossman School of Medicine; 
Chief of Anesthesiology
NYU Langone Orthopedic Hospital
New York, New York
Mary Ellen McCann, MD, MPH
Senior Associate in Anaesthesia
Department of Anesthesiology, Critical Care, and Pain Medicine
Boston Children's Hospital;
Associate Professor of Anaesthesia 
Department of Anaesthesia
Harvard Medical School
Boston, Massachusetts
Grace C. McCarthy, MD
Assistant Professor
Department of Anesthesiology
Duke University Health System;
Staff Anesthesiologist
Veterans Affairs Health System
Durham, North Carolina
Contributors
xii
Matthew D. McEvoy, MD
Professor of Anesthesiology and Surgery
Vanderbilt University School of Medicine;
Vice Chair for Perioperative Medicine
Department of Anesthesiology
Vanderbilt University Medical Center
Nashville, Tennessee
Lingzhong Meng, MD
Endowed Professor and Chair
Department of Anesthesiology
The First Affiliated Hospital
Zhejiang University School of Medicine
Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China
Ronald D. Miller, MD, MS
Professor Emeritus
Department of Anesthesia and Perioperative Care
University of California, San Francisco
San Francisco, California
Ilan Mizrahi, MD
Instructor 
Department of Anaesthesia
Harvard Medical School;
Staff Anesthesiologist 
Department of Anesthesia, Critical Care, and Pain Medicine
Massachusetts General Hospital
Boston, Massachusetts
Shinju Obara, MD
Associate Professor
Fukushima Medical University Hospital, School of Medicine;
Deputy Director 
Surgical Operation Department, and Center for Pain 
Management,
Department of Anesthesiology
Fukushima Medical University Hospital
Hikarigaoka, Fukushima City, Japan
Howard D. Palte, MBChB, FCA(SA)
Professor
Department of Anesthesiology
University of Miami
Miami, Florida
Anup Pamnani, MD
Assistant Professor of Anesthesiology 
Department of Anesthesiology
Weill Cornell Medical College
New York, New York
Anil K. Panigrahi, MD, PhD
Clinical Associate Professor
Department of Anesthesiology, Perioperative and Pain 
Medicine and Department of Pathology 
Division of Transfusion Medicine
Stanford University School of Medicine
Stanford, California
Manuel C. Pardo, Jr., MD, FASA
Professor and Vice Chair for Education 
Department of Anesthesia and Perioperative Care
University of California, San Francisco
San Francisco, California
Sophia P. Poorsattar, MD
Assistant Clinical Professor 
Department of Anesthesiology and Perioperative Medicine
UCLA David Geffen School of Medicine
Los Angeles, California
Mark D. Rollins, MD, PhD
Professor
Department of Anesthesiology and Perioperative Medicine
Mayo Clinic
Rochester, Minnesota
Andrew D. Rosenberg, MD, FASA
Professor and Dorothy Reaves Spatz MD
Chair, Department of Anesthesiology, Perioperative Care, 
and Pain Medicine
NYU Langone Medical Center
NYU Grossman School of Medicine
New York, New York
Ann Cai Shah, MD
Assistant Clinical Professor 
Department of Anesthesia and Perioperative Care
University of California, San Francisco
San Francisco, California
AL GRAWANY
Contributors
xiii
David Shimabukuro, MDCM
Professor 
Department of Anesthesia and Perioperative Care
University of California, San Francisco
San Francisco, California
Mandeep Singh, MBBS, MD, MSc, FRCPC
Assistant Professor 
Department of Anesthesiology
Toronto Western Hospital, University Health Network
University of Toronto
Toronto, Ontario, Canada
Jina Sinskey, MD, FASA
Associate Professor 
Department of Anesthesia and Perioperative Care
University of California, San Francisco
San Francisco, California
Peter D. Slinger, MD, FRCPC
Professor 
Department of Anesthesia
University of Toronto
Toronto, Ontario, Canada
Wendy Smith, MD
Assistant Clinical Professor 
Department of Anesthesia and Perioperative Care
University of California, San Francisco
San Francisco, California
Sulpicio G. Soriano, MD
Professor of Anesthesia
Harvard Medical School;
Endowed Chair in Pediatric Neuroanesthesia
Boston Children’s Hospital
Boston, Massachusetts
Randolph H. Steadman, MD, MS
Chair 
Department of Anesthesiology and Critical Care
Houston Methodist Hospital
Houston, Texas
Erica J. Stein, MD
Professor
Department of Anesthesiology
The Ohio State University
Columbus, Ohio
Marc P. Steurer, MD, MHA, DESA
Professor and Associate Chair of Finance 
Department of Anesthesia and Perioperative Care
UCSF School of Medicine;
Associate Chief 
Anesthesia and Perioperative Care
Zuckerberg San Francisco General Hospital;
San Francisco, California
Po-Yi Paul Su, MD
Assistant Professor 
Department of Anesthesia and Perioperative Care
University of California, San Francisco
San Francisco, California
Kristina R. Sullivan, MD
Professor 
Department of Anesthesia and Perioperative Care
University of California, San Francisco
San Francisco, California
Annemarie Thompson, MD
Professor 
Anesthesiology and Medicine
Duke University
Durham, North Carolina
Chihiro Toda, MD
Staff Anesthesiologist 
Department of General Anesthesiology
Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland, Ohio
Kevin K. Tremper, PhD, MD
Professor 
Department of Anesthesiology
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, Michigan
xiv
Contributors
Victor W. Xia, MD
Professor 
Department of Anesthesiology
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, California
Edward N. Yap, MD
Senior Physician 
Department of Anesthesia
The Permanente Medical Group, South San Francisco;
Assistant Professor 
Department of Anesthesia and Perioperative Care
University of California, San Francisco
San Francisco, California
Avery Tung, MD
Professor
Department of Anesthesia and Critical Care
University of Chicago Medicine
Chicago, Illinois
Christine M. Warrick, MD
Assistant Professor 
Department of Anesthesiology
University of Utah
Salt Lake City, Utah
Stephen D. Weston, MD
Associate Clinical Professor 
Department of Anesthesia and Perioperative Care
University of California, San Francisco
San Francisco, California
AL GRAWANY
xv
Basics of Anesthesia was first published in 1984 with the 
editorial leadership of Robert K. Stoelting and Ronald 
D. Miller. Their goal was to provide a concise source 
of information for the entire community of anesthesia 
learners, including students, residents, fellows, and other 
trainees. This eighth edition—the first without Dr. Miller 
as an editor—continues the pursuit of that goal while 
acknowledging how the specialty has evolved. The total 
number of chapters (49) is two fewer than the prior 
edition. Separate chapters on topics such as congenital 
heart disease and awareness were removed, but these 
subjects are now covered in other chapters. New chapters 
focus on clinician well-being, point-of-care ultrasound, 
perioperative medicine, and the environmental impact of 
anesthetics. The title “basics” belies the fact that chapters 
have more references than prior editions, consistent with 
the growth in knowledge and scholarly publications in 
the field.
PREFACE
This eighth edition is the first to be called Miller's 
Basics of Anesthesia, in recognition of Dr. Miller's leader-
ship of the book throughout his career. It was an honor to 
collaborate with Dr. Miller on the sixth and seventh edi-
tions of this book, and I look forward to the challenge of 
maintaining its excellence as a learning resource.
I am thankful to the authors who contributed to this 
edition—an international group that includes over 35 
new authors. My experience with the pandemic has only 
increased the gratitude I feel for all who contributed despite 
the impact on our personal and professional lives. Finally, 
I would like to acknowledge our publisher, Elsevier, and 
the dedication of their staff, including publisher Sarah 
Barth, senior content strategist Kayla Wolfe, senior content 
development specialist Ann Ruzycka Anderson, and senior 
project manager Beula Christopher—I appreciated our many 
Zoom calls to keep the book on track for publication.
Manuel C. Pardo, Jr.
AL GRAWANY
xvii
As an anesthesia resident at the University of California, 
Chapter 11 NEUROMUSCULAR BLOCKING 
AND REVERSAL AGENTS
160
Cynthia A. Lien
Chapter 12 ANESTHETIC 
NEUROTOXICITY
185
Mary Ellen McCann, Sulpicio G. Soriano
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND 
INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
Chapter 13 PREOPERATIVE 
EVALUATION
195
Manuel C. Pardo, Jr.
Chapter 14 CHOICE OF ANESTHETIC 
TECHNIQUE
221
Manuel C. Pardo, Jr.
Chapter 15 ANESTHESIA DELIVERY 
SYSTEMS
229
Stephen D. Weston
Chapter 16 AIRWAY MANAGEMENT
253
Maytinee Lilaonitkul, Andrew Infosino
Chapter 17 SPINAL, EPIDURAL, AND CAUDAL 
ANESTHESIA
289
Alan J.R. Macfarlane, David W. Hewson, Richard Brull
Chapter 18 PERIPHERAL NERVE BLOCKS
318
Edward N. Yap, Andrew T. Gray
Chapter 19 PATIENT POSITIONING AND 
ASSOCIATED RISKS
336
Kristine E.W. Breyer
Section I INTRODUCTION
Chapter 1 SCOPE OF ANESTHESIA 
PRACTICE
3
Manuel C. Pardo, Jr., Neal H. Cohen
Chapter 2 LEARNING ANESTHESIA
11
Kristina R. Sullivan, Manuel C. Pardo, Jr.
Chapter 3 CLINICIAN WELL-BEING
18
Laura Berenstain, Jina Sinskey
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
Chapter 4 BASIC PHARMACOLOGIC
PRINCIPLES
31
Tae Kyun Kim, Shinju Obara, Ken B. Johnson
Chapter 5 CLINICAL CARDIAC AND 
PULMONARY PHYSIOLOGY
51
John Feiner, Wendy Smith
Chapter 6 AUTONOMIC NERVOUS 
SYSTEM
69
Erica J. Stein, David B. Glick
Chapter 7 INHALED ANESTHETICS
82
Daniel Charles Cook, Hugh C. Hemmings, Jr.
Chapter 8 INTRAVENOUS ANESTHETICS
107
Michael P. Bokoch, Po-Yi Paul Su
Chapter 9 OPIOIDS
125
Talmage D. Egan
Chapter 10 LOCAL ANESTHETICS
143
Charles B. Berde, Anjali Koka
CONTENTS
Contents
xx
Chapter 20 ANESTHETIC MONITORING
351
Ryan Paul Davis, Kevin K. Tremper
Chapter 21 POINT-OF-CARE ULTRASOUND 383
Lindsey L. Huddleston, Kristine E.W. Breyer
Chapter 22 ACID–BASE BALANCE AND 
BLOOD GAS ANALYSIS
400
Linda L. Liu
Chapter 23 HEMOSTASIS
414
Anil K. Panigrahi
Chapter 24 FLUID MANAGEMENT
437
Catherine Chiu, Matthieu Legrand
Chapter 25 BLOOD THERAPY
445
David Shimabukuro, Ronald D. Miller
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC 
CONSIDERATIONS
Chapter 26 CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE
459
Grace C. McCarthy, Annemarie Thompson
Chapter 27 CHRONIC PULMONARY 
DISEASE
477
Andrew J. Deacon, Peter D. Slinger
Chapter 28 RENAL, LIVER, AND BILIARY 
TRACT DISEASE
498
Anup Pamnani, Vinod Malhotra
Chapter 29 NUTRITIONAL, GASTROINTESTINAL, 
AND ENDOCRINE DISEASE
515
Sophia P. Poorsattar, Solmaz Poorsattar Manuel
Chapter 30 CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM 
DISEASE
532
Lingzhong Meng, Alana Flexman
Chapter 31 OPHTHALMOLOGY AND 
OTOLARYNGOLOGY
546
Steven Gayer, Howard D. Palte
Chapter 32 ORTHOPEDIC SURGERY
559
David Furgiuele, Mitchell H. Marshall, 
Andrew D. Rosenberg
Chapter 33 OBSTETRICS
577
Christine M. Warrick, Mark D. Rollins
Chapter 34 PEDIATRICS
612
Erin A. Gottlieb, Dean B. Andropoulos
Chapter 35 GERIATRICS
642
Tyler Seth Chernin
Chapter 36 ORGAN TRANSPLANTATION
661
Randolph H. Steadman, Victor W. Xia
Chapter 37 OUTPATIENT ANESTHESIA
671
Chihiro Toda, Basem B. Abdelmalak
Chapter 38 ANESTHESIA FOR PROCEDURES IN 
NONOPERATING ROOM LOCATIONS
678
Wilson Cui, Chanhung Z. Lee
Section V THE RECOVERY PERIOD
Chapter 39 POSTANESTHESIA 
RECOVERY
697
Matthias R. Braehler, Ilan Mizrahi
Chapter 40 PERIOPERATIVE PAIN 
MANAGEMENT
716
Heather A. Columbano, Robert W. Hurley, 
Meredith C.B. Adams
SECTION VI CONSULTANT ANESTHETIC 
PRACTICE
Chapter 41 CRITICAL CARE MEDICINE
735
Ashish Agrawal, Anne L. Donovan
Chapter 42 PERIOPERATIVE MEDICINE
753
Matthew D. McEvoy, Jeanna D. Blitz, 
Emilee Borgmeier
Chapter 43 ANESTHESIA FOR TRAUMA
768
Marc P. Steurer, Benn Lancman
Chapter 44 CHRONIC PAIN 
MANAGEMENT
794
Christopher R. Abrecht
Contents
xxi
Chapter 45 CARDIOPULMONARY 
RESUSCITATION
810
Joyce Chang, David Shimabukuro
Chapter 46 QUALITY AND PATIENT 
SAFETY IN ANESTHESIA CARE
829
Avery Tung
Chapter 47 PALLIATIVE CARE
839
Ann Cai Shah, Sarah Gebauer
Chapter 48 SLEEP MEDICINE AND 
ANESTHESIA
855
Joanna Bouez, Frances Chung, Mandeep Singh
Chapter 49 ANESTHESIA AND 
ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH
874
Hemra Cil, Seema Gandhi
INDEX
885
Section
I
Chapter 1
SCOPE OF ANESTHESIA PRACTICE, 3
Chapter 2.
LEARNING ANESTHESIA, 11
Chapter 3
CLINICIAN WELL-BEING, 18
INTRODUCTION
AL GRAWANY
3
Chapter
Surgery preceded the development of anesthesia as a 
medical specialty, with significant implications. Surgery 
has been performed for thousands of years. Archae-
ologists have discovered human skulls from prehistoric 
times with evidence of trephination, a surgical proce-
dure involving drilling or scraping a hole in the skull 
to expose the brain. However, the brutality of surgery 
without anesthesia limited the types of surgery that could 
be performed and the disease processes that could be 
treated. Advances in surgery could only be accomplished 
as a result of improved ability to relieve pain during a 
procedure and manage the physiologic changes taking 
place both during surgery and thereafter. The first use 
of an anesthetic agent occurred in 1842 when the use 
of ether as a surgical anesthetic was administered by 
Crawford Long in Georgia. Although acknowledged as 
the first anesthetic administered to a human, it was not 
documented until Dr. Long published his experience in 
1849. The first public demonstration of administration 
of ether anesthesia was provided by dentist William T.G. 
Morton at Massachusetts General Hospital on October 
16, 1846. Since this initial administration of an inhaled 
anesthetic to reduce pain during a surgical procedure, 
the specialty of anesthesiology has advanced beyond the 
surgical suite to encompass the entire course of perio-
perative care in addition to associated subspecialties, 
including pain medicine, critical care medicine, palliative 
care, and sleep medicine.
ANESTHESIOLOGY AS A MULTIDISCIPLI-
NARY SPECIALTY
Although anesthesia is understood to encompass admin-
istration of medications to facilitate surgical procedures, 
as the specialty has evolved, the scope of practice and 
expertise expected of an anesthesiologist have been for-
mally defined by the American Board of Anesthesiology 
(ABA), a member of the American Board of Medical 
ANESTHESIOLOGY AS A MULTIDISCIPLINARY 
SPECIALTY
PERIOPERATIVE PATIENT CARE
ANESTHESIA WORKFORCE
TRAINING AND CERTIFICATION IN 
ANESTHESIOLOGY
QUALITY AND SAFETY
VALUE-BASED CARE
FUTURE OF ANESTHESIA CARE
SCOPE OF ANESTHESIA 
PRACTICE
Manuel C. Pardo, Jr., Neal H. Cohen.
1
Section I INTRODUCTION
4
Specialties (ABMS) (Box 1.1). The ABA establishes and 
maintains criteria for board certification in anesthesiol-
ogy and for subspecialty certification or special quali-
fications in the United States. Similar professional 
certification boards exist in many other countries. 
Currently, formal subspecialty certification is offered 
in anesthesiology and a number of subspecialties by 
the ABA, including critical care medicine (also see 
Chapter 41), pain medicine (also see Chapters 40 and 44), 
hospice and palliative medicine (also see Chapter 47), 
sleep medicine (also see Chapter 48), pediatric anesthesi-
ology (also see Chapter 34), and neurocritical care (also 
see Chapter 30). Other ABMS boards also provide subspe-
cialty qualifications in some of the same subspecialties, 
allowing providers to collaborate in the care of complex 
patients requiring specialized services.
The American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA), 
founded in 1905 as the Long Island Society of Anes-
thetists, is the largest professional society for anesthesi-
ologists. The ASA has over 100 committees and editorial 
boards dedicated to all anesthesia subspecialties and 
aspects of anesthesia practice. In addition to supporting 
the practice of anesthesiology and its subspecialties, the 
ASA advocates on behalf of anesthesiologists with other 
organizations, including Centers for Medicare & Med-
icaid Services (CMS), other medical specialties, hospital 
organizations, and payors. The International Anesthesia 
Research Society (IARS) and subspecialty societies also 
provide support for advancing clinical care and research 
in anesthesia and its subspecialties, reflecting the multi-
disciplinary growth of anesthesiology (Table 1.1).
PERIOPERATIVE PATIENT CARE
Although the specialty of anesthesiology began in the 
operating room, the scope of anesthesia practice has 
evolved as anesthesiologists and surgeons recognized 
that management of each patient before, during, and 
after surgery improved outcomes and quality of care. The 
preoperative evaluation of patients has become critical to 
the preparation for anesthesia and surgical management. 
For selected patients, perioperative management for those 
with underlying medical conditions has also improved 
outcomes and quality of care.1 Similarly, postoperative 
assessment and management related to sequelae of anes-
thesia is an important component of perioperative care.
Based on this broader definition of anesthesia care, 
new drugs, monitoring capabilities, and documented 
improved outcomes in the surgical suite, anesthesia care 
has expanded to many locations within the health care 
system, including hospital-based locations, freestanding 
ambulatory care centers, and office practices (Table 1.2). 
Several other factors are contributing to the evolution of 
anesthesiology practice, including the advances in anes-
thesia care allowing patients with significant comorbidi-
ties to undergo complex procedures; the extremes of age 
of the surgical patient, including the expanding elderly 
population (also see Chapter 35); increasing importance 
of quality, safety, and value of health care delivery (also 
see Chapter 46); changing composition and expectations 
of the anesthesia workforce; increasing fragmentation of 
perioperative care with multiple handoffs and transitions 
of care; and changing payment methods for physicians 
that increasingly emphasize value-based approaches.2
In addition to the factors that affect the clinical prac-
tice of anesthesiology, anesthesiologists have assumed 
broader roles in health system leadership, including 
perioperative medical directors, chief quality officers, 
and other administrative and leadership positions related 
to both perioperative care and broader health system 
management.3
ANESTHESIA WORKFORCE
Anesthesia care is provided by physician anesthesi-
ologists and other providers with various levels of 
training both in the United States and throughout 
the world. In the United States the anesthesia work-
force includes physician anesthesiologists, certified 
registered nurse anesthetists (CRNAs), and anesthesia 
assistants (AAs). Although each state has different 
Box 1.1
American Board of Anesthesiology Definition 
of Anesthesiology
The ABA defines anesthesiology as the practice of medicine 
dealing with but not limited to:
1. Assessment of, consultation for, and preparation of 
patients for anesthesia.
2. Relief and prevention of pain during and after surgical, 
obstetric, therapeutic, and diagnostic procedures.
3. Monitoring and maintenance of normal physiology 
during the perioperative or periprocedural period.
4. Management of critically ill patients.
5. Diagnosis and treatment of acute, chronic, and cancer-
related pain.
6. Management of hospice and palliative care.
7. Clinical management and teaching of cardiac, 
pulmonary, and neurologic resuscitation.
8. Evaluation of respiratory function and application of 
respiratory therapy.
9. Conduct of clinical, translational, and basic science 
research.
10. Supervision, teaching, and evaluation of performance 
of both medical and allied health personnel involved 
in perioperative or periprocedural care, hospice and 
palliative care, critical care, and pain management.
11. Administrative involvement in health care facilities and 
organizations and medical schools as appropriate to our 
mission.
From Policy Book 2021. Raleigh: The American Board of 
Anesthesiology.
I
Chapter 1 Scope of Anesthesia Practice
5
Society
Year Founded
Mission
American Society of 
Anesthesiologists (ASA)
1905
Advancing the practice and securing the future. Strategic pillars 
include advocacy, educational resources, leadership and professional 
development, member engagement, quality and practice advancement, 
research, and scientific discovery.
International Anesthesia Research 
Society (IARS)
1922
To encourage, stimulate, and fund ongoing anesthesia-related 
research projects that will enhance and advance the specialty and to 
disseminate current, state-of-the-art, basic, and clinical research data 
in all areas of clinical anesthesia, including perioperative medicine, 
critical care, and pain management.
World Federation of Societies of 
Anaesthesiologists (WFSA)
1955
To unite anesthesiologists around the world to improve patient care 
and access to safe anesthesia and perioperative medicine.
Society for Obstetric Anesthesia 
and Perinatology (SOAP)
1968
To advance and advocate for the health of pregnant women and their 
babies through research, education, and best practices in obstetric 
anesthesia care.
Society for Neuroscience in 
Anesthesiology and Critical Care 
(SNACC)
1973
Organization dedicated to the neurologically impaired patient.
International Association for the 
Study of Pain (IASP)
1974
IASP brings together scientists, clinicians, health care providers, and 
policy makers to stimulate and support the study of pain and to 
translate that knowledge into improved pain relief worldwide.
American Society of Regional 
Anesthesia (ASRA)
1975
To advance the science and practice of regional anesthesia and pain 
medicine to improve patient outcomes through research, education, 
and advocacy.
Society for Education in Anesthesia 
(SEA)
1985
Support, enrich, and advance anesthesia education and those who 
teach.
Society for Ambulatory Anesthesia 
(SAMBA)
1985
To be the resource for providers who practice in settings outside of 
hospital-based operating rooms.
Society for Pediatric Anesthesia 
(SPA)
1986
SPA advances the safety and quality of anesthesia care, perioperative 
care, and pain management in children by educating clinicians; 
supporting research; and fostering collaboration among clinicians, 
patient families, and professional organizations worldwide.
Society of Critical Care 
Anesthesiologists (SOCCA)
1987
Dedicated to the support and development of anesthesiologists who 
care for critically ill patients of all types.
Society for Technology in 
Anesthesia (STA)
1988
To improve the quality of patient care by improving technology and its 
application.
Society of Cardiovascular 
Anesthesiologists (SCA)
1989
International organization of physicians that promotes excellence in 
patient care through education and research in perioperative care for 
patients undergoing cardiothoracic and vascular procedures.
International Society for 
Anaesthetic Pharmacology (ISAP)
1990
Dedicated to teaching and research about clinical pharmacology in 
anesthesia, with particular reference to anesthetic drugs.
Society for Airway Management 
(SAM)
1995
Dedicated to the practice, teaching, and scientific advancements of the 
field of airway management.
Society of Anesthesia and Sleep 
Medicine (SASM)
2011
To advance standards of care for clinical problems shared by 
anesthesiology and sleep medicine, including perioperative 
management of sleep-disordered breathing, and to promote 
interdisciplinary communication, education, and research in matters 
common to anesthesia and sleep.
Trauma Anesthesiology Society
2014
To advance the art and science of trauma anesthesiology and all related 
fields through education and research.
Table 1.1
Selected Anesthesiology Professional Societies
Section I INTRODUCTION
6
requirements for delivery of care, scope of practice, 
and supervision, and some states have allowed CRNAs 
independent practice, most states currently require 
nonphysician anesthesia providers to be supervised 
by a physician. Those states that license AAs require 
that they be directly supervised by a physician. Dental 
anesthesia is provided by a physician anesthesiologist 
or a dentist who has received specialty training in 
anesthesia care. A 2017 global survey reported that the 
United States had 67,000 physician anesthesiologists, 
49,000 nurse anesthesia providers, and 1960 nonphy-
sician/nonnurse providers.4
The “care team” model that includes CRNAs and 
physician anesthesiologists is the most common prac-
tice model in most states. For most U.S. anesthesia 
groups, the working relationship between physician 
anesthesiologists and CRNAs is highly collaborative, 
benefiting patients by providing a coordinated approach 
to clinical management and immediate availability of 
a provider with the skills and background required to 
address emergencies or unforeseen clinical problems. 
In other countries anesthesia care is provided in a vari-
ety of different models. For most European and Asian 
countries, anesthesia services are provided exclusively 
by physician anesthesiologists or other physicians with 
additional training in anesthesiology. In other countries 
with limited numbers of physicians to provide all aspects 
of clinical management, alternative models are required 
to meet the clinical needs of the surgical patient popula-
tions. In some cases, depending on clinical needs and 
regulatory issues, other providers—often with limited 
formal educational experiences—deliver anesthesia ser-
vices.
As a result of the expansion of surgical services 
and need for anesthesia care in nonoperating room 
environments, the breadth of anesthesia services has 
expanded dramatically over the past decade. Each of 
the surgical subspecialties prefers having a dedicated 
pool of subspecialty trained anesthesiologists; at the 
same time, the roles for other anesthesia subspecialists 
in critical care, pain medicine, preoperative manage-
ment programs, and palliative care and sleep medicine 
have created significant workforce challenges. Despite 
the increasing need for anesthesia providers, the United 
States has had only a modest growth in the number of 
anesthesia providers; the demand for anesthesia ser-
vices far exceeds the current supply. The Association 
of American Medical Colleges (AAMC) commissions 
annual reports to project future supply and demand for 
U.S. physicians. A 2021 AAMC report predicts that by 
2034 the demand for physicians in the “Other Special-
ties” category, which includes anesthesiologists and 
seven other specialties, will exceed supply by 10,300 
to 35,600, even with growth in advanced practice 
providers.5 The main drivers of the increased physi-
cian demand include both population growth (approxi-
mately 10% growth during this time) and aging of the 
population (proportion of the population aged 65 or 
older is estimated to grow by 42%). CRNA programs 
have expanded to address the increasing need; in states 
that license AA programs these programs have also had 
increasing enrollment. Despite the increase in nonphy-
sician anesthesia providers, the number of providers is 
not keeping pace with the increasing clinical demands.
The models of anesthesia practice have also changed 
considerably, as has the relationship with health systems 
and anesthesia practices.2 Many community practices 
have consolidated, often through acquisition into regional 
and national anesthesia or multispecialty groups. In some 
parts of the country physicians, including anesthesi-
ologists, have become employees of medical foundations 
or are directly employed by hospitals. Most academic 
Hospital
Outpatient
Operating 
Room
Nonoperating 
Room Location
Preoperative Unit
Regional 
Anesthesia Service
Postanesthesia 
Care Unit
Intensive 
Care Unit
Hospital Ward
- Acute Pain 
Service
- Perioperative 
Medicine Service
- Palliative Care 
Service
- POCUS Service 
(including TEE/
TTE)
Ambulatory 
Surgery 
Center
Preoperative 
Evaluation 
Clinic
Pain 
Medicine 
Clinic
Table 1.2
Locations of Anesthesia Care
POCUS, Point-of-care ultrasound; TEE, transesophageal echocardiography; TTE, transthoracic echocardiography.
I
Chapter 1 Scope of Anesthesia Practice
7
practices are managed within the academic departments 
with varying financial models for managing both profes-
sional and technical fees with the academic health sys-
tem. Although the primary motivation for some of these 
new business models is financial, the most critical value 
to the integrated models of care is the ability of the phy-
sicians, anesthesiologists and their medical colleagues, 
and the health systems to optimize clinical care, reduce 
complications, and more effectively manage resources. In 
addition, payors, including Medicare and private payors, 
are transitioning to “value-based” care, so this collabora-
tion has been critical.
TRAINING AND CERTIFICATION IN 
ANESTHESIOLOGY
Training of anesthesia providers is based on background 
education, clinical knowledge and experience, and scope 
of practice. As a result, the training of anesthesia provid-
ers in the United States differs for physician anesthesi-
ologists, CRNAs, and certified anesthesiologist assistants 
(CAAs).
For U.S. physician anesthesiologists, training in anes-
thesiology consists of 4 years of supervised experience 
in an approved program after the degree of Doctor of 
Medicine or Doctor of Osteopathy has been obtained. 
The first year of postgraduate training consists of educa-
tion in the fundamental clinical skills of medicine. The 
second, third, and fourth postgraduate years (clinical 
anesthesia years 1 to 3) are spent learning about all 
aspects of clinical anesthesia, including subspecialty 
experience in obstetric anesthesia, pediatric anesthesia, 
cardiothoracic anesthesia, neuroanesthesia, preopera-
tive medicine, postanesthesia care, regional anesthesia, 
and pain management. In addition to these subspecialty 
experiences, 4 months of training in critical care medi-
cine is required as part of this core curriculum. The ABA 
is responsible for initial certification after completion 
of a training program accredited by the Accreditation 
Council for Graduate Medical Education (ACGME), in 
addition to subspecialty certification and maintenance 
of certification. The duration and structure of anesthesi-
ology education differ in other countries, although most 
countries require 4 years or more of training in anesthe-
sia care, often including critical care medicine within the 
core curriculum.4
The admission requirements for training as a CRNA 
include a bachelor's degree, registration as a profes-
sional nurse in the United States or its territories, and 
at least 1 year of full-time equivalent experience as a 
critical care registered nurse. Nurse anesthesia programs 
are accredited by the Council on Accreditation of Nurse 
Anesthesia Educational Programs (COA). All accred-
ited nurse anesthesia programs offered master's-level 
education by late 1998; by 2022 all programs must 
offer doctoral degrees.6 The minimum duration of a 
master's-level program is 24 months of full-time study 
(or its part-time equivalent), whereas the curriculum for 
a practice-oriented doctoral degree is typically a mini-
mum of 36 months of full-time study. After completion 
of an accredited program, a CRNA is eligible to take 
the National Certification Examination of the National 
Board of Certification and Recertification for Nurse 
Anesthetists.
AA education programs require that students have 
a bachelor's degree and premedical course work. After 
receiving 27 months of master's degree–level education in 
an accredited program, they are eligible for the Certifying 
Examination for Anesthesiologist Assistants, administered 
by the National Commission for Certification of Anesthe-
siologist Assistants (NCCAA) in collaboration with the 
National Board of Medical Examiners (NBME). CAAs must 
practice under the supervision of a physician anesthesiol-
ogist as part of the anesthesia care team model. Currently, 
CAAs may practice in 18 U.S. jurisdictions.
QUALITY AND SAFETY
For many years, clinical anesthesia practice has been 
recognized as a model for quality and safety in medicine. 
The 1999 Institute of Medicine (now the National Acad-
emy of Medicine) report, “To Err Is Human,” specifically 
identified anesthesia as “an area in which very impressive 
improvements in safety have been made.”7 The ASA has 
been a leader within organized medicine in the develop-
ment and implementation of formal, published standards 
of practice. ASA standards, practice guidelines, practice 
advisories, and alerts have significantly influenced how 
anesthesia is practiced in the United States.8 Anesthesi-
ologists have also formed patient safety–focused socie-
ties, such as the Anesthesia Patient Safety Foundation 
(APSF), an independent nonprofit corporation begun in 
1985 with the vision “that no patient shall be harmed 
by anesthesia.” The APSF is supported by the ASA and 
corporate sponsors, with members that include physi-
cian anesthesiologists, nurse anesthetists, manufacturers 
of equipment and drugs, engineers, and insurers. The 
APSF Newsletter is dedicated solely to safety and has 
become one of the most widely circulated anesthesia 
publications in the world.9 The APSF has highlighted 
diverse issues such as anesthesia machine checkout, 
opioid-induced respiratory depression, residual neuro-
muscular blockade, postoperative visual loss, emergency 
manual use, and COVID-19 airway management. In 2018 
the APSF board of directors generated a list of the top 
perioperative patient safety priorities; these priorities 
are reviewed on an annual basis. The 2021 top patient 
safety priorities are listed in Box 1.2. Although these 
Section I INTRODUCTION
8
advances in patient safety are significant, clinical chal-
lenges and complications still occur. Anesthesiology 
practices must maintain robust quality assessment and 
improvement programs to continue the leadership role 
of the specialty in advancing patient care. Many of the 
advances in perioperative care made by anesthesiologists 
have emphasized outcomes during a surgical procedure 
to reduce intraoperative adverse events. To continue to 
improve patient safety and quality of care will require 
more focused assessment of the entire perioperative 
period, including identifying postoperative outcomes for 
which anesthesia management might have contributed 
and developing strategies to minimize the likelihood of 
these adverse events prospectively, including the poten-
tial need for readmission.
VALUE-BASED CARE
U.S. health care spending continues to grow, reaching 
$4.1 trillion in 2020, approximately $12,530 per person, 
this represents 19.7% of the gross domestic product.10
The high cost of health care has been challenging for 
clinicians and health systems to manage. As a result of 
the increasing costs of care, often without evidence of 
improved outcome, government (Medicare and Medicaid) 
and private insurance companies have implemented vari-
ous types of alternative payment models (APMs) designed 
to incentivize “value.” For these payment models, value 
is defined as outcome (or quality) divided by cost. A more 
complete description of quality includes six domains 
identified by the Institute of Medicine: safety, effi-
cacy, patient-centered, timely, efficient, and equitable.11
Table 1.3 lists some drivers of value-based health care.12
In a value-based payment model services are compen-
sated based on improved patient health outcomes rather 
than specific services provided.
The value-based payment models, particularly for 
perioperative surgical services, have significant implica-
tions for anesthesia practices. A variety of approaches 
have been used to improve quality and value and create 
opportunities for providers to benefit from efforts to 
optimize care and reduce costs. Medicare has imple-
mented the Merit-Based Incentive Payment System 
(MIPS) requiring anesthesia practices to report quality 
measures as part of the Quality Payment Program (QPP) 
from which payments will be adjusted based on per-
formance. Although the MIPS program continues to be 
refined, the transition to a payment model for anesthesia 
services that is at least partly based on quality metrics 
will continue to have financial impact on anesthesia 
practices.
In addition to the MIPS program and other merit-
based payment models, APMs that provide payment to 
all providers and a health system for a course of care 
are transforming how care is provided and requiring 
those participating in care to document their value. 
For anesthesia practices, the APMs have significant 
implications and provide opportunities for practices to 
assume a greater role in perioperative care, to manage 
costs, and to improve quality, all of which can allow the 
practices to receive financial benefit based on the value 
provided. Most important, the APMs represent a signifi-
cant opportunity to expand the scope of practice across 
the continuum of the perioperative period to optimize 
management, reduce costs, and improve patient safety. 
Some examples in which anesthesia providers have 
transformed their practice to benefit patients and the 
health systems include participation in the Perioperative 
Surgical Home (PSH)13 and leadership roles in the imple-
mentation of Enhanced Recovery After Surgery (ERAS) 
protocols designed to optimize perioperative care, reduce 
complications, costs, and lengths of stay.14 As a result of 
these efforts, the role for anesthesiologists expanded and 
provided opportunities to work collaboratively with a 
more diverse group of providers and health system lead-
ers to improve care for patients beyond the specific needs 
of the surgical patient population.3
Many anesthesia groups are adapting their practices 
to these new models of care and payment; however, 
the transition is challenging. The emphasis on value 
represents an opportunity for anesthesiologists to rede-
fine their role and the scope of anesthesia practice. To 
do so will require that they develop new skills related 
to quality, safety, and management beyond what was 
a part of the core curriculum of anesthesia training. 
Box 1.2
APSF 2021 Perioperative Patient Safety Priorities
1. Culture of safety, inclusion, and diversity
2. Teamwork, collegial communication, and 
multidisciplinary collaboration
3. Preventing, detecting, and determining pathogenesis 
and mitigating clinical deterioration in the perioperative 
period
4. Safety in nonoperating room locations such as 
endoscopy, cardiac catheterization, and interventional 
radiology suites
5. Perioperative delirium, cognitive dysfunction, and brain 
health
6. Prevention and mitigation of opioid-related harm in 
surgical patients
7. Medication safety
8. Emerging infectious diseases (including but not 
limited to COVID-19), including patient management, 
guideline development, equipment modification, and 
determination of operative risk
9. Clinician safety: occupational health and wellness
10. Airway management difficulties, skills, and equipment
APSF, Anesthesia Patient Safety Foundation.
From APSF Newsletter. 2021;36(2):53.
I
Chapter 1 Scope of Anesthesia Practice
9
Residency programs are refining the curriculum to meet 
these new needs. Practicing anesthesiologists are also 
acquiring these additional skills needed to succeed in 
this new model of care and payment. Fig. 1.1 describes 
an approach to proactively improving population health 
in the perioperative setting.12
Program
Description
Cost Savings
Advantages
Disadvantages
Centers of 
Excellence
Multidisciplinary, comprehensive 
program for patient care in a highly 
focused area (e.g., orthopedics, 
bariatric surgery).
Standardized 
approach to 
equipment; 
reduction in 
complications, 
readmissions, and 
discharge to facility.
Potentially improved 
patient outcomes and 
financial performance.
May lead to 
decreased access 
to care. Some 
studies indicate no 
improvement in 
care.
Accountable Care 
Organizations
Group of physicians, hospitals, and 
other health care providers joining 
together to coordinate care among 
Medicare patients.
Health care 
teams meet 
specific quality 
benchmarks, 
increasing 
efficiency of care 
and reducing costs.
Streamlined 
communication, 
reduced medical 
errors, and reduced 
duplication of services 
and cost of care.
May not 
demonstrate 
mortality reduction 
in surgical patients.
Insurance specialty 
programs (e.g., 
bundled payments, 
shared cost savings, 
population-based 
payments, merit-
based incentive 
payment)
Engages physicians and health care 
systems to coordinate care and 
reduce cost. Fosters competition 
among providers to create value. 
Hospital administration negotiates 
with department chairs or practice 
managers for reimbursement, 
including anesthesiology/
perioperative medicine.
Hospital retains 
more money from 
bundle if there 
is a reduction in 
complications, 
readmissions, or 
discharge to facility.
Total allowable 
expenditures for 
an episode of care 
are predetermined. 
Merit-based incentive 
payments tie payment 
to quality, cost, and 
use of health care 
information.
May penalize 
physicians caring 
for the sickest 
patients. May not 
really improve 
quality or cost.
Table 1.3
Drivers of Value-Based Health Care
Adapted from Table 1 in Mahajan A, Esper SA, Cole DJ, et al. Anesthesiologists' role in value-based perioperative care and healthcare 
transformation. Anesthesiology. 2021;134(4):526–540.
Fig. 1.1 An approach to coordinated perioperative patient care with targeted population health 
interventions and risk-based care pathways designed to improve patient outcomes.
(From Mahajan A, Esper SA, Cole DJ, et al. Anesthesiologists' role in value-based perioperative care and 
healthcare transformation. Anesthesiology. 2021;134[4]:526–540, Fig. 4.)
AL GRAWANY
Section I INTRODUCTION
10
FUTURE OF ANESTHESIA CARE
Anesthesiology is a vibrant and exciting specialty that 
has undergone dramatic changes over the past few dec-
ades. Advances in clinical management and new drugs 
and technologies have transformed clinical practice and 
significantly improved patient outcomes. New models 
of care, including the PSH, and an expanded scope of 
practice represent major advances for the specialty. 
At the same time, anesthesia practices must continue 
to evolve, to reassess traditional approaches to clini-
cal care and identify opportunities to improve quality 
and safety across the entire continuum of care. Many 
have taken a broader role in the health care system in 
order to continue to improve value for the populations 
served, implement patient-centered care, and manage the 
financial burdens confronting the health care system. 
Anesthesiologists, along with their colleagues, must also 
contribute to efforts to improve access and address health 
disparities faced by those of low socioeconomic status 
and for racial and ethnic minorities. Although health 
care is undergoing significant change and new models 
of care will continue to evolve, for learners just entering 
the field of anesthesiology, the opportunities are exciting 
and diverse and provide the foundation for a rewarding 
career.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The editors and publisher would like to thank Dr Ronald 
D. Miller for contributing to this chapter in the previous 
edition of this work. It has served as a foundation for the 
current chapter.
1. Carli F, Awasthi R, Gillis C, etal. Inte-
grating prehabilitation in the Ppre-
operative clinic: A paradigm shift in 
perioperative care. Anesth Analg. 2021 
May 1;132(5):1494–1500. doi:10.1213/
ANE.0000000000005471 
PMID: 
33724962.
2. Prielipp RC, Cohen NH. The future of anes-
thesiology: Implications of the chang-
ing healthcare environment. Curr Opin 
Anaesthesiol. 2016 Apr;29(2):198–205. 
doi:10.1097/ACO.0000000000000301 
PMID: 26705129.
3. Mathis MR, Schonberger RB, Whitlock 
EL, et al. Opportunities beyond the 
anesthesiology 
department: 
Broad-
er impact through broader thinking. 
Anesth Analg. 2021 Mar 8:10.1213/
ANE.0000000000005428. doi:10.1213/
ANE.0000000000005428 Epub ahead 
of print PMID: 33684091; PMCID: 
PMC8423864.
4. Kempthorne P, Morriss WW, Mellin-
Olsen J, Gore-Booth J. The WFSA 
Global Anesthesia Workforce Survey. 
Anesth Analg. 2017 Sep;125(3):981–990. 
doi:10.1213/ANE.0000000000002258 
PMID: 28753173.
5. IHS Markit Ltd. The Complexities of Phy-
sician Supply and Demand: Projections 
From 2019 to 2034. Washington, DC: 
AAMC; 2021.
6. Council on Accreditation of Nurse Anes-
thesia Educational Programs. Accredita-
tion Standards, Policies and Procedures, 
and Guidelines. https://www.coacrna.
org/accreditation/accreditation-stand-
ards-policies-and-procedures-and-
guidelines/ Accessed January 6, 2022.
7. Institute of Medicine (US) Committee 
on Quality of Health Care in America. 
To Err is Human: Building a Safer 
Health System. Kohn LT, Corrigan JM, 
Donaldson MS, editors. Washington 
(DC): National Academies Press (US); 
2000. PMID: 25077248.
8. American Society of Anesthesiolo-
gists Guidelines, Statements, Clini-
cal Resources. https://www.asahq.org/
standards-and-guidelines Accessed Jan-
uary 8, 2022.
9. APSF Newsletter. https://www.apsf.org/
apsf-newsletter/ Accessed January 8, 
2022.
10. Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Ser-
vices. National Health Expenditure Data.
https://www.cms.gov/Research-Statistics-
Data-and-Systems/Statistics-Trends-
and-Reports/NationalHealthExpendData/
NationalHealthAccountsHistorical Accessed 
January 9, 2022.
11. Institute of Medicine (US) Committee 
on Quality of Health Care in America. 
Crossing the Quality Chasm: A New 
Health System for the 21st Century. 
Washington (DC): National Academies 
Press (US); 2001 PMID: 25057539.
12. Mahajan A, Esper SA, Cole DJ, Fleisher 
LA. Anesthesiologists' Role in Value-
based Perioperative Care and Healthcare 
Transformation. Anesthesiology. 2021 
Apr 1;134(4):526–540. doi:10.1097/
ALN.0000000000003717 
PMID: 
33630039.
13. Vetter TR. Perioperative Surgical Home 
Models. Anesthesiol Clin. 2018 Dec;
36(4):677–687. 
doi:10.1016/j.anclin.
2018.07.015 Epub 2018 Oct 12. PMID: 
30390787.
14. Ljungqvist O, Scott M, Fearon KC. 
Enhanced Recovery After Surgery: A
Review. JAMA Surg. 2017 Mar 1;152(3):
292–298. doi:10.1001/jamasurg.2016.
4952 PMID: 28097305.
REFERENCES
11
Chapter
The challenges of learning perioperative anesthesia care 
have grown considerably as the specialty has evolved. 
The beginning anesthesia trainee is faced with an ever-
increasing quantity of literature and the need for increased 
knowledge and adequate patient care experiences. Health-
care systems increasingly focus on improving the patient 
experience of care (including quality and satisfaction), 
improving population health, reducing the cost of health-
care,1 and improving environmental sustainability.2
Most training programs begin with close clinical 
supervision by an attending anesthesiologist. More expe-
rienced trainees may also offer their perspectives, coach-
ing, and practical advice to junior trainees. Programs 
use a variety of teaching modalities to facilitate learn-
ing, including problem-based learning, various forms 
of e-learning, hands-on task training, mannequin-based 
patient simulation, and standardized patient sessions.3
The practice of anesthesia involves the development of 
flexible patient care routines, factual and theoretical 
knowledge, manual and procedural skills, and the mental 
abilities to adapt to changing situations.4
COMPETENCIES, MILESTONES, AND 
ENTRUSTABLE PROFESSIONAL ACTIVITIES
Physician anesthesiologists must attain a broad fund 
of knowledge and skills. Over the past few decades, the 
Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education 
(ACGME) has carefully considered how to ensure physician 
competence. In the late 1990s it launched the Outcome 
Project, which includes a focus on six core competencies: 
patient care, medical knowledge, professionalism, inter-
personal and communication skills, systems-based prac-
tice, and practice-based learning and improvement. The 
ACGME then advanced the core competencies approach by 
adopting the Dreyfus model of skill acquisition to create 
a framework of “milestones.” Milestones specific to anes-
thesiology, published in 2014, defined the development 
COMPETENCIES, MILESTONES, AND 
ENTRUSTABLE PROFESSIONAL ACTIVITIES
STRUCTURED APPROACH TO ANESTHESIA 
CARE
Preoperative Evaluation
Creating the Anesthesia Plan
Preparing the Operating Room
Managing the Intraoperative Anesthetic
Patient Follow-up
LEARNING STRATEGIES
Learning Orientation
Cognitive Load
LEARNING ANESTHESIA
Kristina R. Sullivan, Manuel C. Pardo, Jr.
2
Section I INTRODUCTION
12
of anesthesia residents during 4 years of training.5 These 
milestones were updated in 2020 to account for advance-
ments in the field of anesthesiology.6 For example, an 
entire milestone devoted to point-of-care ultrasound was 
added in the 2020 revisions. Table 2.1 shows an example 
of a milestone in the patient care competency. The mile-
stones incorporate several aspects of residency training, 
including a description of expected behavior, the complex-
ity of the patient and the surgical procedure, and the level 
of supervision needed by the resident.
Over the last decade, Entrustable Professional Activi-
ties (EPAs) have gained traction as a tool to advance 
competency-based assessment.7 8 EPAs are defined as 
tasks or responsibilities that trainees are entrusted to per-
form without supervision once relevant competencies are 
attained.7 9 An EPA, or task, can be mapped to multiple 
milestones and competencies and thus provide a frame-
work for assessment. Entrustment decisions by supervisors 
are documented along a continuum (Box 2.1). Feedback 
related to these decisions can help trainees form individu-
alized learning plans that will help inform future goals.
STRUCTURED APPROACH 
TO ANESTHESIA CARE
Anesthesia providers care for the surgical patient in the 
preoperative, intraoperative, and postoperative periods 
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Level 4
Level 5
Identifies the 
components of an 
anesthetic plan
Develops an anesthetic 
plan for a healthy 
patient undergoing 
uncomplicated 
procedures
Develops an anesthetic 
plan for patients 
with well-controlled 
comorbidities 
or undergoing 
complicated procedures
Develops an anesthetic 
plan for patients with 
multiple, uncontrolled 
comorbidities 
and undergoing 
complicated procedures
Identifies the 
components of a pain 
management plan
Implements simple 
perioperative pain 
management plan
Identifies patients with 
a history of chronic 
pain who require a 
modified perioperative 
pain management plan
Implements the 
anesthetic plan for 
patients with complex 
pain history and 
polypharmacy
In collaboration with 
other specialists, 
develops protocols for 
multimodal analgesia 
plan for patients with 
a complex pain history 
and substance use 
disorder
Identifies potential 
impact of anesthesia 
beyond intraoperative 
period
Identifies patient-
specific risks factors for 
long-term anesthetic 
effects
Develops the 
anesthetic plan based 
on risk factors to 
mitigate the long-term 
impact of anesthesia
Implements the 
anesthetic plan to 
mitigate the long-term 
impact of anesthesia
Develops departmental 
or institutional 
protocols for reduction 
of the long-term 
impact of anesthesia
(Box 2.2). Important patient care decisions involve assess-
ing the preoperative evaluation; creating the anesthesia 
plan; preparing the operating room; and managing the 
intraoperative anesthetic, postoperative care, and out-
come. An understanding of this framework will facilitate 
the learning process.
Preoperative Evaluation
The goals of preoperative evaluation include assess-
ing the risk of coexisting diseases, modifying risks, 
addressing patients’ concerns, and discussing options for 
anesthesia care (see Chapters 13 and 14). The beginning 
Table 2.1
Example of Anesthesia Resident Milestones: Patient Care Competency, Perioperative Care, and Management
Milestones are arranged into levels from 1 to 5. These levels do not correspond with postgraduate year of education. Level 4 is designed as a 
graduation goal (but not a graduation requirement).
From Anesthesiology Milestones 2.0. Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education (ACGME), 2020. Available at https://www.acgme.
org/globalassets/PDFs/Milestones/AnesthesiologyMilestones2.0.pdf. Accessed December 17, 2021.
Box 2.1
Example of Entrustable Professional 
Activity (EPA) in Anesthesiology
Task: Induction of anesthesia for a fasted ASA 1/2 patient 
without a known difficult airway
Competencies involved: medical knowledge, patient care, 
interpersonal and communication skills
Milestones addressed: perioperative care and management, 
application and interpretation of monitors, intraoperative 
care, airway management
Entrustment decisions by supervisors: observed, performed 
under supervision, performed independently
ASA, American Society of Anesthesiologists.
I
Chapter 2 LEARNING ANESTHESIA
13
Box 2.2
Phases of Anesthesia Care
Preoperative Phase
Preoperative evaluation
Choice of anesthesia
Premedication
Intraoperative Phase
Physiologic monitoring and vascular access
General anesthesia (i.e., plan for induction, maintenance, and 
emergence)
Regional anesthesia (i.e., plan for type of block, needle, local 
anesthetic)
Postoperative Phase
Postoperative pain control method
Special monitoring or treatment based on surgery or 
anesthetic course
Disposition (e.g., home, postanesthesia care unit, ward, 
monitored ward, step-down unit, intensive care unit)
Follow-up (anesthesia complications, patient outcome)
Creating the Anesthesia Plan
After the preoperative evaluation, the anesthesia plan 
can be completed. The plan should list drug choices 
and doses in detail, in addition to anticipated problems 
(Boxes 2.3 and 2.4). Many alternatives to a given plan may 
be acceptable, but the trainee and the supervising anesthe-
sia provider should agree in advance on the details.
Preparing the Operating Room
After determining the anesthesia plan, the trainee must 
prepare the operating room. Routine operating room 
preparation includes tasks such as checking the anesthe-
sia workstation (see Chapter 15). The specific anesthesia 
plan may have implications for preparing additional 
equipment. For example, fiber-optic tracheal intubation 
requires special equipment that may be kept in a cart 
dedicated to difficult airway management.
Managing the Intraoperative Anesthetic
Intraoperative anesthesia management generally fol-
lows the anesthesia plan but should be adjusted based 
Question
Anesthetic Considerations
What is the indication for the 
proposed surgery?
The indication for surgery may have anesthetic implications. For example, a patient requiring 
esophageal fundoplication will likely have severe gastroesophageal reflux disease, which 
may require modification of the anesthesia plan (e.g., preoperative nonparticulate antacid, 
intraoperative rapid-sequence induction of anesthesia).
What is the proposed 
surgery?
A given procedure may have implications for anesthetic choice. Anesthesia for hand surgery, 
for example, can be accomplished with local anesthesia, peripheral nerve blockade, general 
anesthesia, or sometimes a combination of techniques.
Is the procedure elective, 
urgent, or an emergency?
The urgency of a given procedure (e.g., acute appendicitis) may preclude lengthy delay of the 
surgery for additional testing, without increasing the risk of complications (e.g., appendiceal 
rupture, peritonitis). Surgical procedures related to a cancer diagnosis may also present a degree 
of urgency depending on the risk of metastasis.
What are the inherent risks 
of this surgery?
Surgical procedures have different inherent risks. For example, a patient undergoing coronary 
artery bypass graft has a significant risk of problems such as death, stroke, or myocardial 
infarction. A patient undergoing cataract extraction is unlikely to sustain perioperative morbidity.
Does the patient have 
coexisting medical 
conditions? Does the surgery 
or anesthesia care plan need 
to be modified because of 
them?
The anesthesia provider must understand the physiologic effects of the surgery and anesthetic 
and the potential interaction with the medical condition. For example, a patient with poorly 
controlled systemic hypertension is more likely to have an exaggerated hypertensive response 
to direct laryngoscopy. The anesthetic plan may be modified to increase the induction dose 
of intravenously administered anesthetic (e.g., propofol) and administer a short-acting beta-
adrenergic blocker (e.g., esmolol) before instrumentation of the airway.
Has the patient had 
anesthesia before? Were 
there complications such as 
difficult airway management? 
Does the patient have risk 
factors for difficult airway 
management?
Anesthesia records from previous surgery can yield much useful information. The most 
important fact is the ease of airway management techniques such as direct laryngoscopy. If 
physical examination reveals some risk factors for difficult tracheal intubation but the patient 
had a clearly documented uncomplicated direct laryngoscopy for recent surgery, the anesthesia 
provider may choose to proceed with routine laryngoscopy. Other useful historical information 
includes intraoperative hemodynamic and respiratory instability and occurrence of postoperative 
nausea.
Table 2.2
Questions to Consider in Preoperative Evaluation
trainee should learn the types of questions that are the 
most important to understanding the patient and the 
proposed surgery (Table 2.2).
Section I INTRODUCTION
14
on the patient's responses to anesthesia and surgery. 
The anesthesia provider must evaluate several different 
information pathways from which a decision on whether 
to change the patient's management can be made. The 
trainee must learn to process these different informa-
tion sources and attend to multiple tasks simultaneously. 
The general cycle of mental activity involves observa-
tion, decision making, action, and repeat evaluation10
Case
A 47-year-old, 75-kg female with biliary colic and well-controlled 
asthma requires anesthesia for laparoscopic cholecystectomy.
Preoperative Phase
Premedication:
Midazolam 1–2 mg intravenous (IV) to reduce anxiety
Albuterol, two puffs, to prevent bronchospasm
Intraoperative Phase
Vascular Access and Monitoring
Vascular access: one peripheral IV catheter
Monitors: pulse oximetry, capnography, electrocardiogram, 
noninvasive blood pressure with standard adult cuff size, 
temperature
Induction
Propofol 2 mg/kg (150 mg) IV (preceded by lidocaine 60 mg IV 
to reduce propofol injection pain)
Neuromuscular blocking drug to facilitate tracheal intubation: 
rocuronium 0.6 mg/kg (50 mg) IV
Airway management
Facemask: adult medium size
Direct laryngoscopy: Macintosh 3 blade, 7.0-mm internal 
diameter (ID) endotracheal tube
Maintenance
Inhaled anesthetic: sevoflurane
Opioid: fentanyl, anticipate 2–4 μg/kg IV total during procedure
Neuromuscular blocking drug titrated to train-of-four monitor 
(peripheral nerve stimulator) at the ulnar nerve
Emergence
Antagonize effects of nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking 
drug: sugammadex 2–4 mg/kg based on train-of-four 
monitoring
Antiemetic: dexamethasone 4 mg IV at start of procedure; 
ondansetron 4 mg IV at end of procedure
Tracheal extubation: when patient is awake, breathing, and 
following commands
Possible intraoperative problem and approach: bronchospasm: 
increase inspired oxygen and inhaled anesthetic 
concentrations, decrease surgical stimulation if possible, 
administer albuterol through endotracheal tube 
(5–10 puffs), adjust ventilator to maximize expiratory flow
Postoperative Phase
Postanesthesia care unit (PACU) orders to include fentanyl IV 
prn for postoperative analgesia, in addition to oxycodone 
5 mg PO before PACU discharge; prn antiemetics include 
prochlorperazine, because antiemetics of two different drug 
classes were administered intraoperatively
Disposition: PACU, then hospital ward once PACU discharge 
criteria are met
Box 2.3
Sample General Anesthesia Plan
Case
A 27-year-old, 80-kg male requires diagnostic right shoulder 
arthroscopy for chronic pain. He has no known medical 
problems.
Preoperative Phase
Premedication: midazolam 1–2 mg intravenous (IV) to reduce 
anxiety
Nerve block placed in preoperative area with electrocardiogram 
(ECG), blood pressure, and pulse oximetry monitoring
Type of block: interscalene
Needle: 22-gauge short-bevel, 5 cm long, echogenic
Local anesthetic: 0.5% ropivacaine, 20 mL
Ancillary equipment: ultrasound machine with linear 
transducer, sterile sheath, ultrasound gel
Technique: chlorhexidine skin preparation, localize nerve in 
posterior triangle of neck, use ultrasound to guide in-plane 
needle insertion, inject local anesthetic
Precautions: because of the risk of local anesthetic systemic 
toxicity (LAST), the location of 20% intralipid is confirmed 
before block placement
Intraoperative Phase
Intraoperative sedation and analgesia:
Midazolam 0.5–1 mg IV given every 5–10 minutes as indicated
Fentanyl 25–50 μg IV given every 5–10 minutes as indicated
Postoperative Phase
Postanesthesia care unit (PACU) orders will include prn IV 
fentanyl for analgesia, but will most likely not be required 
because of the long-acting local anesthetic used for the 
nerve block
Disposition: PACU, then home once PACU discharge criteria are met
Box 2.4
Sample Regional Anesthesia Plan
(Fig. 2.1). Vigilance, being watchful and alert, is neces-
sary for safe patient care, but vigilance alone is not 
enough. The anesthesia provider must weigh the signifi-
cance of each observation and can become overwhelmed 
by the amount of information or by rapidly changing 
information. Intraoperative clinical events can stimulate 
thinking and promote an interactive discussion between 
the trainee and supervisor (Table 2.3).
I
Chapter 2 LEARNING ANESTHESIA
15
Patient Follow-up
The patient should be reassessed after recovery from 
anesthesia. This follow-up includes assessing general 
satisfaction with the anesthetic; postoperative pain; and 
a review for complications such as dental injury, nausea, 
nerve injury, and intraoperative recall.
LEARNING STRATEGIES
Learning during supervised direct patient care is the 
foundation of clinical training. Because the scope of 
anesthesia practice is so broad (see Chapter 1) and the 
competencies trainees are required to master are diverse, 
direct patient care cannot be the only component of the 
teaching program. Other modalities include independ-
ent reading, in-person or synchronous virtual lectures 
or small-group discussions, simulations, and various 
forms of e-learning.3 Independent reading should include 
basic textbooks and selected portions of comprehensive 
textbooks in addition to anesthesia specialty journals 
and general medical journals. In-person or synchronous 
virtual lectures can be efficient methods for transmitting 
large amounts of information. However, the large group 
lecture format is not conducive to audience interaction. 
In-person or synchronous virtual group discussions are 
most effective when they are small (fewer than 12 par-
ticipants) and interactive. Journal clubs, quality assur-
ance conferences, and problem-based case discussions 
lend themselves to this format.
A teaching method termed the flipped classroom can 
combine aspects of asynchronous e-learning and in-
person or synchronous group discussions.11 One popular 
approach to the flipped classroom involves the use of an 
asynchronous video lecture that must be viewed before 
the class session. Interactive class time involves discus-
sions or other active learning modalities that are only 
effective if the trainee has viewed the material before-
hand.
Fig. 2.1 Model of the anesthesia professional's complex process of intraoperative decision making. 
There is a primary loop (heavy black arrows) of observation, decision, action, and reevaluation. This loop 
is controlled by higher levels of supervisory control (allocation of attention) and resource management. 
BP, Blood pressure; CO, cardiac output; MAP, mean arterial pressure; P, pressure; res, resistance; 
SVR, systemic vascular resistance. (From Gaba DM, Fish KJ, Howard SK, et al. Crisis Management in 
Anesthesiology, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2014, Figure 1.4.)
Section I INTRODUCTION
16
Simulations can take several forms: task-based simu-
lators to practice discrete procedures such as laryngo-
scopy or intravenous catheter placement, mannequin-
based simulators to recreate an intraoperative crisis 
such as malignant hyperthermia or cardiac arrest, and 
computer-based simulators designed to repetitively man-
age advanced cardiac life support algorithms. The wide 
variety of web-based material that is readily accessible 
to trainees includes podcasts and videocasts, ultrasound 
learning modules, and other procedure-based instruc-
tional videos.3
The beginning trainee is typically focused on learning 
to care for one patient at a time, that is, case-based learn-
ing. When developing an individual anesthesia plan, the 
trainee should also set learning goals for a case (Box 2.5). 
Trainees should regularly reflect on their practice and on 
how they can improve their individual patient care and 
their institution's systems of patient care.
Learning Orientation
The trainee's approach to a learning challenge can be 
described as a “performance orientation” or a “learning 
orientation.”12 Trainees with a performance orientation 
have a goal of validating their abilities, whereas trainees 
with a learning orientation have the goal of increasing 
their mastery of the situation. Feedback is more likely 
to be viewed as beneficial for trainees with a learning 
orientation, whereas a trainee with a performance orien-
tation is likely to view feedback as merely a mechanism 
to highlight an area of weakness. If the training setting is 
challenging and demanding, an individual with a strong 
learning orientation is more likely to thrive.
The growth mindset theory suggests that performance 
versus learning orientation is influenced by an individ-
ual's beliefs about their intelligence and abilities. People 
with a growth mindset believe that intelligence and abili-
ties are not fixed and can be developed. Other features of 
a growth mindset include embracing challenges, viewing 
effort as necessary for success, and considering feedback 
as important for ongoing learning.13 Individuals with a 
growth mindset focus on mastery of learning goals rather 
than performance (either performing more poorly than 
others or trying to outperform others). Although growth 
mindset theory has been studied in primary and second-
ary schools for decades, the theory as it relates to health 
professions education is in its early phase of exploration. 
Although more research is warranted, potential benefits 
of the growth mindset include helping health professions 
learners be more receptive to feedback, which can sup-
port the relationship between learners and educators.13
Event
Questions to Consider
Possible Discussion Topics
Tachycardia after increase in surgical 
stimulation
Is the depth of anesthesia adequate?
Could there be another cause for the 
tachycardia?
Is the patient in sinus rhythm, or could 
this be a primary arrhythmia?
Assessment of anesthetic depth
Approaches to increasing depth of 
anesthesia
Diagnosis of tachycardia
End-tidal CO2 increases after 
laparoscopic insufflation
Is the patient having a potentially life-
threatening complication of laparoscopy 
such as CO2 embolism?
What is the expected rise in end-tidal 
CO2 with laparoscopic procedures?
How should the mechanical ventilator 
settings be adjusted?
Complications of laparoscopy
Mechanical ventilation modes
Causes of intraoperative hypercarbia
Peripheral nerve stimulator indicates 
train-of-four 0/4 15 minutes before the 
end of surgery
Is the nerve stimulator functioning 
properly?
Is there a reason for prolonged 
neuromuscular blockade?
Can the blockade be reversed safely?
Neuromuscular stimulation patterns
Clinical implications of residual 
neuromuscular blockade
Pharmacology of neuromuscular 
blockade reversal
Table 2.3
Examples of Intraoperative Events to Discuss
Box 2.5
Sample Learning Goals for Operating Room Case
A 47-year-old, 75-kg female with biliary colic and well-
controlled asthma requires anesthesia for laparoscopic 
cholecystectomy. Possible learning goals to be addressed by 
directed reading before the case or discussion during the case 
include the following:
What complications of laparoscopic surgery can present 
intraoperatively?
What are the manifestations?
How should these complications be treated?
How will the severity of the patient's asthma be assessed?
What if the patient had wheezing and dyspnea in the 
preoperative area?
I
Chapter 2 LEARNING ANESTHESIA
17
Cognitive Load
Providing anesthesia in the operating room is a complex 
process that requires processing and using enormous 
amounts of information. Anesthesia trainees, especially 
those in the beginning of their training, encounter an 
enormous cognitive load as they learn new information. 
In brief, cognitive load theory suggests that new infor-
mation must be processed by the working memory, which 
has a limited capacity.14 The working memory faces three 
types of cognitive load: intrinsic load, extraneous load, 
and germane load.15 Intrinsic load is related to the degree 
of difficulty of the material and the expertise of the per-
son processing the information (i.e., load associated with 
the task). Extraneous load is the load imposed that is 
not necessary to learning the information (i.e., load not
essential to the task). Germane load is the load imposed 
by the learner's use of strategies to organize and process 
information and may be viewed as a learner's level of 
concentration devoted to learning. Optimizing germane 
load allows learners to organize knowledge into sche-
mas or scripts. These act as a single element in working 
memory and therefore reduce intrinsic load. Extensive 
practice allows for schemas and scripts to become auto-
mated and performed with ease and without effort. This 
opens space in the working memory to process and learn 
more information.
Using cognitive load theory, instructors can facilitate 
learning in one of three ways: (1) teach at the level 
and expertise of the learner (decrease intrinsic load); 
(2) remove content or other interruptions not pertinent 
to the task or subject (decrease extraneous load); and 
(3) encourage strategies that allow for processing of 
information (optimize germane load).14 16 If intrinsic and 
extraneous load are too high, a learner will not have 
enough working memory to allow for the germane load 
needed to develop schemas and scripts. Trainees who 
understand these processes, including the importance of 
practice, are more likely to excel in their learning and 
grow as clinicians.
REFERENCES
1. Whittington JW, Nolan K, Lewis N, Torres 
T. Pursuing the triple aim: The first 7 
years. Milbank Q. 2015;93(2):263–300. 
doi: 10.1111/1468-0009.12122. PMID: 
26044630; PMCID: PMC4462878.
2. MacNeill AJ, McGain F, Sherman JD. 
Planetary health care: A framework 
for sustainable health systems. Lan-
cet Planet Health. 2021;5(2):e66–e68. 
doi:10.1016/S2542-5196(21)00005-X 
PMID: 33581064.
3. Martinelli SM, Isaak RS, Schell RM, 
Mitchell JD, McEvoy MD, Chen F. 
Learners and Luddites in the twenty-
first century: Bringing evidence-
based education to anesthesiology. 
Anesthesiology. 2019;131(4):908–928. 
doi:10.1097/ALN.0000000000002827 
PMID: 31365369.
4. St Pierre M, Nyce JM. How novice and 
expert anaesthetists understand exper-
tise in anaesthesia: A qualitative study. 
BMC Med Educ. 2020 12;20(1):262. 
doi:10.1186/s12909-020-02180-8 PMID: 
32787964; PMCID: PMC7425048.
5. The anesthesiology milestone project. J 
Grad Med Educ. 2014;6(1 Suppl 1):15–
28. 
doi:10.4300/JGME-06-01s1-30 
PMID: 24701262; PMCID: PMC3966579.
6. Anesthesiology Milestones 2.0. Accredi-
tation Council for Graduate Medical 
Education (ACGME), 2020. https://www.
acgme.org/globalassets/PDFs/Mile-
stones/AnesthesiologyMilestones2.0.pdf
Accessed December 17, 2021.
7. Ten Cate O, Schwartz A, Chen HC. 
Assessing trainees and making entrust-
ment decisions: On the nature and 
use of entrustment-supervision scales. 
Acad 
Med. 2020;95(11):1662–1669. 
doi:10.1097/ACM.0000000000003427 
PMID: 32324633.
8. Marty AP, Schmelzer S, Thomasin 
RA, Braun J, Zalunardo MP, Spahn 
DR, Breckwoldt J. Agreement between 
trainees and supervisors on first-year 
entrustable professional activities for 
anaesthesia training. Br J Anaesth. 
2020;125(1):98–103. 
doi:10.1016/j.
bja.2020.04.009 Epub 2020 May 16. 
PMID: 32423610.
9. Woodworth GE, Marty AP, Tanaka PP, 
Ambardekar AP, Chen F, Duncan MJ, 
Fromer IR, Hallman MR, Klesius LL, 
Ladlie BL, Mitchell SA, AK Miller Juve, 
McGrath BJ, Shepler JA, 3rd Sims C, 
Spofford CM, Van Cleve W, Maniker 
RB. Development and Pilot Testing of 
Entrustable Professional Activities for 
US Anesthesiology Residency Training. 
Anesth Analg. 2021 1;132(6):1579–1591. 
doi:10.1213/ANE.0000000000005434 
PMID: 33661789.
10. Gaba DM, Fish KJ, Howard SK, Burden 
A. Crisis Management in Anesthesiology. 
2nd ed Philadephia: Sauders; 2014.
11. Tainter CR, Wong NL, Cudemus-Deseda 
GA, Bittner EA. “Flipped Classroom” mod-
el for teaching in the intensive care unit. J 
Intensive Care Med. 2017;32(3):187–196. 
doi:10.1177/0885066616632156 Epub 
2016 Jul 7. PMID: 26912409.
12. Weidman J, Baker K. The cognitive sci-
ence of learning: Concepts and strate-
gies for the educator and learner. Anesth 
Analg. 2015;121(6):1586–1599.
13. Wolcott MD, McLaughlin JE, Hann A, 
Miklavec A, Beck Dallaghan GL, Rhoney 
DH, Zomorodi M. A review to character-
ise and map the growth mindset theory 
in health professions education. Med 
Educ. 2021;55(4):430–440. doi:10.1111/
medu.14381 Epub 2020 Oct 9. PMID: 
32955728.
14. van Merriënboer JJ, Sweller J. Cog-
nitive load theory in health profes-
sional education: Design principles and 
strategies. Med Educ. 2010;44(1):85–93. 
doi:10.1111/j.1365-2923.2009.03498.x 
PMID: 20078759.
15. Rana J, Burgin S. Teaching & learn-
ing tips 2: Cognitive load theory. Int 
J Dermatol. 2017;56(12):1438–1441. 
doi:10.1111/ijd.13707 PMID: 29130491.
16. Castro-Alonso JC, de Koning BB, 
Fiorella L, Paas F. Five Strategies for 
Optimizing 
Instructional 
Materials: 
Instructor- and Learner-Managed Cog-
nitive Load. Educ Psychol Rev. 2021 
9:1–29. doi:10.1007/s10648-021-09606-
9 Epub ahead of print. PMID: 33716467; 
PMCID: PMC7940870.
18
Chapter
Clinician well-being has emerged as a critical issue 
because of widespread clinician burnout. There is growing 
recognition that a combination of individual strategies 
and systems-level solutions is required to successfully 
promote clinician well-being. Interventions to prevent 
burnout are more effective than those that address 
burnout after it has occurred.
DEFINING TERMS
Burnout
In its 11 revision of the International Classification of 
Diseases (ICD-11) the World Health Organization (WHO) 
defines burnout as an occupational phenomenon rather 
than an individual mental health diagnosis (e.g., depres-
sion).1 The term burnout was initially coined by Freuden-
berger in the 1970s, who described 12 progressive stages 
of burnout experienced by individuals in the helping 
professions in response to severe stress: (1) compulsion 
to prove oneself, (2) working harder, (3) neglecting of 
needs, (4) displacement of conflicts, (5) revision of values, 
(6) denial of emerging problems, (7) withdrawal, (8) obvi-
ous behavioral changes, (9) depersonalization, (10) inner 
emptiness, (11) depression, and (12) burnout.2 Three key 
dimensions of burnout are commonly evaluated: emo-
tional exhaustion, depersonalization, and a diminished 
sense of personal accomplishment.3 Burnout rates in U.S. 
anesthesiologists and anesthesiology trainees range from 
14% to 51%.4 5 Clinician burnout is associated with nega-
tive consequences for (1) patient care, (2) the clinician 
workforce and health care system costs, and (3) clini-
cians’ own health and safety.1 Both work environment 
and individual factors can influence the risk of burnout 
in anesthesiology (Table 3.1).
DEFINING TERMS
Burnout
Resilience
Moral Injury
Well-Being
WHY WELL-BEING IS IMPORTANT
FACTORS AFFECTING CLINICIAN 
WELL-BEING
Individual Level
Organizational Level
Societal Level
MENTAL HEALTH
Fatigue Mitigation
Substance Use Disorders
Depression
Suicide
INTERVENTIONS TO IMPROVE WELL-BEING
Personal Strategies
Systemic Approaches
Policies to Support Well-Being
CLINICIAN WELL-BEING
Laura Berenstain, Jina Sinskey
3
I
Chapter 3 Clinician Well-Being
19
Resilience
Resilience refers to the ability of both individuals and 
social groups to withstand, adapt, recover, or even grow 
from adversity, stress, or trauma; in other words, the 
ability to bounce back from challenging life experiences. 
Traditionally, resilience in the context of clinician well-
being has focused on individual personality traits, behav-
iors, and attitudes. Resilience is a continuous, dynamic 
state that can be nurtured and trained.1
Moral Injury
Moral injury was first described in war veterans. It 
refers to the lasting negative effects on an individual’s 
conscience or moral compass when that person perpe-
trates, fails to prevent, or witnesses acts that transgress 
one's own deeply held moral beliefs and expectations.6
Emotions of guilt, shame, and remorse are frequently 
associated with moral injury. In medicine moral injury 
describes the distress that clinicians experience when 
they are unable to provide high-quality patient care 
because of factors beyond their control. During the 
coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic, concerns 
about adequate personal protective equipment (PPE), wit-
nessing patients dying alone in isolation, and the need 
to make allocation decisions to ration scarce medical 
resources were among numerous factors that contributed 
to clinician moral injury.
Well-Being
Well-being is not simply the absence of burnout. It 
also includes the presence of positive emotions (e.g., 
contentment and happiness), the absence of negative 
emotions, satisfaction with life, fulfillment, engage-
ment, and positive functioning. Professional well-being 
allows clinicians to thrive and achieve their full poten-
tial through the experience of positive perceptions and 
an environment that supports a high quality of life 
at work.1 The terms wellness and well-being are often 
used interchangeably. Efforts to promote wellness have 
traditionally focused on physical and emotional health 
and maintaining a healthy lifestyle. Although physical 
and emotional health are critical to overall well-being, 
they are only part of the equation. In addition to these 
two domains, well-being encompasses several distinc-
tive, interdependent dimensions that can be internal or 
external to the individual (Fig. 3.1). Drivers of clinician 
well-being can be organized into a hierarchy of needs, 
starting with basic needs at the lowest level and leading 
to self-actualization at the highest level (Fig. 3.2).
WHY WELL-BEING IS IMPORTANT
Physicians with high levels of well-being generally have 
enthusiasm for life and work, along with a sense of 
accomplishment and belonging. However, personal char-
acteristics such as perfectionism, self-doubt, inability to 
delegate, and high levels of commitment despite adver-
sity can contribute to emotional exhaustion. Maslach 
and colleagues suggested that the best workers are more 
predisposed to burnout because they will continue to 
expend significant energy to meet their goals even in 
the face of barriers.7 Not surprisingly, the prevalence of 
burnout observed among physicians compared with other 
U.S. workers is significantly higher even after adjustment 
for work hours, age, and gender.1
Chronic occupational stress is linked to neurobiologic 
findings. High levels of norepinephrine and dopamine 
are released in the brain during episodes of uncontrol-
lable stress, weakening the abilities of the prefrontal 
cortex and impairing higher-order functions, includ-
ing reasoning, social cognition, attention regulation, 
and complex decision making. In contrast, controllable 
stressors (such as a meaningful challenge) do not result 
in the same chemical changes.8 Structural magnetic reso-
nance imaging (MRI) findings obtained longitudinally in 
both a control population and a group with occupational 
exhaustion syndrome strongly suggested links between 
chronic occupational stress and thinning of the prefron-
tal cortex, enlargement of the amygdala, and caudate 
reduction. These findings were gender-specific, with 
women affected to a greater degree than men.
Professionalism, teamwork, and patient safety can all 
suffer as a result of burnout. Multiple studies have sug-
gested a relationship between physician burnout and an 
increased incidence of both self-perceived medical errors 
and suboptimal care. Anesthesia residents at greater 
Anesthesia Work 
Environment Factors
Individual Factors
•Front-line providers of
acute care
•Work associated with
time pressure
•Rapid pace of work
•Need for sustained
vigilance
•Chaotic setting
•Limited control over
schedule
•Lack of respect as a
consulting clinician
•Perceived lack of support
at work
•Perceived lack of support
at home
•Working more than
40 hours per week
•Lesbian, gay, transgender/
transsexual, queer/
questioning, intersex, 
asexual status
•Perceived staffing
shortages
From Pinyavat T, Mulaikal TA. Fostering physician well-being in 
anesthesiology. Int Anesthesiol Clin. 2020;58(4):36–40 and Afonso 
AM, Cadwell JB, Staffa SJ, et al. Burnout rate and risk factors 
among anesthesiologists in the United States. Anesthesiology.
2021;134(5):683–696.
Table 3.1
Work Environment and Individual Factors as 
Risk Factors for Burnout in Anesthesiology
Section I INTRODUCTION
20
risk for burnout and depression reported more medica-
tion errors and mistakes with negative consequences for 
patients than residents with lesser risk.9 Perhaps most 
concerning is the finding that emotional distress demon-
strated during residency can have implications for future 
burnout as a practicing physician. In a longitudinal study 
of internal medicine physicians with early signs of emo-
tional distress the persistence of emotional distress along 
with an association with depersonalization was identified 
10 years after residency.10
The negative financial impact of burnout on health 
care systems is considerable. Studies have found that 
physicians with self-reported burnout were approxi-
mately twice as likely to leave the institution; the soci-
etal cost of turnover and reduced productivity caused by 
physician burnout in the United States is estimated to 
Fig. 3.1 The eight dimensions of well-being. (Adapted from Substance Abuse and Mental Health 
Services Administration [SAMHSA]. Creating a Healthier Life: A Step-by-Step Guide to Wellness.
Washington, DC: SAMSHA; 2016.)
be greater than $4 billion annually.1 Clinicians may also 
elect to reduce their work hours or retire early, result-
ing in decreased system productivity and reduced access 
to care for patients. Physician turnover also adversely 
affects colleagues and increases the risk of burnout for 
other health care team members.
The provision of optimal health care is the end product 
of a successful relationship between those providing care 
and those seeking care. Recognizing the negative impact 
of clinician burnout on health care organizations, the 
American Medical Association (AMA) has outlined five 
critical arguments for supporting well-being: (1) moral 
and ethical, (2) business, (3) recognition, (4) regulatory, 
and (5) tragedy.11 The moral and ethical case may be the 
most important, as clinician burnout may contribute to 
excessive alcohol use and suicide.1
I
Chapter 3 Clinician Well-Being
21
FACTORS AFFECTING CLINICIAN 
WELL-BEING
Autonomy, competence, and relatedness (or belonging) 
are basic psychological needs recognized as critical for 
achieving life satisfaction and supporting well-being.12
Motivation also plays a critical role in well-being. Intrin-
sic motivators such as honoring one's values and find-
ing meaning in one's work and life are associated with 
increased satisfaction.12 The Charter on Physician Well-
Being acknowledges the need for commitment on the 
individual, organizational, and societal levels to improve 
clinician well-being.13
Individual Factors
The incidence of burnout symptoms varies across medi-
cal specialties and practice settings. Professional char-
acteristics correlated with a higher risk of burnout or 
Fig. 3.2 Health professional wellness hierarchy. (From Shapiro DE, Duquette C, Abbott LM, et al. Beyond 
burnout: A physician wellness hierarchy designed to prioritize interventions at the systems level. Am J Med.
2019;132[5]:556–563.)
dissatisfaction with work–life integration include medical 
specialty,14 hours worked per week, and the number of 
call nights per week.15 Factors unique to the practice of 
anesthesiology have been shown to result in a higher 
practitioner risk for burnout than seen in other special-
ties. Within the specialty itself, anesthesiology residents 
show the highest risk of developing burnout.16 A National 
Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) Task Load 
Index assessing mental, physical, and time demands and 
perceived effort by the physician was used to determine 
physician task load. Higher task load scores were strongly 
correlated with burnout independent of other variables, 
with anesthesiology demonstrating one of the highest task 
load scores.14
Overall, physicians have a lower rate of satisfaction 
with work–life integration than the general U.S. working 
population, even after adjusting for age, sex, relationship 
status, and hours worked per week.1 A 2021 survey of 
over 4000 American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) 
Section I INTRODUCTION
22
members evaluated the presence of burnout with the 
Maslach Burnout Inventory Human Services Survey.4 Of 
the respondents, 59% were at high risk of burnout and 
14% met criteria for burnout syndrome. The risk factors 
independently associated with a high risk of burnout 
included perceived lack of support at work; working 
more than 40 hours per week; lesbian, gay, bisexual, 
transgender/transsexual, queer/questioning, intersex, or 
asexual status; and perceived staffing shortages.
In a 2021 cross-sectional study of over 4000 U.S. 
physicians lower work–life integration scores were inde-
pendently associated with female gender; age between 35 
and 44 years; working more hours per week; and certain 
medical specialties, including anesthesiology, general 
surgery, and emergency medicine. The relationship sta-
tus of “single” was also associated with lower work–life 
integration. Among females, the most significant adverse 
effect on work–life integration was seen in women 
identifying as Black/African American.15 Compared with 
other physician mothers, physician mothers carrying 
additional caregiving responsibilities (e.g., caring for ill 
parents or other relatives) had significantly higher rates 
of mood or anxiety disorders.17
An overdeveloped sense of responsibility to others 
coupled with a culture that deprioritizes personal needs 
can consistently lead to difficulty finding adequate time 
for self-care and a lack of self-compassion. Impostor 
syndrome, or feelings of not being “enough,” can con-
tribute as well. A multicenter study suggested a strong 
association and dose–response relationship between 
physician self-valuation and both sleep deprivation and 
burnout, with self-valuation accounting for nearly 27% 
of the variability in physician burnout. Differences in 
self-valuation also accounted for most of the observed 
differences between male and female physicians in 
burnout rates.18
Organizational Level
Although individual factors influence clinician well-
being, most clinicians already tend to exhibit high levels 
of resilience, underscoring the importance of organi-
zational factors in promoting well-being.1 A support-
ive work environment can profoundly affect clinician 
engagement. A 2021 study found that perceived lack of 
support at work is strongly associated with a high risk 
for burnout in practicing anesthesiologists.4 A survey 
of anesthesiology trainees found that factors associated 
with a lower risk of burnout include perceived workplace 
resource availability, perceived ability to maintain work–
life balance, and having a strong social support system.5
Numerous factors at the organizational level influence 
clinician well-being. The areas of the work–life model 
proposed by Maslach and Leiter provide an organi-
zational context of burnout by looking at six areas: 
workload, control, reward, community, fairness, and 
values.19 The degree of mismatch existing in these six 
areas is predictive of burnout, representing opportunities 
to develop specific strategies targeted to each area to 
improve matches between people and their work.
Culture refers to the collective norms, values, and 
beliefs of members of a particular group or society. By 
encouraging behaviors such as the compulsion to prove 
oneself, working harder, and neglecting one's needs, the 
culture of medical training often drives clinicians toward 
the initial stages of burnout described previously in this 
chapter.20 Historically, the culture of medicine has upheld 
the idea that the responsibility for clinician well-being 
belongs to the individual rather than the organization 
or society. Organizational culture permeates the work 
experience and can affect and intensify factors perceived 
to be individual in nature. For example, work–life inte-
gration is typically considered to vary by individual. 
However, clinicians feel comfortable tending to nonwork 
needs only when cultural norms in the workplace also 
demonstrate a commitment to work–life integration.21
Societal Level
The practice of medicine happens within, and is strongly 
influenced by, the broader context of society. In 2019 
the National Academy of Medicine (NAM) advocated for 
a systems approach to clinician well-being, with recom-
mendations to reduce stigma and eliminate barriers asso-
ciated with obtaining mental health support (Table 3.2).1
Clinicians are often reluctant to seek help for mental 
health conditions because mental health–related stigma 
and structural issues such as medical licensure can have 
serious repercussions for clinicians’ ability to practice 
medicine. This is especially concerning because failure 
to seek professional mental help is thought to contribute 
to a higher risk of suicide among physicians versus the 
general population. Although the Federation of State 
Medical Boards (FSMB) published recommendations for 
physician well-being in 2018, a review of initial medical 
license applications from 54 states and territories and 
Washington, DC in 2021 found that only 1 state was 
consistent with all recommendations and 5 states were 
consistent with none.22
The rapidly changing and stressful environment 
created by the COVID-19 pandemic exacerbated existing 
clinician burnout. Health care professionals’ experiences 
during COVID-19 compromised the foundation of clini-
cian well-being by threatening not only their basic needs 
but also their safety (physical safety and job security). 
Anesthesia care team members and other individu-
als participating in endotracheal intubation procedures 
experienced an even greater threat to their physical 
safety and mental health because of the heightened risk 
of exposure to, and transmission of, severe acute respira-
tory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). The surge 
of physical and mental health issues in clinicians has 
I
Chapter 3 Clinician Well-Being
23
accentuated the need for a national strategy to protect 
their well-being.
The NAM recommends creating positive work and 
learning environments to foster professional well-being 
in medicine,1 underscoring the importance of inclusive 
environments that allow all clinicians to thrive. The 
recognition that structural racism and health inequities 
exist in medicine and the medical community must be 
acknowledged and addressed. Bias and discrimination 
occur regularly in medicine and can create a harsh 
work environment that can lead to burnout and sui-
cidality.23 Microaggressions refer to everyday slights, 
insults, putdowns, invalidations, and offensive behav-
iors experienced by members of a marginalized group. 
Microaggressions may be intentional or unintentional.24
In medicine microaggressions often take the form of 
verbal and nonverbal reminders of how an individual, 
such as a member of an underrepresented minority or a 
woman, differs from the traditional image of someone in 
their field. This can lead to attrition, continuing and per-
petuating inequities that ultimately hurt the entire medi-
cal community. In contrast, microinterventions can be 
a powerful tool to nurture an environment of diversity, 
equity, and inclusion by providing support and affirma-
tion to individuals targeted by microaggressions.
MENTAL HEALTH
Fatigue Mitigation
Fatigue is defined as mental and physical exhaustion and 
tiredness. Practicing anesthesiologists and anesthesiology 
residents often work 24-hour or overnight shifts, which 
can lead to sleep deprivation and disruption of their 
circadian rhythm. Sleep-related impairment is associ-
ated with decreased professional fulfillment, increased 
burnout, and increased self-reported medical errors.25 The 
Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education 
(ACGME) includes guidelines for fatigue mitigation as 
part of its common program requirements for anesthe-
siology residents.26 Potential strategies for fatigue miti-
gation include scheduling interventions (e.g., 16-hour 
vs. 24-hour shifts), strategic naps, and the use of bright 
lights in clinical settings if feasible.
Substance Use Disorders
Substance use disorders are a serious issue in the anes-
thesia workplace with potentially devastating conse-
quences for the involved clinician and their patients. 
Ease of access to venous cannulation equipment and 
potent drugs with abuse potential, and proficiency with 
both, create a unique risk for substance use disorders. 
The incidence of substance use disorders in practicing 
anesthesiologists and anesthesiology residents ranges 
between 1% and 2%,27 with a high risk of relapse in both 
groups.28 29 The risk of substance use disorder in certified 
registered nurse anesthetists (CRNAs) appears similar.30
Substance use disorders can prove fatal, and one study 
of practicing anesthesiologists demonstrated that nearly 
20% of physicians with a substance use disorder died of 
a substance use disorder–related cause.28
Behavioral changes described in affected anesthesiol-
ogists include withdrawal from family and friends; mood 
swings; increased episodes of anger, irritability, and 
Goal
Description
Create positive work 
environments
Transform health care work systems by creating positive work environments that prevent and 
reduce burnout, foster professional well-being, and support quality care
Create positive learning 
environments
Transform health professions education and training to optimize learning environments that 
prevent and reduce burnout and foster professional well-being
Reduce administrative 
burden
Prevent and reduce the negative consequences on clinicians’ professional well-being that result 
from laws, regulations, policies, and standards promulgated by health care policy, regulatory, 
and standards-setting entities, including government agencies (federal, state, and local), 
professional organizations, and accreditors
Enable technology solutions
Optimize the use of health information technologies to support clinicians in providing high-
quality patient care
Provide support to clinicians 
and learners
Reduce the stigma and eliminate the barriers associated with obtaining the support and services 
needed to prevent and alleviate burnout symptoms, facilitate recovery from burnout, and foster 
professional well-being among learners and practicing clinicians
Invest in research
Provide dedicated funding for research on clinician professional well-being
From National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. National Academy of Medicine: Taking Action Against Clinician Burnout: A 
Systems Approach to Professional Well - Being. 2019.
Table 3.2
National Academy of Medicine Goals for Eliminating Clinician Burnout and Enhancing Professional Well-Being
Section I INTRODUCTION
24
hostility; spending more time at the hospital (even when 
off duty); volunteering for extra calls; refusing relief for 
lunch or coffee breaks; requesting frequent bathroom 
breaks; and signing out increasing amounts of opioids or 
quantities inappropriate for the given case.31 Treatment 
generally involves referral to an inpatient facility that 
specializes in the treatment of health care profession-
als and includes detoxification, monitored abstinence, 
intensive education, exposure to self-help groups, and 
psychotherapy.31 Substance use disorder prevention pro-
grams composed of education, strict substance control 
practices, structured interventions, and testing have been 
proposed as a potential strategy to reduce substance use 
disorders.27 Reentry into clinical practice must be care-
fully planned with appropriate staging and monitoring to 
mitigate the risk of relapse.
Depression
Physicians with a high level of distress, whether because 
of burnout, depression, or both, can potentially enter a 
downward cycle that can result in tragic consequences. 
Burnout can be conceptualized as a process that proceeds 
through stages beginning with exhaustion and poten-
tially culminating in physical symptoms and despair. As 
a clinician progresses through the various stages, patient 
care is often maintained at the expense of the clinician's 
own well-being and mental health. This perspective also 
aids in determining the most appropriate and helpful 
interventions for the clinician who is suffering.
Burnout and major depressive disorder (MDD) can 
share many of the same symptoms, including anhedo-
nia, fatigue, impaired concentration and cognition, and 
changes in appetite and sleep. Burnout is described as a 
workplace phenomenon, whereas MDD is a clinical disor-
der with well-defined diagnostic criteria published by the 
American Psychiatric Association. Consideration for the 
distinction is essential in order not to prevent or delay 
treatment for clinicians with MDD.
The proportion of physicians screening positive for 
MDD showed a modest but steady increase between 
2011 and 2017, reaching 42%.32 Burnout, depression, 
and suicidal ideation are frequent among anesthesiol-
ogy residents. A 22% incidence of depression risk has 
been described in anesthesiology residents, with a rate of 
suicidal ideation more than twice the age-adjusted rate 
observed in developed countries.9 In a repeated cross-
sectional study approximately half of residents were at 
high risk for burnout, and one in eight screened positive 
for depression.5 These estimates may be low because of 
underreporting and undertreatment of depression as a 
result of the stigmatization in medical culture.
Depression is linked to patient safety. Physicians with 
depression are more likely to experience suboptimal 
functioning and report medical errors. In a study of anes-
thesiology residents those at high risk for burnout and 
depression reported more medical errors and less vigilant 
patient monitoring than their fellow residents.9
Suicide
Physicians have the highest suicide rate of any profes-
sion, twice that of the general population, with female 
physicians at greater risk than males.33 Although female 
physicians attempt suicide less often than women in the 
general population, their completion rate equals male 
physicians and is estimated to be 2.5 to 4 times that of 
the general population. A 2020 meta analysis evalu-
ated physician suicide rates since 1980.34 Although the 
age-standardized suicide mortality ratio (SMR) for male 
physicians was significantly lower than the SMR of 
the general male population, female physicians’ SMR 
remained substantially greater than the SMR for the 
general female population. Career-associated factors 
were the most prominent risk factor, and physician spe-
cialties associated with a greater risk of suicide included 
psychiatry and anesthesiology.34 Although overall rates 
of suicide were lower than the rates for the age- and 
gender-matched general population, suicide is the lead-
ing cause of death among male residents and the second 
leading cause among female residents.
Physicians are more likely to commit suicide because 
of a job-related problem than the general population.35
Risk factors for suicide in the medical profession include 
fatigue, social or professional isolation, stress result-
ing from complaints of bullying, the effects of aging, 
a perfectionist personality type, and reluctance to seek 
medical help.33 Depression, substance abuse, impaired 
relationships, and self-destructive tendency have also 
been associated with physician suicide.34 Early recog-
nition of warning signs, continued efforts to enhance 
access to mental health resources, and the availability of 
a national suicide hotline (National Suicide Prevention 
Lifeline: 1-800-273-8255) will hopefully decrease the 
risk and promote emotional wellness for all.
INTERVENTIONS TO IMPROVE WELL-BEING
Personal Strategies
Anesthesiology poses more complex challenges to well-
being than most medical specialties, ranging from con-
stant scheduling changes to the frequency of exposure to 
stressful patient care situations. In concert with fatigue 
and duty to others practice-related challenges can com-
plicate developing reliable personal strategies to enhance 
well-being and resiliency. Individual factors related to 
resilience include self-monitoring, setting limits, promo-
tion of social engagement, and the capacity for mindful-
ness. Choosing the best personal strategies to promote 
well-being and how and when to implement them is an 
I
Chapter 3 Clinician Well-Being
25
individual process, with success related to the sustain-
ability of one's choices. One size does not fit all.
Adequate nutrition, hydration, exercise, and sleep are 
the cornerstones of self-care and fit into the “basics” level 
of the health professional wellness hierarchy (see Fig 3.2). 
Yet even these can prove difficult to achieve consistently, 
as most clinicians become conditioned to ignore or defer 
their own needs in response to work demands. Although 
meeting basic needs can be considered personal strate-
gies, they should also remain departmental and institu-
tional priorities. The individual's ability to consistently 
fill these human needs is greatly facilitated by providing 
adequate breaks, accessibility to nutritional food, and 
conveniently located exercise facilities. Seeking social 
support and having trusted confidants are also crucial for 
regenerating energy.
Clinicians with burnout often experience an inability 
to be “present” and are obsessed with thoughts of the past 
or anxiety about the future. The practice of mindfulness 
provides a path to allow the mind respite by fully engag-
ing in the present moment. By creating intentional and 
nonjudgmental awareness of the moment, mindfulness 
can be practiced during hand hygiene and while washing 
the dishes, eating, walking, or sitting. Meditation is a way 
of cultivating and facilitating mindfulness through the 
self-regulation of attention and awareness. In mindful-
ness meditation an anchor, usually the breath, is used as 
a focus to return to when the mind wanders. Recognizing 
it as a “practice” helps one remember that perfection is 
not the goal. Instead, the aim is to return to the present 
moment as many times as necessary, with nonjudgment 
and acceptance. A greater level of mindfulness has been 
shown to facilitate self-reflection, decrease anxiety, and 
promote emotional self-regulation, with less reactivity to 
stressful situations and emotional triggers.36
As humans, we constantly judge our thoughts, feelings, 
and experiences, many times harshly. Self-compassion is 
defined as being open and sensitive to one's own suf-
fering, experiencing feelings of care and kindness to 
oneself, and not judging one's own inadequacies and 
failures. Self-compassion allows us to recognize and 
accept our common humanity and is also associated with 
compassion towards others.37 Loving-kindness (“metta”) 
or compassion meditations use the self as the object of 
practice, cultivating compassion for oneself and spread-
ing it to others. Multiple studies have suggested a com-
plementary effect between mindfulness and compassion 
practices, with mindfulness practices reducing nega-
tive affect system activity (amygdala) and compassion 
increasing positive emotion brain systems.38
Clinicians often find it hard to permit themselves to 
spend time on self-care. We must shift our mindset and 
learn to choose ourselves, understanding that self-care 
is not selfish and that if we do not care for ourselves, 
we will not be able to care for others effectively. The 
sustained effort necessary to implement and continue 
self-care strategies is not easy, and recognizing this may 
necessitate self-compassion.
Systemic Approaches
The NAM has put forth recommendations for health 
care organizations to address clinician well-being using 
a systems approach (see Table 3.2).1 To address trainee 
well-being, the ACGME includes well-being requirements 
for all accredited residency and fellowship programs.26
Professional societies, including the ASA, are supporting 
clinician well-being by providing open, accessible, and 
practical resources and websites for clinician well-being.
Most anesthesia providers will be involved in a medi-
cal error or adverse event during their career. A survey 
of anesthesiologists showed that 84% of respondents 
were involved in an unanticipated death or serious injury 
of a perioperative patient, and most were emotionally 
affected by the event with feelings of guilt, anxiety, and 
reliving of the episode.39 Sixty-seven percent stated that 
their ability to provide patient care was compromised 
immediately after the event, and 19% acknowledged that 
they had never fully recovered. The term “second victim” 
refers to health care professionals who are injured by the 
same errors as their patients who are harmed. Second 
victims tend to migrate toward one of three paths: drop-
ping out, surviving, or thriving.40 Many institutions have 
formal peer support programs in place to provide social 
support after critical events. Peer support can and should 
also be made available outside of specific critical events.
There is a growing emphasis on well-being education 
for trainees and practicing clinicians, with an increasing 
number of anesthesiology programs developing formal 
well-being curricula. Published well-being curricula for 
anesthesiology residency programs incorporate a combi-
nation of education modalities beyond the traditional lec-
ture format, including facilitated small-group discussions 
and simulation.41 A study comparing facilitated small-
group discussions with providing the same amount of 
free time found that a facilitated small-group curriculum 
aimed at promoting collegiality and community reduced 
depersonalization and increased meaning and engage-
ment in work, with sustained results at 12 months.42
Coaching can be defined as “partnering with a client 
in a thought-provoking and creative process that inspires 
the client to maximize their personal and professional 
well-being.”43 Coaching is distinct from other workplace 
interventions, as it addresses the whole person and can 
explore both professional and personal issues to facilitate 
well-being. Through an ongoing trusting and confiden-
tial relationship, coaching encourages the development 
of self-awareness and recognition of individual strengths, 
enabling the coachee to question self-defeating beliefs 
and assumptions and focus on future possibilities. Unlike a 
traditional mentoring relationship, coach and client work 
as equals, with the client presumed to have the resources 
Section I INTRODUCTION
26
and wisdom to tackle life's challenges. Mindfulness and 
self-reflection are encouraged. Coaching can also be used 
for leadership or career development and to enhance 
team performance. In a randomized study of physicians 
a 6-month coaching intervention decreased overall burn-
out by 17.1% in the intervention group, whereas burnout 
in the control group during the same period increased by 
4.9%. Improvements in emotional exhaustion, resiliency, 
and quality of life were also noted.44 Coaching is not psy-
chological treatment, however, and clinicians suffering 
from depression or substance abuse should be referred to 
appropriate sources for help.
Extensive evidence supports the fact that organizational 
culture and work environment are crucial elements in 
whether clinicians remain engaged or enter the burnout 
cascade. When individual strategies to combat burnout are 
placed at the center of leadership's efforts, there may be 
skepticism regarding leadership's commitment to the prob-
lem. The NAM has advocated for a systemic approach to 
promoting engagement and reducing burnout.1 An organi-
zational infrastructure to support well-being can poten-
tially include a chief well-being officer, well-being com-
mittees, and associate/vice chair positions for well-being.
A 2021 report proposed a new integrative model for 
wellness-centered leadership (WCL) that has three key 
elements. The first and foremost element requires that 
leaders care about people always, seeking to understand 
the complex needs and contributions of both individu-
als and teams.45 The importance of practicing self-care 
should also be emphasized for leaders, as a leader's per-
sonal level of burnout and self-valuation has been shown 
to predict their leadership behavior scores.46 Flexibility 
and work–life integration should be encouraged. The 
second element of WCL requires the cultivation of indi-
vidual and team relationships. This involves articulating 
a vision, creating a shared sense of alignment, and nur-
turing individualized professional development for team 
members. Building community at work leads to increased 
engagement and decreases in burnout. The final compo-
nent for WCL is transformational: to inspire change by 
empowering teams and encouraging innovative thinking. 
Intrinsic motivators, including meaning, purpose, align-
ment in values, and professional development, are 
emphasized. Leadership is transformational rather than 
transactional, and the psychological needs of autonomy, 
competence, and belonging are honored.
Policies to Support Well-Being
The NAM Action Collaborative on Clinician Well-Being 
and Resilience was created in 2017 in response to the 
rising rates of clinician burnout and its consequences. 
Its mission is to improve the understanding of clinician 
well-being challenges and seek and elevate evidence-
based, multidisciplinary solutions. Sponsors of the Action 
Collaborative on Clinician Well-Being and Resilience 
include the ACGME, the AMA, the ASA, and multiple 
academic medical centers.
Several national policies are currently in progress to 
advocate for clinician well-being. The Dr. Lorna Breen 
Health Care Provider Protection Act (HR1667) was passed 
by both the U.S. House of Representatives and the U.S. 
Senate in 2021 after the death by suicide of Dr. Lorna 
Breen.47 The bill specifies that the secretary of Health 
and Human Services will establish evidence-based educa-
tion and awareness campaigns encouraging health care 
professionals to seek support and treatment for mental 
health concerns. It will further establish grants to health 
professions schools and academic health centers for train-
ing in evidence-informed strategies to reduce and prevent 
suicide, burnout, and behavioral health conditions among 
health care professionals and provide funding for evi-
dence-informed strategies to improve clinician well-being 
and job satisfaction. Currently, in early 2022, HR1667 is 
awaiting resolution of technical differences between the 
two bills before being signed into law by President Biden.
Challenges related to well-being exist in a spectrum 
across all stages of a health care professional's career. The 
results of burnout are detrimental to clinicians, patients, 
colleagues, and the health care system. Efforts to enhance 
clinician well-being must occur at all levels: individual, 
organizational, and societal.
REFERENCES
1. National Academies of Sciences, Engi-
neering, and Medicine; National Acad-
emy of Medicine. Taking Action Against 
Clinician Burnout: A Systems Approach 
to Professional Well-Being. 2019.
2. Freudenberger HJ. Staff burn-out. Jour-
nal of Social Issues. 1974;30:159–165.
3. Maslach C, Zimbardo PG. Burnout: The 
Cost of Caring. Englewood Cliffs: Pren-
tice Hall; 1982.
4. Afonso AM, Cadwell JB, Staffa SJ, etal. 
Burnout rate and risk factors among 
anesthesiologists in the United States. 
Anesthesiology. 2021;134(5):683–696.
5. Sun H, Warner DO, Macario A, etal. 
Repeated 
cross-sectional 
surveys 
of burnout, distress, and depression 
among anesthesiology residents and 
first-year graduates. Anesthesiology. 
2019;131(3):668–677.
6. Litz BT, Stein N, Delaney E, etal. Moral 
injury and moral repair in war veter-
ans: a preliminary model and inter-
vention strategy. Clin Psychol Rev. 
2009;29(8):695–706.
7. Maslach C, Schaufeli WB, Leiter MP. 
Job burnout. Annu Rev Psychol. 
2001;52:397–422.
8. Arnsten AFT, Shanafelt T. Physician 
distress and burnout: the neurobio-
logical perspective. Mayo Clin Proc. 
2021;96(3):763–769.
9. de Oliveira Jr GS, Chang R, Fitzgerald 
PC, etal. The prevalence of burnout 
and depression and their association 
with adherence to safety and practice 
standards: a survey of United States 
anesthesiology trainees. Anesth Analg. 
2013;117(1):182–193.
10. Raimo J, LaVine S, Spielmann K, etal. 
The correlation of stress in residen-
cy with future stress and burnout: a 
AL GRAWANY
I
Chapter 3 Clinician Well-Being
27
10-year prospective cohort study. J Grad 
Med Educ. 2018;10(5):524–531.
11. AMA STEPS Forward. Establishing a 
Chief Wellness Officer Position. htt-
ps://edhub.ama-assn.org/steps-forward/
module/2767739. Accessed November 
20, 2021.
12. Ryan RM, Deci EL. Self-determination 
theory and the facilitation of intrin-
sic motivation, social development, and 
well-being. Am Psychol. 2000;55(1):68–
78.
13. Thomas LR, Ripp JA, West CP. Char-
ter on physician well-being. JAMA. 
2018;319(15):1541–1542.
14. Harry E, Sinsky C, Dyrbye LN, etal. 
Physician task load and the risk of burn-
out among US physicians in a national 
survey. Jt Comm J Qual Patient Saf. 
2021;47(2):76–85.
15. Tawfik DS, Shanafelt TD, Dyrbye LN, 
etal. Personal and professional fac-
tors associated with work-life integra-
tion among US physicians. JAMA Netw 
Open. 2021;4(5):e2111575.
16. Pinyavat T, Mulaikal TA. Fostering phy-
sician well-being in anesthesiology. Int 
Anesthesiol Clin. 2020;58(4):36–40.
17. Yank V, Rennels C, Linos E, etal. Behav-
ioral health and burnout among physi-
cian mothers who care for a person with 
a serious health problem, long-term 
illness, or disability. JAMA Intern Med. 
2019;179(4):571–574.
18. Trockel MT, Hamidi MS, Menon NK, 
etal. Self-valuation: Attending to 
the Most Important Instrument in the 
Practice of Medicine. Mayo Clin Proc. 
2019;94(10):2022–2031.
19. Maslach C, Leiter MP. New insights into 
burnout and health care: strategies for 
improving civility and alleviating burn-
out. Med Teach. 2017;39(2):160–163.
20. Vinson AE, Bachiller PR. It’s the Cul-
ture!—How systemic and societal con-
structs impact well-being. Paediatr 
Anaesth. 2021;31(1):16–23.
21. Schwartz SP, Adair KC, Bae J, etal. Con-
sistency between state medical license 
applications 
and 
recommendations 
regarding physician mental health. BMJ 
Qual Saf. 2019;28(2):142–150.
22. Saddawi-Konefka D, Brown A, Eisen-
hart I, etal. Consistency between state 
medical license applications and recom-
mendations regarding physician mental 
health. JAMA. 2021;325(19):2017–2018.
23. Ehie O, Muse I, Hill L, etal. Profession-
alism: microaggression in the health-
care setting. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol. 
2021;34(2):131–136.
24. Sue DW, Alsaidi S, Awad MN, etal. 
Disarming 
racial 
microaggressions: 
microintervention strategies for targets, 
White allies, and bystanders. Am Psy-
chol. 2019;74(1):128–142.
25. Trockel MT, Menon NK, Rowe SG, etal. 
Assessment of physician sleep and well-
ness, burnout, and clinically signifi-
cant medical errors. JAMA Netw Open. 
2020;3(12):e2028111.
26. Accreditation 
Council 
for 
Gradu-
ate 
Medical 
Education 
(ACGME). 
Common Program Requirements for 
Graduate Medical Education in Anes-
thesiology. 
https://www.acgme.org/
Portals/0/PFAssets/ProgramRequire-
ments/040_Anesthesiology_2020.pdf?
ver2020-06-18-132902-423. Accessed 
November 20,2021.
27. Fitzsimons MG, Baker K, Malhotra R, 
etal. Reducing the Incidence of Sub-
stance Use Disorders in Anesthesiology 
Residents: 13 Years of Comprehensive 
Urine Drug Screening. Anesthesiology. 
2018;129(4):821–828.
28. Warner DO, Berge K, Sun H, etal. Sub-
stance use disorder in physicians after 
completion of training in anesthesiology 
in the United States from 1977 to 2013.. 
Anesthesiology. 2020;133(2):342–349.
29. Warner DO, Berge K, Sun H, etal. Sub-
stance Use Disorder Among Anesthe-
siology Residents, 1975–2009. JAMA. 
2013;310(21):2289–2296.
30. Taylor L. Substance abuse and misuse 
identification and prevention: an evi-
dence-based protocol for CRNAs in the 
workplace. AANA J. 2020;88(3):213–
221 PMID: 32442099.
31. Bryson EO, Silverstein JH. Addiction 
and substance abuse in anesthesiology. 
Anesthesiology. 2008;109(5):905–917.
32. Shanafelt TD, West CP, Sinsky C, etal. 
Changes in burnout and satisfaction 
with work-life integration in physicians 
and the general US working population 
between 2011 and 2017. Mayo Clin Proc. 
2019;94(9):1681–1694.
33. Schernhammer ES, Colditz GA. Suicide 
rates among physicians: a quantitative 
and gender assessment (meta-analysis). 
Am J Psychiatry. 2004;161(12):2295–
2302.
34. Duarte D, El-Hagrassy MM, Couto 
TCE, etal. Male and female physi-
cian suicidality: a systematic review 
and meta-analysis. JAMA Psychiatry. 
2020;77(6):587–597.
35. Gold KJ, Sen A, Schwenk TL. Details 
on suicide among US physicians: 
data from the National Violent Death 
Reporting System. Gen Hosp Psychiatry. 
2013;35(1):45–49.
36. Lomas T, Medina JC, Ivtzan I, etal. 
A systematic review of the impact 
of mindfulness on the well-being of 
healthcare professionals. J Clin Psychol. 
2018;74(3):319–355.
37. Neff KD. The development and validation 
of a scale to measure self-compassion. 
Self and Identity. 2003;2(3):223–250.
38. Conversano C, Ciacchini R, Orrù G, etal. 
Mindfulness, compassion, and self-com-
passion among health care profession-
als: what’s new? A systematic review. 
Front Psychol. 2020;11:1683.
39. Gazoni FM, Amato PE, Malik ZM, etal. 
The impact of perioperative catas-
trophes on anesthesiologists: results 
of a national survey. Anesth Analg. 
2012;114(3):596–603.
40. Scott SD, Hirschinger LE, Cox KR, etal. 
The natural history of recovery for 
the healthcare provider “second victim” 
after adverse patient events. Qual Saf 
Health Care. 2009;18(5):325–330.
41. Thornton KC, Sinskey JL, Boscardin CK, 
etal. Design and implementation of an 
innovative, longitudinal wellness cur-
riculum in an anesthesiology residency 
program. A A Pract. 2021;15(2):e01387.
42. West CP, Dyrbye LN, Rabatin JT, etal. 
Intervention to promote physician well-
being, job satisfaction, and professional-
ism: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA 
Intern Med. 2014;174(4):527–533.
43. International Coaching Federation (ICF). 
About ICF. https://coachfederation.org/
about. Accessed June 17, 2021.
44. Dyrbye LN, Shanafelt TD, Gill PR, 
etal. Effect of a professional coach-
ing intervention on the well-being and 
distress of physicians: a pilot rand-
omized clinical trial. JAMA Intern Med. 
2019;179(10):1406–1414.
45. Shanafelt T, Trockel M, Rodriguez A, 
etal. Wellness-centered leadership: 
equipping health care leaders to cultivate 
physician well-being and professional 
fulfillment. Acad Med. 2021;96(5):641–
651.
46. Shanafelt TD, Makowski MS, Wang H, 
etal. Association of burnout, profes-
sional fulfillment, and self-care practices 
of physician leaders with their indepen-
dently rated leadership effectiveness. 
JAMA Netw Open. 2020;3(6):e207961.
47. U.S. Congress. Dr. Lorna Breen Health 
Care Provider Protection Act. https://
www.congress.gov/bill/117th-congress/
house-bill/1667 Accessed February 20, 
2022 Accessed November 20, 2021.
Section
II
Chapter 4
BASIC PHARMACOLOGIC PRINCIPLES, 31
Chapter 5.
CLINICAL CARDIAC AND PULMONARY 
PHYSIOLOGY, 51
Chapter 6
AUTONOMIC NERVOUS SYSTEM, 69
Chapter 7
INHALED ANESTHETICS, 82
Chapter 8
INTRAVENOUS ANESTHETICS, 107
Chapter 9
OPIOIDS, 125
Chapter 10
LOCAL ANESTHETICS, 143
Chapter 11
NEUROMUSCULAR BLOCKING AND 
REVERSAL AGENTS, 160
Chapter 12
ANESTHETIC NEUROTOXICITY, 185
PHARMACOLOGY 
AND PHYSIOLOGY
31
Chapter
The basic principles of pharmacology are a fundamental 
element of an anesthesia provider's knowledge base. This 
chapter provides an overview of key principles in clinical 
pharmacology used to describe anesthetic drug behavior. 
Box 4.1 lists definitions of some basic pharmacologic 
terms. Pharmacokinetic concepts include volumes of 
distribution, drug clearance, transfer of drugs between 
plasma and tissues, and binding of drugs to circulat-
ing plasma proteins. The section on pharmacokinetics 
introduces both the physiologic processes that determine 
pharmacokinetics and the mathematical models used to 
relate dose to concentration. Pharmacodynamic concepts 
include the concentration–drug effect relationship and 
drug–drug interactions for selected anesthetic interac-
tions for selected anesthetic effects. Anesthesia provid-
ers rarely administer just one drug. Most anesthetics 
are a combination of several drugs with specific goals 
in analgesia, sedation, and muscle relaxation. Thus 
pharmacodynamic interactions can profoundly influ-
ence anesthetic effect. Formulating the right dose of an 
anesthetic requires consideration of many patient factors: 
age; body habitus; sex; chronic exposure to opioids, ben-
zodiazepines, or alcohol; presence of heart, lung, kidney, 
or liver disease; and the extent of blood loss or dehydra-
tion, among others. Two of these factors, body habitus 
and age, will be discussed as examples of patient factors 
influencing anesthetic drug pharmacology.
PHARMACOKINETIC PRINCIPLES
Pharmacokinetics describes the relationship between 
drug dose and drug concentration in plasma or at the 
site of drug effect over time. The processes of absorption, 
distribution, and elimination (metabolism and excretion) 
govern this relationship. Absorption is not relevant to 
intravenously administered drugs but is relevant to all 
other routes of drug delivery. The time course of intra-
venously administered drugs is a function of distribution 
PHARMACOKINETIC PRINCIPLES
Fundamental Pharmacokinetic Concepts
PHARMACODYNAMIC PRINCIPLES
Potency and Efficacy
Anesthetic Drug Interactions
SPECIAL POPULATIONS
Influence of Obesity on Anesthetic Drugs
Influence of Increasing Age on Anesthetic Drug 
Pharmacology
SUMMARY
BASIC PHARMACOLOGIC 
PRINCIPLES
Tae Kyun Kim, Shinju Obara, Ken B. Johnson
4
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
32
from the body (Fig. 4.2). Using Eq. 4.1, estimating the 
volume of distribution without accounting for elimi-
nation leads to volume of distribution estimates that 
become larger than the initial volume. To refine the defi-
nition of distribution volume, the amount of drug that is 
present at a given time t is divided by the concentration 
at the same time.
Vd
Amount
Concentration 



t
t
If elimination occurs as a first-order process (i.e., 
elimination is proportional to the concentration at that 
time), the volume of distribution calculated by Eq. 4.2
will be constant (Figs. 4.2 and 4.3).
When a drug is administered intravenously, some 
drug stays in the vascular volume, but most of the drug 
distributes to peripheral tissues. This distribution is often 
represented as additional volumes of distribution (tanks) 
connected to a central tank (blood or plasma volume). 
Peripheral distribution volumes increase the total volume 
of distribution (Fig. 4.4).
The schematic in Fig. 4.4 presents a plasma volume and 
tissue volume. The peripheral tank represents distribution 
of drug in peripheral tissues. There may bemore than 
one peripheral tank (volume) to best describe the entire 
drug disposition in the body. The size of the peripheral 
volumes represents a drug's solubility in tissue relative to 
blood or plasma. The more soluble a drug is in peripheral 
tissue relative to blood or plasma, the larger the peripheral 
volumes of distribution.
An important point illustrated in Fig. 4.4 is that drug 
not only distributes to the peripheral tank and thus 
volume and clearance. Estimates of distribution volumes 
and clearances are described by pharmacokinetic param-
eters. Pharmacokinetic parameters are derived from 
mathematical formulas fit to measured blood or plasma 
concentrations over time after a known drug dose.
Fundamental Pharmacokinetic Concepts
Volume of Distribution
An oversimplified model of drug distribution throughout 
plasma and tissues is the dilution of a drug dose into 
a tank of water. The volume of distribution (Vd) is the 
apparent size of the tank required to explain a measured 
drug concentration from the tank water once the drug 
has had enough time to thoroughly mix within the tank 
(Fig. 4.1). The distribution volume is estimated using the 
simple relationship between dose (e.g., mg) and measured 
concentration (e.g., mg/L) as presented in Eq. 4.1
Volume of distribution
Amount of dose mg
Concentration mg/L





With an estimate of tank volume, drug concentration 
after any bolus dose can be calculated. Just as the tank 
has a volume regardless of whether there is drug in it, 
distribution volumes in people are an intrinsic property 
regardless of whether any drug has been given.
Human bodies are not water tanks. As soon as a drug 
is injected, it begins to be cleared from the body. To 
account for this in the schematic presented in Fig. 4.1, 
a faucet is added to the tank to mimic drug elimination 
Box 4.1
Definitions of Basic Pharmacologic Terms
Pharmacokinetics: the relationship between drug dose and 
drug concentration at the site of drug action.
Biophase: the time delay between changes in plasma 
concentration and drug effect.
Effect-site concentration: a mathematically derived 
virtual location where an anesthetic drug exerts its effect.
Front-end kinetics: a description of intravenous drug 
behavior immediately after administration.
Back-end kinetics: a description of intravenous drug 
behavior when administered as a continuous infusion, 
including the period after termination of infusion.
Context-sensitive half-time: a description of the time 
required for drug concentration to decrease by 50% after 
termination of drug infusion, based on duration of infusion 
(context).
Pharmacodynamics: a description of what the drug 
does to the body, including the relationship between drug 
concentration and pharmacologic effect.
Dynamic range: the drug concentration range in which 
changes in drug effect occur. Drug levels below the dynamic 
range are ineffective; levels above the dynamic range do not 
provide additional effect.
Concentration = 10 mg/L
Blood or plasma
Dose = 10 mg
Volume of distribution = 10 mg/(10 mg/L) = 1 L
Fig. 4.1 Schematic of a single-tank model of distribution volume. 
The group of red dots at the top left represent a bolus dose that, 
when administered to the tank of water, evenly distributes within 
the tank. (Modified from Miller RD, Cohen NH, Eriksson LI, et al., 
eds. Miller’s Anesthesia. 8th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders Elsevier; 
2014:Fig. 24.1.)
II
Chapter 4 Basic Pharmacologic Principles
33
time, pharmacokinetic model structures consist of one or 
more tanks connected with pipes. The tanks have a fixed 
volume, and the rate of drug movement from one tank to 
another is modeled with rate constants. This allows mod-
eling of changes in distribution volumes over time.
The amount of drug that moves to the peripheral tis-
sue commonly surpasses the amount that is eliminated 
during the first few minutes after drug administration. 
As an example, consider a simulation of a propofol bolus 
that plots the accumulation of propofol in peripheral 
tissues and the amount eliminated over time (Fig.4.6). 
During the first 4 minutes, the amount distributed to the 
peripheral tissue is larger than the amount eliminated 
from the body. After 4 minutes, the amounts reverse.
Clearance
Clearance describes the rate of drug removal from the 
plasma or blood. Two processes contribute to drug 
increases the volume of distribution, but it also binds to 
tissue in that tank. This process further lowers the meas-
urable concentration in the central tank. Thus the total 
volume of distribution may even be larger than the two 
tanks added together. In fact, some anesthetics have huge 
distribution volumes (e.g., fentanyl has an apparent distri-
bution volume of 4 L/kg) that are substantially larger than 
an individual's vascular volume (0.07 L/kg) or extracel-
lular volume (0.2 L/kg).
With an additional tank, the volume of distribution 
no longer remains constant over time. As illustrated in 
Fig.4.5, at time = 0, the volume of distribution is estimated 
as 4.3L, the same as that of the model presented in Fig.4.3, 
which has only one tank. The volume of distribution then 
increases to 48 L over the next 10 minutes. The increase 
is due to the distribution of drug to the peripheral volume. 
This illustrates how the volume of distribution changes 
over time. To model distribution of volume changes over 
Dose = 10 mg
Time = 2 min
Concentration = 5 mg/L
Volume of distribution = 5 mg/(5 mg/L) = 1 L
Concentration = 2.5 mg/L
Volume of distribution = 2.5 mg/(2.5 mg/L) = 1 L
Dose = 10 mg
Time = 4 min
Tank volume = 1 L
Blood or plasma
Blood or plasma
Fig. 4.2 Schematic of a single-tank model of elimination as a first-order process. At 2 minutes (left panel) and 
4 minutes (right panel) after a 10-mg drug bolus, tank concentrations are decreasing from 5 to 2.5 mg/mL. 
Accounting for elimination, estimates of the distribution volume at each time point are both 1 L. (From Miller 
RD, Cohen NH, Eriksson LI, et al., eds. Miller’s Anesthesia. 8th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders Elsevier; 2014:Fig. 24.2.)
3
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
1
2
0
0
2
4
6
8
Time (min)
Time (min)
10
12
14
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
0.2
0.4
0.0
2
0
4
6
8
10
12
14
Volume of distribution (L)
Drug  concentration (mg/mL)
Volume of distribution = 1 L
Fig. 4.3 Simulation of concentration (left) and distribution volume (right) changes over time after a bolus 
dose for a single-tank (one-compartment) model. The distribution volume remains constant throughout. 
(From Miller RD, Cohen NH, Eriksson LI, et al., eds. Miller’s Anesthesia. 8th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders 
Elsevier; 2014:Fig. 24.3.)
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
34
rate (e.g., mg/min). To explain why elimination rates do 
not accurately characterize clearance, consider the simu-
lation presented in Fig. 4.8. Using the volume of distribu-
tion, the total amount of drug can be calculated at every 
measured drug concentration. The concentration change 
in time window A is larger than that in time window 
B even though they are both 1 minute in duration. The 
elimination rates are 28 and 10 mg/min for time windows 
A and B, respectively. They are different, and neither can 
be used as a parameter to predict drug concentrations 
when another dose of drug is administered. Because of 
this limitation with elimination rate, clearance was devel-
oped to provide a single number to describe the decay in 
drug concentration presented in Fig. 4.8
For discussion purposes, assume that concentration is 
the power necessary to push drug out of the water tank. 
The higher the concentration, the larger the amount of 
drug eliminated. To standardize the elimination rate, the 
eliminated amount of drug is scaled to concentration. 
For example, the elimination rate in time window A
(28.4 mg/min) scaled to the mean concentration during 
that time window (14 μg/mL) is 2 L/min. Normalizing 
the elimination rate in time window B (10.4 mg/min) to 
concentration (5 μg/mL) gives the same result as A. If 
the time interval is narrowed so that the time window 
approaches zero, the definition of clearance becomes:
Clearance 

dA dt
C
t
/
where dA/dt is the rate of drug elimination at given 
time t and C (t) is the corresponding concentration at 
time t. The elimination rate (dA/dt) can be expressed 
clearance: systemic (out of the tank) and intercompart-
mental (between the tanks) clearance (Fig. 4.7). Systemic 
clearance permanently removes drug from the body, 
either by eliminating the parent molecule or by trans-
forming it into metabolites. Intercompartmental clear-
ance moves drug between plasma and peripheral tissue 
tanks. By way of clarification, in this chapter the words 
compartment and tank are used interchangeably.
Clearance is defined in units of flow, that is, the vol-
ume completely cleared of drug per unit of time (e.g., L/
min). Clearance is not to be confused with elimination 
Blood or plasma
Dose = 10 mg
Concentration = 2.5 mg/L
Volume of distribution = 10 mg/(2.5 mg/L) = 4 L
Tissue bound
Tissue
Fig. 4.4 Schematic of a two-tank model. The total volume of 
distribution consists of the sum of the two tanks. The blue dots in 
the ellipse in the peripheral volume represent tissue-bound drug. 
The measured concentration in the blood or plasma is 2.5 mg/mL 
just after a bolus dose of 10 mg. Using Fig. 4.1, this leads to a 
distribution volume of 4 L. (From Miller RD, Cohen NH, Eriksson 
LI, et al., eds. Miller’s Anesthesia. 8th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders 
Elsevier; 2015:Fig. 24.4.)
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
0
2
4
6
8
Time (min)
Time (min)
10
12
14
16
2
0
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Concentration (µg/mL)
Volume of
distribution = 47.7 L
Extrapolated to Time 0
Volume of distribution
at Time 0 = 4.27 L calculated
from extrapolated concentration
to Time 0
30
40
50
10
20
0
Volume of distribution (L)
Fig. 4.5 Simulation of concentration and apparent distribution volume changes over time after a 
bolus dose for a two-tank (two-compartment) model. On the left, the dots represent measured drug 
concentrations. The solid line represents a mathematical equation fit to the measured concentrations. The 
dotted line represents an extrapolation of the mathematical equation (i.e., pharmacokinetic model) to time 
0. On the right, the apparent distribution volume is time dependent, with the initial volume of distribution 
much smaller than the distribution volume at near steady state. The apparent distribution volume of time 
0 is not a true reflection of the actual volume of distribution. (From Miller RD, Cohen NH, Eriksson LI, et al., 
eds. Miller’s Anesthesia. 8th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders Elsevier; 2015:Fig. 24.5.)
II
Chapter 4 Basic Pharmacologic Principles
35
(ER). Clearance can be estimated as organ blood flow 
multiplied by the ER. Eq. 4.4 can be simplified as shown 
here (Eq. 4.5):
Clearance
ER


Q
The total clearance is the sum of each clearance by 
metabolic organs such as the liver, kidney, and other tis-
sues (Fig. 4.9).
Hepatic clearance has been well characterized. For 
example, the relationship between clearance, liver blood 
flow, and the ER is presented in Fig. 4.10 1 For drugs with 
an ER of nearly 1 (e.g., propofol), a change in liver blood 
flow produces a nearly proportional change in clearance. 
For drugs with a low ER (e.g., alfentanil), clearance is 
nearly independent of the rate of liver blood flow. If 
nearly 100% of the drug is extracted by the liver, this 
implies that the liver has tremendous metabolic capacity 
for the drug. In this case the rate-limiting step in metabo-
lism is flow of drug to the liver, and such drugs are said 
to be “flow limited.” Any reduction in liver blood flow, 
such as usually accompanies anesthesia, can be expected 
to reduce clearance. However, moderate changes in 
hepatic metabolic function per se will have little impact 
on clearance because hepatic metabolic capacity is over-
whelmingly in excess of demand.
For many drugs (e.g., alfentanil), the ER is consider-
ably less than 1. For these drugs, clearance is limited by 
the capacity of the liver to take up and metabolize drug. 
These drugs are said to be “capacity limited.” Clearance 
will change in response to any change in the capacity of 
the liver to metabolize such drugs, as might be caused by 
liver disease or enzymatic induction. However, changes 
in liver blood flow, as might be caused by the anesthetic 
state itself, usually have little influence on clearance 
because the liver handles only a fraction of the drug that 
it sees anyway.
Front-End Kinetics
Front-end kinetics refers to the description of intrave-
nous drug behavior immediately after administration. 
How rapidly a drug moves from the blood into peripheral 
tissues directly influences the peak plasma drug con-
centration. With compartmental models, an important 
assumption is that an intravenous bolus instantly mixes 
in the central volume, with the peak concentration occur-
ring at the moment of injection without elimination or 
distribution to peripheral tissues. For simulation pur-
poses, the initial concentration and volume of distribu-
tion at time = 0 are extrapolated as if the circulation had 
been infinitely fast. This, of course, is not real. If a drug is 
injected into an arm vein and that initial concentration is 
measured in a radial artery, the drug appears in the arte-
rial circulation 30 to 40 seconds after injection. The delay 
likely represents the time required for the drug to pass 
through the venous volume of the upper part of the arm, 
heart, great vessels, and peripheral arterial circulation. 
as Q(Cin −Cout). Rearranging Eq. 4.3, clearance can be 
expressed as follows:
Clearance
in
out
in



Q C
C
C
where Q is the blood flow to metabolic organs, Cin is 
the concentration of drug delivered to metabolic organs, 
and Cout is the concentration of drug leaving metabolic 
organs. The fraction of inflowing drug extracted by the 
organ is (Cin −Cout)/Cin and is called the extraction ratio
Time (min)
60
80
100
20
40
0
1
0
2
3
4
5
6
Amount of drug (mg)
Cumulative elimination
amount of drug
Amount of drug distributed
to peripheral tissue
Fig. 4.6 Simulation of propofol accumulation in the peripheral 
tissues (blue line) and the cumulative amount of propofol 
eliminated (yellow line) after a 2-mg/kg propofol bolus to a 
77-kg (170-lb), 177-cm (5 ft 10 in) tall 53-year-old man, using 
published pharmacokinetic model parameters.31 Drug indicates 
propofol. (From Miller RD, Cohen NH, Eriksson LI, et al., eds. Miller’s 
Anesthesia. 8th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders Elsevier; 2015:Fig. 24.6.)
Blood or plasma
Tissue
Systemic clearance
Intercompartmental
clearance
Fig. 4.7 Schematic of a two-tank model illustrating two sources 
of drug removal from the central tank (blood or plasma): systemic 
and intercompartmental clearance. (From Miller RD, Cohen NH, 
Eriksson LI, et al., eds. Miller’s Anesthesia. 8th ed. Philadelphia: 
Saunders Elsevier; 2015:Fig. 24.8.)
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
36
of distribution at steady state, Vdss. Clearance in which 
the drug leaves the central compartment to the outside 
is the central or metabolic clearance. Clearances between 
the central compartment and the peripheral compart-
ments are the intercompartmental clearances.
Multicompartment Models
Plasma concentrations over time after an intravenous 
bolus resemble the curve in Fig. 4.12. This curve has the 
characteristics common to most drugs when given as an 
intravenous bolus. First, the concentrations continuously 
decrease over time. Second, the rate of decline is initially 
steep but continuously becomes less steep, until we get 
to a portion that is log-linear.
For many drugs, three distinct phases can be distin-
guished, as illustrated for fentanyl in Fig. 4.12. A rapid-
distribution phase (blue line) begins immediately after 
injection of the bolus. Very rapid movement of the drug 
from plasma to the rapidly equilibrating tissues charac-
terizes this phase. Next, a second slow-distribution phase 
(red line) is characterized by movement of the drug into 
More sophisticated models (e.g., a recirculatory model)2
account for this delay and are useful when characterizing 
the behavior of a drug immediately after bolus adminis-
tration, such as with induction agents, when the speed of 
onset and duration of action are of interest.
Compartmental Pharmacokinetic Models
Compartmental models have no physiologic correlate. 
They are built by using mathematical expressions fit to 
concentration over time data and then reparameterized in 
terms of volumes and clearances. The one-compartment 
model presented in Fig. 4.11 contains a single volume and 
a single clearance. Although used for several drugs, this 
model is perhaps oversimplified for anesthetic drugs. To 
better model anesthetic drugs, clinical pharmacologists 
have developed two- or three-compartment models that 
contain several tanks connected by pipes. As illustrated 
in Fig. 4.11, the volume to the right in the two-compart-
ment model—and in the center of the three-compartment 
model—is the central volume. The other volumes are 
peripheral volumes. The sum of all volumes is the volume 
Fig. 4.8 Simulation of drug concentration changes when a drug is administered to a single-tank model 
with linear elimination (see Fig. 4.2). The concentration changes for two time windows are labeled with 
dashed lines from 1 to 2 minutes (time window A) and from 3 to 4 minutes (time window B), respectively. 
The concentrations (CON) at the beginning and end of each time window are used to calculate the amount 
(AMT) of drug that is eliminated (see text). Vd, Volume of distribution. (Modified from Miller RD, Cohen NH, 
Eriksson LI, et al., eds. Miller’s Anesthesia. 8th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders Elsevier; 2015:Fig. 24.9.)
AL GRAWANY
II
Chapter 4 Basic Pharmacologic Principles
37
Venous blood
Arterial blood
Liver Kidney Tissue
Blood flow = Q
Heart
Q Cout
Q Cin
dA/dt = Q Cin – Q Cout
Fig. 4.9 Schematic of drug extraction. A, Amount of drug; Cin
and Cout, drug concentrations presented to and leaving metabolic 
organs; dA/dt, drug elimination rate; Q, blood flow. (From Miller 
RD, Cohen NH, Eriksson LI, et al., eds. Miller’s Anesthesia. 8th ed. 
Philadelphia: Saunders Elsevier; 2015:Fig. 24.10.)
Liver blood flow (L/min)
1.5
2.0
3.0
1.0
Extraction
ratio
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
2.5
0.5
1.0
0
0.5
0
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
Clearance (L/min)
Extraction ratio calculated
at Q = 1.4 L/min
°
Fig. 4.10 Relationship among liver blood flow (Q), clearance, 
and extraction ratio. For drugs with a high extraction ratio, 
clearance is nearly identical to liver blood flow. For drugs with a 
low extraction ratio, changes in liver blood flow have almost no 
effect on clearance.1 (From Miller RD, Cohen NH, Eriksson LI, et al., 
eds. Miller’s Anesthesia. 8th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders Elsevier; 
2015:Fig. 24.11.)
V1
Central
compartment
V
Volume of
distribution
V2
Peripheral
compartment
Drug administration
One-compartment
model
Two-compartment
model
Drug administration
Drug administration
k12
k21
k10
k
I
I
Three-compartment
model
V3
Slowly equilibrating
compartment
V2
Rapidly equilibrating
compartment
I
V1
Central
compartment
k10
k21
k12
k13
k31
Fig. 4.11 One-, two-, and three-compartment mammillary 
models. (From Miller RD, Cohen NH, Eriksson LI, et al., eds. Miller’s 
Anesthesia. 8th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders Elsevier; 2015:Fig. 
24.12.)
100
10
1
0
120
240
Minutes since bolus injection
Rapid
Intermediate
Slow
360
480
600
Concentration
Fig. 4.12 Hydraulic model of fentanyl pharmacokinetics. 
Drug is administered into the central tank, from which it can 
distribute into two peripheral tanks, or it may be eliminated. 
The volume of the tanks is proportional to the volumes of 
distribution. The cross-sectional area of the pipes is proportional 
to clearance.3 (From Miller RD, Cohen NH, Eriksson LI, et al., 
eds. Miller’s Anesthesia. 8th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders Elsevier; 
2015:Fig. 24.13.)
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
38
compartments to the central compartment greatly slows 
the rate of decrease in plasma drug concentration.
Curves that continuously decrease over time, with 
a continuously increasing slope (i.e., like the curve in 
Fig.4.12), can be described by a sum of negative expo-
nentials. In pharmacokinetics, one way of denoting this 
sum of exponentials is to say that the plasma concentra-
tion over time is as follows:
C t
e
e
e
t
t
t






A
B
C



where t is the time since the bolus injection; C(t) is the 
drug concentration after a bolus dose; and A, α, B, β, 
C, and γ are parameters of a pharmacokinetic model. A, 
B, and C are coefficients, whereas α, β, and γ are expo-
nents. After a bolus injection, all six of the parameters 
in Eq. 4.6 will be greater than 0. Polyexponential equa-
tions are used mainly because they describe the plasma 
concentrations observed after bolus injection, except for 
the misspecification in the first few minutes, mentioned 
previously. Compartmental pharmacokinetic models are 
strictly empiric. These models have no anatomic corre-
late. They are based solely on fitting equations to meas-
ured plasma concentrations after a known dose. Kinetic 
models are transformed into models that characterize 
concentration changes over time in terms of volumes 
and clearances. Although more intuitive, they have no 
physiologic correlate.
Special significance is often ascribed to the smallest 
exponent. This exponent determines the slope of the 
final log-linear portion of the curve. When the medical 
literature refers to the half-life of a drug, unless otherwise 
stated, the half-life will be the terminal half-life. How-
ever, the terminal half-life for drugs with more than one 
exponential term is nearly uninterpretable. The terminal 
half-life sets an upper limit on the time required for the 
concentrations to decrease by 50% after drug administra-
tion. Usually, the time needed for a 50% decrease will be 
much faster than that upper limit.
Part of the continuing popularity of pharmacokinetic 
compartmental models is that they can be transformed 
from an unintuitive exponential form to a more intuitive 
compartmental form, as shown in Fig. 4.11. Microrate 
constants, expressed as kij, define the rate of drug trans-
fer from compartment i to compartment j. Compartment 
0 is the compartment outside the model, so k10 is the 
microrate constant for processes acting through metabo-
lism or elimination that irreversibly remove the drug 
from the central compartment (analogous to k for a one-
compartment model). The intercompartmental microrate 
constants (k12, k21, etc.) describe movement of the drug 
between the central and peripheral compartments. Each 
peripheral compartment has at least two microrate con-
stants, one for drug entry and one for drug exit. The 
microrate constants for the two- and three-compartment 
models can be seen in Fig. 4.11.
more slowly equilibrating tissues and return of the drug 
to plasma from the most rapidly equilibrating tissues. 
Third, the terminal phase (green line) is nearly a straight 
line when plotted on a semilogarithmic graph. The termi-
nal phase is often called the “elimination phase” because 
the primary mechanism for decreasing drug concentra-
tion during the terminal phase is elimination of drug 
from the body. The distinguishing characteristic of the 
terminal elimination phase is that the plasma concentra-
tion is lower than tissue concentrations and the relative 
proportion of drug in plasma and peripheral volumes 
of distribution remains constant. During this terminal 
phase, drug returns from the rapid- and slow-distribution 
volumes to plasma and is permanently removed from 
plasma by metabolism or excretion.
The presence of three distinct phases after bolus 
injection is a defining characteristic of a mammillary 
model with three compartments.3 In this model, shown 
in Fig. 4.12, there are three tanks corresponding (from 
left to right) to the slowly equilibrating peripheral com-
partment, the central compartment (the plasma into 
which drug is injected), and the rapidly equilibrating 
peripheral compartment. The horizontal pipes represent 
intercompartmental clearance or (for the pipe draining 
onto the page) metabolic clearance. The volumes of each 
tank correspond to the volumes of the compartments 
for fentanyl. The cross-sectional areas of the pipes cor-
relate with fentanyl's systemic and intercompartmental 
clearance. The height of water in each tank corresponds 
to drug concentration. By using this hydraulic model, 
we can follow the processes that decrease drug concen-
tration over time after bolus injection. Initially, drug 
flows from the central compartment to both peripheral 
compartments via intercompartmental clearance and 
completely out of the model via metabolic clearance. 
Because there are three places for drug to go, the con-
centration in the central compartment decreases very 
rapidly. At the transition between the blue line and the 
red line, there is a change in the role of the most rapidly 
equilibrating compartment. At this transition, the con-
centration in the central compartment falls below the 
concentration in the rapidly equilibrating compartment, 
and the direction of flow between them is reversed. After 
this transition (red line), drug in plasma has only two 
places to go: into the slowly equilibrating compartment 
or out the drain pipe. These processes are partly offset by 
the return of drug to plasma from the rapidly equilibrat-
ing compartment. The net effect is that once the rapidly 
equilibrating compartment has come to equilibration, 
the concentration in the central compartment falls far 
more slowly than before.
Once the concentration in the central compartment 
decreases below both the rapidly and slowly equilibrating 
compartments (green line), the only method of decreas-
ing the plasma concentration is metabolic clearance, 
the drain pipe. Return of the drug from both peripheral 
II
Chapter 4 Basic Pharmacologic Principles
39
the decrement times vary substantially. A popular decre-
ment time is the 50% decrement time, also known as the 
context-sensitive half-time.4 The term context-sensitive
refers to infusion duration. The term half-time refers to 
the 50% decrement time.
Biophase
Biophase refers to the time delay between changes in 
plasma concentration and drug effect. Biophase accounts 
for the time required for a drug to diffuse from the 
plasma to the site of action plus the time required, once 
drug is at the site of action, to elicit a drug effect. A 
simulation of various propofol bolus doses and their pre-
dicted effect on the electroencephalogram (EEG) bispec-
tral index scale (BIS) is presented in Fig. 4.15. The time 
to peak effect for each dose is identical (approximately 
1.5 minutes after the peak plasma concentration). The 
difference between each dose is the magnitude and dura-
tion of effect. A key principle is that when drug concen-
trations are in flux (i.e., during induction of anesthesia 
and emergence from anesthesia), changes in drug effect 
will lag behind changes in drug concentration. This lag 
between the plasma concentration and effect usually 
results in the phenomenon called hysteresis, in which 
two different plasma concentrations correspond to one 
drug effect or one plasma concentration corresponds to 
two drug effects. For example, Fig. 4.15 shows that the 
different concentrations at C and c correspond to the 
same BIS score.
To collapse the hysteresis between plasma concentra-
tion and effect and to match one plasma concentration to 
one drug effect, this lag is often modeled with an “effect-
site” compartment added to the central compartment. 
Kinetic microrate constants used to describe biophase 
include k1e and ke0. The k1e describes drug movement 
from the central compartment to the effect site, and ke0
describes the elimination of drug from the effect-site 
compartment. There are two important assumptions with 
the effect-site compartment: (1) The amount of drug that 
moves from the central compartment to the effect-site 
compartment is negligible and vice versa, and (2) there is 
no volume estimate to the effect-site compartment.
Typically, the relationship between plasma and the site 
of drug effect is modeled with an effect-site model, as 
shown in Fig. 4.16. The site of drug effect is connected to 
plasma by a first-order process. Eq. 4.7 relates effect-site 
concentration to plasma concentration:
dCe
k
Cp
Ce
e





0
dt
where Ce is the effect-site concentration, Cp is the plasma 
drug concentration, and ke0 is the rate constant for elimi-
nation of the drug. The constant ke0 describes the rate of 
rise and offset of drug effect (Fig. 4.17).
Back-End Kinetics
Using estimates of distribution volume and clearance, 
back-end kinetics is a useful tool that describes the 
behavior of intravenous drugs when administered as con-
tinuous infusions. Back-end kinetics provide descriptors 
of how plasma drug concentrations decrease once a con-
tinuous infusion is terminated. An example is decrement 
time. This predicts the time required to reach a certain 
plasma concentration once an infusion is terminated. 
Decrement times are a function of infusion duration. 
Consider the example of decrement times for a set of 
continuous target-controlled infusions (TCIs) (Fig. 4.13). 
In this simulation TCI of propofol is set to maintain a 
concentration of 4 μg/mL for 30, 60, and 120 minutes. 
Once the infusion is stopped, the time to reach 0.5 μg/
mL is estimated. As illustrated, the longer the infusion, 
the longer the time required to reach 0.5 μg/mL. This 
example demonstrates how drugs accumulate in periph-
eral tissues with prolonged infusions. This accumulation 
prolongs the decrement time.
Another use of decrement times is as a tool to compare 
drugs within a drug class (e.g., opioids). As a comparator, 
plots of decrement times are presented as a function of 
infusion duration. When used this way, decrement times 
are determined as the time required to reach a target 
percentage of the concentration immediately after termi-
nation of a continuous infusion. Examples of 50% and 
80% decrement times for selected opioids and sedatives 
are presented in Fig. 4.14. Of note, for shorter infusions, 
the decrement times are similar for both classes of anes-
thetic drugs. Once infusion duration exceeds 2 hours, 
Time (min)
65 min
40
min
30
min
2
3
4
1
0
30
0
60
90
120
150
240
210
180
Concentration (µg/mL)
Fig. 4.13 Simulation of decrement times for a target-controlled 
infusion set to maintain a target propofol concentration of 4 μg/mL 
for 30, 60, and 120 minutes. Once terminated, the time required 
to reach 0.5 μg/mL was 30, 40, and 65 minutes for each infusion, 
respectively. Simulations of the decrement times used a published 
pharmacokinetic model.31 (From Miller RD, Cohen NH, Eriksson 
LI, et al., eds. Miller’s Anesthesia. 8th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders 
Elsevier; 2015:Fig. 24.14.)
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
40
Models used to describe the concentration–effect 
relationships are created in much the same way as phar-
macokinetic models; they are based on observations and 
used to create a mathematical model. To create a phar-
macodynamic model, plasma drug levels and a selected 
drug effect are measured simultaneously. For example, 
consider the measured plasma concentrations of an 
intravenous anesthetic drug after a bolus dose and the 
associated changes on the EEG spectral edge frequency 
(a measure of anesthetic depth) from one individual, pre-
sented in Fig. 4.18. Shortly after the plasma concentra-
tion peaks, the spectral edge starts to decrease, reaches a 
nadir, and then returns to baseline as the plasma concen-
trations drop to near 0.
Combining data from several individuals and plotting 
the measured concentrations versus the observed effect 
(modified to be a percentage of the maximal effect across 
In summary the conventional pharmacokinetic term 
half-life has little meaning to anesthesia providers, who 
work with drugs whose clinical behavior is not well 
described by half-life. The pharmacokinetic principles 
discussed in this section (such as volume of distribu-
tion, clearance, elimination, front-end kinetics, back-end 
kinetics, context-sensitive half-time, and biophase) better 
illustrate how an anesthetic will behave.
PHARMACODYNAMIC PRINCIPLES
Simply stated, pharmacokinetics describes what the body 
does to the drug, whereas pharmacodynamics describes 
what the drug does to the body. In particular, phar-
macodynamics describes the relationship between drug 
concentration and pharmacologic effect.
200
250
300
100
50
150
0
50% decremental time (min)
(Context-sensitive half-time)
400
500
600
200
100
300
0
80% decremental time (min)
Time (min)
0
100
200
300
600
500
400
Time (min)
200
250
300
100
50
150
0
0
100
200
300
600
500
400
50% decremental time (min)
(Context-sensitive half-time)
Time (min)
0
100
200
300
600
500
400
Time (min)
400
500
600
200
100
300
0
0
100
200
300
600
500
400
80% decremental time (min)
Midazolam
Propofol
Thiopental
Dexmedetomidine
Alfentanil
Fentanyl
Sufentanil
Remifentanil
Fig. 4.14 These graphs show 50% and 80% decrement times for selected sedatives (left side) and opioids 
(right side). The vertical axis refers to the time required to reach the desired decrement time. The horizontal 
axis refers to infusion duration. Simulations of the decrement times used published pharmacokinetic 
models for each sedative and analgesic.5,31,32,41–43 (From Miller RD, Cohen NH, Eriksson LI, et al., eds. 
Miller’s Anesthesia. 8th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders Elsevier; 2015:Fig. 24.15.)
II
Chapter 4 Basic Pharmacologic Principles
41
Most concentration–effect relationships in anesthesia are 
described with a sigmoid curve. The standard equation 
for this relationship is the Hill equation, also known as 
the sigmoid Emax relationship (Eq. 4.8):
Effect
max
50










E
E
E
C
C
C
0
0



/
where E0 is the baseline effect, Emax is the maximal 
effect, C is the drug concentration, and γ represents the 
slope of the concentration–effect relationship; γ is also 
known as the Hill coefficient. For values of γ less than 
1, the curve is hyperbolic, and for values greater than 
all individuals) creates a hysteresis loop (Fig. 4.19). The 
ascending portion of the loop represents rising drug con-
centrations (see arrow). While rising, the increase in drug 
effect lags behind the increase in drug concentration. 
For the descending loop, the decrease in drug effect lags 
behind the decrease in drug concentration.
To create a pharmacodynamic model, the hysteresis 
loop is collapsed using modeling techniques that account 
for the lag time between plasma concentrations and 
the observed effect. These modeling techniques pro-
vide an estimate of the lag time, known as the t½ke0, 
and an estimate of the effect-site concentration (Ce) 
associated with a 50% probability of drug effect (C50). 
20
5
10
15
0
Plasma concentration (µg/mL)
Time (min)
80
100
40
20
60
0
0
2
1
4
3
7
6
5
10
9
8
Bispectral index
Time delay from peak plasma to peak effect
0.5 mg/kg
0.7 mg/kg
1.0 mg/kg
Line A
C
c
Fig. 4.15 Demonstration of biophase. The top plot presents 
a simulation of three propofol doses and the resultant plasma 
concentrations. The bottom plot presents a simulation of the 
predicted effect on the bispectral index scale (BIS). These 
simulations assume linear kinetics: regardless of the dose, 
effects peak at the same time (Line A), as do the plasma 
concentration. The time to peak effect is 1.5 minutes. Even the 
plasma concentrations of points C and c are different; however, 
the BIS scores of those two points are the same. This finding 
demonstrates the hysteresis between plasma concentration and 
BIS score. Simulations used published pharmacokinetic and 
pharmacodynamic models.30 32 (From Miller RD, Cohen NH, 
Eriksson LI, et al., eds. Miller’s Anesthesia. 8th ed. Philadelphia: 
Saunders Elsevier; 2015:Fig. 24.16.)
Drug administration
V3
Slowly equilibrating
compartment
Effect site
Ve
V2
Rapidly equilibrating
compartment
k12
k13
k10
k1e
k21
ke0
I
V1
Central
compartment
Fig. 4.16 A three-compartment model with an added effect site 
to account for the delay in equilibration between the rise and fall in 
arterial drug concentrations and the onset and offset of drug effect. 
The effect site is assumed to have a negligible volume. (From Miller 
RD, Cohen NH, Eriksson LI, et al., eds. Miller’s Anesthesia. 8th ed. 
Philadelphia: Saunders Elsevier; 2015:Fig. 24.17.)
Time (min)
6
8
2
4
0
0
2
4
6
10
8
Effect-site concentration (µg/mL)
ke0 0.2
ke0 0.4
ke0 0.8
Fig. 4.17 Simulations of predicted plasma and effect-site 
concentrations for three different ke0 values. As the ke0 increases, 
the time to peak effect increases and the peak predicted effect-
site concentration decreases.30,32,44 (From Miller RD, Cohen NH, 
Eriksson LI, et al., eds. Miller’s Anesthesia. 8th ed. Philadelphia: 
Saunders Elsevier; 2015:Fig. 24.18.)
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
42
Potency and Efficacy
Two important concepts are relevant to this relationship: 
potency and efficacy. Potency describes the amount of 
drug required to elicit an effect. The C50 is a common 
parameter used to describe potency. For drugs that have 
a concentration-versus-effect relationship that is shifted 
to the left (small C50), the drug is considered to be more 
potent, and the reverse is true for drugs that have a con-
centration-versus-effect relationship shifted to the right. 
For example, as illustrated in Fig. 4.21, the analgesia C50
for some of the fentanyl congeners ranges from small for 
sufentanil (0.04 ng/mL) to large for alfentanil (75 ng/mL). 
Thus sufentanil is more potent than alfentanil.
Efficacy is a measure of drug effectiveness once it 
occupies a receptor. Similar drugs that work through the 
same receptor may have varying degrees of effectiveness 
despite having the same receptor occupancy. For exam-
ple, with G protein–coupled receptors, some drugs may 
bind the receptor in such a way as to produce a more 
pronounced activation of second messengers, causing 
more of an effect than others. Drugs that achieve maxi-
mal effect are known as full agonists and those that have 
a less-than-maximal effect are known as partial agonists.
Anesthetic Drug Interactions
An average clinical anesthetic rarely consists of one 
drug, but rather a combination of drugs to achieve 
desired levels of hypnosis, analgesia, and muscle relaxa-
tion. Hypnotics, analgesics (also see Chapters 8 and 9), 
1, the curve is sigmoid. Fig. 4.20 presents an example 
of this relationship: a fentanyl effect-site concentra-
tion–effect curve for analgesia. This example illustrates 
how C50 and γ characterize the concentration–effect 
relationship.
Time (min)
Baseline
effect
Maximal effect
0
2
1
4
3
7
6
5
10 11 12 13 14 15
9
8
Plasma concentrations (ng/mL)
Spectral edge (Hz)
150
250
200
50
100
0
20
30
25
10
5
15
0
Fig. 4.18 Schematic representation of drug plasma concentrations 
(blue circles) after a bolus and the associated changes in the 
electroencephalogram’s spectral edge (red line) measured in one 
individual. Note that changes in the spectral edge lag behind 
changes in plasma concentrations. (From Miller RD, Cohen NH, 
Eriksson LI, et al., eds. Miller’s Anesthesia. 8th ed. Philadelphia: 
Saunders Elsevier; 2015:Fig. 24.19.)
Plasma or effect-site drug concentration (ng/mL)
70
90
80
100
40
30
20
10
50
60
0
10
40
30
20
60
50
EEG changes (% of maximum)
0
Collapsed loop
Ascending
Descending
Fig. 4.19 Schematic representation of plasma concentrations 
versus normalized spectral edge measurements (presented as a 
percentage of maximal effect) from several individuals (blue circles). 
The black arrows indicate the ascending and descending arms of a 
hysteresis loop that coincide with increasing and decreasing drug 
concentrations. The red line represents the pharmacodynamic 
model developed from collapsing the hysteresis loop. EEG,
electroencephalogram. (From Miller RD, Cohen NH, Eriksson 
LI, et al., eds. Miller’s Anesthesia. 8th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders 
Elsevier; 2015:Fig. 24.20.)
Fentanyl concentration (ng/mL)
Dynamic range
50%
probability
of effect
0.7
0.9
0.8
1.0
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.5
0.6
0.0
0
1
4
3
2
6
5
Probability of analgesia
C50
γ
Fig. 4.20 A pharmacodynamic model for the analgesic effect 
of fentanyl. The green area represents the dynamic range, the 
concentration range where changes in concentration lead to a 
change in effect. Concentrations above or below the dynamic 
range do not lead to changes in drug effect. The C50 represents the 
concentration associated with 50% probability of analgesia. Gamma 
(γ) represents the slope of the curve in the dynamic range. (From 
Miller RD, Cohen NH, Eriksson LI, et al., eds. Miller’s Anesthesia. 8th 
ed. Philadelphia: Saunders Elsevier; 2015:Fig. 24.21.)
II
Chapter 4 Basic Pharmacologic Principles
43
was additive; with synergistic interactions, the overall effect 
is greater than if the drug combination was additive.
A term used to characterize the continuum of drug 
concentrations across various combinations of drug pairs 
(X in combination with Y) is the isobole. The isobole is an 
isoeffect line for a selected probability of effect. A com-
mon isobole is the 50% isobole line. It represents all pos-
sible combinations of two-drug effect-site concentrations 
that would lead to a 50% probability of a given effect. 
Other isoboles are of more clinical interest. For example, 
the 95% isobole for loss of responsiveness represents the 
concentration pairs necessary to ensure a 95% probabil-
ity of unresponsiveness. Similarly, the 5% isobole rep-
resents the concentration pairs having a low likelihood 
of that effect (i.e., most patients would be responsive). 
When formulating an anesthetic dosing regimen, dosing 
an anesthetic to achieve a probability of effect just above 
but not far beyond the 95% isobole is ideal (Fig. 4.23).
Several researchers have developed mathematical mod-
els that characterize anesthetic drug interactions in three 
dimensions. These models are known as response surface 
models and include effect-site concentrations for each drug 
in addition to a probability estimate of the overall effect. 
Fig. 4.24 presents the propofol–remifentanil interaction 
for loss of responsiveness as published by Bouillon and 
associates.5 The response surface presents the full range 
of remifentanil–propofol isoboles (0%–100%) for loss of 
and muscle relaxants (also see Chapter 11) all interact 
with one another such that each drug, when administered 
in the presence of other drugs, rarely behaves as if it were 
administered alone. For example, when an analgesic is 
administered in the presence of a hypnotic, analgesia is 
more profound with the hypnotic than by itself, and hyp-
nosis is more profound with the analgesic than by itself. 
Thus anesthesia is the practice of applied drug interac-
tions. This phenomenon is likely a function of each class 
of drug exerting an effect on different receptors.
Substantial studies have been performed exploring how 
anesthetic drugs interact with one another. As illustrated in 
Fig. 4.22, interactions have been characterized as antagonis-
tic, additive, and synergistic. When drugs that have an addi-
tive interaction are coadministered, their overall effect is the 
sum of the two individual effects. With antagonistic interac-
tions, the overall effect is less than if the drug combination 
Drug X (Ce)
Drug X (Ce)
Drug X (Ce)
Panel C
Panel B
Panel A
Drug Y (Ce)
Drug Y (Ce)
Drug Y (Ce)
Y
y
Y
y
Y
y
0
0
0
0
X
x
x
x
0
X
0
X
Fig. 4.22 Drug interactions. For two drugs, X and Y, Panel A
represents additive, Panel B represents synergistic, and Panel C
represents antagonistic interactions. Ce, Effect-site concentration. 
(From Miller RD, Cohen NH, Eriksson LI, et al., eds. Miller’s 
Anesthesia. 8th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders Elsevier; 2015:Fig. 24.26.)
Drug X (Ce)
C50Y
C95Y
0
0
C95X
C50X
Drug Y (Ce)
Fig. 4.23 Schematic illustration of isoeffect (isobole) lines. The 
red, green, and blue lines represent the 50% and 95% isoboles for 
a synergistic interaction between drugs X and Y. Isoboles represent 
concentration pairs with an equivalent effect. A set of 5%, 50%, 
and 95% isoboles can be used to describe the dynamic range of the 
concentrations for drugs X and Y for a given effect. As with single 
concentration effect curves, the ideal dosing leads to concentration 
pairs that are near the 95% isobole. Ce, Effect-site concentration. 
(From Miller RD, Cohen NH, Eriksson LI, et al., eds. Miller’s Anesthesia.
8th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders Elsevier; 2015:Fig. 24.27.)
Fentanyl concentration (ng/mL)
0.7
0.9
0.8
1.0
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.5
0.6
0.0
0.001
0.01
10
1
0.1
1000
100
Probability of analgesia
Fentanyl
Alfentanil 
Remifentanil
Sufentanil
Fig. 4.21 Pharmacodynamic models for fentanyl congeners. The 
C50 for each drug is different, but the slope and maximal effect are 
similar.45 (From Miller RD, Cohen NH, Eriksson LI, et al., eds. Miller’s 
Anesthesia. 8th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders Elsevier; 2015:Fig. 24.22.)
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
44
Fig. 4.24 Simulation of a 90-minute total intravenous anesthetic consisting of propofol bolus (2 mg/
kg) and infusion (100 μg/kg/min), remifentanil infusion (0.2 μg/kg/min), and intermittent fentanyl 
boluses (1.5 μg/kg). (A) Resultant effect-site concentrations (Ce) are presented. (B) Predictions of loss of 
responsiveness are presented on a topographic (top-down) view. 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
Time (minutes)
A
Remifentanil 0.2 µg/kg/min
Fentanyl 1.5 µg/kg
Propofol 2 mg/kg
Fentanyl 1.5 µg/kg
Propofol 100 µg/kg/min
Propofol Ce (µg/mL)
5
20
10
1
2
Remifentanil Equivalents
Ce (ng/mL)
5
20
10
1
2
Propofol
Remifentanil Equivalents
Propofol Ce µg/mL
Induction
Maintenance
Infusions Turned Off
10
8
6
4
Remifentanil ng/mL
B
95% Isobole
50% Isobole
5% Isobole
2
0
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
II
Chapter 4 Basic Pharmacologic Principles
45
to determine the correct dose. Such factors include age; 
body habitus; gender; chronic exposure to opioids, ben-
zodiazepines, or alcohol; presence of heart, lung, kidney, 
or liver disease; and the extent of blood loss or dehydra-
tion. Each of them can dramatically affect anesthetic drug 
kinetics and dynamics. How some patient characteristics 
(e.g., obesity) influence anesthetic drug behavior has been 
studied, whereas other patient characteristics remain dif-
ficult to assess (e.g., chronic opioid exposure). The findings 
are briefly summarized to characterize the pharmacokinetics 
and pharmacodynamics in a few unique special populations.
Influence of Obesity on Anesthetic Drugs
Obesity is a worldwide epidemic, and overweight patients 
frequently undergo anesthesia and surgery. Therefore 
anesthesia providers should be familiar with the phar-
macologic alterations of anesthetics in obese individuals. 
In general, manufacturer dosing recommendations are 
scaled to kilograms of actual total body weight (TBW). 
However, anesthesia providers rarely use mg/kg dosing 
in obese patients for fear of administering an excessive 
dose (e.g., a 136-kg patient does not require twice as 
much drug as a patient of the same height who weighs 
68 kg). Accordingly, researchers have developed several 
responsiveness. There are two common representations of 
the response surface model: the three-dimensional plot and 
the topographic plot. The topographic plot represents a top-
down view of the response surface with drug concentrations 
on the vertical and horizontal axes. Drug effect is repre-
sented with selected isobole lines (i.e., 5%, 50%, and 95%).
Response surface models have been developed for a 
variety of anesthetic effects to include responses to ver-
bal and tactile stimuli, painful stimuli, hemodynamic or 
respiratory effects, and changes in electrical brain activ-
ity. For example, with airway instrumentation, response 
surface models have been developed for loss of response 
to placing a laryngeal mask airway,6 laryngoscopy,7 8
tracheal intubation,9 and esophageal instrumentation10
for selected combinations of anesthetic drugs. Although 
many response surface models exist, there are several 
gaps in available models covering all common combina-
tions of anesthetic drugs and various forms of stimuli 
encountered in the perioperative environment.
SPECIAL POPULATIONS
When formulating an anesthetic, many aspects of patient 
demographics and medical history need to be considered 
0
0
2
2
4
4
6
6
8
8
10
0
20
40
60
80
100
95% 
Isobole
Induction
Maintenance
Infusions Turned Off
50%
Isobole
5%
Isobole
Remifentanil
Ce (µg/mL)
10
12
Probability of Loss of
Responsiveness
Propofol Ce (µg/mL)
C
Fig. 4.24 cont’d (C) On a three-dimensional response surface plot, the green, black, and yellow lines
represent the 5%, 50%, and 95% isoboles, respectively. Each isobole presents the propofol–remifentanil 
pairs that yield the same effect. The inward bow of the isoboles indicates that the interaction is synergistic. 
The isoboles are in close proximity to one another, indicating a steep transition from responsive to 
unresponsive. (From Miller RD, Cohen NH, Eriksson LI, et al., eds. Miller’s Anesthesia. 8th ed. Philadelphia: 
Saunders Elsevier; 2015:Fig. 24.29. Author’s representation based on data from Bouillon TW, Bruhn 
J, Radulescu L, et al. Pharmacodynamic interaction between propofol and remifentanil regarding 
hypnosis, tolerance of laryngoscopy, bispectral index, and electroencephalographic approximate entropy. 
Anesthesiology. 2004;100[6]:1353–1372.)
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
46
for obese patients with what is required for normal-size 
patients. These scaled weights are usually smaller than 
TBW in obese patients and thus help prevent excessive 
drug administration (Fig. 4.25). Scaled weights have been 
used in place of TBW for both bolus (mg/kg) and infusion 
(mg/kg/hr) dosing and for TCIs.
This section will discuss the pharmacologic altera-
tions of select intravenous anesthetic drugs (propofol, 
remifentanil, and fentanyl) in obese patients, including 
shortcomings of weight scalars when used in bolus and 
continuous infusion dosing.
Propofol
The influence of obesity on propofol pharmacokinetics is 
becoming clearer (also see Chapter 8). Generally, in obese 
patients the blood distributes more to nonadipose than to 
adipose tissues, resulting in higher plasma drug concentra-
tions in obese patients with mg/kg dosing than in normal 
patients with less adipose mass. Furthermore, propofol 
clearance increases because of the increased liver volume 
and liver blood flow associated with obesity (and increased 
cardiac output). Changes to volumes of distribution likely 
influence concentration peaks with bolus dosing, whereas 
changes in clearance likely influence concentrations dur-
ing and after infusions. Various weight scalars in propofol 
bolus and continuous infusion dosing have been studied.
Dosing Scalars for Propofol
Simulations of an infusion using various weight scalars 
are presented in Fig. 4.26. The simulations predict propo-
fol effect-site concentrations from a 60-minute infusion 
weight scalars in an attempt to avoid excessive dosing 
or underdosing in this patient population. Some of these 
scalars include lean body mass (LBM), ideal body weight 
(IBW), and fat-free mass (FFM). Table 4.1 presents the 
formulas used to estimate these weight scalars. Table 
4.2 presents samples of the resultant scaled weight for 
a lean individual and an obese individual. In general, 
the aim of weight scalars is to match dosing regimens 
Scalara
Equations
Ideal body weight
Male: 
50 kg + 2.3 kg for each 2.54 cm 
(1 inch) over 152 cm (5 feet)
Female: 
45.5 kg + 2.3 kg for each 2.54 cm 
(1 inch) over 152 cm (5 feet)
Lean body mass
Male:
1.1 × TBW −128 × (TBW/Ht)2
Female:
1.07 × TBW −148 × (TBW/Ht)2
Fat-free mass46
Male:
(9.27 × 103 × TBW)/
(6.68 × 103 + 216 × BMI) 
Female:
(9.27 × 103 × TBW)/
(8.78 × 103 + 244 × BMI)
Pharmacokinetic mass24 25 52/(1 + [196.4 × e−0.025 TBW − 
53.66]/100) (fentanyl only)
Modified fat-free mass13 47 FFM + 0.4b (TBW −FFM)
Dosing Weight, 176-cm 
(6-foot)-Tall Male
Dosing Scalar
68 kg 
BMI = 22
185 kg 
BMI = 60
Total body weight (TBW)
68
185
Ideal body weight (IBW)
72
72
Lean body mass (LBM)
56
62
Fat-free mass (FFM)
55
88
Modified fat-free mass (MFFM)
60
127
Table 4.1
Common Weight Scalars
aSuperscript numbers in this column indicate references at the end 
of the chapter.
bThe dose/kg using IBW, TBW, or FFM in an obese person are all less 
than the dose/kg using TBW in a nonobese patient.
BMI, Body mass index; FFM, fat-free mass; Ht, height in centimeters; 
IBW, ideal body weight; LBM, lean body mass; MFFM, modified fat-
free mass; TBW, total body weight in kg.
Table 4.2
Dosing Weights Based on Various Dosing Scalars
BMI, Body mass index (kg/m2).
Fig. 4.25 Scaled weights as a function of total body weight (TBW). 
Key points in this plot: IBW remains the same regardless of the TBW, 
and LBM starts to decline for weight increases above 127 kg. CBW,
Corrected body weight; FFM, fat-free mass; IBW, ideal body weight; 
LBM, lean body mass (for a 40-year-old man, 176 cm tall). (From 
Miller RD, Cohen NH, Eriksson LI, et al., eds. Miller’s Anesthesia. 8th 
ed. Philadelphia: Saunders Elsevier; 2015:Fig. 24.31.)
Total body weight (kg)
100
140
120
80
60
40
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
Scale body weight (kg)
LBM
IBW
CBW
TBW
FFM
AL GRAWANY
II
Chapter 4 Basic Pharmacologic Principles
47
barbiturates) in obese patients. Although not clinically 
validated in obese patients, bolus doses probably should 
be based on TBW, and use of other dosing scalars will 
lead to inadequate effect. For dexmedetomidine, dosing 
according to TBW can lead to excessive sedation and 
lower oxygen hemoglobin saturations in obese patients.14
Clinical pharmacology research in obese patients sug-
gests that the FFM scalar may be a better choice for bolus 
dosing.15
In contrast, continuous infusion rates should be 
dosed to IBW.16 Remimazolam, an ultra-short-acting 
benzodiazepine, has recently become available. At 
this time, an appropriate selection of weight scalars 
in obese patients is unknown, which warrants future 
investigation.
Opioids
Remifentanil
The distribution volume and clearance of remifentanil 
are similar in lean and obese patients, largely because 
of its rapid metabolism by nonspecific esterases.17 As 
with propofol, researchers have explored several scaled 
weights in an effort to optimize bolus dosing, continuous 
infusions, and TCIs.
Dosing Scalars
As described earlier, simulation is used to predict remifen-
tanil effect-site concentrations and analgesic effect for a 
variety of scaled weights in a 174-cm-tall obese (185 kg, 
body mass index [BMI] of 60) individual and lean (68 kg, 
BMI of 22) individual (Fig. 4.27). Pharmacokinetic model 
parameters are estimated from an obese population, and 
pharmacodynamic model parameters are used to predict 
the probability of analgesia.18 19 Several key points are 
illustrated in these simulations:
1. For an obese patient, dosing scaled to FFM or IBW 
resulted in almost identical remifentanil effect-site 
concentrations as in the lean patient dosed according 
to TBW. Unlike propofol, dosing remifentanil to CBW 
(red line, see Fig. 4.27A) leads to higher plasma 
concentrations compared with levels achieved when 
dosing to TBW in a lean individual.
2. Dosing scaled to LBM in the obese individual resulted 
in lower effect-site concentrations than those in a lean 
individual dosed according to TBW.
3. Dosing the obese individual to TBW was excessive.
4. All dosing scalars, except LBM, provided effect-site 
concentrations associated with a high probability of 
analgesia.
As can be appreciated in Fig. 4.27, LBM has substan-
tial shortcomings in morbidly obese patients.20 First, dos-
ing remifentanil to LBM leads to plasma concentrations 
with a low probability of effect compared with the other 
dosing scalars. Second, with excessive weight (BMI over 
(167 μg/kg/min) in a 176-cm (6-foot)-tall obese (185kg) 
and lean (68 kg) male patient. If dosed according to 
TBW, peak plasma concentrations in the lean and obese 
individuals are different. The other weight scalars lead to 
much smaller concentrations with the infusion.
Of the many available dosing scalars, authors recom-
mend LBM11 for bolus dosing (i.e., during induction) and 
TBW or corrected body weight (CBW) for infusions.9 12
For continuous infusions, other weight scalars are likely 
to result in inadequate dosing (most worrisome for LBM).
One concern with using TBW to dose continuous 
infusions (i.e., μg/kg/min) is drug accumulation. Prior 
investigations, however, do not support this assump-
tion. Servin and colleagues13 performed pharmacokinetic 
analyses of propofol administration to normal and obese 
patients using TBW and CBW. The CBW was defined as 
the IBW + 0.4 × (TBW −IBW).11 They found similar con-
centrations at eye opening in both groups and absence of 
propofol accumulation in obese patients. However, some 
reports suggest that dosing infusions according to CBW 
may underdose morbidly obese patients.12
Other Sedatives
Only limited information is available on the behavior of 
other sedatives (i.e., midazolam, ketamine, etomidate, and 
Time (min)
3
6
4
5
2
1
0
0
15
30
45
60
75
90
Propofol effect-site concentration (ng/mL)
TBW (lean)
TBW (obese)
CBW (obese)
LBM (obese)
IBW (obese)
FFM (obese)
Fig. 4.26 Simulations of propofol plasma concentrations that result 
from a 60-minute infusion (10 mg/kg/hr [167 μg/kg/min]) to a 
40-year-old man who is 176 cm tall. Simulations include the following 
dosing weights: total body weights (TBWs) of 68 kg and 185 kg (body 
mass indices of 22 and 60, respectively) and scaled weights for the 
185-kg weight to include Servin’s corrected body weight (CBW), lean 
body mass (LBM), ideal body weight (IBW), and fat-free mass (FFM). 
Key points: At the 185-kg weight, when dosed to TBW, the infusion 
leads to high propofol concentrations, whereas when dosed to IBW 
or LBM, the infusion leads to low propofol concentrations. When 
the 185-kg individual is dosed using CBW, it best approximates the 
propofol concentrations that result from TBW in a lean individual. 
(From Miller RD, Cohen NH, Eriksson LI, et al., eds. Miller’s Anesthesia.
8th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders Elsevier; 2014:Fig. 24.32.)
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
48
no pharmacokinetic data are available for morphine 
in obese patients, one group of investigators measured 
morphine metabolites in morbidly obese patients.27 They 
found that rate of morphine metabolism is not altered 
in morbidly obese patients, but the elimination of its 
metabolites is reduced. Specifically, there were increased 
levels of both morphine-3-glucuronide and morphine-
6-glucuronide. Of note, the latter metabolite can cause 
sedation.
Inhaled Anesthetics
A widely held perception of volatile anesthetics (also see 
Chapter 7) is that they accumulate more in obese than in 
lean patients and that this leads to prolonged emergence. 
This concept, however, has not been confirmed.28 Two 
phenomena contribute to this observation: first, blood 
flow to adipose tissue decreases with increasing obesity,29
and second, the time required to fill adipose tissue with 
volatile anesthetics is long.
Influence of Increasing Age on Anesthetic Drug 
Pharmacology
Age is one of the most valuable covariates to con-
sider when developing an anesthetic plan (also see 
Chapter 35). As with obesity, both remifentanil and 
propofol can serve as prototypes to understand how age 
influences anesthetic drug behavior. The influence of age 
on remifentanil and propofol is characterized in quanti-
tative terms.30 33
40), LBM actually becomes smaller with increasing TBW, 
making it impractical to use (see Fig. 4.25). A modified 
LBM,11 FFM eliminates the extremely low dosing weight 
problem.21 In this simulation IBW also provides suitable 
effect-site concentrations, but this may not always be 
the case when using a weight scalar that is based only 
on patient height.
Fentanyl
Despite widespread use in the clinical arena, relatively 
little work has explored how obesity affects fentanyl 
pharmacokinetics (also see Chapter 9). Published fen-
tanyl pharmacokinetic models22 23 tend to overestimate 
fentanyl concentrations as TBW increases.13 Investiga-
tors have24 25 explored ways to improve predictions using 
published models by modifying demographic data (e.g., 
either height or weight). Recommendations include use of 
a modified weight, called the pharmacokinetic mass, to 
improve the predictive performance of one of the many 
available fentanyl kinetic models.
Other Opioids
Even less information regarding the impact of obesity 
on drug behavior is available for opioids other than 
remifentanil and fentanyl. Researchers have studied 
sufentanil in obese patients and found that its volume of 
distribution increases linearly with TBW,26 and clearance 
was similar between lean and obese individuals. They 
recommend bolus dosing using TBW and “prudently 
reduced” dosing for continuous infusions. Although 
B
A
Time (min)
6
12
8
10
4
2
0
0
15
30
45
60
75
90
Remifentanil effect-site
concentration (ng/mL)
TBW (lean)
TBW (obese)
CBW (obese)
LBM (obese)
IBW (obese)
FFM (obese)
Time (min)
60
100
80
40
20
0
0
20
40
60
80
100
Probability of analgesia
TBW (lean)
TBW (obese)
CBW (obese)
LBM (obese)
IBW (obese)
FFM (obese)
Fig. 4.27 Simulations of remifentanil effect-site concentrations (A) and analgesic effect (B) that result 
from a 1-μg/kg bolus and a 60-minute infusion at a rate of 0.15 μg/kg/min to a 40-year-old man who 
is 176 cm tall. Simulations include the following dosing weights: total body weights (TBWs) of 68 kg 
and 185 kg (body mass indices of 22 and 60, respectively) and scaled weights for the 185-kg weight to 
include Servin’s corrected body weight (CBW), lean body mass (LBM), ideal body weight (IBW), and fat-free 
mass (FFM). Remifentanil effect-site concentrations and estimates of analgesic effect were estimated 
using published pharmacokinetic models (Kim et al., Anesthesiology. 2017;126:1019–1032 and Ref. 28). 
Analgesia was defined as loss of response to 30 psi of pressure on the anterior tibia.
II
Chapter 4 Basic Pharmacologic Principles
49
“physiologic” age instead of solely relying on chrono-
logic age.39 40 For some older patients, such as those with 
no significant coexisting disease, normal body habitus, 
and good exercise tolerance, a substantial reduction in 
dose may not be warranted.
SUMMARY
This chapter reviewed basic principles of clinical phar-
macology used to describe anesthetic drug behavior: 
pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, and anesthetic 
drug interactions. These principles provide anesthe-
sia practitioners with the information needed to make 
rational decisions about the selection and administration 
of anesthetics. From a practical aspect, these principles 
characterize the magnitude and time course of drug 
effect, but because of complex mathematics, they have 
limited clinical utility in everyday practice. Advances in 
computer simulation, however, have brought this capa-
bility to the point of real-time patient care. One of the 
most important advances in our understanding of clinical 
pharmacology is the development of interaction models 
that describe how different classes of anesthetic drugs 
influence one another. This knowledge is especially rel-
evant to anesthesia providers, given that they rarely use 
just one drug when providing an anesthetic.
With remifentanil, elderly patients require less drug 
to produce an opioid effect. The effectiveness of reduced 
doses in older patients is primarily a function of changes 
in pharmacodynamics, but may involve pharmacokinetic 
changes as well.31 Based on previously published phar-
macokinetic and pharmacodynamic models built from 
measurements over a wide age range,30 33 simulations 
can be performed to explore how age may influence dos-
ing. For example, to achieve equipotent doses in 20- and 
80-year-olds, the dose for the 80-year-old should be 
reduced by 55%. A similar analysis for propofol recom-
mends that the dose for an 80-year-old be reduced by 
65% compared with that of a 20-year-old.
The mechanisms for these changes are not clear, 
especially for pharmacodynamic changes. One possible 
source of change in pharmacokinetic behavior may 
be the result of decreased cardiac output. Decreased 
cardiac output in the elderly15 results in slower circu-
lation and drug mixing. This may lead to high peak 
concentrations15 34 and decreased drug delivery to meta-
bolic organs and reduced clearance. Many intravenous 
anesthetics (propofol, thiopental, and etomidate) have 
slower clearance and a smaller volume of distribu-
tion.30 35 37 inthe elderly. Beyond age-related changes in 
cardiac output, other comorbid conditions may reduce 
cardiovascular function as well.38 Taking this into 
account, anesthesia providers often consider a patient's 
1. Wilkinson GR, Shand DG. Commentary: 
a physiological approach to hepatic 
drug clearance. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 
1975;18:377–390.
2. Krejcie TC, Avram MJ, Gentry WB, etal. 
A recirculatory model of the pulmonary 
uptake and pharmacokinetics of lido-
caine based on analysis or arterial and 
mixed venous data from dogs. J Phar-
macokinet Biopharm. 1997;25:169–190.
3. Youngs EJ, Shafer SL. Basic pharma-
cokinetic and pharmacodynamic prin-
ciples. In: White PF, ed. Textbook of 
Intravenous Anesthesia: Baltimore: Wil-
liams & Wilkins; 1997.
4. Hughes MA, Glass PS, Jacobs JR. 
Context-sensitive half-time in multi-
compartment pharmacokinetic models 
for intravenous anesthetic drugs. Anes-
thesiology. 1992;76(3):334–341.
5. Bouillon TW, Bruhn J, Radulescu L, etal. 
Pharmacodynamic interaction between 
propofol and remifentanil regarding 
hypnosis, tolerance of laryngoscopy, 
bispectral index, and electroencephalo-
graphic approximate entropy. Anesthe-
siology. 2004;100(6):1353–1372.
6. Heyse B, Proost JH, Schumacher 
PM, etal. Sevoflurane remifentanil 
interaction: comparison of different 
response surface models. Anesthesiol-
ogy. 2012;116(2):311–323.
7. Kern SE, Xie G, White JL, Egan TD. A 
response surface analysis of propofol-
remifentanil pharmacodynamic inter-
action in volunteers. Anesthesiology. 
2004;100(6):1373–1381.
8. Manyam SC, Gupta DK, Johnson KB, 
etal. Opioid-volatile anesthetic synergy: 
a response surface model with remifen-
tanil and sevoflurane as prototypes. 
Anesthesiology. 2006;105(2):267–278.
9. Mertens MJ, Engbers FH, Burm AG, Vuyk 
J. Predictive performance of computer-
controlled infusion of remifentanil dur-
ing propofol/remifentanil anaesthesia. 
Br J Anaesth. 2003;90(2):132–141.
10. LaPierre CD, Johnson KB, Randall BR, 
etal. An exploration of remifentanil-
propofol combinations that lead to a loss 
of response to esophageal instrumenta-
tion, a loss of responsiveness, and/or 
onset of intolerable ventilatory depres-
sion. Anesth Analg. 2011;113(3):490–499.
11. Albertin A, Poli D. La Colla L, etal. 
Predictive performance of “Servin's 
formula” during BIS-guided propofol-
remifentanil target-controlled infusion 
in morbidly obese patients. Br J Anaesth. 
2007;98(1):66–75.
12. Igarashi T, Nagata O, Iwakiri H, etal. 
Two cases of intraoperative awareness 
during intravenous anesthesia with 
propofol in morbidly obese patients. 
Masui. 2002;51(11):1243–1247.
13. Servin F, Farinotti R, Haberer JP, Des-
monts JM. Propofol infusion for main-
tenance of anesthesia in morbidly obese 
patients receiving nitrous oxide. A clini-
cal and pharmacokinetic study. Anesthe-
siology. 1993;78(4):657–665.
14. Xu B, Zhou D, Re L, etal. Pharmacoki-
netic and pharmacodynamics of intra-
venous dexmedetomidine in morbidly 
obese patients undergoing laparoscopic 
surgery. J Anesth. 2017;31(6):813.
15. Cortinez LI, Anderson BJ, Holford NHG, 
etal. Dexmedetomidine pharmacokinet-
ics in the obese. Eur J Clin Pharmacol. 
2015;71(12):1501–1508.
16. Greenblatt DJ, Abernethy DR, Locniskar 
A, etal. Effect of age, gender, and obe-
sity on midazolam kinetics. Anesthesiol-
ogy. 1984;61(1):27–35.
17. Upton RN, Ludbrook GL, Grant C, Martin-
ez AM. Cardiac output is a determinant of 
the initial concentrations of propofol after 
REFERENCES
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
50
short-infusion administration. Anesth 
Analg. 1999;89(3):545–552.
18. Kim TK, Obara S, Egan TD, etal. Dispo-
sition of remifentanil in obesity: a new 
pharmacokinetic model incorporating 
the influence of body mass. Anesthesiol-
ogy. 2017;126(6):1019–1032.
19. Johnson KB, Syroid ND, Gupta DK, etal. 
An evaluation of remifentanil propofol 
response surfaces for loss of respon-
siveness, loss of response to surrogates 
of painful stimuli and laryngoscopy in 
patients undergoing elective surgery. 
Anesth Analg. 2008;106(2):471–479.
20. La Colla L, Albertin A, La Colla G, 
etal. No adjustment vs. adjustment 
formula as input weight for propofol 
target-controlled infusion in morbid-
ly obese patients. Eur J Anaesthesiol. 
2009;26(5):362–369.
21. La Colla L, Albertin A, La Colla G, etal. 
Predictive performance of the “Minto” 
remifentanil pharmacokinetic parameter 
set in morbidly obese patients ensu-
ing from a new method for calculating 
lean body mass. Clin Pharmacokinet. 
2010;49(2):131–139.
22. Anderson BJ, Holford NH. Mechanistic 
basis of using body size and maturation 
to predict clearance in humans. Drug 
Metab Pharmacokinet. 2009;24(1):25–36.
23. Duffull SB, Dooley MJ, Green B, etal. 
A standard weight descriptor for dose 
adjustment in the obese patient. Clin 
Pharmacokinet. 2004;43(16):1167–1178.
24. Shibutani K, Inchiosa Jr. MA, Sawada 
K, Bairamian M. Accuracy of pharma-
cokinetic models for predicting plasma 
fentanyl concentrations in lean and 
obese surgical patients: derivation of 
dosing weight (“pharmacokinetic mass”). 
Anesthesiology. 2004;101(3):603–613.
25. Shibutani K, Inchiosa Jr. MA, Sawada K, 
Bairamian M. Pharmacokinetic mass of 
fentanyl for postoperative analgesia in 
lean and obese patients. Br J Anaesth. 
2005;95(3):377–383.
26. Schwartz AE, Matteo RS, Ornstein 
E, etal. Pharmacokinetics of sufen-
tanil in obese patients. Anesth Analg. 
1991;73(6):790–793.
27. Hoogd S, Välitalo PAJ, Dahan A, etal. 
Influence of Morbid Obesity on the 
Pharmacokinetics of Morphine, Mor-
phine-3-Glucuronide, and Morphine-
6-Glucuronide. Clin Pharmacokinet. 
2017;56(12):1577–1587.
28. Cortinez LI, Gambús P, Trocóniz IF, 
etal. Obesity does not influence the 
onset and offset of sevoflurane effect 
as measured by the hysteresis between 
sevoflurane concentration and bispectral 
index. Anesth Analg. 2011;113(1):70–76.
29. Lesser GT, Deutsch S. Measurement of 
adipose tissue blood flow and perfu-
sion in man by uptake of 85Kr. J Appl 
Physiol. 1967;23(5):621–630.
30. Schnider TW, Minto CF, Gambus PL, etal. 
The influence of method of administra-
tion and covariates on the pharmacoki-
netics of propofol in adult volunteers. 
Anesthesiology. 1998;88(5):1170–1182.
31. Minto CF, Schnider TW, Egan TD, etal. 
Influence of age and gender on the 
pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynam-
ics of remifentanil. I. Model develop-
ment. Anesthesiology. 1997;86(1):10–23.
32. Schnider TW, Minto CF, Shafer SL, 
etal. The influence of age on propo-
fol pharmacodynamics. Anesthesiology. 
1999;90(6):1502–1516.
33. Minto CF, Schnider TW, Shafer SL. Phar-
macokinetics and pharmacodynamics 
of remifentanil. II. Model application.. 
Anesthesiology. 1997;86(1):24–33.
34. Krejcie TC, Avram MJ. What determines 
anesthetic induction dose? It's the front-
end kinetics, doctor!. Anesth Analg. 
1999;89(3):541–544.
35. Arden JR, Holley FO, Stanski DR. 
Increased sensitivity to etomidate in 
the elderly: initial distribution versus 
altered brain response. Anesthesiology. 
1986;65(1):19–27.
36. Homer TD, Stanski DR. The effect of 
increasing age on thiopental disposition 
and anesthetic requirement. Anesthesi-
ology. 1985;62:714–724.
37. Stanski DR, Maitre PO. Population phar-
macokinetics and pharmacodynamics of 
thiopental: the effect of age revisited. 
Anesthesiology. 1990;72(3):412–422.
38. Rodeheffer RJ, Gerstenblith G, Beck-
er LC, etal. Exercise cardiac output 
is maintained with advancing age in 
healthy human subjects: cardiac dilata-
tion and increased stroke volume com-
pensate for a diminished heart rate. 
Circulation. 1984;69(2):203–213.
39. Avram MJ, Krejcie TC, Henthorn TK. 
The relationship of age to the pharma-
cokinetics of early drug distribution: 
the concurrent disposition of thiopental 
and indocyanine green. Anesthesiology. 
1990;72(3):403–411.
40. Williams TF. Aging or disease?. Clin 
Pharmacol Ther. 1987;42(6):663–665.
41. Lee S, Kim BH, Lim K, etal. Pharmacoki-
netics and pharmacodynamics of intra-
venous dexmedetomidine in healthy 
Korean subjects. J Clin Pharm Ther. 
2012;37:698–703.
42. Hudson RJ, Bergstrom RG, Thomson IR, 
etal. Pharmacokinetics of sufentanil in 
patients undergoing abdominal aortic sur-
gery. Anesthesiology. 1989;70:426–431.
43. Scott JC, Stanski DR. Decreased fentanyl 
and alfentanil dose requirements with 
age. A simultaneous pharmacokinetic and 
pharmacodynamic evaluation. J Pharma-
col Exp Ther. 1987;240(1):159–166.
44. Doufas AG, Bakhshandeh M, Bjorksten 
AR, etal. Induction speed is not a deter-
minant of propofol pharmacodynamics. 
Anesthesiology. 2004;101:1112–1121.
45. Egan TD, Muir KT, Hermann DJ, etal. 
The electroencephalogram (EEG) and 
clinical measures of opioid potency: 
defining the EEG-clinical potency rela-
tionship (“fingerprint”) with applica-
tion to remifentanil. Int J Pharm Med. 
2001;15(1):11–19.
46. Janmahasatian S, Duffull SB, Ash S, 
etal. Quantification of lean bodyweight. 
Clin Pharmacokinet. 2005;44(10):1051–
1065.
47. Cortinez LI, Anderson BJ, Penna A, 
etal. Influence of obesity on propo-
fol pharmacokinetics: derivation of a 
pharmacokinetic model. Br J Anaesth. 
2010;105(4):448–456.
51
Chapter
When it comes to direct, integrated, daily management 
of cardiac and pulmonary physiology, no specialty com-
pares with anesthesiology.1–3 A sound understanding of 
the separate and integrated fundamentals of cardiorespi-
ratory physiology is essential for an anesthesia provider 
to rapidly manage both critical and common situations 
such as hypotension, arterial hypoxemia, hypercapnia, 
and high peak airway pressures. The knowledge and skills 
required to excel as anesthesia providers provide invalu-
able insight when facing novel physiologic and logistic 
conundrums, as evidenced by anesthesiologists during 
the COVID-19 pandemic.4 This chapter reviews the basic 
tools and approaches every anesthesia provider must 
have in their armamentarium in order to provide safe, 
physiologically sound patient care. Although concepts 
are explained in discrete parts, the skilled anesthesia 
provider must also consider the integration and interde-
pendence of multiple physiologic systems.
HEMODYNAMICS
Arterial Blood Pressure
Systemic arterial blood pressure and mean arterial pressure 
(MAP) are commonly monitored by anesthesia providers 
via a blood pressure cuff or an indwelling arterial cannula. 
Although treatment of chronic systemic hypertension is 
sometimes necessary, acute hypotension is more often 
encountered during anesthesia care. Hypotension varies 
from mild, clinically insignificant reductions in MAP 
from general anesthesia or regional anesthesia to life-
threatening emergencies. Hypotension can be of sufficient 
magnitude to jeopardize organ perfusion, causing injury 
and an adverse outcome. Organs of most immediate con-
cern are the heart and brain, followed by the kidneys, liver, 
and lungs. All have typical injury patterns associated with 
HEMODYNAMICS
Arterial Blood Pressure
Physiologic Approach to Hypotension
CARDIAC REFLEXES
Autonomic Nervous System
Baroreceptors
CORONARY BLOOD FLOW
PULMONARY CIRCULATION
Pulmonary Artery Pressure
Pulmonary Vascular Resistance
Zones of the Lung
Pulmonary Edema
PULMONARY GAS EXCHANGE
Oxygen
Carbon Dioxide
PULMONARY MECHANICS
Static Properties
Dynamic Properties and Airway Resistance
CONTROL OF BREATHING
Central Integration and Rhythm Generation
Central Chemoreceptors
Peripheral Chemoreceptors
Hypercapnic Ventilatory Response
Hypoxic Ventilatory Response
Effects of Anesthesia
Disorders of Ventilatory Control
Identifying the Cause of Respiratory Failure
INTEGRATION OF THE HEART AND LUNGS
Supply and Delivery
Oxygen Delivery
Oxygen Extraction
Mechanical Relationships
CLINICAL CARDIAC 
AND PULMONARY 
PHYSIOLOGY
John Feiner, Wendy Smith
5
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
52
prolonged shock. Understanding the physiology behind 
hypotension is critical for diagnosis and treatment.
Intraoperative hemodynamic instability has long been 
thought to result in worse outcomes after surgery. In 
large retrospective studies intraoperative hypotension of 
even 5 minutes' duration (systolic blood pressure [SBP] 
<70 mm Hg, MAP <50 mm Hg, diastolic blood pressure 
[DBP] <30 mm Hg) is associated with increased postop-
erative morbidity and mortality risks.5 6 In a large 2020 
observational study of patients undergoing noncardiac 
surgery intraoperative hypotension was associated with 
acute kidney injury in those patients in higher-risk 
groups (based on American Society of Anesthesiologists 
[ASA] physical status and type of surgery).7 Postoperative 
hypotension is also a risk factor for myocardial injury 
after noncardiac surgery.8
Physiologic Approach to Hypotension
This chapter will focus mainly on the physiology of 
the left ventricle (LV) in the discussion of hypotension. 
However, the contribution of the right ventricle (RV) 
and venous system is also important.9 To assess and 
treat acute hypotension, it is logical to start with the 
MAP and to consider it as the product of its physiologic 
components:
MAP
SVR
CO


where SVR is the systemic vascular resistance and CO is 
cardiac output. When faced with an inadequate MAP, one 
should consider which component is the primary culprit. 
Additionally, although the clinician's focus tends to be 
on MAP alone, the contributing pressures (e.g., SBP, DBP, 
and pulse pressure [PP = SBP −DBP]) also require atten-
tion and can provide invaluable information when for-
mulating a differential diagnosis and treatment plan. The 
pulse pressure is created by the addition of stroke volume 
(SV) on top of the DBP within the compliant vascular 
tree. The aorta is responsible for most of this compliance. 
Increased pulse pressure can occur with an increased SV, 
but most often occurs because of the poor aortic com-
pliance that accompanies aging (also see Chapter 35). 
Decreasing DBP can have more dramatic effects on SBP 
when vascular compliance is poor.
Systemic Vascular Resistance
Most drugs administered during general anesthesia 
and neuraxial regional anesthesia (also see Chapter 17) 
decrease SVR. Several pathologic conditions can produce 
profound reductions in SVR, including sepsis, anaphy-
laxis, spinal shock, and reperfusion of ischemic organs. 
The calculation for SVR is as follows:
SVR
80
MAP
CVP CO



(
)/
where CVP is the central venous pressure, and the fac-
tor 80 converts units into dyne/s/cm5 from pressure in 
millimeters of mercury (mm Hg) and CO given in liters 
per minute (L/min).
Pulmonary artery (PA) catheterization can be used to 
obtain the measurements necessary for calculating SVR, 
but this monitor is not usually immediately available. 
Signs of adequate perfusion (e.g., warm extremities, good 
pulse oximeter plethysmograph waveform and perfusion 
index) may sometimes be present when hypotension is 
caused by low SVR. On the other hand, hypertension 
nearly always involves excessive vasoconstriction.1
According to Poiseuille's law, resistance is inversely 
proportional to the fourth power of the radius of a ves-
sel. Individually, small vessels offer a very high resistance 
to flow. However, total SVR is decreased when there are 
many vessels arranged in parallel. Capillaries, despite 
being the smallest blood vessels, are not responsible for 
most of the SVR because there are so many in parallel. 
Most of the resistance to blood flow on the arterial side 
of the circulation is in the arterioles.
Cardiac Output
As a cause of hypotension, decreased CO may be more 
difficult to treat than decreased SVR. Increased CO is not 
usually associated with systemic hypertension, and most 
hyperdynamic states, such as sepsis and liver failure, are 
associated with decreased systemic blood pressure, which 
may lead to falsely believing the issue is low SVR alone.
CO is defined as the amount of blood (in liters) pumped 
by the heart in 1 minute. Although the amount of blood 
pumped by the right side and left side of the heart can 
differ in the presence of certain congenital heart mal-
formations, these amounts are usually the same. CO is 
the product of heart rate (HR) and SV, the net amount of 
blood ejected by the heart in one cycle:
CO
HR
SV


HR is an obvious determinant, as are the components 
of SV: preload, afterload, and contractility, which must 
all be considered when determining the cause of hypoten-
sion. CO can be measured clinically by thermodilution via 
a PA catheter and by transesophageal echocardiography 
(TEE). Less invasive devices to measure CO have been 
developed, including esophageal Doppler and pulse con-
tour analysis (also see Chapter 20). Because the normal 
CO changes according to body size, cardiac index (CO 
divided by body surface area) is often used.
Heart Rate
Tachycardia and bradycardia can cause hypotension if 
CO is decreased. The electrocardiogram (ECG), pulse oxi-
metry, or physical examination can identify the presence 
1Perfusion index is a measure of the pulsatile signal relative 
to the background absorption and is an important measure of 
signal strength.
II
Chapter 5 Clinical Cardiac and Pulmonary Physiology
53
of bradycardia or tachycardia. A determination of rhythm 
and an understanding of how rhythm affects filling 
pressures are essential for analyzing HR and its poten-
tial effects on hypotension. Loss of sinus rhythm and 
atrial contraction results in decreased ventricular filling. 
Atrial contraction constitutes a significant percentage of 
preload, even more so in patients with a poorly compliant 
ventricle. A slow HR may result in enhanced ventricular 
filling and an increased SV, but an excessively slow HR 
results in an inadequate CO in the setting of a stiff ven-
tricle, making CO more HR dependent. Tachycardia may 
result in insufficient time for the LV to fill and result in 
low CO and hypotension.
Ejection Fraction and Stroke Volume
Ejection fraction (EF) is the percentage of ventricular 
blood volume that is pumped by the heart in a single 
contraction (SV/end-diastolic volume [EDV]). Unlike SV, 
the EF does not differ based on body size, and an EF of 
60% to 70% is considered normal. Hyperdynamic states 
such as sepsis and cirrhosis are reflected by an increased 
EF. Poor cardiac function is indicated by a reduced EF. 
Because CO can be maintained by increasing HR, the SV 
should be calculated to better assess cardiac function. 
However, with chronic dilated cardiomyopathy, the SV 
can improve despite the smaller EF.
Preload
Preload refers to the amount the cardiac muscle is 
“stretched” before contraction. Preload is best defined 
clinically as the EDV of the heart, which can be measured 
directly with TEE. Filling pressures (e.g., left atrial [LA] 
pressure, pulmonary capillary wedge pressure [PCWP], 
pulmonary artery diastolic [PAD] pressure) can also assess 
preload. CVP measures filling pressures on the right side 
of the heart, which correlates with filling pressures on the 
left side of the heart in the absence of pulmonary disease 
and when cardiac function is normal. By using a balloon 
to stop flow in a PA, pressure equilibrates within the sys-
tem so that PCWP is nearly equivalent to LA pressure and 
reflects the filling pressure of the left side of the heart. 
The relationship between pressure and volume of the heart 
in diastole is depicted by ventricular compliance curves 
(Fig.5.1). With a poorly compliant heart, normal filling 
pressures may not produce an adequate EDV. Likewise, 
trying to fill a “stiff” LV to a normal volume may increase 
intracardiac and pulmonary capillary pressures excessively.
Frank–Starling Mechanism
The Frank–Starling mechanism, a physiologic descrip-
tion of the increased pumping action of the heart with 
increased filling to an ideal volume, highlights the 
importance of preload. For a given ventricle, achieve-
ment of the ideal preload results in increased contraction 
necessary to eject added ventricular volume, resulting in 
a larger SV and similar EF. Reduced ventricular filling, as 
Fig. 5.1 The pressure–volume relationship of the heart in diastole 
is shown in the compliance curves plotting left ventricular (LV) 
diastolic volume versus pressure. The “stiff” heart shows a steeper 
rise of pressure with increased volume than the normal heart. The 
dilated ventricle shows a much more compliant curve.
“Stiff” 
ventricle
Normal
ventricle
Dilated
ventricle
0
5
10
15
20
25
0
50
100
150
LV diastolic volume (mL)
LV diastolic pressure (mm Hg)
200
250
300
Fig. 5.2 The cardiac function curve shows the typical relationship 
between preload, represented by left ventricular (LV) filling 
pressure, and cardiac function, reflected in cardiac output or stroke 
volume. Filling pressure can be measured as left atrial pressure or 
pulmonary capillary wedge pressure. At low preload, augmentation 
of filling results in significantly increased cardiac output. This is 
the steeper portion of the curve. At higher LV filling pressures, little 
improvement in function occurs with increased preload, and with 
overfilling, a decrement in function can occur because of impaired 
perfusion (not shown). Lower contractility or higher systemic 
vascular resistance (SVR) shifts the normal curve to the right and 
downward.
Lower contractility 
or higher SVR
Normal
0
20
10
40
50
30
60
70
80
90
100
0
5
10
15
LV filling pressure (mm Hg)
20
25
Cardiac output or stroke volume 
(% of maximal)
in hypovolemia, results in reduced SV. Small increases in 
preload may have dramatic effects (“volume responsive-
ness”) on SV and CO (Fig. 5.2). At higher points on the 
curve, little additional benefit is derived from increases 
in preload; for patients with heart failure, the increase in 
preload can be detrimental.
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
54
Causes of Low Preload
Causes of low preload can be broken down into absolute 
(hypovolemia) and relative (venodilation and obstruc-
tion). Hypovolemia may result from hemorrhage or fluid 
losses. Venodilation occurs with general anesthesia and 
may be even more prominent in the presence of neu-
raxial anesthesia (also see Chapter 17). Tension pneu-
mothorax and pericardial tamponade prevent ventricular 
filling because of increased pressure around the heart, 
obstructing blood flow and preventing the establish-
ment of appropriate filling pressures.10 Thus cardiac 
tamponade may exist even in the setting of normal or 
increased CVP. Patients with low preload may mani-
fest systolic pressure variation (SPV), which describes 
changes in SBP with tidal breathing or ventilation that 
can be observed on an arterial blood pressure tracing11
(also see Chapter 20). The extreme form of this is pulsus 
paradoxus, a marked decrease in SBP during the inspira-
tory phase of tidal breathing. Pulse pressure variation 
(PPV) [(PPpeak −PPnadir)/PPaverage] is analogous to SPV but 
requires computer calculation. Both SPV and PPV are also 
useful in identifying hypovolemia and are more sensitive 
and specific indicators of intravascular volume respon-
siveness than filling pressures such as CVP. However, 
when using low tidal volume ventilation, especially in 
patients with poor lung compliance (e.g., acute respira-
tory distress syndrome [ARDS]), SPV and PPV may not 
reliably predict fluid responsiveness unless tidal volume is 
temporarily increased (so-called tidal volume challenge).12
Additionally, pathologic problems on the right side of 
the heart may prevent filling of the LV. Right heart fail-
ure, pulmonary embolism, and other causes of pulmonary 
hypertension may prevent the right side of the heart from 
pumping a sufficient volume to fill the left side of the heart. 
With an overfilled RV (e.g., from hypervolemia and/or 
pump failure), the interventricular septum may be shifted, 
further constricting filling of the left side of the heart.
Contractility
Contractility, or the inotropic state of the heart, is a 
measure of the force of contraction independent of load-
ing conditions (preload or afterload). It can be measured 
for research purposes by the rate at which pressure 
develops in the cardiac ventricles (dP/dT) or by systolic 
pressure–volume relationships (Fig. 5.3). Decreased myo-
cardial contractility, alone or in conjunction with other 
causes discussed in this section, should be considered in 
the differential diagnosis of hypotension (Box 5.1).13
Afterload
Afterload is the resistance to ejection of blood from the 
LV with each contraction. For our purposes, afterload is 
largely determined by SVR and myocardial wall stress. 
When SVR is increased beyond normal values (900 to 
1440 dyn/s/cm−5), the heart does not empty as com-
pletely, resulting in a lower SV, EF, and CO (see Fig. 5.2). 
High SVR also increases cardiac filling pressures, which 
may contribute to increased cardiac ischemia (described 
later) and increased wall stress. Wall stress is described 
using the law of Laplace: wall stress = P × r/T. In this 
equation P = ventricular transmural pressure, r = ven-
tricular radius, and T = ventricular wall thickness. Low 
SVR improves SV and increases CO such that a low SVR 
is often associated with a higher CO (Fig. 5.4).
However, low SVR may also decrease cardiac filling 
pressures. This finding may suggest that preload rather 
than afterload is the cause of hypotension. Low SVR 
allows more extensive emptying and a lower end-systolic 
Fig. 5.3 The closed loop (red line) shows a typical cardiac cycle. 
Diastolic filling occurs along the typical diastolic curve from a 
volume of 50 mL to an end-diastolic volume (EDV) of 150 mL. 
Isovolumetric contraction increases the pressure in the left 
ventricle (LV) until it reaches the pressure in the aorta (at diastolic 
blood pressure) and the aortic valve opens. The LV then ejects 
blood, and volume decreases. Pressure in the LV and aorta reaches 
a peak at some point during ejection (systolic blood pressure), and 
the pressure then drops until the point at which the aortic valve 
closes (roughly the dicrotic notch). The LV relaxes without changing 
volume (isovolumetric relaxation). When the pressure decreases 
below left atrial pressure, the mitral valve opens, and diastolic 
filling begins. The plot shows a normal cycle, and the stroke 
volume (SV) is 100 mL, ejection fraction (EF) is SV/EDV = 67%, and 
blood pressure is 130/75 mm Hg. The systolic pressure–volume 
relationship (black line) can be constructed from a family of curves 
under different loading conditions (i.e., different preload) and 
reflects the inotropic state of the heart.
Stroke volume = 100 mL
Ejection fraction = 67%
Systolic pressure-
volume relationship
Systolic blood pressure 
= 130 mm Hg
Diastolic blood 
pressure 
= 75 mm Hg
Isovolumetric
contraction
0
50
100
150
200
0
20
40
60
80
120 140
100
LV volume (mL) 
160 180 200
Isovolumetric
relaxation
LV pressure (mm Hg) 
Diastolic
filling
curve
Box 5.1 Conditions Associated With Decreased 
Myocardial Contractility as a Cause of Hypotension
Myocardial ischemia
Anesthetic drugs
Cardiomyopathy
Previous myocardial infarction
Valvular heart disease (decreased stroke volume independent 
of preload)
II
Chapter 5 Clinical Cardiac and Pulmonary Physiology
55
volume (ESV), one of the hallmarks of low SVR on TEE. 
With the same venous return, the heart does not fill to 
the same EDV, resulting in lower left ventricular filling 
pressures (see Fig. 5.4). A similar process occurs when the 
SVR is increased. Such stress-induced increases in cardiac 
filling pressures are more pronounced in patients with 
poor cardiac function. For any given patient, the goal 
is to find the SVR at which filling pressures allow the 
ventricle to operate on the most efficient portion of the 
Starling curve while not providing excessive afterload.
CARDIAC REFLEXES
The cardiovascular regulatory system consists of periph-
eral and central receptor systems that can detect various 
physiologic states, a central “integratory” system in the 
brainstem, and neurohumoral output to the heart and 
vascular system. A clinical understanding of cardiac 
reflexes is based on the concept that the cardiovascular 
system in the brainstem integrates the signal and pro-
vides a response through the autonomic nervous system.
Autonomic Nervous System (Also See Chapter 6)
The heart and vascular systems are controlled by the 
autonomic nervous system. Sympathetic and parasym-
pathetic efferents innervate the sinoatrial and atrioven-
tricular nodes. Sympathetic nervous system stimulation 
increases HR through activation of β1-adrenergic receptors. 
Parasympathetic nervous system stimulation can pro-
foundly slow HR through stimulation of muscarinic ace-
tylcholine receptors in the sinoatrial and atrioventricular 
nodes, whereas parasympathetic nervous system suppres-
sion contributes to increased HR. Conduction through 
the atrioventricular node is increased and decreased by 
sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous system inner-
vation, respectively. Sympathetic nervous system stimula-
tion increases myocardial contractility. Parasympathetic 
nervous system stimulation may decrease myocardial 
contractility slightly, but it has its major effect through 
decreasing HR.
Baroreceptors
Baroreceptors in the carotid sinus and aortic arch are 
activated by increased systemic blood pressure that 
stimulates stretch receptors to send signals through the 
vagus and glossopharyngeal nerves to the central nervous 
system. The sensitivity of baroreceptors to systemic blood 
pressure changes varies and is significantly altered by 
long-standing essential hypertension. A typical response 
to acute hypertension is increased parasympathetic nerv-
ous system stimulation that decreases HR. Vagal stimula-
tion and decreases in sympathetic nervous system activity 
also decrease myocardial contractility and cause reflex 
vasodilatation. This carotid sinus reflex can be used 
therapeutically to produce vagal stimulation that may be 
an effective treatment for supraventricular tachycardia.
The atria and ventricles are innervated by a variety 
of sympathetic and parasympathetic receptor systems. 
Atrial stretch (i.e., Bainbridge reflex) can increase HR, 
which may help match CO to venous return.
Stimulation of the chemoreceptors in the carotid 
sinus has respiratory and cardiovascular effects. Arte-
rial hypoxemia results in sympathetic nervous system 
stimulation. The sympathetic response is a major factor 
in tolerance of mild to moderate hypoxemia.14 However, 
it is notable that more profound and prolonged arterial 
hypoxemia can result in bradycardia, possibly through 
central mechanisms. A variety of other reflexes causing 
bradycardia include increased ocular pressure (i.e., ocu-
locardiac reflex), bradycardia with stretch of abdominal 
viscera, and the Cushing reflex (bradycardia in response 
to increased intracranial pressure).
Many anesthetics blunt cardiac reflexes in a dose-
dependent fashion, with the result that sympathetic nerv-
ous system responses to hypotension are reduced. The 
blunting of such reflexes represents an additional mecha-
nism by which anesthetic drugs contribute to hypotension.
CORONARY BLOOD FLOW
The coronary circulation is unique in that a larger per-
centage of oxygen is extracted by the heart than in any 
Fig. 5.4 Changes in the cardiac cycle that can occur with 
vasodilatation are depicted. The cycle in green is the same cycle 
shown in Fig. 5.3. The red dashed line suggests the transition to the 
new cardiac cycle shown in blue. The systolic blood pressure has 
decreased to 105 mm Hg. The end-systolic volume has decreased, 
as has the end-diastolic volume. End-diastolic pressure (EDP) has 
decreased from 11 to 7 mm Hg in this example. The ejection 
fraction is slightly increased; however, the stroke volume may 
decrease, but with restoration of left ventricular (LV) filling pressures 
to the same level as before, the stroke volume will be higher.
EDP = 7 mm Hg
EDP = 
11 mm Hg
0
50
100
150
200
0
20
40
60
80
120 140
100
LV volume (mL) 
LV pressure (mm Hg) 
160 180 200
Diastolic
filling
curve
Systolic pressure-
volume relationship
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
56
other vascular bed, up to 60% to 70%, compared with the 
25% extraction for the body as a whole. The consequence 
of this physiology is that the heart cannot increase 
oxygen extraction as a reserve mechanism. In cases of 
threatened oxygen supply vasodilatation to increase 
blood flow is the primary compensatory mechanism of 
the heart.
Coronary reserve is the ability of the coronary cir-
culation to increase flow more than the baseline state. 
Endogenous regulators of coronary blood flow include 
adenosine, nitric oxide, and adrenergic stimulation. With 
coronary artery stenosis, compensatory vasodilatation 
downstream can maintain coronary blood flow until about 
90% stenosis, when coronary reserve begins to become 
exhausted.
The perfusion pressure of a vascular bed is usually 
calculated as the difference between MAP and venous 
pressure, based on the Hagen–Poiseuille law:
Q
P
P /R
)
1
2


(
where Q is flow, P1 is upstream pressure, P2 is down-
stream pressure, and R is resistance. Instantaneous 
flow through the coronary arteries varies throughout 
the cardiac cycle, peaking during systole. The heart is 
fundamentally different from other organs because the 
myocardial wall tension developed during systole can 
completely stop blood flow in the subendocardium. The 
LV is therefore perfused predominantly during diastole. 
The end-diastolic pressure in the left ventricle (LVEDP) 
may exceed CVP and represents the effective downstream 
pressure. Perfusion pressure to most of the LV is therefore 
DBP minus LVEDP. Thus elevated LVEDP, as is seen in 
decompensated heart failure or extreme volume overload, 
may be associated with coronary ischemic events. The 
RV, with its lower intramural pressure, is perfused during 
diastole and systole.
PULMONARY CIRCULATION
The pulmonary circulation includes the RV, PAs, pul-
monary capillary bed, and pulmonary veins, ending 
in the left atrium. The bronchial circulation supplies 
nutrients to lung tissue and empties into the pulmonary 
Value
CVP 
(mm Hg)
PAS 
(mm Hg)
PAD 
(mm Hg)
PAM 
(mm Hg)
PCWP 
(mm Hg)
Normal
2–8
15–30
4–12
9–16
4–12
High
>12
>30
>12
>25
>12
Pathologic
>18
>40
>20
>35
>20
Table 5.1
Normal Values for Pressures in the Venous and Pulmonary Arterial Systems
CVP, Central venous pressure; PAD, pulmonary artery diastolic pressure; PAM, pulmonary artery mean pressure; PAS, pulmonary artery systolic 
pressure; PCWP, pulmonary capillary wedge pressure.
veins and left atrium. The pulmonary circulation differs 
substantially from the systemic circulation in its regula-
tion, normal pressures (Table 5.1), and responses to drugs. 
Use of a PA catheter to measure pressures in the pulmo-
nary circulation requires a fundamental understanding 
of their normal values and their meaning. Pulmonary 
hypertension has idiopathic causes and may accompany 
several common diseases (e.g., cirrhosis of the liver, sleep 
apnea). It is associated with significant anesthetic-related 
morbidity and mortality rates and, like many disease 
states, requires a sound understanding of cardiopul-
monary physiology to mitigate complications (also see 
Chapter 26).
Pulmonary Artery Pressure
Pulmonary artery pressure (PAP) is much lower than 
systemic pressure because of low pulmonary vascular 
resistance (PVR). Like the systemic circulation, the pul-
monary circulation accepts the entire CO and must adapt 
its resistance to meet different conditions.
Pulmonary Vascular Resistance
Determinants of PVR are different from SVR in the 
systemic circulation. During blood flow through the pul-
monary circulation, resistance is thought to occur in the 
larger vessels, small arteries, and capillary bed. Vessels 
within the alveoli and the extraalveolar vessels respond 
differently to forces within the lung.
The most useful physiologic model for describing 
changes in the pulmonary circulation is the distention
of capillaries and the recruitment of new capillaries. 
The distention and recruitment of capillaries explain 
the changes in PVR in a variety of circumstances. 
Increased PAP causes distention and recruitment of 
capillaries, increasing the cross-sectional area and 
decreasing PVR. Increased CO also decreases PVR 
through distention and recruitment. The reciprocal 
changes between CO and PVR maintain fairly constant 
pulmonary pressures over a wide range of CO values 
in nonpathologic states.
Just as cardiac contraction can affect coronary blood 
flow, alveolar distension can affect pulmonary blood flow. 
AL GRAWANY
II
Chapter 5 Clinical Cardiac and Pulmonary Physiology
57
Lung volumes have different effects on intraalveolar and 
extraalveolar vessels. With large lung volumes, intraal-
veolar vessels can be compressed, whereas extraalveolar 
vessels have lower resistance. The opposite is true at very 
small lung volumes. Therefore higher PVR can occur at 
both large and small lung volumes. Increased PVR at 
small lung volumes helps to divert blood flow from col-
lapsed alveoli, such as during one-lung ventilation.
Sympathetic nervous system stimulation can cause 
pulmonary vasoconstriction, but the effect is not large, 
in contrast to the systemic circulation, in which neurohu-
moral influence is the primary regulator of vascular tone. 
The pulmonary circulation has therefore been very difficult 
to treat with drugs. Previously, the mainstay of treatment 
included nitric oxide, an important regulator of vascular 
tone delivered by inhalation, in addition to prostaglandins 
and phosphodiesterase inhibitors (e.g., sildenafil), which 
are both pulmonary vasodilators. Although advances in 
pharmacologic treatments have been made and new recep-
tors can be targeted (e.g., endothelin receptor antagonists, 
guanylate cyclase stimulators, and prostacyclins), effective 
pulmonary hypertension treatment remains challenging.15
Hypoxic Pulmonary Vasoconstriction
Hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction (HPV) is the pulmo-
nary vascular response to a low alveolar oxygen partial 
pressure (Pao2). In many patients HPV is an important 
adaptive response that improves gas exchange by divert-
ing blood away from poorly ventilated areas, decreasing 
shunt fraction. Normal regions of the lung can easily 
accommodate the additional blood flow without increas-
ing PAP. Global alveolar hypoxia, such as occurs with 
apnea or at high altitude, can cause significant HPV and 
increased PAP.
Anesthetic drugs such as the potent inhaled anesthet-
ics can impair HPV, whereas commonly used intravenous 
drugs, such as propofol and opioids, demonstrate no inhi-
bition of HPV. Calcium channel blockers may blunt HPV 
in the setting of preexisting V/Q mismatch.16 During sur-
gical procedures requiring one-lung ventilation, HPV may 
play a role in the resolution of hypoxemia, although many 
other factors are also important, including acid–base sta-
tus, CO, development of atelectasis, and concomitant drug 
administration17 (also see Chapter 27).
Pulmonary Emboli
Pulmonary emboli obstruct blood vessels, increasing the 
overall resistance to blood through the pulmonary vascu-
lar system. Common forms of emboli are blood clots and 
air, but they also include amniotic fluid, carbon dioxide, 
and fat emboli.
Arteriolar Thickening
Arteriolar thickening occurs in several clinical circum-
stances. It is associated with certain types of long-
standing congenital heart disease. Primary pulmonary 
hypertension is an idiopathic disease associated with 
arteriolar hyperplasia. Similar changes are associated with 
cirrhosis of the liver (i.e., portopulmonary hypertension).
Zones of the Lung
A useful concept in pulmonary hemodynamics is West's 
zones of the lung. Gravity determines the way pressures 
change in the vascular system relative to the measure-
ment at the level of the heart. These differences are small 
compared with arterial pressures, but for venous pres-
sure and PAP, these differences are clinically significant. 
Every 20 cm of change in height produces a 15-mm Hg 
pressure difference. This can create significant positional 
differences in PAP that affect blood flow in the lung in 
various positions, such as upright and lateral positions.
In zone 1 airway pressures exceed PAP and pulmonary 
venous pressures. Zone 1 therefore has no blood flow 
despite ventilation. Normally, zone 1 does not exist, but 
with positive-pressure ventilation or low PAP, as may 
occur under anesthesia or with blood loss, zone 1 may 
develop. In zone 2 airway pressure is more than pulmo-
nary venous pressure, but it is not more than PAP. In 
zone 2 flow is proportional to the difference between PAP 
and airway pressure. In zone 3 PAP and venous pressure 
exceed airway pressure, and a normal blood flow pattern 
results (i.e., flow is proportional to the difference between 
PAP and venous pressure). Position can also be used 
therapeutically to decrease blood flow to abnormal areas 
of the lung, such as unilateral pneumonia, and thereby 
improve gas exchange. Blood flow through the collapsed 
lung during one-lung ventilation is also reduced by this 
physiologic effect.
Pulmonary Edema
Intravascular fluid balance in the lung depends on 
hydrostatic driving forces. Excessive pulmonary capil-
lary pressures cause fluid to leak into the interstitium 
and then into alveoli. Although the pulmonary lymphatic 
system is very effective in clearing fluid, it can be over-
whelmed. Hydrostatic pulmonary edema is expected with 
high left ventricular filling pressures. Pulmonary edema 
occurs as PCWP exceeds 20 mm Hg, although patients 
may tolerate even higher pressures if these pressures 
persist chronically. Pulmonary edema can also occur with 
“capillary leak” from lung injury, such as acid aspiration 
of gastric contents, sepsis, or blood transfusion.
PULMONARY GAS EXCHANGE
Oxygen
Oxygen must pass from the environment to the tissues, 
where it is consumed during aerobic metabolism. Arterial 
hypoxemia is defined as a low partial pressure of oxygen 
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
58
in arterial blood (Pao2). An arbitrary definition of arterial 
hypoxemia (Pao2<60 mm Hg) is commonly used but 
not necessary. Occasionally, arterial hypoxemia is used 
to describe a Pao2 that is low relative to what might be 
expected based on the inspired oxygen concentration 
(Fio2). Arterial hypoxemia (which reflects pulmonary 
gas exchange and denotes low oxygen in the blood) is 
distinguished from hypoxia—low oxygen content in tis-
sues—which reflects circulatory factors.
Mild and even moderate arterial hypoxemia (e.g., at 
high altitude) can be well tolerated and is not usually 
associated with substantial injury or adverse outcomes. 
Anoxia, a nearly complete lack of oxygen, is potentially 
fatal and is often associated with permanent neurologic 
injury, depending on its duration. Arterial hypoxemia is 
most significant when anoxia is threatened, such as with 
apnea, and the difference between the two may be less 
than 1 minute.
Measurements of Oxygenation
Measurements of arterial blood oxygen levels include 
Pao2, oxyhemoglobin saturation (Sao2), and arterial oxy-
gen content (Cao2). Pao2 and Sao2 are related through the 
oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve (Fig. 5.5). Understand-
ing the oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve is facilitated 
by the ability to measure continuous oxyhemoglobin 
saturation with pulse oximetry (Spo2) and measurement 
of Pao2 with arterial blood gas analysis.
Oxyhemoglobin Dissociation Curve
Rightward and leftward shifts of the oxyhemoglobin disso-
ciation curve provide significant homeostatic adaptations 
Fig. 5.5 The oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve is S-shaped and 
relates oxygen partial pressure to the oxyhemoglobin saturation. 
A typical arterial curve is shown in red. The higher Pco2 and the 
lower pH of venous blood cause a rightward shift of the curve and 
facilitate unloading of oxygen in the tissues (blue). Normal adult 
P50, the Po2 at which hemoglobin is 50% saturated, is shown 
(26.8 mm Hg). Normal Pao2 of about 100 mm Hg results in an 
Sao2 of about 98%. Normal Pvo2 is about 40 mm Hg, resulting in 
a saturation of about 75%.
Arterial curve
P50 = 26.8 mm Hg
Venous
 curve
Arterial
point
Venous point
(PO2  40 mm Hg)
0
20
10
40
50
30
60
70
80
90
100
0
20
30
10
40
50
65
70
O2 partial pressure (mm Hg)
Oxyhemoglobin saturation (%)
80
90
100
Left Shift
Right Shift
(P50 <26.8 mm Hg)
(P50 >26.8 mm Hg)
Alkalosis
Acidosis
Hypothermia
Hyperthermia
Decreased 
2,3-diphosphoglycerate 
(stored blood)
Increased 
2,3-diphosphoglycerate 
(chronic arterial hypoxemia 
or anemia)
to changing oxygen availability. P50, the Po2 at which 
hemoglobin is 50% saturated with oxygen, is a measure-
ment of the position of the oxyhemoglobin dissociation 
curve (see Fig. 5.5 and Table 5.2). The normal P50 value 
of adult hemoglobin is 26.8 mm Hg. Other points on the 
curve, such as the normal venous point and points for 
80% and 90% oxygen saturations, may also be clinically 
useful.
As Fig. 5.5 shows, clinical implications of rightward 
and leftward shifts are more significant as Sao2 values 
decrease below 100 mm Hg. Therefore a rightward shift 
causes little change in conditions for loading oxygen 
(essentially the same Sao2 at Po2 of 100 mm Hg), but 
it allows larger amounts of oxygen to dissociate from 
hemoglobin in the tissues where the Sao2 is lower. This 
improves tissue oxygenation. Carbon dioxide and meta-
bolic acid shift the oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve 
rightward, whereas alkalosis shifts it leftward. It should 
be noted that fetal hemoglobin is intrinsically left shifted, 
an adaptation uniquely suited to placental physiology 
(also see Chapter 33).
Oxygen in arterial blood is carried in two ways: bound 
to hemoglobin and dissolved in the plasma. The blood 
oxygen content is the sum of the two forms. Although 
amounts of dissolved oxygen are trivial at normal Po2
levels, at high Fio2 dissolved oxygen can be physiologi-
cally and clinically important. Although under normal 
conditions only a fraction (25%) of the oxygen on hemo-
globin is used, all the dissolved oxygen, added while 
giving supplemental oxygen, can be used.
Arterial Oxygen Content
Cao2 is calculated based on Sao2 and partial pressure plus 
the hemoglobin concentration (Fig. 5.6):
Ca
Sa
Hb
Pa
O
O
O
2
2
2



(
.
)
.
(
)
1 39
0 003
In the equation Hb is the hemoglobin level, 1.39 is the 
capacity of hemoglobin for oxygen (1.39 mL of O2/g of 
Hb fully saturated), and 0.003 mL O2/dL/mm Hg is the 
solubility of oxygen. For example, if Hb = 15 g/dL and 
Table 5.2
Events That Shift the Oxyhemoglobin 
Dissociation Curve
P50, Po2 value at which hemoglobin is 50% saturated with oxygen.
II
Chapter 5 Clinical Cardiac and Pulmonary Physiology
59
Pao2 = 100 mm Hg, resulting in nearly 100% saturation, 
the value of Cao2 is calculated as follows:
Ca
100 15 139
0 003 (100)
mL/dL
O2 





.
(
.
)
.
.
.
20 85
0 3
21 15
Dissolved oxygen can continue to provide additional 
Cao2, which can be clinically significant, with Fio2 of 1.0 
and with hyperbaric oxygen. The oxygen cascade depicts 
the passage of oxygen from the atmosphere to the tissues 
(Fig. 5.7).
Multiwavelength Pulse Oximetry
Complete measurement of oxygen parameters is derived 
not just from analysis of arterial blood gases (Pao2) but 
also from multiwavelength pulse oximetry. Oximetry 
provides measurement of methemoglobin (MetHb) and 
carboxyhemoglobin (COHb). Most blood gas machines are 
now combined with oximeters so that the Sao2 provided 
is a true measured value, not calculated. This is called 
the functional saturation, which is the percentage of 
oxyhemoglobin saturation relative to hemoglobin avail-
able to bind oxygen. The fractional saturation is relative 
to all hemoglobin. Therefore fractional saturation is the 
functional saturation minus MetHb and COHb. Newer 
pulse oximeters can now also measure MetHb and COHb.
Determinants of Alveolar Oxygen Partial Pressure
The alveolar gas equation describes transfer of oxygen 
from the environment into the alveoli:
P
F
P
P
P
RQ
AO
IO
B
H O
CO
2
2
2
2




(
)
/
where Pb is the barometric pressure, Ph2o is the vapor 
pressure of water (47 mm Hg at normal body temperature 
Fig. 5.6 The relationship between Pao2 and oxygen content is also 
sigmoidal because most of the oxygen is bound to hemoglobin. 
Oxygen content at the plateau of the curve (Po2 > 100 mm Hg) 
continues to rise because dissolved oxygen still contributes a small, 
but not negligible, quantity. Hb, Hemoglobin.
CaO2 = SaO2 · 1.39 mL/g · Hb + 0.003 · PaO2
0
4
2
8
10
6
12
14
16
18
20
0
50
100
150
O2 partial pressure (mm Hg)
O2 content (mL/dL)
200
250
Fig. 5.7 The oxygen cascade depicts the physiologic steps as oxygen travels from the atmosphere to the 
tissues. Oxygen starts at 21% in the atmosphere and is initially diluted with water vapor to about 150 mm 
Hg, Pio2. Alveolar Po2 (Pao2) is determined by the alveolar gas equation. Diffusion equilibrates Po2 between 
the alveolus and the capillary. The A-a (alveolar-to-arterial) gradient occurs with intrapulmonary shunt and 
ventilation-to-perfusion (V/Q) mismatch. Oxygen consumption then reduces Po2 to tissue levels (about 
40 mm Hg).
O2
Consumption
O2 partial pressure (mm Hg)
Alveolar
(PAO2)
Tissue PO2
PIO2 = FIO2 • (760 – 47) = 150 mm Hg
Diffusion
A-a Gradient
(shunt)
Atmosphere
PAO2 =
PIO2 – PaCO2/RQ
0
20
60
80
40
100
120
140
160
180
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
60
of 37°C), and RQ is the respiratory quotient (the ratio of 
carbon dioxide production to oxygen consumption). For 
example, while breathing 100% oxygen (Fio2 = 1.0) at 
sea level (Pb = 760 mm Hg) and the Ph2o = 47 mm Hg 
with Paco2 = 40 mm Hg, the alveolar Po2 (Pao2) is calcu-
lated as follows. RQ is usually assumed to be approxi-
mately 0.8 on a normal diet.
P
10 760
0 8
mm Hg
O
A
2 





. (
)
/ .
47
40
713
50
663
The alveolar gas equation describes the way in which 
inspired oxygen and ventilation determine Pao2. It also 
describes the way in which supplemental oxygen improves 
oxygenation. One clinical consequence of this relationship 
is that supplemental oxygen can easily compensate for 
and mask the adverse effects of hypoventilation (Fig. 5.8).
A sound understanding of the differential diagnosis 
of arterial hypoxemia is vital for anesthesia providers 
because of the common and life-threatening nature of 
this condition. From an oxygen supply perspective, low 
barometric pressure is a culprit at high altitude. Though 
modern anesthesia workstations have multiple safety 
mechanisms to prevent delivery of hypoxic gas mixtures, 
death from delivery of gases other than oxygen is still 
occasionally reported. This may be because of errors in 
pipeline connections made during construction or remod-
eling. During patient transport, delivery of an inadequate 
Fio2 may occur when oxygen tanks run out or with failure 
to recognize accidental disconnection of a self-inflating 
bag (Ambu) from its oxygen source (also see Chapter 15).
From both an oxygen supply and demand perspec-
tive, apnea is an important cause of arterial hypoxemia, 
as storage of oxygen in the lung is of prime importance 
in delaying the appearance of arterial hypoxemia in 
humans. Storage of oxygen on hemoglobin is secondary, 
because use of this oxygen requires significant oxyhemo-
globin desaturation. In contrast to voluntary breath-
holding, apnea during anesthesia or sedation occurs at 
functional residual capacity (FRC). This substantially 
reduces the time to oxyhemoglobin desaturation com-
pared with a breath-hold at total lung capacity.
The time can be estimated for Sao2 to reach 90% when 
the FRC is 2.5 L and the Pao2 is 100 mm Hg. Normal 
oxygen consumption is about 300 mL/min, although 
this is somewhat lower during anesthesia. It would take 
only about 30 seconds under these room air conditions 
to develop arterial hypoxemia. After breathing 100% 
oxygen, it might take 7 minutes to reach an Sao2 of 90%. 
The time it takes to develop arterial hypoxemia after 
breathing 100% oxygen varies. Desaturation begins when 
enough alveoli have collapsed and intrapulmonary shunt 
develops, not simply when oxygen stores have become 
exhausted. Obese patients develop arterial hypoxemia 
with apnea substantially faster than lean patients (also 
see Chapter 29).
Venous Admixture
Venous admixture describes physiologic causes of arterial 
hypoxemia for which Pao2 is normal. The alveolar-to-
arterial oxygen (A-a) gradient reflects venous admixture. 
Normal A-a gradients are 5 to 10 mm Hg, but they 
increase with age. For example, if the arterial Po2 while 
breathing 100% oxygen were measured as 310 mm Hg, 
the A-a gradient could be calculated from the previous 
example.
A-agradient
P
Pa
mm Hg
310 mm Hg
353 mm Hg
AO
O





2
2
663
A picture of gas exchange can be accomplished math-
ematically by integrating all the effects of shunting, sup-
plemental oxygen, and the oxyhemoglobin dissociation 
curve to create “isoshunt” diagrams (Fig. 5.9). Although 
calculating a shunt fraction may be the most exact way 
to quantitate problems in oxygenation, it requires infor-
mation only available from a PA catheter and therefore is 
not always clinically useful. A-a gradients are clinically 
simpler and more useful to derive but do not represent a 
constant measurement of oxygenation with different Fio2
levels. The A-a gradient is probably most useful in room 
air. The P/F ratio (Pao2/Fio2) is a simple and useful meas-
urement of oxygenation that remains more consistent at 
high Fio2 (Fig. 5.10).18
Intrapulmonary Shunt
An intrapulmonary shunt is one of the most important 
causes of an increased A-a gradient and the development 
Fig. 5.8 Hypoventilation decreases oxygenation, as determined 
by the alveolar gas equation. The blue curve shows what is 
expected for room air (Fio2 = 0.21). High Paco2 further shifts 
the oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve to the right. However, 
as little as 30% oxygen can completely negate the effects of 
hypoventilation (red curve).
FiO2 = 0.30
Room air, FiO2 = 0.21
0
20
10
40
50
30
60
70
80
90
100
30
40
45
35
50
55
60
65
Arterial PCO2 (mm Hg)
70
75
80
Oxyhemoglobin saturation (%)
II
Chapter 5 Clinical Cardiac and Pulmonary Physiology
61
of arterial hypoxemia. In the presence of an intrapulmo-
nary shunt mixed venous blood is not exposed to alveo-
lar gas, and it continues through the lungs to mix with 
oxygenated blood from normal areas of the lung. This 
mixing lowers the Pao2. Clinically, shunting occurs when 
alveoli are not ventilated, as with atelectasis, or when 
alveoli are filled with fluid, as with pneumonia or pulmo-
nary edema. The quantitative effect of an intrapulmonary 
shunt is described by the shunt equation:
Qs/Qt
Cco
Cao
Cc o
Cvo





(
)/(
)
2
2
2
2
In the equation Qs/Qt is the shunt flow relative to total 
flow (i.e., shunt fraction), C is the oxygen content, c′ is 
end-capillary blood (for a theoretical normal alveolus), a 
is arterial blood, and v is mixed venous blood.
Fig. 5.9 The effect of intrapulmonary shunting and Fio2 on 
Pao2 (A) and Sao2 (B) is shown graphically at shunt fractions 
from 10% (mild) to 40% (severe). Assumed values for these 
calculations are hemoglobin, 14 g/dL; Paco2, 40 mm Hg; arterial-
to-venous oxygen content difference, 4 mL O2/dL; and sea-
level atmospheric pressure, 760 mm Hg. Increased Fio2 still 
substantially improves oxygenation at high shunt fractions but is 
unable to fully correct it.
82
86
84
88
90
94
92
98
96
100
0.4
0.5
0.3
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Fraction inspired O2
Arterial PO2 (mm Hg) 
1.0
0
200
100
300
400
600
500
0.2
0.4
0.5
0.3
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Oxyhemoglobin saturation (%)
A
B
Shunt = 10%
Shunt = 20%
Shunt = 30%
Shunt = 40%
0.2
Ventilation–Perfusion Mismatch
Ventilation–perfusion (V˙/Q˙) mismatch is similar to intrapul-
monary shunt (V˙/Q˙ = 0), with some important distinctions. 
In V˙/Q˙ mismatch disparity between the amount of venti-
lation and perfusion in various alveoli leads to areas of 
high V˙/Q˙ (i.e., well-ventilated alveoli) and areas of low 
V˙/Q˙ (i.e., poorly ventilated alveoli). Because of the shape 
of the oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve, the improved 
oxygenation in well-ventilated areas cannot compensate 
for the low Po2 in the poorly ventilated areas, resulting in 
lower Pao2 or arterial hypoxemia.
Clinically, in V˙/Q˙ mismatch administering 100%oxy-
gen can achieve a Po2 on the plateau of the oxyhemo-
globin dissociation curve even in poorly ventilated 
alveoli. Conversely, administering 100% oxygen in the 
presence of an intrapulmonary shunt only adds more dis-
solved oxygen in the normally perfused alveoli, although 
as seen in Fig. 5.9, this may result in more improvement 
in oxygenation than is often appreciated. Arterial hypox-
emia remaining despite administration of 100% oxygen 
is always caused by the presence of an intrapulmonary 
shunt.
Diffusion Impairment
Diffusion impairment is not equivalent to low diffus-
ing capacity. For diffusion impairment to cause an A-a 
gradient, equilibrium has not occurred between the Po2
in the alveolus and the Po2 in pulmonary capillary blood. 
This rarely occurs, even in patients with limited diffusing 
capacity. The small A-a gradient that can result from dif-
fusion impairment is easily eliminated with supplemental 
oxygen, making this a clinically unimportant problem. 
Clinically significant diffusion impairment can occur with 
exercise at extreme altitude, owing both to the smaller 
driving oxygen partial pressure and the limited time for 
equilibrium because of the rapid transit of blood through 
the pulmonary capillaries.
Venous Oxygen Saturation
Low Sv–o2 causes a subtle but important effect when 
intrapulmonary shunt is already present.19 Shunt is a 
mixture of venous blood and blood from normal regions 
of the lungs. If the Sv–o2 is lower, the resulting mixture 
must have a lower Pao2. Low CO may lower Sv–o2 sig-
nificantly. This changes the way in which we interpret 
intrapulmonary shunt in different clinical conditions. For 
example, in sepsis when the Sv–o2 may be quite high, the 
shunt fraction may be higher than expected; high Sv–o2
may be described as covering up a high shunt fraction.
Carbon Dioxide
Carbon dioxide is produced in the tissues and removed 
from the lungs by ventilation. Carbon dioxide is carried in 
the blood as dissolved gas, as bicarbonate, and as a small 
amount bound to hemoglobin as carbaminohemoglobin. 
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
62
Unlike the oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve, the dis-
sociation curve for carbon dioxide is essentially linear.
Hypercapnia
New-onset hypercapnia (i.e., high Paco2) may be a sign 
of respiratory difficulty or oversedation with opioids. 
Although hypercapnia itself may not be dangerous, Paco2
values greater than 80 mm Hg that are uncompensated 
may cause CO2 narcosis, possibly contributing to delayed 
awakening in the postanesthesia care unit. The greatest 
concern of hypercapnia is that it may indicate a risk of 
impending respiratory failure and apnea, in which arte-
rial hypoxemia and anoxia can rapidly ensue. Although 
the presence of hypercapnia may be obvious if capnog-
raphy is used, this monitor is not always available, and 
substantial hypercapnia may go unnoticed. Supplemental 
oxygen can prevent arterial hypoxemia despite severe 
hypercapnia, and an analysis of arterial blood gases 
would not necessarily be performed if hypercapnia were 
not suspected (see Fig. 5.8).
The organ systems affected by hypercapnia include 
the lungs (pulmonary vasoconstriction, right shift of 
hemoglobin–oxygen dissociation curve), kidneys (renal 
bicarbonate resorption), central nervous system (somno-
lence, cerebral vasodilation), and heart (coronary artery 
vasodilation, decreased cardiac contractility).20 21
Determinants of Arterial Carbon Dioxide Partial Pressure
Paco2 is a balance of production and removal. If removal 
exceeds production, Paco2 decreases. If production 
exceeds removal, Paco2 increases. The resulting Paco2 is 
expressed by an alveolar carbon dioxide equation:
Pa
k
V
V
CO
CO
A
2
2



/
In the equation k is a constant (0.863) that corrects 
units, Vco2 is carbon dioxide production, and Va is alveo-
lar ventilation.
Rebreathing
Because breathing circuits with rebreathing properties 
are frequently used in anesthesia, increased inspired Pco2
concentrations are a potential cause of hypercapnia. 
Exhausted carbon dioxide absorbents and malfunction-
ing expiratory valves on the anesthesia delivery circuit 
are possible causes of rebreathing in the operating room 
that are easily detected with capnography. Use of certain 
transport breathing circuits may be the most common 
cause of clinically significant rebreathing, which may be 
unrecognized because capnography is not routinely used 
during patient transport from the operating room.
Increased Carbon Dioxide Production
Several important physiologic causes of increased car-
bon dioxide production may cause hypercapnia under 
anesthesia (Box 5.2). The anesthesia provider should not 
view CO2 production in terms of cellular production, but 
rather as the pulmonary excretion of CO2. This is how 
it would be measured clinically and how it would be 
detected by the homeostatic mechanisms of the body. 
Other brief increases in CO2 production may occur when 
Fig. 5.10 Despite a constant shunt fraction of 0.3 (30%), the A-a gradient is much higher at high Fio2, 
indicating problems in its usefulness as a measurement of oxygenation with different Fio2 values. The 
ratio of Pao2 to Fio2 (the P/F ratio) is remarkably constant at high Fio2, making it a useful measurement of 
oxygenation when the gold standard, shunt fraction, is not available.
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Fraction inspired O2
A-a gradient, PaO2 or PaO2/FIO2 ratio (mm Hg)
PaO2/FiO2 (P/F ratio)
PaO2
A-a gradient
Shunt = 30%
II
Chapter 5 Clinical Cardiac and Pulmonary Physiology
63
administering sodium bicarbonate, which is converted 
into CO2, or when releasing a tourniquet, where carbon 
dioxide has accumulated in the tissues of the leg and then 
returns to the circulation.
Increased Dead Space
Dead space, or “wasted ventilation,” refers to areas receiv-
ing ventilation that do not participate in gas exchange. 
Dead space is further categorized as anatomic, alveolar, 
and physiologic (total) dead space. Anatomic dead space 
represents areas of the tracheobronchial tree that are not 
involved in gas exchange. This includes equipment dead 
space, such as the endotracheal tube and tubing distal to 
the Y-connector of the anesthesia delivery circuit. Alveo-
lar dead space represents alveoli that do not participate in 
gas exchange owing to lack of blood flow. Physiologic or 
total dead space represents the sum of anatomic and alve-
olar dead space. Most pathologically significant changes 
in dead space represent increases in alveolar dead space.
Dead space is increased in many clinical conditions. 
Emphysema and other end-stage lung diseases, such as 
cystic fibrosis, are often characterized by substantial 
dead space. Pulmonary embolism is a potential cause of 
significant increases in dead space. Physiologic processes 
that decrease PAP, such as hemorrhagic shock, can be 
expected to increase dead space (increased zone 1 through 
decreased arterial pressure). Increased airway pressure 
and positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) can also 
increase dead space (increased zone 1 through increased 
airway pressure). Dead space has been shown to be an 
important prognostic indicator in patients with ARDS and 
can help guide PEEP management22 (also see Chapter 41).
Quantitative estimates of dead space are described by 
the Bohr equation, which expresses the ratio of dead space 
ventilation (VD) relative to tidal ventilation (Vt):
V /V
Pa
P
/Pa
D
T
CO
ECO
CO




(
)
2
2
2
where Peco2 is the mixed-expired carbon dioxide.
For example, if the Paco2 = 40mmHg and the 
Peco2 = 20mmHg during controlled ventilation of the 
lungs, the Vd/Vt can be calculated as follows:
V / V
40
20
0
D
T






(
)/
/
4
20 40
0 5
Box 5.2 Causes of Increased Carbon Dioxide Production
Fever
Malignant hyperthermia
Systemic absorption during laparoscopy procedures 
(physiologically similar to increased production)
Thyroid storm
Tourniquet release
Administration of sodium bicarbonate
Fig. 5.11 Carbon dioxide has a hyperbolic relationship with 
ventilation. The depicted curves are simulated with a normal 
resting carbon dioxide production (250 mL/min), low carbon 
dioxide production (125 mL/min, as during anesthesia), and 
increased carbon dioxide production (500 mL/min, as during 
moderate exercise). The value of physiologic dead space is assumed 
to be 30% in these calculations.
0
20
10
40
50
30
60
70
80
90
100
0
5
10
15
Minute ventilation (L/min)
20
25
VCO2 = 500 mL/min
VCO2 = 
125 mL/min
VCO2 = 
250 mL/min
Arterial PCO2 (mm Hg) 
Some physiologic dead space (25%−30%) is con-
sidered normal because some anatomic dead space is 
always present. The Paco2−Petco2 gradient is a useful 
indication of the presence of alveolar dead space. How-
ever, this gradient will change as Paco2 changes with 
hyperventilation or hypoventilation even when dead 
space is constant.
Hypoventilation
Decreased minute ventilation is the most important and 
common cause of hypercapnia (Fig. 5.11). This may be 
because of decreased tidal volume, breathing frequency, 
or both. Alveolar ventilation (V˙ a) combines minute 
ventilation and dead space (V˙ a = V˙ t – V˙ d); however, 
it is more clinically useful to separate these processes. 
Ventilatory depressant effects of anesthetic drugs are a 
common cause of hypoventilation. Although increased 
minute ventilation can often completely compensate for 
elevated carbon dioxide production, rebreathing, or dead 
space, there is no physiologically useful compensation 
for inadequate minute ventilation.
If alveolar ventilation decreases by one half, Paco2
should double (see Fig. 5.11). This change occurs over 
several minutes as a new steady state develops. CO2
changes during apnea are more complicated. During 
the first minute of apnea, Paco2 increases from a nor-
mal of 40 mm Hg to 46 mm Hg (the normal Pvco2). 
This increase may be higher and more rapid in patients 
with smaller lung volumes or high arterial-to-venous 
carbon dioxide differences. After the first minute, Paco2
increases more slowly as carbon dioxide production 
adds carbon dioxide to the blood, at about 3 mm Hg 
per minute.
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
64
Differential Diagnosis of Increased Arterial Carbon Dioxide 
Partial Pressure
Increased Paco2 values can be analyzed by assessing 
minute ventilation, performing capnography, and meas-
uring an arterial blood gas value. Capnography can eas-
ily detect rebreathing. A clinical assessment of minute 
ventilation by physical examination and as measured 
by most mechanical ventilators should be adequate. 
Comparison of end-tidal Pco2 with Paco2 can identify 
abnormal alveolar dead space. Abnormal carbon dioxide 
production can be inferred. However, significant abnor-
malities of carbon dioxide physiology often are unrec-
ognized when Paco2 is normal, because increased minute 
ventilation can compensate for substantial increases in 
dead space and carbon dioxide production. Noticing the 
presence of increased dead space when minute ventila-
tion is increased in volume and Paco2 is 40 mm Hg is 
just as important as noticing abnormal dead space when 
the Paco2 is 80 mm Hg and minute ventilation is normal.
PULMONARY MECHANICS
Pulmonary mechanics concern pressure, volume, and flow 
relationships in the lung and bronchial tree (Fig.5.12). 
An understanding of pulmonary mechanics is essential 
for managing the ventilated patient. Pressures in the air-
way are routinely measured or sensed by the anesthesia 
provider delivering positive-pressure ventilation. Differ-
entiation between static and dynamic properties can lead 
to important changes in patient management.
Static Properties
The lung is made of elastic tissue that stretches under 
pressure (Fig. 5.13). Surface tension has a significant role 
in the compliance of the lung because of the air–fluid 
interface in the alveoli. Surfactant decreases surface ten-
sion and stabilizes small alveoli, which would otherwise 
tend to collapse.
The chest wall has its own compliance curve. At 
FRC, the chest wall tends to expand, but negative (sub-
atmospheric) intrapleural pressure keeps the chest wall 
collapsed. The lungs tend to collapse, but they are held 
expanded because of the pressure difference from the 
airways to the intrapleural pressure. FRC is the natural 
balance point between the lungs tending to collapse and 
chest wall tending to expand.
Dynamic Properties and Airway Resistance
Airway resistance is mainly determined by the radius of 
the airway, but turbulent gas flow may make resistance 
worse. A number of clinical processes can affect airway 
resistance (Box 5.3). Resistance in small airways is physi-
ologically different, because they have no cartilaginous 
Fig. 5.12 Lung volume is shown as a function of time (A) in a 
typical volume-controlled ventilator with constant flow rates. Lung 
volume increases at a constant rate during inspiration because of 
constant flow. Exhalation occurs with a passive relaxation curve. 
The lower panel (B) shows the development of pressure over 
time. Pressure is produced from a static compliance component 
(see Fig. 5.13) and a resistance component. If flow is held during 
an inspiratory pause, a plateau pressure is reached, where there 
is no resistive pressure component. In this example peak airway 
pressure (PAP) is 24 cm H2O, and positive end-expiratory pressure 
(PEEP) is 5 cm H2O. Dynamic compliance is tidal volume (Vt): (Vt)/
(PAP −PEEP) = 37 mL/cm H2O. Plateau pressure (Pplat) is 21 cm 
H2O, and static compliance is Vt/(Pplat −PEEP) = 44 mL/cm H2O.
0
0
200
100
400
500
300
600
700
800
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
0
5
15
20
10
25
30
0
2
4
6
8
Time (s)
10
12
14
Plateau 
pressure 
= 21 cm H2O
PEEP = 
5 cm H2O
Airway pressure (cm H2O)
Lung volume (mL)
Peak airway pressure 
= 24 cm H2O
A
B
Box 5.3 Factors Influencing Airway Resistance
Radius of the airways
Smooth muscle tone
Bronchospasm
Inflammation of the airways (asthma, chronic bronchitis)
Foreign bodies
Compression of airways
Turbulent gas flow (helium, a temporizing measure)
Anesthesia equipment
structure or smooth muscle. Unlike capillaries, which have 
positive pressure inside to keep them open, small airways 
have zero (atmospheric) pressure during spontaneous 
II
Chapter 5 Clinical Cardiac and Pulmonary Physiology
65
ventilation. However, these airways are kept open by the 
same forces (i.e., pressure inside is greater than the pres-
sure outside) that keep capillaries open. Negative pressure 
is transmitted from the intrapleural pressure through the 
structure of lung, and this pressure difference keeps small 
airways open. When a disease process, such as emphy-
sema, makes pleural pressure less negative, resistance in 
the small airways is increased, and dynamic compression 
occurs during exhalation.
During positive-pressure ventilation, resistance in 
anesthesia breathing equipment or airways manifests as 
elevated airway pressures, because flow through resist-
ance causes a pressure change. Distinguishing airway 
resistance effects from static compliance components is 
a useful first step in the differential diagnosis of high 
peak airway pressures. This is facilitated by anesthesia 
machines that are equipped to provide an inspiratory 
pause. During ventilation, airway pressure reaches a peak 
inspiratory pressure, but when ventilation is paused, the 
pressure component from gas flow and resistance disap-
pears, and the airway pressure decreases toward a plateau 
pressure (see Fig. 5.12).
CONTROL OF BREATHING
Anesthesia providers are in a unique position to observe 
ventilatory control mechanisms because most drugs 
administered for sedation and anesthesia depress 
breathing.
Fig. 5.13 A static compliance curve of a normal lung has a slight S shape. A slightly higher pressure can 
be required to open alveoli at low lung volumes (i.e., beginning of the curve), whereas higher distending 
pressures are needed as the lung is overdistended. Static compliance is measured as the change (Δ) in 
volume divided by the change in pressure (inspiratory pressure [PIP] −positive end-expiratory pressure 
[PEEP]), which is 46 mL/cm H2O in this example.
100%
50%
0%
Static compliance = V/(PIP – PEEP) =
800 mL/17.5 cm H2O = 46 mL/cm H2O
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
0
10
20
30
40
P
V
50
60
Airway pressure (cm H2O)
70
Lung volume (mL)
Central Integration and Rhythm Generation
Specific areas of the brainstem are involved in generat-
ing the respiratory rhythm, processing afferent signal 
information, and changing the efferent output to the 
inspiratory and expiratory muscles.
Central Chemoreceptors
Superficial areas on the ventrolateral medullary surface 
respond to pH and Pco2. Carbon dioxide is in rapid 
equilibrium with carbonic acid and therefore imme-
diately affects the local pH surrounding the central 
chemoreceptors. Although the signal is transduced 
by protons, not carbon dioxide directly, these chemo-
receptors are described clinically as carbon dioxide 
responsive. The central chemoreceptors are protected 
from rapid changes in metabolic pH by the blood–brain 
barrier.
Peripheral Chemoreceptors
Carotid bodies are the primary peripheral chemore-
ceptors in humans; aortic bodies have no significant 
role. Low Po2, high Pco2, and low pH stimulate the 
carotid bodies.23 Unlike the central chemoreceptors, 
metabolic acids immediately affect peripheral chemo-
receptors. Because of high blood flow, peripheral 
chemoreceptors are effectively at arterial, not venous, 
blood values.
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
66
Hypercapnic Ventilatory Response
Ventilation increases dramatically as Paco2 is increased. 
In the presence of high Po2 values most of this ventila-
tory response results from the central chemoreceptors, 
whereas in the presence of room air about one-third 
of the response results from peripheral chemoreceptor 
stimulation. The ventilatory response to carbon dioxide is 
moderately linear, although at Paco2 levels below resting 
values, minute ventilation does not tend to go to zero 
because of an “awake” drive to breathe (Fig. 5.14). At a 
high Paco2 value, minute ventilation is eventually limited 
by maximal minute ventilation.
Decreasing Paco2 during anesthesia, as produced by 
assisted ventilation, results in a point at which ventila-
tion ceases, called the apneic threshold. As CO2 rises, ven-
tilation returns at the apneic threshold and then stabilizes 
at a Paco2 setpoint that is about 5 mm Hg higher.
The brainstem response to carbon dioxide is slow, 
requiring about 5 minutes to reach 90% of steady-state 
ventilation. When allowing the Paco2 to rise in an apneic 
patient, it may take a noticeably long time to stabilize 
minute ventilation, which is a direct consequence of the 
dynamics of the central ventilatory drive.
Hypoxic Ventilatory Response
Ventilation increases as Pao2 and Sao2 decrease, reflecting 
stimulation of the peripheral chemoreceptors. The central 
response to hypoxemia paradoxically results in decreased 
minute ventilation, called hypoxic ventilatory decline
(HVD). The timing and combination of these effects mean 
Fig. 5.14 The hypercapnic ventilatory response (HCVR) is 
measured as the slope of the plot of Pco2 versus minute ventilation 
(VE). End-tidal Pco2 is usually substituted for Paco2 for clinical 
studies. The apneic threshold is the Pco2 at which ventilation is 
zero. It can be extrapolated from the curve, but it is difficult to 
measure in awake volunteers, although it is easy to observe in 
patients under general anesthesia. A depressed carbon dioxide 
response results from opioids, which lower the slope and raise the 
apneic threshold.
0
10
5
15
20
25
30
35
40
30
35
40
45
50
Arterial PCO2 (mm Hg)
55
60
Normal CO2 response
Slope = V•
E/PCO2
= 1.5 L/min/mm Hg
Depressed CO2
response
Minute ventilation (L/min)
Fig. 5.15 Hypoxic ventilatory response (HVR) expressed relative to 
Sao2 is approximately linear, which is simpler than the curvilinear 
response expressed as a function of Pao2. HVR is the slope of the 
linear plot. HVR is higher at higher carbon dioxide concentrations. 
Both absolute ventilation and the slope are shifted. Low Paco2
likewise lowers HVR.
HVR, slope = V•
E/SaO2
= 0.8 L/min/%
HVR at higher PaCO2
0
20
10
40
50
30
60
70
80
50
60
65
55
70
75
80
85
Arterial oxyhemoglobin saturation, SaO2 (%) 
90
95
100
Minute ventilation (L/min)
that in prolonged arterial hypoxemia, ventilation rises 
to an initial peak, reflecting the rapid response of the 
peripheral chemoreceptors, and then decreases to an inter-
mediate plateau in 15 to 20 minutes, reflecting the slower 
addition of HVD.
Although it is Po2 that affects the carotid body, it is 
easier to consider the hypoxic ventilatory response in 
terms of oxyhemoglobin desaturation because minute 
ventilation changes linearly with Sao2 (Fig. 5.15). The 
effects of hypoxia and hypercapnia on the carotid body 
are synergistic. At high Paco2 levels, the response to 
hypoxia is much larger, whereas low Paco2 levels can 
dramatically decrease responsiveness. Unlike the hyper-
capnic ventilatory response, the response to hypoxia is 
rapid and takes only seconds to appear.
Effects of Anesthesia
Opioids, sedative-hypnotics, and volatile anesthetics 
have dose-dependent depressant effects on ventilation 
and ventilatory control (also see Chapters 7–9). Opioid 
receptors are present on neurons considered responsible 
for respiratory rhythm generation. Sedative-hypnotics 
work primarily on γ-aminobutyric acid A receptors 
(GABAA), which provide inhibitory input in multiple 
neurons of the respiratory system. Volatile anesthetics 
decrease excitatory neurotransmission. All these drugs 
exert most of their depressant effects in the central inte-
gratory area and therefore clinically appear to decrease 
the hypoxic and hypercapnic ventilatory responses 
similarly. Specific effects of drugs on peripheral chemo-
receptors include the inhibitory effects of dopamine and 
the slight excitatory effects of dopaminergic blockers 
such as haloperidol.
AL GRAWANY
II
Chapter 5 Clinical Cardiac and Pulmonary Physiology
67
Disorders of Ventilatory Control
Neonates with a history of prematurity and of post-
conceptual age <60 weeks may have episodes of apnea 
after anesthesia. Likewise, sudden infant death syn-
drome may be a result of immature ventilatory control 
systems. Ondine's curse, originally described after 
surgery near the upper cervical spinal cord, results in 
profound hypoventilation during sleep and anesthesia 
caused by abnormalities in the central integratory sys-
tem that seem to blunt the hypoxic and hypercapnic 
ventilatory responses. Idiopathic varieties of Ondine's 
curse have occurred in children and are referred to as 
primary central alveolar hypoventilation syndromes. 
Morbidly obese patients and those with sleep apnea may 
exhibit abnormalities of ventilatory control (also see 
Chapter 48).
Periodic breathing, a pattern in which groups of 
sequential breaths are separated by apneic episodes, 
is commonly observed during drug-induced sedation. 
Mechanistically, this is most likely when peripheral 
chemoreceptors are activated by mild arterial hypoxemia. 
Continual overcorrection and undercorrection of the Pao2
leads to oscillations of Paco2 and Sao2. Periodic breathing 
is also common during sleep at higher altitudes.
Identifying the Cause of Respiratory Failure
With a solid foundation of respiratory physiology, the 
anesthesia provider is particularly well suited to rapid, 
accurate diagnosis and correction of acute respiratory 
failure. The first step is differentiating between hypox-
emic, hypercarbic, and mixed etiologies. Once the pri-
mary insult is identified, the differential diagnosis can 
focus on whether the issue is external or intrinsic to 
the patient, the result of dead space or shunt, or any 
combination of the factors discussed earlier. Addition-
ally, understanding the signal pathways that detect and 
compensate for hypoxemia and/or hypercarbia allow for 
a deeper understanding of confusing physiologic states, 
such as the “silent hypoxia” that was described in the 
early days of the COVID-19 pandemic.14
INTEGRATION OF THE HEART AND LUNGS
Supply and Delivery
The interrelationship between the heart and lungs is sug-
gested by the Fick equation, which relates oxygen con-
sumption and oxygen needs at the tissue level:
V
C
Ca
Cv
O
O
O
O



2
2
2
(
)
where Vo2 is oxygen consumption, Cao2 is the arterial 
oxygen content, Cvo2 is the mixed venous oxygen con-
tent, and CO is cardiac output.
Oxygen Delivery
Oxygen delivery (Do2) is the total amount of oxygen sup-
plied to tissues and is a function of CO and Cao2:
D
CO
Ca
O
O
2
2


Do2 can be limited by decreases in CO or Cao2. Cao2
can be limited by anemia or hypoxemia. It is important to 
think of supply and delivery as being inextricably linked. 
Under ideal circumstances, hypoxemia can be compen-
sated for by increased CO. This is an important concept 
for anesthesia providers to recognize and use when car-
ing for the patient with hypoxemia.14
Oxygen Extraction
Different indices can be used to assess how much oxygen 
is removed from blood by tissues to meet their metabolic 
demand. Mixed venous oxygen saturation (Sv–o2) is nor-
mally about 75%. If tissues extract more oxygen, Sv–o2
decreases. However, with high Fio2, Sv–o2 may increase 
because of the added amount of dissolved oxygen, even 
though true extraction has not changed. The arteriovenous 
oxygen content difference (Cao2 −Cv–o2) is independent of 
changes in Fio2 and is therefore a useful measurement 
of the balance of oxygen supply and demand. On the 
other hand, the arteriovenous oxygen content difference 
decreases in anemia because extracting the same percent-
age of oxygen means extracting less total oxygen because 
of the lower hemoglobin concentration. The most reliable 
figure is the calculated oxygen extraction ratio:
O extraction
Ca
Cv
Ca
2
2
2
2
O
O
O


(
_
)/
Anemia
An example of threatened oxygen supply is anemia. To 
adapt to anemia, the body can increase CO or extract 
more oxygen. The normal physiologic response is to 
increase CO and maintain Do2. Increased HR and SV 
are responsible for this compensation. However, during 
anesthesia with a near-absent HR response, increased 
oxygen extraction is a more important mechanism of 
compensation.24
Metabolic Demand
Increased oxygen consumption is usually met with a 
combination of increased CO and increased oxygen 
extraction. Whereas oxygen consumption is usually con-
stant and relatively low under anesthesia, recovery from 
anesthesia may be associated with significant increases 
in metabolic demands. Shivering and early ambulation 
after outpatient surgery are stresses that may affect 
patients still recovering from anesthesia or after signifi-
cant blood loss. Increased minute ventilation is required 
to meet increased oxygen needs and to eliminate the 
extra carbon dioxide produced.
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
68
Mechanical Relationships
The relationship between the heart and lungs is further 
highlighted during periods of extreme physiologic stress 
such as refractory hypoxemia. Whereas most treatment 
approaches for refractory hypoxemia have little effect 
on the heart (e.g., lung-protective ventilation, neuro-
muscular blockade), lung recruitment maneuvers and 
prone positioning can lead to hemodynamic compro-
mise.25–27 Given their colocation in the thoracic cavity, it 
is not surprising that the cardiac and respiratory systems 
have a mechanical relationship. In an underfilled state 
a recruitment maneuver (e.g., a sustained inspiration of 
30 seconds) or a switch to prone positioning, although 
helpful for improving V/Q matching, may impede 
venous return to the right heart, leading to clinically 
significant hypotension. More commonly, a switch to 
positive-pressure ventilation will increase RV afterload 
while decreasing LV afterload through a reduction in LV 
wall stress.
REFERENCES
1. Berne RM, Levy MN. Cardiovascular 
Physiology. 8th ed. Mosby; 2001.
2. Lumb AB, Thomas CR. Nunn and Lumb's 
Applied Respiratory Physiology. 9th ed: 
Elsevier; 2021.
3. West JB. Respiratory Physiology: The 
Essentials. 9th ed. Wolters Kluwer 
Health/Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 
2012.
4. van Klei WA, Hollmann MW, Sneyd 
JR. The value of anaesthesiologists 
in the COVID-19 pandemic: A model 
for our future practice? Br J Anaesth. 
2020;125(5):652–655. 
doi:10.1016/j.
bja.2020.08.014.
5. Walsh M, Devereaux PJ, Garg AX, etal. 
Relationship between intraoperative 
mean arterial pressure and clinical out-
comes after noncardiac surgery: Toward 
an empirical definition of hypotension. 
Anesthesiology. 2013;119(3):507–515. 
doi:10.1097/ALN.0b013e3182a10e26.
6. Wesselink EM, Kappen TH, Torn HM, 
Slooter AJC, van Klei WA. Intraopera-
tive hypotension and the risk of postop-
erative adverse outcomes: A systematic 
review. Br J Anaesth. 2018;121(4):706–
721. doi:10.1016/j.bja.2018.04.036.
7. Mathis MR, Naik BI, Freundlich R, etal. 
Preoperative risk and the association 
between hypotension and postopera-
tive acute kidney injury. Anesthesiology. 
2020;132:461–475.
8. Liem VG, Hoeks SE, Mol KH, etal. 
Postoperative hypotension after non-
cardiac surgery and the association 
with myocardial injury. Anesthesiology. 
2020;133:519–522.
9. Funk DJ, Jacobsohn E, Kumar A. The 
role of venous return in critical illness 
and shock-part I: Physiology. Crit Care 
Med. 2013;41(1):255–262. doi:10.1097/
CCM.0b013e3182772ab6.
10. Gelman S, Warner DS, Warner MA. 
Venous function and central venous 
pressure: A physiologic story. Anesthesi-
ology. 2008;108(4):735–748. doi:10.1097/
ALN.0b013e3181672607.
11. Michard F. Changes in arterial pres-
sure during mechanical ventilation. 
Anesthesiology. 2005;103(2):419–428. 
doi:10.1097/00000542-200508000-
00026.
12. Myatra SN, Prabu NR, Divatia JV, 
Monnet X, Kulkarni AP, Teboul JL. 
The changes in pulse pressure varia-
tion or stroke volume variation after a 
“tidal volume challenge” reliably pre-
dict fluid responsiveness during low 
tidal volume ventilation. Crit Care 
Med. 2017 Mar;45(3):415–421. doi:
10.1097/CCM.0000000000002183. 
PMID: 27922879.
13. Topalian S, Ginsberg F, Parrillo JE. Cardio-
genic shock. Crit Care Med. 2008;36(1):
S66. doi:10.1097/01.CCM.0000296268.
57993.90.
14. Bickler PE, Feiner JR, Lipnick MS, 
McKleroy W. “Silent” presentation of 
hypoxemia and cardiorespiratory com-
pensation in COVID-19. Anesthesiol-
ogy. 2021;134(2):262–269. doi:10.1097/
ALN.0000000000003578.
15. Ruopp NF. Cockrill BA. Diagnosis and 
treatment of pulmonary arterial hyper-
tension: A review. JAMA. 2022 Apr 
12;327(14):1379–1391. 
doi:10.1001/
jama.2022.4402. PMID: 35412560.
16. Mishra A, Reed RM, Eberlein M. Severe, 
rapidly reversible hypoxemia in the early 
period after bilateral lung transplanta-
tion. Ann Am Thorac Soc. 2016;13(6):
979–985. doi:10.1513/AnnalsATS.201602-
107CC.
17. Lumb AB, Slinger P. Hypoxic pulmo-
nary vasoconstriction: Physiology and 
anesthetic implications. Anesthesiol-
ogy. 2015;122(4):932–946. doi:10.1097/
ALN.0000000000000569.
18. Feiner JR, Weiskopf RB. Evaluating pul-
monary function: An assessment of 
Pao2/Fio2. Crit Care Med. 2017;45(1):e40. 
doi:10.1097/CCM.0000000000002017.
19. Shepherd SJ, Pearse RM. Role of cen-
tral and mixed venous oxygen satura-
tion measurement in perioperative care. 
Anesthesiology. 2009;111(3):649–656. 
doi:10.1097/ALN.0b013e3181af59aa.
20. Weinberger SE, Schwartzstein RM, 
Weiss JW. Hypercapnia. N Engl J Med. 
1989;321(18):1223–1231. doi:10.1056/
NEJM198911023211804.
21. Crystal GJ. Carbon dioxide and 
the heart: Physiology and clini-
cal 
implications. 
Anesth 
Analg. 
2015;121(3):610–623. 
doi:10.1213/
ANE.0000000000000820.
22. Kallet RH, Zhuo H, Liu KD, Calfee CS, 
Matthay MA. The association between 
physiologic dead-space fraction and 
mortality in subjects with ARDS enrolled 
in a prospective multi-center clinical 
trial. Respir Care. 2014;59(11):1611–
1618. doi:10.4187/respcare.02593.
23. Weir EK, López-Barneo J, Buckler KJ, 
Archer SL Acute oxygen-sensing. mech-
anisms. doi: 10.1056/NEJMra050002.
24. Weiskopf RB, Viele MK, Feiner J, etal. 
Human cardiovascular and metabolic 
response to acute, severe isovolemic ane-
mia. JAMA. 1998;279(3):217–221. doi:
10.1001/jama.279.3.217.
25. Guérin C, Reignier J, Richard JC, et al. 
Prone positioning in severe acute res-
piratory distress syndrome. doi:10.1056/
NEJMoa1214103.
26. Moss M, Huang DT, Brower RG, et al., 
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute 
PETAL Clinical Trials Network. Early 
neuromuscular blockade in the acute 
respiratory distress syndrome. N Engl J 
Med. 2019 May 23;380(21):1997–2008. 
Epub 2019 May 19. PMID: 31112383; 
PMCID: PMC6741345.
27. Fan E, Del Sorbo L, Goligher EC, 
etal. An official American Thoracic 
Society/European Society of Intensive 
Care Medicine/Society of Critical Care 
Medicine Clinical Practice Guideline: 
Mechanical ventilation in adult patients 
with acute respiratory distress syn-
drome. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 
2017;195(9):1253–1263. doi:10.1164/
rccm.201703-0548ST.
69
Chapter
ANATOMY OF THE AUTONOMIC NERVOUS 
SYSTEM
The Sympathetic Nervous System
The preganglionic fibers of the SNS originate from the 
thoracolumbar region (T1–L2 or L3) of the spinal cord 
(Fig. 6.1). The cell bodies of these neurons lie in the spi-
nal gray matter. The nerve fibers extend to paired gan-
glia, creating the sympathetic chains that lie immediately 
lateral to the vertebral column or extend to unpaired 
distal plexuses (e.g., the celiac and mesenteric plexuses). 
Preganglionic sympathetic fibers not only synapse at the 
ganglion of the level of their origin in the spinal cord but 
can also course up and down the paired ganglia. A sym-
pathetic response therefore is not confined to the segment 
from which the stimulus originates, as discharge can be 
amplified and diffuse. The postganglionic neurons of the 
SNS then travel to the target organ. The sympathetic 
ANATOMY OF THE AUTONOMIC NERVOUS 
SYSTEM
The Sympathetic Nervous System
The Parasympathetic Nervous System
ADRENERGIC PHARMACOLOGY
Endogenous Catecholamines
Synthetic Catecholamines
Noncatecholamine Sympathomimetic Amines
SELECTIVE α-ADRENERGIC RECEPTOR 
AGONISTS
α1-Adrenergic Agonists
α2-Adrenergic Agonists
β2-ADRENERGIC RECEPTOR AGONISTS
α-ADRENERGIC RECEPTOR ANTAGONISTS
Phenoxybenzamine
Prazosin
Yohimbine
β-ADRENERGIC ANTAGONISTS
Adverse Effects of β-Adrenergic Blockade
Specific β-Adrenergic Blockers
CHOLINERGIC PHARMACOLOGY
Muscarinic Antagonists
Cholinesterase Inhibitors
AUTONOMIC NERVOUS 
SYSTEM
Erica J. Stein, David B. Glick
6
The autonomic nervous system (ANS) controls involun-
tary activities of the body outside consciousness. It is at 
once the most primitive and among the most essential 
of control systems—primitive in that its characteristics 
are largely preserved across all mammalian species and 
essential in that it oversees responses to immediate life-
threatening challenges and the body’s vital maintenance 
needs. The ANS is divided into two major branches. The 
sympathetic nervous system (SNS) controls the “fight or 
flight” response, including redistribution of blood flow 
from the viscera to skeletal muscle and increased cardiac 
output. The parasympathetic nervous system (PNS), on 
the other hand, oversees the body’s maintenance needs, 
such as digestion and genitourinary function. The pri-
mary goal of anesthetic management is to modulate the 
body’s autonomic responses. As a result, safe admin-
istration of anesthetic care requires knowledge of ANS 
pharmacology, disease states that may impair ANS func-
tion, and expected responses to surgery and anesthesia.
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
70
Parasympathetic
innervation
Sympathetic
innervation
Superior
cervical
ganglion
Inferior
cervical
ganglion
Stellate
ganglion
Cardioaccelerator
nerve
Splanchnic
nerve
III
Pons
Spinal cord
Pelvic
nerve
Tectal
Cervical
Thoracic
Lumbar
Sacral
VII
IX
X
Kidneys
Proximal
colon
Small intestine
Stomach
Respiratory
tract
Heart
Salivary glands
Lacrimal glands
Circular muscles,
iris
Radial muscles
iris
Ureters
Bladder
Distal colon
Rectum
Genitals
Kidneys
Adrenal gland
Sweat glands
Blood vessels,
trunk
Blood vessels,
head and neck
Small intestine
Stomach
Liver
Spleen
Respiratory
tract
Heart
Blood vessels,
lower
extremities
Bladder
Colon
Rectum
Genitals
Paravertebral sympathetic ganglion chain
Salivary glands
Celiac
ganglion
Superior
mesenteric
ganglion
Inferior
mesenteric
ganglion
Hypogastric
nerve
Fig. 6.1 Schematic representation of the autonomic nervous system depicting the functional innervation 
of peripheral effector organs and the anatomic origin of peripheral autonomic nerves from the spinal cord. 
Although both paravertebral sympathetic ganglia chains are presented, the sympathetic innervation to 
the peripheral effector organs is shown only on the right side of the figure, whereas the parasympathetic 
innervation of peripheral effector organs is depicted on the left. The roman numerals on nerves originating 
in the tectal region of the brainstem refer to the cranial nerves that provide parasympathetic outflow to the 
effector organs of the head, neck, and trunk. (From Ruffolo R. Physiology and biochemistry of the peripheral 
autonomic nervous system. In Wingard L, Brody T, Larner J, et al., eds. Human Pharmacology: Molecular to 
Clinical. St. Louis: Mosby-Year Book; 1991:77.)
II
Chapter 6 Autonomic Nervous System
71
(Fig. 6.4). The rate-limiting step is the transformation 
of tyrosine to dihydroxyphenylalanine (DOPA), which is 
catalyzed by the enzyme tyrosine hydroxylase. DOPA is 
then converted to dopamine and, once inside the stor-
age vesicle at the nerve terminal, is β-hydroxylated to 
norepinephrine. In the adrenal medulla norepinephrine 
is methylated to epinephrine. The neurotransmitters are 
stored in vesicles until the postganglionic nerve is stimu-
lated. Then the vesicles merge with the cell membrane 
and release their contents into the synapse (Fig. 6.5). 
In general, only 1% of the total stored norepinephrine 
is released with each depolarization; thus there is a 
tremendous functional reserve. The released norepineph-
rine binds to the presynaptic and postsynaptic adrener-
gic receptors. The postsynaptic receptors then activate 
secondary messenger systems in the postsynaptic cell 
via G protein–linked activity. Norepinephrine is then 
released from these receptors and mostly taken up at 
the presynaptic nerve terminal and transported to stor-
age vesicles for reuse. Norepinephrine that escapes this 
reuptake process and makes its way into the circulation 
is metabolized by either the monoamine oxidase (MAO) 
or catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) enzyme in the 
blood, liver, or kidney.
preganglionic fibers are relatively short because sympa-
thetic ganglia are generally close to the central nervous 
system (CNS). In contrast, the postganglionic fibers run a 
long course before innervating effector organs (Fig. 6.2).
The neurotransmitter released at the terminal end of 
the preganglionic sympathetic neuron is acetylcholine 
(ACh), and the cholinergic receptor on the postganglionic 
neuron is a nicotinic receptor. Norepinephrine is the 
primary neurotransmitter released at the terminal end of 
the postganglionic neuron at the synapse with the target 
organ (Fig. 6.3). Other classic neurotransmitters of the 
SNS include epinephrine and dopamine. Additionally, 
co-transmitters, such as adenosine triphosphate (ATP) 
and neuropeptide Y, modulate sympathetic activity. 
Norepinephrine and epinephrine bind postsynaptically 
to adrenergic receptors, which include the α1-, β1-, β2-, 
and β-receptors. When norepinephrine binds to the α2
receptors, located presynaptically on the postganglionic 
sympathetic nerve terminal, subsequent norepinephrine 
release is decreased (negative feedback). Dopamine (D) 
binds to D1 receptors postsynaptically or D2 receptors 
presynaptically.
Sympathetic neurotransmitters are synthesized from 
tyrosine in the postganglionic sympathetic nerve ending 
Fig. 6.2 Schematic diagram of the peripheral autonomic nervous system. Preganglionic fibers and 
postganglionic fibers of the parasympathetic nervous system release acetylcholine (ACh) as the 
neurotransmitter. Postganglionic fibers of the sympathetic nervous system release norepinephrine (NE) 
as the neurotransmitter (exceptions are fibers to sweat glands, which release ACh). (From Lawson NW, 
Wallfisch HK. Cardiovascular pharmacology: A new look at the pressors. In Stoelting RK, Barash J, eds. 
Advances in Anesthesia. Chicago: Year Book Medical Publishers; 1986:195–270.)
CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM
Parasympathetic
Sympathetic
Preganglionic fiber
Ganglion
Ganglion
Cholinergic ACh receptor
(nicotinic)
Cholinergic ACh receptor
(nicotinic)
End organ
End organ
Adrenergic NE
receptor
Cholinergic ACh
receptor
(muscarinic)
Postganglionic fiber
Postganglionic fiber
Preganglionic fiber
Presynaptic
Postsynaptic
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
72
The Parasympathetic Nervous System
The PNS arises from cranial nerves III, VII, IX, and X and 
from sacral segments S1–S4 (see Fig. 6.1). Unlike the gan-
glia of the SNS, the ganglia of the PNS are in close prox-
imity to (or even within) their target organs (see Fig.6.2). 
Like the SNS, the preganglionic nerve terminals release 
ACh into the synapse, and the postganglionic cell binds 
the ACh via nicotinic receptors. The postganglionic nerve 
terminal then releases ACh into the synapse it shares 
with the target organ cell. The ACh receptors of the target 
organ are muscarinic receptors. Like the adrenergic recep-
tors, muscarinic receptors are coupled to G proteins and 
secondary messenger systems. ACh is rapidly inactivated 
within the synapse by the cholinesterase enzyme. The 
effects of stimulating adrenergic and cholinergic recep-
tors throughout the body are listed in Table 6.1
ADRENERGIC PHARMACOLOGY
Endogenous Catecholamines
Table 6.2 summarizes the pharmacologic effects and 
therapeutic doses of catecholamines.
Norepinephrine
Norepinephrine, the primary adrenergic neurotransmit-
ter, binds to α- and β-receptors. It is used primarily for 
its α1-adrenergic effects that increase systemic vascular 
resistance. Like all the endogenous catecholamines, the 
half-life of norepinephrine is short (2.5 minutes), so it is 
usually given as a continuous infusion at rates of 3μg/
min or more and titrated to the desired effect. The increase 
in systemic resistance can lead to reflex bradycardia. 
Additionally, because norepinephrine vasoconstricts the 
pulmonary, renal, and mesenteric circulations, infusions 
must be carefully monitored to prevent injury to vital 
organs. Prolonged infusion of norepinephrine can also 
cause ischemia in the fingers and toes because of the 
marked peripheral vasoconstriction.
Epinephrine
Like norepinephrine, epinephrine binds to α- and 
β-adrenergic receptors. Exogenous epinephrine is used 
intravenously in life-threatening circumstances to treat 
cardiac arrest, circulatory collapse, and anaphylaxis. It 
is also commonly used locally to decrease the systemic 
absorption of local anesthetics and to reduce surgical 
blood loss. Among the therapeutic effects of epineph-
rine are positive inotropy, chronotropy, and enhanced 
conduction in the heart (β1); smooth muscle relaxation 
in the vasculature and bronchial tree (β2); and vasocon-
striction (α1). The effects that predominate depend on the 
dose of epinephrine administered. Epinephrine also has 
endocrine and metabolic effects that include increasing 
the levels of blood glucose, lactate, and free fatty acids.
An intravenous dose of 1 mg can be given for car-
diovascular collapse, asystole, ventricular fibrillation, 
pulseless electrical activity, or anaphylactic shock to con-
strict the peripheral vasculature and maintain myocar-
dial and cerebral perfusion. In less acute circumstances 
epinephrine can be given as a continuous infusion. The 
response of individual patients to epinephrine varies, so 
the infusion must be titrated to effect while the patient 
is monitored for signs of compromised renal, cerebral, 
or myocardial perfusion. In general, an infusion rate of 
1to 2 μg/min should primarily stimulate β2-receptors 
and decrease airway resistance and vascular tone. A rate 
Postsynaptic
Effector cell
NE
Sympathetic neuron
Stimulates
Presynaptic
Inhibits
NE
NE


2
1

Fig. 6.3 Schematic depiction of the postganglionic sympathetic nerve ending. Release of the 
neurotransmitter norepinephrine (NE) from the nerve ending results in stimulation of postsynaptic 
receptors, which are classified as α1, β1, and β2. Stimulation of presynaptic α2-receptors results in inhibition 
of NE release from the nerve ending. (Adapted from Ram CVS, Kaplan NM. Alpha- and beta-receptor 
blocking drugs in the treatment of hypertension. In Harvey WP, ed. Current Problems in Cardiology.
Chicago: Year Book Medical Publishers; 1970.)
II
Chapter 6 Autonomic Nervous System
73
of 2to 10 μg/min increases heart rate, contractility, and 
conduction through the atrioventricular node. When 
doses larger than 10 μg/min are given, the α1-adrenergic 
effects predominate, resulting in generalized vasocon-
striction, which can lead to reflex bradycardia.
Epinephrine also can be administered as an aerosol 
to treat severe croup or airway edema. Bronchospasm is 
treated with epinephrine administered subcutaneously in 
doses of 300 μg every 20 minutes with a maximum of 
three doses. Epinephrine treats bronchospasm both via its 
direct effect as a bronchodilator and because it decreases 
antigen-induced release of bronchospastic substances (as 
may occur during anaphylaxis) by stabilizing the mast 
cells that release these substances.
Because epinephrine decreases the refractory period 
of the myocardium, the risk of arrhythmias during 
Dopamine β
hydroxylase
Norepinephrine
HO
OH
CH2
CH
CH3
HO
NH
HO
OH
CH2
CH
NH2
HO
HO
CH2
CH2
NH2
CH
CH2
0
OH
NH2
NH2
C
HO
CH
CH2
COOH
HO
HO
HO
Epinephrine
Epinephrine
Phenylethanolamine
N-methyltransferase
L-Dopa
Dopamine
Aromatic L-amino acid
decarboxylase
Cell membrane
Cytoplasm
Storage vesicle
Tyrosine hydroxylase
Tyrosine
A
B
Fig. 6.4 Biosynthesis of norepinephrine and epinephrine in sympathetic nerve terminal (and adrenal 
medulla). (A) Perspective view of molecules. (B) Enzymatic processes. (From Tollenaeré JP. Atlas of the 
Three-Dimensional Structure of Drugs. Amsterdam: Elsevier North-Holland; 1979, as modified by 
Vanhoutte PM. Adrenergic neuroeffector interaction in the blood vessel wall. Fed Proc. 1978;37:181.)
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
74
kidney and aid in diuresis. Subsequently, dopamine was 
not found to have a beneficial effect on renal function 
in shock states. Its routine use for patients in shock is 
questionable because it may increase mortality risk and 
the incidence of arrhythmic events.1 2
Synthetic Catecholamines
Isoproterenol
Isoproterenol (Isuprel) provides relatively pure and non-
selective β-adrenergic stimulation. Its β1-adrenergic 
stimulation is greater than its β2-adrenergic effects. Its 
popularity has declined because of adverse effects such 
as tachycardia and arrhythmias. It is no longer part of 
the advanced cardiac life support (ACLS) protocols (also 
see Chapter 45), and its principal uses now are as a 
chronotropic drug after cardiac transplantation and to 
initiate atrial fibrillation or other arrhythmias during car-
diac electrophysiology ablation procedures. With larger 
doses, isoproterenol may cause vasodilation caused by 
β2-adrenergic stimulation. Because isoproterenol is not 
taken up into the adrenergic nerve endings, its half-life 
is longer than that of the endogenous catecholamines, 
ranging from 2.5 to 5 minutes.
halothane anesthesia is increased when epinephrine is 
given. The risk of arrhythmias seems to be less in chil-
dren but increases with hypocapnia.
Dopamine
In addition to binding to α- and β-receptors, dopamine 
binds to dopaminergic receptors. Besides its direct effects, 
dopamine acts indirectly by stimulating the release of 
norepinephrine from storage vesicles. Dopamine is unique 
in its ability to improve blood flow through the renal and 
mesenteric beds in shock-like states by binding to postjunc-
tional D1 receptors. Dopamine is rapidly metabolized by 
MAO and COMT and has a half-life of 1 minute, so it must 
be given as a continuous infusion. At doses between 0.5 
and 2.0 μg/kg/min, D1 receptors are stimulated and renal 
and mesenteric beds are dilated. When the infusion is 
increased to 2 to 10 μg/kg/min, the β1-receptors are stimu-
lated and cardiac contractility and output are increased. 
At doses of 10 μg/kg/min and higher, α1-receptor binding 
predominates and causes marked generalized constriction 
of the vasculature, negating any benefit to renal perfusion.
In the past dopamine was frequently used to treat 
patients in shock. The belief was that infusions of dopa-
mine, by improving renal blood flow, could protect the 
Synthesis:
Tyrosine
tyr hyd
Dopa
aad
Dopamine
DβH
NE
DβH
DβH
Storage
vesicle
Adrenergic nerve
varicosity
NE
Ca2+
Ca2+
NE
NE
Neuronal
uptake
Cell membrane
Membrane depolarization
action potentials
(nerve stimulation)
Fig. 6.5 Release and reuptake of norepinephrine at sympathetic nerve terminals. Solid circle, Active carrier; 
aad, aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase; DβH, dopamine β-hydroxylase; Dopa, L-dihydroxyphenylalanine; 
NE, norepinephrine; tyr hyd, tyrosine hydroxylase. (From Vanhoutte PM. Adrenergic neuroeffector 
interaction in the blood vessel wall. Fed Proc. 1978;37:181, as modified by Shepherd J, Vanhoutte 
P. Neurohumoral regulation. In Shepherd S, Vanhoutte P, eds. The Human Cardiovascular System: Facts 
and Concepts. New York: Raven Press; 1979:107.)
II
Chapter 6 Autonomic Nervous System
75
complicated by low cardiac output. Doses smaller than 
20 μg/kg/min usually do not produce tachycardia. 
Because dobutamine directly stimulates β1-receptors, 
it does not rely on endogenous norepinephrine stores 
for its effects and may still be useful in catecholamine-
depleted states such as chronic CHF. However, prolonged 
treatment with dobutamine causes downregulation of 
β-adrenergic receptors. If given for more than 3 days, 
tolerance and even tachyphylaxis may occur and can 
be avoided by intermittent infusions of dobutamine. 
Dobutamine
Dobutamine, a synthetic analog of dopamine, has predom-
inantly β1-adrenergic effects. When compared with iso-
proterenol, inotropy is more affected than chronotropy. It 
exerts less of a β2-type effect than isoproterenol does and 
less of an α1-type effect than does norepinephrine. Unlike 
dopamine, endogenous norepinephrine is not released, and 
dobutamine does not act at dopaminergic receptors.
Dobutamine is potentially useful in patients with 
congestive heart failure (CHF) or myocardial infarction 
Effector Organ
Adrenergic 
Response
Receptor 
Involved
Cholinergic 
Response
Receptor 
Involved
Dominant 
Response (A or C)
Heart
Rate of contraction
Force of contraction
Increase
Increase
β1
β1
Decrease
Decrease
M2
M2
C
C
Blood vessels
Arteries (most)
Skeletal muscle
Veins
Vasoconstriction
Vasodilation
Vasoconstriction
α1
β2
α2
A
A
A
Bronchial tree
Bronchodilation
β2
Bronchoconstriction
M3
C
Splenic capsule
Contraction
α1
A
Uterus
Contraction
α1
Variable
A
Vas deferens
Contraction
α1
A
Gastrointestinal tract
Relaxation
α2
Contraction
M3
C
Eye
Radial muscle, iris
Circular muscle, iris
Ciliary muscle
Contraction 
(mydriasis)
Relaxation
α1
β2
Contraction (miosis)
Contraction 
(accommodation)
M3
M3
A
C
C
Kidney
Renin secretion
β1
A
Urinary bladder
Detrusor
Trigone and sphincter
Relaxation
Contraction
β2
α1
Contraction
Relaxation
M3
M3
C
A, C
Ureter
Contraction
α1
Relaxation
A
Insulin release from 
pancreas
Decrease
α2
A
Fat cells
Lipolysis
β1 (β3)
A
Liver glycogenolysis
Increase
α1 (β3)
A
Hair follicles, smooth 
muscle
Contraction 
(piloerection)
α1
A
Nasal secretion
Decrease
α1
Increase
C
Salivary glands
Increase 
secretion
α1
Increase secretion
C
Sweat glands
Increase 
secretion
α1
Increase secretion
C
Table 6.1
Responses Elicited in Effector Organs by Stimulation of Sympathetic and Parasympathetic Nerves
A, Adrenergic; C, cholinergic; M, muscarinic.
From Bylund DB. Introduction to the autonomic nervous system. In Wecker L, Crespo L, Dunaway G, et al., eds. Brody's Human Pharmacology: 
Molecular to Clinical. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Mosby; 2010:102.
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
76
Tachyphylaxis caused by the indirect effects of ephed-
rine may develop as norepinephrine stores are depleted. 
In addition, although drugs with indirect activity are 
widely used as a first-line therapy for intraoperative 
hypotension, repeat doses of ephedrine administration in 
life-threatening events (instead of switching to epineph-
rine) may contribute to morbidity.6
SELECTIVE α-ADRENERGIC 
RECEPTOR AGONISTS
α1-Adrenergic Agonists
Phenylephrine
Phenylephrine (Neo-Synephrine), a selective α1-agonist, 
is frequently used for peripheral vasoconstriction when 
cardiac output is adequate (e.g., in the hypotension that 
may accompany spinal anesthesia). It is also used to 
maintain afterload in patients with aortic stenosis whose 
coronary perfusion is compromised by a decline in sys-
temic vascular resistance. Given intravenously, phenyle-
phrine has a rapid onset and relatively short duration of 
action (5-10 minutes). It may be given as a bolus of 40 
to 100 μg or as an infusion starting at a rate of 10 to 
20 μg/min. Larger doses of phenylephrine, up to 1 mg, 
may lead to conversion of supraventricular tachycardia 
to sinus rhythm through reflex action, but this treatment 
option is not part of current ACLS algorithms (also see 
Chapter 45). Phenylephrine is also a mydriatic and nasal 
decongestant. Applied topically, alone or in combination 
with local anesthetics, phenylephrine is used to prepare 
the nares for nasotracheal intubation.
α2-Adrenergic Agonists
α2-Agonists are assuming greater importance as anesthetic 
adjuvants and analgesics. Their primary effect is sympa-
tholytic. They reduce peripheral norepinephrine release 
by stimulating prejunctional inhibitory α2-receptors. Tra-
ditionally, they have been used as antihypertensive drugs, 
However, there are no controlled trials demonstrating 
improved survival.3
Fenoldopam
Fenoldopam is a selective D1 agonist and potent vaso-
dilator that enhances renal blood flow and diuresis; its 
peak effect takes 15 minutes. Because of mixed results in 
clinical trials, fenoldopam is no longer used for treatment 
of chronic hypertension or CHF. Instead, intravenous 
fenoldopam, at infusion rates of 0.1 to 0.8μg/kg/min, 
has been approved for treatment of severe hypertension. 
Fenoldopam is an alternative to sodium nitroprusside with 
fewer side effects (e.g., no thiocyanate toxicity, rebound 
effect, or coronary steal) and improved renal function. 
However, clinical studies on the use of fenoldopam as a 
nephroprotective agent have provided mixed results.4 5
Noncatecholamine Sympathomimetic Amines
Most noncatecholamine sympathomimetic amines act at 
α- and β-receptors through both direct (binding of the 
drug by adrenergic receptors) and indirect (release of 
endogenous norepinephrine stores) activity. Mephenter-
mine and metaraminol are rarely used currently, so the 
only widely used noncatecholamine sympathomimetic 
amine at this time is ephedrine.
Ephedrine
Ephedrine increases arterial blood pressure and has a 
positive inotropic effect. Because it does not have detri-
mental effects on uterine blood flow in animal models, 
ephedrine became widely used as a pressor in hypoten-
sive pregnant patients. However, phenylephrine is now 
the preferred treatment for hypotension in the parturient 
because of a decreased risk of fetal acidosis (also see 
Chapter 33). As a result of its β1-adrenergic stimulating 
effects, ephedrine is helpful in treating moderate hypo-
tension, particularly if accompanied by bradycardia. The 
usual dose is 2.5 to 10 mg given intravenously or 25 to 
50 mg administered intramuscularly.
Catecholamine
Mean 
Arterial 
Pressure
Heart 
Rate
Cardiac 
Output
Systemic 
Vascular 
Resistance
Renal 
Blood 
Flow
Arrhythmogenicity
Preparation 
(mg/250 mL)
Intravenous 
Dose (mcg /
kg/min)
Dopamine
+
+
+++
+
+++
+
200 (800 μg/mL)
2–20
Norepinephrine
+++
−
−
+++
−−−
+
4 (16 μg/mL)
0.01–0.1
Epinephrine
+
++
++
++
−−
+++
1 (4 μg/mL)
0.01–0.15
Isoproterenol
−
+++
+++
−−
−
+++
1 (4 μg/mL)
0.03–0.15
Dobutamine
+
+
+++
−
++
±
250 (1000 μg/mL)
2–20
Table 6.2
Pharmacologic Effects and Therapeutic Doses of Catecholamines
+, Mild increase; + +, moderate increase; +++, marked increase; −, mild decrease; −−, moderate decrease; −−−, marked decrease.
AL GRAWANY
II
Chapter 6 Autonomic Nervous System
77
the perioperative management of obese patients with 
obstructive sleep apnea minimized the need for narcotics 
while providing adequate analgesia.11
β2-ADRENERGIC RECEPTOR AGONISTS
β2-Agonists are used to treat asthma (also see Chapter27). 
With large doses, the β2-receptor selectivity can be lost, 
and severe side effects related to β1-adrenergic stimu-
lation are possible. Commonly used agonists include 
metaproterenol (Alupent, Metaprel), terbutaline (Brethine, 
Bricanyl), and albuterol (Proventil, Ventolin).
β2-Agonists are also used to arrest premature labor 
(also see Chapter 33). Ritodrine (Yutopar) has been 
marketed for this purpose. Unfortunately, β1-adrenergic 
adverse effects are common, particularly when the drug 
is given intravenously.
α-ADRENERGIC RECEPTOR ANTAGONISTS
α1-Antagonists have long been used as antihypertensive 
drugs, but their side effects, which include marked ortho-
static hypotension and fluid retention, have made them 
less popular as other medications for controlling arterial 
blood pressure with more attractive side effect profiles 
have become available.
Phenoxybenzamine
Phenoxybenzamine (Dibenzyline) is the prototypical α1-
adrenergic antagonist (though it also has α2-antagonist 
effects). Because it irreversibly binds α1-receptors, new 
receptors must be synthesized before complete recovery. 
Phenoxybenzamine decreases peripheral resistance and 
increases cardiac output. Its primary adverse effect is 
orthostatic hypotension that can lead to syncope with 
rapid patient movement from the supine to standing 
position. Nasal stuffiness is another effect. Phenoxy-
benzamine is most commonly used in the treatment of 
pheochromocytomas. It establishes a “chemical sym-
pathectomy” preoperatively that makes arterial blood 
pressure less labile during surgical resection of these 
catecholamine-secreting tumors. When exogenous sym-
pathomimetics are given after α1-blockade, their vaso-
constrictive effects are inhibited. Despite its irreversible 
binding to the receptor, the recommended treatment for 
a phenoxybenzamine overdose is an infusion of norepi-
nephrine because some receptors remain free of the drug; 
vasopressin may also beeffective in this setting.
Prazosin
Prazosin (Minipress) is a potent selective α1-blocker that 
antagonizes the vasoconstrictor effects of norepinephrine 
but applications based on their sedative, anxiolytic, and 
analgesic properties are becoming increasingly common.
Clonidine
Clonidine, the prototypical drug of this class, is a selec-
tive agonist for α2-adrenoreceptors. Its antihypertensive 
effects result from central and peripheral attenuation 
of sympathetic outflow. Clonidine withdrawal may pre-
cipitate a hypertensive crisis, so it should be continued 
throughout the perioperative period. A transdermal patch 
is available if a patient cannot take clonidine orally. If it 
is not continued perioperatively, arterial blood pressure 
should be monitored closely with ready ability to treat 
hypertension. Labetalol is used to treat clonidine with-
drawal syndrome.
Although experience with α2-agonists as a sole anes-
thetic is limited (also see Chapter 8), these drugs can 
reduce the requirements for other intravenous or inhaled 
anesthetics as part of a general or regional anesthetic 
technique.7 The results of a 2003 meta-analysis imply that 
perioperative use of clonidine and the other α2-agonists 
dexmedetomidine and mivazerol also decreased myocar-
dial infarction and perioperative mortality rates in patients 
who had vascular surgery.8 However, a more recent (2014) 
large randomized trial of perioperative clonidine did not 
show a reduction in death or nonfatal myocardial infarc-
tion within 30 days of noncardiac surgery.9
In addition to their use in the operative setting, 
α2-agonists provide effective analgesia for acute and 
chronic pain, particularly as adjuncts to local anesthetics 
and opioids. Epidural clonidine is indicated for the treat-
ment of intractable pain, which is the basis for approval 
of parenteral clonidine in the United States as an orphan 
drug. Clonidine also is used to treat patients with reflex 
sympathetic dystrophy and other neuropathic pain syn-
dromes (also see Chapter 44).
Dexmedetomidine
Like clonidine, dexmedetomidine is highly selective for 
the α2-receptors. Its half-life of 2.3 hours and distribu-
tion half-life of less than 5 minutes make its clinical 
effect quite short. Unlike clonidine, dexmedetomidine is 
available as an intravenous solution in the United States. 
The usual dosing is an infusion of 0.3 to 0.7 μg/kg/h 
either with or without a 1 μg/kg initial dose given over 
10 minutes.
In healthy volunteers dexmedetomidine increases seda-
tion, analgesia, and amnesia; it decreases heart rate, cardiac 
output, and circulating catecholamines in a dose-dependent 
fashion. The inhaled anesthetic-sparing, sedative, and 
analgesic effects demonstrated in preclinical and volunteer 
studies have been borne out in clinical practice. The rela-
tively minor impact of α2-induced sedation on respiratory 
function combined with the short duration of action of 
dexmedetomidine has led to its use for awake fiber optic 
endotracheal intubation.10 Dexmedetomidine infusions for 
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
78
review on perioperative β-blockade from the American 
College of Cardiology/American Heart Association (ACC/
AHA) states that although perioperative continuation of 
β-blockade started 1 day or less before noncardiac sur-
gery in high-risk patients prevents nonfatal myocardial 
infarctions, it increases the rate of death, hypotension, 
bradycardia, and stroke. In addition, there is insufficient 
data regarding continuation of β-blockade started 2 days 
or more before noncardiac surgery.16 The 2014 ACC/AHA 
guideline on perioperative cardiovascular evaluation and 
management of patients undergoing noncardiac surgery 
recommends that patients on chronic β-blocker therapy 
continue this therapy in the perioperative period, but 
β-blocker therapy should not be started on the day of 
surgery17 (also see Chapter 13). Additionally, other litera-
ture reviews have shown that the evidence for all-cause 
mortality with perioperative β-blockade is uncertain, 
with no evidence of a difference in ventricular arrythmias 
or cerebrovascular events and low-certainty evidence 
that β-blockers reduced atrial fibrillation and myocardial 
infarctions; however, β-blockers may increase bradycar-
dia and increase hypotension.18
The most widely used β-adrenergic blockers in anes-
thetic practice are propranolol, metoprolol, labetalol, 
and esmolol because they are available as intravenous 
formulations and have well-characterized effects. The 
most important differences among these blockers are tied 
to cardioselectivity and duration of action. Nonselective 
β-blockers act at the β1- and β2-receptors. Cardioselective 
β-blockers have stronger affinity for β1-adrenergic recep-
tors than for β2-adrenergic receptors. With β1-receptor 
selective blockade, velocity of atrioventricular conduc-
tion, heart rate, and cardiac contractility decrease. The 
release of renin by the juxtaglomerular apparatus and 
lipolysis at adipocytes also decrease. With larger doses, 
the relative selectivity for β1-receptors is lost and β2
receptors are also blocked, with the potential for broncho-
constriction, peripheral vasoconstriction, and decreased 
glycogenolysis.
Adverse Effects of β-Adrenergic Blockade
Life-threatening bradycardia, even asystole, may occur 
with β-adrenergic blockade, and decreased contractility 
may precipitate heart failure in patients with compro-
mised cardiac function. In patients with bronchospastic 
lung disease β2-blockade may be fatal. Diabetes mel-
litus is a relative contraindication to the long-term use 
of β-adrenergic antagonists because warning signs of 
hypoglycemia (tachycardia and tremor) can be masked 
and because compensatory glycogenolysis is blunted. 
To avoid worsening of hypertension, use of β-blockers 
in patients with pheochromocytomas should be avoided 
unless α-receptors have already been blocked. Over-
dose of β-blocking drugs may be treated with atropine, 
but isoproterenol, dobutamine, or glucagon also may 
and epinephrine. Orthostatic hypotension is a major prob-
lem with prazosin. Unlike other antihypertensive drugs, 
prazosin improves lipid profiles by lowering low-density 
lipoprotein levels and raising the level of high-density 
lipoproteins. The usual starting dose of prazosin is 0.5 to 
1 mg given at bedtime because of the risk of orthostatic 
hypotension. Doxazosin (Cardura) and terazosin (Hytrin) 
have pharmacologic effects similar to those of prazosin 
but have longer pharmacokinetic half-lives. Because of 
the high cost of phenoxybenzamine, these agents are 
being used with greater frequency for the preoperative 
preparation of patients with pheochromocytomas. How-
ever, because these agents provide competitive antago-
nism instead of permanent binding to the α-receptors, 
modest intraoperative hypertensive episodes seem to 
be more common in these patients than in those who 
received phenoxybenzamine.12 Agents such as tamsulosin 
(Flomax) show selectivity for the α1A-receptor subtype 
and are effective in the treatment of benign prostatic 
hyperplasia without the hypotensive effects seen when the 
nonselective α1-blockers are used to treat this condition.
Yohimbine
α2-Antagonists such as yohimbine increase the release of 
norepinephrine, but they have found little clinical utility 
in anesthesia.
β-ADRENERGIC ANTAGONISTS
β-Adrenergic antagonists (i.e., β-blockers) are frequently 
taken by patients about to undergo surgery. Clinical 
indications for β-adrenergic blockade include ischemic 
heart disease, postinfarction management, arrhythmias, 
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, hypertension, heart fail-
ure, migraine prophylaxis, thyrotoxicosis, and glaucoma. 
In patients with heart failure and reduced ejection frac-
tion β-blocker therapy has been shown to reverse ven-
tricular remodeling and reduce mortality rate.13 In the 
1990s a study by the Perioperative Ischemia Research 
Group demonstrated the value of initiating β-blockade 
perioperatively in patients at risk for coronary artery dis-
ease.14 Study subjects given perioperative β-blockers had 
a markedly reduced all-cause 2-year mortality rate (68% 
survival rate in placebo group vs. 83% in atenolol-treated 
group). The presumed mechanism for this improved sur-
vival rate was a diminution of the surgical stress response 
by the β-blockers. These and other confirmatory findings 
led to tremendous political and administrative pressure 
to increase the use of β-blockers perioperatively. Sub-
sequent studies, however, have questioned the value of 
perioperative β-blockade, including a large study of oral 
metoprolol started on the day of surgery and continuing 
for 30 days (POISE trial), which demonstrated increased 
mortality rate in the β-blocker group.15 A systematic 
II
Chapter 6 Autonomic Nervous System
79
even with significant reductions in blood pressure22 (also 
see Chapter 33).
Esmolol
Because it is hydrolyzed by bloodborne esterases, esmo-
lol (Brevibloc) has a uniquely short half-life of 9 to 
10minutes, which makes it particularly useful in anes-
thetic practice. It can be used when β-blockade of short 
duration is desired or in critically ill patients in whom the 
adverse effects of bradycardia, heart failure, or hypoten-
sion may require rapid withdrawal of the drug. Esmolol 
is cardioselective, and the peak effects of a loading dose 
are seen within 5 to 10 minutes and diminish within 20 to 
30minutes. It may be given as a bolus of 0.5 mg/kg or as 
an infusion. When used to treat supraventricular tachycar-
dia, a bolus of 500 μg/kg is given over 1 minute, followed 
by an infusion of 50 μg/kg/min for 4 minutes. If the heart 
rate is not controlled, a repeat loading dose followed by 
a 4-minute infusion of 100 μg/kg/min is given. If needed, 
this sequence is repeated with the infusion increased in 
50-μg/kg/min increments up to 300 μg/kg/min. Esmolol is 
safe and effective for the treatment of intraoperative and 
postoperative hypertension and tachycardia. If continu-
ous use is required, it may be replaced by a longer-lasting 
cardioselective β-blocker such as metoprolol.
CHOLINERGIC PHARMACOLOGY
In contrast to the rich selection of drugs to manipulate 
adrenergic responses, there is a relative paucity of drugs 
that affect cholinergic transmission. A small number of 
direct cholinergic agents are used topically for the treat-
ment of glaucoma or to restore gastrointestinal or urinary 
function. The classes of drugs with relevance to the anes-
thesia provider are the anticholinergic agents (muscarinic 
antagonists) and the anticholinesterases.
Muscarinic Antagonists
The muscarinic antagonists compete with neurally released 
ACh for access to muscarinic cholinoceptors and block 
ACh's effects. The results are faster heart rate, sedation, and 
dry mouth. With the exception of the quaternary ammo-
nium compounds that do not readily cross the blood–brain 
barrier and have few actions on the CNS, there is no 
significant specificity of action among these drugs; they 
block all muscarinic effects with equal efficacy, although 
there are some quantitative differences in effect (Table 6.3).
In the era of ether anesthetics a muscarinic antagonist 
was added to anesthetic premedication to decrease secre-
tions and to prevent harmful vagal reflexes. This addi-
tion is less important with modern inhaled anesthetics. 
Preoperative use of these drugs continues in some pedi-
atric and otorhinolaryngologic cases or when fiber-optic 
intubation is planned.
be required along with cardiac pacing to maintain an 
adequate rate of contraction.
Undesirable drug interactions are possible with 
β-blockers. The rate and contractility effects of verapamil 
are additive to those of β-blockers, so care must be taken 
when combining these drugs. Similarly, the combination of 
digoxin and β-blockers can have powerful effects on heart 
rate and conduction and should be used with special care.
Specific β-Adrenergic Blockers
Propranolol
Propranolol (Inderal, Ipran), the prototypical β-blocker, 
is a nonselective β-blocking drug. Because of its high 
lipid solubility, it is extensively metabolized in the liver, 
but metabolism varies greatly from patient to patient. 
Clearance of the drug can be affected by liver disease 
or altered hepatic blood flow. Propranolol is available 
in an intravenous form and was initially given as either 
a bolus or an infusion. Infusions of propranolol have 
largely been supplanted by the shorter-acting esmolol. 
For bolus administration, doses of 0.1 mg/kg may be 
given, but most practitioners initiate therapy with much 
smaller doses, typically 0.25 to 0.5 mg, and titrate to 
effect. Propranolol shifts the oxyhemoglobin dissociation 
curve to the right, which might account for its efficacy in 
vasospastic disorders.19 Additionally, propranolol is com-
monly used in the treatment of hyperthyroidism to miti-
gate tachycardia that may result and because propranolol 
inhibits the peripheral conversion of T4 thyroid hormone 
to the more active T3 hormone.
Metoprolol
Metoprolol (Lopressor), a cardioselective β-adrenergic 
blocker, is approved for the treatment of angina pectoris 
and acute myocardial infarction. No dosing adjustments 
are necessary in patients with liver failure. The usual oral 
dose is 100 to 200 mg/day taken once or twice daily for 
hypertension and twice daily for angina pectoris. Intra-
venous doses of 2.5 to 5 mg may be administered every 
2 to 5 minutes up to a total dose of 15 mg, with titration 
to heart rate and blood pressure.
Labetalol
Labetalol (Trandate, Normodyne) acts as a competitive 
antagonist at the α1- and β-adrenergic receptors. Metabo-
lized by the liver, its clearance is affected by hepatic 
perfusion. Labetalol may be given intravenously every 
5minutes in 5- to 10-mg doses or as an infusion of up to 
2mg/min. It can be effective in the treatment of patients 
with aortic dissection20 and in hypertensive emergencies. 
Because vasodilation is not accompanied by tachycardia, 
labetalol has been given to patients with coronary artery 
disease postoperatively. It may be used to treat hyperten-
sion in pregnancy both on a long-term basis and in more 
acute situations.21 Uterine blood flow is not affected, 
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
80
Cholinesterase Inhibitors
Anticholinesterase drugs impair the inactivation of ACh 
by the cholinesterase enzyme and sustain cholinergic 
agonism at nicotinic and muscarinic receptors. These 
drugs are used to reverse neuromuscular blockade (see 
Chapter 11) and to treat myasthenia gravis. The most 
prominent side effect of these drugs is bradycardia. The 
commonly used cholinesterase inhibitors are physostig-
mine, neostigmine, pyridostigmine, and edrophonium. 
In addition to reversing the effects of neuromuscular-
blocking drugs by increasing the concentration of ACh 
at the neuromuscular junction, cholinesterase inhibitors 
stimulate intestinal function or are applied topically to 
the eye as a miotic. One topical drug (echothiophate 
iodide) irreversibly binds cholinesterase and can interfere 
with the metabolism of succinylcholine (as the anticho-
linesterases impair the function of the pseudocholinest-
erase enzyme as well).
Because of its tertiary structure, atropine can cross the 
blood–brain barrier. Thus large doses (1–2 mg) can affect 
the CNS. In contrast, because of its quaternary structure, 
the synthetic antimuscarinic drug glycopyrrolate (Robinul) 
does not cross the blood–brain barrier. Glycopyrrolate 
has a longer duration of action than atropine and has 
largely replaced atropine for blocking the adverse mus-
carinic effects (bradycardia) of the anticholinesterase 
drugs that reverse neuromuscular blockade (also see 
Chapter 11). Scopolamine also crosses the blood–brain 
barrier and can have profound CNS effects. The patch 
preparation of scopolamine is used prophylactically for 
postoperative nausea and vomiting, but it may be asso-
ciated with adverse eye, bladder, skin, and psychological 
effects. The CNS side effects (e.g., delusions or delirium) 
that can follow treatment with atropine or scopolamine 
are treated with physostigmine, an anticholinesterase 
that is able to cross the blood–brain barrier.
Effect
Atropine
Scopolamine
Glycopyrrolate
Antisialagogue effect
+
+++
++
Sedative and amnesic effect
+
+++
0
Increased gastric fluid pH
0
0
0/+
Central nervous system toxicity
+
++
0
Lower esophageal sphincter relaxation
++
++
++
Mydriasis and cycloplegia
+
+++
0
Heart rate
++
0/+
+
Table 6.3
Comparative Effects of Anticholinergics Administered Intramuscularly as Pharmacologic Premedication
REFERENCES
1. Holmes CL, Walley KR. Bad medicine: 
Low-dose dopamine in the ICU. Chest. 
2003;123:1266–1275.
2. DeBacker D, Aldecoa C, Nijimi H, etal. 
Dopamine versus norepinephrine in the 
treatment of septic shock: A meta-analysis. 
Crit Care Med. 2012;40(3):725–730.
3. Krell MJ, Kline EM, Bates ER, etal. Inter-
mittent, ambulatory dobutamine infu-
sions in patients with severe congestive 
heart failure. Am Heart J. 1986;112:787–
791.
4. Sun H, Xie Q, Peng Z. Does fenoldopam 
protect kidney in cardiac surgery? A 
systemic review and meta-analysis with 
trail sequential analysis. Shock. 2019;
52(3):326–333.
5. Ranucci M, Soro G, Barzaghi N, etal. 
Fenoldopam prophylaxis of postop-
erative acute renal failure in high-risk 
cardiac surgery patients. Ann Thorac 
Surg. 2004;78:1332–1338.
6. Caplan RA, Ward RJ, Posner K, etal. 
Unexpected cardiac arrest during spinal 
anesthesia: A closed claims analysis 
of predisposing factors. Anesthesiology. 
1988;68:5–11.
7. Maze M, Tranquilli W. Alpha-2 adrener-
gic agonists: Defining the role in clini-
cal anesthesia. Anesthesiology. 1991;
74:581–605.
8. Wijeysundera DN, Naik JS, Beattie WS. 
Alpha-2 adrenergic agonists to prevent 
perioperative cardiovascular compli-
cations—A meta-analysis. Am J Med. 
2003;114:742–752.
9. Devereaux PJ, Sessler DI, Leslie K, etal. 
Clonidine in patients undergoing non-
cardiac surgery. N Engl J Med. 2014;16:
1504–1513.
10. Bergese SD, Khabiri B, Roberts WD, 
etal. Dexmedetomidine for conscious 
sedation in difficult awake fiberoptic 
intubation cases. J Clin Anesth. 2007;19:
141–144.
11. Ramsay MA, Saha D, Hebeler RF. Tra-
cheal resection in the morbidly obese 
patient: The role of dexmedetomidine. 
J Clin Anesth. 2006;18:452–454.
12. Kong H, Li N, Yang X. et al. Nonselec-
tive compared with selective α-blockade 
is associated with less intraoperative 
hypertension in patients with pheochro-
mocytomas and paragangliomas: A ret-
rospective cohort study with propensity 
score matching. Anesth Analg. 2021;
132:140–149.
13. Florea VG, Cohn JN. The autonomic 
nervous system and heart failure. Circ 
Res. 2014;114:1815–1826.
0, None; +, mild; ++, moderate; +++, marked.
II
Chapter 6 Autonomic Nervous System
81
14. Mangano DT, Layug EL, Wallace A, etal. 
Effect of atenolol on mortality and car-
diovascular morbidity after noncardiac 
surgery. Multicenter Study of Periopera-
tive Ischemia Research Group. N Engl J 
Med. 1996;335:1713–1720.
15. POISE Study Group. Effects of extended-
release metoprolol succinate in patients 
undergoing non-cardiac surgery (POISE 
trial): A randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 
2008;371:1839–1847.
16. Wijeysundera DN, Duncan D, Nkonde-
Price C, etal. Perioperative beta block-
ade in noncardiac surgery: A systematic 
review for the 2014 ACC/AHA guideline 
on perioperative cardiovascular evaluation 
and management of patients undergoing 
noncardiac surgery. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2014;64:2406–2425.
17. Fleisher LA, Fleischmann KE, Auer-
bach AD, etal. ACC/AHA guideline on 
perioperative cardiovascular evaluation 
and management of patients undergo-
ing noncardiac surgery: A report of 
the American College of Cardiology/
American Heart Association Task Force 
on Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Car-
diol. 2014;64:e77–e137.
18. Blessberger H, Lewis SR, Pritchard MW, 
etal. Perioperative beta-blockers for 
preventing 
surgery-related 
mortal-
ity and morbidity in adults undergoing 
non-cardiac surgery (review). Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev. 2019;(9) :CD013438.
19. Pendleton RG, Newman DJ, Sherman 
SS, etal. Effect of propranolol upon the 
hemoglobin-oxygen dissociation curve. 
J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 1972;180:647–656.
20. DeSanctis RW, Doroghazi RM, Austen 
WG, etal. Aortic dissection. N Engl J 
Med. 1987;317:1060–1067.
21. Lavies NG, Meiklejohn BH, May AE, 
etal. Hypertensive and catecholamine 
response to tracheal intubations in 
patients with pregnancy-induced hyper-
tension. Br J Anaesth. 1989;63:429–434.
22. Jouppila P, Kirkinen P, Koivula A, etal. 
Labetalol does not alter the placental 
and fetal blood flow or maternal pros-
tanoids in pre-eclampsia. Br J Obstet 
Gynaecol. 1986;93:543–547.
82
Chapter
HISTORY
Before the introduction of anesthesia, surgery was usu-
ally excruciating and harrowing for patients, limited 
in duration and technique by what the patient could 
tolerate.1 On October 16, 1846, the dentist William T. 
G. Morton administered diethyl ether for a surgery at 
the Massachusetts General Hospital to remove a tumor 
from Ebenezer Hopkins Frost’s neck.2 The patient’s abil-
ity to tolerate the surgery, recalling afterwards a dulled 
sensation,2 led the surgeon, John C. Warren, to famously 
exclaim, “Gentlemen, this is no humbug.”3 This case is 
generally credited as the first successful public dem-
onstration of an inhaled anesthetic used for surgery.3
Within a month, this and other experiences using ether 
for procedures were published in the Boston Medical 
and Surgical Journal (now the New England Journal 
of Medicine),2 and within months surgeries were being 
performed routinely with ether anesthesia in the United 
States and Europe.4
The public demonstration of ether anesthesia by 
Morton was preceded by other successful applications of 
ether anesthesia, notably by Crawford Long in Georgia, 
and by consideration of the utility of nitrous oxide for 
surgery, such as by Sir Humphy Davy of England, and 
an unsuccessful public attempt of a tooth extraction 
under nitrous oxide anesthesia by the dentist Horace 
Wells.3 Nevertheless, the immediate, far-reaching, and 
profound impact of the demonstration of ether anesthesia 
for surgery4 underlies why this date continues to be cel-
ebrated as “Ether Day.”1 After October 16, 1846, Morton 
and his associates spent years quarreling for credit over 
the discovery and seeking to patent ether, unfortunately 
leading to underwhelming and tragic ends.1 Nevertheless, 
the advent of inhaled anesthesia ushered in a new era of 
surgery and medicine, and the article describing the first 
surgeries performed under ether anesthesia was voted as 
the most important in 200 years of publications from 
the New England Journal of Medicine 5 This recognition 
HISTORY
CHEMICAL AND PHYSICAL PROPERTIES
Molecular Structures
Physical Properties
UPTAKE AND DISTRIBUTION IN THE BODY
Vaporizers
Anesthetic Circuit
Partition Coefficients
Gas Exchange
Concentration and Second Gas Effects
MINIMUM ALVEOLAR CONCENTRATION
MECHANISMS
Molecular Mechanisms
Neuronal Network Mechanisms
ORGAN SYSTEM EFFECTS
Central Nervous System
Cardiovascular System
Pulmonary System
Renal System
Hepatic System
Neuromuscular Function
UNIQUE ISSUES WITH NITROUS OXIDE
TOXICITY AND ADVERSE EVENTS
Postoperative Nausea and Vomiting
Malignant Hyperthermia
Developmental Neurotoxicity
Postoperative Cognitive Dysfunction
Cancer Recurrence and Morbidity
Reactions With Carbon Dioxide Absorbents
METABOLISM, ELIMINATION, AND 
RECOVERY
ENVIRONMENTAL CONSIDERATIONS
INHALED ANESTHETICS
Daniel Charles Cook, Hugh C. Hemmings, Jr.
7
II
Chapter 7 Inhaled Anesthetics
83
is well deserved for one of the most important advances 
in medicine.
CHEMICAL AND PHYSICAL PROPERTIES
Molecular Structures
The most commonly used inhaled anesthetics available in 2020 
are isoflurane (1-chloro-2,2,2-trifluoroethyl difluoromethyl 
ether), sevoflurane (1,1,1,3,3,3-hexafluoro-2-(fluoromethoxy)
propane), and desflurane (2-(difluoromethoxy)-1,1,1,2-tetra-
fluoroethane). They are halogenated ethers containing 
fluorine and/or chlorine (Fig.7.1). Halothane (2-bromo-
2-chloro-1,1,1-trifluoroethane), which is rarely used today, is 
a polyhalogenated alkane. Both sevoflurane and desflurane 
have fluorine exclusively as the halogen substitution, which 
is credited for their minimal metabolism and improved phar-
macokinetic profile.6–8 Other halogenated ethers, including 
isoflurane, contain both chlorine and fluorine, and halo-
thane also contains bromine. These four drugs, and several 
others that preceded them, are known as volatile anesthetics.
Volatility refers to their tendency, as liquids at standard tem-
perature and pressure, to evaporate. The other routinely used 
inhaled anesthetic, nitrous oxide, is an oxide of nitrogen, 
with the chemical formula N2O. Xenon, an element classified 
as a noble gas, is also an inhaled anesthetic, but given its 
limited availability, difficult delivery and expense, it is rarely 
used, though research suggests it may have specific applica-
tions as a neuroprotectant.
Physical Properties
Several physicochemical properties of inhaled anes-
thetics are critical to understanding their delivery and 
pharmacokinetics. To understand the pharmacology and 
chemistry of inhaled anesthetics, it is useful to consider 
the ideal gas law:
PV
nRT
=
where P is pressure, V is volume, n is the number of gas 
particles (in moles), R is the universal gas constant, and 
T is temperature. Other relationships, such as Charles' law 
(V1/T1 = V2/T2) and Boyle's law (P1 V1 = P2 V2), can be 
derived simply from the ideal gas law by considering the 
other variables as constants.
The partial pressure of a gas is the pressure exerted by 
one individual gas within a gaseous mixture. The total 
pressure of a gas mixture is the sum of the partial pres-
sures of each of its components:
P
P
P
P
T
n



1
2
where PT is the total pressure of the gas mixture com-
posed of n gases denoted by the subscripts. The contribu-
tion of any one gas within the gas mixture to the total 
Ethers
Alkanes
Gases
Diethyl ether
Methoxypropane
Vinyl ether
Enflurane
Methoxyflurane
Isoflurane
Sevoflurane
Desflurane
Chloroform
Trichloroethylene
Halothane
Cyclopropane
Ethylene
Nitrous oxide
Xenon
Xe
N N
H
H
H
C
C
H
Br
Cl
F3C
F3C
F3C
F
O
F3C
F
F
F
O
F3C
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
Cl
Cl
Cl
Cl
O
O
O
O
O
O
Cl
Cl
H
Cl
Cl
Cl
Cl
C
H
N
O
O
+
+
N
Fig. 7.1 Molecular structures and space-filling model of 
historical and currently used inhaled anesthetics. (From Hudson 
AE, Hemmings HC Jr. Pharmacokinetics of inhaled anesthetics, 
Ch. 3. In: Hemmings HC Jr, Egan TD, eds. Pharmacology and 
Physiology for Anesthesia: Foundations and Clinical Application, 2nd 
ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019:45.)
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
84
pressure among the modern volatile agents. Its boiling 
point is 24°C (75°F), highlighting its propensity to evapo-
rate or boil under temperature and pressure conditions 
that may occur in the operating room. This distinction 
necessitates a unique bottle design and pressurized vapor-
izer mechanism.11 Although other volatile anesthetics 
can be poured into a vaporizer, desflurane would quickly 
evaporate, polluting the operating room environment, 
thus necessitating a closed system (see later).
The most important physicochemical property to 
explain the pharmacokinetics of inhaled anesthetics is 
their solubility, which is the amount of a gas that can be 
homogeneously dissolved into a liquid. At low concen-
trations, the solubility of a gas can be defined by Henry's 
law,
C
kPgas
=
where C is the concentration, P is the partial pressure, 
and k is the solubility constant that depends on the gas, 
solvent, and temperature (as temperature increases, solu-
bility decreases). In anesthetic pharmacology the partition 
coefficient is the metric generally used to convey and 
compare solubility. The partition coefficient is the ratio 
of concentrations at equilibrium of a solute dissolved in 
two different solvents (Fig. 7.2). Applied to inhaled anes-
thesia, the partition coefficient is the concentrations of 
the anesthetic in two different body compartments when 
the partial pressure of the drug has equilibrated.7 Anes-
thetic uptake from lung alveoli into the blood is described 
by the blood:gas partition coefficient. Anesthetics with 
lower blood:gas partition coefficients are less soluble, 
and therefore a lower amount (mass) of anesthetic is 
required to reach a given partial pressure in the blood. 
Partition coefficients between the blood and other organs 
approximate the relative accumulation of the anesthetic 
pressure is proportional to its molar fraction within the 
mixture:
P
XP
i
t
=
where X is the molar fraction (the percentage of the gas 
mixture for the individual gas) and Pi is the partial pres-
sure of that gas. It is the partial pressure of a volatile 
anesthetic within the body that determines its pharma-
cologic effect. Conceptually, partial pressure is the gas 
equivalent of plasma concentration for an intravenous 
anesthetic. A striking example of this concept is the 
lowering of analgesia, sedation, and nausea because of a 
fixed concentration of nitrous oxide when ambient pres-
sure is lowered within a pressurized chamber.9 Because it 
is the absolute partial pressure of an inhaled anesthetic 
that is pharmacodynamically relevant, lowering ambient 
pressure at a constant concentration decreases its partial 
pressure and, thereby, its anesthetic effect. Although not 
well-studied, this concept likely applies to the provision 
of anesthesia at elevated altitudes, a setting in which the 
potency of an anesthetic at a given concentration will be 
reduced by the reduction in atmospheric pressure.10
Vapor pressure is the partial pressure exerted by the 
gaseous phase of a chemical in equilibrium with its liquid 
phase (Table 7.1). It can be conceptualized as the pressure 
exerted on a liquid to prevent molecules from escap-
ing into the gaseous phase. Thus liquids that are more 
likely to evaporate (i.e., are more volatile) have higher 
vapor pressures. This chemical property depends on tem-
perature; as temperature is increased, vapor pressure also 
increases. Boiling occurs when the temperature of a liquid 
is increased such that its vapor pressure exceeds ambient 
pressure. Thus a more volatile liquid, with a higher vapor 
pressure, will also boil at lower temperatures (it has a 
lower boiling point). Desflurane has the highest vapor 
Characteristic
Halothane
Methoxyflurane
Isoflurane
Sevoflurane
Desflurane
Nitrous oxide
Xenon
Partition coefficients
Blood–gas
2.54
11
1.46
0.65
0.45
0.46
0.14
Brain–blood
1.9
1.6
1.7
1.3
1.1
Muscle–blood
3.4
2.9
3.1
2.0
1.2
Fat–blood
51
45
48
27
2.3
MAC (age 40)
0.75
0.16
1.28
2.05
6.0
104
0.71
Vapor pressure at 
20°C (mm Hg)
244
22.5
240
160
669
Molecular weight
197.4
165
184.5
200.1
168.0
44.0
131.3
Percent metabolized
15–40
70
0.2
5
0.02
Table 7.1
Comparative Properties of Inhaled Anesthetics
Adapted from McKay RE. Inhaled anesthetics, Chapter 8 In: Basics of Anesthesia, 7th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018: 81. Based on Steward A, 
Allott PR, Cowles AL, et al. Solubility coefficients for inhaled anaesthetics for water, oil, and biological media. Br J Anaesth. 1973;45:282–293. 
Yasuda N, Targ AG, Eger EI. Solubility of I-653, sevoflurane, isoflurane, and halothane in human tissues. Anesth Analg. 1989;69:370–373.
II
Chapter 7 Inhaled Anesthetics
85
supply wall outlet or from a tank connected to the anes-
thesia workstation. The concentration of nitrous oxide 
(vol%) is controlled by adjusting the flows of oxygen, air, 
and nitrous oxide through a mixer. Older machines used 
manual adjustments of flowmeters, but newer machines 
use electronic controls to set overall fresh gas flow and 
the percentage of nitrous oxide.
Anesthetic Circuit
The anesthesia work station delivers a gas mixture 
determined by the settings of the vaporizers and fresh 
gas flows. However, it is important to account for the 
nontrivial volume of the breathing circuit. Adjusting 
the vaporizer will not immediately change the mixture 
received by the patient because the gases must first reach 
steady state within the circuit. This process is described by
F
F
e
C
FGF
t t


(
)
/
1
where FC is the concentration of anesthetic in the circuit, 
FFGF is the concentration of anesthetic in the fresh gas 
delivered to the circuit, and τ is the time constant of the 
circuit, defined as
V
FGF
C /
where VC is the volume of the circuit and FGF is the fresh 
gas flow.13
Partition Coefficients
Aqueous solubility is the chemical property of inhaled 
anesthetics that determines the kinetics of uptake and 
distribution, and induction of anesthesia. The solubility of 
inhaled anesthetics is conveyed in their blood:gas partition 
throughout the body and, importantly, between the blood 
and brain (i.e., the brain:blood partition coefficient).
UPTAKE AND DISTRIBUTION IN THE BODY
Vaporizers
Maintaining general anesthesia with inhaled anesthet-
ics requires precise delivery. For the potent, volatile 
anesthetics, vaporizers are used to deliver specific gas 
concentrations (dose) to a patient. Most modern vapor-
izers use a variable bypass design (Fig. 7.3). Gas from the 
anesthesia machine that enters into the vaporizer is split 
between two paths in a specific ratio: one path proceeds 
without accumulating anesthetic (bypasses), while the 
other path is through a chamber saturated with vapor-
ized anesthetic agent. The two pathways are recombined 
such that the bypassing gas dilutes the gas saturated 
with anesthetic to achieve the desired output as volume 
percent (vol%)12 (also see Chapter 44).
The vaporizer for desflurane is an exception to the 
variable bypass design. The high vapor pressure of 
desflurane would require substantial fresh gas flows to 
dilute the anesthetic to clinical concentrations. Moreover, 
because of its low boiling point, it can boil under ambi-
ent conditions, which would preclude a precise output of 
anesthetic with a variable bypass vaporizer design. Thus 
desflurane vaporizers heat the anesthetic above its boil-
ing point to achieve a constant vapor pressure, which can 
then be injected in controlled volumes into the gas flow 
pathway (see Fig. 7.3).12
Nitrous oxide and xenon exist as gases at standard 
temperature and pressure, and are known as gaseous 
anesthetics. Nitrous oxide is supplied from a central 
Fig. 7.2 Blood–gas partition coefficients reflect the solubility of inhaled anesthetics in blood. The partition 
coefficient is the ratio of concentrations of the anesthetic in blood to that in alveoli at steady state when 
partial pressures are equal in each compartment. (From Hudson AE, Hemmings HC Jr. Pharmacokinetics of 
inhaled anesthetics, Ch. 3. In: Hemmings HC Jr, Egan TD, eds. Pharmacology and Physiology for Anesthesia: 
Foundations and Clinical Application, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019:47.)
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
86
plasma concentration achieved. Drugs that are more lipo-
philic redistribute more widely from the plasma into other 
tissues; thus the plasma concentration reached will be 
relatively low, leading to a greater VD. In effect, the drug 
distributes to a plasma volume that is larger than its actual 
volume. Solubility of inhaled anesthetics is similar concep-
tually to the VD for intravenous drugs. Inhaled anesthetics 
that are more soluble, and therefore have higher blood:gas 
partition coefficients, distribute to a virtual plasma vol-
ume that is relatively large and have higher plasma molar 
concentrations (Fig. 7.4). Thus higher concentrations are 
required to reach a given partial pressure. In other words, 
more drug uptake is required to achieve the target partial 
pressure to reach the desired anesthetic effect.
The brain:blood partition coefficient is an important 
consideration for the induction of and recovery from 
coefficients. Anesthetics with lower solubility (lower 
blood:gas partition coefficients) have quicker onset and 
recovery profiles.14 The partial pressure of an anesthetic 
determines the magnitude of its effect; in other words, 
partial pressure is the effective concentration of an inhaled 
anesthetic in the blood, brain, and other organ systems. 
Once a therapeutic steady state has been achieved, the 
partial pressure of the anesthetic will be the same in the 
alveoli, blood, and brain, while concentrations in each of 
these compartments will differ according to the relevant 
partition coefficients. Anesthetics with lower solubility 
require lower concentrations in the blood to achieve a 
given partial pressure, thus speeding the rate of induc-
tion. An analogy can be made with the administration of 
intravenous drugs and their volume of distribution (VD), 
which is defined as the bolus dose of a drug divided by the 
Fig. 7.3 Schematic of vaporizers for volatile anesthetic delivery. (A) Inhaled anesthetics require specialized 
equipment to deliver them to patients in accurate concentrations. The most common design is the 
variable-bypass vaporizer, which works by diluting gas saturated with anesthetic with fresh gas to achieve 
the desired concentration. (B) The boiling point of desflurane is near room temperature, thus preventing 
reliable administration of desflurane by a variable-bypass vaporizer. The Tec 6, designed specifically to 
administer desflurane, heats and pressurizes the anesthetic chamber to achieve a steady vapor pressure. 
Injection of desflurane vapor into the fresh gas dilutes the anesthetic to the desired concentration. Des,
Desflurane. (From Eisenkraft JB. Anesthesia vaporizers, Ch. 2. In: Ehrenwerth J, Eienkraft JB, Berry JB, eds. 
Anesthesia Equipment: Principles and Applications, 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2013:68, 86.)
Concentration
setting dial
Saturated vapor
Liquid agent in
vaporizer sump
Vaporizing
chamber or sump
Fresh gas inflow
Vaporizer
outflow at
dialed-in
concentration
Sump
shut-off
valve
Variable pressure
control valve to
make PDes = PMain
Concentration dial
variable restrictor
PDes
Pressure
transducer
RMain
PMain
Fixed restrictor
FlowMain
Gas flowing
from machine
flowmeters
Des liquid
heated
Des vapor
1500 mm Hg
39°C
RDes
FlowDes
Control
electronics
AL GRAWANY
II
Chapter 7 Inhaled Anesthetics
87
pressure, partial pressure is determined by the fractional 
concentration of the drug relative to that of total alveolar 
gas, so achieving a specific volume fraction of inhaled 
anesthetic in the alveolus, FA, is necessary to induce gen-
eral anesthesia, with the rate of induction depending on 
how rapidly the target FA is reached. The anesthetist con-
trols the fraction of inspired gas made up by the inhaled 
anesthetic delivered to the patient in the inspired gas (FI). 
As the lungs are ventilated, FA approaches and eventually 
equals FI, with the rate of induction depending on how 
quickly the FA/FI ratio approaches 1.7
The rate of the rise of FA/FI is determined by anesthetic 
solubility, expressed as the blood:gas partition coefficient 
(Fig. 7.5).7 Drugs with lower blood:gas partition coef-
ficients are less soluble in blood, and thus FA increases 
more quickly and target anesthetic partial pressure is 
reached faster. As anesthetic diffuses across the alveolar 
membrane, its partial pressure in blood increases, thereby 
decreasing the partial pressure gradient, such that more 
anesthetic remains in the alveolus to contribute to FA
A variety of other factors, determined by either the 
anesthetist or physiologic states, affect the rate of rise of 
FA/FI
7 Increasing anesthetic delivery to the alveoli, either 
through higher fresh gas flow, anesthetic concentration, 
or alveolar ventilation, speeds the rise in FA/FI. Processes 
that decrease anesthetic uptake from the alveoli also 
increase the rate of rise of FA/FI. An example is a decrease 
in cardiac output, which allows the partial pressure in the 
alveolus to equilibrate with the blood in the pulmonary 
capillaries more quickly, this reduces the partial pressure 
difference and retains more anesthetic in the alveoli to 
increase FA. Ventilation-perfusion mismatching reduces 
general anesthesia because the nervous system is the 
major target organ. Lower tissue solubility will lead 
to more rapid equilibration from the blood and, by 
extension, from alveoli to that tissue.15 However, the 
brain:blood partition coefficients of inhaled anesthetics 
have a smaller range (from 1.1 to 1.9 for nitrous oxide 
and halothane, respectively) than the blood:gas parti-
tion coefficients (from 0.45 to 2.54 for desflurane and 
halothane, respectively).16 Thus the parameter that differs 
more between agents is the blood:gas coefficient, which 
has a greater impact on how anesthetic selection deter-
mines pharmacokinetics for a given patient. Moreover, 
various diseases affect the uptake of inhaled anesthetics 
from the alveolus, and these effects are influenced by 
the blood:gas partition coefficient, as described further 
later in the chapter. Conversely, there is relatively little 
the anesthesiologist can do to change the equilibration 
of an anesthetic from the blood into the brain. For these 
reasons, the blood:gas partition coefficient is the critical 
parameter determining onset, and practitioners need to 
understand how the solubility of an agent affects the 
conduct of the anesthetic procedure.
Gas Exchange
The driving force of gas diffusion is the gradient in 
partial pressure. Gas exchange continues until partial 
pressures across the diffusion barrier are equalized. To 
induce general anesthesia, a target partial pressure of an 
inhaled anesthetic must be reached in the brain and spi-
nal cord. At steady state, the partial pressure in the brain 
and alveoli are equal. According to Dalton's law of partial 
Fig. 7.4 Blood and tissue solubilities of inhaled anesthetics determine their pharmacokinetic distribution 
and relative concentrations in each compartment. At steady state, partial pressure equalizes across body 
compartments (represented by cubic volumes) but concentrations of anesthetics within compartments 
will differ based on the relevant partition coefficients. In the example of isoflurane the concentration 
increases relative to alveolar gas in blood and in the brain. (From Forman SA, Ishizawa Y. Inhaled anesthetic 
pharmacokinetics: Uptake, distribution, metabolism, and toxicity, Ch. 20. In: Gropper MA, ed. Miller’s 
Anesthesia, 9th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:512.)
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
88
Concentration and Second Gas Effects
The effective concentration of nitrous oxide as a percent-
age of gas volume (vol%) is substantially higher than 
for the volatile anesthetics because of its lower potency. 
Nitrous oxide is routinely administered at 60% to 70% 
of the gas mixture, whereas volatile anesthetics have 
clinically relevant concentrations in the range of 1.5% 
to 6.5 vol%. Thus uptake of nitrous oxide into the blood 
affects alveolar volume, whereas these changes are insig-
nificant for volatile anesthetics. This unique property of 
nitrous oxide affects the rate of induction of anesthesia 
(Fig.7.6).17 As nitrous oxide diffuses out of the alveoli, the 
uptake of nitrous oxide into blood and the reduction in 
alveolar volume concentrates the coadministered volatile 
anesthetic. For a volatile anesthetic, if 50% of the agent 
diffuses into the blood, its FA will decrease by 50% because 
the corresponding decrease in alveolar volume is negligi-
ble. However, if nitrous oxide is administered at 80 vol% 
of a gas mixture and half of it (40% of alveolar volume) 
is taken up into the blood, the remaining alveolar volume 
is 60%, so the FA has changed from 0.8 (80/100) to 0.67 
(40/60). The concurrent change in alveolar volume with 
uptake of nitrous oxide serves to increase nitrous oxide 
delivery as fresh gas replaces the absorbed anesthetic. 
This phenomenon, known as the concentration effect,
increases the rate of rise of FA/FI for nitrous oxide relative 
to volatile anesthetics with similar blood-gas coefficients, 
explaining, in part, its rapid induction profile.17
A similar principle applies to the effect that high 
concentrations of nitrous oxide have on other inhaled 
anesthetics. The substantial decrease in alveolar volume 
as nitrous oxide diffuses into the blood partly offsets 
the uptake of a coadministered volatile anesthetic and 
concentrates the remaining anesthetic within the alveoli 
(see Fig. 7.6). Thus the rate of rise of FA/FI for a volatile 
anesthetic is greater in the presence of nitrous oxide 
than without it, a phenomenon known as the second gas 
effect 17
MINIMUM ALVEOLAR CONCENTRATION
Volatile anesthetic potencies are measured and compared 
as minimum alveolar concentration (MAC), the concen-
tration necessary to prevent movement in response to a 
painful surgical stimulus in 50% of subjects in a popula-
tion (Fig. 7.7). This concept was pioneered by Edmond 
Eger II and his colleagues in the early 1960s.18 A MAC 
of 1.0 indicates that the end-tidal concentration of the 
inhaled anesthetic is such that half of patients would 
be immobile in response to surgical incision. Though 
achieving a desirable outcome in only 50% of patients 
is not a clinically useful endpoint, MAC has a variety 
of properties that make it useful in comparing between 
anesthetic properties and, in practice, for dosing them.19
anesthetic uptake. In the case of dead space ventilation 
alveolar ventilation is diverted, so anesthesia uptake is 
decreased. For a right-to-left shunt, the shunt fraction 
reduces the mixed venous content of anesthetic, thereby 
increasing the partial pressure gradient from alveolus 
to pulmonary capillary blood, slowing the rise in FA. In 
contrast, a left-to-right shunt does not significantly alter 
FA/FI
Inhaled anesthetic solubility remains an important 
consideration, even in patient-specific situations. For 
instance, a decrease in cardiac output speeds the rise in 
FA/FI, more so for anesthetics that are relatively insoluble. 
For soluble anesthetics, equilibration of partial pres-
sures between the alveolus and blood takes longer and 
is affected less by lower cardiac output. Conversely, a 
right-to-left shunt will have a greater impact in slowing 
the rate of the rise of FA/FI with insoluble anesthetics.
0
10
20
30
0.1
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Minutes of administration
FA/FI
Mean ± SD
Halothane
Isoflurane
Sevoflurane
Desflurane
N2O
Fig. 7.5 Solubility in blood is the primary property of inhaled 
anesthetics governing equilibration between alveoli and blood 
and, thereby, the rate of induction of anesthesia. FA, Fraction of 
alveolar gas; FI, fraction of inhaled gas. (From McKay RE. Inhaled 
anesthetics, Ch. 7. In Pardo M, ed. Basics of Anesthesia, 7th ed. 
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018:91.)
II
Chapter 7 Inhaled Anesthetics
89
Once a steady anesthetic concentration is reached 
(equilibrium or steady state), end-tidal anesthetic con-
centration is proportional to the alveolar partial pressure, 
which is in equilibrium with all organ systems, includ-
ing the central nervous system. Thus MAC is a surrogate 
measure for the partial pressure of anesthetic in the 
brain and spinal cord (Table7.2). Inhaled anesthetics 
with lower MAC values are more potent, as lower anes-
thetic concentrations are required to achieve the clinical 
endpoint. The dose at which movement is prevented is 
Second gas
Second gas
Second gas
O2
N2O
O2
N2O
O2
N2O
O2
N2O
1%
1.7%
31.5%
32%
7.6%
0.4%
40%
66.7%
Absorption
of
50% N2O 
Inhalation
of
80% N2O 
19% O2
1% Second gas 
19%
80%
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0
10
20
Minutes of anesthesia
Mean, SD
Desflurance in
5% N2O 
Desflurance in
65% N2O 
65% N2O 
FA/FI
A
B
5% N2O 
19%
1%
Fig. 7.6 Uptake of nitrous oxide during induction. (A) Nitrous oxide is administered at relatively high 
concentrations. The resultant decrease in alveolar volume concentrates the remaining alveolar nitrous 
oxide and other anesthetic gases, which is termed the concentration effect and second gas effect, respectively. 
These effects offset gas uptake during induction to maintain a high alveolar partial pressure, thereby 
increasing the rate of induction. (B) Increasing the concentration of nitrous oxide results in a more rapid rise 
of FA/FI for nitrous oxide alone (concentration effect) and desflurane in nitrous oxide (second gas effect). FA,
Fraction of alveolar gas; FI, fraction of inhaled gas. (A, Modified from Stoelting RK, Eger EI 2nd. An additional 
explanation for the second gas effect: A concentrating effect. Anesthesiology. 1969;30:273–277.
B, Modified from Taheri S, Eger EI 2nd. A demonstration of the concentration and second gas effects in 
humans anesthetized with nitrous oxide and desflurane. Anesth Analg. 1999;89:774–780. From Hudson 
AE, Hemmings HC Jr. Pharmacokinetics of inhaled anesthetics, Ch. 3. In: Hemmings HC Jr, Egan TD, eds. 
Pharmacology and Physiology for Anesthesia: Foundations and Clinical Application, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: 
Elsevier; 2019:54.)
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
90
oxide, it is higher relative to MAC immobility (0.55 and 
0.64 MAC, respectively).19 Similarly, MAC-amnesia is 
the concentration to prevent recall in 50% of a popula-
tion. This value is not as well defined, but it is likely 
less than MAC-awake, and it is assumed that conscious 
recall is abolished at anesthetic concentrations prevent-
ing a meaningful response (again, when measured in the 
absence of noxious stimuli). Another endpoint is MAC-
BAR, or blunted autonomic response, at which 50% of 
a population will not mount an adrenergic response, 
evidenced by tachycardia, hypertension, and other signs, 
in response to a surgical stimulus. The MAC-BAR is 
approximately 1.5 to 1.6 times MAC.19
MAC is a measurement of a response to an anesthetic 
across a population. However, individual patients can 
have different anesthetic requirements depending on 
physiology, pathology, and other medications (Box7.1). 
Age is an important and well-validated factor influ-
encing anesthetic potency. MAC values are generally 
referenced to a specific age, usually 40 years. Increas-
ing age reduces MAC by 6% to 7% for each decade. 
This trend is broken for infants less than 1 year of age, 
where MAC increases from neonates to older children. 
Other nonmodifiable patient factors that increase MAC 
are red hair and chronic ethanol use, whereas pregnancy 
and chronic amphetamine use decrease MAC. Certain 
pathophysiologic conditions affect MAC. Hyperthermia 
and hypernatremia increase MAC, whereas hypother-
mia, hyponatremia, hypercarbia, hypoxia, and anemia 
decrease MAC. A variety of drugs can affect MAC, 
including many that are used regularly for surgery under 
general anesthesia. Acute alcohol intoxication decreases, 
whereas amphetamine use increases MAC. Benzodi-
azepines, ketamine, barbiturates, propofol, etomidate, 
dexmedetomidine, opioids, and local anesthetics decrease 
MAC. Other nonanesthetic medications, such as lithium 
and verapamil, can also lower MAC.19
reproducible within subjects, and the range of concentra-
tions across a population is narrow, thus allowing precise 
determinations of MAC for each anesthetic.19
The standard deviation for MAC across anesthetics is 
about 0.1 (i.e., 10% of the concentration defining MAC). 
Therefore 1.2 times MAC, an increase in the dose of 
20% over MAC, or two standard deviations, will produce 
immobility to a surgical stimulus in 95% of patients.19
MAC values are additive. Two inhaled anesthetics deliv-
ered in a gas mixture will have a combined MAC that is 
the sum of the individual MAC values for the concentra-
tions employed. Thus administering nitrous oxide and 
sevoflurane each at half their MAC (0.5 MAC) will yield a 
gas mixture with a combined MAC of 1.0.7
Other clinical endpoints to compare potencies of 
inhaled anesthetics have been defined. For isoflurane, 
sevoflurane, and desflurane, these other definitions are 
generally related to the MAC for immobility by a mul-
tiplicative factor. MAC-awake is the end-tidal anesthetic 
concentration that allows a patient to respond meaning-
fully (in the absence of noxious stimuli). MAC-awake 
is about one-third of MAC. For halothane and nitrous 
Agent
MAC (vol%)
PMAC (mm Hg)
Halothane
0.75
5.7
Enflurane
1.68
12.8
Isoflurane
1.15
8.7
Methoxyflurane
0.16
1.2
Sevoflurane
2.10
16
Desflurane
7.25
55
Nitrous oxide
104
790
Xenon
71
540
Table 7.2
Expression of MAC as Partial Pressure
From Eisenkraft JB. Anesthesia vaporizers, Ch. 3. In: Ehrenwerth 
J, Eienkraft JB, Berry JB, eds. Anesthesia Equipment: Principles and 
Applications, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier: 2021:66–99.
Immobility
Unconsciousness
Amnesia
100
50
Responder (%)
0
0.25
0.50
0.75
MAC fraction
1.0
Fig. 7.7 Definition of minimum alveolar concentration (MAC).
MAC is defined as the concentration of an inhaled anesthetic 
required to produce immobility in response to a noxious stimulus 
in 50% of the population. This definition has been applied to 
other clinical endpoints, such as amnesia and unconsciousness, 
in addition to immobility. The slope reflects the small population 
variability in sensitivity to inhaled anesthesia. (From Hudson AE, 
Herold KF, Hemmings HC Jr. Pharmacology of inhaled anesthetics, 
Ch. 11. In: Hemmings HC Jr, Egan TD, eds. Pharmacology and 
Physiology for Anesthesia: Foundations and Clinical Application, 2nd 
ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019:222.)
II
Chapter 7 Inhaled Anesthetics
91
widespread use of inhaled anesthetics began, much of 
the scientific exploration sought to discover a common 
target of their effects, an approach that was influenced 
by the work of the French physiologist Claude Ber-
nard.20 The lipophilicity of inhaled anesthetics led to 
theories that attributed anesthetic action to disruption 
of lipid membranes. Early experimental support for 
this concept at the turn of the 20th century correlated 
anesthetic potencies with their oil–water partition coef-
ficients, which was known as the Meyer–Overton cor-
relation for the two pharmacologists involved (Fig. 7.8). 
20 Since the late 1970s, rigorous biophysical studies, 
led by Nicholas Franks and William Lieb, demonstrated 
inhibition of the purified firefly protein luciferase in the 
absence of lipids. The degree of inhibition of luciferase, 
as determined by its light-generating chemical reaction, 
correlated with anesthetic potency, signifying that the 
clinical characteristics of inhaled anesthetics could be 
attributed to effects on proteins as opposed to lipids 
(see Fig. 7.8).21 These findings ushered in an era of 
defining target proteins in the central nervous system. 
Lipophilicity of inhaled anesthetics is likely important 
to determining their ability to access specific sites in 
target protein complexes, including ion channels. How-
ever, inhaled anesthetics do not affect lipid membrane 
properties at clinically relevant concentrations, so direct 
membrane-mediated effects are unlikely to explain the 
clinical effects of anesthetics.22
A variety of voltage- and ligand-gated ion channels are 
modulated by inhaled anesthetics and are thought to rep-
resent their critical neuronal targets for their neurophysi-
ologic effects (Fig. 7.9). These effects can be divided into 
presynaptic and postsynaptic targets. Postsynaptically, vol-
atile anesthetics potentiate inhibitory GABAA and glycine 
receptors, causing hyperpolarization and thus inhibiting 
action potential generation; however, these channels are 
not modulated by the inhaled anesthetics nitrous oxide or 
xenon.23 All the inhaled anesthetics inhibit acetylcholine, 
α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole propionic acid 
(AMPA), and N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors.24
Voltage-gated ion channels are also modulated by volatile 
anesthetics. Two-pore potassium channels are potenti-
ated, causing hyperpolarization of neurons, thus inhibiting 
depolarization and action potential generation and propa-
gation. Voltage-gated sodium and calcium channels are 
also targets of volatile anesthetics.24 Studies have yielded 
conflicting results for anesthetic effects on synaptic vesicle 
exocytotic SNARE proteins. Volatile anesthetics also inhibit 
mitochondrial function, in particular by inhibiting complex 
I of the electron transport chain. Notably, patients with 
mutations in complex I exhibit a substantial increase in 
sensitivity to volatile anesthesia, confirming involvement 
of this target in potentiating anesthetic potency.25 Never-
theless, the degree to which each of these various targets 
contribute to produce general anesthesia remains unclear.
MECHANISMS
Molecular Mechanisms
Despite 175 years of using inhaled anesthetics, the 
molecular mechanisms leading to amnesia, uncon-
sciousness, and immobility remain elusive. Although 
the molecular targets of intravenous anesthetics are 
better defined, an equivalent reductionist understand-
ing for inhaled anesthetics has not been achieved. An 
emerging consensus holds that multiple targets that 
can vary between agents are responsible for the char-
acteristic endpoints of general anesthesia. After the 
Box 7.1
Factors That Increase or Decrease Anesthetic 
Requirements
Factors Increasing MAC
Drugs
•Amphetamine (acute use)
•Cocaine
•Ephedrine
•Ethanol (chronic use)
Age
•Highest at age 6 months
Electrolytes
•Hypernatremia
•Hyperthermia
Red hair
Factors Decreasing MAC
Drugs
•Propofol
•Etomidate
•Barbiturates
•Benzodiazepines
•Ketamine
•α2 -Agonists (clonidine, dexmedetomidine)
•Ethanol (acute use)
•Local anesthetics
•Opioids
•Amphetamines (chronic use)
•Lithium
•Verapamil
Age
•Elderly patients
Electrolyte disturbance
•Hyponatremia
Other factors
•Anemia (hemoglobin <5 g/dL)
•Hypercarbia
•Hypothermia
•Hypoxia
•Pregnancy
From McKay RE. Inhaled anesthetics. Ch. 7. In Pardo M, ed. Basics of 
Anesthesia, 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2018:86.
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
92
Neuronal Network Mechanisms
At the neural network level, volatile anesthetics reduce 
functional connectivity between brain regions, with the 
most consistent effects observed on frontoparietal cortical 
interactions.26 Studies employing electroencephalography 
(EEG) to monitor patterns of activity under anesthesia 
show discrete brain states that transition nonrandomly and 
independently of surgical stimuli. Thus anesthesia-induced 
unconsciousness caused by inhaled anesthetics may be the 
result of alterations in connections and patterns of brain 
activity, preventing integration of multiple systems that 
underlie consciousness (Fig. 7.10).26 Additional studies are 
required to understand how modulation of molecular targets 
gives rise to alterations in brain connectivity and how these 
processes relate to the clinical endpoints of sedation, amne-
sia, and unconsciousness, although effects on ion channels 
to reduce neuronal excitability are likely important.
Volatile anesthetics produce immobility primarily by 
actions on the spinal cord, not the brain.27 Delivery of 
volatile anesthetics into the vasculature of the spinal cord 
of animal models reduced the dose required to prevent 
movement in response to noxious stimuli compared with 
selective delivery to brain.28 Moreover, transection of the 
spinal cord in rats did not alter sensitivity to isoflurane of 
reflex movement in response to noxious stimuli.29 These 
studies strongly implicate the spinal cord as primarily 
responsible for mediating the immobility caused by vola-
tile anesthesia.
ORGAN SYSTEM EFFECTS
Inhaled anesthetics alter normal physiologic mecha-
nisms and can have pronounced, organ-specific effects. 
The clinical pharmacology of inhaled anesthesia can 
be exploited to achieve intraoperative goals, but, con-
versely, anesthetics can have undesirable detrimental 
effects on patients. Understanding organ-specific effects 
and toxicity is thus critical to the safe use of inhaled 
anesthetics.
Central Nervous System
With increasing doses of volatile anesthetics, neuronal 
activity is progressively inhibited. These effects can be 
readily observed by EEG, which shows a transition to 
higher-amplitude and lower-frequency electrical pat-
terns, primarily in the alpha (8 to 13 Hz) and slow 
delta (1 Hz) frequencies, with theta oscillations (5 to 8 
Hz) appearing at MAC doses of anesthetics.30 Further 
increases beyond typical surgical levels of anesthesia 
produce burst suppression and, ultimately, an isolectric 
EEG. Once an isolectric EEG is induced, detectable neu-
ronal electrophysiologic activity is mostly absent, and 
cerebral metabolism, reflected in the cerebral metabolic 
Fig. 7.8 The potency of inhaled anesthetics correlates with their 
lipophilicity. This relationship was originally described as the 
Meyer–Overton correlation. More recently, inhibition of purified 
luciferase was also shown to correlate with anesthetic potency. 
This seminal experiment focused further research on anesthetic 
interactions with proteins, which indicates that inhaled anesthesia 
acts through modulation of various proteins involved in neuronal 
function, not via bulk effects on lipid bilayers. (From Hudson AE, 
Herold KF, Hemmings HC Jr. Pharmacology of inhaled anesthetics, 
Ch. 11. In Hemmings HC Jr., Egan TD, eds. Pharmacology and 
Physiology for Anesthesia: Foundations and Clinical Application, 2nd 
ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019:219.)
n-Decanol
n-Decanol
n-Nonanol
n-Nonanol
n-Octanol
n-Octanol
n-Hexane
n-Hexane
n-Pentane
n-Pentane
n-Pentanol
n-Propanol
n-Propanol
Acetone
Acetone
Methanol
−1
−1
−2
0
A
B
0
Log10 (Lipid bilayer/water partition coefficient)
Log10 (Potency for general anesthesia)
1
1
2
3
4
5
6
2
3
4
5
−1
−1
−2
0
0
Log10 (Potency for luciferase inhibition)
Log10 (Potency for general anesthesia)
1
1
2
3
4
5
6
2
3
4
5
Methanol
Ethanol
Ethanol
n-Butanol
n-Butanol
Diethyl ether
Paraldehyde
2-Butanone
Benzyl Alcohol
Benzyl Alcohol
n-Hexanol
n-Hexanol
Chloroform
n-Heptanol
Methoxyflurane
Methoxyflurane
Halothane
Halothane
II
Chapter 7 Inhaled Anesthetics
93
considered excessive for the purposes of surgery. Burst 
suppression has been targeted to prevent ischemic neu-
ronal injury, but no advantage in neurologic outcomes 
has been shown.32 Isoelectricity is also targeted in 
patients with status epilepticus unresponsive to other 
treatments.
Stereotypic, dose-dependent changes in the EEG pat-
tern occur with volatile anesthesia. At sub-MAC con-
centrations, beta frequencies (13 to 24 Hz) are reduced 
and alpha and delta (8 to 13 and 1 to 4 Hz, respectively) 
frequencies predominate. Increasing anesthetic concen-
tration further causes theta frequencies (4 to 7 Hz) to 
emerge (Fig. 7.11).30 At doses of 1.3 times MAC and 
above, burst suppression can be observed.33 These dose-
dependent effects on the EEG have led to the development 
of devices to monitor the “brain state” under anesthesia, 
with the BIS monitor being the most widely used and 
studied. However, large trials investigating BIS have not 
shown reduced rates of intraoperative awareness when 
compared with maintaining end-tidal anesthetic above 
0.7 times MAC,34 nor has there been a mortality benefit 
associated with targeting BIS values to a lighter depth of 
anesthesia35 (also see Chapter 20).
rate for oxygen (CMRO2), is reduced to 40% to 50% 
of normal, with the remaining metabolic demand 
needed to maintain baseline ion gradients and cellular 
integrity.31 For most agents, further decreases can be 
achieved only by hypothermia. Halothane can produce 
dose-dependent reductions even after cessation of corti-
cal activity, which has been interpreted as evidence of 
neurotoxicity.31 An isoelectric EEG under anesthesia is 
Wake
A
B
Thalamo
cortical
(fMRI)
Cortico-
cortical
(EEG)
~4.4% Sevo
3% Sevo
2% Sevo
0.05
0.05
x → y
x ← y
x = y
Fig. 7.10 Inhaled anesthetics at clinically relevant concentrations 
disrupt normal functional connectivity in the brain, which may 
contribute to unconsciousness. (From Hemmings HC, Riegelhaupt 
PM, Kelz MB, et al. Towards a comprehensive understanding of 
anesthetic mechanisms of action: A decade of discovery. Trends 
Pharmacol Sci. 2019;40[7]:464–481.)
Sevoflurane
3%
2%
1%
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
0
20
40
60
80
100
15
10
5
15
20
25
10
Power (dB)
Frequency (Hz)
5
0
Fig. 7.11 Stereotypic changes in the electroencephalogram occur with volatile anesthetics. Increases in 
delta and alpha frequencies with sevoflurane are shown in the spectrogram by intense bands centered 
around frequencies of ∼1 Hz and ∼10 Hz. (From Purdon PL, Sampson A, Pavone KJ, et al. Clinical 
electroencephalography for anesthesiologists part I: Background and basic signatures. Anesthesiology.
2015;123[4]:937–960.)
GABAA
receptor
Isoflurane
Sevoflurane
Nitrous oxide
and xenon
Glycine
receptor
nACH
(muscle)
receptor
nACH
(neuronal)
receptor
5-HT3
receptor
Na+
channels
Ca2+
channels
Background
K+
channels
AMPA
receptor
NMDA
receptor
Fig. 7.9 Inhaled anesthetics inhibit or potentiate various ion channels and neurotransmitter receptors 
involved in neurotransmission within the central nervous system, with agent-specific differences. (From 
Hudson AE, Herold KF, Hemmings HC Jr. Pharmacology of inhaled anesthetics, Ch. 11. In: Hemmings HC 
Jr., Egan TD, eds. Pharmacology and Physiology for Anesthesia: Foundations and Clinical Application, 2nd ed. 
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019:220.)
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
94
They also affect respiratory drive in response to oxygen 
and carbon dioxide. In unanesthetized subjects decreas-
ing oxygenation increases minute ventilation, an effect 
known as the hypoxic ventilatory response (HVR). At 
subanesthetic doses, as might occur during postanesthetic 
recovery, volatile anesthetics potently suppress HVR, 
and at surgical concentrations, HVR can be completely 
abolished.46 Volatile anesthetics also profoundly inhibit 
the peripheral chemoreceptor response to hypercarbia.47
However, the central chemoreceptor response remains, 
Cerebral autoregulation describes the relationship 
between cerebral blood flow (CBF) and cerebral or systemic 
arterial pressures. Within the autoregulatory range, CBF 
remains nearly constant despite changing mean arterial 
blood pressure. With excessively low or excessively high 
arterial pressures falling outside this range, CBF decreases 
or increases, respectively, in a pressure-dependent man-
ner.36 Cerebral autoregulation is inhibited by relatively high 
doses (above 1.5 times MAC) of halothane, isoflurane, and 
desflurane, while sevoflurane affects autoregulation less.37 38
CBF is coupled to metabolic demands, a process called 
flow–metabolism coupling. This process is altered by 
volatile anesthesia. Volatile anesthetics are direct vaso-
dilators, and at higher concentrations, this can lead to 
an increase in CBF. However, as noted earlier, volatile 
anesthetics also reduce CMRO2. Whether CBF is increased 
depends on the relative effects on vasodilation and sup-
pression of CMRO2
37 38 Volatile anesthetic concentrations 
below MAC generally do not cause an increase in CBF or 
intracranial pressure (ICP) because vasodilation is offset 
by the decreased CMRO2. However, above MAC, the vaso-
dilatory effects predominate and ICP increases.
Cardiovascular System
All volatile anesthetics produce hypotension, mediated 
primarily by systemic vasodilation.39 40 The reduction in 
systemic vascular resistance (SVR) caused by arterial vas-
odilation is accompanied by inhibition of the baroreceptor 
reflex, particularly with halothane, thereby augmenting 
the hypotension from vasodilation (Fig.7.12).41 42 Volatile 
anesthetics also depress myocardial contractility; at MAC 
or greater, isoflurane, sevoflurane, and desflurane can 
decrease cardiac index.39 40 The depressed cardiac func-
tion may be partially offset by reduced SVR; for instance, 
at 2.0 times MAC of sevoflurane, cardiac index normal-
izes despite reduced contractility because afterload is also 
decreased (Fig. 7.13).40
Volatile anesthetics at higher concentrations, or with a 
sudden change in concentration, can cause tachycardia, an 
effect most prominent with desflurane; this phenomenon is 
likely the result of a vagolytic effect.43 Volatile anesthetics 
can prolong the QT interval, which can predispose patients 
with prolonged QT interval to torsades de pointes. Halo-
thane, in particular, predisposes to ventricular tachycardia 
resulting from epinephrine. However, volatile anesthetics 
can have either proarrhythmic or antiarrhythmic effects 
depending on the underlying predisposing pathology and 
the part of the conduction system at risk.44
Pulmonary System
Volatile anesthetics alter many aspects of pulmonary 
physiology. Although they increase respiratory rate, they 
concurrently decrease tidal volume such that minute 
ventilation is reduced in a dose-dependent fashion.45
Halothane
Desflurane
1600
1400
1200
1000
Dynes/second/cm5
800
600
400
0.0
0.5
1.0
MAC
1.5
2.0
2.5
Fig. 7.12 Volatile anesthetics reduce vascular resistance. The 
reduction in systemic vascular resistance is dose-dependent and 
agent-specific (isoflurane > desflurane > sevoflurane > halothane).
Change in Cardiac index
Minimum Alveolar Concentration
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
H
S
I
D
3
1
1
Lmin∙m2
Fig. 7.13 Volatile anesthetics variably affect cardiac index. 
Halothane > sevoflurane > isoflurane produce dose-dependent 
reductions in cardiac index, whereas desflurane has comparatively 
little effect. Cardiac index increases with 2 MAC isoflurane. (From 
Ebert TJ, Naze SA. Inhaled anesthetics, Ch. 18. In: Barash PG, 
Cahalan MK, Cullen BF, et al., eds. Clinical Anesthesia, 8th ed. 
Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2017:474.)
II
Chapter 7 Inhaled Anesthetics
95
A
90
80
Paco2 (mm Hg)
70
60
50
40
30
0
0.5
1
MAC
Desflurane-N2O
Isoflurane
Halothane
N2O
Desflurane-O2
1.5
2
B
1.2
1.0
Fraction of awake ventilatory
response to CO2
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
0
0.5
1
MAC
Halothane
N2O
Isoflurane
Desflurane-N2O
Desflurane-O2
1.5
2
Volatile anesthetics are all bronchodilators because 
of their smooth muscle–relaxing effects; however, there 
are agent-specific differences, such that sevoflurane and 
halothane exert greater effects than isoflurane or des-
flurane.48 Mucociliary clearance is decreased by volatile 
anesthetics and nitrous oxide in a dose-dependent fash-
ion,49 with sevoflurane causing the least impairment in 
vitro.50 Volatile anesthetics may also decrease surfactant 
production.51 These effects may contribute to postop-
erative pulmonary complications, including atelectasis, 
hypoxemia, and pneumonia.
As vasodilators, volatile anesthetics diminish hypoxic 
pulmonary vasoconstriction in a dose-dependent fashion. 
Halothane is most potent, but isoflurane, sevoflurane, 
and desflurane have similar effects.52 The net impact on 
pulmonary shunt during one-lung ventilation is minimal, 
so it is unlikely to have a clinically relevant impact in 
worsening gas exchange.53
Renal System
Historically, kidney injury caused by volatile anesthesia 
was a concern. Methoxyflurane is capable of causing 
high-output renal failure as a result of elevated plasma 
levels of fluoride from its metabolism (Fig. 7.15).54 This 
toxicity led to discontinuation of its use in anesthetic 
practice, although it continues to be used outside the 
United States in nonanesthetic doses via inhaler as an 
analgesic for trauma and procedural pain.55 Production 
of compound A from sevoflurane breakdown by alkaline 
carbon dioxide absorbents can cause nephrotoxicity in 
animal models; however, compound A has not been 
shown to lead to kidney injury in humans.56
Ischemic preconditioning by volatile anesthetics may 
be protective in ischemia-reperfusion injury that can lead 
to acute kidney injury (AKI).57 However, in animal mod-
els, volatile anesthesia is also capable of reducing renal 
blood flow and oxygen delivery when compared with 
propofol anesthesia.58 There are few randomized con-
trolled trials (RCTs) to assess whether volatile anesthesia 
may be nephrotoxic or protective. In the small VAPOR-1 
trial the sevoflurane group had a lower incidence of 
kidney transplant graft failure compared with the propo-
fol group despite higher kidney injury biomarkers after 
surgery.58 Further studies are needed to assess if volatile 
anesthetics can be used to mitigate ischemic kidney 
injury and improve kidney function postoperatively.
Hepatic System
Certain volatile anesthetics can cause hepatotoxicity. 
Most notably, halothane can lead to fulminant hepati-
tis in 1/15,000 cases, attributed to trifluoroacetylated 
compounds generated by CYP2E1 oxidative metabolism, 
triggering adduct and neoantigen formation and result-
ing in autoimmune liver injury (Fig. 7.16).59 Isoflurane 
Fig. 7.14 Volatile anesthetics suppress the ventilatory response 
to carbon dioxide. (A) Progressive hypercarbia occurs in a dose-
dependent and agent-specific manner. (B) All agents similarly 
depress the ventilatory response to inhaled carbon dioxide. 
Paco2, Arterial partial pressure of CO2. (From McKay RE. Inhaled 
anesthetics, Ch. 7. In: Pardo M, ed. Basics of Anesthesia, 7th ed. 
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018:99.)
but is depressed up to 70% at surgical levels of volatile 
anesthesia (Fig. 7.14). Thus volatile anesthesia makes a 
patient reliant on Paco2 to stimulate ventilation.
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
96
and desflurane also produce trifluoroacetylated com-
pounds, but substantially less, and therefore have esti-
mated rates of hepatic failure less than 1/1,000,000, 
whereas sevoflurane does not produce trifluoroacety-
lated by-products. Thus the modern volatile anesthet-
ics have a substantially reduced incidence of clinically 
relevant hepatotoxicity.59
The phenomenon of ischemic preconditioning has 
led to interest in using volatile anesthetics to mitigate 
hepatic injury in liver transplant,60 but supportive clini-
cal evidence is lacking. Hepatic blood flow is altered by 
volatile anesthetics. Total hepatic blood flow is reduced 
at doses above MAC. Portal blood flow is decreased, 
likely secondary to reduced cardiac output and dimin-
ished blood flow to preportal organs. However, hepatic 
arterial blood flow is either preserved or increased, an 
effect that could be the result of hepatic arterial blood 
flow response or direct vasodilation.61
Neuromuscular Function
Volatile anesthetics inhibit nicotinic acetylcholine 
receptors and thereby affect neuromuscular function. 
All volatile anesthetics potentiate the effects of non-
depolarizing neuromuscular blocking drugs in a dose-
dependent, agent-specific fashion.62 This effect appears 
to result from direct, noncompetitive antagonism of 
nicotinic acetylcholine receptors. However, decreased 
acetylcholine release from presynaptic nerve terminals 
at the neuromuscular junction may also contribute.63
The primary effect appears to be potentiation of neuro-
muscular blockade. Studies on the duration or recovery 
of neuromuscular function have yielded inconsistent 
results.62 64
UNIQUE ISSUES WITH NITROUS OXIDE
Nitrous oxide has unique properties that distinguish it 
pharmacologically from other inhaled anesthetics. The 
MAC of nitrous oxide is 104 vol%, and the MAC-awake 
is higher than for volatile anesthetics (∼0.6 MAC).65 Thus 
nitrous oxide must be used with other anesthetic agents to 
achieve general anesthesia and minimize the risk of aware-
ness. The relatively high concentrations required for surgi-
cal anesthesia give rise to the concentration and second 
gas effects (see earlier). A similar pharmacologic principle 
applies on emergence from nitrous oxide. Once nitrous 
oxide is discontinued, the partial pressure of nitrous oxide 
in blood exceeds the partial pressure of nitrous oxide in 
the alveoli; the resulting diffusion of nitrous oxide from 
blood to alveoli causes dilution of other alveolar gases. 
Dilution of oxygen, known as diffusion hypoxia, can pre-
dispose patients to hypoxemia on emergence from nitrous 
oxide anesthesia.65 However, this process also contributes 
to the rapid emergence profile of nitrous oxide.
Fig. 
7.16 Hepatic 
metabolism 
of 
halothane 
produces 
trifluoroacetylated adducts. Adducted liver proteins can form 
neoantigens that trigger an autoimmune reaction, causing fulminant 
hepatotoxicity. TFA, Trifluroacetyl. (From Forman SA, Ishizawa Y. Inhaled 
anesthetic pharmacokinetics: Uptake, distribution, metabolism, and 
toxicity, Ch. 20. In: Gropper MA, ed. Miller s Anesthesia, 9th ed. 
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:529.)
Fig. 7.15 Metabolism of certain volatile anesthetics can increase 
serum fluoride concentration. Volatile anesthetics exhibit agent-
specific metabolism and release of fluoride. This effect is greatest 
with anesthetic doses of methoxyflurane and can precipitate 
nephrotoxicity. (From Forman SA, Ishizawa Y. Inhaled anesthetic 
pharmacokinetics: Uptake, distribution, metabolism, and toxicity, 
Ch. 20. In: Gropper MA, ed. Miller s Anesthesia, 9th ed. Philadelphia: 
Elsevier; 2020:530.)
II
Chapter 7 Inhaled Anesthetics
97
anesthesia, occurring in 30% of patients, that have 
profound effects on patient satisfaction.68 A variety 
of risk factors have been shown to increase the likeli-
hood of PONV (Fig. 7.18).68 The Apfel score enables risk 
stratification for PONV, with 1 point each assigned for 
postoperative opioid use, being a nonsmoker, having a 
history of PONV or motion sickness, and female sex; a 
score of 4 predicts an 80% risk of PONV.68 Other factors 
also contribute to the development of PONV, including 
type and duration of surgery, age, and the use of volatile 
Because it is used clinically at high partial pressures 
and its solubility exceeds nitrogen, nitrous oxide diffuses 
into enclosed gas-filled compartments and can generate 
pressures that may be harmful. For this reason, nitrous 
oxide is contraindicated in conditions or surgeries gener-
ating enclosed compartments of gas, for example, closed-
loop bowel obstruction, pneumocephalus, pneumothorax, 
middle ear surgery, and ophthalmic surgeries using injec-
tions of insoluble gases such as sulfur hexafluoride.65
Nitrous oxide inhibits methionine synthetase. Prolonged 
use in patients with vitamin B12 deficiency can promote 
neuropathy and megaloblastic anemia.65 Homocysteine 
levels may also be increased by nitrous oxide, which has 
raised concern for increased cardiovascular morbidity 
because of the deleterious effects of elevated homocysteine 
(Fig. 7.17). In the large ENIGMA RCT comparing volatile 
anesthesia with nitrous oxide in 30% oxygen with volatile 
anesthesia in 80% oxygen patients in the nitrous group 
had a higher rate of myocardial infarction (MI), though 
stroke and death were the same in both groups.66 A follow-
up study, ENIGMA II, examined cardiovascular morbidity 
and death in high-risk patients, maintaining the same 
fraction of inspired oxygen (Fio2) between groups. This 
trial, which was better powered and designed to evaluate 
cardiovascular morbidity resulting from nitrous oxide, 
failed to detect differences in MI, stroke, or death. Thus 
nitrous oxide is likely safe to use with regard to cardiovas-
cular outcomes, even in high-risk patients.67
TOXICITY AND ADVERSE EVENTS
Postoperative Nausea and Vomiting
Postoperative nausea and vomiting (PONV) are com-
mon complications of general anesthesia with inhaled 
DNA 
methylation
CH3
Methionine
Dietary intake 
Betaine 
pathway
S-Adenosyl
homocysteine
S-Adenosyl
methionine
Homocysteine
Methionine
 systhase
vitamin B12
Nitrous
oxide
5-Methyl
THF
Dietary 
folate
Tetrahydro-
folate
10-Formyl
THF
5,10-Methylenyl 
THF
5,10-Methylene 
THF
Serine
Glycine
DNA synthesis 
dTMP
dUMP
Dihydro-
folate
Folic 
acid
Fig. 7.17 Nitrous oxide inhibits methionine synthetase. Prolonged use of nitrous oxide can cause 
homocystinemia and reduce tetrahydrofolate formation, which promotes megaloblastic anemia. (From 
Forman SA, Ishizawa Y. Inhaled anesthetic pharmacokinetics: Uptake, distribution, metabolism, and 
toxicity, Ch. 20. In: Gropper MA, ed. Miller’s Anesthesia, 9th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:534.)
Age
Non-
smoking
Hx of PONV or 
motion sickness
Volatile
 anesthesia
Risk surgery
Female
Postop opioid
Risk factors for 
PONV in adults 
Duration
(hour)
Fig. 7.18 Use of volatile anesthetics is a major risk factor 
for postoperative nausea and vomiting (PONV). (From Gan TJ, 
Belani KG, Bergese S, et al. Fourth consensus guidelines for the 
management of postoperative nausea and vomiting. Anesth 
Analg. 2020;131[2]:411–448.)
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
98
myonecrosis, hypermetabolism, and severe hyperther-
mia. The presenting symptoms are often an unexplained 
increase in temperature or end-tidal CO2, tachycardia, 
lactic acidosis, hyperkalemia, and rhabdomylosis.70
Without treatment, mortality is 60% to 80%. How-
ever, prompt recognition and aggressive treatment 
can reduce mortality to <2%.70 71 The specific therapy 
for MH is dantrolene, which is an inhibitor of RyR1 
that prevents excessive release of calcium from the 
sarcoplasmic reticulum. Supportive care with cool-
ing, hyperventilation with 100% oxygen, intravenous 
bicarbonate and fluids, electrolyte management, and 
hemodynamic support are also critical (Table 7.3).70
The severity of the disease requires that, in patients 
who have MH or may be MH susceptible, precau-
tions must be taken to avoid any exposure to volatile 
anesthetic or succinylcholine triggers.70 The disease 
phenotype can be tested at limited centers by the caf-
feine halothane contracture test and confirmed with 
genetic testing that shows a pathogenic mutation.70
The Malignant Hyperthermia Association of the United 
States (MHAUS; https://www.mhaus.org/) is an excel-
lent resource for information and offers a 24-hour hot-
line that can be called during an emergency possibly 
caused by MH.
anesthesia. The pathogenesis of PONV is likely the result 
of anesthetic and surgical effects affecting serotonin-
ergic, dopaminergic, and µ opioid receptors of the area 
postrema of the brainstem, with vagal and vestibular 
afferents contributing.69 It is unclear how volatile anes-
thetics specifically affect these pathways. Nitrous oxide 
used for more than an hour further increases risk, but 
prophylactic antiemetics can ameliorate the impact of 
nitrous oxide.68
Malignant Hyperthermia
Malignant hyperthermia (MH) is a pharmacogenetic 
reaction that can lead to a lethal response to volatile 
anesthesia or succinylcholine. MH is caused most com-
monly by mutations in the ryanodine receptor 1 (RyR1) 
isoform, but about 25% of patients have mutations in 
other genes, such as the CACNA1 gene that encodes 
the L-type voltage-gated calcium channel responsible 
for triggering the opening of RyR1 in skeletal muscle.69
These mutations result in excessive calcium efflux from 
the sarcoplasmic reticulum, which is the major intracel-
lular store of calcium (Fig. 7.19). This overwhelming rise 
in cytosolic calcium in skeletal muscle leads to uncon-
trolled, sustained muscle contraction, muscle rigidity, 
Fig. 7.19 Pathophysiology of malignant hyperthermia (MH). MH is a pharmacogenetic syndrome, often 
inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion, that is caused primarily by mutations in the ryanodine 
receptor isoform 1 (RyR1), which is expressed in skeletal muscle. In patients with MH, exposure to 
volatile anesthetics and succinylcholine triggers excessive release of calcium from the sarcoplasmic 
reticulum, leading to multisystem toxicity from hypermetabolism, hyperthermia, and myonecrosis. DHP,
Dihydropyridine. (From Zhou J, Nozri A, Bateman B, et al. Malignant hyperthermia and muscle-related 
disorders, Ch. 35. In: Gropper MA, ed. Miller’s Anesthesia, 9th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:1118.)
II
Chapter 7 Inhaled Anesthetics
99
cognitive deficits in adult animals. Studies in nonhuman 
primates confirmed increased neuroapoptosis and behav-
ioral changes, such as increased social anxiety responses, 
in young animals exposed to volatile anesthetics.72 These 
preclinical studies suggest that exposure to many com-
monly used anesthetics in mammals during early life, 
during the phase of rapid synaptogenesis, can cause 
acute toxicity leading to persistent neurodevelopmental 
deficits.
Large, retrospective cohort studies in young children 
requiring general anesthesia have yielded inconsist-
ent findings regarding neurocognitive impairment, 
Developmental Neurotoxicity (also see 
Chapter 12)
Whether commonly used inhaled anesthetics can cause 
neurotoxicity and long-lasting cognitive dysfunction has 
been studied intensively since the early 2000s. Initial 
studies identified that gamma-aminobutyric acid type A 
receptor (GABAAR) agonists, such as volatile anesthetics, 
and NMDA receptor antagonists, such as nitrous oxide 
and ketamine, caused widespread apoptosis of neurons 
and oligodendrocytes in fetal and neonatal rodents.72
These effects were accompanied by evidence of persistent 
Action
Notes
Stop potent inhalation agents
Turn vaporizers “OFF” and/or insert activated charcoal filters into the circuit
Do not repeat succinylcholine if it has been 
previously administered
Increase minute ventilation to lower ETCO2
Eliminate the inhalational agent
Get help
Duty anesthetist
Consultant anesthetist
Prepare and administer dantrolene
2.5 mg/kg initial dose
Every 10–15 min until acidosis, pyrexia, muscle rigidity are resolving
Begin cooling measures if hyperthermic
Tissue destruction will occur at 41.5°C (106.7°F)
Use intravenous normal saline at 4°C (39.2°F)
Ice packs to all exposed areas
More aggressive measures as needed
Stop cooling measures at 38.5°C (101.3°F)
Treat arrhythmias as needed
Amiodarone is the first choice
Lignocaine
Do not use calcium channel blockers
Secure blood gases, electrolytes, creatine 
kinase, blood, and urine for myoglobin
Coagulation profile; check values regularly
Treat hyperkalemia with hyperventilation, glucose and insulin as needed
Once crisis is under control, an MH hotline should be contacted for further 
guidance
Continue dantrolene
1 mg/kg every 4–8 h for 24–48 h
Alternatively and only if recrudescence occurs, dantrolene at 2.5 mg/kg bolus
Ensure urine output of 2 mL/kg/h with
Mannitol
Furosemide
Fluids as needed
Evaluate need for invasive monitoring and 
continued mechanical ventilation
Observe patient in intensive care unit
At least 24 h
Refer patient and family for MH testing
Contracture or DNA testing
Table 7.3
Managing a Malignant Hyperthermia Crisis
From Rosenberg H, Pollock N, Schiemann A, et al. Malignant hyperthermia: A review. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2015;10:93.
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
100
studies comparing neuraxial anesthesia with volatile 
anesthesia report similar rates of cognitive dysfunc-
tion at 3 months.82 84 However, studies comparing 
volatile anesthesia with intravenous anesthesia have 
found worse cognitive function with volatile anesthe-
sia within 1 week. Overall, it remains difficult to draw 
firm conclusions as to whether cognitive impairment 
can be attributed to general anesthesia, surgery, or 
both as a result of significant heterogeneity in research 
methods.85 Nevertheless, in 2018 the Perioperative 
Neurotoxicity Working Group, convened as part of the 
American Society of Anesthesiologists Brain Health 
Initiative, provided recommendations for screening, 
counseling, and management goals in patients at risk 
of POCD (Box 7.2).86
Cancer Recurrence and Morbidity
Volatile anesthetics can inhibit the immune response, 
raising concern for worsened outcomes after resections 
for cancer. A recent meta analysis of nine retrospective 
analyses and a single RCT reported greater recurrence-
free and overall survival using total intravenous 
anesthesia (TIVA) as opposed to volatile anesthesia.87
However, the authors noted that substantial heterogene-
ity of study design and outcomes weakened the conclu-
sion. In the single RCT included in the meta analysis 
there was no difference at 2 years in women randomized 
to receive propofol and remifentanil or sevoflurane for 
breast cancer resection; however, the relatively short 
follow-up and small trial size (80 patients) may have 
limited the ability of the trial to detect survival dif-
ferences.88 Large RCTs are underway to better assess 
whether volatile anesthesia worsens cancer outcomes 
compared with TIVA.
though developmental deficits may be more likely with 
multiple exposures and underlying risk factors.73 The 
accumulated evidence prompted the US Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA) to release a statement in 2016 
that lengthy or repeated exposure to general anesthe-
sia may affect the cognitive development of children, 
with a recommendation to postpone procedures requir-
ing anesthesia when reasonable.74 International and 
US anesthesia experts have developed advocacy and 
research initiatives, SafeTots and SmartTots, respec-
tively.73 The publication of two large, prospective 
cohort studies with rigorous neurocognitive evaluations 
found no difference in outcomes in children exposed 
once to general anesthesia compared with nonexposed 
children,75 76 though deficits were found in secondary 
outcomes of learning and behavior in multiply exposed 
children.76 To date, only one study, the general anes-
thesia or awake-regional anesthesia in infancy (GAS) 
trial, has randomized young children to either general 
anesthesia or regional anesthesia without sedation to 
assess neurodevelopmental impairment. In prespecified 
analyses at 2 and 5 years of age, no differences in neu-
rocognitive assessments were found for children receiv-
ing a mean of 1 hour of sevoflurane compared with spi-
nal anesthesia.77 78 Thus inhaled anesthesia for a single 
surgery lasting an hour or less is likely safe. Whether 
longer or multiple exposures to general anesthesia or 
preexisting neurologic disease predispose to develop-
mental deficits in young children remains unresolved.
Postoperative Cognitive Dysfunction
The risk of postoperative neurocognitive disorder 
(PND), also known as postoperative cognitive dysfunc-
tion (POCD), after surgery has been studied for nearly 
70years.79 Nevertheless, controversy continues as to 
whether anesthesia, surgery, or both lead to lasting 
cognitive impairments. Possible mechanisms that have 
been explored in preclinical models include inflam-
mation and increased proinflammatory cytokines, 
increased tau protein phosphorylation, increased Aβ
peptide, mitochondrial dysfunction, calcium dysregula-
tion, decreased neuronal dendritic spines, and altera-
tions in neurotransmitter receptor expression.80 In 
clinical studies higher rates of cognitive dysfunction 
occur 1 week after surgery and anesthesia compared 
with nonoperative control subjects, but there are mixed 
results as to whether cognitive impairment persists at 
3 months. In a study with assessments at 1 to 2 years 
postoperatively there was no difference in cognitive 
impairments between operative and control subjects, 
and only 1% of subjects had cognitive impairment at 
all three assessment intervals (1 week, 3months, and 
1 to 2 years).81
It is possible that neurocognitive dysfunction does 
not result from general anesthesia, as randomized 
Box 7.2
Intraoperative Recommendations to Promote 
Perioperative Brain Health
Avoid (or use with caution) centrally acting 
anticholinergics, benzodiazepines, meperidine, first- and 
second-generation antipsychotics, corticosteroids, and H2
receptor antagonists
Avoid relative hypotension
Maintain normothermia
Monitor age-adjusted end-tidal MAC fraction
Use EEG-based intraoperative brain monitoring to titrate 
anesthetic administration
Adapted from Berger M, Schenning KJ, Brown CH, et al. Best practices 
for postoperative brain health: Recommendations from the fifth 
international perioperative neurotoxicity working group. Anesth Analg. 
2018;127:1406–1413.EEG, Electroencephalogram; MAC, minimum 
alveolar concentration.
II
Chapter 7 Inhaled Anesthetics
101
CO2 Absorbent
Ca(OH)2 (%)
Ba(OH)2 (%)
KOH (%)
NaOH (%)
LiOH (%)
H2O (%)
Baralyme†
70
10
4.6
–
–
14
Soda lime I
80
–
2.6
1.3
–
15
Sodasorb
90
–
0.0005
3.8
–
16
Drägersorb 800 plus
82
–
0.003
2
–
16
Soda lime II/Medisorb
81
–
0.003
2.6
–
16
Spherasorb
84.5
–
0.003
1.5
–
14
Amsorb
83.2
–
–
–
–
14.4
LofloSorb
84
–
–
–
–
16
Superia
79.5
–
–
–
–
17.5
Lithium hydroxide
–
–
–
–
99
1
From Forman SA, Ishizawa Y. Inhaled anesthetic pharmacokinetics: Uptake, distribution, metabolism, and toxicity, Ch. 20. In: Gropper MA, 
ed. Miller’s Anesthesia, 9th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:509–539. Data from Keijzer C, Perez RSGM, De Lange JJ. Compound A and carbon 
monoxide production from sevoflurane and seven different types of carbon dioxide absorbent in a patient model. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand.
2007;51:31–37 and Kharasch ED, Powers KM, Artru AA. Comparison of Amsorb, sodalime, and Baralyme degradation of volatile anesthetics and 
formation of carbon monoxide and compound A in swine in vivo. Anesthesiology. 2002;96:173–182.
*Various absorbents also contain other components, such as polyvinylpyrrolidone, calcium chloride, calcium sulfate, magnesium chloride, and 
aluminosilicate.
†Baralyme was withdrawn from the market in 2004.
Table 7.4
Composition of Base Chemicals and Water Content of Carbon Dioxide Absorbents*
Reactions With Carbon Dioxide Absorbents 
(also see Chapter 15)
Modern anesthesia workstations are designed to work 
with circle circuits that allow rebreathing of expired gas; 
this design conserves inhaled anesthetics, reduces the 
release of anesthetics to the atmosphere, and helps to 
maintain physiologic airway temperature and humidity. 
To prevent excessive buildup and rebreathing of CO2, 
circuits include CO2 absorbent in the expiratory limb 
that consists of a mixture of sodium, potassium, calcium, 
or barium hydroxides to catalyze a chemical reaction 
converting CO2 and water into carbonates (Table 7.4). 
However, with desiccated absorbent, toxic by-products 
can be formed. Carbon monoxide (CO) can be generated, 
potentially causing CO poisoning. The propensity to gen-
erate CO is dependent on the makeup of the absorbent 
(KOH > NaOH >> Ba(OH)2 > Ca(OH)2) and the volatile 
anesthetic used (primarily desflurane and isoflurane).89
Additionally, the reactions are exothermic, and prolonged 
use of desiccated absorbent, particularly with sevoflu-
rane, can generate substantial heat and, rarely, cause a 
fire or explosion.89 90 Although newer CO2 absorbents are 
less hazardous, it is important to replace the absorbent 
regularly, particularly once the pH indicator shows it is 
exhausted.
Compound A is a breakdown product formed by the 
reaction of sevoflurane with strong alkali absorbents 
(Fig. 7.20). It can cause nephrotoxicity in rodent models, 
but has not been shown to cause toxicity in human 
subjects.91 The theoretical risk of injury has led to the 
recommendation to maintain a fresh gas flow of at least 
1 L min−1 if used for over 2 MAC-hours.54
METABOLISM, ELIMINATION, AND 
RECOVERY
The modern volatile anesthetics isoflurane, sevoflurane, 
and desflurane are minimally metabolized (0.2%, 5%, 
and 0.02%, respectively). Halothane, however, undergoes 
substantial hepatic metabolism (46%).92,93 Metabolism 
occurs primarily by the cytochrome P450 system in the 
liver, specifically by CYP2E1, although other enzymes 
contribute to other volatile anesthetics. The breakdown 
of volatile anesthetics liberates fluoride.93 Only methoxy-
flurane has been shown to release sufficient fluoride to 
generate clinical renal injury.
Similar to intravenous anesthetics, the duration of 
inhaled anesthesia affects their elimination, a concept 
referred to as context-sensitive decrement time (Fig. 
7.21) (also see Chapter 4). For procedures of short 
duration, there are minimal differences in the time to 
eliminate volatile anesthetics. However, longer dura-
tions of administration increase the decrement time. 
This phenomenon is explained by a multicompart-
ment pharmacokinetic model in which the anesthetic 
accumulates in slowly equilibrating, lipophilic tissues 
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
102
such as fat.94 Thus the critical pharmacologic param-
eters dictating the context-sensitive decrement time of 
inhaled anesthetics are their blood–gas and blood–tis-
sue partition coefficients, particularly blood–fat, and 
relative perfusion of the various compartments. The 
blood–gas partition coefficient largely determines elim-
ination and recovery for shorter procedures, whereas 
the blood–fat partition coefficient affects elimination 
for longer procedures.
Beyond these pharmacokinetic considerations, 
emergence from general anesthesia shows hysteresis 
with respect to the partial pressure of inhaled anes-
thetic, meaning less anesthetic is required to maintain 
anesthesia than to induce it. This phenomenon, also 
referred to as neural inertia, may be best explained 
if emergence is considered as a series of transitions 
through discrete brain states under anesthesia with 
resistance to state transitions.95 Thus patients can 
remain anesthetized despite minimal inhaled anesthetic 
concentrations. Moreover, greater population variabil-
ity is observed for doses of anesthetics required for 
emergence as opposed to induction. Thus emergence 
is more complex than pharmacokinetic elimination of 
inhaled anesthetics and is not linearly related to partial 
pressure (Fig. 7.22).
Minutes to recovery
Hours of 1.6 MAC-anesthesia
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Halothane
Isoflurane
Sevoflurane
Desflurane
Fig. 7.21 Context-sensitive elimination of volatile anesthetics. 
Similar to intravenous anesthetics, inhaled anesthetics exhibit 
context-sensitive decrement times, whereby longer durations of 
administration prolong the time from cessation of delivery to 
elimination and recovery. Anesthetics with greater blood and tissue 
solubility have longer recovery times. (From Eger EI II. Desflurane 
(Suprane): A Compendium and Reference. Nutley: Anaquest; 1993:111.)
Fig. 7.20 Degradation of sevoflurane. Compound A is formed by the breakdown of sevoflurane catalyzed 
by strong bases in carbon dioxide absorbents. Compound A can be inhaled and undergo metabolism in the 
body. Although compound A mediates nephrotoxicity in animal models, it has not been shown to cause 
clinically relevant kidney injury in human patients. (Adapted from Martin JL, Kandel L, Laster MJ, et al. 
Studies of the mechanism of nephrotoxicity of compound A in rats. J Anesth. 1997;11:32–37. From Forman 
SA, Ishizawa Y. Inhaled anesthetic pharmacokinetics: Uptake, distribution, metabolism, and toxicity, Ch. 20. 
In: Gropper MA, ed. Miller’s Anesthesia, 9th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:531.)
II
Chapter 7 Inhaled Anesthetics
103
Desflurane
Desflurane
Isoflurane
Isoflurane
Propofol
0
0
10,000
20,000
30,000
40,000
50,000
A
B
60,000
2O release
Propofol
Sevoflurane
Sevoflurane
2O Manufacturing
GHG emissions (gCO2e)
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
Fig. 7.23 The production and clinical use of inhaled anesthetics have agent-specific adverse environmental 
effects. Environmental impact is determined largely by atmospheric release of wasted gases. (From Sherman J, Le C, 
Lamers V, et al. Life cycle greenhouse gas emissions of anesthetic drugs. Anesth Analg. 2012;114[5]:1086–1090.)
Emergence
path
0
0.7
0.8
0.9
Fraction of MAC Induction
1.0
1.1
25
50
75
Percent without righting reflex
100
Induction
path
EC50
EC50
Fig. 7.22 Hysteresis in induction of and emergence from general anesthesia. Induction of anesthesia 
requires higher concentrations than are required for maintenance of anesthesia. Loss of righting reflex is a 
surrogate measure for loss of consciousness/immobility in rodents. (From Aranake A, Mashour GA, Avidan 
MS. Minimum alveolar concentration: Ongoing relevance and clinical utility. Anaesthesia. 2013;68:512–522.)
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
104
1. Fenster JM. Ether Day: The Strange Tale 
of America's Greatest Medical Discovery 
and the Haunted Men Who Made It. 
New York: HaperCollins Publishers Inc.; 
2002.
2. Bigelow HJ. Insensibility during surgical 
operations by inhalation. Bost Med Surg 
J. 1847;35:518–519.
3. Eger EI, Saidman LJ, Westhorpe RN. 
The Wondrous Story of Anesthesia. New 
York: Springer; 2014.
4. Warren JC. Etherization, With Surgical 
Remarks: Ticknor & Fields; 1848.
5. Kliff S. The New England Journal of 
Medicine's most important article. The 
Washington Post. 2012.
6. Targ AG, Nobuhiko Y, Eger EI, etal. 
Halogenation and anesthetic potency. 
Anesth Analg. 1989;68:599–602.
7. Eger EI. Current and future perspectives 
on inhaled anesthetics. Pharmacothera-
py. 1998;18:895–910.
8. Fiserova-Bergerova V, Holaday DA. 
Uptake and clearance of inhalation 
anesthetics in man. Drug Metab Rev. 
1979;9:43–60.
9. James MF, Manson ED, Dennett JE. 
Nitrous oxide analgesia and altitude. 
Anaesthesia. 1982;37:285–288.
10. Safar P, Tenicela R. High altitude physi-
ology in relation to anesthesia and 
inhalation 
therapy. 
Anesthesiology. 
1964;25:515–531.
11. Graham SG. The desflurane Tec 6 vapor-
izer. Br J Anaesth. 1994;72:470–473.
12. Boumphrey S, Marshall N. Understand-
ing vaporizers. Contin Educ Anaesthesia 
Crit Care Pain. 2011;11:199–203.
13. Kern D, Larcher C, Basset B, etal. 
Inside anesthesia breathing circuits: time 
to reach a set sevoflurane concentra-
tion in toddlers and newborns: simula-
tion using a test lung. Anesth Analg. 
2012;115:310–314.
14. Yasuda N, Lockhart SH, Eger EI, etal. 
Kinetics of desflurane, isoflurane, and 
halothane in humans. Anesthesiology. 
1991;74:489–498.
15. Yasuda N, Targ AG, Eger EI, etal. 
Pharmacokinetics of desflurane, sevoflu-
rane, isoflurane, and halothane in pigs. 
Anesth Analg. 1990;71:340–348.
16. Eger EI. Physicochemical properties 
and pharmacodynamics of desflurane. 
Anaesthesia. 1995;50:3–8.
17. Taheri S, Eger EI. A demonstration of 
the concentration and second gas effects 
in humans anesthetized with nitrous 
oxide and desflurane. Anesth Analg. 
1999;89:774–780.
18. Merkel G, Eger EI. A comparative 
study of halothane and halopropane 
anesthesia including method for deter-
mining equipotency. Anesthesiology. 
1963;24:346–357.
19. Aranake A, Mashour GA, Avidan MS. 
Minimum alveolar concentration: ongo-
ing relevance and clinical utility. Anaes-
thesia. 2013;68:512–522.
20. Perouansky M. The quest for a unified 
model of anesthetic action: a century in 
Claude Bernard's shadow. Anesthesiol-
ogy. 2012;117:465–474.
21. Franks NP, Lieb WR. Do general 
anaesthetics act by competitive bind-
ing to specific receptors?. Nature. 
1984;310:599–601.
22. Herold KF, Sanford RL, Lee W, etal. 
Clinical concentrations of chemically 
diverse general anesthetics minimally 
affect lipid bilayer properties. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci USA. 2017;114:3109–3114.
23. Forman SA, Chin VA. General anes-
thetics and molecular mechanisms 
of unconsciousness. Int Anesth Clin. 
2008;46:43–53.
24. Campagna JA, Miller KW, Forman SA. 
Mechanisms of actions of inhaled anes-
thetics. N Engl J Med. 2003;348:2110–
2124.
25. Morgan 
PG, 
Hoppel 
CL, 
Seden-
sky MM. Mitochondrial defects and 
anesthetic sensitivity. Anesthesiology. 
2002;96:1268–1270.
26. Hemmings Jr HC, Riegelhaupt PM, Kelz 
MB, etal. Towards a comprehensive 
understanding of anesthetic mechanisms 
of action: a decade of discovery. Trends 
Pharmacol Sci. 2019;40:464–481.
27. Sonner JM, Antognini JF, Dutton RC, 
etal. Inhaled anesthetics and immobil-
ity: mechanisms, mysteries, and mini-
mum alveolar anesthetic concentration. 
Anesth Analg. 2003;97:718–740.
28. Yang J, Chai Y, Gong C, etal. Further 
proof that the spinal cord, and not the 
brain, mediates the immobility produced 
by inhaled anesthetics. Anesthesiology. 
2009;110:591–595.
29. Rampil IJ. Anesthetic potency is not 
altered after hypothermic spinal cord 
transfection in rats. Anesthesiology. 
1994;80:606–610.
30. Purdon PL, Sampson A, Pavone KJ, etal. 
Clinical electroencephalography for 
anesthesiologists, Part 1: Background 
and basic signatures. Anesthesiology. 
2015;123:937–960.
31. Newberg LA, Milde JH, Michenfelder 
JD. The cerebral metabolic effects of 
isoflurane at and above concentrations 
that suppress corticla electrical activity. 
Anesthesiology. 1983;59:23–28.
32. Roach GW, Newman MF, Murkin JM, 
etal. Ineffectiveness of burst suppres-
sion therapy in mitigating perioperative 
cerebrovascular dysfunction. Anesthesi-
ology. 1999;90:1255–1264.
33. Pilge S, Jordan D, Kreuzer M, etal. 
Burst suppression-MAC and burst sup-
pression-CP50 as measures of cerebral 
effects of anaesthetics. Br J Anaesth. 
2014;112:1067–1074.
34. Avidan MS, Mashour GA. Preven-
tion of intraoperative awareness with 
explicit recall: making sense of the 
evidence. Anesthesiology. 2013;118:449–
456.
35. Short TG, Campbell D, Framptom C, etal: 
Anaesthetic depth and complications 
after major surgery: an international, 
randomised controlled trial. Lancet 394: 
1907–1914, 2019.
36. Dagal A, Lam AM. Cerebral autoregula-
tion and anesthesia. Curr Opin Anaes-
thesiol. 2009;22:547–552.
37. Matta BF, Mayberg TS, Lam AM. Direct 
cerebrovasodilatory effects of halo-
thane, isoflurane, and desflurane during 
propofol-induced isoelectric electroen-
cephalogram in humans. Anesthesiology. 
1995;83:980–985.
38. Matta BF, Heath KJ, Tipping K, etal. 
Direct cerebral vasodilatory effects of 
sevoflurane and isoflurane. Anesthesiol-
ogy. 1999;91:677–680.
ENVIRONMENTAL CONSIDERATIONS 
(ALSO SEE CHAPTER 49)
Evidence of ozone depletion by halogenated chemicals 
in the atmosphere elicited concern for the environmental 
impact of inhaled anesthesia as early as 1975.96 Wasted 
inhaled anesthetics are scavenged, and the exhaust is 
released from health care facility ventilation systems 
into the environment. Inhaled anesthetics can cause 
deleterious effects in two major ways: a greenhouse gas 
REFERENCES
effect and ozone depletion.97 Nitrous oxide can deplete 
ozone, and it is also a potent greenhouse gas, with a 
global warming potential 300 times higher than carbon 
dioxide.98 The medical and dental industries account for 
86% of nitrous oxide generated for use as a product, 
comprising nearly 1% of nitrous oxide released into the 
atmosphere.98 The modern halogenated agents exert envi-
ronmental effects as greenhouse gases, with atmospheric 
lifetimes and global warming potentials in the order of 
desflurane > isoflurane > sevoflurane (Fig.7.23).99,100
II
Chapter 7 Inhaled Anesthetics
105
39. McKinney MS, Fee JP, Clarke RS. Car-
diovascular effects of isoflurane and 
halothane in young and elderly adult 
patients. Br J Anaesth. 1993;71:696–
701.
40. Jr. Malan TP, DiNardo JA, Isner RJ, 
etal. Cardiovascular effects of sevo-
flurane compared with those of iso-
flurane in volunteers. Anesthesiology. 
1995;83:918–928.
41. Muzi M, Ebert TJ. A comparison of 
baroreflex sensitivity during isoflurane 
and desflurane anesthesia in humans. 
Anesthesiology. 1995;82:919–925.
42. Duke PC, Fownes D, Wade JG. Halothane 
depress baroreflex control of heart rate 
in man. Anesthesiology. 1977;46:184–
187.
43. Picker O, Scheeren TW, Arndt JO. Inha-
lation anaesthetics increase heart rate 
by decreasing cardiac vagal activity in 
dogs. Br J Anaesth. 2001;87:748–754.
44. Gallagher JD, McClernan CA. The effects 
of halothane on ventricular tachycar-
dia in intact dogs. Anesthesiology. 
1991;75:866–875.
45. Canet J, Sanchis J, Segri A, Llorente C, 
etal. Effects of halothane and isoflurane 
on ventilation and occlusion pressure. 
Anesthesiology. 1994;81:563–571.
46. Knill RL, Gelb AW. Ventilatory responses 
to hypoxia and hypercapnia during 
halothane sedation and anesthesia in 
man. Anesthesiology. 1978;49:244–251.
47. Sollevi A, Lindahl SG. Hypoxic and 
hypercapnic ventilatory responses dur-
ing isoflurane sedation and anaesthesia 
in women. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand. 
1995;39:931–938.
48. Dikmen Y, Eminoglu E, Salihoglu Z, 
etal. Pulmonary mechanics during 
isoflurane, sevoflurane and desflurane 
anaesthesia. Anaesthesia. 2003;58:745–
748.
49. Forbes AR, Horrigan RW. Mucociliary 
flow in the trachea during anesthesia 
with enflurane, ether, nitrous oxide, and 
morphine. Anesthesiology. 1977;46:319–
321.
50. Matsuura S, Shirakami G, Iida H, etal. 
The effect of sevoflurane on ciliary 
motility in rat cultured tracheal epi-
thelial cells: a comparison with iso-
flurane and halothane. Anesth Analg. 
2006;102:1703–1708.
51. Araújo MN, Santos CL, Samary CS, etal. 
Sevoflurane, compared with isoflurane, 
minimizes lung damage in pulmonary 
but not in extrapulmonary acute respir-
atory distress syndrome in rats. Anesth 
Analg. 2017;125:491–498.
52. Lumb AB, Slinger P. Hypoxic pulmo-
nary vasoconstriction. Anesthesiology. 
2015;122:932–946.
53. Benumof 
JL. 
Isoflurane 
anesthe-
sia and arterial oxygenation during 
one-lung ventilation. Anesthesiology. 
1986;64:419–422.
54. Fukazawa K, Lee HT. Volatile anesthet-
ics and AKI: risks, mechanisms, and a 
potential therapeutic window. J Am Soc 
Nephrol. 2014;25:884–892.
55. Jephcott C, Grummet J, Nguyen N, etal. 
A review of the safety and efficacy of 
inhaled methoxyflurane as an analgesic 
for outpatient procedures. Br J Anaesth. 
2018;120:1040–1048.
56. Eger EI. Compound A: does it matter?. 
Can J Anesth. 2001;48:427–430.
57. Iguchi N, Kosaka J, Booth LC, etal. 
Renal perfusion, oxygenation, and sym-
pathetic nerve activity during volatile 
or intravenous general anaesthesia in 
sheep. Br J Anaesth. 2019;122:342–349.
58. Nieuwenhuijs-Moeke GJ, Nieuwenhuijs 
VB, Seelen MAJ, etal. Propofol-based 
anaesthesia versus sevoflurane-based 
anaesthesia for living donor kidney 
transplantation: results of the VAPOR-1 
randomized controlled trial. Br J 
Anaesth. 2017;118:720–732.
59. Safari S, Motavaf M, Siamdoust SAS, 
etal. Hepatotoxicity of halogenated 
inhalational anesthetics. Iran Red Cres-
cent Med J. 2014;16:e20153.
60. Rao Z, Xiongxiong P, Zhang H, etal. 
Isoflurane preconditioning alleviated 
murine liver ischemia and reperfu-
sion injury by restoring AMPK/mTOR-
mediated autophagy. Anesth Analg. 
2017;125:1355–1363.
61. Gelman S: Hepatic oxygen supply dur-
ing surgery and anesthesia, Clinical 
Aspects of O2 Transport and Tissue 
Oxygenation, 384–396, 1989.
62. Wulf H, Ledowski T, Linstedt U, etal. 
Neuromuscular blocking effects of rocu-
ronium during desflurane, isoflurane, 
and sevoflurane anaesthesia. Can J 
Anesth. 1998;45:526–532.
63. De Castro Fonseca M, Da Silva JH, 
Perpetua Ferraz V, etal. Comparative 
presynaptic effects of the volatile anes-
thetics sevoflurane and isoflurane at the 
mouse neuromuscular junction. Muscle 
Nerve. 2015;52:876–884.
64. Taivainen T, Meretoja OA. The neuro-
muscular blocking effects of vecuronium 
during sevoflurane, halothane and bal-
anced anaesthesia in children. Anaes-
thesia. 1995;50:1046–1049.
65. Buhre W, Disma N, Hendrickx J, etal. 
European Society of Anaesthesiology 
Task Force on Nitrous Oxide: a narrative 
review of its role in clinical practice. Br 
J Anaesth. 2019;122:587–604.
66. Leslie K, Myles PS, Chan MT, etal. 
Nitrous oxide and long-term morbid-
ity and mortality in the ENIGMA trial. 
Anesth Analg. 2011;112:387–393.
67. Leslie K, Myles PS, Kasza J, etal. Nitrous 
oxide and serious long-term morbid-
ity and mortality in the evaluation of 
nitrous oxide in the gas mixture for 
anaesthesia (ENIGMA)-II trial. Anesthe-
siology. 2015;123:1267–1280.
68. Gan TJ, Belani KG, Bergese S, etal. 
Fourth Consensus Guidelines for the 
Management of Postoperative Nau-
sea and Vomiting. Anesth and Analg. 
2020;131:411–448.
69. Horn CC, Wallisch WJ, Homanics GE, 
etal. Pathophysiological and neuro-
chemical mechanisms of postoperative 
nausea and vomiting. Eur J Pharmacol. 
2014;722:55–66.
70. Rosenberg H, Pollock N, Schiemann A, 
etal. Malignant hyperthermia: a review. 
Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2015;10:1–19.
71. Larach MG, Brandom BW, Allen GC, 
etal. Cardiac arrests and deaths associ-
ated with malignant hyperthermia in 
North America from 1987 to 2006: a 
report from the North American Malig-
nant Hyperthermia Registry of the 
Malignant Hyperthermia Association 
of the United States. Anesthesiology. 
2008;108:603–611.
72. Jevtovic-Todorovic V. Exposure of 
developing brain to general anesthesia: 
what is the animal evidence?. Anesthe-
siology. 2018;128:832–839.
73. McCann ME, Soriano SG. Does general 
anesthesia affect neurodevelopment in 
infants and children?. BMJ. 2019;367:
1–12.
74. FDA Drug Safety Communication: FDA 
approves label changes for use of gen-
eral anesthetic and sedation drugs in 
young children, https://www.fda.gov/
drugs/drug-safety-and-availability/
fda-drug-safety-communication-fda-
approves-label-changes-use-general-
anesthetic-and-sedation-drugs.
75. Sun LS, Li G, Miller TLK, etal. Associa-
tion between a single general anesthesia 
exposure before age 36 months and neu-
rocognitive outcomes in later childhood. 
JAMA. 2016;315:2312–2320.
76. Warner DO, Zaccariello MJ, Katusic SK, 
etal. Neuropsychological and behavio-
ral outcomes after exposure of young 
children to procedures requiring general 
anesthesia: the Mayo anesthesia safety 
in kids (MASK) study. Anesthesiology. 
2018;129:89–105.
77. Davidson AJ, Disma N, de Graaf 
JC, etal. Neurodevelopmental out-
come at 2 years of age after gen-
eral anaesthesia and awake-regional 
anaesthesia in infancy (GAS): an 
international multicentre, randomised 
controlled trial. Lancet. 2016;387:239–
250.
78. McCann ME, de Graaff JC, Dorris L, 
etal. Neurodevelopmental outcome at 5 
years of age after general anaesthesia or 
awake-regional anaesthesia in infancy 
(GAS): an international, multicentre, 
randomised, controlled equivalence trial. 
Lancet. 2019;393:664–677.
79. Bedford PD. Adverse cerebral effects 
of anaesthesia on old people. Lancet. 
1953;269:259–263.
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
106
80. Belrose JC, Noppens RR. Anesthesiology 
and cognitive impairment: a narrative 
review of current clinical literature. BMC 
Anesthesiol. 2019;19:1–12.
81. Abildstrom H, Rasmussen LS, Rentowl 
P, etal. Cognitive dysfunction 1–2 
years after non-cardiac surgery in 
the elderly. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand. 
2000;44:1246–1251.
82. Rasmussen LS, Johnson T, Kuipers HM, 
etal. Does anaesthesia cause postop-
erative cognitive dysfunction? A ran-
domised study of regional versus general 
anaesthesia in 438 elderly patients. Acta 
Anaesthesiol Scand. 2003;47:260–266.
83. Silbert BS, Evered LA, Scott DA. Incidence 
of postoperative cognitive dysfunction 
after general or spinal anaesthesia for 
extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy. 
Br J Anaesth. 2014;113:784–791.
84. Evered LA, Scott DA, Silbert B, etal. 
Postoperative cognitive dysfunction is 
independent of type of surgery and anes-
thetic. Anesth Analg. 2011;112:1179–
1185.
85. Evered LA, Silbert BS. Postoperative 
cognitive dysfunction and noncardiac 
surgery. Anesth Analg. 2018;127:496–
505.
86. Berger M, Schenning KJ, Brown CH, 
etal. Best practices for postoperative 
brain health: recommendations from the 
fifth international perioperative neuro-
toxicity working group. Anesth Analg. 
2018;127:1406–1413.
87. Yap A, Lopez-Olivo MA, Dubowitz J, 
etal. Anesthetic technique and cancer 
outcomes: a meta analysis of total intra-
venous versus volatile anesthesia. Can J 
Anesth. 2019;66:546–561.
88. Yan T, Zhang GH, Wang BN, etal. 
Effects of propofol/remifentanil-based 
total intravenous anesthesia versus 
sevoflurane-based inhalational anes-
thesia on the release of VEGF-C and 
TGF-β and prognosis after breast can-
cer surgery: a prospective, randomized 
and controlled study. BMC Anesthesiol. 
2018;18:1–9.
89. Coppens MJ, Versichelen LFM, Rolly G, 
etal. The mechanisms of carbon mon-
oxide production by inhalational agents. 
Anaesthesia. 2006;61:462–468.
90. Olympio MA. Carbon dioxide absorbent 
dessication safety conference convened 
by APSF. APSF Newsletter. 2005;20:25–
44.
91. Sondekoppam RV, Narsingani KH, 
Schimmel TA, etal. The impact of 
sevoflurane anesthesia on postoperative 
renal function: a systematic review and 
meta-analysis of randomized-controlled 
trials. Can J Anesth. 2020;67:1595–
1623.
92. Eger EI. Characteristics of anesthetic 
agents used for induction and mainte-
nance of general anesthesia. Am J Heal 
Pharm. 2004;61:3–10.
93. Karasch ED, Thummel KE. Identifica-
tion of cytochrome P450 2E1 as the
predominant enzyme catalyzing human 
liver microsomal defluorination of sevo-
flurane, isoflurane, and methoxyflu-
rane. Anesthesiology. 1993;79:795–807.
94. Carpenter RL, Eger EI, Johnson BH, 
etal. Does the duration of anesthetic 
administration affect the pharmacoki-
netics or metabolism of inhaled anes-
thetics in humans?. Anesth Analg. 
1987;66:1–8.
95. McKinstry-Wu AR, Proekt A, Kelz MB. 
Neural inertia: a sticky situation for 
anesthesia. J Neurosurg Anesthesiol. 
2020;32:190–192.
96. Fox JW, Fox EJ, Villaneuva R. 
Stratospheric ozone destruction and 
halogenated 
anaesthetics. 
Lancet. 
1975;305:864.
97. Ishizawa Y. General anesthetic gases 
and the global environment. Anesth 
Analg. 2011;112:213–217.
98. Inventory of U.S. greenhouse gas emis-
sions and sinks: 1990–2018. United 
States Environmental Protection Agen-
cy. https://www.epa.gov/ghgemissions/
inventory-us-greenhouse-gas-emis-
sions-and-sinks-1990-2018
99. Sulbaek Andersen MP, Sander SP, 
Nielsen OJ, Wagner DS, etal. Inhala-
tion anaesthetics and climate change. 
Br J Anaesth. 2010;105:760–766.
100. Ryan SM, Nielsen CJ. Global warming 
potential of inhaled anesthetics: appli-
cation to clinical use. Anesth Analg. 
2010;111:92–98.
107
Chapter
WHY INTRAVENOUS ANESTHETICS?
Intravenous (IV) anesthetics are fundamental tools in the 
daily practice of modern anesthesia (Box 8.1). One or 
more IV anesthetics will be administered in essentially 
any clinical encounter where a provider delivers anes-
thesia or sedation, regardless of the setting (operating 
room, non–operating room, or intensive care unit [ICU]). 
When used appropriately, IV anesthetics have many 
advantages and only a few drawbacks (Table 8.1). A chief 
advantage is the rapid onset of hypnosis (within seconds 
when given as a bolus) with sufficient depth of anesthesia 
for laryngoscopy. A relative disadvantage is the current 
inability to quantify effect site (i.e., brain) concentra-
tions of IV anesthetics in real time, analogous to the 
end-tidal inhaled anesthetic measurements on modern 
anesthesia machines. Therefore anesthesia providers rely 
on knowledge of pharmacokinetics, careful and repeated 
observation of clinical endpoints (such as respiratory 
WHY INTRAVENOUS ANESTHETICS?
GABAA RECEPTOR AGONISM
PROPOFOL
Physical Properties and Pharmacokinetics
Pharmacodynamics
Clinical Uses
Alternative Formulations
BARBITURATES
Pharmacokinetics and Pharmacodynamics
Side Effects
Clinical Uses
BENZODIAZEPINES
Pharmacokinetics and Pharmacodynamics
Side Effects
Clinical Uses
Remimazolam
KETAMINE
Pharmacokinetics and Pharmacodynamics
Clinical Uses
ETOMIDATE
Pharmacokinetics and Pharmacodynamics
Clinical Uses
DEXMEDETOMIDINE
Pharmacokinetics and Pharmacodynamics
Clinical Uses
INTRAVENOUS 
ANESTHETICS
Michael P. Bokoch, Po-Yi Paul Su
8
Box 8.1
Classification of Intravenous Anesthetic Drugs
Isopropylphenol
Propofol
Barbiturates
Thiopental
Methohexital
Benzodiazepines
Diazepam
Midazolam
Lorazepam
Remimazolam
Arylcyclohexylamine
Ketamine
Carboxylated imidazole
Etomidate
α2-adrenergic agonists
Dexmedetomidine
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
108
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
0
2
4
6
8
10
Time (minutes)
12
14
16
18
20
Propofol 2.0 mg/kg
Therapeutic
range
Plasma concentration (µg/mL)
Fig. 8.2 Time course of the propofol plasma concentration after 
a simulated single bolus injection of 2.0 mg/kg. The shape of this 
curve is similar for other induction drugs, although the slope and 
the absolute concentrations are different. (From Vuyk J, Sitsen 
E, Reekers M. Intravenous anesthetics. In: Miller RD, ed. Miller's 
Anesthesia. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2015: 821–863. 
[Original chapter: Reves JG, Glass PSA. Chapter 9, Nonbarbiturate 
intravenous anesthetics. In: Miller RD, ed. Miller's Anesthesia. 
3rd ed. New York, NY: Churchill Livingstone; 1990: 243–279.])
rate), surrogate monitors (such as the processed electro-
encephalogram), and clinical experience to optimally and 
safely use IV anesthetics—topics that we aim to introduce 
in this chapter.
IV anesthetics used for induction of general anesthe-
sia are lipophilic and preferentially partition into highly 
perfused, lipid-rich tissues (brain and spinal cord). This 
pharmacokinetic property accounts for the rapid onset of 
action. Redistribution of the drug into less perfused and 
inactive tissues such as skeletal muscles and fat leads 
to rapid termination of effect after a single IV bolus 
(Fig. 8.1). Thus many different IV anesthetics share a 
similar time to recovery (∼5 to 10 minutes) after a single 
dose despite significant differences in their metabolism 
and elimination (Fig. 8.2 and Table 8.2).
Similar to inhaled anesthetics, IV anesthetics can 
provide the key components of anesthesia (hypnosis, 
amnesia, analgesia, and immobility) and are extremely 
useful as part of “balanced anesthesia” techniques—the 
practice of using smaller doses of multiple drugs in syn-
ergy rather than a large dose of a single drug in order to 
limit associated side effects. Other drug classes used as 
part of balanced anesthesia include inhaled anesthetics, 
opioids, and neuromuscular blockers (see Chapters 7, 9, 
and 11). Together, IV anesthetics represent an indispen-
sable toolkit for tailoring an anesthetic plan to any given 
patient and clinical scenario.
Blood
Vessel-rich
Skeletal muscle
Fat
Metabolized
0
20
10
30
40
70
60
50
1
3
10
30
100
300
Time (min)
Administered dose (%)
Fig. 8.1 After rapid intravenous injection of thiopental, the 
percentage of the administered dose remaining in blood (brown 
line) rapidly decreases as the drug moves from the blood to 
highly perfused vessel-rich tissues (blue line), especially the brain. 
Subsequently, thiopental is redistributed to skeletal muscles (red 
line) and, to a lesser extent, to fat (pink line). Ultimately, most 
of the administered dose of thiopental undergoes metabolism 
(green line). (From Saidman LJ. Uptake, distribution, and 
elimination of barbiturates. In: Eger EI, ed. Anesthetic Uptake 
and Action. Baltimore, MA: Williams & Wilkins; 1974:264–284, 
used with permission.)
Advantages
Disadvantages
Rapid onset of induction 
with deep anesthesia for 
airway instrumentation
Hard to measure effect-site 
concentration during clinical 
use, depth of anesthesia 
less predictable (i.e., no 
end-tidal concentration, 
no minimum alveolar 
concentration)
Rapid recovery after bolus 
dose
Organ system effects and 
side effects vary by agent
Elimination depends on 
hepatic and/or renal 
function
Portable (no vaporizer/
special delivery equipment/
scavenger required)
Slow recovery after 
prolonged infusion (context-
sensitive half-time)
No environmental hazard 
(no direct greenhouse gas 
generation)
May impair spontaneous 
ventilation
Beneficial ancillary 
properties (e.g., antiemetic)
Hard to ensure immobility if 
used alone
Table 8.1
Pros and Cons of Intravenous Anesthetics (as 
Compared With Volatile Anesthetics)
II
Chapter 8 Intravenous Anesthetics
109
bind at a site in the extracellular portion of the receptor 
that is different from the endogenous neurotransmitter 
GABA. Propofol, barbiturates, and etomidate most likely 
bind to distinct sites within the transmembrane region of 
GABAARs.2
The properties of IV anesthetics on the GABAAR 
almost certainly depend on the binding site. For example, 
benzodiazepines are unlikely to open the channel inde-
pendent of endogenous GABA. Instead, benzodiazepines 
assist GABA in triggering a rotational motion that opens 
the ion channel. Propofol and barbiturates, on the other 
hand, may act independently (directly open the channel) 
or synergistically with GABA. Although the complex 
pharmacology of GABAARs remains incompletely under-
stood, the aforementioned factors explain in part the 
diverse effects of IV anesthetics.
PROPOFOL
Propofol, a GABAAR agonist, is the most frequently 
administered IV anesthetic because of its many favora-
ble properties. When administered as a bolus for the 
induction of general anesthesia, propofol provides rapid 
hypnosis, excellent suppression of airway reflexes, short 
duration of action, and largely predictable hemodynamic 
side effects. Before the introduction of propofol in the 
late 1980s, the prevailing induction techniques (barbi-
turate injection or inhalational) could not produce this 
constellation of effects. Since that time, propofol has also 
Fig. 8.3 High-resolution cryo-electron microscopy structure of the human α1β3γ2 GABAA receptor in a lipid bilayer as viewed (A) 
from within the plane of the membrane and (B) from the extracellular face looking down the chloride (Cl-) pore. The position of bound 
GABA (green) and diazepam (DZP, orange) molecules are shown, as are the approximate binding sites for etomidate/propofol (purple)
and barbiturates/propofol (light blue). Receptor subunits are shown as transparent ribbons and color-coded (red = α1, blue = β3, and 
yellow = γ2). (PDB ID: 6HUP, structure originally published in Masiulis S, Desai R, Uchanski T, et al. GABAA receptor signalling mechanisms 
revealed by structural pharmacology. Nature. 2019;565[7740]:454–459. Images prepared using PyMOL v1.7.0.3, Schrödinger LLC.)
GABAA RECEPTOR AGONISM
γ-aminobutyric acid type-A receptors (GABAARs) are 
ligand-gated ion channels that are the common target 
of most IV anesthetics. GABA is the main inhibitory 
neurotransmitter in the central nervous system (CNS). 
Upon activation, GABAARs conduct inhibitory (hyperpo-
larizing) chloride currents across the plasma membrane 
of neurons. Four types of IV anesthetic discussed in this 
chapter (propofol, barbiturates, benzodiazepines, and eto-
midate) behave as agonists, or activators, of GABAARs. 
Only two IV anesthetics act by different mechanisms: 
ketamine is primarily an antagonist of N-methyl-D-
aspartate (NMDA) glutamate receptors, and dexmedeto-
midine is an agonist of α2-adrenergic receptors.
The IV anesthetics targeting GABAARs exhibit distinct 
clinical differences. Such differences may seem surprising 
given the shared common target. However, the biology of 
these receptors is complex. First, GABAARs are a diverse 
family of pentameric receptors, not a single gene product. 
Nineteen possible subunits exist in the human genome. 
The most common type of GABAAR in the brain is com-
posed of two α, two β, and one γ subunit (Fig. 8.3).1 Sec-
ond, GABAARs may be located either within or outside 
of synapses. This diversity may explain why several 
different types of GABA-mediated currents are found in 
the CNS (fast versus slow, phasic versus tonic). Different 
IV anesthetics likely have some selectivity for certain 
types of GABAARs. Third, multiple drug binding sites 
exist on each receptor (see Fig. 8.3). Benzodiazepines 
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
110
hepatic blood flow (Table 8.2). This finding, confirmed 
during the anhepatic phase of liver transplantation, 
proves that propofol metabolism occurs at extrahepatic 
tissue sites. The kidney, small intestine, and lungs are 
major contributors and together account for 40% of 
plasma propofol clearance. The rapid clearance explains 
the more complete recovery from propofol, with less 
“hangover” than observed with thiopental. As with other 
IV drugs, the effects of propofol are well described by 
a three-compartment model (also see Chapter 4). The 
hypnotic effect is terminated by redistribution from 
the plasma and highly perfused compartments (such as 
the brain) to poorly perfused compartments (such as 
skeletal muscle; see Fig. 8.1). A patient usually awakens 
within 8 to 10 minutes after an induction dose of propo-
fol, which tracks the period of decline in plasma concen-
tration after a single bolus dose (see Fig. 8.2).6
Continuous Intravenous Infusion
Propofol has three pharmacokinetic properties that 
make it ideal for use as a continuous IV infusion: (1) 
efficient plasma clearance, (2) rapid metabolism, and (3) 
slow redistribution from poorly perfused compartments 
back into the central compartment. As a result, patients 
awaken relatively quickly after prolonged infusion of 
propofol as compared with other IV anesthetics. One 
way to characterize the kinetics of an anesthetic infu-
sion is the “context-sensitive half-time,” a parameter 
that describes the time needed for the plasma levels of a 
drug to drop by 50% (the “half-time”) after stopping the 
infusion (Fig. 8.5).7 This time depends on the duration for 
which an infusion has been run (the “context”) (also see 
Chapter 4). The context-sensitive half-time of propofol 
remains short even after a prolonged infusion.
Pharmacodynamics
The major mechanism of action of propofol is through 
increasing the flow of inhibitory chloride current through 
GABAARs. Propofol binds nonselectively to multiple 
sites within the transmembrane domain of the receptor. 
Some binding sites are shared with etomidate and others 
with barbiturates (see Fig. 8.3A).2 These sites are distinct 
from the GABA and benzodiazepine binding sites on the 
GABAAR extracellular domains. Propofol both directly 
activates the GABAAR and potentiates activation of the 
channel by endogenous GABA.
risen to become the leading drug for sedation by airway-
trained providers during endoscopy, radiology, and other 
non–operating room procedures (also see Chapter 38). 
Propofol is also a mainstay of ICU sedation for patients 
requiring mechanical ventilation. Propofol infusion is 
often combined with volatile anesthetics to maintain 
general anesthesia, and it may be used as the sole hyp-
notic agent during total intravenous anesthesia (TIVA) 
techniques. TIVA with propofol may be the anesthetic 
technique of choice for select surgical procedures and/
or patient populations (Box 8.2).3 Given the fundamental 
role of propofol in modern anesthetic practice and the 
transformative effect it has had on global health care, 
it is fitting that the veterinarian John (Iain) Glen was 
awarded a 2018 Lasker Prize for developing this indis-
pensable drug.4
Physical Properties and Pharmacokinetics
Propofol (2,6-diisopropylphenol) is insoluble in aqueous 
solution (Fig. 8.4). It is formulated at 1% (10 mg/mL) in 
an emulsion containing 10% soybean oil (to dissolve the 
propofol), 2.25% glycerol (to yield isotonicity), and 1.2% 
egg lecithin (to stabilize the soybean oil–propofol drop-
lets).4 The emulsion is milky white and slightly viscous, 
with a pH of 7 to 8.5. In some countries a 2% formu-
lation is available. Because bacteria can grow within 
the emulsion, it is imperative to use aseptic technique 
when drawing up propofol. Unused vials and syringes 
should be discarded within 12 hours after opening. To 
slow microbial growth, most manufacturers include a 
preservative such as ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid 
(0.05 mg/mL), metabisulfite (0.25 mg/mL), or benzyl 
alcohol (1 mg/mL). Allergic reactions to propofol are rare, 
and there is no evidence for cross-reactivity in patients 
with immunoglobulin E-mediated allergy to egg, soy, or 
peanut.5 Formulations containing metabisulfite may be 
of concern for patients with asthma or sulfite allergy.
Propofol is rapidly metabolized in the liver through 
phase I (oxidation by cytochrome P450 enzymes) and 
phase II (mainly glucuronidation) reactions.6 The inac-
tive water-soluble metabolites are excreted through the 
kidneys. Certain propofol metabolites occasionally color 
the urine green. Plasma clearance is rapid and exceeds 
Box 8.2
Examples of Scenarios Where Total Intravenous 
Anesthesia (Typically Propofol-Based) Is Preferred
Severe postoperative nausea and vomiting
Neuromonitoring (evoked potential monitoring)
Malignant hyperthermia (known or suspected)
Airway surgery
Fig. 8.4 Chemical structure of propofol. Marvin software 
was used for drawing all chemical structures in this chapter, 
MarvinSketch 6.2.2, 2014, ChemAxon (http://www.chemaxon.
com).
II
Chapter 8 Intravenous Anesthetics
111
Drug
Induction 
Dose (mg/
kg IV)
Duration of 
Action (min)
Vd,ss (L/kg)
t1/2α (min)
Protein 
Binding (%)
Clearance 
(mL/kg/min)
t1/2β (h)
Propofol
1–2.5
3–8
2–10
2–4
97
20–30
4–23
Thiopental
3–5
5–10
2.5
2–4
83
3.4
11
Methohexital
1–1.5
4–7
2.2
5–6
73
11
4
Midazolam
0.1–0.3
15–20
1.1–1.7
7–15
94
6.4–11
1.7–2.6
Diazepam
0.3–0.6
15–30
0.7–1.7
10–15
98
0.2–0.5
20–50
Lorazepam
0.03–0.1
60–120
0.8–1.3
3–10
98
0.8–1.8
11–22
Ketamine
1–2
5–10
3.1
11–16
12
12–17
2–4
Etomidate
0.2–0.3
3–8
2.5–4.5
2–4
77
18–25
2.9–5.3
Dexmedetomidine
N/A
N/A
2–3
6
94
10–30
2–3
aData are for average adult patients. The duration of action reflects the duration after an average single IV dose.
IV, Intravenous; N/A, not applicable; t1/2α distribution half-time; t1/2β elimination half-time; Vd,ss volume of distribution at steady state.
Table 8.2
Pharmacokinetic Dataa for Intravenous Anesthetics
Central Nervous System
In the CNS propofol primarily acts as a hypnotic without 
analgesia. It reduces the cerebral metabolic rate for oxy-
gen (CMRO2), which leads to decreased cerebral blood 
flow (CBF) through preserved flow-metabolism coupling 
(Table 8.3). This results in decreases in cerebral blood 
volume, intracranial pressure (ICP), and intraocular pres-
sure. Propofol preserves cerebral autoregulation (the 
relationship between CBF and cerebral perfusion pres-
sure) better than higher doses of volatile anesthetics (>0.5 
minimum alveolar concentration). Although propofol can 
reduce ICP, it must be used with caution in brain-injured 
patients, as the combination of systemic hypotension and 
reduced CBF may compromise cerebral perfusion.
The direct effect of propofol on neuron viability, 
whether neuroprotective or neurotoxic, likely depends 
on the exact dose and context. At high doses, propofol 
induces burst suppression on the electroencephalogram 
(EEG), an endpoint that has been used for the titration of 
IV anesthetics for neuroprotection during neurosurgical 
procedures. Although propofol may be toxic to develop-
ing neurons in animals and cell culture, no human study 
has demonstrated long-term cognitive or memory prob-
lems in children who have received propofol anesthesia 
(see also Chapter 12). Occasionally, excitatory effects 
such as twitching or spontaneous movement occur dur-
ing propofol induction. Although these motor effects may 
resemble seizure activity, propofol is actually an anticon-
vulsant and may be safely administered to patients with 
seizure disorders or to emergently treat seizures.
Cardiovascular System
Propofol produces a larger decrease in systemic arterial 
blood pressure than any other drug used for induction 
of anesthesia.8 It causes profound vasodilation but does 
not affect myocardial contractility at clinical doses.6
Vasodilation occurs in both the arterial and venous cir-
culation and leads to reductions in preload and afterload. 
The effect is worse with rapid injection and is more 
pronounced in elderly patients, especially those with 
reduced intravascular fluid volume (also see Chapter 
35). The degree of vasodilation may also be altered in 
patients with diabetes, hypertension, or obesity. Propofol 
inhibits the normal baroreflex response, often blunting 
a compensatory increase in heart rate and exacerbat-
ing hypotension during IV induction. Extreme decreases 
0
50
100
150
0
1
2
3
4
Infusion duration (hours)
Context-sensitive half-time (minutes)
5
6
7
8
9
Diazepam
Thiopental
Midazolam
Ketamine
Propofol
Etomidate
Fig. 8.5 Context-sensitive half-time for the most commonly 
used intravenous anesthetics. Propofol, etomidate, and ketamine 
have the smallest increase in context-sensitive half-times, with 
prolonged infusions making these drugs more suitable for use 
as continuous infusions. (From Vuyk J, Sitsen E, Reekers M. 
Intravenous anesthetics. In: Miller RD, ed. Miller's Anesthesia. 
8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2015:821–863.)
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
112
occurs with sedative doses or during emergence from 
propofol anesthesia.
Propofol suppresses upper airway reflexes to a 
greater extent than other IV anesthetics, making it 
well suited for supraglottic airway placement or upper 
endoscopy procedures. Propofol also inhibits lower 
airway irritability and reduces the incidence of bron-
choconstriction after tracheal intubation as compared 
with thiopental or etomidate.10 Given these properties, 
propofol often provides excellent intubating conditions 
even without neuromuscular blocking drugs if sufficient 
doses are given.
Other Effects
Two other properties of propofol increase its utility as a 
first-line anesthetic: (1) it is an antiemetic and (2) it does 
not prolong the action of neuromuscular blocking drugs 
in blood pressure may occur in patients with cardiac 
tamponade, cardiomyopathy, coronary artery disease, 
or valvular heart disease, as these groups are less able 
to compensate for the peripheral vasodilation. Severe 
bradycardia and, rarely, asystole may occur with propo-
fol administration.
Respiratory System
Propofol is a respiratory depressant and often produces 
apnea after an IV induction dose. Propofol infusion 
decreases minute ventilation by reducing tidal volume 
and respiratory rate, with a more pronounced effect on 
tidal volume. The ventilatory response to hypoxia and 
hypercapnia is also blunted. Propofol increases upper 
airway collapsibility by inhibiting oropharyngeal mus-
cles, including the genioglossus (the major tongue mus-
cle).9 Consequently, upper airway obstruction frequently 
Dose/Effect
Propofol
Thiopental
Midazolam
Ketamine
Etomidate
Dexmedetomidine
Dose for induction of 
anesthesia (mg/kg IV)
1.5–2.5
3–5
0.1–0.3
1–2
0.2–0.3
Systemic blood pressure
Decreased
Decreased
Unchanged to 
decreased
Increaseda
Unchanged to 
decreased
Decreasedb
Heart rate
Unchanged to 
decreased
Increased
Unchanged
Increased
Unchanged to 
increased
Decreased
Systemic vascular 
resistance
Decreased
Decreased
Unchanged to 
decreased
Increased
Unchanged to 
decreased
Decreasedb
Ventilation
Decreased
Decreased
Unchanged
Unchanged
Unchanged to 
decreased
Unchanged to 
decreased
Respiratory rate
Decreased
Decreased
Unchanged to 
decreased
Unchanged
Unchanged to 
decreased
Unchanged
Response to carbon 
dioxide
Decreased
Decreased
Decreased
Unchanged
Decreased
Unchanged
Cerebral blood flow
Decreased
Decreased
Decreased
Increased to 
unchanged
Decreased
Decreased
Cerebral metabolic 
requirements for oxygen
Decreased
Decreased
Decreased
Increased to 
unchanged
Decreased
Unchanged
Intracranial pressure
Decreased
Decreased
Unchanged
Increased to 
unchanged
Decreased
Unchanged
Anticonvulsant
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes?
No
No
Anxiolysis
Yes
No
Yes
No
No
Yes
Analgesia
No
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
Emergence delirium
No
No
No
Yes
No
May reduce
Nausea and vomiting
Decreased
Unchanged
Decreased
Unchanged
Increased
Unchanged
Pain on injection
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
No
aMay cause direct myocardial depression and hypotension in critically ill or catecholamine-depleted patients.
bBolus injection may increase systemic vascular resistance and blood pressure.IV, Intravenous.
Table 8.3
Summary of the Pharmacodynamic Effects of Commonly Used Intravenous Anesthetics
II
Chapter 8 Intravenous Anesthetics
113
surgery. Preclinical propofol studies have demonstrated 
beneficial immune, antiinflammatory, and antitumor 
properties as compared with volatile anesthetics.3 Some 
retrospective studies suggest that propofol TIVA may be 
associated with better long-term outcomes after cancer 
surgery. However, this exciting possibility is not yet sup-
ported by prospective clinical trials.
Sedation
Propofol is a popular choice for sedation of mechanically 
ventilated patients in the ICU (also see Chapter 41) and 
for sedation during procedures in or outside the operat-
ing room. The typical continuous infusion rate is between 
25 and 75 μg/kg/min. Because of its pronounced respira-
tory depressant effect and its narrow therapeutic range, 
propofol should be administered only by individuals 
trained in airway management. Spontaneous ventilation 
is usually preserved in children at quite rapid propo-
fol infusion rates (200 to 250 μg/kg/min), making it a 
good choice for pediatric procedures such as magnetic 
resonance imaging scans (also see Chapter 34).14 Small 
boluses of propofol (10 to 20 mg IV) may provide useful 
anxiolysis.
Antiemetic
Subanesthetic bolus doses of propofol or a subanesthetic 
infusion can be used to treat postoperative nausea and 
vomiting (PONV) (10 to 20 mg IV or 10 to 20 μg/kg/min as 
an infusion).15 Propofol TIVA, as compared with volatile 
anesthetics, reduces PONV but may not reduce unplanned 
admissions, postdischarge nausea and vomiting, or the 
cost of anesthesia in the ambulatory setting.16 17
Alternative Formulations
Because of the widespread use of propofol for sedation 
during non–operating room procedures such as endos-
copy, great interest and intense research have focused on 
finding an alternative drug with more favorable proper-
ties (namely, less respiratory depression). Fospropofol, a 
water-soluble prodrug of propofol, was one such com-
pound that was approved by the Food and Drug Admin-
istration (FDA) in 2008. Similar to propofol, respiratory 
depression and airway compromise were major concerns. 
The FDA concluded that fospropofol should be admin-
istered only by anesthesia providers trained in airway 
management. Fospropofol has since been discontinued, 
and some of the pharmacokinetic data leading to its 
approval were eventually retracted.
BARBITURATES
Barbiturates (e.g., thiopental) were the most common 
IV anesthetic induction agents before the introduction 
of propofol. These GABAAR agonists are hypnotics with 
as much as volatile anesthetics. A rare but potentially 
fatal side effect is propofol infusion syndrome, which 
is usually characterized by unexpected arrhythmias or 
electrocardiogram changes after prolonged high-dose 
administration (>20 hours). These findings should prompt 
discontinuation of propofol and laboratory investigation 
for possible metabolic acidosis, rhabdomyolysis, elevated 
triglycerides, and hyperkalemia.11
Clinical Uses
Pain from injection of propofol is a common complaint 
that can lead to patient distress or dissatisfaction. The 
most effective means to reduce injection pain is to inject 
into an antecubital vein (larger, faster venous flow rate). 
Alternatively, if a hand vein is chosen, (1) premedication 
with a small dose of opioid and (2) IV lidocaine injection 
(up to 1.5 mg/kg) through the same IV, with or without 
proximal venous occlusion, are effective to reduce pain. 
Lidocaine may be administered alone or as an admixture 
with propofol.12
Induction and Maintenance of General Anesthesia
Propofol (1 to 2.5 mg/kg IV) is the most common drug 
for induction of general anesthesia. The dose should be 
decreased in the elderly, especially those who have a 
reduced cardiovascular reserve, or after premedication 
with benzodiazepines or opioids. Children generally require 
larger doses (2.5 to 3.5 mg/kg IV). Obese patients require 
a larger total dose compared with nonobese patients of 
similar height and age. Propofol boluses for morbidly 
obese patients should be calculated per kilogram of lean 
body weight rather than total body weight to avoid excess 
hypotension.13 Generally, titration of the induction dose of 
propofol (rather than a single bolus) helps prevent severe 
hemodynamic changes. Propofol, like its predecessor thio-
pental, is an excellent choice for rapid-sequence intubation 
when combined with a fast-acting neuromuscular blocking 
drug such as succinylcholine or rocuronium.
Propofol is also often used to maintain general anes-
thesia as part of a balanced regimen along with volatile 
anesthetics, opioids, nitrous oxide, and/or other IV anes-
thetics. When combined with nitrous oxide or opioids, 
the therapeutic plasma propofol concentration for main-
tenance of anesthesia normally ranges between 2 and 8 
μg/mL. This typically requires a continuous infusion rate 
between 100 and 200 μg/kg/min. Propofol may also serve 
as the sole sedative-hypnotic agent in TIVA techniques, 
where it is usually combined with opioids. Some clinical 
trials suggest a reduction in postoperative pain scores 
and opioid consumption for patients receiving propofol-
based TIVA as compared with volatile anesthesia, but it 
is difficult to draw firm conclusions because of the small 
trial sizes and significant heterogeneity.3 Propofol itself 
is not thought to provide significant analgesia. A current 
area of investigation is the role of propofol in cancer 
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
114
administration of barbiturates or other drugs that induce 
oxidative microsomal enzymes enhances barbiturate 
metabolism. Through stimulation of aminolevulinic acid 
synthetase, the production of porphyrins is increased. 
Therefore barbiturates should not be administered to 
patients with acute intermittent porphyria.
Methohexital is cleared more rapidly by the liver 
than thiopental and thus has a shorter elimination half-
time. This allows for faster and more complete recovery. 
Although thiopental is metabolized slowly and has a 
long elimination half-time, clinical recovery after a sin-
gle bolus is comparable to methohexital and propofol 
because it depends on redistribution to inactive tissue 
sites rather than metabolism (see Fig. 8.1). However, 
even single induction doses of thiopental may lead to 
psychomotor impairment lasting several hours. If admin-
istered as repeated boluses or as a continuous infusion, 
especially when using larger doses to produce burst 
suppression on the EEG, thiopental recovery is markedly 
prolonged because of the long context-sensitive half-
time (see Fig. 8.5).
Central Nervous System
Barbiturates produce dose-dependent CNS depression 
ranging from sedation to general anesthesia. They do 
not have analgesic properties and may even reduce the 
pain threshold. Barbiturates are potent cerebral vaso-
constrictors and produce predictable decreases in CBF, 
cerebral blood volume, and ICP (see Table 8.3). As a 
result, they decrease CMRO2 in a dose-dependent man-
ner up to the point where the EEG becomes isoelectric. 
Because of this property, IV infusions may be useful 
in the critical care setting to treat refractory status 
epilepticus. An exception to this rule is methohexital, 
which activates epileptic foci, thus facilitating seizure-
mapping surgeries. For the same reason, methohexital 
is also a popular choice for anesthesia to facilitate ECT 
(also see Chapter 38).
Cardiovascular System
Induction doses of barbiturates produce modest decreases 
in systemic arterial blood pressure that are smaller than 
those produced by propofol. This effect is principally the 
result of peripheral vasodilation and reflects barbiturate-
induced depression of the medullary vasomotor center 
and decreased sympathetic nervous system outflow from 
the CNS. Although barbiturates blunt the baroreceptor 
reflex, compensatory increases in heart rate limit the 
magnitude and duration of hypotension. Negative ino-
tropic effects of barbiturates, which can be demonstrated 
in isolated heart preparations, are usually masked invivo 
by baroreceptor reflex–mediated responses.
Respiratory System
Barbiturates cause respiratory depression similar to 
propofol: decreased minute ventilation via reduced tidal 
similar speed of onset to propofol, but have fallen out 
of use because of inferior kinetics (prolonged context-
sensitive half-time), suboptimal suppression of airway 
reflexes, and problems with the alkaline chemical for-
mulation.18 Methohexital, the shortest-acting barbiturate, 
still plays a niche role in contemporary anesthesia prac-
tice as a common induction agent for electroconvulsive 
therapy (ECT) procedures.
Pharmacokinetics and Pharmacodynamics
Barbiturates activate GABAARs by binding within the 
transmembrane domain of the pentameric ion channel. 
There is evidence for at least partial overlap between the 
propofol and barbiturate binding sites (see Fig. 8.3A).2
Similar to propofol, and unlike benzodiazepines, high 
barbiturate concentrations are able to directly open the 
chloride channel even in the absence of endogenous 
GABA molecules.
Thiopental and methohexital (Fig. 8.6) are formulated 
as sodium salts mixed with anhydrous sodium carbon-
ate. After reconstitution with water or normal saline, 
the solutions (2.5% thiopental and 1% methohexital) 
are alkaline, with a pH higher than 10. Although this 
property prevents bacterial growth and helps increase the 
shelf life of the solution after reconstitution, it will lead 
to precipitation when mixed with acidic drug prepara-
tions such as neuromuscular blockers. These precipitates 
can irreversibly block IV delivery lines if mixing occurs 
during administration. Furthermore, accidental injection 
into an artery or infiltration into subcutaneous tissue will 
cause extreme pain and may lead to severe tissue injury.
Most barbiturates undergo hepatic metabolism. The 
most important phase I reaction is oxidation; the result-
ing metabolites are inactive and excreted in the urine 
(directly) or in the bile (after conjugation). Chronic 
Fig. 8.6 Chemical structure of the barbiturate drugs thiopental 
(left) and methohexital (right), The common barbituric acid 
skeleton is shown in red.
II
Chapter 8 Intravenous Anesthetics
115
endpoint that indicates maximal reduction of CMRO2. 
The ability of barbiturates to decrease ICP makes these 
drugs an option for managing patients with space-
occupying intracranial lesions (also see Chapter 30).20
Furthermore, they may provide neuroprotection from 
focal cerebral ischemia (stroke, surgical retraction, tem-
porary clips during aneurysm surgery) but probably not 
from global cerebral ischemia (cardiac arrest). Barbitu-
rates are unlikely to provide cerebral protection during 
cardiac surgery. A clear risk of high-dose barbiturate 
therapy to decrease ICP is the associated hypotension, 
which can critically reduce cerebral perfusion pressure. 
Although barbiturates can lower ICP after traumatic 
brain injury, their use commonly causes hypotension and 
reduced cerebral perfusion pressure; there is no evidence 
for improved outcomes in this setting.21 Prolonged infu-
sions to achieve “barbiturate coma” for neuroprotection 
may cause immune suppression, electrolyte disturbances, 
and hypothermia.
BENZODIAZEPINES
Benzodiazepines commonly used in the perioperative 
period include diazepam, midazolam, and lorazepam. 
These drugs generally lack the hypnotic efficacy and 
rapid recovery kinetics required to be useful as sole 
agents for IV induction of general anesthesia. Neverthe-
less, they remain extremely useful in the perioperative 
period. Benzodiazepines are most often used as pre-
medication or part of sedation regimens for the desirable 
effects of anxiolysis and anterograde amnesia. They have 
a favorable side effect profile and cause minimal cardio-
vascular or respiratory depression when used alone and 
in moderate doses. Benzodiazepines are unique among 
IV anesthetics in that their action is readily reversed by 
administration of flumazenil, a selective antagonist.
Pharmacokinetics and Pharmacodynamics
The shared chemical structure of benzodiazepines con-
sists of a benzene ring fused to a seven-member diaz-
epine ring (Fig. 8.7). Similar to propofol and barbiturates, 
benzodiazepines bind to GABAARs and enhance the 
conduction of chloride currents, thereby leading to 
hyperpolarization of neurons and reduced excitability. 
Unlike other IV anesthetics that bind in the GABAAR 
transmembrane domain, benzodiazepines bind in the 
extracellular domain (see Fig. 8.3). Benzodiazepine bind-
ing alone is insufficient to activate the GABAAR. Rather, 
these drugs enhance the ability of endogenous GABA to 
open the channel by inducing a rotational conforma-
tional change in the receptor. Consistent with its greater 
potency, midazolam has an affinity for GABAARs that 
is approximately twice that of diazepam. GABAARs that 
respond to benzodiazepines occur almost exclusively on 
volume and respiratory rate. Suppression of laryngeal 
and cough reflexes is not as profound as with propofol 
administration, making barbiturates an inferior choice 
for airway instrumentation in the absence of neuromus-
cular blocking drugs. Furthermore, stimulation of the 
upper airway or trachea (e.g., from secretions, supraglot-
tic airway placement, direct laryngoscopy, tracheal intu-
bation) during inadequate depression of airway reflexes 
may result in laryngospasm or bronchospasm. This 
phenomenon is not unique to barbiturates but is true in 
general when anesthetic depth is insufficient.
Side Effects
Accidental intraarterial injection of barbiturates results 
in excruciating pain and intense vasoconstriction, often 
leading to severe tissue injury involving gangrene. 
Aggressive therapy is directed at reversing the vaso-
constriction to maintain perfusion and reduce the drug 
concentration by dilution. One approach is to block the 
sympathetic nervous system in the involved extremity 
(stellate ganglion block) to facilitate vasodilation. Barbi-
turate crystal formation probably results in the occlusion 
of distal, small-diameter arterioles. Crystal formation in 
veins is less hazardous because of the greater capac-
ity of venodilation. Accidental subcutaneous injection 
(extravasation) of barbiturates results in local tissue irri-
tation, thus emphasizing the importance of using dilute 
concentrations (2.5% thiopental, 1% methohexital). If 
extravasation occurs, some recommend local injection of 
the tissues with 0.5% lidocaine (5 to 10 mL) in an attempt 
to dilute the barbiturate concentration.
Life-threatening allergic reactions to barbiturates are 
rare. However, barbiturate-induced histamine release is 
occasionally seen.
Clinical Uses
The principal clinical use of barbiturates is rapid IV 
induction of anesthesia. A continuous IV infusion of a 
barbiturate such as thiopental is rarely used to maintain 
anesthesia because of its long context-sensitive half-time 
and prolonged recovery period (see Fig. 8.5).7
Induction of Anesthesia
Administration of thiopental (3 to 5 mg/kg IV) or 
methohexital (1 to 1.5 mg/kg IV) produces unconscious-
ness in less than 30 seconds. Patients may experience 
a garlic or onion taste during induction of anesthesia. 
When used as an anesthetic for ECT, methohexital may 
allow for longer seizure duration when compared with 
propofol.19
Neuroprotection
When used for neuroprotection, barbiturates have tradi-
tionally been titrated to achieve an isoelectric EEG, an 
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
116
for midazolam and diazepam is oxidation by hepatic 
cytochrome P450 3A4, a process susceptible to factors 
such as age, liver disease, and interaction with drugs 
that modulate the efficiency of the enzyme systems. 
Midazolam is selectively metabolized to a single domi-
nant metabolite, 1-hydroxymidazolam, which has some 
sedative effects but undergoes rapid glucuronidation and 
clearance. This metabolite does not cause significant 
sedation in patients with normal hepatic and renal func-
tion unless midazolam is given as a prolonged infusion. 
The long elimination half-time of diazepam explains the 
prolonged CNS effects, especially in elderly patients. In 
contrast, lorazepam is one of the few benzodiazepines 
that does not undergo oxidative metabolism and is 
excreted after a single-step conjugation to glucuronic 
acid.
Central Nervous System
All benzodiazepines share a wide spectrum of CNS 
effects, although predilections for individual effects 
vary between drugs. The most important effects are the 
sedative-hypnotic and amnestic properties (anterograde, 
but not retrograde).22 In addition, benzodiazepines are 
anticonvulsants used to treat seizures. Muscle relaxation 
is mediated through the spinal cord and may require 
larger doses.
postsynaptic nerve endings in the CNS, with the greatest 
density found in the cerebral cortex. This anatomic dis-
tribution explains the minimal effects of benzodiazepines 
outside the CNS (see Table 8.3).
Midazolam is the most lipophilic of the three ben-
zodiazepines most commonly used in the perioperative 
setting. However, it is packaged in an acidic formulation 
that solubilizes the drug in an open-ring structure. Once 
absorbed into the blood at physiologic pH, the diazepine 
structure rapidly forms through spontaneous ring closure. 
Midazolam, lorazepam, and diazepam are all highly pro-
tein bound, mainly to serum albumin. Although they are 
discussed here as IV formulations, they may be absorbed 
orally. Other possible routes of administration include 
intramuscular (IM), intranasal, and sublingual. Mida-
zolam rapidly crosses into the CNS, but is considered to 
have a slower effect-site equilibration time than propofol 
and thiopental. In this regard, IV doses of midazolam 
should be sufficiently spaced to permit the peak clinical 
effect to be recognized before a repeat dose is considered. 
Midazolam has the shortest context-sensitive half-time 
of the group, making it the most suitable for continuous 
infusion (see Fig. 8.5).7
Similar to other IV anesthetics, termination of bolus 
action occurs by rapid redistribution to inactive tissue 
sites (see Table 8.2). The primary metabolic pathway 
Fig. 8.7 Chemical structure of the most commonly used benzodiazepine drugs (midazolam, lorazepam, and diazepam), the new short-
acting drug remimazolam, and the antagonist flumazenil. The common benzodiazepine ring structure is shown in red.
II
Chapter 8 Intravenous Anesthetics
117
occur. Administration of flumazenil in patients receiving 
chronic benzodiazepine therapy may induce seizures.
Preoperative Medication and Sedation
The amnestic, anxiolytic, and sedative effects of ben-
zodiazepines are the basis for their use as preoperative 
medication. Midazolam (1 to 2 mg IV) is effective for 
premedication, sedation during regional anesthesia, and 
brief procedures. The addition of midazolam to propofol 
sedation for colonoscopy may improve operating condi-
tions without slowing recovery time or worsening cog-
nitive impairment at discharge.23 When compared with 
diazepam, midazolam produces a more rapid onset, with 
more intense amnesia and less postoperative sedation. 
Many patients who receive preoperative midazolam do 
not recall the operating room, and some have no memory 
of the preoperative holding area.24 Both anesthesia pro-
viders and surgeons should be aware of this fact when 
providing information to patients and families before 
surgery. Although awareness during anesthesia is rare, 
benzodiazepines seem to be superior to ketamine and 
barbiturates for prevention of recall. Midazolam is com-
monly used for oral premedication of children. For exam-
ple, 0.5 mg/kg administered orally 30 minutes before 
induction of anesthesia provides reliable sedation and 
anxiolysis in children without delayed awakening (also 
see Chapter 34). Midazolam also lowers the incidence of 
PONV.25 Despite these possible benefits, the routine use of 
premedication with benzodiazepines for elective surgery 
may not improve patient experience.26
The synergistic effects between benzodiazepines and 
other drugs, especially opioids and propofol, facilitate 
better sedation and analgesia. However, the combina-
tion of these drugs also exacerbates respiratory depres-
sion and may lead to airway obstruction or apnea. 
These drugs may also increase the risk for aspiration of 
gastric contents by impairing pharyngeal function and 
the coordination between breathing and swallowing.27
Benzodiazepine effects, in addition to synergy with 
other respiratory depressants, are more pronounced in 
the elderly (also see Chapter 35), so smaller doses and 
careful titration may be necessary. Caution is advised 
when using benzodiazepines for sedation of critically ill, 
mechanically ventilated patients, as this drug class has 
been linked to longer duration of ICU stay and increased 
delirium compared with alternative regimens (propofol or 
dexmedetomidine)28 (also see Chapter 41).
Induction of Anesthesia
Although rarely used for this purpose, general anesthesia 
can be induced by the administration of midazolam (0.1 
to 0.3 mg/kg IV). The onset of unconsciousness, however, 
is slower than induction with thiopental, propofol, or eto-
midate. Unconsciousness is facilitated when a small dose 
of opioid (fentanyl, 50 to 100 μg IV) is injected 1 to 3 
minutes before midazolam. Despite the possible reduction 
Like propofol and barbiturates, benzodiazepines 
decrease CMRO2 and CBF, but to a lesser extent. How-
ever, midazolam is unable to produce an isoelectric EEG 
even at high doses, thus emphasizing that there is a ceil-
ing effect on CMRO2 reduction. Patients with decreased 
intracranial compliance demonstrate little or no change 
in ICP after the administration of midazolam. Benzodiaz-
epines have not been shown to possess neuroprotective 
properties. They are potent anticonvulsants for the treat-
ment of status epilepticus, alcohol withdrawal, and local 
anesthetic–induced seizures.
Cardiovascular System
When administered alone and in small doses, benzodi-
azepines cause minimal changes in heart rate or blood 
pressure. If given in sufficient doses to induce general 
anesthesia, midazolam produces a larger decrease in arte-
rial blood pressure than diazepam. This change is most 
likely the result of peripheral vasodilation. Hypotension 
is more likely in hypovolemic patients.
Respiratory System
Benzodiazepines produce minimal depression of ventila-
tion. Transient apnea may occur with rapid IV admin-
istration of midazolam for induction of anesthesia. 
Benzodiazepines decrease the ventilatory response to 
carbon dioxide, but this effect is not usually significant 
if they are administered alone. More severe respiratory 
depression can occur when benzodiazepines are coad-
ministered with opioids.
Side Effects
Allergic reactions to benzodiazepines are extremely 
rare to nonexistent. Pain during IV injection and 
subsequent thrombophlebitis are most pronounced 
with diazepam. Propylene glycol, the organic solvent 
required to dissolve diazepam and lorazepam, is most 
likely responsible for pain during IM or IV adminis-
tration and for the unpredictable absorption after IM 
injection. Midazolam is water soluble in the low pH 
formulation, which obviates the need for an organic 
solvent and decreases the likelihood of pain during 
injection or erratic absorption.
Clinical Uses
Benzodiazepines are used for (1) preoperative medication, 
(2) sedation, (3) IV induction of anesthesia, and (4) sup-
pression of seizure activity. The slow onset and prolonged 
duration of action of lorazepam limit its usefulness in the 
perioperative setting, especially when rapid and sustained 
awakening at the end of surgery is desirable. Flumazenil 
(8 to 15 μg/kg IV) may be useful for treating patients 
experiencing delayed awakening, but its duration of 
action is brief (about 20 minutes) and resedation may 
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
118
during the Vietnam War. However, with the unpleasant 
psychomimetic side effects, the abuse potential of keta-
mine, and the introduction of propofol, the popularity of 
ketamine as the primary or sole IV anesthetic has since 
declined. Still, the unique features of ketamine (potent 
analgesia with minimal respiratory depression and rela-
tive cardiovascular stability) and its versatile routes of 
administration (IV, IM, oral, intranasal, rectal, epidural) 
make it a very valuable alternative in certain settings 
(Box 8.3). In pain medicine subanesthetic doses of keta-
mine are administered to limit or reverse opioid tolerance 
and opioid-induced hyperalgesia and to treat refractory 
chronic pain (also see Chapter 44). More recently, keta-
mine is recognized for its benefits in the treatment of 
refractory major depression.
Pharmacokinetics and Pharmacodynamics
The mechanism of action of ketamine is complex, but the 
major anesthetic effect is produced through noncompeti-
tive inhibition of the NMDA receptor complex. Ketamine 
conventionally exists as a racemic mixture, with the S(+) 
form being more potent than the R(−) enantiomer (Fig. 8.8). 
More recently, the S(+) enantiomer–only formulation, 
appropriately named esketamine, was approved by the 
FDA for major depression treatment. The high lipid solubil-
ity of ketamine ensures a rapid onset of effect. Like other 
IV induction drugs, the effect of a single bolus injection is 
terminated by redistribution to inactive tissue sites. Metab-
olism occurs primarily in the liver and involves N-demeth-
ylation by the cytochrome P450 system. Norketamine, the 
primary active metabolite, is less potent (one-third to one-
fifth the potency of ketamine) and is subsequently further 
of cardiovascular side effects, it is unlikely that the use 
of a benzodiazepine for induction of anesthesia offers 
any advantage over propofol, and delayed awakening 
may occur.
Suppression of Seizure Activity
The efficacy of benzodiazepines as anticonvulsants is the 
result of their ability to enhance the inhibitory effects of 
GABA, particularly in the limbic system. Indeed, diazepam 
(0.1 mg/kg IV) is often effective in abolishing seizure 
activity produced by local anesthetics or alcohol with-
drawal. Lorazepam (0.1 mg/kg IV) is the IV benzodiazepine 
of choice for status epilepticus. Diazepam (0.2 mg/kg IV) 
may also be used. For prehospital treatment of status epi-
lepticus, IM administration of midazolam (10 mg IM for 
patients >40 kg; 5 mg IM for patients 13 to 40 kg) is effec-
tive and can be performed more rapidly than IV therapy.
Remimazolam
In 2020 the FDA approved a new ultrashort-acting ben-
zodiazepine named remimazolam based on the results of 
several clinical trials demonstrating its utility and safety 
in procedural sedation (mostly endoscopy). Remima-
zolam contains a carboxylic ester group that is rapidly 
hydrolyzed by tissue esterases, analogous to remifen-
tanil (also see Chapter 9). Compared with midazolam, 
remimazolam has a smaller volume of distribution, faster 
clearance, clearance independent of body weight, and 
a markedly shorter context-sensitive half time.29 The 
kinetic properties of remimazolam make it a promising 
IV anesthetic drug that may yield less prolonged sedation 
compared with midazolam, particularly in patients with 
liver disease or those taking cytochrome P450–inhibiting 
drugs. However, at least one study suggests moderate 
hemodynamic effects (elevated heart rate and decreased 
blood pressure) during remimazolam infusion.29
KETAMINE
Ketamine is an arylcyclohexylamine and relative of 
phencyclidine (PCP) that works uniquely through antago-
nism of NMDA receptors to facilitate a characteristic hyp-
notic state known as dissociative anesthesia, wherein the 
patient’s eyes remain open with a slow nystagmic gaze 
(see Table 8.3). Additionally, ketamine is different from 
most other IV anesthetics in that it produces significant 
analgesia. In anesthetic doses ketamine produces full 
anesthesia with an increase in blood pressure and with-
out significant respiratory depression or upper airway 
collapse. However, when ketamine is administered as the 
sole anesthetic, amnesia is not as complete as with the 
administration of a benzodiazepine.
After its approval by the FDA in 1970, ketamine was 
established as a safe anesthetic and was widely used 
Fig. 8.8 Chemical structure of racemic ketamine.
Box 8.3
Clinical Scenarios for Potential Ketamine Use
•Sedation for painful procedures
•Infusion for analgesia, especially with opioid-tolerant
patients or those with anticipated difficult pain 
management
•Intramuscular induction for uncooperative patients
•IV induction while maintaining spontaneous respiration
and hemodynamics
•IV rapid-sequence induction to maintain hemodynamics
IV, Intravenous.
II
Chapter 8 Intravenous Anesthetics
119
to hypercapnia is preserved and arterial blood gases 
remain stable. Transient hypoventilation and, in rare 
cases, a short period of apnea can follow rapid adminis-
tration of large IV doses for induction of anesthesia. The 
ability to protect the upper airway in the presence of keta-
mine cannot be assumed despite the presence of active 
airway reflexes and maintenance of pharyngeal muscle 
tone. Frequently, lacrimation and salivation are increased, 
and premedication with an anticholinergic drug may be 
required to limit this effect. Especially in children the risk 
for laryngospasm may be increased because of excess 
salivation. Ketamine relaxes bronchial smooth muscles 
and may be helpful in the management of patients expe-
riencing bronchospasm.
Clinical Uses
Induction and Maintenance of Anesthesia
Induction of anesthesia can be achieved with ketamine, 
1 to 2 mg/kg IV or 4 to 6 mg/kg IM. Ketamine can be 
used for rapid-sequence intubation. Though not com-
monly used for maintenance of anesthesia, the short 
context-sensitive half-time makes ketamine an option 
for this purpose (see Fig. 8.3).7 For example, general 
anesthesia can be achieved with the infusion of ketamine, 
15 to 45 μg/kg/min, plus 50% to 70% nitrous oxide or 
by ketamine alone, 30 to 90 μg/kg/min. Ketamine can 
also be mixed in the same syringe as propofol (“ketofol”) 
for procedural sedation to provide significant analgesia 
and to minimize the need for supplemental opioids. For 
example, a final ketamine concentration of 1 to 2 mg/mL 
in propofol can be given as a sedative infusion at a rate 
based on propofol dosing and titrated by the anesthesia 
provider to effect.
Analgesia
Small bolus doses of ketamine (0.2 to 0.8 mg/kg IV) 
can provide effective analgesia without compromise of 
the airway (e.g., cesarean section under neuraxial anes-
thesia when the regional block becomes insufficient). 
An infusion of a subanesthestic dose of ketamine (3 to 
5 μg/kg/min) during general anesthesia and in the early 
postoperative period may be useful to produce analgesia 
or reduce opioid tolerance and opioid-induced hyper-
algesia, although not all studies examining the use of 
ketamine as an adjunct show the desired improvement 
in pain scores and recovery.34 Moderate-quality evidence 
supports the use of moderate-dose ketamine infusions 
(80 mg infused over 2 hours) to improve pain from com-
plex regional pain syndrome. Analgesic outcomes for 
other refractory pain conditions such as fibromyalgia, 
headaches, and phantom limb pain remain controversial. 
Nevertheless, ketamine infusions continue to be safely 
administered for these difficult-to-treat conditions (also 
see Chapter 44).35
metabolized and excreted in urine. Ketamine has many 
possible routes of administration with good bioavailability, 
except enterically where it undergoes extensive first-pass 
metabolism. Ketamine is the only IV anesthetic that has 
low protein binding (12%) (see Table 8.2).30
Central Nervous System
In contrast to other IV anesthetics, ketamine is a cer-
ebral vasodilator that increases both CBF and CMRO2 
(also see Chapter 30). The historical literature emphasizes 
concerns of elevated ICP with ketamine administra-
tion because of the increased CBF and thus it has been 
avoided in patients with intracranial disease. More recent 
studies argue against this notion in both traumatic and 
nontraumatic neurologic illnesses, and in fact, ketamine 
may lower ICP in some cases.31,32 At low doses, ketamine 
may facilitate seizures; however, at anesthetic doses, it is 
considered an anticonvulsant and may be considered for 
treatment of status epilepticus when more conventional 
drugs are ineffective.
Transient, self-resolving psychotomimetic and schizo-
phrenia-like symptoms can occur after ketamine adminis-
tration in healthy patients.33 Such reactions may include 
vivid colorful dreams; hallucinations; out-of-body expe-
riences; and increased and distorted visual, tactile, and 
auditory sensitivity. These reactions can be distressing, 
particularly to those with underlying psychiatric history. 
A euphoric state may also be induced, which explains 
the abuse potential of the drug. Administration of a 
benzodiazepine in combination with ketamine may help 
limit the unpleasant experiences and provide amnesia. 
Although ketamine has been largely avoided in patients 
with psychosis and schizophrenia, this is not an absolute 
contraindication and may be considered by evaluating 
the risks, benefits, and alternatives in a particular clini-
cal context.
Cardiovascular System
Ketamine can produce significant, but transient, increases 
in systemic arterial blood pressure, heart rate, and cardiac 
output via centrally mediated sympathetic stimulation, 
adrenocortical stimulation, and inhibition of norepi-
nephrine reuptake. These effects, which are associated 
with increased cardiac work and myocardial oxygen 
demand, are not always desirable and can be blunted by 
coadministration of benzodiazepines, opioids, or inhaled 
anesthetics. Ketamine is a direct myocardial depressant, 
but this property is usually masked by its stimulation of 
the sympathetic nervous system. However, hypotension 
can develop in critically ill patients with limited ability 
to increase their sympathetic nervous system activity or 
patients with limited cardiovascular reserve.
Respiratory System
Ketamine does not produce significant respiratory depres-
sion. When used as a single drug, the respiratory response 
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
120
Central Nervous System
Etomidate reduces CMRO2 and is, in parallel, also a potent 
direct cerebral vasoconstrictor resulting in decreased CBF 
and ICP (also see Chapter 30). Despite its reduction of 
CMRO2, etomidate showed mixed neuroprotection results 
in animal studies, and human studies are lacking. Excita-
tory spikes on the EEG are more frequent after etomidate 
than from thiopental. Similar to methohexital, etomidate 
may activate seizure foci, manifested as fast activity on 
the EEG. Etomidate can be used in ECT to facilitate longer 
motor seizure activity (also see Chapter 38).
Cardiovascular System
A characteristic and desired feature of etomidate bolus 
injection for induction of anesthesia is cardiovascular 
stability. Arterial blood pressure remains unchanged 
or minimally decreased and principally reflects small 
decreases in systemic vascular resistance. Any hypo-
tensive effects of etomidate can be exaggerated in the 
presence of hypovolemia. Etomidate produces minimal 
changes in heart rate and cardiac output. The depressive 
effects on myocardial contractility are minimal at clini-
cally used concentrations.
Respiratory System
The depressant effects of etomidate on ventilation are 
less pronounced than those of barbiturates, although 
apnea may occasionally follow rapid IV injection. Etomi-
date may decrease tidal volume but is compensated for 
by an increase in respiratory rate. Depression of ventila-
tion may be exaggerated when etomidate is combined 
with inhaled anesthetics or opioids.
Endocrine System
Etomidate causes adrenocortical suppression by produc-
ing a dose-dependent inhibition of 11β-hydroxylase, an 
enzyme necessary for the conversion of cholesterol to 
cortisol (Fig. 8.10). This suppression lasts at least 4 to 8 
hours after a single induction dose of etomidate, and rela-
tive adrenal insufficiency may last up to 24 to 48 hours. 
Infusion of etomidate for sedation in patients with sepsis 
(or critically ill patients in general) is no longer used 
because of low-level evidence and inferences from corti-
sol testing, but whether etomidate contributes causally to 
mortality has not been definitely established. The safety 
of single-dose etomidate for intubation of critically ill 
patients and as an induction drug for general anesthesia 
continues to generate controversy. Some high-quality 
randomized trials show no mortality risk related to single 
administration of etomidate; other metaanalyses find sig-
nificant associations between single-dose etomidate, with 
an increased risk of adrenal insufficiency and mortality 
in patients with or at risk of sepsis.38–40 Development of 
novel short-acting etomidate derivatives (e.g., ABP-700) 
is underway with promising results (including no adreno-
cortical side effects) in healthy human volunteers.41
Treatment of Major Depression
Ketamine is receiving attention as a rapid-onset thera-
peutic option for treatment-resistant major depression. 
Intranasal and IV ketamine can improve depressive symp-
toms, and the antidepressant efficacy is sustained with 
repeated administration.36 37 ECT is the alternative treat-
ment modality for refractory depression. Whether using 
ketamine as part of the anesthesia for ECT can provide 
additive or synergistic antidepressant effect is controver-
sial. With optimization of dose, timing, and frequency of 
treatments, ketamine may prove useful for maintenance 
of antidepressant effects in treatment-resistant patients.
ETOMIDATE
Etomidate is an IV anesthetic with hypnotic (but not 
analgesic) properties and a favorable hemodynamic effect 
profile (Fig. 8.9). However, it uniquely causes reversible, 
dose-dependent adrenocortical suppression, which has 
sparked debates about the risks and benefits of its use in 
specific settings.
Pharmacokinetics and Pharmacodynamics
Etomidate has GABA-like effects and seems to primarily 
act through potentiation of GABAAR-mediated chloride 
currents, like most other IV anesthetics. An induction 
dose of etomidate produces rapid onset of anesthesia, 
and recovery depends on redistribution to inactive 
tissue sites (comparable to thiopental and propofol). 
Metabolism is primarily hepatic by ester hydrolysis to 
inactive metabolites, which are then excreted in urine 
and bile. The duration of action is linearly related to the 
dose, with each 0.1 mg/kg providing about 100 seconds 
of unconsciousness. Because of its minimal effects on 
hemodynamics and short context-sensitive half-time, 
larger doses, repeated boluses, or continuous infusions 
can safely be administered (see Fig. 8.5).7 Etomidate, like 
most other IV anesthetics, is highly protein bound (77%), 
primarily to albumin.
Fig. 8.9 Chemical structure of R(+)-etomidate.
II
Chapter 8 Intravenous Anesthetics
121
unclear in nonseptic perioperative patients. Theoretically, 
this suppression may be either desirable if it reduces 
neurohormonal stresses during surgery and anesthesia, 
or undesirable if it prevents useful protective responses 
against perioperative stresses. Although controversy 
remains regarding the risk of mortality with single-dose 
etomidate in septic patients, one should be prompted to 
perform an assessment of risks and benefits of etomidate 
use (e.g., patients with cardiovascular risk factors or risk 
of postinduction hypotension) and alternative induction 
agents (for example, ketamine).
DEXMEDETOMIDINE
Dexmedetomidine is a highly selective and potent 
α2-adrenergic agonist used most prevalently as a seda-
tive agent in the procedure suites and ICUs. It has the 
ability to induce a unique cooperative-sedative response 
with minimal respiratory depression, which allows for 
a smooth transition between wakefulness and sleeplike 
state upon gentle stimulation (Box 8.5). Additionally, it 
has anxiolytic, sympatholytic, and analgesic properties 
and can be used as an anesthetic adjunct to decrease the 
dose of other inhaled or IV anesthetics.
Pharmacokinetics and Pharmacodynamics
Dexmedetomidine produces its effects through activa-
tion of CNS α2-receptors; these effects can be reversed 
with α2-antagonists. Dexmedetomidine is the active 
S-enantiomer of medetomidine, a highly selective 
α2-adrenergic agonist and imidazole derivative that is 
used in veterinary medicine (Fig. 8.11). Dexmedetomidine 
is water soluble and undergoes rapid hepatic metabolism 
involving N-methylation, hydroxylation, and conjugation. 
Clinical Uses
Etomidate is an alternative to propofol and barbiturates for 
the rapid IV induction of anesthesia, especially in patients 
with compromised myocardial contractility, coronary 
artery disease, or severe aortic stenosis. After a standard 
induction dose (0.2 to 0.3 mg/kg IV), the onset of uncon-
sciousness is comparable to that achieved by thiopental 
and propofol but is superior in avoidance of postinduction 
hypotension (Box 8.4). Etomidate is superior to propofol 
and thiopental in achieving ideal intubating conditions 
by preserving the hemodynamics, and hence distribution 
pharmacokinetics, of neuromuscular blocking agents.
There is a frequent incidence of pain followed by 
venous irritation during IV injection of propylene glycol–
formulated etomidate; newer lipid emulsion formulations 
without the organic solvent are much better tolerated. 
Involuntary myoclonic movements are common from the 
transient imbalance of excitatory and inhibitory signal-
ing in the thalamocortical tract and are not reflective of 
seizures. Myoclonus may be masked by the concomitant 
administration of neuromuscular blocking agents, ben-
zodiazepines, and/or opioids. Awakening after a single 
IV dose of etomidate is rapid, with little evidence of any 
residual depressant effects. Etomidate does not produce 
analgesia, and PONV may be more common than after 
the administration of thiopental or propofol. The principal 
limiting factor in the clinical use of etomidate for induc-
tion of anesthesia is its undesired ability to transiently 
depress adrenocortical function. The clinical significance 
of transient etomidate-induced adrenal suppression is 
0
20
10
40
30
0
4
8
12
16
20
24
Hours
Plasma cortisol (µg/100 mL)
Etomidate
Thiopental
Fig. 8.10 Etomidate, but not thiopental, is associated with 
decreases in the plasma concentrations of cortisol. P < 0.005 
versus thiopental, mean ± SD (standard deviation). (From Fragen 
RT, Shanks CA, Molteni A, et al. Effects of etomidate on hormonal 
responses to surgical stress. Anesthesiology. 1984;61:652–656, 
used with permission.)
Box 8.5
Clinical Scenarios for Potential Dexmedetomidine 
Use
•Continuous infusion for sedation in the intensive care unit
•Sedation for procedures such as colonoscopies,
endoscopies, awake fiber-optics, and awake seizure 
mapping
•Continuous infusion as part of balanced anesthesia for
neuromonitoring, multimodal analgesia
•Prevention of postoperative delirium/emergence agitation
Box 8.4
Clinical Scenarios for Potential Etomidate Use
•IV rapid-sequence induction to maintain hemodynamics
•IV induction for patients with cardiovascular risk factors
where hemodynamic stability is critically important
•IV induction for ECT to help facilitate seizures
ECT, Electroconvulsive therapy; IV, intravenous.
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
122
may produce transient increases in systemic arterial blood 
pressure and reflex bradycardia because of vasoconstric-
tion mediated by peripheral α2-adrenergic receptors. 
Clinically useful loading doses (0.5 to 1 μg/kg IV over 
10 minutes) increase systemic vascular resistance and 
mean arterial pressure, but probably do not significantly 
increase pulmonary vascular resistance.47 Bradycardia or 
hypotension associated with dexmedetomidine infusion 
may require treatment. Increasing age, decreased baseline 
arterial blood pressure (mean arterial pressure <70 mm 
Hg), and hypovolemia are risk factors for hemodynamic 
instability during dexmedetomidine infusion. Heart block, 
severe bradycardia, or even asystole may result from 
unopposed vagal stimulation; the response to anticho-
linergic drugs is unchanged. When used as an adjunct to 
general anesthesia, dexmedetomidine reduces plasma cat-
echolamine levels and may attenuate heart rate increases 
during emergence.48
Respiratory System
One favorable property of dexmedetomidine is its mini-
mal depression on the respiratory system—in fact, 
dexmedetomidine can be safely used through tracheal 
extubation. A small to moderate decrease in tidal volume 
and minimal change in the respiratory rate can be seen 
with dexmedetomidine infusion. The ventilatory response 
to carbon dioxide is largely unchanged, but the response 
to hypoxia seems reduced to a similar degree as propofol. 
Importantly, although the respiratory effects are mild, 
upper airway obstruction as a result of sedation is pos-
sible and comparable to propofol.49
Immune System
Surgery induces a stress endocrine, metabolic, and 
immune response. This response can be a risk factor for 
poor outcomes in patients with cardiovascular, endocrine, 
metabolic, immune, or infectious disorders. Dexmedeto-
midine is capable of blunting the surgical stress response 
comparable to epidural anesthesia.48 Dexmedetomidine 
infusion inhibits the release of epinephrine, norepineph-
rine, cortisol, and other proinflammatory factors in the 
blood. These antiinflammatory effects may play a part in 
the possible renal, myocardial, and cognitive protective 
effects of dexmedetomidine.50
Clinical Uses
Dexmedetomidine was approved by the FDA in 1999 for 
sedation of intubated and mechanically ventilated patients 
during treatment in an intensive care setting and for seda-
tion of nonintubated patients before and/or during surgi-
cal and other procedures. Although there is no evidence 
of mortality benefit, some clinical studies suggest that 
dexmedetomidine may reduce the duration of mechanical 
ventilation, shorten the length of ICU stay, and improve 
sleep quality. In the operating room dexmedetomidine 
Inactive metabolites are excreted through urine and bile. 
Clearance is high, and the elimination half-time is short 
(see Table 8.2). However, there is a significant increase 
in the context-sensitive half-time from 4 minutes after a 
10-minute infusion to 250 minutes after an 8-hour infu-
sion.
Central Nervous System
Recognition of the usefulness of α2-agonists was based on 
the observation that patients receiving chronic clonidine 
therapy have decreased anesthetic requirements. Hypno-
sis presumably results from stimulation of α2-receptors in 
the locus ceruleus, and the analgesic effect originates at 
the level of the spinal cord. The sedative effect produced 
by dexmedetomidine has a different quality than that 
of other IV anesthetics: it more resembles a physiologic 
sleep state through activation of endogenous sleep 
pathways. Dexmedetomidine has a synergistic sedative 
effect when combined with other sedative-hypnotics. 
Dexmedetomidine decreases CBF without significant 
changes in ICP and CMRO2 (see Table 8.3). Tolerance and 
dependence can develop, and patients can exhibit with-
drawal symptoms upon cessation of a prolonged infusion 
of dexmedetomidine. Although changes in the EEG do 
occur, spikes from seizure foci are not suppressed, making 
dexmedetomidine a useful drug for epilepsy surgery.42
Evoked potentials monitored during spine surgery are 
not suppressed at usual infusion doses (<0.6 μg/kg/hr).43
Dexmedetomidine has been associated with a 
decreased risk of postoperative cognitive dysfunction 
(including delirium) in the ICU and after various types 
of surgeries in the immediate perioperative period.44–46
However, whether dexmedetomidine influences long-
term postoperative cognitive outcomes remains an active 
area of research (also see Chapter 35).
Cardiovascular System
Dexmedetomidine infusion produces moderate decreases 
in heart rate and systemic vascular resistance and, conse-
quently, decreases systemic arterial blood pressure through 
its effect on central α2 receptos. A bolus or loading dose 
Fig. 8.11 Chemical structure of S-dexmedetomidine.
II
Chapter 8 Intravenous Anesthetics
123
facilitate better postoperative analgesia and prolong the 
duration of the block.
Dexmedetomidine has been used extensively in chil-
dren and has demonstrated efficacy in this population. 
Specifically, it may be beneficial for prevention of emer-
gence delirium after pediatric anesthesia without affecting 
time to extubation or discharge (also see Chapter 34).51
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The editors and publisher would like to thank Dr. Helge 
Eilers for his contributions to prior editions of this 
chapter. The authors thank Hamed Darbanian for sug-
gesting helpful corrections to Table 8.3
may be used as an adjunct to general anesthesia or to 
provide sedation during regional anesthesia or awake 
fiber-optic tracheal intubation. When administered dur-
ing general anesthesia, dexmedetomidine (0.5 to 1 μg/kg 
IV initial dose over a period of 10 to 15 minutes, followed 
by an infusion of 0.2 to 0.7 μg/kg/hr) decreases the dose 
requirements for inhaled and IV anesthetics. Awakening 
and the transition to the postoperative setting may benefit 
from dexmedetomidine-produced sedative and analgesic 
effects without respiratory depression. Dexmedetomidine 
decreases perioperative opioid consumption and may 
improve pain scores, but analgesic benefit has not been 
shown in all settings. Perineural dexmedetomidine is also 
used as a potent adjunct to local anesthetics in neuraxial 
and peripheral regional anesthesia. It has been shown to 
REFERENCES
1. Scott S, Aricescu AR. A structural perspec-
tive on GABAA receptor pharmacology. 
Curr Opin Struct Biol. 2019;54:189–197. 
http://doi.org/10.1016/j.sbi.2019.03.023.
2. Kent DE, Savechenkov PY, Bruzik KS, 
Miller KW. Binding site location on 
GABAA receptors determines wheth-
er mixtures of intravenous general 
anaesthetics interact synergistically or 
additively in vivo. Br J Pharmacol. 
2019;176(24):4760–4772. 
http://doi.
org/10.1111/bph.14843.
3. Irwin MG, Chung CKE, Ip KY, Wiles MD. 
Influence of propofol-based total intra-
venous anaesthesia on peri-operative 
outcome measures: A narrative review. 
Anaesthesia. 2020;75(Suppl 1):e90–
e100. http://doi.org/10.1111/anae.14905.
4. Walsh CT. Propofol: Milk of amne-
sia. Cell. 2018;175(1):10–13. http://doi.
org/10.1016/j.cell.2018.08.031.
5. Asserhøj LL, Mosbech H, Krøigaard M, 
Garvey LH. No evidence for contraindi-
cations to the use of propofol in adults 
allergic to egg, soy or peanut. Br J 
Anaesth. 2016;116(1):77–82. http://doi.
org/10.1093/bja/aev360.
6. Sahinovic MM, Struys MMRF, Absalom 
AR. Clinical pharmacokinetics and phar-
macodynamics of propofol. Clin Pharma-
cokinet. 2018;57(12):1539–1558. http://
doi.org/10.1007/s40262-018-0672-3.
7. Hughes MA, Glass PS, Jacobs JR. Con-
text-sensitive half-time in multicom-
partment pharmacokinetic models for 
intravenous anesthetic drugs. Anesthe-
siology. 1992;76(3):334–341. http://doi.
org/10.1097/00000542-199203000-00003.
8. Hannam JA, Mitchell SJ, Cumin D, etal. 
Haemodynamic profiles of etomidate 
vs propofol for induction of anaesthe-
sia: A randomised controlled trial in 
patients undergoing cardiac surgery. Br 
J Anaesth. 2019;122(2):198–205. http://
doi.org/10.1016/j.bja.2018.09.027.
9. Simons JCP, Pierce E, Diaz-Gil D, 
etal. Effects of depth of propofol and 
sevoflurane anesthesia on upper air-
way collapsibility, respiratory geni-
oglossus activation, and breathing 
in healthy volunteers. Anesthesiol-
ogy. 2016;125(3):525–534. http://doi.
org/10.1097/ALN.0000000000001225.
10. Eames WO, Rooke GA, Wu RS, Bishop MJ. 
Comparison of the effects of etomidate, 
propofol, and thiopental on respiratory 
resistance after tracheal intubation. Anes-
thesiology. 1996;84(6):1307–1311. http://
doi.org/10.1097/00000542-199606000-
00005.
11. Krajčová A, Waldauf P, Anděl M, et al. 
Propofol infusion syndrome: A struc-
tured review of experimental studies and 
153 published case reports. Crit Care. 
2015;19(398):1–9. http://doi.org/10.1186/
s13054-015-1112-5
12. Euasobhon P, Dej-arkom S, Sirius-
sawakul A, etal. Lidocaine for reducing 
propofol-induced pain on induction of 
anaesthesia in adults. Cochrane Data-
base Syst Rev Online. 2016;2:CD007874. 
http://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.
CD007874.pub2.
13. Ingrande J, Brodsky JB, Lemmens 
HJ Lean body weight scalar for the 
anesthetic induction dose of propo-
fol in morbidly obese subjects. Anesth 
Analg. 2011;113(1):57–62. doi: 10.1213/
ANE.0b013e3181f6d9c0
14. Heard C, Harutunians M, Houck J, 
Joshi P, Johnson K, Lerman J Propo-
fol anesthesia for children undergoing 
magnetic resonance imaging. Anesth 
Analg. 2015;120(1):157–164. http://doi.
org/10.1213/ANE.0000000000000504
15. Borgeat A, Wilder-Smith OH, Saiah M, 
Rifat K. Subhypnotic doses of propo-
fol possess direct antiemetic properties. 
Anesth Analg. 1992;74(4):539–541. doi: 
10.1213/00000539-199204000-00013.
16. Apfel CC, Korttila K, Abdalla M, etal. 
A factorial trial of six interventions 
for the prevention of postoperative 
nausea and vomiting. N Engl J Med. 
2004;350(24):2441–2451. 
http://doi.
org/10.1056/NEJMoa032196.
17. Kumar G, Stendall C, Mistry R, Gurusamy 
K, Walker D. A comparison of total intra-
venous anaesthesia using propofol with 
sevoflurane or desflurane in ambulatory 
surgery: Systematic review and meta-
analysis. Anaesthesia. 2014;69(10):1138–
1150. http://doi.org/10.1111/anae.12713.
18. Sneyd JR. Thiopental to desflurane—An 
anaesthetic journey. Where are we going 
next?. Br J Anaesth. 2017;119(suppl_1):i44–
i52. http://doi.org/10.1093/bja/aex328.
19. Lihua P, Su M, Ke W, Ziemann-Gimmel P. 
Different regimens of intravenous seda-
tives or hypnotics for electroconvulsive 
therapy (ECT) in adult patients with 
depression. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 
Online. 2014;4:CD009763. http://doi.
org/10.1002/14651858.CD009763.pub2.
20. Roberts I, Sydenham E. Barbitu-
rates 
for 
acute 
traumatic 
brain 
injury. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 
Online. 2012;12:CD000033. http://doi.
org/10.1002/14651858.CD000033.pub2.
21. Ellens N, Figueroa B, Clark J. The 
use of barbiturate-induced coma dur-
ing cerebrovascular neurosurgery pro-
cedures: A review of the literature. 
Brain Circ. 2015;1(2):140–146. http://
doi.org/10.4103/2394-8108.172887.
22. Bulach R, Myles PS, Russnak M. Double-
blind randomized controlled trial to deter-
mine extent of amnesia with midazolam 
given immediately before general anaes-
thesia. Br J Anaesth. 2005;94(3):300–
305. http://doi.org/10.1093/bja/aei040.
23. Padmanabhan U, Leslie K, Eer AS, 
Maruff P, Silbert BS. Early cognitive 
impairment after sedation for colonos-
copy: The effect of adding midazolam 
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
124
and/or fentanyl to propofol. Anesth 
Analg. 2009;109(5):1448–1455. http://
doi.org/10.1213/ane.0b013e3181a6ad31.
24. Chen Y, Cai A, Fritz BA, et al. Amnesia 
of the operating room in the B-unaware 
and BAG-RECALL clinical trials. Anesth 
Analg. 2016;122(4):1158–1168. http://doi.
org/10.1213/ANE.0000000000001175.
25. Grant MC, Kim J, Page AJ, Hob-
son D, Wick E, Wu CL The effect of 
intravenous midazolam on postop-
erative nausea and vomiting. Anesth 
Analg. 2016;122(3):656–663 http://doi.
org/10.1213/ANE.0000000000000941.
26. Maurice-Szamburski A, Auquier P, 
Viarre-Oreal V, etal. Effect of sedative 
premedication on patient experience 
after general anesthesia: A randomized 
clinical trial. JAMA. 2015;313(9):
916–925. doi: http://doi.org/10.1001/
jama.2015.1108.
27. Cedborg AIH, Sundman E, Boden K, etal. 
Effects of morphine and midazolam on 
pharyngeal function, airway protection, 
and coordination of breathing and swal-
lowing in healthy adults. Anesthesiol-
ogy. 2015;122(6):1253–1267. http://doi.
org/10.1097/ALN.0000000000000657.
28. Kok L, Slooter AJ, Hillegers MH, van 
Dijk D, Veldhuijzen DS. Benzodiazepine 
use and neuropsychiatric outcomes in 
the ICU: A systematic review. Crit Care 
Med. 2018;46(10):1673–1680. http://doi.
org/10.1097/CCM.0000000000003300.
29. Schüttler J, Eisenried A, Lerch M, Fech-
ner J, Jeleazcov C, Ihmsen H. Pharma-
cokinetics and pharmacodynamics of 
remimazolam (CNS 7056) after con-
tinuous infusion in healthy male vol-
unteers: Part I. Pharmacokinetics and 
clinical pharmacodynamics. Anesthesi-
ology. 2020;132(4):636–651. http://doi.
org/10.1097/ALN.0000000000003103.
30. Peltoniemi MA, Hagelberg NM, Olkkola 
KT, Saari TI. Ketamine: A review of clin-
ical pharmacokinetics and pharmacody-
namics in anesthesia and pain therapy. 
Clin Pharmacokinet. 2016;55(9):1059–
1077. 
http://doi.org/10.1007/s40262-
016-0383-6.
31. Zeiler FA, Teitelbaum J, West M, Gillman 
LM. The ketamine effect on intracranial 
pressure in nontraumatic neurological ill-
ness. J Crit Care. 2014;29(6):1096–1106. 
http://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcrc.2014.05.024.
32. Zeiler FA, Teitelbaum J, West M, Gill-
man LM. The ketamine effect on ICP 
in traumatic brain injury. Neurocrit 
Care. 2014;21(1):163–173. http://doi.
org/10.1007/s12028-013-9950-y.
33. Beck K, Hindley G, Borgan F, etal. 
Association of ketamine with psychi-
atric symptoms and implications for 
its therapeutic use and for under-
standing schizophrenia: A systematic 
review and meta-analysis. JAMA Netw 
Open. 2020;3(5):e204693. doi: 10.1001/
jamanetworkopen.2020.4693.
34. Gorlin AW, Rosenfeld DM, Ramakrishna 
H. Intravenous sub-anesthetic ketamine 
for perioperative analgesia. J Anaesthe-
siol Clin Pharmacol. 2016;32(2):160–167. 
http://doi.org/10.4103/0970-9185.182085.
35. Pickering G, Pereira B, Morel V, etal. 
Ketamine and magnesium for refrac-
tory neuropathic pain: A randomized, 
double-blind, crossover trial. Anesthesi-
ology. 2020;133(1):154–164. http://doi.
org/10.1097/ALN.0000000000003345.
36. Daly EJ, Singh JB, Fedgchin M, etal. 
Efficacy and safety of intranasal esket-
amine adjunctive to oral antidepres-
sant therapy in treatment-resistant 
depression: A randomized clinical trial. 
JAMA Psychiatry. 2018;75(2):139–148. 
http://doi.org/10.1001/jamapsychia-
try.2017.3739.
37. Singh JB, Fedgchin M, Daly EJ, etal. 
A double-blind, randomized, placebo-
controlled, dose-frequency study of 
intravenous ketamine in patients with 
treatment-resistant depression. Am J 
Psychiatry. 2016;173(8):816–826. http://
doi.org/10.1176/appi.ajp.2016.16010037.
38. Bruder EA, Ball IM, Ridi S, Pickett W, 
Hohl C. Single induction dose of etomi-
date versus other induction agents for 
endotracheal intubation in critically ill 
patients. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 
Online. 2015;1:CD010225. http://doi.
org/10.1002/14651858.CD010225.pub2.
39. Gu W-J, Wang F, Tang L, Liu J-C. Single-
dose etomidate does not increase mortal-
ity in patients with sepsis: A systematic 
review and meta-analysis of randomized 
controlled trials and observational stud-
ies. Chest. 2015;147(2):335–346. http://
doi.org/10.1378/chest.14-1012.
40. Erdoes G, Basciani RM, Eberle B. 
Etomidate—A review of robust evi-
dence for its use in various clinical 
scenarios. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand. 
2014;58(4):380–389. 
https://doi.
org/10.1111/aas.12289.
41. Valk BI, Absalom AR, Meyer P, etal. 
Safety and clinical effect of i.v. infu-
sion of cyclopropyl-methoxycarbonyl 
etomidate (ABP-700), a soft analogue 
of etomidate, in healthy subjects. Br J 
Anaesth. 2018;120(6):1401–1411. http://
doi.org/10.1016/j.bja.2018.01.038.
42. Oda Y, Toriyama S, Tanaka K, et al. The 
effect of dexmedetomidine on electrocor-
ticography in patients with temporal lobe 
epilepsy under sevoflurane anesthesia. 
Anesth Analg. 2007;105(5):1272-1277. 
h t t p : / / d o i . o r g / 1 0 . 1 2 1 3 / 0 1 .
ane.0000281075.77316.98
43. Rozet I, Metzner J, Brown M, etal. Dex-
medetomidine does not affect evoked 
potentials during spine surgery. Anesth 
Analg. 2015;121(2):492–501. http://doi.
org/10.1213/ANE.0000000000000840.
44. Su X, Meng Z-T, Wu X-H, etal. Dexme-
detomidine for prevention of delirium 
in elderly patients after non-cardiac 
surgery: A randomised, double-blind, 
placebo-controlled 
trial. 
Lancet. 
2016;388(10054):1893–1902. http://doi.
org/10.1016/S0140-6736(16)30580-3.
45. Djaiani G, Silverton N, Fedorko L, etal. 
Dexmedetomidine versus propofol seda-
tion reduces delirium after cardiac surgery: 
A randomized controlled trial. Anesthesi-
ology. 2016;124(2):362–368. http://doi.
org/10.1097/ALN.0000000000000951.
46. Duan X, Coburn M, Rossaint R, Sand-
ers RD, Waesberghe JV, Kowark A. 
Efficacy of perioperative dexmedeto-
midine on postoperative delirium: 
Systematic review and meta-analysis 
with trial sequential analysis of ran-
domised controlled trials. Br J Anaesth. 
2018;121(2):384–397. 
http://doi.
org/10.1016/j.bja.2018.04.046.
47. Friesen RH, Nichols CS, Twite MD, etal. 
The hemodynamic response to dexmedeto-
midine loading dose in children with and 
without pulmonary hypertension. Anesth 
Analg. 2013;117(4):953–959. http://doi.
org/10.1213/ANE.0b013e3182a15aa6.
48. Li Y, Wang B, Zhang L, etal. Dexmedeto-
midine combined with general anesthe-
sia provides similar intraoperative stress 
response reduction when compared 
with a combined general and epidural 
anesthetic technique. Anesth Analg. 
2016;122(4):1202–1210. 
http://doi.
org/10.1213/ANE.0000000000001165.
49. Lodenius Å, Maddison KJ, Lawther BK, 
etal. Upper airway collapsibility during 
dexmedetomidine and propofol sedation 
in healthy volunteers: A nonblinded 
randomized crossover study. Anesthesi-
ology. 2019;131(5):962–973. http://doi.
org/10.1097/ALN.0000000000002883.
50. Wang K, Wu M, Xu J, etal. Effects of 
dexmedetomidine on perioperative stress, 
inflammation, and immune function: 
Systematic review and meta-analysis. 
Br J Anaesth. 2019;123(6):777–794. 
http://doi.org/10.1016/j.bja.2019.07.027.
51. Dahmani S, Delivet H, Hilly J. Emer-
gence delirium in children: An update. 
Curr Opin Anaesthesiol. 2014;27(3):309–
315. 
http://doi.org/10.1097/
ACO.0000000000000076.
125
Chapter
BASIC PHARMACOLOGY
Structure and Activity
The opioids of clinical interest in anesthesiology share 
many structural features. Morphine is a benzylisoqui-
noline alkaloid (Fig. 9.1). Many commonly used semi-
synthetic opioids are created by simple modification of 
the morphine molecule. Codeine, for example, is the 
3-methyl derivative of morphine. Similarly, hydromor-
phone, hydrocodone, and oxycodone are also synthesized 
by relatively simple modifications of morphine. More 
complex alteration of the morphine molecular skeleton 
results in mixed agonist-antagonists like nalbuphine and 
even complete antagonists like naloxone.
The fentanyl series of opioids are chemically related to 
meperidine. Meperidine is the first completely synthetic 
opioid and can be regarded as the prototype clinical phe-
nylpiperidine (see Fig. 9.1). Fentanyl is a simple modi-
fication of the basic phenylpiperidine structure. Other 
commonly used fentanyl congeners like alfentanil and 
sufentanil are somewhat more complex versions of the 
same phenylpiperidine skeleton.
Opioids share many physicochemical features in 
common, although some individual drugs have unique 
features (Table 9.1). In general, opioids are highly soluble 
weak bases that are highly protein bound and largely 
ionized at physiologic pH. Opioid physicochemical prop-
erties influence their clinical behavior. For example, rela-
tively unbound, unionized molecules such as alfentanil 
BASIC PHARMACOLOGY
Structure and Activity
Mechanism
Metabolism
CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
Pharmacokinetics
Pharmacodynamics
Drug Interactions
Special Populations
Unique Features of Individual Opioids
Opioid Agonist-Antagonists and Pure 
Antagonists
CLINICAL APPLICATION
Common Clinical Indications
Rational Drug Selection and Administration
EMERGING DEVELOPMENTS
Opioid Abuse Epidemic
Multimodal General Anesthesia 
(and Opioid-Free Anesthesia)
Biased mu-Receptor Agonists
OPIOIDS
Talmage D. Egan
9
Opioids play an indispensable role in the practice of 
anesthesiology, critical care, and pain management. A 
sound understanding of opioid pharmacology, includ-
ing both basic science and clinical aspects, is critical for 
the safe and effective use of these important drugs. This 
chapter will focus almost exclusively on the intravenous 
opioid receptor agonists used perioperatively.
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
126
transduction mechanisms activated by the opioid recep-
tors.1 Binding of opioid agonists with the receptors leads 
to activation of the G protein, producing effects that are 
primarily inhibitory (Fig. 9.2); these effects ultimately 
culminate in hyperpolarization of the cell and reduction 
of neuronal excitability.
Three classical opioid receptors have been identified 
using molecular biology techniques: mu, kappa, and 
delta. More recently, a fourth opioid receptor, ORL1 (also 
known as NOP), has also been identified, although its 
function is quite different from that of the classical opioid 
and remifentanil have a shorter latency to peak effect 
after bolus injection.
Mechanism
Opioids produce their main pharmacologic effects by 
interacting with opioid receptors, which are typical of the 
G protein–coupled family of receptors widely found in 
biology (e.g., beta-adrenergic and dopaminergic, among 
others). Expression of cloned opioid receptors in cultured 
cells has facilitated analysis of the intracellular signal 
CH3CH2OC
CH3CH2 C
CH2CH2
Fentanyl
Codeine
Meperidine
N
N
O
O
O
O
H
H
H
H
H
HO
N
H3C
N
CH3
CH3
Morphine
O
HO
N
CH3
H
HO
Fig. 9.1 The molecular structures of morphine, codeine, meperidine, and fentanyl. Note that codeine is a 
simple modification of morphine (as are many other opiates); fentanyl and its congeners are more complex 
modifications of meperidine, a phenylpiperidine derivative.
Morphine
Fentanyl
Sufentanil
Alfentanil
Remifentanil
pKa
8.0
8.4
8.0
6.5
7.1
% Un ionized at pH 7.4
23
<10
20
90
67?
Octanol–H2O partition coefficient
1.4
813
1778
145
17.9
% Bound to plasma protein
20–40
84
93
92
80
Diffusible fraction (%)
16.8
1.5
1.6
8.0
13.3
Vdc (L/kg)
0.1–0.4
0.4–1.0
0.2
1.1–0.3
0.06–0.08
Vdss (L/kg)
3–5
3–5
2.5–3.0
0.4–1.0
0.2–0.3
Clearance (mL/min/kg)
15–30
10.20
10–15
4–9
30–40
Hepatic extraction ratio
0.6–0.8
0.8–1.0
0.7–0.9
0.3–0.5
NA
Table 9.1
Selected Opioid Physicochemical and Pharmacokinetic Parameters
From Bailey, P.L., Egan, T.D., Stanley, T. H. Intravenous opioid anesthetics. In: Miller, R.D., ed. Anesthesia, 5th ed. New York, Churchill Livingstone; 
2000:312.
NA, Not applicable; Vdc, volume of distribution of central compartment; Vdss, volume of distribution at steady state; ? indicates greater 
uncertainty about the value.
II
Chapter 9 Opioids
127
Metabolism
The intravenous opioids in common perioperative clinical 
use are transformed and excreted by a wide variety of 
metabolic pathways. In general, opioids are metabolized 
by the hepatic microsomal system, although hepatic 
conjugation and subsequent excretion by the kidney are 
important for some drugs. For certain opioids, the spe-
cific metabolic pathway involved has important clinical 
implications in terms of active metabolites (e.g., mor-
phine, meperidine) or an ultrashort duration of action 
(e.g., remifentanil). For other opioids, genetic variation 
in the metabolic pathway can drastically alter the clinical 
effects (e.g., codeine). These nuances are addressed in a 
subsequent section focused on individual drugs.
CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
Pharmacokinetics (also see Chapter 4)
Pharmacokinetic differences are the primary basis for the 
rational selection and administration of opioids in perio-
perative anesthesia practice. Key pharmacokinetic behav-
iors are (1) the latency to peak effect-site concentration 
after bolus injection (i.e., bolus front-end kinetics), (2) the 
time to clinically relevant decay of concentration after 
bolus injection (i.e., bolus back-end kinetics), (3) the time 
receptors. Each of these opioid receptors has a commonly 
employed experimental bioassay, associated endogenous 
ligand(s), a set of agonists and antagonists, and a spec-
trum of physiologic effects when the receptor is agonized 
(Table 9.2). Although the existence of opioid receptor 
subtypes (e.g., mu-1, mu-2) has been proposed, it is not 
clear from molecular biology techniques that distinct 
genes code for them. Posttranslational modification of 
opioid receptors certainly occurs and may be responsible 
for conflicting data regarding opioid receptor subtypes.2
Opioids exert their therapeutic effects at multiple sites. 
They inhibit the release of substance P from primary 
sensory neurons in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord, 
mitigating the transfer of painful sensations to the brain. 
Opioid actions in the brainstem modulate nociceptive 
transmission in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord through 
descending inhibitory pathways. Opioids are thought to 
change the affective response to pain through actions in 
the forebrain; decerebration prevents opioid analgesic 
efficacy in rats.3 Furthermore, morphine induces signal 
changes in “reward structures” in the human brain.4
Studies in genetically altered mice have yielded impor-
tant information about opioid receptor function. In mu 
opioid receptor knockout mice morphine-induced anal-
gesia, reward effect and withdrawal effect are absent.5 6
Importantly, mu receptor knockout mice also fail to 
exhibit respiratory depression in response to morphine.7
Opioid binding
site
Opioid
receptor
Cell
membrane
Ca2+
K+
K+ channel
(inward rectifier)
(+)
(+)
G protein
(–)
MAPK cascade
Gene expression
Adenylate
cyclase
ATP
cyclic AMP
Phospholipase A2
Production of
prostaglandins
and leukotrienes
(–)
(Extracellular)
(Intracellular)
Voltage-dependent
Ca2+ channel (N-type)
Fig. 9.2 Opioid mechanisms of action. The endogenous ligand or drug binds to the opioid receptor and 
activates the G protein, resulting in multiple effects that are primarily inhibitory. The activities of adenylate 
cyclase and the voltage-dependent Ca2+ channels are depressed. The inwardly rectifying K+ channels and 
mitogen activated protein kinase (MAPK) cascade are activated. AMP, Adenosine monophosphate; ATP,
adenosine triphosphate.
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
128
may not be a good choice. Similarly, when the clinical 
goal is a brief duration of opioid effect followed by rapid 
dissipation, remifentanil or alfentanil might be preferred. 
Note how remifentanil's concentration has declined 
very substantially before fentanyl's peak concentration 
has even been achieved. The simulation illustrates why 
the front-end kinetics of fentanyl make it a drug well 
suited for patient-controlled analgesia (PCA) (also see 
Chapter40). In contrast to morphine, the peak effect of a 
fentanyl bolus is manifest before a typical PCA lockout 
period has elapsed, thus mitigating a “dose stacking” 
problem.
The latency to peak effect is governed by the speed 
with which the plasma and effect site come to equilib-
rium (i.e., the ke0 parameter; also see Chapter 4). Drugs 
with a more rapid equilibration typically have a higher 
“diffusible” fraction (i.e., the proportion of drug that is 
unionized and unbound) and high lipid solubility (see 
Table 9.1). However, a very large dose of a typically 
slow-onset opioid can produce a rapid onset because a 
supratherapeutic drug level in the effect site is reached 
even though the peak concentration comes later.
The time to steady state after beginning a continu-
ous infusion is also best examined by pharmacokinetic 
simulation. Using the same prototypes as with bolus 
administration, pharmacokinetic simulation (see Fig. 9.3, 
middle panel) shows the time required to achieve steady-
state effect-site concentrations (i.e., infusion front-end 
kinetics).
This simulation of simple, constant-rate infusions has 
obvious clinical implications. First, the time required to 
reach a substantial fraction of the ultimate steady-state 
concentration is very long in the context of intraoperative 
to steady-state concentration after starting a continuous 
infusion (i.e., infusion front-end kinetics), and (4) the 
time to clinically relevant decay in concentration after 
stopping a continuous infusion (i.e., infusion back-end 
kinetics).
Applying opioid pharmacokinetic concepts to clinical 
anesthesiology requires recognition of several fundamen-
tal principles. First, a table of pharmacokinetic parameters 
has limited clinical value (see Table 9.1). Understanding 
pharmacokinetic behavior is best achieved through com-
puter simulation. Second, opioids administered by bolus 
injection or continuous infusion must be considered 
separately.8 Third, pharmacokinetic information must 
be integrated with knowledge about the concentration–
effect relationship and drug interactions (i.e., pharmaco-
dynamics) in order to be clinically useful.
The latency to peak effect and the offset of effect after 
bolus injection (i.e., bolus front-end kinetics and bolus 
back-end kinetics) of various intravenous opioids can 
be explored by predicting the time course of effect-site 
concentrations after a bolus is administered. Because the 
opioids differ in terms of potency (and thus the required 
dosages), for comparison purposes, the effect-site con-
centrations must be normalized to the percentage of 
peak concentration for each drug. Considering morphine, 
fentanyl, sufentanil, alfentanil, and remifentanil as 
among the most commonly used opioids intraoperatively, 
pharmacokinetic simulation illustrates how opioids differ 
in terms of latency to peak effect after a bolus is admin-
istered (Fig. 9.3, top panel).
The simulation of a bolus injection (see Fig. 9.3, top 
panel) has obvious clinical implications. For example, 
when a rapid onset of opioid effect is desirable, morphine 
Mu (μ)
Delta (δ)
Kappa (κ)
Tissue bioassay*
Guinea pig ileum
Mouse vas deferens
Rabbit vas deferens
Endogenous ligand
β-Endorphin
Leu-enkephalin
Dynorphin
Endomorphin
Met-enkephalin
Agonist prototype
Morphine
Deltorphin
Buprenorphine
Fentanyl
Pentazocine
Antagonist prototype
Naloxone
Naloxone
Naloxone
Supraspinal analgesia
Yes
Yes
Yes
Spinal analgesia
Yes
Yes
Yes
Ventilatory depression
Yes
No
No
Gastrointestinal effects
Yes
No
Yes
Sedation
Yes
No
Yes
Table 9.2
A Summary of Selected Features of Opioid Receptors
From Bailey, P.L., Egan, T.D., Stanley, T.H. Intravenous opioid anesthetics. In: Miller, R.D., ed. Anesthesia, 5th ed. New York, Churchill Livingstone; 
2000:312.
*Traditional experimental method to assess opioid receptor activity in vivo.
II
Chapter 9 Opioids
129
use. To reach a near steady state more quickly requires 
a bolus to be administered before the infusion is com-
menced (or increased). Remifentanil perhaps represents 
a partial exception to this general rule. Also, for many 
drugs, opioid concentrations will increase for many hours 
after an infusion is commenced; in other words, concen-
trations are typically increasing even though the infusion 
rate may have been the same for hours! That remifentanil 
achieves a near steady state relatively quickly is certainly 
part of why it has emerged as a popular drug for total 
intravenous anesthesia (TIVA).
The time to offset of effect after stopping a steady-state 
infusion is best expressed by the context-sensitive half-
time (CSHT) simulation.9 Defined as the time required to 
achieve a 50% decrease in concentration after stopping 
a continuous, steady-state infusion, the CSHT is a means 
of normalizing the pharmacokinetic behavior of drugs 
so that rational comparisons can be made regarding the 
predicted offset of drug effect. The CSHT is thus focused 
on “infusion back-end” kinetics (also see Chapter 4).
The bottom panel of Fig. 9.3 is a CSHT simulation 
for commonly used opioids. For most drugs, the CSHT 
changes with time. Thus for brief infusions, the pre-
dicted back-end kinetics for the various drugs do not 
differ much (remifentanil is a notable exception to this 
general rule). As the infusion time lengthens, the CSHTs 
begin to differentiate, providing a rational basis for drug 
selection. Second, depending on the desired duration of 
opioid effect, either the shorter-acting or longer-acting 
drugs can be chosen. Finally, the shapes of these curves 
differ depending on the degree of concentration decline 
required. In other words, the curves representing the 
time required to achieve a 20% or an 80% decrease in 
concentration (e.g., the 20% or 80% decrement time 
simulations) are quite different.8 Thus depending on the 
anesthesia technique applied, the CSHT simulations are 
not necessarily the clinically relevant simulations (i.e., a 
50% decrease may not be the clinical goal). Also, CSHT 
simulation for morphine does not account for active 
metabolites (see the section on individual drugs).
Pharmacodynamics
In most respects the mu agonist opioids can be considered 
pharmacodynamic equals with important pharmacoki-
netic differences; that is, both the therapeutic and adverse 
effects are essentially the same. Their efficacy as analge-
sics and their propensity to produce ventilatory depression 
are indistinguishable from each other. Pharmacodynamic 
differences do exist in part as a function of non–opioid 
receptor mechanisms such as histamine release.
Because the nervous system profoundly influences the 
function of the entire body, mu opioid agonist pharma-
codynamic effects are observed in many organ systems. 
Fig. 9.4 summarizes the major pharmacodynamic effects 
of the fentanyl congeners. Depending on the clinical 
BOLUS: Front-end & Back-end
100
80
60
40
20
0
0
5
10
Bolus at time zero
Morphine
Fentanyl
Remifentanil
Sufentanil
Alfentanil
15
20
25
30
Proportion of Peak Ce (%)
Time After Bolus Injection (min)
100
80
60
40
20
0
0
100
200
Infusion begins at time zero
300
400
500
600
Proportion of Steady-State Ce (%)
Fentanyl
Morphine
Alfentanil
Sufentanil
Infusion Duration (min)
Remifentanil
INFUSION: Front-end
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Time to 50% Decrement in Ce (min)
Fentanyl
Morphine
Alfentanil
Sufentanil
Remifentanil
Infusion Duration (min)
Fentanyl
Remifentanil
Alfentanil
Sufentanil
Morphine
INFUSION: Back-end
Fig. 9.3 Opioid pharmacokinetics. Simulations illustrating front-
end and back-end pharmacokinetic behavior after administration 
by bolus injection or continuous infusions for morphine, fentanyl, 
alfentanil, sufentanil, and remifentanil using pharmacokinetic 
parameters from the literature (see text for details).49,87–90
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
130
effects. The brain is the anatomic substrate for the seda-
tive action of mu agonists. With increasing doses, mu 
agonists eventually produce drowsiness and sleep (the 
relief of pain no doubt contributes to the promotion of 
sleep in uncomfortable patients both preoperatively and 
postoperatively). With sufficient doses, the mu agonists 
produce pronounced delta wave activity on the electro-
encephalogram, which resembles the pattern observed 
during natural sleep.
Mu agonists can of course produce significant pain 
relief at doses that do not produce sleep. This is the basis 
of their clinical utility in the treatment of pain in ambu-
latory patients. On the other hand, the fact that increas-
ing doses eventually produce drowsiness (and therefore 
the inability to request additional doses) is the essential 
scientific foundation for the safety of PCA devices. How-
ever, even large doses of opioids do not reliably produce 
unresponsiveness and amnesia, and thus opioids cannot 
be viewed as complete anesthetics when used alone.
Opioids also suppress the cough reflex via the cough 
centers in the medulla. Attenuation of the cough reflex 
presumably makes coughing and “bucking” against the 
indwelling endotracheal tube less likely.
circumstances and clinical goals of treatment, some of 
these widespread effects can be viewed as therapeutic or 
adverse. For example, in some clinical settings the seda-
tion produced by mu agonists might be viewed as a goal 
of therapy. In others drowsiness would clearly be thought 
of as an adverse effect.
Therapeutic Effects
The relief of pain is the primary therapeutic effect of 
opioid analgesics. Acting at spinal and brain mu recep-
tors, opioids provide analgesia both by attenuating the 
nociceptive traffic from the periphery and by altering 
the affective response to painful stimulation centrally. 
Mu agonists are most effective in treating “second pain” 
sensations carried by slowly conducting, unmyelinated 
C fibers; they are less effective in treating “first pain” 
sensations (carried by small, myelinated A-delta fibers) 
and neuropathic pain. A unique aspect of opioid-induced 
analgesia (in contrast to drugs like local anesthetics) is 
that other sensory modalities are not affected (e.g., touch 
and temperature, among others).
Perioperatively (certainly intraoperatively), the drows-
iness produced by mu agonists is also one of the targeted 
Miosis
Cough suppression
Bradycardia
Delayed gastric
emptying
Ileus and constipation
Urinary retention
Pruritus
Depressed
cellular immunity
Muscle rigidity
Increased biliary
pressure
Ventilatory depression
Vasodilation
Spinal analgesia
Supraspinal analgesia
Sedation and euphoria
Nausea and vomiting
Fig. 9.4 Opioid pharmacodynamics. A summary chart of selected effects of the fentanyl congeners (see 
text for details).
II
Chapter 9 Opioids
131
increased, both respiratory rate and tidal volume progres-
sively decrease, eventually culminating in an irregular 
ventilatory rhythm and then complete apnea.
A variety of factors can increase the risk of opioid-
induced ventilatory depression. Clear risk factors include 
large opioid dose, advanced age, concomitant use of 
other central nervous system (CNS) depressants, and renal 
insufficiency (for morphine). Natural sleep also increases 
the ventilatory depressant effect of opioids.12
Opioids can alter cardiovascular physiology by a 
variety of different mechanisms. Compared with many 
other anesthetic drugs (e.g., propofol, volatile anesthet-
ics), however, the cardiovascular effects of opioids, par-
ticularly the fentanyl congeners, are relatively minimal 
(morphine and meperidine are exceptions, see later).
The fentanyl congeners cause bradycardia by directly 
increasing vagal nerve tone in the brainstem, which 
experimentally can be blocked by microinjection of 
naloxone into the vagal nerve nucleus or by peripheral 
vagotomy.13 14
Opioids also produce vasodilation by depressing vaso-
motor centers in the brainstem and, to a lesser extent, 
by a direct effect on vessels. This action decreases both 
preload and afterload. Decreases in arterial blood pres-
sure are more pronounced in patients with increased 
sympathetic tone, such as patients with congestive heart 
failure or hypertension. Clinical doses of opioids do not 
appreciably alter myocardial contractility.
Opioids can induce muscle rigidity, usually from the 
rapid administration of large bolus doses of the fentanyl 
congeners. This rigidity can even make bag and mask ven-
tilation during induction of anesthesia nearly impossible 
as a result of vocal cord rigidity and closure.15 The rigidity 
tends to coincide with the onset of unresponsiveness.16
Although the mechanism of opioid-induced muscle rigid-
ity is unknown, it is not a direct action on muscle because 
it can be eliminated by neuromuscular blocking drugs.
Opioids also cause nausea and vomiting. They stimu-
late the chemoreceptor trigger zone in the area postrema 
on the floor of the fourth ventricle in the brain. This can 
lead to nausea and vomiting, which are exacerbated by 
movement. This perhaps explains why ambulatory sur-
gery patients are more likely to be troubled by postopera-
tive nausea and vomiting, PONV (also see Chapter 39).
Pupillary constriction induced by mu agonists can be 
a useful diagnostic sign indicating some ongoing opioid 
effect. Opioids stimulate the Edinger–Westphal nucleus 
of the oculomotor nerve to produce miosis. Even small 
doses of opioids elicit this response, and very little toler-
ance to the effect develops. Thus miosis is a useful, albeit 
nonspecific, indicator of opioid exposure even in opioid-
tolerant patients. Opioid-induced pupillary constriction is 
reversible with naloxone.
Opioids have important effects on gastrointestinal 
physiology. Opioid receptors are found throughout the 
enteric plexus of the bowel. Stimulation of these receptors 
Adverse Effects
Depression of ventilation is the primary adverse effect 
associated with mu agonist drugs. When the airway is 
secured and ventilation is controlled intraoperatively, 
opioid-induced depression of ventilation is of little con-
sequence. However, opioid-induced respiratory depres-
sion in the postoperative period can lead to hypoxemic 
brain injury and death.
Mu agonists alter the ventilatory response to arterial 
carbon dioxide at the ventilatory control center in the 
medulla. The depression of ventilation is mediated by the 
mu receptor; mu receptor knockout mice do not exhibit 
respiratory depression from morphine.10
In unmedicated humans increases in arterial carbon 
dioxide partial pressure markedly increase minute vol-
ume (Fig. 9.5). Under the influence of opioid analgesics, 
the curve is flattened and shifted to the right; for a given 
carbon dioxide partial pressure, the minute volume is 
lower.11 More importantly, the “hockey stick” shape of the 
normal curve is lost; there may be a partial pressure of 
carbon dioxide below which the patient will not breathe 
(i.e., the “apneic threshold”) in the presence of opioids.
The clinical signs of depressed ventilation are quite 
subtle with moderate opioid doses. Postoperative patients 
receiving opioid analgesic therapy can be awake and alert 
and yet have a significantly decreased minute volume. 
Respiratory rate decreases, whereas initially tidal volume 
may increase slightly. As the opioid concentration is 
10
0
5
10
15
20
25
Minute Volume (L/min)
20
30
PaCO2 (mm Hg)
Normal
Opioid
40
50
60
Fig. 9.5 Opioid-induced ventilatory depression study methodology. 
The method characterizes the relationship between Paco2 and 
minute volume. The curve labeled “Normal” represents the 
expected response of minute volume to rising Paco2 levels in an 
awake human. Note the dramatic increase in minute volume as 
CO2 tension rises. The curve labeled “Opioid” represents the blunted 
response of minute volume to rising CO2 levels after administration 
of an opioid. Note that the slope of the curve decreases and the 
curve no longer has a “hockey stick” shape; this means that at 
physiologic Paco2 levels, the patient receiving sufficient opioid may 
be apneic or severely hypoventilatory. (Adapted with permission 
from Gross.11)
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
132
opioid treatment.22,23 Whether acute tolerance and OIH 
play important roles in the management of perioperative 
patients is somewhat controversial, in part because the 
data from animal and human studies are inconsistent.23,24
Current thinking suggests that both phenomena may 
coexist to some degree in certain perioperative settings. 
Key risk factors for the occurrence of both tolerance and 
OIH include prolonged therapy and higher opioid dos-
ages. There is some evidence that N-methyl-D-aspartic 
acid (NMDA) receptor antagonism mediated through 
drugs like ketamine may mitigate the severity of OIH.25
Drug Interactions
Drug interactions can be based on two mechanisms: phar-
macokinetic (i.e., where one drug influences the concen-
tration of the other) or pharmacodynamic (i.e., where one 
drug influences the effect of the other). In anesthesia prac-
tice although unintended pharmacokinetic interactions 
sometimes occur, pharmacodynamic interactions occur 
with virtually every anesthetic and are produced by design.
The most common pharmacokinetic interaction in opi-
oid clinical pharmacology is observed when intravenous 
opioids are combined with propofol. Perhaps because of 
the hemodynamic changes induced by propofol and their 
impact on pharmacokinetic processes, opioid concentra-
tions may be higher when given in combination with a 
continuous propofol infusion.26
The most important pharmacodynamic drug interac-
tion involving opioids is the synergistic interaction that 
occurs when opioids are combined with sedatives.27 When 
combined with volatile anesthetics, opioids dramati-
cally reduce the minimum alveolar concentration (MAC) 
ofa volatile anesthetic (Fig. 9.6) Careful examination of 
“opioid-MAC reduction” data reveals several clinically 
critical concepts (see Fig. 9.6). First, opioids synergistically 
reduce MAC. Second, the MAC reduction is substantial (as 
much as 75% or more). Third, most of the MAC reduction 
occurs at moderate opioid levels (i.e., even modest opioid 
doses substantially reduce MAC). Fourth, the MAC reduc-
tion is not complete; that is, opioids are not complete 
anesthetics. The addition of the opioid cannot completely 
eliminate the need for the other anesthetic. And fifth, an 
infinite number of hypnotic-opioid combinations will 
achieve MAC (this implies that clinicians must choose the 
optimal combination based on the goals of the anesthetic 
and operation). All of these concepts also apply when 
opioids are used in combination with propofol for TIVA.28
Special Populations
Hepatic Failure
Even though the liver is the metabolic organ primarily 
responsible for the biotransformation of most opioids, liver 
failure is usually not severe enough to have a major impact 
on opioid pharmacokinetics. Of course, the anhepatic 
by opioids causes tonic contraction of gastrointestinal 
smooth muscle, thereby decreasing coordinated, peristal-
tic contractions. Clinically, this results in delayed gastric 
emptying and presumably larger gastric volumes in 
patients receiving opioid therapy preoperatively. Postop-
eratively, patients can develop opioid-induced ileus that 
can potentially delay the resumption of proper nutrition 
and discharge from the hospital. An extension of this 
acute problem is the chronic constipation associated with 
long-term opioid therapy. Methylnaltrexone, alvimopan, 
and several other more recently approved drugs are mu 
receptor antagonists whose physicochemical properties 
prevent them from crossing the blood–brain barrier in 
appreciable amounts, thus rendering their mu receptor 
antagonism active in the gut but not in the CNS. These 
drugs have been shown to be effective in the treatment of 
postoperative ileus and the constipation associated with 
chronic opioid use,17 but the conventional wisdom about 
the clinical use of these agents is still evolving.18
Similar effects are observed in the biliary system, 
which also has an abundance of mu receptors. Mu ago-
nists can produce contraction of the gallbladder smooth 
muscle and spasm of the sphincter of Oddi, potentially 
causing a falsely positive cholangiogram during gallblad-
der and bile duct surgery. These effects are completely 
reversible with naloxone and can be partially reversed by 
glucagon treatment.
Although the urologic effects are minimal, opioids can 
sometimes cause urinary retention by decreasing bladder 
detrusor tone and by increasing the tone of the urinary 
sphincter. These effects are in part centrally mediated, 
although peripheral effects are also likely, given the 
widespread presence of opioid receptors in the genitouri-
nary tract.19,20 Although the urinary retention associated 
with opioid therapy is not typically pronounced, it can 
be troublesome in males, particularly when the opioid is 
administered intrathecally or epidurally.
Although not an acute effect relevant to intraop-
erative management, opioids depress cellular immunity. 
Morphine and the endogenous opioid beta-endorphin, 
for example, inhibit the transcription of interleukin-2 
in activated T cells, among other immunologic effects.21
Individual opioids (and perhaps classes of opioids) may 
differ in terms of the exact nature and extent of their 
immunomodulatory effects. Although opioid-induced 
impairment of cellular immunity is not well understood, 
impaired wound healing, perioperative infections, and 
cancer recurrence are possible adverse outcomes.
Opioid therapy produces adaptations in the CNS that 
result in tolerance and opioid-induced hyperalgesia (OIH). 
These phenomena are pharmacologically distinct, but 
both can result in poorly controlled pain and the need for 
an escalation in dosage. Opioid tolerance is a decrease in 
the analgesic response over time secondary to continued 
opioid administration. OIH, in contrast, is an increased 
pain response to a noxious stimulus while undergoing 
II
Chapter 9 Opioids
133
M3G and M6G) are excreted via the kidney. The kidney 
also plays a role in the conjugation of morphine and may 
account for as much as half of its conversion to M3G 
and M6G.
M3G is inactive, but M6G is an analgesic with a 
potency rivaling morphine. Very high levels of M6G and 
life-threatening respiratory depression can develop in 
patients with renal failure (Fig. 9.7).32 Consequently, mor-
phine may not be a good choice in patients with severely 
altered renal clearance mechanisms.
The clinical pharmacology of meperidine is also signif-
icantly altered by renal failure. Normeperidine, the main 
metabolite, has analgesic and excitatory CNS effects that 
range from anxiety and tremulousness to myoclonus and 
phase of orthotopic liver transplantation is a notable 
exception to this general rule (also see Chapter36). With 
ongoing drug administration, concentrations of opioids 
that rely on hepatic metabolism increase when the patient 
has no liver. Even after partial liver resection, an increase 
in the ratio of morphine glucuronides to morphine occurs, 
indicating a decrease in the rate of morphine metabo-
lism.29 Because remifentanil's metabolism is completely 
unrelated to hepatic clearance mechanisms, its disposition 
is not affected during liver transplantation.30
Pharmacodynamic considerations can be important 
for opioid therapy in patients with severe liver disease. 
Patients with ongoing hepatic encephalopathy are espe-
cially vulnerable to the sedative effects of opioids. As a 
consequence, this drug class must be used with caution 
in this patient population.
Kidney Failure
Renal failure has implications of major clinical impor-
tance with respect to morphine and meperidine (see the 
section on individual drugs later). For the fentanyl con-
geners, the clinical importance of kidney failure is much 
less marked. Remifentanil's metabolism is not affected by 
kidney disease.31
Morphine is principally metabolized by conjugation 
in the liver; the resulting water-soluble glucuronides (i.e., 
morphine 3-glucuronide and morphine 6-glucuronide, 
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
2
4
6
Plasma Fentanyl (ng/mL)
No movement
Movement
MAC
95% CI
n=73
Expired Isoflurane (%)
8
10
12
Fig. 9.6 Volatile anesthetic minimum alveolar concentration 
(MAC) reduction by opioids: the prototype example of isoflurane 
and fentanyl. The solid curve is MAC; the dotted curves are the 
95% confidence intervals (see text for details). (Adapted with 
permission from McEwan et al.27)
1000
100
10
0
0
4
8
12
Morphine 3-glucuronide
NORMAL KIDNEYS
KIDNEY FAILURE
Morphine 6-glucuronide
Morphine
Morphine 3-glucuronide
Morphine 6-glucuronide
Morphine
16
20
24
Plasma Concentration (nmol/L)
Plasma Concentration (nmol/L)
Time (hours)
1000
100
10
0
0
4
8
12
16
20
24
Time (hours)
Fig. 9.7 The pharmacokinetics of morphine and its metabolites 
in normal volunteers versus kidney failure patients. Note the 
significant accumulation of the metabolites in renal failure. 
(Adapted with permission from Osborne et al.32)
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
134
in older patients (>65 years of age). Remifentanil doses 
should be decreased by at least 50% or more in elderly 
patients. Similar dosage reductions are prudent for the 
other opioids as well.
Obesity
Although detailed information is unavailable for many of 
the commonly used opioids, evidence from the study of 
drugs introduced more recently suggests that body weight 
is an important factor influencing the clinical pharmacol-
ogy of opioids. Opioid pharmacokinetic parameters, espe-
cially clearance, appear to be more closely related to lean 
body mass (LBM) rather than to total body weight. In 
practical terms this means that morbidly obese patients 
do indeed require a higher dosage than lean patients in 
order to achieve the same target concentration, but the 
very obese patients do not need nearly as much as would 
be suggested by their total body weight.36
For example, as illustrated through pharmacokinetic 
simulation (Fig. 9.9), a total body weight (TBW)–based 
dosing scheme results in much higher remifentanil effect-
site concentrations than a dosing calculation based on 
LBM.37 In contrast, TBW and LBM dosing schemes result 
in similar concentrations for lean patients. More recent 
information from two larger studies has confirmed these 
concepts,38 39 which likely apply to other opioids as well.
Unique Features of Individual Opioids
Codeine
Codeine, although not commonly used intraoperatively, 
has special importance among opioids because of the well-
characterized pharmacogenomic nuance associated with it. 
frank seizures. Because the active metabolites are subject 
to renal excretion, CNS toxicity secondary to accumula-
tion of normeperidine is especially a concern in patients 
with renal failure. This shortcoming of meperidine has 
caused many hospital formularies to restrict its use or to 
remove it from the formulary altogether.
Gender
Gender may have an important influence on opioid phar-
macology. Morphine is more potent in women than in 
men and has a slower onset of action in women.33 Some 
of these differences may be related to cyclic gonadal 
hormones and psychosocial factors.
Age (also see Chapter 35)
Advancing age is clearly an important factor influenc-
ing the clinical pharmacology of opioids. For example, 
fentanyl congeners are more potent in the older patient 
(Fig.9.8).34 35 Decreases in clearance and central distribu-
tion volume also occur in older patients.
With advanced age, although pharmacokinetic changes 
also play a role, pharmacodynamic differences are pri-
marily responsible for the decreased dose requirement 
5
4
3
2
1
0
20
40
60
80
100
Central Clearance (ng/mL–1)
Age (years)
30
20
10
0
20
40
60
80
100
EC50 (ng/mL–1)
Age (years)
Fig. 9.8 The influence of age on the clinical pharmacology of 
remifentanil. Although there is considerable variability, in general, 
older subjects have a lower central clearance and a higher potency 
(i.e., lower EC50).34
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
150
0
15
30
45
60
75
90
105 120 135
Remifentanil Ce (ng/mL–1)
Time (min)
Obese patient - TBW dosing
Lean patient - TBW dosing
Lean patient - LBM dosing
Obese patient - LBM dosing
Fig. 9.9 A pharmacokinetic simulation illustrating the conse-
quences of calculating the remifentanil dosage based on total body 
weight (TBW) or lean body mass (LBM) in obese and lean patients 
(1 mcg/kg bolus injection followed by an infusion of 0.5 mcg/
kg/min for 15 min and 0.25 mcg/kg/min for an additional 105 
min). Note that TBW-based dosing in an obese patient results in 
dramatically higher concentrations. (Adapted with permission from 
Egan et al.37)
II
Chapter 9 Opioids
135
ways. In addition to the intravenous route, fentanyl can 
be delivered by transdermal, transmucosal, transnasal, 
and transpulmonary routes.
Oral transmucosal delivery of fentanyl citrate (OTFC) 
results in the faster achievement of higher peak levels 
than when the same dose is swallowed.45 Avoidance of 
the first-pass effect results in substantially greater bio-
availability. Because OTFC is noninvasive and rapid in 
onset, it is a successful therapy for breakthrough pain 
in opioid-tolerant cancer patients, often in combination 
with a transdermal fentanyl patch.
Alfentanil
Alfentanil was the first opioid to be administered almost 
exclusively by continuous infusion. Because of its rela-
tively short terminal half-life, alfentanil was originally 
predicted to have a rapid offset of effect after termina-
tion of a continuous infusion.46 Subsequent advances 
in pharmacokinetic theory (i.e., the CSHT) proved this 
assertion to be false.8 However, alfentanil is in fact a 
short-acting drug after a single bolus injection because 
of its high “diffusible fraction”; it reaches peak effect-
site concentrations quickly and then begins to decline 
(see the relevant “Pharmacokinetics” section earlier). 
Alfentanil illustrates how a drug can exhibit different 
pharmacokinetic profiles depending on the method of 
administration (i.e., bolus versus continuous infusion). 
More so than fentanyl and sufentanil, alfentanil's metab-
olism by the liver may be more unpredictable because 
of the significant interindividual variability of hepatic 
CYP3A4, the primary enzyme responsible for alfentanil 
biotransformation.
Sufentanil
Sufentanil's distinguishing feature is that it is the most 
potent opioid commonly used in anesthesia practice. 
Because it is more intrinsically efficacious at the opioid 
receptor, the absolute doses used are much smaller com-
pared with the other less potent drugs (e.g., a 1000-fold 
less than morphine doses).
Remifentanil
Remifentanil is a prototype example of how specific 
clinical goals can be achieved by designing molecules 
with specialized structure–activity (or structure–metabo-
lism) relationships. By losing its mu receptor agonist 
activity upon ester hydrolysis, a very short-acting opioid 
results (Fig. 9.10).47 The perceived unmet need driving 
remifentanil's development was having an opioid with a 
rapid onset and offset so that the drug could be titrated 
up and down as necessary to meet the dynamic needs 
of the patient during the rapidly changing conditions of 
anesthesia and surgery.
Compared with the currently marketed fentanyl con-
geners, remifentanil's CSHT is short, on the order of 
about 5 minutes.48 Pharmacodynamically, remifentanil 
Codeine is actually a prodrug; morphine is the active com-
pound. Codeine is metabolized (in part) by O-demethylation 
into morphine, a metabolic process mediated by the liver 
microsomal isoform CYP2D6.40 Patients who lack CYP2D6 
because of deletions, frameshift, or splice mutations (i.e., 
approximately 10% of the Caucasian population) or whose 
CYP2D6 is inhibited (e.g., patients taking quinidine) would 
not be expected to benefit from codeine even though they 
exhibit a normal response to morphine.41,42 Conversely, 
patients with CYP2D6 gene duplications are expected to 
exhibit excessive effect with codeine administration (this 
genotype can be especially troublesome for a mother with 
a nursing infant; the child may exhibit morphine toxicity).
Morphine
Morphine is the prototype opioid against which all newcom-
ers are compared. There is no evidence that any synthetic 
opioid is more effective in controlling pain than nature's 
morphine, derived from the opium poppy plant. Were it not 
for the histamine release and the resulting hypotension asso-
ciated with morphine, fentanyl may not have replaced mor-
phine as the most commonly used opioid intraoperatively
Morphine has a slow onset time. Morphine's pKa 
renders it almost completely ionized at physiologic 
pH. This property and its low lipid solubility account 
for morphine's prolonged latency to peak effect; mor-
phine penetrates the CNS slowly. This feature has both 
advantages and disadvantages associated with it. The 
prolonged latency to peak effect means that morphine is 
perhaps less likely to cause acute respiratory depression 
after bolus injection of typical analgesic doses compared 
with the more rapid-acting opioids. On the other hand, 
the slow onset time means that clinicians are perhaps 
more likely to inappropriately “stack” multiple morphine 
doses in a patient experiencing severe pain, thus creating 
the potential for a toxic “overshoot.”43
Morphine's active metabolite, M6G, has important clin-
ical implications. Although conversion to M6G accounts 
for only 10% of morphine's metabolism, M6G may con-
tribute to morphine's analgesic effects even in patients 
with normal renal function, particularly with longer-term 
use. Because of morphine's high hepatic extraction ratio, 
the bioavailability of orally administered morphine is 
significantly lower than after parenteral injection. The 
hepatic first-pass effect on orally administered morphine 
results in high M6G levels. In fact, M6G may be the pri-
mary active compound when morphine is administered 
orally.44 As noted in the section on kidney failure, M6G's 
accumulation to potentially toxic levels in dialysis patients 
is another important implication of this active metabolite.
Fentanyl
Fentanyl may be the most important opioid used in 
modern anesthesia practice. As the original fentanyl 
congener, its clinical application is well entrenched and 
highly diverse. Fentanyl can be delivered in numerous 
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
136
need underlying the development of these drugs. Drugs in 
this category are used for the treatment of chronic pain and 
for the treatment of opioid addiction. These drugs cause 
some degree of competitive antagonism when administered 
in the presence of ongoing full agonist activity (e.g., when 
administered after morphine and other pure agonists).
Pure opioid antagonists, of which naloxone is the 
prototype, are complete competitive antagonists of the 
opioid receptor that are devoid of any agonist activity. 
These pure antagonists are used in the management of 
acute opioid overdose and chronic abuse.
Tramadol
Tramadol is a centrally acting analgesic with moderate mu 
receptor affinity and weak kappa and delta receptor affinity. 
Notably, tramadol also has antagonist activity at the 5HT 
and nicotinic acetylcholine (NA) receptors. Although provid-
ing analgesia both through opioid and serotonin receptor 
pathways, tramadol carries less risk of respiratory depression. 
However, when combined with serotonin reuptake inhibitors 
or other serotonergic medications, it does carry the risk of 
serotonin syndrome and of CNS excitability and seizures.52
Buprenorphine
Buprenorphine is an opioid agonist-antagonist with 
increasing clinical implications in the perioperative 
patient. (Also see Chapter 40.) It is 25 times more potent 
than morphine with a 50 times greater affinity for the mu 
receptor. It can be administered sublingually, transder-
mally, or parenterally, but undergoes extensive first-pass 
hepatic metabolism with oral administration. Although 
moderate doses can be used to treat chronic pain, higher 
doses used in the treatment of chronic pain can antago-
nize the effects of other opioids, making the treatment of 
acute-on-chronic pain difficult. Because it binds opioid 
receptors so tightly and its elimination half-life is in the 
range of 20 to 72hours, high-dose opioid full agonists are 
required toovercome its effects.53 Buprenorphine, includ-
ing long acting injectable formulations, is playing an 
increasing role in the treatment of opioid use disorder.92
Nalbuphine
Also an opioid agonist-antagonist, nalbuphine has a potency 
and duration of action similar to morphine. It can be used 
as a sole agent for sedation with more limited ventilatory 
depression and as an agent to reverse ventilatory depression 
in opioid overdose while maintaining some analgesia, such 
as at the end of an anesthetic when a patient is exhibiting 
excessive opioid effect (usually in very small doses).54
Naloxone/Naltrexone
Naloxone is an injectable mu antagonist that reverses 
both the therapeutic and adverse effects of mu agonists.55
Naloxone's most common indication is the emergency 
reversal of opioid-induced ventilatory depression after 
acute overdose. Its important role in this regard has merited 
exhibits a short latency to peak effect similar to alfenta-
nil and a potency slightly less than fentanyl.49
Remifentanil's role in modern anesthesia practice is 
now well established. Remifentanil is perhaps best suited 
for cases where its responsive pharmacokinetic profile can 
be exploited to advantage. These cases include the fol-
lowing: (1) when rapid recovery is desirable, (2) when the 
anesthetic requirement rapidly fluctuates, (3) when opioid 
titration is unpredictable or difficult, (4) when there is a 
substantial danger to opioid overdose, or (5) when a “high 
dose” opioid technique is advantageous but the patient is 
not going to be mechanically ventilated postoperatively.50
Remifentanil's most common clinical application is the 
provision of TIVA in combination with propofol. Perhaps 
remifentanil's principal advantage in the context of TIVA 
is that it quickly reaches a steady state after dosage adjust-
ment. Remifentanil is also commonly given by bolus when 
only a very brief pulse of opioid effect followed by rapid 
recovery is desired (e.g., in preparation for local anesthetic 
injection during Monitored Anesthesia Care).51
Opioid Agonist-Antagonists and Pure 
Antagonists
Opioid agonist-antagonists act as partial agonists at the mu 
receptor, while having competitive antagonist properties at 
the same receptors. These drugs serve as analgesics with 
more limited ventilatory depression and a lower potential 
for dependence, as they demonstrate a “ceiling effect,” 
producing less analgesia compared with pure agonists. The 
lower abuse potential was the primary perceived unmet 
C
C
O
N
O
O
C
O
CH3
O
CH3
N
Remifentanil
H3C
C
C
O
N
O
O
C
O
CH3
OH
N
GI90291
GI94219
Major
Minor
H3C
C
O
N
O
C
O
CH3
N
H
H3C
Fig. 9.10 Remifentanil's metabolic pathway. De esterification (i.e., 
ester hydrolysis) by nonspecific plasma and tissue esterases to an 
inactive acid metabolite (GI-90291) accounts for the vast majority 
of remifentanil's metabolism. (Adapted with permission from Egan 
et al.48)
II
Chapter 9 Opioids
137
“High-dose opioid anesthesia,” a technique originally 
described for morphine in the early days of open heart 
surgery60 and later associated with the fentanyl conge-
ners,61 is another common application of opioids in clini-
cal anesthesia. The original scientific underpinning of this 
approach was that high doses of opioids enabled the clini-
cian to reduce the concentration of volatile anesthetic to a 
minimum, thereby avoiding the direct myocardial depres-
sion and other untoward hemodynamic effects in patients 
whose cardiovascular systems were already compromised. 
In addition, fentanyl often produces a relative bradycardia 
that could be helpful in patients vulnerable to myocardial 
ischemia. Currently, although the general concept is still 
applied, the opioid doses used are smaller. Opioids are 
also sometimes administered for their possible beneficial 
effects in terms of cardioprotection (i.e., preconditioning).
TIVA is a more recently developed and increasingly 
popular indication for opioids in anesthesia practice. 
As the name implies, this technique relies entirely upon 
intravenous agents for the provision of general anesthe-
sia. Most commonly, continuous infusions of remifentanil 
or alfentanil are combined with a propofol infusion. 
Both the opioid and the sedative can be delivered by 
target controlled infusion (TCI)–enabled pumps. A clear 
advantage of this technique, perhaps among others, is the 
enhanced patient well-being in the early postoperative 
period, including less nausea and vomiting and often a 
feeling of euphoria.62
Rational Drug Selection and Administration
In articulating a scientific foundation for rational opioid 
selection, pharmacokinetic considerations are extremely 
important. Indeed, the mu agonists (opioids) can be con-
sidered pharmacodynamic equals (in most respects) with 
important pharmacokinetic differences.63 Thus rational 
selection of one mu opioid agonist over another requires 
the clinician to identify the desired temporal profile of 
drug effect and then choose an opioid that best enables 
the clinician to achieve it (within obvious constraints 
such as pharmacoeconomic concerns).
In selecting the appropriate opioid, among the key 
questions to address are: How quickly must the desired 
opioid effect be achieved? How long must the opioid 
effect be maintained? How critical is it that opioid-
induced ventilatory depression or sedation dissipate 
quickly (e.g., will the patient be mechanically ventilated 
postoperatively)? Is the capability to raise and lower 
the level of opioid effect quickly during the anesthetic 
critical? Will there be significant pain postoperatively 
that will require opioid treatment? All of these questions 
relate to the optimal temporal profile of opioid effect. 
The answers to these questions are addressed through the 
application of pharmacokinetic concepts.
For example, when a brief pulse of opioid effect 
followed by rapid recovery is desired (e.g., to provide 
naloxone's inclusion on the World Health Organization's 
“List of Essential Medicines.” Naloxone is sometimes used 
in much smaller doses during emergence from anesthesia 
to restore adequate ventilatory effort and thereby expedite 
extubation of the trachea. The treatment of opioid-induced 
pruritus is another common therapeutic application.
Although the drug is very effective in reversing the 
ventilatory depression associated with opioids, it can 
cause numerous untoward effects, including acute with-
drawal syndrome, nausea, vomiting, tachycardia, hyper-
tension, seizures, and pulmonary edema, among others.56
Recognizing that naloxone's duration of action is shorter 
than most of the mu agonists is a key point in determin-
ing the dosing schedule; repeated doses may be necessary 
to sustain its effects.
In response to the opioid abuse epidemic in the United 
States, new delivery systems have been developed that 
are intended for emergency use by lay persons in the 
event of opioid overdose; these include nasal spray and 
autoinjector preparations.57,58
Naltrexone, a longer-acting mu opioid antagonist 
available in oral, injectable, and implantable forms, is 
used in the long-term management of opioid addiction 
in combination with other nonpharmacologic therapies.59
CLINICAL APPLICATION
Opioids play a vital role in virtually every area of anesthe-
sia practice. In the treatment of postoperative pain (also see 
Chapter 40) opioids are of prime importance, whereas in 
most other settings in perioperative medicine, opioids are 
therapeutic adjuncts used in combination with other drugs.
Common Clinical Indications
Postoperative analgesia is the longest-standing indica-
tion for opioid therapy in anesthesia practice. In the 
modern era, opioid administration via PCA devices is 
perhaps the most common mode of delivery (also see 
Chapter 40). In recent years opioids are increasingly 
combined postoperatively with various other analgesics, 
such as nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), 
to increase efficacy and safety.
Internationally, the most common clinical indication 
for opioids in anesthesia practice is their use for what has 
come to be known as “balanced anesthesia.” This perhaps 
misguided term connotes the use of multiple drugs (e.g., 
volatile anesthetics, neuromuscular blockers, sedative-
hypnotics, and opioids) in smaller doses to produce the 
state of anesthesia. With this technique, the opioids are 
primarily used for their ability to decrease MAC. A basic 
assumption underlying this balanced anesthesia approach 
is that the drugs used in combination mitigate the disad-
vantages of the individual drugs (i.e., the volatile anes-
thetics) used in larger doses as single-drug therapy.
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
138
OUD have focused on improved opioid stewardship (e.g., 
multimodal analgesia regimens to reduce opioid exposure 
and limited prescribing of opioids for use after hospital 
discharge, among others).76 A particular question of con-
temporary interest is whether intraoperative opioid usage 
patterns influence the incidence of persistent opioid use 
after surgery.77 This question has given rise to increased 
interest in “multimodal general anesthesia.”
Multimodal General Anesthesia (and Opioid-
Free Anesthesia)
In recent years the concept of “multimodal general anes-
thesia” has extended the concept of balanced anesthesia to 
include more drugs that target different neuroanatomic cir-
cuits and multiple neurophysiologic mechanisms.78 The opi-
oid epidemic has provided much of the motivation to move 
away from opioids toward other adjunct drugs. Multimodal 
general anesthesia does not call for the total abandonment 
of intraoperative opioids, but rather a more eclectic pharma-
cologic assortment that decreases the total opioid exposure.
The suggested pharmacopeia includes a host of anes-
thetic adjuncts, including opioids (e.g., remifentanil), 
alpha-2 agonists (e.g., dexmedetomidine), local anesthet-
ics (e.g., lidocaine), cations (e.g., magnesium), and NMDA 
antagonists (e.g., ketamine, N2O). The pharmacologic 
foundation of the concept is grounded in the firmly 
established observation that when anesthetic drugs of 
different mechanisms are administered together, they typi-
cally interact with synergism. This approach will almost 
certainly reduce dose-related opioid adverse effects perio-
peratively and may have some impact on postoperative 
opioid abuse, although this is still speculative.79
Opioid-free anesthesia (OFA) can be viewed as a sub-
set of this multimodal general anesthesia concept; the 
overriding goal is to further decrease (or eliminate) perio-
perative opioid exposure. Although the OFA anesthesia 
technique has gained some momentum in contemporary 
anesthesia practice, whether the technique is broadly and 
practically feasible and whether the desired goals can be 
fully achieved remain controversial.80 81
Biased mu-Receptor Agonists
The most serious adverse effects of conventional opioids, 
both clinically and in a social context, are their ventila-
tory depressive and addictive properties, both of which 
are manifest prominently by the opioid epidemic. An 
ideal opioid would have the analgesic potential of the tra-
ditional opioids while avoiding their respiratory depres-
sive effects and addictive potential. Recent advances in 
the understanding of the mu opioid receptor mechanisms 
have made some improvement in opioids a possibility, at 
least in terms of ventilatory depressant effects.
Two distinct transduction pathways have been 
described in connection with mu opioid receptor 
analgesia for a retrobulbar block), a bolus of remifentanil 
or alfentanil might be preferred. When long-lasting opi-
oid effect is desired, such as when there will be signifi-
cant postoperative pain or when the trachea will remain 
intubated, a fentanyl infusion is a prudent choice. If the 
patient should be awake and alert shortly after the proce-
dure is finished (e.g., a craniotomy in which the surgeons 
hope to perform a neurologic examination in the operat-
ing room immediately postoperatively), a remifentanil 
infusion might be advantageous.
The formulation of a rational administration strategy 
also requires the proper application of pharmacokinetic 
principles. An important goal of any dosing scheme is to 
reach and maintain a steady-state level of opioid effect. To 
achieve a steady-state concentration in the site of action, 
opioids are frequently administered by continuous infusion. 
This is increasingly accomplished through the use of TCI 
technology, which requires that the clinician be familiar with 
the appropriate pharmacokinetic model for the opioid of 
interest. When these systems are not available, the clinician 
must remember that infusions must be preceded by a bolus 
in order to reach steady state in a timely fashion.
EMERGING DEVELOPMENTS
Opioid Abuse Epidemic
Deaths related to the abuse and diversion of prescription 
opioids have skyrocketed in the United States and else-
where.64 In addition to fatalities, this pervasive pattern of 
prescription and illicit opioid abuse has resulted in a huge 
surge in admissions to facilities specializing in the treat-
ment of opioid use disorder (OUD), although this is contro-
versial65 The trend is partly the result of opioid prescribing 
practices for chronic pain conditions that may predispose 
some patients to addiction.66,67 Perioperative opioid pre-
scribing practices also likely influence the incidence of 
OUD, although this is controversial.68 Tragically, viewing 
pain as the “fifth vital sign,” as promulgated by The Joint 
Commission on accreditation of health care organizations 
beginning in the late 1990s, is thought to have contributed 
to the development of the opioid abuse epidemic.69
The epidemic has reached such a crisis level that federal 
and state government authorities in the United States have 
enacted legislation and set aside funding to support research, 
prevention, and treatment of the problem.70,71 State-approved 
pharmacy-based naloxone dispensing (without a physician's 
prescription) for patients filling opioid prescriptions is a 
notable example of the efforts supported by such legisla-
tion.72 In addition, professional societies and the Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) have produced new 
guidelines for opioid prescribing.73 Properly viewed as a “dis-
ease of despair,”74 OUD is currently an area of intense public 
discussion and medical investigation.75
In the perioperative arena efforts to prevent the 
development of persistent opioid use after surgery and 
II
Chapter 9 Opioids
139
Although biased agonists show promise in the treatment 
of pain and the curbing of opioid epidemic deaths, they do 
not eliminate all of the adverse effects of the previously 
marketed opioids. Notably, they exert the same sedative 
effects as classic opioids. And because the G protein pathway 
mediates the reward signals that lead to opioid addiction, 
there is a possibility that the biased agonists may decrease 
deaths associated with opioid abuse but increase the overall 
prevalence, although this is entirely speculative. Nonopiate 
strategies for analgesia continue to be a prominent part of 
the strategy to stem the tide against the opioid epidemic.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Dr. Ezekiel D. Egan contributed to the Emerging 
Developments section in a substantive way through lit-
erature review, discussion of key points, the creation of 
text, and editing of the final manuscript. His contribu-
tions to the chapter are gratefully acknowledged.
activation, as shown in Fig. 9.11. The G protein–cou-
pled signaling pathway is responsible for the analgesic, 
reward, and pleasure effects. The beta-arrestin pathway 
mediates the respiratory depression and gastrointestinal 
effects.82 83 Findings in experiments using beta-arrestin 
knockout mice provide support for these observations.84
Improved understanding of these signaling pathways has 
led to the development of a novel class of opioids: the biased 
agonists. The biased agonists are full agonists of the G pro-
tein–mediated pathway, but produce less recruitment of the 
beta-arrestin pathway. Biased agonists, therefore, have the 
full analgesic effects of conventional opioids with less risk of 
constipation and respiratory depression. The nomenclature 
connotes a bias toward the G protein–signaling pathway.
The biased agonist oliceridine was recently approved 
by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Oliceridine 
has been shown to be equianalgesic to morphine with 
similar potency, but with significantly less respiratory 
depression.85 Other candidate molecules are being devel-
oped for their potential as biased agonists.86
Fig. 9.11 The role of the beta-arrestin pathway in mu agonist adverse effects. Opiate-induced MOR 
signaling through Gi activates G protein–gated inwardly rectifying potassium channels (GIRKs) and inhibits 
adenylyl cyclase, leading to analgesia. Conversely, recruitment of beta-arrestin is implicated in tolerance, 
respiratory depression, and constipation. (Adapted with permission from Manglik et al.91)
REFERENCES
1. Minami M, Satoh M. Molecular biology 
of the opioid receptors: structures, func-
tions and distributions. Neurosci Res. 
1995;23:121–145.
2. Pan L, Xu J, Yu R, Xu MM, Pan YX, 
Pasternak GW. Identification and char-
acterization of six new alternatively 
spliced variants of the human mu opi-
oid receptor gene. Oprm Neuroscience. 
2005;133:209–220.
3. Matthies BK, Franklin KB. Formalin 
pain is expressed in decerebrate rats 
but not attenuated by morphine. Pain. 
1992;51:199–206.
4. Becerra L, Harter K, Gonzalez RG, 
Borsook D. Functional magnetic reso-
nance imaging measures of the effects 
of morphine on central nervous system 
circuitry in opioid-naive healthy volun-
teers. Anesth Analg. 2006;103:208–216 
Table of contents.
5. Matthes HW, Maldonado R, Simonin 
F, Valverde O, Slowe S, Kitchen I, 
Befort K, Dierich A, Le Meur M, Dolle 
P, Tzavara E, Hanoune J, Roques BP, 
Kieffer BL. Loss of morphine-induced 
analgesia, reward effect and withdrawal 
symptoms in mice lacking the mu-opi-
oid-receptor gene. Nature. 1996;383:
819–823.
6. Sora I, Takahashi N, Funada M, Ujike H, 
Revay RS, Donovan DM, Miner LL, Uhl 
GR, Matthies BK, Franklin KB, Minami 
M, Satoh M. Opiate receptor knockout 
mice define mu receptor roles in endog-
enous nociceptive responses and mor-
phine-induced analgesia. Proc Natl Acad 
Sci U S A. 1997;94:1544–1549.
7. Dahan A, Sarton E, Teppema L, Olievier 
C, Nieuwenhuijs D, Matthes HW, Kieffer 
BL. Anesthetic potency and influence of 
morphine and sevoflurane on respiration 
in mu-opioid receptor knockout mice. 
Anesthesiology. 2001;94:824–832.
8. Shafer SL, Varvel JR. Pharmacokinetics, 
pharmacodynamics, and rational opioid 
selection. Anesthesiology. 1991;74:53–63.
9. Hughes MA, Glass PS, Jacobs JR. 
Context-sensitive half-time in multi-
compartment pharmacokinetic models 
for intravenous anesthetic drugs [see 
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
140
comments]. Anesthesiology. 1992;76:
334–341.
10. Romberg R, Sarton E, Teppema L, Mat-
thes HW, Kieffer BL, Dahan A. Com-
parison of morphine-6-glucuronide and 
morphine on respiratory depressant and 
antinociceptive responses in wild type 
and mu-opioid receptor deficient mice. 
Br J Anaesth. 2003;91:862–870.
11. Gross JB. When you breathe IN you 
inspire, when you DON’T breathe, you … 
expire: new insights regarding opioid-
induced ventilatory depression. Anes-
thesiology. 2003;99:767–770.
12. Jr. Forrest WH, Bellville JW. The effect 
of sleep plus morphine on the respira-
tory response to carbon dioxide. Anes-
thesiology. 1964;25:137–141.
13. Laubie M, Schmitt H, Vincent M. Vagal 
bradycardia produced by microinjec-
tions of morphine-like drugs into the 
nucleus ambiguus in anaesthetized dogs. 
Eur J Pharmacol. 1979;59:287–291.
14. Reitan JA, Stengert KB, Wymore ML, 
Martucci RW. Central vagal control of 
fentanyl-induced bradycardia during 
halothane anesthesia. Anesth Analg. 
1978;57:31–36.
15. Bennett JA, Abrams JT, Van Riper DF, 
Horrow JC. Difficult or impossible ven-
tilation after sufentanil-induced anes-
thesia is caused primarily by vocal cord 
closure. Anesthesiology. 1997;87:1070–
1074.
16. Streisand JB, Bailey PL, LeMaire L, 
Ashburn MA, Tarver SD, Varvel J, Stan-
ley TH. Fentanyl-induced rigidity and 
unconsciousness in human volunteers. 
Incidence, duration, and plasma concen-
trations. Anesthesiology. 1993;78:629–
634.
17. Nee J, Zakari M, Sugarman MA, Whelan 
J, Hirsch W, Sultan S, Ballou S, Iturrino 
J, Lembo A. Efficacy of treatments for 
opioid-induced constipation: systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Clin Gastro-
enterol Hepatol. 2018;16:1569–1584 e2.
18. Chamie K, Golla V, Lenis AT, Lec PM, 
Rahman S, Viscusi ER. Peripherally act-
ing μ-opioid receptor antagonists in 
the management of postoperative ileus: 
a clinical review. J Gastrointest Surg. 
2020.
19. Dray A, Metsch R. Inhibition of urinary 
bladder contractions by a spinal action 
of morphine and other opioids. J Phar-
macol Exp Ther. 1984;231:254–260.
20. Dray A, Metsch R. Spinal opioid recep-
tors and inhibition of urinary bladder 
motility in vivo. Neurosci Lett. 1984;
47:81–84.
21. Borner C, Warnick B, Smida M, Hartig 
R, Lindquist JA, Schraven B, Hollt V, 
Kraus J. Mechanisms of opioid-mediat-
ed inhibition of human T cell receptor 
signaling. J Immunol. 2009;183:882–
889.
22. Konopka KH, van Wijhe M. Opioid-
induced hyperalgesia: pain hurts?. Br J 
Anaesth. 2010;105:555–557.
23. Angst MS. Intraoperative use of remifen-
tanil for TIVA: postoperative pain, acute 
tolerance, and opioid-induced hyperal-
gesia. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth. 2015;
29(Suppl 1):S16–S22.
24. Colvin LA, Bull F, Hales TG. Periop-
erative opioid analgesia-when is enough 
too much? A review of opioid-induced 
tolerance and hyperalgesia. Lancet. 
2019;393:1558–1568.
25. Joly V, Richebe P, Guignard B, Fletch-
er D, Maurette P, Sessler DI, Chauvin 
M. Remifentanil-induced postoperative 
hyperalgesia and its prevention with 
small-dose ketamine. Anesthesiology. 
2005;103:147–155.
26. Bouillon T, Bruhn J, Radu-Radules-
cu L, Bertaccini E, Park S, Shafer S. 
Non-steady state analysis of the phar-
macokinetic interaction between propo-
fol and remifentanil. Anesthesiology. 
2002;97:1350–1362.
27. McEwan AI, Smith C, Dyar O, Good-
man D, Smith LR, Glass PS. Isoflu-
rane minimum alveolar concentration 
reduction by fentanyl. Anesthesiology. 
1993;78:864–869.
28. Vuyk J, Lim T, Engbers FH, Burm AG, 
Vletter AA, Bovill JG. The pharmacody-
namic interaction of propofol and alfen-
tanil during lower abdominal surgery in 
women. Anesthesiology. 1995;83:8–22.
29. Rudin A, Lundberg JF, Hammarlund-
Udenaes M, Flisberg P, Werner MU. 
Morphine metabolism after major liver 
surgery. Anesth Analg. 2007;104:1409–
1414 table of contents.
30. Dershwitz M, Hoke JF, Rosow CE, 
Michalowski P, Connors PM, Muir KT, 
Dienstag JL. Pharmacokinetics and 
pharmacodynamics of remifentanil in 
volunteer subjects with severe liver dis-
ease. Anesthesiology. 1996;84:812–820.
31. Hoke JF, Shlugman D, Dershwitz M, 
Michalowski P, Malthouse-Dufore S, 
Connors PM, Martel D, Rosow CE, Muir 
KT, Rubin N, Glass PS. Pharmacokinetics 
and pharmacodynamics of remifentanil 
in persons with renal failure compared 
with healthy volunteers. Anesthesiology. 
1997;87:533–541.
32. Osborne R, Joel S, Grebenik K, Trew 
D, Slevin M. The pharmacokinetics of 
morphine and morphine glucuronides 
in kidney failure. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 
1993;54:158–167.
33. Sarton E, Olofsen E, Romberg R, den 
Hartigh J, Kest B, Nieuwenhuijs D, Burm 
A, Teppema L, Dahan A. Sex differences 
in morphine analgesia: an experimental 
study in healthy volunteers. Anesthesiol-
ogy. 2000;93:1245–1254 discussion 6A.
34. Minto CF, Schnider TW, Egan TD, 
Youngs E, Lemmens HJ, Gambus PL, 
Billard V, Hoke JF, Moore KH, Hermann 
DJ, Muir KT, Mandema JW, Shafer SL. 
Influence of age and gender on the 
pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynam-
ics of remifentanil. I. Model develop-
ment. Anesthesiology. 1997;86:10–23.
35. Scott JC, Stanski DR. Decreased fentanyl 
and alfentanil dose requirements with 
age. A simultaneous pharmacokinetic 
and pharmacodynamic evaluation. J 
Pharmacol Exp Ther. 1987;240:159–166.
36. Bouillon T, Shafer SL. Does size matter?. 
Anesthesiology. 1998;89:557–560.
37. Egan TD, Huizinga B, Gupta SK, Jaars-
ma RL, Sperry RJ, Yee JB, Muir KT. 
Remifentanil pharmacokinetics in obese 
versus lean patients. Anesthesiology. 
1998;89:562–573.
38. Eleveld DJ, Proost JH, Vereecke H, Absa-
lom AR, Olofsen E, Vuyk J, Struys M. An 
allometric model of remifentanil phar-
macokinetics and pharmacodynamics. 
Anesthesiology. 2017;126:1005–1018.
39. Kim TK, Obara S, Egan TD, Minto CF, La 
Colla L, Drover DR, Vuyk J, Mertens M. 
Disposition of remifentanil in obesity: a 
new pharmacokinetic model incorporat-
ing the influence of body mass. Anes-
thesiology. 2017;126:1019–1032.
40. Poulsen L, Brosen K, Arendt-Nielsen L, 
Gram LF, Elbaek K, Sindrup SH. Codeine 
and morphine in extensive and poor 
metabolizers of sparteine: pharmacoki-
netics, analgesic effect and side effects. 
Eur J Clin Pharmacol. 1996;51:289–295.
41. Caraco Y, Sheller J, Wood AJ. Pharma-
cogenetic determination of the effects 
of codeine and prediction of drug 
interactions. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 
1996;278:1165–1174.
42. Eckhardt K, Li S, Ammon S, Schanzle G, 
Mikus G, Eichelbaum M. Same incidence 
of adverse drug events after codeine 
administration irrespective of the genet-
ically determined differences in mor-
phine formation. Pain. 1998;76:27–33.
43. Lotsch J, Dudziak R, Freynhagen R, Mar-
schner J, Geisslinger G. Fatal respiratory 
depression after multiple intravenous 
morphine injections. Clin Pharmacoki-
net. 2006;45:1051–1060.
44. Osborne R, Joel S, Trew D, Slevin M. 
Morphine and metabolite behavior after 
different routes of morphine administra-
tion: demonstration of the importance 
of the active metabolite morphine-
6-glucuronide. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 
1990;47:12–19.
45. Streisand JB, Varvel JR, Stanski DR, Le 
Maire L, Ashburn MA, Hague BI, Tarver 
SD, Stanley TH. Absorption and bioa-
vailability of oral transmucosal fentanyl 
citrate. Anesthesiology. 1991;75:223–
229.
46. Stanski DR, Jr. Hug CC. Alfentanil–a 
kinetically predictable narcotic analge-
sic. Anesthesiology. 1982;57:435–438.
47. Egan TD. Remifentanil pharmacoki-
netics 
and 
pharmacodynamics. 
A 
II
Chapter 9 Opioids
141
preliminary appraisal. Clin Pharmacoki-
net. 1995;29:80–94.
48. Egan TD, Lemmens HJ, Fiset P, Hermann 
DJ, Muir KT, Stanski DR, Shafer SL. 
The pharmacokinetics of the new short-
acting opioid remifentanil (GI87084B) in 
healthy adult male volunteers. Anesthe-
siology. 1993;79:881–892.
49. Egan TD, Minto CF, Hermann DJ, Barr 
J, Muir KT, Shafer SL. Remifentanil 
versus alfentanil: comparative pharma-
cokinetics and pharmacodynamics in 
healthy adult male volunteers [pub-
lished erratum appears in Anesthesiolo-
gy. 1996 Sep;85(3):695]. Anesthesiology. 
1996;84:821–833.
50. Egan TD. The clinical pharmacology of 
remifentanil: a brief review. J Anesth. 
1998;12:195–204.
51. Egan TD, Kern SE, Muir KT, White J. 
Remifentanil by bolus injection: a safe-
ty, pharmacokinetic, pharmacodynamic, 
and age effect investigation in human 
volunteers. Br J Anaesth. 2004;92:335–
343.
52. Grond S, Sablotzki A. Clinical pharma-
cology of tramadol. Clin Pharmacokinet. 
2004;43:879–923.
53. Chen KY, Chen L, Mao J. Buprenorphine-
naloxone therapy in pain management. 
Anesthesiology. 2014;120:1262–1274.
54. Errick JK, Heel RC. Nalbuphine. A pre-
liminary review of its pharmacologi-
cal properties and therapeutic efficacy. 
Drugs. 1983;26:191–211.
55. Jasinski DR, Martin WR, Haertzen CA. 
The human pharmacology and abuse 
potential of N-allylnoroxymorphone 
(naloxone). J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 
1967;157:420–426.
56. Jasinski DR, Martin WR, Sapira JD. 
Antagonism of the subjective, behavio-
ral, pupillary, and respiratory depressant 
effects of cyclazocine by naloxone. Clin 
Pharmacol Ther. 1968;9:215–222.
57. Edwards ET, Edwards ES, Davis E, Mul-
care M, Wiklund M, Kelley G. Com-
parative usability study of a novel 
auto-injector and an intranasal sys-
tem for naloxone delivery. Pain Ther. 
2015;4:89–105.
58. Krieter P, Chiang N, Gyaw S, Skolnick 
P, Crystal R, Keegan F, Aker J, Beck M, 
Harris J. Pharmacokinetic properties and 
human use characteristics of an FDA 
approved intranasal naloxone product 
for the treatment of opioid overdose. 
J Clin Pharmacol. 2016;56:1243–1253.
59. Kunoe N, Lobmaier P, Ngo H, Hulse G. 
Injectable and implantable sustained 
release naltrexone in the treatment of 
opioid addiction. Br J Clin Pharmacol. 
2014;77:264–271.
60. Lowenstein E, Hallowell P, Levine FH, 
Daggett WM, Austen WG, Laver MB. 
Cardiovascular response to large doses 
of intravenous morphine in man. N Engl 
J Med. 1969;281:1389–1393.
61. Lunn JK, Stanley TH, Eisele J, Web-
ster L, Woodward A. High dose fen-
tanyl anesthesia for coronary artery 
surgery: plasma fentanyl concentrations 
and influence of nitrous oxide on car-
diovascular responses. Anesth Analg. 
1979;58:390–395.
62. Hofer CK, Zollinger A, Buchi S, Klag-
hofer R, Serafino D, Buhlmann S, Bud-
deberg C, Pasch T, Spahn DR. Patient 
well-being after general anaesthesia: 
a prospective, randomized, controlled 
multi-centre trial comparing intrave-
nous and inhalation anaesthesia. Br J 
Anaesth. 2003;91:631–637.
63. Mather LE. Pharmacokinetic and phar-
macodynamic profiles of opioid analge-
sics: a sameness amongst equals?. Pain. 
1990;43:3–6.
64. Rudd RA, Aleshire N, Zibbell JE, Glad-
den RM. Increases in drug and opioid 
overdose deaths–United States, 2000–
2014. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 
2016;64:1378–1382.
65. Brady KT, McCauley JL, Back SE. Pre-
scription opioid misuse, abuse, and treat-
ment in the United States: an update. Am 
J Psychiatry. 2016;173:18–26.
66. Johnson SR. The opioid abuse epidemic: 
How healthcare helped create a crisis. 
Mod Healthc. 2016;46:8–9.
67. Weisberg DF, Becker WC, Fiellin DA, 
Stannard C. Prescription opioid misuse 
in the United States and the United 
Kingdom: cautionary lessons. Int J Drug 
Policy. 2014;25:1124–1130.
68. Yaster M, Benzon HT, Anderson TA. 
“Houston, We Have a Problem!”: The 
role of the anesthesiologist in the cur-
rent opioid epidemic. Anesth Analg. 
2017;125:1429–1431.
69. Chidgey BA, McGinigle KL, McNaull 
PP. When a vital sign leads a country 
astray-The opioid epidemic. JAMA Surg. 
2019;154:987–988.
70. Kharasch ED, Brunt LM. Perioperative 
opioids and public health. Anesthesiol-
ogy. 2016;124:960–965.
71. Office of the Press Secretary the White 
House President Obama proposes $1.1 
billion in new funding to address the 
prescription opioid abuse and heroin use 
epidemic. J Pain Palliat Care Pharmaco-
ther. 2016;30:134–137.
72. Bachyrycz A, Shrestha S, Bleske BE, 
Tinker D, Bakhireva LN. Opioid overdose 
prevention through pharmacy-based 
naloxone prescription program: innova-
tions in healthcare delivery. Subst Abus. 
2017;38:55–60.
73. Frieden TR, Houry D. Reducing the risks 
of relief–The CDC opioid-prescribing 
guideline. N Engl J Med. 2016;374:1501–
1504.
74. Feinberg J. Tackle the epidemic, not the 
opioids. Nature. 2019;573:165.
75. Strang J, Volkow ND, Degenhardt L, 
Hickman M, Johnson K, Koob GF, 
Marshall BDL, Tyndall M, Walsh SL. 
Opioid use disorder. Nat Rev Dis Prim-
ers. 2020;6:3.
76. Ashburn MA, Fleisher LA. Perioperative 
opioid management-An opportunity to 
put the genie back into the bottle. JAMA 
Surg. 2018;153:938.
77. Egan TD. Are opioids indispensable for 
general anaesthesia?. Br J Anaesth. 
2019;122:e127–e135.
78. Brown EN, Pavone KJ, Naranjo M. Mul-
timodal general anesthesia: theory and 
practice. Anesth Analg. 2018;127:1246–
1258.
79. Egan TD, Svensen CH. Multimodal gen-
eral anesthesia: a principled approach 
to producing the drug-induced, revers-
ible coma of anesthesia. Anesth Analg. 
2018;127:1104–1106.
80. Edwards DA, Hedrick TL, Jayaram J, 
Argoff C, Gulur P, Holubar SD, Gan TJ, 
Mythen MG, Miller TE, Shaw AD, Thacker 
JKM, McEvoy MD. American Society for 
Enhanced Recovery and Perioperative 
Quality 
Initiative 
joint 
consensus 
statement on perioperative management 
of patients on preoperative opioid therapy. 
Anesth Analg. 2019;129:567–577.
81. Shanthanna H, Ladha KS, Kehlet H, 
Joshi GP. Perioperative opioid adminis-
tration: a critical review of opioid-free 
versus opioid-sparing approaches. Anes-
thesiology. 2021;134:645–659.
82. Violin JD, Lefkowitz RJ. Beta-arrestin-
biased ligands at seven-transmem-
brane receptors. Trends Pharmacol Sci. 
2007;28:416–422.
83. Siuda ER, 3rd Carr R, Rominger DH, 
Violin JD. Biased mu-opioid receptor 
ligands: a promising new generation of 
pain therapeutics. Curr Opin Pharmacol. 
2017;32:77–84.
84. Raehal KM, Walker JK, Bohn LM. Mor-
phine side effects in beta-arrestin 2 
knockout mice. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 
2005;314:1195–1201.
85. Dahan A, van Dam CJ, Niesters M, van 
Velzen M, Fossler MJ, Demitrack MA, 
Olofsen E. Benefit and risk evalua-
tion of biased μ-receptor agonist olic-
eridine versus morphine. Anesthesiology. 
2020;133:559–568.
86. Kudla L, Bugno R, Skupio U, Wiktorows-
ka L, Solecki W, Wojtas A, Golembiowska 
K, Zádor F, Benyhe S, Buda S, Makuch 
W, Przewlocka B, Bojarski AJ, Przew-
locki R. Functional characterization of a 
novel opioid, PZM21, and its effects on 
the behavioural responses to morphine. 
Br J Pharmacol. 2019;176:4434–4445.
87. Lotsch J, Skarke C, Schmidt H, Liefhold 
J, Geisslinger G. Pharmacokinetic mode-
ling to predict morphine and morphine-
6-glucuronide plasma concentrations in 
healthy young volunteers. Clin Pharma-
col Ther. 2002;72:151–162.
88. Lotsch J, Skarke C, Schmidt H, Grosch 
S, Geisslinger G. The transfer half-life 
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
142
of 
morphine-6-glucuronide 
from 
plasma to effect site assessed by pupil 
size measurement in healthy volun-
teers. Anesthesiology. 2001;95:1329–
1338.
89. Gepts E, Shafer SL, Camu F, Stanski DR, 
Woestenborghs R, Van Peer A, Hey-
kants JJ. Linearity of pharmacokinet-
ics and model estimation of sufentanil. 
Anesthesiology. 1995;83:1194–1204.
90. Scott JC, Cooke JE, Stanski DR. Electro-
encephalographic quantitation of opioid 
effect: comparative pharmacodynamics of 
fentanyl and sufentanil. Anesthesiology.
 1991;74:34–42.
91. Manglik A, Lin H, Aryal DK, McCorvy 
JD, Dengler D, Corder G, Levit A, Kling 
RC, Bernat V, Hubner H, Huang XP, Sas-
sano MF, Giguere PM, Lober S, Da D, 
Scherrer G, Kobilka BK, Gmeiner P, Roth 
BL, Shoichet BK. Structure-based dis-
covery of opioid analgesics with reduced 
side effects. Nature. 2016;537:185–190.
92. Shulman M, Wai JM, Nunes EV. 
Buprenorphine treatment for opioid 
use disorder: an overview. CNS Drugs. 
2019;33(6):567–580.
143
Chapter
Local anesthesia can be defined as loss of sensation in a 
discrete region of the body caused by disruption of nerve 
impulse generation or propagation. Local anesthesia can 
be produced by various chemical and physical means. 
However, in routine clinical practice local anesthesia is 
produced by several compounds whose mechanism of 
action is similar. Although they have different durations 
of action, recovery is normally spontaneous, predictable, 
and complete. The clinical duration of local anesthesia 
can be extended in various ways, including continuous 
infusion via indwelling catheters or pumps, additives, 
and other formulations that prolong the duration of local 
anesthetics.
HISTORY
Clinical use of local anesthetics began with cocaine in 
the 1880s.1 The topically applied local anesthetic ben-
zocaine and the injectable drugs procaine, tetracaine, 
and chloroprocaine were subsequently developed as 
adaptations of cocaine's structure as an amino ester 
(Figs. 10.1 and 10.2).
In 1948 lidocaine was introduced as the first mem-
ber of a new class of local anesthetics, the amino 
amides. Advantages of the amino amides over the 
earlier amino esters included more stability and a 
reduced frequency of allergic reactions. Because of 
these favorable properties, lidocaine became the tem-
plate for the development of a series of amino-amide 
anesthetics (see Fig. 10.2).
Along with lidocaine, most amino-amide local anes-
thetics are derived from the aromatic amine xylidine, 
including mepivacaine, bupivacaine, ropivacaine, and 
levobupivacaine. Ropivacaine and levobupivacaine 
share an additional distinctive characteristic: they 
are single enantiomers rather than racemic mixtures. 
They are products of a developmental strategy that 
takes advantage of the differential stereoselectivity of 
HISTORY
NERVE CONDUCTION
LOCAL ANESTHETIC ACTIONS ON SODIUM 
CHANNELS
pH, Net Charge, and Lipid Solubility
DIFFERENTIAL LOCAL ANESTHETIC 
BLOCKADE
SPREAD OF LOCAL ANESTHESIA AFTER 
INJECTION
PHARMACOKINETICS
Local Anesthetic Vasoactivity
Metabolism
Additives
ADVERSE EFFECTS
Systemic Toxicity
Lipid Resuscitation
Local Tissue Toxicity
Allergic Reactions
SPECIFIC LOCAL ANESTHETICS
Amino Esters
Amino Amides
Single Enantiomers
Topical Local Anesthetics
Tumescent Local Anesthesia
Systemic Local Anesthetics for Acute and 
Chronic Pain
WHEN LOCAL ANESTHESIA FAILS
FUTURE LOCAL ANESTHETICS
CONCLUSIONS
LOCAL ANESTHETICS
Charles B. Berde, Anjali Koka
10
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
144
neuronal and cardiac sodium ion channels in an effort 
to reduce the potential for cardiac toxicity (see “Adverse 
Effects” later). Almost all of the amides undergo bio-
transformation in the liver, whereas the esters undergo 
hydrolysis in plasma.
NERVE CONDUCTION
Under normal or resting circumstances, the neural 
membrane is characterized by a negative potential of 
roughly −90 mV (the potential inside the nerve fiber is 
negative relative to the extracellular fluid). This nega-
tive potential is created by energy-dependent outward 
transport of sodium and inward transport of potassium 
ions, combined with greater membrane permeability to 
potassium ions relative to sodium ions. With excita-
tion of the nerve, there is an increase in the membrane 
permeability to sodium ions, causing a decrease in 
the transmembrane potential. If a critical potential 
is reached (i.e., threshold potential), there is a rapid 
and self-sustaining influx of sodium ions resulting 
in a propagating wave of depolarization,—the action 
potential, after which the resting membrane potential 
is reestablished.
Nerve fibers can be classified according to fiber 
diameter, presence (type A and B) or absence (type C) 
of myelin, and function (Table 10.1). The nerve fiber 
diameter influences conduction velocity; a larger diam-
eter correlates with more rapid nerve conduction. The 
presence of myelin also increases conduction velocity. 
This effect results from insulation of the axolemma from 
the surrounding media, forcing current to flow through 
periodic interruptions in the myelin sheath (i.e., nodes of 
Ranvier) (Fig. 10.3).
O
N
H2N
C
NH
CH2
C2H5
C2H5
CH3
CH3
Lidocaine
O
O
N
C
CH2
CH2
C2H5
C2H5
Procaine
Intermediate chain
Aromatic part
Lipophilic
Amino group
Hydrophilic
Fig. 10.1 Local anesthetics have three portions: (1) lipophilic, (2) hydrophilic, and a connecting 
(3) hydrocarbon chain. This figure illustrates creative ways of altering this basic structure for desired 
pharmacologic characteristics (duration of action, cardiovascular).
LOCAL ANESTHETIC ACTIONS ON SODIUM 
CHANNELS
Local anesthetics act on a wide range of molecular targets, 
but they exert their predominant desired clinical effects by 
blocking sodium ion flux through voltage-gated sodium 
channels. Voltage-gated sodium channels are complex 
transmembrane proteins comprising large α-subunits and 
much smaller β-subunits2 (Fig. 10.4).
The α-subunits have four homologous domains 
arranged in a square, each composed of six transmem-
brane helices, and the pore lies in the center of these four 
domains. β-Subunits modulate electrophysiologic proper-
ties of the channel, and they also have prominent roles 
in channel localization, binding to adhesion molecules, 
and connection to intracellular cytoskeletons. There are 
nine major subtypes of sodium channel α-subunits in 
mammalian tissues and four major subtypes of β-subunits.
Different sodium channel subtypes are expressed in 
different tissues, at diverse developmental stages, and ina 
range of disease states. Sodium channel subtypes are an 
active area of investigation around human diseases with 
spontaneous pain and pain insensitivity, as targets of new 
analgesics, and in other areas of medicine, including car-
diology and neurology.2,3 Sodium channel subtypes will 
be discussed again later in this chapter (see “When Local 
Anesthesia Fails” and “Future Local Anesthetics”).
From an electrophysiologic standpoint, local anesthet-
ics block conduction of impulses by decreasing the rate 
of depolarization in response to excitation, preventing 
achievement of the threshold potential. They do not alter 
the resting transmembrane potential, and they have little 
effect on the threshold potential.
Sodium channels cycle between resting, open, and 
inactive conformations. During excitation, the sodium 
II
Chapter 10 Local Anesthetics
145
Procaine
O
H2N
CI
H2N
COCH2CH2N
C2H5
C2H5
Tetracaine
O
N
H9C4
H
COCH2CH2N
CH3
CH3
Lidocaine
O
NHCCH2N
C2H5
C2H5
Cocaine
O
O
N
H3CO
H
CO
C
CH3
CH3
CH3
O
NHCCHN
C2H5
C2H5
C3H7
C2H5
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
Mepivacaine
O
NHC
N
N
CH3
CH3
CH3
Bupivacaine
Etidocaine
O
NHCCHNHCH2CH2CH3
CH3
Prilocaine
Ropivacaine
O
NHC
NH
H
CO
N
CH3
CH3
CH2CH2CH2CH3
Chloroprocaine
O
COCH2CH2N
C2H5
C2H5
Fig. 10.2 Chemical structures of ester (i.e., procaine, chloroprocaine, tetracaine, and cocaine) and amide 
(i.e., lidocaine, mepivacaine, bupivacaine, etidocaine, prilocaine, and ropivacaine) local anesthetics.
Fiber
Type
Subtype
Diameter (μm)
Conduction Velocity (m/s)
Function
A (myelinated)
Alpha
12–20
80–120
Proprioception, large motor
Beta
5–15
35–80
Small motor, touch, pressure
Gamma
3–8
10–35
Muscle tone
Delta
2–5
5–25
Pain, temperature, touch
B (myelinated)
3
5–15
Preganglionic autonomic
C (unmyelinated)
0.3–1.5
0.5–2.5
Dull pain, temperature, touch
Table 10.1
Classification of Nerve Fibers
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
146
channel moves from a resting closed state to an open 
activated state, with an increase in the inward flux of 
sodium ions and consequent depolarization. The channel 
transitions to an inactive state and must undergo further 
conformational change back to a resting state before it 
can again open in response to a wave of depolarization.
According to the modulated receptor model, local anes-
thetics act not by physically “plugging the pore” of the 
channel, but rather by an allosteric mechanism; that is, 
bychanging the relative stability and kinetics of cycling of 
channels through resting, open, and inactive conformations. 
In so doing, the fraction of channels accessible to open-
ing and conducting inward sodium currents in response 
to a wave of depolarization is reduced.4 This mechanism 
provides nerve blocks that are either a “use-dependent” 
or “frequency-dependent” type of block; that is, the block 
intensifies with more frequent rates of nerve firing.
pH, Net Charge, and Lipid Solubility
The predominant binding site for local anesthetics on 
sodium channels is near the cytoplasmic side of the plasma 
membrane. A major structural requirement for a molecule 
to be an effective local anesthetic is sufficient solubility 
and rapid diffusion in both hydrophilic environments 
(extracellular fluid, cytosol, and the headgroup region of 
membrane phospholipids) and in the hydrophobic envi-
ronment of the lipid bilayers in plasma membranes.
The amino-amide and amino-ester local anesthetics in 
common clinical use achieve this aim of good solubility 
in both water and fat because they each contain a tertiary 
amine group that can rapidly convert between a proto-
nated hydrochloride form (charged, hydrophilic) and an 
unprotonated base form (uncharged, hydrophobic). The 
charged, protonated form is the predominant active spe-
cies at binding sites on sodium channels (Fig. 10.5).5
The relative proportion of charged and uncharged 
local anesthetic molecules is a function of the disso-
ciation constant of the drug and the environmental pH. 
Recalling the Henderson-Hasselbalch equation, the dis-
sociation constant (Ka) can be expressed as follows:
pK
pH
base
conjugate acid
a 











log
If the concentrations of the base and conjugate acid are 
equal, the latter component of the equation cancels (because 
log 1 = 0). Thus the pKa provides a useful way to describe 
the propensity of a local anesthetic to exist in a charged or 
uncharged state. The lower the pKa, the greater the percent-
age of unionized fraction at a given pH. In contrast, because 
the pKa values of the commonly used injectable anesthetics 
are between 7.6 and 8.9, less than one half of themolecules 
are unionized at physiologic pH (Table10.2). The base forms 
of local anesthetics are poorly soluble in water and less sta-
ble, so they are generally marketed as water-soluble hydro-
chloride salts at slightly acidic pH. Bicarbonate is sometimes 
added to local anesthetic solutions immediately before injec-
tion to increase the unionized fraction in an effort to hasten 
the onset of anesthesia. Other conditions that lower pH, such 
as tissue acidosis produced by infection, inflammation, or 
ischemia, may likewise have a negative impact on the onset 
and quality of local anesthesia.
Lipid solubility of a local anesthetic affects tissue pen-
etration, time course of uptake, potency, and duration of 
action. Duration of the local anesthetic action also cor-
relates with protein binding, which likely serves to retain 
anesthetic within the nerve.
Degrees of anesthetic potency may be altered by the 
invitro or invivo system in which these effects are 
determined. For example, tetracaine is approximately 
20 times more potent than bupivacaine when assessed 
in isolated nerves, but these drugs are nearly equipotent 
when assessed in vivo. Even when assessed invivo, com-
parisons among local anesthetics may vary based on the 
specific site of application (spinal vs. peripheral block) 
because of secondary effects such as the inherent vasoac-
tive properties of the anesthetic.
DIFFERENTIAL LOCAL ANESTHETIC 
BLOCKADE
From a clinical viewpoint and from electrophysiologic 
measurements, local anesthesia is not an all-or-none 
10 µm
Direction of impulse
A
B
1 µm
+
+
+
+
+
+
+ + +
+
+
+
+
−
−
−
−
−
+
+ + +
−
−
−
−−−
+
+
+
+ + +
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+ +
Fig. 10.3 Pattern of “local circuit currents” flowing during 
propagation of an impulse in a nonmyelinated C fiber's axon (A) and 
a myelinated axon (B). During propagation of impulses, from left
to right, current entering the axon at the initial rising phase of the 
impulse (large vertical arrows) passes through the axoplasm (local 
circuit current) and depolarizes the adjacent membrane. Plus and 
minus signs adjacent to the axon membrane indicate the polarization 
state of the axon membrane: negative inside at rest, positive inside 
during active depolarization under the action potential, and less 
negative in regions where local circuit currents flow. This ionic 
current passes relatively uniformly across the nonmyelinated axon, 
but in the myelinated axon it is restricted to entry at the nodes of 
Ranvier, several of which are simultaneously depolarized during 
a single action potential. (From Berde CB, Strichartz GR. Local 
anesthetics. In: Miller RD, Cohen NH, Eriksson LI, et al., eds. Miller's 
Anesthesia. 8th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders Elsevier; 2015.)
II
Chapter 10 Local Anesthetics
147
phenomenon: patients experience gradations in the inten-
sity of sensory and motor blockade that vary over time after 
local anesthetic injections. Clinically apparent “numbness” 
generally correlates with intraneural concentrations of 
local anesthetics but also reflects complex integration 
and processing of inputs in the spinal dorsal horn and 
at supraspinal sites in the somatosensory pathway. When 
compound action potentials are recorded in peripheral 
CO 2
NH+
3
P
P
P
P
Lipid
Extracellular
Intracellular
LAs
LAs
LAs
D-1
D-2
X
LA potency general
X
X
X
D-3
D-4
Na+
Domain 4
H+
Na+
Extracellular
Membrane
Intracellular
“Gating charges”
Gate
S6
S6
X
X
+
+
+
+
S4
+
+
+
+
S4
B
A
C
12345
12345
12345
12345
6
6
6
6
1
2
I
III
IV
5
3
α-subunit
Stereoselectivity selected
Inner ring of “selectivity filter”
Fig. 10.4 Structural features of the Na+ channel that determine local anesthetic (LA) interactions. 
(A) Consensus arrangement of the single peptide of the Na+ channel α-subunit in a plasma membrane. 
Four domains with homologous sequences (D-1 through D-4) each contain six α-helical segments 
that span the membrane (S1 to S6). Each domain folds within itself to form one cylindrical bundle 
of segments, and these bundles converge to form the functional channel's quaternary structure 
(B). Activation gating leading to channel opening results from primary movement of the positively 
charged S4 segments in response to membrane depolarization (see panel C). Fast inactivation of the 
channel follows binding to the cytoplasmic end of the channel of part of the small loop that connects 
D-3 to D-4. Ions travel through an open channel along a pore defined at its narrowest dimension by the 
P region formed by partial membrane penetration of the four extracellular loops of protein connecting S5 
and S6 in each domain. Intentional, directed mutations of different amino acids on the channel indicate 
residues that are involved in LA binding in the inner vestibule of the channel (X on S6 segments), at 
the interior regions of the ion-discriminating “selectivity filter (square on the P region), and also are 
known to influence stereoselectivity for phasic inhibition (circle, also on S6 segments). (C) Schematic 
cross section of the channel speculating on the manner in which S6 segments, forming a “gate,” may 
realign during activation to open the channel and allow entry and departure of a bupivacaine molecule 
by the “hydrophilic” pathway. The closed (inactivated) channel has a more intimate association with 
the LA molecule, whose favored pathway for dissociation is no longer between S6 segments (the former 
pore) but now, much more slowly, laterally between segments and then through the membrane, the 
“hydrophobic” pathway. Na+ ions entering the pore will compete with the LA for a site in the channel, 
and H+ ions, which pass very slowly through the pore, can enter and leave from the extracellular 
opening, thereby protonating and deprotonating a bound LA molecule and thus regulating its rate of 
dissociation from the channel. (From Berde CB, Strichartz GR. Local anesthetics. In: Miller RD, Cohen 
NH, Eriksson LI, et al., eds. Miller's Anesthesia. 8th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders Elsevier; 2015.)
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
148
nerves exposed to local anesthetics in varying concentra-
tions and lengths of nerve exposed, conduction blockade 
is facilitated either by increasing the concentration of local 
anesthetic or by increasing the length of nerve exposed to 
more dilute concentrations. At the limit of short lengths 
of nerve exposed to local anesthetic, conduction blockade 
requires exposure of at least three successive nodes of 
Ranvier to prevent the action potential from “skipping 
over” the region of local anesthetic exposure.
Historically, the term differential blockade in clinical 
textbooks referred to the observation that infusions of 
dilute concentrations of local anesthetic could produce 
analgesia and signs of autonomic blockade with relative 
sparing of motor strength. This clinical trend is not readily 
explained by the electrophysiologic observations of action 
potential blockade in large and small fibers perfused to 
steady state.6 The mechanisms underlying this divergence 
between clinical experience and experimental data are 
poorly understood, but they may be related to the anatomic 
and geographic arrangement of nerve fibers, variability in 
the longitudinal spread required for neural blockade, effects 
on other ion channels, and inherent impulse activity.
SPREAD OF LOCAL ANESTHESIA AFTER 
INJECTION
When local anesthetics are deposited around a periph-
eral nerve, they must cross a series of diffusion barriers 
to access sodium channels in nerve axons (Fig. 10.6). 
With large nerve trunks, they diffuse from the outer 
surface (mantle) toward the center (core) of the nerve 
along a concentration gradient (Fig. 10.7).7 As a result, 
nerve fibers located in the mantle of the mixed nerve 
are blocked first. These mantle fibers are generally dis-
tributed to more proximal anatomic structures, whereas 
distal structures are innervated by fibers near the core. 
This anatomic arrangement accounts for the initial 
development of proximal anesthesia with subsequent 
distal involvement as local anesthetic diffuses to reach 
more central core nerve fibers. Skeletal muscle weakness 
may precede sensory blockade if the motor nerve fibers 
are more superficial. The sequence of onset and recovery 
from conduction blockade of sympathetic, sensory, and 
motor nerve fibers in a mixed peripheral nerve depends 
as much or more on the anatomic location of the nerve 
fibers within the mixed nerve than on their intrinsic sen-
sitivity to local anesthetics.
PHARMACOKINETICS
For most oral and intravenous drugs, systemic uptake 
carries the drug from the administration site to the effect 
site. Local anesthetics are different: when drug is depos-
ited near the target site, systemic absorption competes 
with drug entry into effect sites in nerves. Thus rapid and 
efficient systemic uptake from an injection site dimin-
ishes, rather than increases, efficacy in nerve blockade. 
This principle is illustrated in Fig. 10.8. High plasma 
concentrations of local anesthetics after absorption from 
injection sites (or unintended intravascular injection) are 
undesirable and are the origin of their potential toxic-
ity. Peak plasma concentrations achieved are determined 
by the rate of systemic uptake and, to a lesser extent, 
the rate of clearance of the local anesthetic. Uptake is 
affected by several factors related to the physiochemical 
properties of the local anesthetic and local tissue blood 
flow. Uptake tends to be delayed for local anesthetics 
with high lipophilicity and protein binding.
Local Anesthetic Vasoactivity
Anesthetics differ in their tendencies to cause either 
vasoconstriction or vasodilation of blood vessels. These 
effects vary with site of injection, concentration, and bal-
ance of local direct actions on vascular smooth muscle 
versus indirect actions via blockade of sympathetic effer-
ent fibers. Such differences may be clinically important. 
For example, the less frequent incidence of systemic 
toxicity of S (−) ropivacaine compared with the R (+) 
enantiomer in part may result from its vasoconstrictive 
activity (see “Adverse Effects”). The variable effect of 
vasoconstrictors added to local anesthetic solutions used 
for spinal anesthesia is another example. In contrast to 
LA + H+
LAH+
LA
LAH+
LA + H+
LAH+
Fig. 10.5 During diffusion of local anesthetic across the 
nerve sheath and membrane to receptor sites within the inner 
vestibule of the sodium channel, only the uncharged base (LA) 
can penetrate the lipid membrane. After reaching the axoplasm, 
ionization occurs, and the charged cationic form (LAH+) attaches 
to the receptor. Anesthetic may also reach the channel laterally 
(i.e., hydrophobic pathway). (From Covino BG, Scott DB, Lambert 
DH. Handbook of Spinal Anesthesia and Analgesia. Philadelphia: 
WB Saunders; 1994:7, used with permission.)
II
Chapter 10 Local Anesthetics
149
Classification and 
Compounds
pKa
% Nonionized at 
pH 7.4
Potencya
Max. Dose (mg) 
for Infiltrationb
Duration After 
Infiltration (min)
Topical
Local
IV
Periph
Epi
Spinal
Esters
Procaine
8.9
3
1
500
45–60
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
Chloroprocaine
8.7
5
2
600
30–60
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yesc
Tetracaine
8.5
7
8
N/A
N/A
Yesd
No
No
No
No
Yes
Amides
Lidocaine
7.9
24
2
300
60–120
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yesc
Mepivacaine
7.6
39
2
300
90–180
No
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yesc
Prilocaine
7.9
24
2
400
60–120
Yese
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yesc
Bupivacaine, 
levobupivacaine
8.1
17
8
150
240–480
No
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Ropivacaine
8.1
17
6
200
240–480
No
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Table 10.2
Comparative Pharmacology and Common Current Use of Local Anesthetics
aRelative potencies vary based on experimental model or route of administration.
bDosage should take into account the site of injection, use of a vasoconstrictor, and patient-related factors.
cUse of procaine, lidocaine, mepivacaine, prilocaine, and chloroprocaine for spinal anesthesia is somewhat controversial; indications are evolving (see text).
dUsed in combination with another local anesthetic to increase duration.
eFormulated with lidocaine as a eutectic mixture.
Epi, Epidural; IV, intravenous; Periph, peripheral.
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
150
lidocaine or bupivacaine, there is some evidence that 
tetracaine produces a significant increase in spinal cord 
blood flow. Consequently, prolongation of spinal anes-
thesia by epinephrine or other vasoconstrictors is more 
Nucleus of
Schwann cell
Nucleus of
Schwann cell
Schwann cell
sheath
Nerve fiber
Nerve fiber
Epineurium
Endoneurium
Perineurium
Myelin sheath
A
B
C
Fig. 10.6 Transverse sections of a peripheral nerve (A) showing the outermost epineurium; the inner 
perineurium, which collects nerve axons in fascicles; and the endoneurium, which surrounds each 
myelinated fiber. Each myelinated axon (B) is encased in the multiple membranous wrappings of 
myelin formed by one Schwann cell, each of which stretches longitudinally more than approximately 
100 times the diameter of the axon. The narrow span of axon between these myelinated segments, the 
node of Ranvier, contains the ion channels that support action potentials. Nonmyelinated fibers (C) are 
enclosed in bundles of 5 to 10 axons by a chain of Schwann cells that tightly embrace each axon with 
but one layer of membrane. (From Berde CB, Strichartz GR. Local anesthetics. In: Miller RD, Cohen NH, 
Eriksson LI, et al., eds. Miller's Anesthesia. 8th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders Elsevier; 2015.)
Mantle bundle
(proximal)
Proximal:
early block
Core bundle
(distal)
Distal: delayed block
Fig. 10.7 Local anesthetics deposited around a peripheral nerve 
diffuse along a concentration gradient to block nerve fibers on 
the outer surface (mantle) before more centrally located (core) 
fibers. This accounts for early manifestations of anesthesia in 
more proximal areas of the extremity.
>95% of dose
<5% of dose
Injection or
absorption
site
Central
Circulation
Effect site
Metabolism
and
elimination
Fig. 10.8 Heuristic model of local anesthetic uptake and distribution. 
Systemic uptake of local anesthetics from the perineural injection 
compartment competes with drug entry into nerves. Vasoconstrictors 
delay systemic uptake from the perineural injection compartment, 
reducing peak blood concentrations of local anesthetics and 
maintaining a higher concentration gradient favoring drug entry into 
nerves over the first 30 minutes after injection.
II
Chapter 10 Local Anesthetics
151
pronounced with tetracaine than with other commonly 
used spinal anesthetics.
Metabolism
The amino-ester local anesthetics undergo hydrolysis 
by plasma esterases, whereas the amino-amide local 
anesthetics undergo metabolism by hepatic microsomal 
enzymes. The lungs are also capable of extracting local 
anesthetics such as lidocaine, bupivacaine, and prilocaine 
from the circulation. The rate of this metabolism and 
first-pass pulmonary extraction may influence toxicity 
(see “Systemic Toxicity”). In this regard, the relatively 
rapid hydrolysis of the ester local anesthetic chloropro-
caine makes it less likely to produce sustained plasma 
concentrations than other local anesthetics, particularly 
the amino amides. However, patients with atypical plasma 
cholinesterase levels may be at increased risk of develop-
ing excessive plasma concentrations of chloroprocaine or 
other ester local anesthetics because of absent or limited 
plasma hydrolysis. Hepatic metabolism of lidocaine is 
extensive, and clearance of this local anesthetic from 
plasma parallels hepatic blood flow. Liver disease or 
decreases in hepatic blood flow, as occur with congestive 
heart failure or general anesthesia, can decrease the rate 
of metabolism of lidocaine. Less than 5% of injected local 
anesthetics are excreted unchanged in the urine.
Additives
Epinephrine is the most common additive in local anes-
thetic solutions. In a typical concentration of 5 μg/mL 
(1:200,000), epinephrine produces local vasoconstriction, 
which slows the rate of tissue absorption and there-
fore reduces peak systemic concentrations, decreasing 
the odds of systemic toxicity (see “Systemic Toxicity”). 
Depending on the injection site and the local anesthetic 
to which epinephrine is added, epinephrine may result 
in some prolongation of sensory or motor block. Epi-
nephrine can also be used as a marker for detection of 
intravascular injection based on effects on heart rate, 
arterial blood pressure, or symptoms. However, systemic 
absorption of epinephrine may contribute to cardiac 
dysrhythmias or accentuate systemic hypertension in 
vulnerable patients. Epinephrine should be avoided when 
performing peripheral nerve blocks in areas that may 
lack collateral flow (e.g., digital blocks). In contrast, 
epinephrine-induced vasoconstriction decreases local 
bleeding and may provide added benefit when combined 
with local anesthetics used for infiltration anesthesia.
In addition to the vasoconstrictive agent epinephrine, 
other additives are used clinically to prolong analgesia 
from peripheral nerve blocks, including α2 agonists, opi-
oids, and antiinflammatories. Of the perineural additives 
studied, the off-label use of buprenorphine, clonidine, 
dexamethasone, dexmedetomidine, and magnesium most 
consistently prolong clinical analgesia from peripheral 
nerve blocks. Additive doses vary clinically and may 
correlate with side effects, which can include bradycar-
dia, hypotension, and nausea.8 Traditionally, anesthesia 
providers have exercised considerable freedom in mixing 
their own additives and combinations. There is a growing 
recognition that this practice sometimes produces drug 
administration errors. In addition, although some additives 
have undergone proper preclinical testing to ensure the 
absence of local tissue toxicities on nerve and muscle, oth-
ers have not (see “Local Tissue Toxicity”). Caution should 
be exercised when using additives that lack sufficient 
preclinical safety data and a regulatory evaluation process.
ADVERSE EFFECTS
Important adverse effects of local anesthetics, although 
rare, may occur from systemic absorption, local tissue 
toxicity, allergic reactions, and drug-specific effects.
Systemic Toxicity
Systemic toxicity of local anesthetics results from exces-
sive plasma concentrations of these drugs, most often 
from accidental intravascular injection during perfor-
mance of epidural and caudal blocks. Less often, exces-
sive plasma concentrations result from absorption of local 
anesthetics from tissue injection sites. The magnitude 
of local anesthetic systemic absorption depends on the 
dose injected, the specific site of injection, and the inclu-
sion of a vasoconstrictor in the local anesthetic solution. 
Systemic absorption of local anesthetic is greatest after 
injection for intercostal nerve blocks and caudal anesthe-
sia, intermediate after epidural anesthesia, and least after 
brachial plexus and lower extremity blocks (Fig. 10.9).9
Clinically significant systemic toxicity results from 
effects on the central nervous system and cardiovascular 
system. Establishment of maximal acceptable local anes-
thetic doses for performance of regional anesthesia is an 
attempt to limit plasma concentrations that can result 
from systemic absorption of these drugs (see Table 10.2). 
However, standard dosage recommendations are not 
entirely evidence based and are inconsistent, and they 
fail to consider the specific injection-site and patient-
related factors.10 Nonetheless, dosage recommendations 
represent a starting point for dose adjustments based on 
clinical circumstances and evolving evidence.
Central Nervous System Toxicity
Increasing plasma concentrations of local anesthetics 
classically produce circumoral numbness, facial tingling, 
restlessness, vertigo, tinnitus, and slurred speech, culmi-
nating in tonic-clonic seizures, though marked variation 
from this pattern is quite common.11 Local anesthetics 
are neuronal depressants, and onset of seizures likely 
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
152
reflects selective depression of cortical inhibitory neu-
rons, leaving excitatory pathways unopposed. However, 
larger doses may affect inhibitory and excitatory path-
ways, resulting in central nervous system depression and 
even coma. These effects generally parallel anesthetic 
potency. Arterial hypoxemia and metabolic acidosis can 
occur rapidly during seizure activity, and hypoxemia and 
acidosis both can enhance the central nervous system 
toxicity of the local anesthetics.
Treatment of central nervous system toxic reactions 
begins with prompt intervention, with administration 
of supplemental oxygen and assisting ventilation as 
indicated to prevent hypoxemia and hypercarbia. Ben-
zodiazepines (i.e., midazolam, lorazepam, diazepam) are 
generally the drugs of first choice to terminate seizures 
because of their efficacy and relative hemodynamic sta-
bility. Propofol, although more immediately accessible, 
should be used with caution for seizure suppression, as it 
can compromise cardiac function.
Cardiovascular System Toxicity
High plasma concentrations of local anesthetics can 
produce profound hypotension caused by relaxation of 
arteriolar vascular smooth muscle and direct myocardial 
depression. The cardiac toxicity, in part, reflects the ability 
of local anesthetics to block cardiac sodium ion channels 
in addition to other ion channels, including calcium chan-
nels. As a result, cardiac automaticity and conduction of 
cardiac impulses are impaired, manifesting on the electro-
cardiogram as prolongation of the PR interval and widen-
ing of the QRS complex. Local anesthetics may profoundly 
depress myocardial contractility to varying degrees. For 
example, the ratio of the dose required to produce cardio-
vascular collapse compared with that producing seizures 
for lidocaine is about twice that for bupivacaine.12 Such 
findings support the concept that bupivacaine is more 
likely to cause cardiac toxicity, which has been the driving 
force for the development of single-enantiomer anesthet-
ics, such as ropivacaine and levobupivacaine.
Lipid Resuscitation
Intravenous infusions of lipid emulsions have become a 
standard treatment of local anesthetic systemic toxicity 
(LAST) (also see Chapters 18 and 45). The mechanism by 
which lipid is effective is not clear but is likely related to 
its ability to extract bupivacaine (or other lipophilic drugs) 
from aqueous plasma or tissue targets, thus reducing their 
effective free concentration (“lipid sink”).13 Accordingly, 
solutions of lipid emulsion should be stocked and readily 
accessible in any area where major conduction blockade 
is performed, and in locations where overdoses from any 
lipophilic drug might be treated. A more detailed discus-
sion of this topic and guidelines for administration of 
lipid emulsions (20%), checklists, and treatment protocols 
can be found in a publication by the American Society 
of Regional Anesthesia and Pain Medicine (ASRA) Task 
Force on Local Anesthetic Systemic Toxicity.10 14
According to the ASRA guidelines, an intravenous bolus 
dose of 20% lipid emulsion starts with a bolus of 1.5mL/kg 
over 2 to 3 minutes (100 mL if greater than 70 kg) followed 
by a continuous infusion at 0.25 mL/kg/min. Although 
lipid rescue is important and should be used, it is not 
100% effective and not a substitute for following dosing 
guidelines and safe practice regarding patient monitoring, 
fractionated dosing, and observation for early warning 
signs of systemic toxicity.
ASRA guidelines recommend additional modifications 
of standard advanced cardiac life support (ACLS) proto-
cols, including avoidance of vasopressin, calcium channel 
blockers, β-blockers, and other local anesthetics (lidocaine, 
amiodarone). Incremental dosing of epinephrine should be 
decreased to less than 1 mcg/kg14
Local Tissue Toxicity
Local anesthetics are in general well tolerated in terms of 
their local tissue effects. Nevertheless, all currently avail-
able local anesthetics have intrinsic toxicities to nerve 
Intercostal
Caudal
Caudal
Epidural
Brachial plexus
Sciatic femoral
Intercostal
Intercostal
Caudal
Intercostal
Epidural
Epidural
Epidural
2
4
Blood levels (g/mL)
Mepivacaine
500 mg
Lidocaine
400 mg
Prilocaine
400 mg
Etidocaine
300 mg
6
8
Brachial plexus
Brachial plexus
Sciatic femoral
Fig. 10.9 Peak plasma concentrations of local anesthetics 
resulting during performance of various types of regional 
anesthetic procedures. (From Covino BD, Vassals HG. Local 
Anesthetics: Mechanism of Action in Clinical Use. Orlando: 
Grune & Stratton; 1976:97, used with permission.)
II
Chapter 10 Local Anesthetics
153
and muscle that occasionally become clinically apparent. 
These incidences of toxicities increase with local tissue 
concentration15 and duration of exposure, and these 
risks may be exacerbated by factors that increase nerve 
vulnerability and predispose to nerve ischemia, including 
preexisting nerve dysfunction, metabolic and inflamma-
tory conditions, increased tissue pressure, and systemic 
hypotension. Intraneural concentrations can rise steadily 
during prolonged perineural infusions. For these reasons, 
for prolonged perineural infusions, we recommend use of 
relatively dilute local anesthetic concentrations, gener-
ally no more than 0.2% for bupivacaine or ropivacaine.
Allergic Reactions
Allergic reactions to local anesthetics are rare, despite the 
frequent use of these drugs. Less than 1% of all adverse reac-
tions to local anesthetics are caused by allergic mechanisms. 
Most adverse responses attributed to allergic reactions are 
instead caused by additives or are manifestations of sys-
temic toxicity from excessive plasma concentrations of the 
local anesthetic. Hypotension associated with syncope may 
be vagally mediated, whereas tachycardia and palpitations 
may occur from systemic absorption of epinephrine.
Cross-Sensitivity
The amino-ester local anesthetics, which produce metabo-
lites related to para-aminobenzoic acid, are more likely to 
evoke hypersensitivity reactions than the amino amides. 
Allergic reactions may also be caused by methylparaben or 
similar compounds that resemble para-aminobenzoic acid, 
which are used as preservatives in commercial formulations 
of ester and amide local anesthetics. Although patients 
known to be allergic to amino-ester local anesthetics can 
receive amino-amide local anesthetics, this recommenda-
tion should be cautiously accepted because it assumes that 
the local anesthetic was responsible for evoking the initial 
allergic reaction, rather than a common preservative.
Documentation
Documentation of an allergy to local anesthetics is 
based principally on clinical history (e.g., rash, laryngeal 
edema, hypotension, bronchospasm). However, increases 
in serum tryptase, a marker of mast cell degranulation, 
may have some value with respect to confirmation, and 
intradermal testing may help establish the local anesthetic 
as the offending antigen if other drugs (e.g., sedative-
hypnotics, opioids) have been administered concurrently.
SPECIFIC LOCAL ANESTHETICS
Amino Esters
Procaine
The earliest injectable local anesthetic, procaine, enjoyed 
extensive use during the first half of the past century, 
primarily as a spinal anesthetic. Its instability and the 
considerable potential for hypersensitivity reactions 
resulted in limited use after the introduction of lidocaine. 
Transient neurologic symptoms (TNS) is a rare condition 
characterized by severe pain of the buttocks and lower 
extremities after spinal anesthesia. Concerns regarding 
TNS associated with spinal lidocaine (see “Lidocaine”) 
have renewed interest in procaine as a spinal anes-
thetic. Limited data suggest that procaine offers a small 
advantage with respect to TNS; however, spinal procaine 
is associated with a significantly greater incidence of 
nausea.16
Tetracaine
Tetracaine is still commonly used for spinal anesthesia. 
As such, it has a long duration of action, particularly if 
used with a vasoconstrictor, although this combination 
results in a surprisingly high risk of TNS.17 Tetracaine 
is available as a 1% solution or as Niphanoid crystals; 
the crystal form is preferable because of the relative 
instability of the anesthetic in solution. Tetracaine is 
rarely used for epidural anesthesia or peripheral nerve 
blocks because of its slow onset, profound motor block-
ade, and potential toxicity when administered at high 
doses. Although it is an ester, its rate of metabolism 
is one-fourth that of procaine and one-tenth that of 
chloroprocaine.
Chloroprocaine
Chloroprocaine initially gained popularity as an epi-
dural anesthetic, particularly in obstetrics, because its 
rapid hydrolysis virtually eliminated concern about sys-
temic toxicity and fetal exposure to the local anesthetic. 
Unfortunately, neurotoxic injury, presumed to occur 
from accidental intrathecal injection of large doses 
intended for the epidural space, tempered enthusiasm 
for neuraxial administration of chloroprocaine. This 
toxicity was thought to be caused by the preservative 
sodium bisulfite contained in the commercial formula-
tion. However, subsequent studies do not demonstrate 
neurotoxicity from intrathecal bisulfite; instead, it was 
found not to be neurotoxic and may even have neu-
roprotective effects.18 In any event a formulation of 
chloroprocaine devoid of preservatives and antioxidants 
is available.
Chloroprocaine produces epidural anesthesia of a 
relatively short duration. Epidural administration of 
chloroprocaine is sometimes avoided because it impairs 
the anesthetic or analgesic action of epidural bupiv-
acaine and of opioids used concurrently or sequen-
tially.19 Chloroprocaine has been reevaluated as a spinal 
anesthetic, and the risk of TNS appears low.20 Chloro-
procaine solutions used for spinal anesthesia should 
be bisulfite-free. Commonly used intrathecal doses in 
adults range from 30 to 60 mg.
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
154
Because of its rapid plasma clearance, chloroprocaine 
has two unique roles in pediatric regional anesthesia: (1) 
as a continuous epidural infusion in neonates and very 
young infants and (2) for repeat loading doses in patients 
receiving postoperative epidural or peripheral perineural 
infusions in the setting where a repeat loading dose with 
the more commonly used amino-amide local anesthetics 
would result in stepwise increase of blood concentrations 
into a toxic range.
Amino Amides
Lidocaine
Lidocaine is the most commonly used local anesthetic. It 
is used for local, topical, and regional intravenous block; 
peripheral nerve block; and spinal and epidural anes-
thesia. Although recent issues have led to restricted use 
of lidocaine for spinal anesthesia, this local anesthetic 
remains popular for all other applications, including 
epidural anesthesia.
Potential neurotoxicity (i.e., cauda equina syndrome) 
when lidocaine is administered for spinal anesthesia 
has emerged as a concern, especially when used with a 
continuous spinal technique.21 Most of the initial injuries 
resulted from neurotoxic concentrations of anesthetic in 
the caudal region of the subarachnoid space achieved by 
the combination of maldistribution and relatively large 
doses of anesthetic administered through small-gauge 
spinal catheters.22 However, even doses of lidocaine rou-
tinely used for single-injection spinal anesthesia (75–100 
mg) have been associated with neurotoxicity.
As described earlier, TNS is pain of the lower extremi-
ties after spinal anesthesia. Symptoms of TNS generally 
manifest within the first 12 to 24 hours after surgery, most 
often resolve within 3 days, and rarely persist beyond 
a week. Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs are often 
effective and should be used as first-line treatment. TNS is 
not associated with sensory loss, motor weakness, or bowel 
and bladder dysfunction. Additionally, magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI) and electrophysiologic examinations are 
normal. The cause and significance of TNS symptoms 
remain to be established, but discrepancies between factors 
affecting TNS and experimental animal toxicity cast doubt 
that TNS and persistent neurologic deficits (e.g., cauda 
equina syndrome) are mediated by the same mechanism.
All local anesthetics can cause TNS; however, the risk 
is 5-to 10-fold higher when patients receive intrathecal 
doses of lidocaine or mepivacaine compared with bupi-
vacaine, levobupivacaine, prilocaine, procaine, and ropi-
vacaine. There is a suggestion that the risk of TNS with 
intrathecal chloroprocaine may be lower, though authors 
of a recent systematic review regarded this conclusion as 
preliminary.23 In addition to the use of intrathecal lido-
caine, factors that may contribute to the occurrence of 
TNS include the lithotomy position and outpatient status. 
In contrast, local anesthetic concentration, the presence 
of glucose, concomitant administration of epinephrine, 
and technique-related factors such as the size or type of 
needle do not alter the incidence of TNS with lidocaine.17
Mepivacaine
Mepivacaine was the first in the series of pipecholyl 
xylidines, combining the piperidine ring of cocaine with 
the xylidine ring of lidocaine (see Fig. 10.2). This resulted 
in an anesthetic with characteristics similar to lidocaine, 
although with less vasodilation, and a slightly longer 
duration of action. The clinical use of mepivacaine par-
allels lidocaine, with the exception that it is relatively 
ineffective as a topical local anesthetic. Mepivacaine is 
often used for short-duration spinal anesthesia, although 
its use still carries a risk for developing TNS.
Prilocaine
Prilocaine was introduced into clinical practice with the 
anticipation that its rapid metabolism and infrequent 
acute toxicity (central nervous system toxicity about 
40% less than lidocaine) would make it a useful drug. 
Unfortunately, administration of large doses (>600 mg) 
may result in clinically significant accumulation of 
the metabolite ortho-toluidine, an oxidizing compound 
capable of converting hemoglobin to methemoglobin. 
Prilocaine-induced methemoglobinemia spontaneously 
subsides and can be reversed by the administration of 
methylene blue (1 to 2 mg/kg given intravenously over 
a 5-minute period). Nevertheless, the capacity to induce 
dose-related methemoglobinemia has limited the clinical 
acceptance of prilocaine.
Bupivacaine
Bupivacaine is a congener of mepivacaine, with a butyl 
rather than a methyl group on the piperidine ring, a 
modification that imparts a longer duration of action. 
This characteristic, combined with its high-quality sen-
sory anesthesia relative to motor blockade, has estab-
lished bupivacaine as one of the most commonly used 
local anesthetics for epidural anesthesia during labor and 
for postoperative pain management. Bupivacaine is also 
commonly used for peripheral nerve block, and it has a 
relatively unblemished record as a spinal anesthetic.
Refractory cardiac arrest has been associated with the 
use of 0.75% bupivacaine when accidentally injected 
intravenously during attempted epidural anesthesia,24 and 
this concentration is no longer recommended for epidural 
anesthesia. The most likely mechanism for bupivacaine's 
cardiotoxicity relates to the nature of its interaction with 
cardiac sodium ion channels.25 When electrophysiologic 
differences between anesthetics are compared, lidocaine 
enters the sodium ion channel quickly and leaves quickly. 
In contrast, recovery from bupivacaine blockade during 
diastole is relatively prolonged, making it far more potent 
with respect to depressing the maximum upstroke veloc-
ity of the cardiac action potential (Vmax) in ventricular 
II
Chapter 10 Local Anesthetics
155
cardiac muscle. As a result, bupivacaine has been labeled 
a “fast-in, slow-out” local anesthetic. This characteris-
tic likely creates conditions favorable for unidirectional 
block and reentry. Other mechanisms may contribute to 
bupivacaine's cardiotoxicity, including disruption of atrio-
ventricular nodal conduction, depression of myocardial 
contractility, and indirect effects mediated by the central 
nervous system.26 This potential for cardiotoxicity places 
important limitations on the total dose of bupivacaine, and 
it underscores the vital role of fractional dosing and meth-
ods to detect inadvertent intravascular injection when 
large doses of local anesthetic (especially bupivacaine) are 
given for regional block. The recent identification of lipid 
emulsion as a therapeutic intervention for bupivacaine 
cardiotoxicity does not diminish the critical importance of 
these preventive measures. Cardiotoxicity is of no concern 
when small doses are administered for spinal anesthesia.
Single Enantiomers
Concerns for bupivacaine cardiotoxicity have focused 
attention on the stereoisomers of bupivacaine and on its 
homolog, ropivacaine.
Stereochemistry
Isomers are different compounds that have the same 
molecular formula. Subsets of isomers that have atoms 
connected by the same sequence of bonds but that have 
different spatial orientations are called stereoisomers.
Enantiomers are a particular class of stereoisomers that 
exist as mirror images. The term chiral is derived from the 
Greek cheir, meaning “hand,” because the forms can be 
considered nonsuperimposable mirror images. Enantiom-
ers have identical physical properties except for the direc-
tion of the rotation of the plane of polarized light. This 
property is used to classify the enantiomer as dextrorota-
tory (+) if the rotation is to the right, or clockwise, and as 
levorotatory (−) if it is to the left, or counterclockwise. A 
racemic mixture is a mixture of equal parts of enantiom-
ers and is optically inactive because the rotation caused 
by the molecules of one isomer is canceled by the oppo-
site rotation of its enantiomer. Chiral compounds can 
also be classified on the basis of absolute configuration, 
generally designated as R (rectus) or S (sinister). Enanti-
omers may differ with respect to specific biologic activity. 
For example, the S (−) enantiomer of bupivacaine has 
inherently less cardiotoxicity than its R (+) mirror image.
Ropivacaine
Ropivacaine (levopropivacaine) is the S (−) enantiomer 
of the homolog of mepivacaine and bupivacaine with a 
propyl tail on the piperidine ring. In addition to a more 
favorable interaction with cardiac sodium ion channels, 
it is more likely to produce vasoconstriction. Motor 
blockade is less pronounced, and electrophysiologic stud-
ies raise the possibility that C fibers are preferentially 
blocked, together suggesting that ropivacaine may more 
easily produce a differential block. However, as expected 
from its lower lipid solubility, ropivacaine is less potent 
than bupivacaine. The question of potency is critical to 
any comparison of these anesthetics; if more drug needs 
to be administered to achieve a desired effect, the appar-
ent benefits with respect to cardiotoxicity (or differential 
block) may not exist when more appropriate equipotent 
dose comparisons are made. Ropivacaine likely offers 
some advantage with respect to cardiotoxicity, but any 
benefit over bupivacaine with respect to differential 
block is marginal, at best.
Levobupivacaine
Levobupivacaine is the single S (−) enantiomer of bupiv-
acaine. Similar to ropivacaine, cardiotoxicity is reduced, 
but there is no advantage over bupivacaine with respect 
to differential blockade. As with ropivacaine, the clini-
cally significant advantage of this compound over the 
racemic mixture is restricted to situations in which rela-
tively high doses of anesthetic are administered.
Topical Local Anesthetics
Local anesthetics are commonly administered on mucosal 
surfaces,27 on cut skin to facilitate laceration repair,28
and on intact skin, especially for needle procedures in 
children. Systemic absorption through mucosal surfaces 
is relatively rapid and efficient. Systemic toxicity is a 
recognized problem with excessive dosing of local anes-
thetic sprays and gels from the oral, nasal, or tracheo-
bronchial mucosa, particularly in infants and children.
The keratinized layer of the skin provides an effective 
barrier to diffusion of topical anesthetics, making it rela-
tively more difficult to achieve anesthesia of intact skin 
by topical application. This limitation can be overcome 
by using relatively high concentrations of local anesthetic 
(e.g., 4% lidocaine as in LMX or tetracaine 4% gel as in 
Ametop). A combination of 2.5% lidocaine and 2.5% pri-
locaine cream (i.e., eutectic mixture of local anesthetics 
[EMLA]) is widely used on intact skin. This mixture has a 
lower melting point than either component, and it exists 
as an oil at room temperature that is capable of overcom-
ing the barrier of the skin. EMLA cream is particularly 
useful in children (also see Chapter34) for the prevention 
or attenuation of pain associated with venipuncture or 
placement of an intravenous catheter, although it may 
take up to an hour before adequate topical anesthesia 
is produced.29 Another product, Synera, uses a heating 
element to accelerate the onset of skin analgesia from a 
lidocaine–tetracaine patch.
Tumescent Local Anesthesia
A variety of plastic and cosmetic surgical procedures are 
commonly performed by a technique known as tumescent 
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
156
local anesthesia, which involves subcutaneous infusion 
of large volumes of very dilute local anesthetic. The total 
lidocaine doses used in this approach are very large, such 
as eightfold larger than recommended doses for infiltra-
tion or peripheral nerve blockade. Nevertheless, there is 
a pharmacokinetic basis for this approach. When recom-
mended dose guidelines and techniques are followed, 
plasma lidocaine concentrations remain in a safe range, 
though plasma concentrations commonly peak more than 
12 hours after injection.30 Several case series support 
the general safety of this approach when recommended 
guidelines are followed. Conversely, adverse events have 
occurred when guidelines were not followed. In par-
ticular, additional dosing of other local anesthetics over 
the next day has resulted in toxic reactions. Any health 
facility using this technique should have resources and 
protocols for treatment of LAST.
Systemic Local Anesthetics for Acute and 
Chronic Pain
Local anesthetics and related sodium channel block-
ers such as mexiletine can be administered as systemic 
analgesics and for local anesthesia. There is evidence for 
effectiveness as adjuvant analgesics for postoperative 
pain31 and for several types of neuropathic pain.32 For 
some patients with neuropathic pain, brief intravenous 
lidocaine infusions may produce a remarkable, though 
poorly understood, extended duration of pain relief (e.g., 
for days or weeks) that far outlasts any apparent pharma-
cologic duration of lidocaine.15 33
WHEN LOCAL ANESTHESIA FAILS
Anesthesia providers and all clinicians should strive to 
improve the reliability of clinical use of local anesthetics. 
Historically, a common cause of failed local anesthesia 
has been technical failure; that is, needle placement and 
injection of the solution not sufficiently close to the 
intended site of action. The widespread use of ultrasound 
guidance has clearly improved the technical success of 
many forms of regional anesthesia, especially involv-
ing peripheral nerve and plexus blocks (also see Chapter 
18). Although multiple studies indicate that ultrasound 
facilitates more successful rates of regional anesthesia 
with much smaller volumes of local anesthetics, the 
median effective dose or volume (i.e., effectiveness for 
50% of subjects) is not a relevant variable for clinical 
practice; what is more relevant is an ED95 (an effective 
dose in 95% of subjects).34 Long-established techniques, 
such as thoracic epidural anesthesia, have significant 
technical failure rates when inserted using solely “blind” 
techniques such as loss of resistance. There is a growing 
appreciation for more objective approaches to confirma-
tion of needle and catheter placement for many forms 
of regional anesthesia in addition to ultrasound, such 
as Tsui and colleagues' nerve stimulation approach for 
epidural catheter placement,35 transduction of epidural 
space pressure waves, and selective use of fluoroscopy36
(also see Chapters 17 and 18).
Aside from technical failure in needle location, local 
anesthesia can fail for a range of other reasons. Clini-
cians can make erroneous assumptions about the relevant 
neuroanatomy of pain arising from a surgical procedure, 
leading to coverage of an inadequate subset of the nerves 
innervating a surgical site. In addition, there is an under-
appreciation of biologic sources of variation in local 
anesthetic responsiveness. For example, some patients 
with Ehlers–Danlos syndrome type III show relative 
resistance to local anesthetics.37
Local anesthetics commonly have diminished effec-
tiveness in sites of infection or inflammation. Inflamma-
tion-induced local anesthetic resistance probably results 
from both pharmacokinetic factors (local acidosis, edema, 
hyperemia) that reduce drug entry into nerves and phar-
macodynamic factors, including peripheral and central 
sensitization.38
Rapidly developing tolerance (tachyphylaxis) can 
occur in some patients with repeated dosing or prolonged 
infusion. Animal studies39 and clinical observations40
associate tachyphylaxis with the development of hyper-
algesia. Tachyphylaxis can be diminished or prevented 
by coadministration of antihyperalgesic drugs or other 
analgesics with central actions.41
Patients with long-standing chronic pain and hyperal-
gesia often appear to require larger volumes or concen-
trations, or both, of local anesthetics to achieve adequate 
analgesia in addition to coadministration of other anal-
gesic or antihyperalgesic drugs. Although psychologi-
cal factors may influence a patient's ability to tolerate 
surgery with regional anesthesia, clinicians should avoid 
“blaming the patient” for insufficient degrees of sensory 
block or analgesia caused by a variety of technical or 
biologic factors that influence block effectiveness.
There are other possible effects of chronic pain and 
its treatment on peripheral nerves and sodium channels. 
Nerve injury and inflammation change the expression 
of different sodium channel subtypes. Although the 
α-subunit of the sodium channel composes the “pore,” 
β-subunits are also differentially expressed after nerve 
injury or inflammation, and these β-subunits modulate 
channel electrophysiology and thereby may alter local 
anesthetic responsiveness. In a rat model chronic, but not 
acute, opioid exposure caused impaired local anesthetic 
responsiveness in the sciatic nerve.42
FUTURE LOCAL ANESTHETICS
Local anesthetics play a central role in modern anes-
thetic practice. However, despite major advances in 
II
Chapter 10 Local Anesthetics
157
pharmacology and techniques for administration over 
the past century, this class of compounds has a relatively 
narrow therapeutic index with respect to their potential 
for neurotoxicity and for adverse cardiovascular and cen-
tral nervous system effects. Another class of molecules 
that block sodium channels by a different site and mech-
anism are called the site 1 sodium channel blockers. They 
appear to be devoid of neurotoxicity and myotoxicity in 
some preliminary studies.43 These observations suggest 
that sodium channel blockade and local tissue toxicity 
to nerve and muscle may not be mediated by a common 
mechanism. Site 1 blockers also appear to have minimal 
cardiotoxicity,44 probably because of their much weaker 
affinity for the predominant sodium channel subtype in 
the myocardium, Nav1.5.
Regional anesthesia has grown in safety and impor-
tance in intraoperative and postoperative analgesia (also 
see Chapters 17, 18, and 40). Opioid sparing per se is 
recognized as a beneficial consequence of using regional 
anesthesia and analgesia. Available local anesthetics typ-
ically provide less than 12 hours of analgesia after a sin-
gle injection. Although analgesia can be prolonged using 
additives or continuous catheters, these approaches carry 
risks. Continuous catheter infusions involve potential 
for dislodgement and additional postoperative care and 
expense. Therefore there have been several approaches 
to producing prolonged local anesthesia for wound 
infiltration or peripheral nerve blockade via a single 
injection. Controlled release or on-demand release45 of 
local anesthetics has been achieved from microparticles, 
liposomes, hydrogels, and other vehicles. One liposomal 
bupivacaine product, Exparel, was approved in 2011 in 
the United States with approval for surgical site infiltra-
tion. Clinical trial outcomes have been mixed, but recent 
reviews and metaanalysis show no advantage to using 
liposomal bupivacaine compared with nonliposomal 
bupivacaine.46 48
Our group* is actively investigating the site 1 sodium 
channel blockers in animals49 and in early clinical 
trials.50 Site 1 blockers show profound synergism with 
existing local anesthetics and marked prolongation by 
epinephrine.
*Disclosure: Charles B. Berde, his collaborator Dr. Daniel 
Kohane, and Boston Children's Hospital have licensed the site 
1 blocker neosaxitoxin for commercial development and have 
received milestone payments, with a potential for future mile-
stone payments and royalties.
Another limitation of existing local anesthetics is 
the absence of modality selectivity. For example, in 
epidural analgesia for labor it would be very desirable 
to have intense analgesia, avoidance of weakness and 
hypotension, and preservation of sufficient sensation 
to feel an urge to push (also see Chapter 33). Recent 
research has approached sensory-selective blockade by 
two predominant strategies: (1) targeting local anesthetic 
entry preferentially into small sensory nerve fibers51 and 
(2)developing drugs that bind preferentially to subtypes 
of sodium channels located predominantly in small sen-
sory fibers.
CONCLUSIONS
Local anesthetics are used widely in anesthesiology and 
many areas of medicine. They have some risks and side 
effects, but they can be used with very good safety and 
clinical effectiveness by attention to safe dosing guide-
lines, early recognition of intravascular injection, and 
optimal technique. Local anesthetics are not a “solved 
problem,” and current research may lead to improve-
ments in regional anesthesia and postoperative care in 
the future.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors, editor, and publisher would like to thank Dr. 
Kenneth Drasner for contributing to this chapter in previ-
ous editions of this work. It has served as the foundation 
for the current chapter.
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
158
1. Drasner K. Local anesthetic systemic 
toxicity: A historical perspective. Reg 
Anesth Pain Med. 2010;35:162–166.
2. Catterall WA. Voltage-gated sodi-
um channels at 60: Structure, func-
tion and pathophysiology. J Physiol. 
2012;590:2577–2589.
3. Dib-Hajj SD, Cummins TR, Black JA, 
Waxman SG. Sodium channels in nor-
mal and pathological pain. Annu Rev 
Neurosci. 2010;33:325–347.
4. Wang 
GK, 
Strichartz 
GR. 
State-
dependent 
inhibition 
of 
sodium 
channels by local anesthetics: A 40-year 
evolution. Biochem (Mosc) Suppl Ser A 
Membr Cell Biol. 2012;6:120–127.
5. Covino BG, Scott DB, Lambert DH. 
Handbook of Spinal Anaesthesia and 
Analgesia. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 
1994:7.
6. Gissen AJ, Covino BG, Gregus J. Differ-
ential sensitivities of mammalian nerve 
fibers to local anesthetic agents. Anes-
thesiology. 1980;53:467–474.
7. Winnie AP, Tay CH, Patel KP, etal. 
Pharmacokinetics of local anesthetics 
during plexus blocks. Anesth Analg. 
1977;56:852–861.
8. Kirksey MA, Haskins SC, Cheng J, Liu 
SS. Local anesthetic peripheral nerve 
block adjuvants for prolongation of 
analgesia: A systematic qualitative 
review. PLoS One. 2015;10:e0137312.
9. Covino BG, Vassallo HG. Local Anesthet-
ics: Mechanisms of Action and Clinical 
Use. Philadelphia: Grune & Stratton; 
1976.
10. Rosenberg PH, Veering BT, Urmey WF. 
Maximum recommended doses of local 
anesthetics: A multifactorial concept. 
Reg Anesth Pain Med. 2004;29:564–575 
discussion 524.
11. Neal JM, Bernards CM, Butterworth JF, 
etal. ASRA practice advisory on local 
anesthetic systemic toxicity. Reg Anesth 
Pain Med. 2010;35:152–161.
12. de Jong RH, Ronfeld RA, DeRosa RA. 
Cardiovascular effects of convulsant 
and supraconvulsant doses of amide 
local 
anesthetics. 
Anesth 
Analg. 
1982;61:3–9.
13. Weinberg G, Ripper R, Feinstein DL, 
Hoffman W. Lipid emulsion infusion 
rescues dogs from bupivacaine-induced 
cardiac toxicity. Reg Anesth Pain Med. 
2003;28:198–202.
14. Neal JM, Neal EJ, Weinberg GL. Ameri-
can Society of Regional Anesthesia and 
Pain Medicine Local Anesthetic System-
ic Toxicity checklist: 2020 version. Reg 
Anesth Pain Med. 2021 Jan;46(1):81–82. 
www.asra.com/content/documents/asra_
last_checklist
15. Lambert LA, Lambert DH, Strichartz 
GR. Irreversible conduction block in 
isolated nerve by high concentrations 
of local anesthetics. Anesthesiology. 
1994;80:1082–1093.
16. Hodgson PS, Liu SS, Batra MS, etal. Pro-
caine compared with lidocaine for inci-
dence of transient neurologic symptoms. 
Reg Anesth Pain Med. 2000;25:218–222.
17. Freedman JM, Li DK, Drasner K, etal. 
Transient neurologic symptoms after 
spinal anesthesia: An epidemiologic 
study of 1,863 patients. Anesthesiology. 
1998;89:633–641.
18. Taniguchi M, Bollen AW, Drasner K. 
Sodium bisulfite: Scapegoat for chloro-
procaine neurotoxicity Anesthesiology. 
2004;100:85–91.
19. Eisenach JC, Schlairet TJ, Dobson 2nd 
CE, Hood DH. Effect of prior anesthetic 
solution on epidural morphine analge-
sia. Anesth Analg. 1991;73:119–123.
20. Casati A, Fanelli G, Danelli G, etal. 
Spinal anesthesia with lidocaine or pre-
servative-free 2-chlorprocaine for out-
patient knee arthroscopy: A prospective, 
randomized, double-blind comparison. 
Anesth Analg. 2007;104:959–964.
21. Drasner K. Local anesthetic neurotoxic-
ity: Clinical injury and strategies that 
may minimize risk. Reg Anesth Pain 
Med. 2002;27:576–580.
22. Rigler ML, Drasner K. Distribution of 
catheter-injected local anesthetic in a 
model of the subarachnoid space. Anes-
thesiology. 1991;75:684–692.
23. Forget P, Borovac JA, Thackeray EM, 
Pace NL. Transient neurological symp-
toms (TNS) following spinal anaes-
thesia with lidocaine versus other 
local anaesthetics in adult surgical 
patients: A network meta-analysis. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2019 Dec 
1;12(12):CD003006.
24. Albright GA. Cardiac arrest fol-
lowing regional anesthesia with eti-
docaine or bupivacaine. Anesthesiology. 
1979;51:285–287.
25. Clarkson CW, Hondeghem LM. Mecha-
nism for bupivacaine depression of car-
diac conduction: Fast block of sodium 
channels during the action potential with 
slow recovery from block during dias-
tole. Anesthesiology. 1985;62:396–405.
26. Bernards CM, Artu AA. Hexamethonium 
and midazolam terminate dysrhythmias 
and hypertension caused by intracer-
ebroventricular bupivacaine in rabbits. 
Anesthesiology. 1991;74:89–96.
27. Qi X, Lai Z, Li S, Liu X, Wang Z, Tan 
W. The efficacy of lidocaine in laryn-
gospasm prevention in pediatric sur-
gery: A network meta-analysis. Sci Rep. 
2016;6:32308 Sep 2.
28. Tayeb BO, Eidelman A, Eidelman CL, 
McNicol ED, Carr DB. Topical anaesthet-
ics for pain control during repair of 
dermal laceration. Cochrane Database 
Syst Rev. 2017;2(2):CD005364 Feb 22.
29. Shahid S, Florez ID, Mbuagbaw L. Effi-
cacy and safety of EMLA cream for pain 
control due to venipuncture in infants: 
A meta-analysis. Pediatrics. 2019 Jan;1
43(1):e20181173.
30. Klein JA, Jeske DR. Estimated maximal 
safe dosages of tumescent lidocaine. 
Anesth Analg. 2016 May;122(5):1350–
1359.
31. Weibel S, Jelting Y, Pace NL, etal. Con-
tinuous intravenous perioperative lido-
caine infusion for postoperative pain and 
recovery in adults. Cochrane Database 
Syst Rev. 2018 Jun 4;6(6):CD009642.
32. Challapalli V, Tremont-Lukats IW, 
McNicol ED, Lau J, Carr DB. Systemic 
administration of local anesthetic agents 
to relieve neuropathic pain. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev. 2019 Oct 7;2019(10).
33. Araujo MC, Sinnott CJ, Strichartz GR. 
Multiple phases of relief from experi-
mental mechanical allodynia by sys-
temic lidocaine: Responses to early and 
late infusions. Pain. 2003;103:21–29.
34. Fisher D. What if half of your patients 
moved (or remembered or did something 
else bad) at incision? Anesthesiology. 
2007;107:1–2.
35. Tsui BC, Wagner A, Cave D, Kearney R. 
Thoracic and lumbar epidural analgesia 
via the caudal approach using electri-
cal stimulation guidance in pediatric 
patients: A review of 289 patients. Anes-
thesiology. 2004;100:683–689.
36. Taenzer AH, Ct Clark, Kovarik WD. 
Experience with 724 epidurograms for 
epidural catheter placement in pediat-
ric anesthesia. Reg Anesth Pain Med. 
2010;35:432–435.
37. Arendt-Nielsen L, Kaalund S, Bjer-
ring P, Hogsaa B. Insufficient effect 
of local analgesics in Ehlers Danlos 
type III patients (connective tissue 
disorder). Acta Anaesthesiol Scand. 
1990;34:358–361.
38. Cairns BE, Gambarota G, Dunning PS, 
etal. Activation of peripheral excitatory 
amino acid receptors decreases the dura-
tion of local anesthesia. Anesthesiology. 
2003;98:521–529.
39. Lee KC, Wilder RT, Smith RL, Berde CB. 
Thermal hyperalgesia accelerates and 
MK-801 prevents the development of 
tachyphylaxis to rat sciatic nerve block-
ade. Anesthesiology. 1994;81:1284–
1293.
40. Bromage PR, Pettigrew RT, Crowell DE. 
Tachyphylaxis in epidural analgesia: I. 
Augmentation and decay of local anes-
thesia. J Clin Pharmacol J New Drugs. 
1969;9:30–38.
41. Lund C, Mogensen T, Hjortso NC, Kehlet 
H. Systemic morphine enhances spread 
of sensory analgesia during postopera-
tive epidural bupivacaine infusion. Lan-
cet. 1985;2:1156–1157.
REFERENCES
II
Chapter 10 Local Anesthetics
159
42. Liu Q, Gold MS. Opioid-induced loss of 
local anesthetic potency in the rat sciatic 
nerve. Anesthesiology. 2016;125(4):755–
764.
43. Epstein-Barash H, Shichor I, Kwon AH, 
etal. Prolonged duration local anes-
thesia with minimal toxicity. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci USA. 2009;106:7125–7130.
44. Wylie MC, Johnson VM, Carpino E, 
etal. Respiratory, neuromuscular, and 
cardiovascular effects of neosaxitoxin 
in isoflurane-anesthetized sheep. Reg 
Anesth Pain Med. 2012;37:152–158.
45. Cullion K, Petishnok LC, Sun T, Santam-
aria CM, Pemberton GL, McDannold NJ, 
Kohane DS. Local anesthesia enhanced 
with increasing high-frequency ultra-
sound intensity. Drug Deliv Transl Res. 
2020 Oct;10(5):1507–1516.
46. Hamilton TW, Athanassoglou V, Mel-
lon S, etal. Liposomal bupivacaine 
infiltration at the surgical site for the 
management of postoperative pain. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2017 Feb 
1;2(2):CD011419.
47. Ilfeld BM, Eisenach JC, Gabriel RA. 
Clinical effectiveness of liposomal bupi-
vacaine administered by infiltration or 
peripheral nerve block to treat postop-
erative pain. Anesthesiology. 2021 Feb 
1;134(2):283–344.
48. Hussain N, Brull R, Sheehy B, etal. 
Perineural liposomal bupivacaine is not 
superior to nonliposomal bupivacaine for 
peripheral nerve block analgesia. Anes-
thesiology. 2021 Feb 1;134(2):147–164.
49. Templin JS, Wylie MC, Kim JD, etal. 
Neosaxitoxin in rat sciatic block: 
Improved therapeutic index using com-
binations with bupivacaine, with and 
without epinephrine. Anesthesiology. 
2015;123:886–898.
50. Lobo K, Donado C, Cornelissen L, etal. 
A phase 1, dose-escalation, double-
blind, block-randomized, controlled trial 
of safety and efficacy of neosaxitoxin 
alone and in combination with 0.2% 
bupivacaine, with and without epineph-
rine, for cutaneous anesthesia. Anesthe-
siology. 2015;123:873–885.
51. Binshtok AM, Bean BP, Woolf CJ. Inhibi-
tion of nociceptors by TRPV1-mediated 
entry of impermeant sodium channel 
blockers. Nature. 2007;449:607–610.
52. Relland LM, Beltran R, Kim SS, et al. 
Continuous epidural chloroprocaine after 
abdominal surgery is associated with 
lower postoperative opioid exposure in 
NICU infants.. J Pediatr Surg. 2021. 
doi:10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2021.05.015. 
34154813.
160
Chapter
INTRODUCTION
Neuromuscular blocking agents (NMBAs) interrupt the 
usual transmission of nerve impulses at the neuro-
muscular junction (NMJ) by one of two mechanisms 
to interfere with neuromuscular transmission and 
produce paralysis of skeletal muscles. On the basis of 
differences in their mechanisms of action, these drugs 
can be classified as depolarizing NMBAs (which mimic 
the actions of acetylcholine [ACh] at the acetylcholine 
receptor [AChR]) and nondepolarizing NMBAs (which 
interfere with the actions of ACh by blocking binding 
sites on the AChR). Nondepolarizing NMBAs are further 
subdivided into long-, intermediate-, and short-acting 
drugs (Table 11.1) based on their duration of action. 
Succinylcholine (SCh) is the only depolarizing NMBA 
that is used clinically.
This chapter will describe the choice of NMBA, dosing 
of NMBAs, monitoring depth of neuromuscular blockade 
(NMB), and pharmacologic reversal of NMB.
INTRODUCTION
Clinical Uses
Choice of Neuromuscular Blocking Agent
THE NEUROMUSCULAR JUNCTION
Prejunctional Receptors and Release of 
Acetylcholine
Postjunctional Receptors
Extrajunctional Receptors
STRUCTURE–ACTIVITY RELATIONSHIPS
DEPOLARIZING NEUROMUSCULAR 
BLOCKING AGENTS: SUCCINYLCHOLINE
Characteristics of Blockade
Pharmacodynamics
Metabolism
Adverse Side Effects
NONDEPOLARIZING NEUROMUSCULAR 
BLOCKING AGENTS
Pharmacokinetics
Pharmacodynamic Responses
Adverse Effects
Long-Acting Nondepolarizing Neuromuscular 
Blocking Agent: Pancuronium
Intermediate-Acting Nondepolarizing 
Neuromuscular Blocking Agents
Vecuronium
Rocuronium
Atracurium
Cisatracurium
Short-Acting Nondepolarizing Neuromuscular 
Blocking Agent: Mivacurium
MONITORING THE EFFECTS OF 
NONDEPOLARIZING NEUROMUSCULAR 
BLOCKING AGENTS
NEUROMUSCULAR 
BLOCKING AND 
REVERSAL AGENTS
Cynthia A. Lien
11
ANTAGONISM OF RESIDUAL 
NEUROMUSCULAR BLOCK
Anticholinesterases
Selective relaxant Binding Agents: Sugammadex
SUMMARY
II
Chapter 11 Neuromuscular Blocking and Reversal Agents
161
Clinical Uses
NMBAs are used of NMBAs in the operating room to 
facilitate endotracheal intubation and optimize surgical 
conditions. They may also be administered in other clinical 
settings to facilitate emergent intubations, and to facilitate 
mechanical ventilation of intubated patients. NMBAs do not 
have analgesic or anesthetic effects and should not be used 
to render an inadequately anesthetized patient immobile. 
Patient airways must be secured and ventilation supported 
once an NMBA has been administered and this support con-
tinued until muscle strength has returned to baseline (a train-
of-four ratio [TOFR] ≥0.9). Intraoperative evaluation of depth 
of NMB is monitored by the muscular response to stimulation 
of a peripheral nerve, and the results of monitoring are used 
to determine whether additional NMB is necessary and how 
to dose reversal agents.
Choice of Neuromuscular Blocking Agent
The choice of NMBA is influenced by its speed of onset, 
duration of action, route of elimination, and associated 
adverse effects. The rapid onset and brief duration of skel-
etal muscle paralysis, characteristic of SCh-induced NMB, 
are useful when tracheal intubation is the only reason for 
administering an NMBA. Although SCh could be given inter-
mittently for shorter procedures, doing so is associated with 
an increased risk of bradycardia, asystolic cardiac arrest, and 
prolonged duration of NMB. For intubation and mainte-
nance of NMB, administration of short- or intermediate-act-
ing nondepolarizing NMBAs may be appropriate. The choice 
of long-, intermediate-, or short-acting agent will depend on 
the duration of NMB that is necessary and the anticipated 
means of administration of the NMBA (intermittent boluses 
or an infusion). The choice of specific NMBA in each of these 
categories will also depend on availability of the NMBA, the 
presence of patient comorbidities, and plans for antagonism 
of residual NMB.
Table 11.1
Classification of Neuromuscular Blocking 
Agents
Mechanism of 
Action
Neuromuscular 
Blocking Agent
Duration of Action
Depolarizing
Succinylcholine
Ultrashort-acting
Nondepolarizing
Pancuronium
Long-acting
Vecuronium
Intermediate-acting
Rocuronium
Intermediate-acting
Atracurium
Intermediate-acting
Cisatracurium
Intermediate-acting
Mivacurium
Short-acting
THE NEUROMUSCULAR JUNCTION
The NMJ consists of a prejunctional motor nerve ending 
separated from the highly folded postjunctional membrane 
of the skeletal muscle by a synaptic cleft (Fig. 11.1). Nicotinic 
acetylcholine receptors (nAChRs) are located at prejunctional 
and postjunctional sites.1 Neuromuscular transmission is ini-
tiated by arrival of an impulse at the motor nerve terminal 
with an associated influx of calcium ions and subsequent 
release of the ligand ACh. ACh binds to AChRs (the ligand-
gated channel) on the postjunctional muscle membrane, 
opening the AChR channel and causing a change in mem-
brane permeability to ions through the cell membrane, prin-
cipally potassium and sodium. This change in permeability 
and movement of ions causes a decrease in the transmem-
brane potential from about −90 mV to −45 mV (threshold 
potential), at which point a propagated action potential 
spreads over the surfaces of skeletal muscle fibers and leads 
to muscular contraction. ACh is rapidly hydrolyzed at the 
NMJ (within 15 ms) by the enzyme acetylcholinesterase (true 
cholinesterase) (AChE), so that it can no longer bind with the 
nAChR, restoring membrane permeability (repolarization) 
and preventing sustained depolarization.
The release of ACh in response to neural stimulation is a 
calcium-dependent process, resulting in the release of 50 to 
100 vesicles containing ACh. The connection between the 
impulse and depolarization and the rise in intracellular cal-
cium is a voltage-gated calcium channel, which allows for 
intracellular movement of calcium in response to an electrical 
current. In response to the increase in intracellular calcium, the 
ACh-containing synaptic vesicles move to release sites on the 
nerve terminal membrane. The release of ACh from the synap-
tic vesicles is mediated by a series of proteins. The protein syn-
apsin anchors the ACh vesicle to the release site of the nerve 
terminal through the formation of a ternary complex with 
syntaxin during depolarization and calcium entry. Assembly 
of the ternary complex forces the vesicle in close apposition to 
the nerve membrane at the active zone of the nerve terminal 
with release of its contents, ACh. The fusion is disassembled 
once the ACh has been released, and the vesicle is recycled.
Small amounts of ACh are released from nerve termi-
nals without a nerve impulse. These result in miniature 
end-plate potentials (MEPPs). Although not large enough 
to cause a muscle depolarization, MEPPs are diminished 
by the administration of nondepolarizing NMBAs and 
increased by the administration of anticholinesterases.
Synchronized release of ACh from the synaptic vesicles 
of the nerve terminal in an amount adequate to generate an 
action potential occurs in response to an electrical impulse. 
The rapid release of ACh once an impulse arrives at the 
motor nerve terminal indicates that only those vesicles close 
to the membrane of the nerve terminal can participate in the 
process of exocytosis. With repetitive stimulation, vesicles 
are moved toward the motor nerve terminal for subse-
quent release, accounting for the post tetanic potentiation 
observed during NMB.
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
162
Not all of the released ACh binds to the AChR of the 
motor end plate. Most of it is hydrolyzed by AChE at 
the NMJ. The AChE is anchored to the basal lamina of 
the postjunctional membrane. Although firmly anchored 
to the motor end plate region, its catalytic sites have ready 
access to ACh in the junctional cleft. A different cholinest-
erase, butyrylcholinesterase, which metabolizes SCh, does 
not exist in the synaptic cleft of the NMJ.
Prejunctional Receptors and Release 
of Acetylcholine
Cholinergic receptors are found presynaptically, at the 
motor nerve terminal, and at the postsynaptic region 
of the NMJ. The prejunctional receptors are involved 
Myelin
Schwann cell
Synaptic space
Primary
cleft
Secondary
cleft
Actin-myosin
complex
Na+
channel
Mitochondrion
Microtubules
Active zone or
release site
Nerve
Muscle
Fig. 11.1 Adult neuromuscular junction with the three cells that constitute the synapse: the motor 
neuron (i.e., nerve terminal), muscle fiber, and Schwann cell. The motor neuron from the ventral horn 
of the spinal cord innervates the muscle. Each fiber receives only one synapse. The motor nerve loses 
its myelin and terminates on the muscle fiber. The nerve terminal, covered by a Schwann cell, has 
vesicles clustered about the membrane thickenings, which are the active zones, toward its synaptic 
side and mitochondria and microtubules toward its other side. A synaptic gutter, made up of a primary 
and many secondary clefts, separates the nerve from the muscle. The muscle surface is corrugated, and 
dense areas on the shoulders of each fold contain acetylcholine receptors. Sodium channels are present 
at the clefts and throughout the muscle membrane. (From Martyn JA. Neuromuscular physiology and 
pharmacology. In: Miller RD, ed. Miller’s Anesthesia. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015.)
in the modulation of the release of ACh into the NMJ. 
Prejunctional nicotinic receptors are activated by ACh 
and are believed to function in a positive-feedback 
control system that serves to maintain the availability 
of ACh when demand for it is high. They are involved 
with the mobilization of ACh, but not the actual process 
of its release.
Presynaptic receptors, aided by calcium, facilitate 
replenishment of the motor nerve terminal. In addition to 
being stimulated by ACh, they are stimulated by SCh and 
neostigmine and depressed by small doses of nondepo-
larizing NMBAs. Inhibition of these presynaptic nAChRs 
explains the fade in response to high-frequency repetitive 
stimulation such as tetanic or even train-of-four (TOF) 
stimulation.1
II
Chapter 11 Neuromuscular Blocking and Reversal Agents
163
Postjunctional Receptors
The postjunctional, mature AChR is an intrinsic mem-
brane glycoprotein with five distinct subunits (Fig. 11.2): 
two α, one β, one δ, and one ε. The α-subunits contain 
the major portion of the ACh receptor binding site. Each 
of the subunits contains four helical domains, M1 to 
M4, that traverse the cell membrane. The ion channel 
of each subunit has permeability that is equal to that of 
Na+ and K+, allowing for the flow of ions across the cell 
membrane along their concentration gradients, with 
Na+ entering and K+ leaving the muscle cell. Calcium 
contributes ≈2.5% to the total permeability. This flow 
of ions is the basis of normal neuromuscular transmis-
sion. There are two distinct pockets for binding of ACh 
formed by the N and C termini of the protein. One occurs 
at the intersection of the α to ε subunits and the other 
at the intersection of the α to δ subunits. These bind-
ing sites have different affinities for different NMBAs. 
Occupation of one or both α-subunits by a nondepolar-
izing NMBA causes the ion channel to remain closed, 
in spite of the release of ACh from the prejunctional 
neuron so that the ion flow to produce depolarization 
cannot occur. SCh binds to the AChR binding sites and 
acts as an agonist, causing the ion channel to remain 
open (mimicking ACh) and resulting in prolonged depo-
larization. Its duration of action is longer than that of 
ACh because it remains in the NMJ available to bind to 
the AChR until it diffuses away from the NMJ, where 
it is metabolized by butyrylcholinesterase. SCh is not a 
metabolite for AChE.
Nondepolarizing NMBAs may, in addition to competi-
tively binding to the AChR, inhibit neuromuscular trans-
mission by occluding the AChR channel preventing the 
normal flow of ions required for subsequent depolariza-
tion. NMB secondary to occlusion of channels is resistant 
Fig. 11.2 The nicotinic acetylcholine receptor within the lipid bilayer of the postjunctional muscle 
membrane. The acetylcholine receptor is composed of five subunits: two α, one ε, one δ, and one β. The 
binding sites for acetylcholine are located at the extracellular portion of the α to ε and α to δ subunits.
to drug-enhanced antagonism with anticholinesterase 
drugs. The lipid environment around cholinergic recep-
tors can be altered by volatile anesthetics, which change 
the properties of the ion channels. This may account in 
part for the augmentation of NMB by volatile anesthetics.
Extrajunctional Receptors
Extrajunctional receptors are different in structure 
than the postjunctional nAChRs. They retain the two 
α-subunits but have γ-unit replacing the ε-subunit. Addi-
tionally, whereas postjunctional receptors are confined to 
the area of the end plate of skeletal muscle that is oppo-
site the prejunctional motor neurons (as a component of 
the motor end plate), extrajunctional receptors are pre-
sent throughout skeletal muscles. Extrajunctional recep-
tor synthesis is normally suppressed by neural activity. 
Prolonged inactivity, sepsis, skeletal muscle denervation, 
burn injury, or trauma may be associated with a pro-
liferation of extrajunctional receptors. When activated, 
extrajunctional receptors stay open longer and permit 
more ions to flow across the muscle cell membrane,2
which in part explains the exaggerated hyperkalemic 
response when SCh is administered to patients with den-
ervation or burn injury. Proliferation of these receptors 
also accounts for the resistance or tolerance to nondepo-
larizing NMBAs, which can be observed in patients with 
burns or prolonged immobilization.2,3
STRUCTURE–ACTIVITY RELATIONSHIPS
NMBAs are quaternary ammonium compounds with at 
least one positively charged nitrogen atom (Fig. 11.3) that 
will bind to one or both of the binding sites present on 
the postsynaptic cholinergic receptors. In addition, these 
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
164
N
N
O
O
Succinylcholine
Acetylcholine
Atracurium
NCH2CH2OCCH2CH2COCH2CH2N
CH2CH2CO(CH2)3OCCH2 CH2
CH2CH2
CHCH2CH2
CH3COCH2CH2N
O
O
O
CH3 
CH3 
CH3 
CH3 
OCH3 
OCH3 
OCH3 
OCH3 
OCH3 
CH3 
CH3 
CH3 
CH3 
H3C
O
N
Vecuronium
O
CH3 
CH3 
H3C
CH3O
H3C
CH3O
OC
CO
(CH2)3
(CH2)3
CH3 
CH2 
OCH3 
OCH3 
OCH3 
OCH3 
OCH3 
OCH3 
H3CO
H3CO
H3CO
H3CO
H3C
CH3O
+N
+N
N+
N+
N+
O
H
C
C
C
O
C
C
O
O
O
O
Rocuronium
Mivacurium
O
O
Cisatracurium
CH3 
OCH3 
OCH3 
OCH3 
OCH3 
CH3O
H3C
N+
N
CH3 
CH3 
CH3 
H2C
O
O
O
HO
CH3O
CH3O
CH3O
CH3 
CH2
CH2
CH2
(CH2)5
CH2 
O
C
O
N
Pancuronium
O
CH3 
CH3 
CH3 
CH3CO
Fig. 11.3 Chemical structure of acetylcholine and neuromuscular blocking drugs.
II
Chapter 11 Neuromuscular Blocking and Reversal Agents
165
NMBA
Hepatic
Renal
Metabolism
Unchanged, Biliary 
Excretion
Degradation
%
Means of 
Elimination
Pancuronium
5-10%
10%
80%
Vecuronium
40-75%
20-30%
15-25%
Rocuronium
50-70%
10-20%
10-25%
Atracurium
10-40%
60-90%
Hofmann Elimination, 
Nonspecific Esterases
Cisatracurium
16%
77%
Hofmann Elimination
Mivacurium
<5%
95-99%
Butyrylcholinesterase
Table 11.2
Elimination of Neuromuscular Blocking Agents
compounds have structural similarities to the endogenous 
neurotransmitter ACh. For example, SCh is two molecules 
of ACh linked by methyl groups. The long, slender, flexible 
structure of ACh allows it to bind to and activate cholin-
ergic receptors. Although the bulky rigid nondepolarizing 
NMBAs contain structural elements similar to ACh, they do 
not activate cholinergic receptors.
Nondepolarizing NMBAs are either aminosteroid 
compounds (pancuronium, vecuronium, rocuronium) or 
benzylisoquinolinium compounds (atracurium, cisatra-
curium, mivacurium). Pancuronium is the bisquaternary 
aminosteroid NMBA most closely related to ACh struc-
turally. The ACh-like fragments of pancuronium give 
the steroidal molecule its high degree of neuromuscu-
lar blocking activity. Vecuronium and rocuronium are 
monoquaternary analogs of pancuronium. Their different 
structures account for the differing means of elimination 
of the amino steroidal NMBAs and the benzylisoquino-
linium NMBAs from the body (Table 11.2).
DEPOLARIZING NEUROMUSCULAR 
BLOCKING AGENTS: SUCCINYLCHOLINE
Characteristics of Blockade
SCh mimics the action of ACh and produces a sustained 
depolarization of the postjunctional membrane. Skeletal 
muscle paralysis occurs because a depolarized postjunc-
tional membrane and inactivated sodium channels cannot 
respond to subsequent release of ACh. Depolarizing NMB 
is also referred to as phase I blockade. Phase II blockade 
is present when the postjunctional membrane has become 
repolarized but still does not respond normally to ACh 
(desensitization NMB). The mechanism of phase II blockade 
is unknown but may reflect the development of nonexcit-
able areas around the end plates that become repolarized 
but unable to promote the spread of impulses initiated by 
ACh. With the initial dose of SCh, subtle signs of a phase 
II blockade begin to appear (fade to tetanic stimulation).4
Phase II blockade, which resembles the blockade produced 
by nondepolarizing NMBAs, predominates when the intra-
venous dose of SCh exceeds 3 to 5 mg/kg.
Pharmacodynamics
SCh is the only depolarizing NMBA used clinically. Its 
mechanism of action and its relatively rapid metabolism 
(Fig. 11.4) are responsible for its unique pharmacodynamic 
properties, which include both a rapid onset and an ultra-
short duration of action. Typically, doses of 0.5 to 1.5 mg/
kg are administered intravenously to produce a rapid onset 
of skeletal muscle paralysis (30 to 60 seconds) that lasts 5 
to 10 minutes. These pharmacodynamic characteristics are 
useful in a compound that is administered to facilitate tra-
cheal intubation. SCh has been used clinically for more than 
60 years, and despite consistent industrial efforts, no NMBA 
has been developed that has these pharmacodynamic prop-
erties.5 Although an intravenous dose of 0.5 mg/kg may 
be adequate, larger doses are commonly administered to 
facilitate tracheal intubation. If a subparalyzing dose of 
a nondepolarizing NMBA (pretreatment with 5% to 10% 
ED95—the dose that, on average, will cause 95% suppression 
of muscle response to neural stimulation) is administered 2 
to 4 minutes before administration of SCh to blunt fascicu-
lations, the dose of SCh should be increased by about 70%. 
It is important to remember that the administration of even 
small, precurarizing or defasciculating doses of NMBAs can 
cause symptomatic muscle weakness and put patients at 
risk of difficulty breathing or swallowing.
The sustained depolarization produced by the initial 
administration of SCh is initially manifested as transient 
generalized skeletal muscle contractions known as fas-
ciculations. The sustained opening of sodium channels 
produced by SCh is associated with leakage of potassium 
from the interior of cells sufficient to increase plasma 
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
166
Succinylcholine
Succinylmonocholine
Succinic acid
Choline
Choline
Plasma cholinesterase
Plasma cholinesterase
H3CNCH2CH2OCCH2CH2COH
O
O
CH3 
CH3 
HOCCH2CH2COH
O
O
H3CNCH2CH2OCCH2CH2COCH2CH2NCH3 
O
O
CH3 
CH3 
CH3 
CH3 
HOCH2CH2NCH3 
+
+
CH3 
CH3 
HOCH2CH2NCH3 
CH3 
CH3 
Fig. 11.4 The brief duration of action of succinylcholine is the 
result of its rapid hydrolysis in plasma by cholinesterase enzyme 
to inactive metabolites (succinylmonocholine has 1/20 to 1/80 
the activity of succinylcholine at the neuromuscular junction).
concentrations of potassium by about 0.1 to 0.4 mEq/L in 
a healthy patient. In patients with denervation, burns, or 
trauma, where there is likely to be proliferation of extra-
junctional nAChRs and damaged muscle membranes, many 
more channels will leak potassium, causing hyperkalemia.2
Metabolism
Hydrolysis of SCh to inactive metabolites is accomplished 
by plasma cholinesterase (pseudocholinesterase, butyryl-
cholinesterase), which is produced in the liver. Plasma 
cholinesterase has an enormous capacity to hydrolyze 
SCh at a rate rapid enough that only a small fraction of 
the original intravenous dose of SCh reaches the NMJ. 
Because plasma cholinesterase is not present at the NMJ, 
the NMB produced by SCh is terminated by its diffu-
sion from the NMJ into plasma. Therefore plasma cho-
linesterase influences the duration of action of SCh by 
controlling the amount of SCh that is hydrolyzed before 
it reaches the NMJ. Liver disease must be severe before 
decreases in the synthesis of plasma cholinesterase are 
sufficient to prolong the effects of SCh. Anticholinest-
erases, as used in the treatment of myasthenia gravis, 
and certain chemotherapeutic drugs (nitrogen mustard, 
cyclophosphamide) may decrease plasma cholinesterase 
activity enough that prolonged skeletal muscle paralysis 
follows the administration of SCh.
Atypical Plasma Cholinesterase
Atypical plasma cholinesterase lacks the ability to hydro-
lyze ester bonds in drugs such as SCh and mivacurium. 
The presence of this atypical enzyme is often recognized 
only after an otherwise healthy patient experiences 
prolonged skeletal muscle paralysis (>1 hour) after the 
administration of a conventional dose of SCh or mivacu-
rium. Subsequent determination of the dibucaine number 
permits diagnosis of the presence of atypical plasma 
cholinesterase. Dibucaine is an amide local anesthetic 
that inhibits normal plasma cholinesterase activity by 
about 80%, whereas the activity of atypical enzyme is 
inhibited by only 20% (Table 11.3). The dibucaine number 
reflects the quality of plasma cholinesterase (ability to 
metabolize SCh and mivacurium) and not the quantity 
of enzyme that is circulating in plasma. For example, 
decreases in plasma cholinesterase activity because of 
liver disease, advanced age, pregnancy, or treatment with 
an anticholinesterase are often associated with a normal 
dibucaine number.
Adverse Side Effects
In spite of its utility in facilitating tracheal intubation, 
SCh has many adverse effects (Box 11.1). Adverse side 
effects after the administration of SCh are numerous 
and may limit or even contraindicate the use of this 
NMBA in certain patients. SCh should not be given to 
patients more than 24 hours after major burns, trauma, 
and extensive denervation of skeletal muscles because it 
may cause acute hyperkalemia and cardiac arrest.2 When 
administered to boys with unrecognized muscular dystro-
phy, SCh has resulted in acute hyperkalemia and cardiac 
arrest. Because of this, the U.S. Food and Drug Admin-
istration (FDA) issued a warning against the use of SCh 
in children, except for emergency control of the airway. 
When administered with volatile anesthetics in suscepti-
ble patients it can trigger malignant hyperthermia.6
Cardiac Dysrhythmias
Sinus bradycardia, junctional rhythm, and sinus arrest 
may follow the administration of SCh. These responses 
are the result of the action of SCh at cardiac postgan-
glionic muscarinic receptors, where this drug mimics the 
normal effects of ACh. Cardiac dysrhythmias are most 
likely to occur when a second intravenous dose of SCh 
is administered within minutes of the first dose. Whereas 
intravenous administration of atropine 1 to 3 minutes 
before SCh decreases the likelihood of these cardiac 
responses, atropine administered intramuscularly with 
the preoperative medication can cause tachycardia and 
does not reliably protect against SCh-induced decreases 
in heart rate.7
II
Chapter 11 Neuromuscular Blocking and Reversal Agents
167
Hyperkalemia
Administration of SCh can result in rapid development 
of hyperkalemia, serious cardiac arrythmias, and cardiac 
arrest.2 In susceptible patients potassium levels can exceed 
10 mEq/L. The classic conditions that lead to hyper-
kalemia after SCh include burns, trauma, and spinal cord 
or other major neurologic damage, with the risk of hyper-
kalemia beginning 24 hours after the injury. The delay in 
the hyperkalemic response to SCh is because of the time 
needed for development of extrajunctional, atypical recep-
tors, as previously described.2 3 When muscle has returned 
to its normal state, hyperkalemia will not occur. However, 
the judgment as to the “normal” state of the muscle is a 
clinically difficult estimation. Extrajunctional receptors 
and hyperkalemia will also develop in any patient who 
is immobile (such as critical care patients) for several 
days if SCh is administered. For example, cardiac arrest 
has occurred when SCh has been used for emergency 
endotracheal intubation in the intensive care unit (ICU). 
The duration of susceptibility to the hyperkalemic effects 
of SCh is unknown, but the risk is likely decreased several 
months after denervation injury. All factors considered, it 
is prudent to avoid administration of SCh to any patient 
more than 24 hours after a burn injury, extensive trauma, 
or spinal cord transection.
Even though they may have increased baseline potas-
sium levels, patients with renal failure are not susceptible 
to an exaggerated release of potassium, and SCh can be 
administered to these patients.
Variants of Plasma 
Cholinesterase
Incidence
Dibucaine Number (% inhibition of 
enzyme activity)
Duration of SCh-Induced 
Neuromuscular Blockade (min)
Homozygous, typical
Normal
70–80
5–10
Heterozygous
1/480
50–60
20
Homozygous, atypical
1/3200
20–30
60–180
Box 11.1
Adverse Effects of Succinylcholine
Cardiac dysrhythmias
- Sinus bradycardia
- Junctional rhythm
- Sinus arrest
Fasciculations
Hyperkalemia
Myalgia
Myoglobinuria
Increased intraocular pressure
Increased intragastric pressure
Trismus
Malignant hyperthermia
Table 11.3
Variants of Plasma Cholinesterase and Duration of Action of Succinylcholine (SCh)
Myalgia
Postoperative skeletal muscle myalgias, manifested par-
ticularly in the muscles of the neck, back, and abdomen, 
may follow the administration of SCh. Young adults 
undergoing minor surgical procedures are most likely to 
report postoperative myalgias. Unsynchronized contrac-
tions of skeletal muscle fibers (fasciculations) associated 
with generalized depolarization lead to myalgia. Preven-
tion of fasciculations by prior administration of subpara-
lyzing doses of a nondepolarizing NMBA (pretreatment) 
or lidocaine will decrease the incidence of, but will not 
totally prevent, myalgia.8 Magnesium will prevent fas-
ciculations but not myalgia. Nonsteroidal antiinflamma-
tory medications are effective in treating the myalgias.
Increased Intraocular Pressure and Increased Intracranial 
Pressure
SCh causes an increase in intraocular pressure that peaks 
2 to 4 minutes after its administration. This increase in 
intraocular pressure is transient and lasts 5 to 10 minutes. 
The mechanism by which SCh increases intraocular pres-
sure is unknown, although contraction of extraocular 
muscles with associated compression of the globe may 
be involved. The concern that contraction of extraocular 
muscles could cause extrusion of intraocular contents 
in the presence of an open eye injury has resulted in 
the common clinical practice of avoiding the adminis-
tration of SCh to these patients. This theory has never 
been substantiated and is challenged by the report of 
patients with an open eye injury in whom intravenous 
administration of SCh did not cause extrusion of globe 
contents. Furthermore, there is evidence that contraction 
of extraocular muscles does not contribute to the increase 
in intraocular pressure that accompanies the administra-
tion of SCh.9
Similarly, increases in intracranial pressure (ICP) after 
the administration of SCh can occur but have not been 
reported to be of clinical consequence in patients with 
intracranial pathology.
Increased Intragastric Pressure
SCh causes unpredictable increases in intragastric pres-
sure, and increases in pressure are not correlated with 
the dose of SCh administered. When intragastric pressure 
does increase, it appears to be related to the intensity of 
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
168
fasciculations. Observed increases in sustained intragas-
tric pressure may be large enough to increase the risk of 
aspiration in patients with compromised lower esopha-
geal sphincter tone.
Trismus
Incomplete jaw relaxation with masseter jaw rigidity 
after a halothane–SCh induction sequence is not uncom-
mon in children and is considered a normal response. 
Trismus can occur in adults and has been reported to be 
severe.10 In extreme cases this response may be so severe 
that the ability to mechanically open the patient's mouth 
is limited. The difficulty lies in separating the normal 
response to SCh from the masseter rigidity that may be 
associated with malignant hyperthermia. Because SCh is 
not recommended for use in children, the occurrence of 
trismus is decreased in current clinical practice.
NONDEPOLARIZING NEUROMUSCULAR 
BLOCKING AGENTS
Nondepolarizing NMBAs are classified as long-, interme-
diate-, and short-acting compounds. These agents act by 
competing with ACh for binding sites at the α-subunits at 
the postjunctional nicotinic cholinergic receptors, block-
ing ACh from binding with the AChRs and preventing 
changes in ion permeability. As a result, depolarization 
cannot occur, and skeletal muscle paralysis develops. 
Differences in onset, duration of action, rate of recovery, 
metabolism, and clearance influence the clinical decision 
to select one NMBA or another (Table 11.4).
Pharmacokinetics
Nondepolarizing NMBAs, because of their quaternary 
ammonium groups, are highly ionized, water-soluble com-
pounds at physiologic pH and possess limited lipid solubil-
ity. As a result, these compounds cannot easily cross lipid 
membrane barriers, such as the blood–brain barrier, renal 
tubular epithelium, gastrointestinal epithelium, or pla-
centa. Therefore nondepolarizing NMBAs do not produce 
central nervous system effects, renal tubular reabsorption 
is minimal, oral administration is ineffective, and maternal 
administration does not adversely affect the fetus. Redis-
tribution of nondepolarizing NMBAs also exerts a role in 
the pharmacokinetics of these agents.
Many of the variable pharmacologic responses of 
patients to nondepolarizing NMBAs can be explained by 
differences in pharmacokinetics, which are influenced by 
many factors, such as hypovolemia, hypothermia, and 
the presence of hepatic or renal disease (or both). Renal 
and hepatic elimination is aided by access to a large 
fraction of the administered drug because of the high 
degree of ionization, which both maintains high plasma 
concentrations of nondepolarizing NMBAs and prevents 
renal reabsorption of excreted drug.
Renal disease markedly alters the pharmacokinetics of 
the long-acting nondepolarizing NMBAs, such as pan-
curonium. Although a small fraction of vecuronium is 
eliminated through the kidney, repeated administration 
of maintenance doses of vecuronium to patients with 
renal failure results in the prolongation of the duration 
of action (the time required for the first twitch in the 
TOF to recover to 25% of its baseline value) after each 
subsequent dose11 12 because of redistribution to the 
liver and decreased elimination. The intermediate- and 
short-acting NMBAs are also eliminated by the liver 
(rocuronium), by metabolism by plasma cholinesterase 
(mivacurium), by Hofmann elimination (atracurium and 
cisatracurium), or by a combination of these mechanisms.
Pharmacodynamic Responses
NMBAs can be classified on the basis of their underlying 
structure, their potency as NMBAs, their onset of effect, 
their duration of action, and their means of elimination 
from the body (see Tables 11.1, 11.2, and 11.4). When 
compared on the basis of molar potency (the number of 
molecules rather than the mass of the molecules), potent 
NMBA
ED95 (mg/kg)
Min to Maximal 
Twitch Depression
Min to Return to 
≥25% of Control 
Twitch Height
Intubating 
Dose (mg/kg)
Continuous Infusion 
(mg/kg/min)
Pancuronium
0.07
3–5
60–90
0.1
Vecuronium
0.05
3–5
20–35
0.08–0.1
1
Rocuronium
0.3
1–2
20–35
0.6–1.2
Atracurium
0.2
3–5
20–35
0.4–0.5
6–8
Cisatracurium
0.05
4–6
20–35
0.15
1–1.5
Mivacurium
0.08
2–3
12–20
0.25
5–6
Table 11.4
Comparative Pharmacology of Nondepolarizing NMBAs
II
Chapter 11 Neuromuscular Blocking and Reversal Agents
169
NMBAs have a slower onset of effect (Fig. 11.5) than less 
potent NMBAs, in part because fewer molecules of the 
NMBA are being administered and there is less of a driving 
force to move it from the plasma to the NMJ. Other fac-
tors that are likely to influence the onset of NMB include 
protein binding, clearance, the rate of transport between 
plasma and effect compartment, and molecular mass.13 14
Onset of potent NMBAs can be shortened by increasing 
the dose that is administered. This, though, comes with the 
potential downside of increasing the duration of action of 
an intermediate-acting NMBA so that it is similar to that 
of a long-acting NMBA (Fig. 11.6).15
Potentiation of NMB by volatile anesthetics results in 
lower plasma concentrations of nondepolarizing NMBAs 
being required to produce a given depth of NMB when 
a volatile anesthetic is being administered. In addition to 
volatile anesthetics, other medications, such as aminogly-
coside antibiotics, local anesthetics, cardiac antiarrhythmic 
drugs, dantrolene, magnesium, lithium, and tamoxifen, 
may enhance the NMB produced by nondepolarizing 
NMBAs. A few medications can diminish the effects of a 
nondepolarizing NMBA. These medications include cal-
cium, corticosteroids, and anticonvulsant medications. 
Electrolyte abnormalities can also increase or decrease 
resistance to NMBAs. Neuromuscular diseases, includ-
ing myopathies, myasthenic syndrome, Guillain–Barré, 
myasthenia gravis, and Duchenne muscular dystrophy, 
are associated with altered pharmacodynamic responses to 
NMBAs. Burn injury causes resistance to the effects of non-
depolarizing NMBAs, as reflected by the need to establish 
a higher plasma concentration of drug to achieve the same 
pharmacologic effect as in patients without a burn injury. 
There is resistance to the effects of nondepolarizing NMBAs 
in skeletal muscles affected by a cerebrovascular accident, 
perhaps reflecting proliferation of extrajunctional receptors 
that respond to ACh.
Adverse Effects
Cardiovascular Effects
Clinically significant cardiovascular effects are most 
likely after the administration of long-acting NMBAs. At 
commonly used doses, they cause drug-induced release 
of histamine, blockade of cardiac muscarinic receptors, 
or blockade of nicotinic receptors at the autonomic gan-
glia. The intermediate- and short-acting NMBAs, atracu-
rium and mivacurium, may cause transient hypotension 
after the rapid administration of relatively large doses 
[>0.45 mg/kg (2.5 × ED95) and 0.2 mg/kg (2.5 × ED95), 
respectively].16 17 The relative magnitude of circulatory 
effects varies from patient to patient and depends on 
factors such as underlying autonomic nervous system 
Fig. 11.5 The onset of equipotent doses of cisatracurium, vecuronium, and rocuronium. The 
percentage of maximal effect of a single ED95 dose of cisatracurium (-□-), vecuronium (-●-) or 
rocuronium (-■-). The percentage of maximal effect at 60 seconds is greatest after the administration 
of rocuronium, which is the least potent of the NMBAs tested, and least with cisatracurium, which 
is the most potent of the three NMBAs. (Adapted with permission from Kopman AF, Klewicka MM, 
Kopman DJ, et al. Molar potency is predictive of the speed of onset of neuromuscular block for agents 
of intermediate, short, and ultrashort duration. Anesthesiology. 1999;90(2):425–431.14)
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
170
activity, blood volume status, preoperative medication, 
medications administered for induction and maintenance 
of anesthesia, and concurrent medication therapy.
Critical Illness Myopathy and Polyneuropathy
NMBAs are not used as often in the ICU as they had 
been in the past. The most common uses of NMBAs in 
this setting include facilitation of intubation, mechani-
cal ventilation in patients with acute respiratory failure, 
and avoidance of coughing in patients with increased 
ICP. Patients with asthma (receiving corticosteroids) or 
acutely injured patients with multiple organ system failure 
(including sepsis) who require mechanical ventilation of 
the lungs for prolonged periods may develop prolonged 
weakness.18 These patients exhibit moderate to severe 
quadriparesis with or without areflexia. The time course 
of the weakness is unpredictable, and in some patients the 
weakness may progress and persist for weeks or months. 
The risks and benefits of NMBAs in critically ill individuals 
should be considered when deciding on their use (also see 
Chapter 41). Use of NMBAs during mechanical ventilation 
may decrease barotrauma risk, but ventilator support of 
spontaneous ventilation improves matching of ventilation 
and perfusion.19 NMBAs have also been associated with 
exacerbation of mechanical ventilation–induced diaphrag-
matic dysfunction.20 Although myopathy can occur in 
critically ill patients who are not receiving NMBAs, their 
administration can augment the severity of this condition.
Hypersensitivity Reactions
The overall incidence of life-threatening anesthetic-
related hypersensitivity reactions varies widely between 
countries and ranges from between 1/10,000 and 1/20,000.
Fig. 11.6 The average duration of action of increasing doses of rocuronium (2 × ED95, 3 × ED95, 
and 4 × ED95). The range of values are shown in the () above each bar. As the dose of rocuronium 
increases, the time required to return to 25% of baseline T1 strength increases and almost doubles 
with increasing the dose of rocuronium.31
*Duration of action: The time (minutes) required to spontaneously recover to 25% of baseline muscle 
strength after bolus administration of a NMBA.
Although hypersensitivity refers to the constella-
tion of symptoms related to an immune-type response, 
the Sampson Criteria21 provided a description of the 
distinct criteria to be used in diagnosing anaphylaxis. 
Since its redefinition in 2006, all immunoglobulin E 
(IgE)–mediated and non-IgE-mediated reactions are con-
sidered anaphylactic reactions.22 The reported severity 
of anaphylactic reactions varies greatly. Patients in the 
operating room may not be able to describe the cuta-
neous symptoms, such as itching, which can affect the 
interpretation and grading of severity of a reaction.23
A three-point grading system developed by Rose and 
colleagues24 is useful for intraoperative diagnosis of ana-
phylaxis and initiating treatment (Table 11.5).
Recognition of anaphylaxis-inducing mediators is 
important to prevent unnecessary exposure to allergens 
during an anesthetic. Skin-prick testing and intradermal 
testing remain the gold standard for allergen testing. Testing 
should wait 4 to 6 weeks after an allergic reaction to avoid 
a false-negative response.
Perioperative hypersensitivity-related reactions and 
anaphylaxis are rare but serious events, and aminosteroi-
dal NMBAs are the most common cause of intraoperative 
anaphylaxis in most countries. Antibiotics are the second 
most common cause of anaphylaxis in the United States,25
France,26 and Western Australia.27 Anaphylaxis caused by 
aminosteroidal NMBAs is likely related to its quaternary 
ammonium structure.28,29 Women are 2.5 times more 
likely than men to have an anaphylactic reaction to ami-
nosteroidal NMBAs.25 Their higher incidence of anaphy-
laxis may be the result of either chronic skin sensitization 
caused by allergenic amines in cosmetics or to hormonal 
changes during puberty. Overall, anaphylaxis to steroidal 
II
Chapter 11 Neuromuscular Blocking and Reversal Agents
171
NMBAs occurs in approximately 1 in 2500 individuals 
receiving either vecuronium or rocuronium.30
Effective treatment of a life-threatening hypersensi-
tivity reaction requires early recognition and immediate 
therapy, including CPR and epinephrine.
Long-Acting Nondepolarizing Neuromuscular 
Blocking Agent: Pancuronium
Pancuronium (see Fig. 11.3) is a bisquaternary aminosteroid 
nondepolarizing NMBA with an ED95 of 70 μg/kg; it has an 
onset of action of 3 to 5 minutes and a duration of action of 
60 to 90 minutes. An estimated 80% of a single dose of pan-
curonium is eliminated unchanged in urine. In the presence of 
renal failure, plasma clearance of pancuronium is decreased 
30% to 50%, resulting in a prolonged duration of action. An 
estimated 10% to 40% of pancuronium undergoes hepatic 
deacetylation to inactive metabolites, with the exception of 
3-desacetylpancuronium, which has neuromuscular blocking 
activity and is approximately 50% as potent as pancuronium.
Pancuronium typically produces a 10% to 15% 
increase in heart rate, mean arterial pressure, and car-
diac output after administration of an intubating dose 
(1.4 × ED95). The increase in heart rate reflects pancuro-
nium-induced selective blockade of cardiac muscarinic 
receptors, principally in the sinoatrial node.
Intermediate-Acting Nondepolarizing 
Neuromuscular Blocking Agents
Rocuronium, vecuronium, atracurium, and cisatracurium 
are classified as nondepolarizing NMBAs with an inter-
mediate duration of action. In contrast to the long-acting 
pancuronium, these agents are cleared from the body 
more rapidly, allowing them to have a shorter duration 
of action.
When compared with pancuronium, these NMBAs have (1) 
approximately one-third the duration of action, (2) a 30% to 
50% more rapid clearance, and (3) minimal to no cardiovascu-
lar effects. Neostigmine or sugammadex antagonism of resid-
ual NMB produced by intermediate-acting nondepolarizing 
NMBAs is facilitated by the concomitant spontaneous recovery 
that occurs because of the rapid clearance of the NMBAs.
Vecuronium
Vecuronium (see Fig. 11.3) is a monoquaternary aminos-
teroid nondepolarizing NMBA with an ED95 of 50 μg/kg 
that has an onset of action of 3 to 5 minutes and a dura-
tion of action of 20 to 35 minutes. This NMBA under-
goes both hepatic and renal excretion. Metabolites are 
largely pharmacologically inactive, with the exception 
of 3-desacetylvecuronium, which is approximately 50% 
to 70% as potent as its parent compound, vecuronium, 
and has a longer duration of action than vecuronium. 
The increased lipid solubility of vecuronium as compared 
with pancuronium also facilitates its biliary excretion. 
The effect of renal failure on the duration of action of 
vecuronium is small, but repeated or large doses may 
result in prolonged NMB. Vecuronium does not cause 
adverse circulatory effects.
Rocuronium
Rocuronium (see Fig. 11.3) is a monoquaternary aminos-
teroid nondepolarizing NMBA with an ED95 of 0.3 mg/kg 
that has an onset of action of 1 to 2 minutes and a dura-
tion of action of 20 to 35 minutes. The lack of potency of 
rocuronium in comparison with vecuronium is an impor-
tant factor in its rapid onset of effect. As noted previously, 
when a large number of molecules are administered, the 
result is a larger number of molecules that are available to 
Grade
Definition
Clinical Findings
A
Moderate
Measurable derangements in one of more major organ systems; non–life-threatening
Cardiovascular: hypotension, tachycardia or bradycardia, arrhythmia
Respiratory: cough, wheeze, difficult ventilation, oxygen desaturation, difficulty swallowing, 
rhinorrhea
Other: change in LOC, agitation, GI upset
B
Life-threatening
Cardiovascular and/or respiratory derangement that is life-threatening
Cardiovascular: systolic blood pressure <60 mm Hg, life-threatening tachyarrhythmia or 
bradyarrhythmia
Respiratory: oxygen saturation <90%, inspiratory pressures >40 cm H2O, severe difficulty inflating 
the lungs, airway angioedema
C
Cardiac arrest 
with or without 
respiratory arrest
Cardiac and/or respiratory arrest
Cardiovascular: cardiac arrest
Respiratory: respiratory arrest or complete failure of ventilation
GI, Gastrointestinal; LOC, loss of consciousness.
Table 11.5
Perioperative Anaphylaxis Grading System
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
172
diffuse to the NMJ. Thus a rapid onset of action is more 
likely to be achieved with a less potent compound, such as 
rocuronium. The onset of maximum single-twitch depres-
sion after the administration of rocuronium, 4 × ED95
(1.2 mg/kg), resembles the onset of action of SCh after the 
administration of 1 mg/kg (Fig. 11.7).15 However, the large 
doses of rocuronium (3 to 4 × ED95) needed to mimic the 
onset time of SCh produces a substantially longer duration 
of action, resembling that of pancuronium (see Fig. 11.6).31
Clearance of rocuronium is largely as an unchanged 
drug in bile; deacetylation does not occur. Renal excre-
tion of the drug may account for as much as 30% of 
a dose, and administration of this drug to patients in 
renal failure could result in a longer duration of action, 
especially with repeated doses or prolonged intravenous 
infusion.
Atracurium
Atracurium (see Fig. 11.3) is a bisquaternary benzyliso-
quinolinium nondepolarizing NMBA that consists of a 
mixture of 10 stereoisomers. It has an ED95 of 0.2 mg/kg 
and an onset of action of 3 to 5 minutes. Like other 
intermediate-acting NMBAs, its duration of action is 
20 to 35 minutes. This NMBA is cleared by Hofmann 
elimination, which is a chemical process of spontaneous, 
nonenzymatic degradation at normal body temperature 
and pH. It is also eliminated through hydrolysis by non-
specific plasma esterases, which are different than the 
plasma cholinesterase that metabolizes SCh and miva-
curium, and AChE, which metabolizes ACh. Laudanosine 
is the major metabolite of both Hofmann degradation 
and ester hydrolysis. The two routes of metabolism occur 
simultaneously and are independent of hepatic and renal 
function. As such, the duration of atracurium-induced 
NMB is similar in healthy patients and those with absent 
or impaired renal or hepatic function. Ester hydrolysis 
accounts for an estimated two-thirds of degraded atracu-
rium. Hofmann elimination accounts for the remaining 
breakdown of atracurium.
In large doses atracurium can, especially with rapid 
bolus administration, cause histamine release resulting 
in transient hypotension and tachycardia. Doses smaller 
than 2 × ED95 rarely cause histamine release.
Cisatracurium
Cisatracurium is one of the 10 stereoisomers comprising 
atracurium and, as such, is a benzylisoquinolinium non-
depolarizing NMBA. It has an ED95 of 50 μg/kg and an 
onset of action of 7 and 5 minutes after administration of 
either 1 × ED95 or 2 × ED95, respectively (reflective of its 
greater potency). Like atracurium, it has an intermediate 
duration of action. Cisatracurium is primarily degraded 
by a spontaneous chemical process—Hofmann elimi-
nation. In contrast to atracurium, nonspecific plasma 
esterases are not involved in its clearance. Because of 
the organ-independent clearance of cisatracurium, it can, 
like atracurium, be administered to patients with renal or 
hepatic failure or advanced age without a change in its 
duration of action. Cisatracurium is often used in patients 
undergoing renal transplantation. In contrast to atracu-
rium, cisatracurium does not cause histamine release, so 
administration of large doses, as are frequently used to 
Fig. 11.7 The average onset of maximal effect of increasing doses of rocuronium compared with 
vecuronium 0.1 mg/kg and succinylcholine 1.0 mg/kg. 2 × ED95 of rocuronium has a faster onset 
of effect than an equipotent dose of vecuronium, likely because of its lesser potency as an NMBA. 
Increasing the dose of rocuronium to 1.2 mg/kg, or 4 × ED95, shortens its onset to 100% NMB to, on 
average, less than 60 seconds, comparable to succinylcholine 1 mg/kg.31
II
Chapter 11 Neuromuscular Blocking and Reversal Agents
173
shorten its onset of effect, is free of adverse cardiovas-
cular effects.
Short-Acting Nondepolarizing Neuromuscular 
Blocking Agent: Mivacurium
Mivacurium (see Fig. 11.3) is a benzylisoquinolinium 
nondepolarizing NMBA with an ED95 of 80 μg/kg that 
has an onset of action of 2 to 3 minutes and a dura-
tion of action of 15 minutes. The duration of action 
of mivacurium is approximately twice that of SCh and 
30% to 40% that of the intermediate-acting nondepolar-
izing NMBAs. Mivacurium consists of a mixture of three 
stereoisomers (a cis-trans, a trans-trans, and a cis-cis
isomer), and the two most active isomers are hydrolyzed 
by plasma cholinesterase at a rate equivalent to 88% that 
of SCh. Hydrolysis of these two isomers is responsible for 
the short duration of action of mivacurium. The cis-cis
isomer comprises only a small fraction of the mixture 
of isomers (∼5%), is a relatively impotent NMBA, and 
has an intermediate duration of action. Because it is 
metabolized by plasma cholinesterase, the clearance of 
mivacurium is decreased and its duration of action is 
increased in patients with atypical plasma cholinesterase. 
Mivacurium disappeared from the U.S. market in 2006 
and was reintroduced in 2016.
Because of its short duration of action, mivacurium 
would be an appropriate NMBA for short surgical proce-
dures. If used for longer procedures, it should be admin-
istered as an infusion.
Like atracurium, rapid administration of large doses 
of mivacurium can cause histamine release, resulting in 
transient hypotension and tachycardia.
MONITORING THE EFFECTS OF 
NONDEPOLARIZING NEUROMUSCULAR 
BLOCKING AGENTS
Routine monitoring of the depth of NMB and adequacy 
of recovery of neuromuscular function is both recom-
mended by all experts in the field and supported by large 
multicenter trials. Monitoring provides a necessary guide 
for NMBA requirements intraoperatively and for the 
effective antagonism of residual NMB by either neostig-
mine or sugammadex. In spite of its import, monitoring 
of the depth of NMB is not routine when NMBAs are 
administered as part of a general anesthetic. Surveys 
have found that only 30% to 70% of anesthesiologists in 
the United States, Australia, and Europe monitor depth of 
paralysis when an NMBA is administered.32,33
Mechanically evoked responses used for monitoring 
the effects of NMBAs include the single-twitch response, 
TOF ratio, double burst stimulation, and post tetanic 
stimulation. The response to peripheral nerve stimulation 
should be used to answer the following questions: (1) Is 
the depth of NMB adequate for surgery? (2) Is the depth 
of NMB excessive? (3) Can the NMB be antagonized?
Adequate recovery of muscle strength is defined as a 
TOF ratio (TOFR), measured at the adductor pollicis, of 
0.9 (90%). When there are four responses to TOF stimula-
tion, the strength of the fourth response is compared with 
the strength of the first response to determine the TOFR 
(Fig. 11.8). In volunteers even a TOFR <0.9 is associated 
with impaired ability to swallow, increased incidence of 
aspiration,34 and decreased hypoxic drive to breathe35; 
facial weakness; diplopia36; and in patients, decreased 
patient satisfaction with their postoperative experience, 
increased respiratory complications, and death.37,38
When monitoring return of muscle strength, either 
clinically (with tests such as a head lift or grip strength) 
or with qualitative monitoring of depth of neuromuscular 
block (through either visual or tactile assessment of the 
muscle response to a TOF stimulus), it is impossible to tell 
when a patient is strong enough for safe tracheal extuba-
tion.39 Clinical monitoring of muscle strength is, at best, 
inadequate. Tidal volume is generated by the diaphragm, 
which is resistant to NMB, and patients can generate a 
tidal volume of 300 mL even when profoundly para-
lyzed. To paralyze the diaphragm, patients must have a 
profound level of NMB and a post tetanic count of 3 to 5 
(Fig. 11.9).40 At this depth of NMB, a patient would have 
no respone to TOF stimulation at the adductor pollicis. 
Similarly, the results of clinical tests of muscle strength 
can be misleading. A 5-second head lift, a 5-second leg 
lift, and a strong and sustained hand grip can each be 
performed over a relatively wide range of TOFRs, and 
unanesthetized volunteers can accomplish these tasks 
with a TOFR as low as 0.50.36
When it is monitored, depth of NMB is most com-
monly assessed qualitatively; that is, a nerve stimulator 
is used to apply a stimulus to a superficial nerve, and the 
response of the muscle it innervates to that stimulation 
is “measured” either tactilely or visually. In assessing the 
TOFR qualitatively the number of responses to stimula-
tion is determined (Fig. 11.10), and when there are four 
responses, the strength of the fourth response relative to 
the first is determined (Fig. 11.8). TOF stimulation (four 
electrical stimulations at 2 Hz delivered every 0.5 second) 
is delivered through superficial electrodes placed over 
the course of the ulnar nerve most commonly, and the 
response of the adductor pollicis to stimulation is deter-
mined. The rationale for the use of TOF stimulation is 
based on the concept that ACh is depleted by successive 
stimulations. Generally, during a balanced anesthetic, 
two to four responses to TOF stimulation (Fig. 11.10) are 
maintained, with repeated boluses of NMBA; recovery of 
muscle strength is monitored through an increase in the 
strength of the fourth response to stimulation relative to 
the first (Figs. 11.8 and 11.11). Clinicians cannot, regard-
less of their level of expertise, reliably detect anything 
less than 60% fade in the TOFR. Even with a TOFR of 
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
174
0.4,36 the four responses to ulnar nerve stimulation may 
look and feel as if they are all the same (Fig. 11.8); the 
fourth response will more reliably appear weaker only 
once the TOFR is <0.4.39 Difficulty in estimating the TOFR 
may be caused by the fact that the two middle twitch 
responses interfere with comparison of the first and last 
twitch response.
Although it will not provide information about 
whether or not recovery of muscle strength is com-
plete, simply counting the number of responses to TOF 
stimulation is likely to be reproducible and will provide 
information about how reversal agents should be dosed. 
Counting the number of visible TOF responses may be 
helpful in predicting the ease with which NMB can 
be antagonized with an anticholinesterase drug, and 
recommendations for specific doses of reversal agents 
based on the response to TOF count have been made 
(Fig. 11.12).41
Double burst stimulation of the ulnar nerve may 
improve the clinician's ability to detect more subtle 
degrees of neuromuscular block. It allows detection of 
40% fade between the first and the second response (the 
equivalent of a TOFR of 0.6). Double burst stimulation 
(two bursts of three electrical stimulations separated by 
750 ms) is perceived by the observer as two separate 
twitches (Fig. 11.13), eliminating some of the challenges 
in interpreting the TOFR. The observer's ability to detect a 
TOFR less than 0.4 is improved with double burst stimu-
lation, but the ability to conclude that the TOF ratio is 
greater than 0.9, or even 0.7, is still not ensured.
Profound paralysis that is too deep to be measured 
by TOF stimulation can be assessed by the post tetanic 
count. This depth of block is observed after administra-
tion of an intubating dose of NMBA, where the TOF 
count is zero. Applying a tetanic stimulus (50 Hz for 
5 seconds) and observing the response to single twitch at 
1 Hz that is begun 3 seconds after the tetanic stimulation 
allows for these profound depths of NMB to be quanti-
fied (Fig. 11.9). For the intermediate-acting NMBAs, 
once the number of post tetanic responses is 3, the first 
twitch in the TOF will appear in approximately 10 min-
utes, and once the post tetanic response is 10, the first 
response to TOF stimulation should reappear in 1 to 2 
minutes.42 This information is valuable when maintain-
ing a profound level of NMB for a surgery, such as an 
airway procedure, when patient movement or coughing 
can be detrimental. In these situations it is important to 
gauge spontaneous recovery of neuromuscular strength 
in order to anticipate when to administer and how to 
dose the reversal agent.
Because of their lack of sensitivity, the use of qualita-
tive monitors of NMB (those monitors to which response 
to TOF stimulation has to be assessed by the clinician) 
does not eliminate the possibility of extubating patients 
before adequate recovery of muscle strength.
The only way to confirm complete recovery of neu-
romuscular function is with a quantitative monitor. 
Quantitative monitors stimulate the ulnar nerve and then 
interpret the response to TOF stimulation and provide 
a display of the measured response, eliminating the 
Fig. 11.8 Graphic representations of the response to train-of-four stimulation. In the depiction in the 
left-hand panel, the train-of-four ratio = 0.95 (the fourth response [T4] is 95% of the first response 
[T1]). In the panel on the right side of the diagram the TOFR = 0.5, T4/T1 = 0.5. In both of these 
situations the clinician is likely to interpret the response, either by touch or by sight, as being the same. 
Fade is not reliably detectable given this degree of NMB with TOF monitoring because the second and 
third responses (T2 and T3, respectively) confuse interpretation of the ratio.
II
Chapter 11 Neuromuscular Blocking and Reversal Agents
175
Fig. 11.10 Different responses to train-of-four stimulation, as commonly used to determine degree of 
neuromuscular blockade during anesthesia. A train-of-four stimulus is a series of four stimuli delivered 
over 2 seconds at a frequency of 2 Hz. Clinicians cannot reliably determine the degree of fade between 
the first and the fourth response (the train-of-four ratio). They can, though, more reliably count the 
number of responses to stimulation and on the basis of the response determine either the need for more 
NMBA or the dose of reversal agent to administer. With profound levels of neuromuscular block, there is 
no response to TOF stimulation. As recovery of neuromuscular function occurs after an intubating dose 
of NMBA, one response to TOF stimulation appears, then two, then three, and finally four. As recovery 
continues, the fourth response becomes as strong as the first response, T4 = T1 and the TOFR = 1.0. 
Typically two to three twitches in response to TOF stimulation are maintained intraoperatively through 
administration of small maintenance doses of NMBA. See the text for additional detail.
Fig. 11.9 Examples of two different responses to post tetanic stimulation. In each example as indicated 
in the top portion of the panel, a 50 Hz stimulus is applied for 5 seconds followed by a series of 
single twitches at 1 Hz beginning 3 seconds after the tetanic stimulus. Responses to the stimulation 
are shown in the bottom portion of the diagram. On the left-hand side of the figure, there are three 
responses to the post tetanic stimulus. On the right-hand side of the diagram, the depth of paralysis is 
less but still relatively profound; there are eight responses to post tetanic stimulation.
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
176
Fig. 11.11 Stylized graphic representation of the onset of neuromuscular blockade and recovery of 
neuromuscular function as documented with repetitive train-of-four stimuli. The train-of-four stimulus 
consists of four supramaximal stimuli separated by 0.5 second administered to a superficially located 
neural unit, such as the ulnar nerve, and the muscular response that it causes in the adductor pollicis. 
In the patient with no neuromuscular blockade there are four equal responses to stimulation. As 
neuromuscular blockade becomes more profound, the strength of those responses diminishes and the 
number of responses falls off to three, then two, and then one response. Recovery of neuromuscular 
function is indicated by the ↑ in the diagram. The train-of-four ratio (TOFR) is determined by the 
strength of the fourth response relative to the first response. A patient is considered to have recovered 
enough muscle strength when their TOFR is ≥0.9.
Fig. 11.12 Dosing of reversal agents based on the train-of-four count—when only a qualitative 
monitor is available to determine the depth of NMB or when qualitative monitoring is unreliable. (See 
Ref. 41 and package insert for sugammadex.)
II
Chapter 11 Neuromuscular Blocking and Reversal Agents
177
need for the clinician to estimate the TOFR. Four types 
of quantitative monitors have been described: mech-
anomyography (MMG), kinemyography (KMG), accel-
eromyography (AMG), and electromyography (EMG) (Fig. 
11.14). MMG had been the gold standard for monitoring 
and measures the strength of response to stimulation. 
Its setup, though, is cumbersome and the equipment 
required, complex. Acceleromyographs are available for 
use in the clinical setting. These devices monitor the 
acceleration of the thumb as it responds to ulnar nerve 
stimulation. Although the setup is less cumbersome, the 
results can be variable, with the AMG overinterpreting 
recovery of neuromuscular function (TOF response is 
greater than it would have been with an MMG).43 In addi-
tion, the thumb must be able to move freely in response 
to stimulation of the ulnar nerve. Similarly, KMG requires 
movement of the thumb to gauge muscle strength. It 
measures the bending of a mechanosensory strip placed 
between the thumb and the index finger in response 
to stimulation of the ulnar nerve. As with AMG, the 
KMG will overinterpret the degree of recovery of muscle 
strength. EMG, the oldest of the monitoring modalities, 
is different than MMG, AMG, or KMG in that it does 
not measure movement in response to stimulation. EMG 
measures the action potential generated by stimulation of 
the nerve. The results of EMG monitoring are most con-
sistent with those obtained with MMG monitoring and do 
not overestimate recovery of neuromuscular function.43
All recommendations for dosing of neuromuscular 
blocking and reversal agents are based on the response 
of the adductor pollicis to TOF stimulation of the ulnar 
nerve. Although the adductor pollicis is not always read-
ily accessible intraoperatively, the potency of all NMBAs 
is determined by the response of this neuromuscular unit 
to stimulation. Sensitivity to the effects of NMBAs is dif-
ferent in different muscles.44 The more centrally located 
muscles, such as the diaphragm and the orbicularis oculi, 
are resistant to the NMB caused by nondepolarizing 
NMBAs. Although onset of NMBA occurs more quickly in 
these muscles, the depth of NMB that results from a sin-
gle dose of NMBA is not as profound as it is in the adduc-
tor pollicis (Fig. 11.15). Additionally, recovery of muscle 
strength occurs more slowly in the adductor pollicis than 
it does in the orbicularis oculi or diaphragm. Because 
of the different response of muscles to NMBAs, dosing 
based on the result of the orbicularis oculi will result in 
overdosing of NMBAs and overestimation of the degree 
of recovery and, as a result, increases the incidence of 
postoperative residual NMB in the postanesthesia care 
unit (PACU).45
Fig. 11.13 Schematic illustration of the pattern of double burst stimulation (DBS; three electrical 
impulses at 50 Hz separated by 750 ms). Monitoring with DBS, when compared with TOF stimulation, 
allows for a small increase in sensitivity to detect residual neuromuscular blockade. Fade in the second 
when compared with the first response will be reliably detected once there is 40% fade (a TOFR = 0.6). 
In this figure the second response is 50% of the first response and would feel diminished when 
compared with the first.
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
178
No matter which type of peripheral nerve stimula-
tor is used, clinical care will be improved if monitoring 
is employed. Despite the presence of studies designed to 
establish the relative efficacy of different types of monitors, 
the specific monitor is of secondary importance. Never-
theless, understanding of the various types of monitoring 
modalities used is important when NMB is part of a general 
anesthetic.
ANTAGONISM OF RESIDUAL 
NEUROMUSCULAR BLOCK
The time starting with the extubation of the trachea, 
transport to the PACU, and the first 30 minutes in the 
PACU can be among the most dangerous times in the 
perioperative period. Inadequately antagonized or resid-
ual NMB can impair the integrity of the airway and cause 
critical respiratory events in the PACU.38 Residual NMB 
is usually a component of adverse outcomes and even 
death. Specifically, residual NMB contributes to airway 
obstruction, inadequate ventilation, and hypoxia and 
occurs with an incidence of 0.8% to 6.9%.38 Other fac-
tors contributing to adverse effects in the PACU include 
obesity, opioids, emergency surgery, long duration of 
surgery, and abdominal surgery. It is important to assure 
that residual NMB does not persist into the postoperative 
period by careful monitoring.46 Close observation and 
awareness of the likelihood of residual NMB will facili-
tate its diagnosis and management.
Fig. 11.14 Monitoring the EMG in response to ulnar nerve 
stimulation. The stimulating electrodes are placed over the 
course of the ulnar, with the negative one being the more distal. 
To monitor the EMG of the adductor pollicis, three electrodes are 
placed over the palm of the hand, as indicated in the figure, with 
the ground being close to the crease of the wrist, the reference 
electrode being over the thumb, and the third electrode over the 
belly of the adductor pollicis muscle.
There is significant variation in antagonism of resid-
ual NMB. In contrast to most European countries, where 
routine antagonism is not the typical practice, the major-
ity of anesthesiologists in the United States antagonize 
the residual effects of nondepolarizing NMBAs at the end 
of surgery.33 Routine antagonism of neuromuscular block 
is recommended by some anesthesiologists to ensure 
complete recovery in all patients, regardless of whether 
depth of block was monitored objectively. This practice, 
however, is not without risk, as unnecessary administra-
tion of reversal agents is associated with adverse effects.
To effectively enhance recovery of neuromuscular 
function, the ACh concentration at the NMJ needs to be 
increased or the plasma concentrations of the NMBA at 
the NMJ need to be decreased (Fig. 11.16). For the avail-
able NMBAs, pharmacologic options for reversal include 
increasing ACH at the NMJ by inhibiting AChE with 
neostigmine or encapsulating the NMBA with sugamma-
dex in the plasma, so that it cannot enter the NMJ.
Anticholinesterases
Neostigmine, an anticholinesterase used for reversal of NMB, 
inhibits AChE at the NMJ, which increases the concentration 
of ACh at the motor end plate. Increased amounts of ACh in 
the NMJ improve the chance that two ACh molecules will 
0
40
60
80
20
100
10
15
20
5
0
30
25
35
40
Time (min)
T1 (%)
Rocuronium, 0.5 mg/kg
Adductor pollicis
Larynx
Fig. 11.15 The maximal depression of the response to 
neuromuscular stimulation (as determined by % suppression of 
T1) at the larynx and the adductor pollicis after administration 
of 0.5 mg/kg rocuronium. Maximal effect of NMB is observed 
more quickly in the larynx and is less intense than what is 
observed at the adductor pollicis. Recovery occurs more slowly 
in the adductor pollicis than it does in the larynx. All dosing 
recommendations for neuromuscular blocking and their reversal 
agents are based on the response of the adductor pollicis to 
ulnar nerve stimulation. (From Meistelman C, Plaud B, Donati 
F. Rocuronium [ORG 9426] neuromuscular blockade at the 
adductor muscles of the larynx and adductor pollicis in humans. 
Can J Anaesth. 1992;39:665–669, used with permission.)
II
Chapter 11 Neuromuscular Blocking and Reversal Agents
179
bind to the α-subunits of the nicotinic cholinergic receptors 
(Figs. 11.2 and 11.16). This action alters the balance of the 
competition between ACh and a nondepolarizing NMBA in 
favor of the neurotransmitter (ACh) and restores neuromus-
cular transmission. In addition, neostigmine may generate 
antidromic action potentials and repetitive firing of motor 
nerve endings (presynaptic effects).
Determinants of Speed and Adequacy of Recovery
During anticholinesterase-facilitated antagonism, recov-
ery of neuromuscular transmission is the function of 
primarily two processes: ongoing spontaneous recovery 
of neuromuscular function as the NMBA concentration at 
the NMJ decreases, and increasing ACh at the NMJ after 
administration of the anticholinesterase. Antagonism 
of nondepolarizing neuromuscular block with anticho-
linesterases requires a variable amount of time that 
depends on several factors. Time from administration to 
peak effect varies with presynaptic ACh reserve, in addi-
tion to the degree of spontaneous rate of recovery from 
NMB. A number of clinical factors may render reversal 
of NMB more difficult (Box 11.2). Anticholinesterases 
should be administered only once spontaneous recovery 
of neuromuscular function has begun. It takes longer to 
antagonize profound neuromuscular block than it does 
moderate or shallow neuromuscular block. Anticholinest-
erase-facilitated recovery from an intermediate-acting 
NMBA occurs more quickly than that induced with a 
long-acting compound. Speed of recovery also depends 
on the anticholinesterase used for reversal. Recovery from 
a moderate depth of block occurs more quickly after the 
administration of edrophonium than neostigmine.
There is a limit to what an anticholinesterase can 
effectively antagonize; profound NMB cannot be 
reversed. Once the maximum dose of neostigmine has 
been administered, AChE has been maximally inhibited, 
and administration of additional anticholinesterase will 
not produce greater recovery from residual NMB.47
Adverse Effects
The effects of anticholinesterases are not limited to the 
motor end plate. Administration of these compounds also 
increases acetylcholine at other sites, and their effects are 
more widespread than just the NMJ. The muscarinic and 
nAChRs in the parasympathetic system can be activated 
by administration of an anticholinesterase, causing pro-
nounced vagal effects such as bradycardia, prolonged QT 
interval, and asystole. Other muscarinic parasympathetic 
side effects include bronchospasm, increased bronchial 
and pharyngeal secretions, miosis, and increased intesti-
nal tone. Because of these parasympathetic side effects, 
anticholinesterases are typically administered in combi-
nation with antimuscarinic drugs, such as glycopyrrolate 
or atropine. These compounds block muscarinic, but not 
nicotinic, receptors so that neuromuscular block can be 
antagonized while muscarinic effects are minimized. 
Fig. 11.16 Schematic representation of the molecular mechanisms of neuromuscular blockade 
and its reversal. In a very simplistic way acetylcholine competes with the NMBA for binding sites on 
the acetylcholine receptor. To overcome neuromuscular block, acetylcholine concentration can be 
increased by blocking the activity of acetylcholinesterase with an anticholinesterase (neostigmine). At 
the same time, the quantity of NMBA at the NMJ is decreased as the NMBA diffuses away from the 
NMJ and is eliminated from the body, metabolized, or encapsulated with a selective relaxant binding 
agent (sugammadex).
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
180
Antimuscarinic compounds increase the risk of tachyar-
rhythmias and other effects of antagonism of muscarinic 
receptors, such as urinary retention, blurred vision, pho-
tophobia, mydriasis, xerostomia, dry skin, constipation, 
nausea, urinary retention, insomnia, and dizziness.
Neostigmine can also block AChR, increasing the 
availability of ACh at the NMJ. Excessive ACh can cause 
both a depolarizing and an open-channel block.48
Dosing
The optimal dose of anticholinesterase depends on the 
depth of block, the duration of action of the NMBA 
used, the timing of the last dose of NMBA relative to 
administration of the anticholinesterase, and the moni-
toring technique used. Fig. 11.12 summarizes general 
recommendations for dosing of anticholinesterases; the 
actual range of doses varies between studies. Simply, 
though, smaller doses of anticholinesterases should be 
administered to antagonize shallower degrees of NMB, 
and ideally, anticholinesterases should be administered 
only when necessary (i.e., in the presence of residual 
paralysis). Without objective monitoring of neuro-
muscular function, it is not possible to discriminate 
between TOFR values of 0.4 or 0.9.39 The administration 
of anticholinesterases should optimally be guided by 
quantitative evaluation of the TOFR. The typical dose of 
neostigmine for antagonism of profound neuromuscular 
block (a TOF count of 2-3) is 0.05 mg/kg and 0.015 to 
0.025 mg/kg for antagonism of lesser degrees of neu-
romuscular block (a TOF count of 4 with no fade).41 49
Profound block with a TOF count below 2 should not 
be antagonized with neostigmine because of the risk of 
inadequate recovery of neuromuscular function.47 No 
anticholinesterase is required if TOFR is >0.9, as deter-
mined by monitoring with a quantitative monitor of 
neuromuscular function.
Pharmacokinetics and Pharmacodynamics
Bolus doses of either neostigmine or edrophonium result 
in peak plasma concentrations within 5 to 10 minutes 
that decrease rapidly, followed by a slower elimination 
Box 11.2
Factors That Increase Difficulty of NMB Reversal
•Intensity of depth of NMB at the time that the
pharmacologic antagonist is administered
•Dose of the reversal agent
•Rate of spontaneous recovery from the NMBA
•Patient temperature
•Electrolyte abnormalities
•Concomitant medications
•Presence of significant concentrations of the volatile
anesthetic
NMB, Neuromuscular blockade; NMBA, neuromuscular blocking 
agent.
phase. Anticholinesterases are eliminated through active 
secretion by the kidneys. In patients with renal failure 
where the duration of action of NMBAs may be increased, 
clearance of anticholinesterases is also reduced and their 
elimination half-life increased, making dose adjustment 
of anticholinesterases in patients with renal dysfunction 
unnecessary.
The anticholinesterases have markedly different onset 
characteristics, possibly because of the different potency 
of each agent. Neostigmine is more potent than edro-
phonium, and smaller doses are required to antagonize 
residual neuromuscular block. During a steady-state 
infusion of NMBA, the onset of action of edrophonium is 
1 to 2 minutes and that of neostigmine is 7 to 11 minutes. 
Edrophonium has approximately one-twelfth the potency 
of neostigmine, and its potency increases as spontaneous 
recovery from neuromuscular block occurs.
Selective Relaxant Binding Agents: 
Sugammadex
Sugammadex is a modified γ-cyclodextrin (Fig. 11.17) 
designed specifically to encapsulate steroidal NMBAs so 
that they are unable to move into the NMJ and bind to 
the AChR. In developing sugammadex the depth of the 
cavity of the molecule was increased to 11 Å through 
the addition of eight side chains to encapsulate the four 
steroidal rings of rocuronium and leave the hydrophilic 
portions of the steroidal NMBA exposed to the surround-
ing environment. Additionally, the negatively charged 
carboxyl groups on the added side chains enhanced 
electrostatic binding to the quaternary nitrogen of 
rocuronium. Sugammadex forms a complex with either 
vecuronium or rocuronium in a 1:1 ratio, with an affinity 
that is greater for rocuronium than it is for vecuronium. 
Administration of an appropriate dose of sugammadex 
results in the binding of all free NMBA and rapidly elimi-
nates free NMBA from the plasma. Sugammadex remains 
in the plasma and has no action at the NMJ. The rate that 
it reverses even a profound neuromuscular block is rapid 
(2 to 3 minutes) and complete.
The sugammadex:rocuronium complex (Fig. 11.18) 
is eliminated through the kidney. It can be removed 
from the circulation through dialysis in patients with 
end-stage renal disease, and a recent review of its use 
in this patient population identified no adverse out-
comes.50
Sugammadex significantly reduces the time to recov-
ery from rocuronium-induced NMB when compared with 
neostigmine reversal.51 As a consequence of its rapid 
reversal of NMB, sugammadex may be used when a 
large dose of either rocuronium or vecuronium has been 
administered to patients who subsequently cannot be 
intubated or ventilated.52,53
Although sugammadex should be able to eliminate 
residual postoperative paralysis,54 there is an increasing 
II
Chapter 11 Neuromuscular Blocking and Reversal Agents
181
Fig. 11.18 The sugammadex–rocuronium complex. The white central structure is rocuronium. 
The green, red, and a bit of yellow tubular structure is sugammadex. A simple explanation is that 
sugammadex “encircles” rocuronium so that it cannot move into the NMJ and bind to the acetylcholine 
receptor. The rocuronium:sugammadex complex is excreted through the kidneys. (Used with 
permission from Bom A, Bradley M, Cameron K, et al. A novel concept of reversing neuromuscular 
block: Chemical encapsulation of rocuronium bromide by a cyclodextrin-based synthetic host. Angew 
Chem Int Ed Engl. 2002;41:266–270.)
Fig. 11.17 The chemical structure of sugammadex.
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
182
body of evidence indicating that when administered in an 
unwarranted fashion (e.g., without TOF monitoring or by 
using an inadequate dose), an incidence of residual NMB 
occurs in about 5% of patients.55 Of note, incomplete 
reversal after sugammadex occurs when the number of 
circulating sugammadex molecules is insufficient to bind 
to a critical number of the rocuronium molecules present 
in the body. When a large dose of rocuronium is followed 
by an inadequate dose of sugammadex, previously redis-
tributed rocuronium may be mobilized to produce recur-
rence of NMB.56 Sugammadex dosing recommendations 
in adults are in Fig. 11.12
Adverse effects of sugammadex are listed in Box 11.3, 
and many can be related to displacement by endog-
enous molecules or to nonspecific binding, such as to 
coagulation factor Xa. Sugammadex can cause a dose-
dependent, transient prolongation of activated partial 
thromboplastin time (aPTT) and prothrombin time (PT; 
international normalized ratio [INR])57; however, it does 
not increase the risk ofbleeding.58
Sugammadex-associated anaphylaxis occurs infre-
quently; the incidence is equal to, or lower than, the 
overall incidence of anaphylaxis caused by aminosteroi-
dal NMBAs and antibiotics. There appears to be a geo-
graphical variation of hypersensitivity and anaphylactic 
reactions to sugammadex.28 In the United States anaphy-
laxis to sugammadex occurs at a rate of approximately 
1 in 3500 to 10,000, whereas in Japan, a country with 
high rates of sugammadex administration, the incidence 
is estimated to be as low as 1 in 35,000.59
Box 11.3
Adverse Effects of Sugammadex
Nausea and vomiting
Dry mouth
Tachycardia, bradycardia
Dizziness
Cough
Anxiety, depression
Hypotension, hypertension
Myalgias
Headache
Sugammadex also causes bradycardia. Bradycardia 
was first noted as a side effect during premarket tri-
als. Since its approval, there have been case reports of 
patients having either transient or severe bradycardic 
episodes, occasionally resulting in asystole requiring 
CPR and use of a transient pacemaker.60,61 Between 
2009 and 2017, 138 cardiac events, including brady-
cardia and transient heart block, and nine deaths were 
reported after administration of sugammadex.61,62 Most 
of the patients in these reports had no history of car-
diopulmonary disease that would have rendered them 
more susceptible to developing transient heart block. 
The cause of sugammadex-induced bradycardia remains 
unknown. Because it may occur after an orthotopic 
heart transplant,63 it is not likely to be parasympathetic-
mediated.
Sugammadex is ineffective in reversing NMB induced 
with the benzylisoquinolines, which is why these agents 
may be preferable when NMB has to be reinstated after 
reversal with sugammadex.
SUMMARY
NMBAs are vital components of anesthetic care and air-
way management. Significant improvements to NMBAs 
and their reversal agents have been made since their 
original introduction more than 50 years ago. We now 
appreciate the adverse effects that can result from 
administration of NMBAs and have evidence that use of 
NMBAs can add a measure of safety if properly used, and 
that, without attention to the potential adverse effects of 
NMBAs, patient outcomes can be worsened. With use of 
quantitative monitors of depth of neuromuscular block to 
guide dosing of NMBAs and their reversal agents, NMBAs 
can be safely administered to facilitate airway manage-
ment, ventilation and surgery.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The author, editors and publisher would like to thank Dr. 
Ronald D. Miller for contributing to this chapter in the 
previous edition of this work. It has served as the founda-
tion for the current chapter.
II
Chapter 11 Neuromuscular Blocking and Reversal Agents
183
REFERENCES
1. Fagerlund MJ, Eriksson LI. Current con-
cepts in neuromuscular transmission. Br 
J Anaesth. 2009;103(1):108–114.
2. Martyn JAJ, Richtsfeld M. Succinylcho-
line-induced hyperkalemia in acquired 
pathologic states: Etiologic factors and 
molecular mechanisms. Anesthesiology. 
2006;104(1):158–169.
3. Gronert GA. Succinylcholine-induced 
hyperkalemia and beyond. 1975. Anes-
thesiology. 2009;111(6):1372–1377.
4. Naguib M, Lien CA, Aker J, Eliazo 
R. Posttetanic potentiation and fade 
in the response to tetanic and train-
of-four stimulation during succinyl-
choline-induced block. Anesth Analg. 
2004;98(6):1686–1691 Table of contents.
5. Miller R. Will succinylcholine ever 
disappear? Anesth Analg. 2004;98(6):
1674–1675.
6. Larach MG, Klumpner TT, Brandom 
BW, Vaughn MT, Belani KG, Herlich 
A, etal. Succinylcholine use and dant-
rolene availability for malignant hyper-
thermia treatment: database analyses 
and systematic review. Anesthesiology. 
2019;130(1):41–54.
7. Fastle RK, Roback MG. Pediatric rapid 
sequence intubation: Incidence of reflex 
bradycardia and effects of pretreat-
ment with atropine. Pediatr Emerg Care. 
2004;20(10):651–655.
8. Schreiber JU, Lysakowski C, Fuchs-Buder 
T, Tramèr MR. Prevention of succinylcho-
line-induced fasciculation and myalgia: 
A meta-analysis of randomized trials. 
Anesthesiology. 2005;103(4):877–884.
9. Kelly RE, Dinner M, Turner LS, Haik 
B, Abramson DH, Daines P. Succinyl-
choline increases intraocular pressure 
in the human eye with the extraocu-
lar muscles detached. Anesthesiology. 
1993;79(5):948–952.
10. Gill M, Graeme K, Guenterberg K. 
Masseter spasm after succinylcho-
line administration. J Emerg Med. 
2005;29(2):167–171.
11. Bevan DR, Donati F, Gyasi H, Williams 
A. Vecuronium in renal failure. Can 
Anaesth Soc J. 1984;31(5):491–496.
12. Lepage JY, Malinge M, Cozian A, Pinaud 
M, Blanloeil Y, Souron R. Vecuronium 
and atracurium in patients with end-
stage renal failure. A comparative study. 
Br J Anaesth. 1987;59(8):1004–1010.
13. Bartkowski RR, Witkowski TA, Azad 
S, Lessin J, Marr A. Rocuronium onset 
of action: A comparison with atracu-
rium and vecuronium. Anesth Analg. 
1993;77(3):574–578.
14. Kopman AF, Klewicka MM, Kopman DJ, 
Neuman GG. Molar potency is predictive 
of the speed of onset of neuromuscular 
block for agents of intermediate, short, 
and ultrashort duration. Anesthesiology. 
1999;90(2):425–431.
15. Magorian T, Flannery KB, Miller RD. 
Comparison 
of 
rocuronium, 
suc-
cinylcholine, and vecuronium for 
rapid-sequence induction of anesthe-
sia in adult patients. Anesthesiology. 
1993;79(5):913–918.
16. Basta SJ, Ali HH, Savarese JJ, Sun-
der N, Gionfriddo M, Cloutier G, etal. 
Clinical pharmacology of atracurium 
besylate (BW 33A): A new non-depo-
larizing muscle relaxant. Anest Analg. 
1982;61(9):723–729.
17. Savarese JJ, Ali HH, Basta SJ, Scott RP, 
Embree PB, Wastila WB, etal. The car-
diovascular effects of mivacurium chlo-
ride (BW B1090U) in patients receiving 
nitrous oxide-opiate-barbiturate anes-
thesia. Anesthesiology. 1989;70(3):386–
394.
18. Farhan H, Moreno-Duarte I, Latronico 
N, Zafonte R, Eikermann M. Acquired 
muscle weakness in the surgical inten-
sive care unit: Nosology, epidemiology, 
diagnosis, and prevention. Anesthesiol-
ogy. 2016;124(1):207–234.
19. Doorduin J, Nollet JL, Roesthuis LH, van 
Hees HW, Brochard LJ, Sinderby CA, 
etal. Partial neuromuscular blockade 
during partial ventilatory support in 
sedated patients with high tidal vol-
umes. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 
2017;195(8):1033–1042.
20. Price DR, Mikkelsen ME, Umscheid CA, 
Armstrong EJ. Neuromuscular blocking 
agents and neuromuscular dysfunction 
acquired in critical illness: A system-
atic review and meta-analysis. Crit Care 
Med. 2016;44(11):2070–2078.
21. Sampson HA, Munoz-Furlong A, Camp-
bell RL, Adkinson NF, Jr Bock SA, 
Branum A, etal. Second symposium 
on the definition and management of 
anaphylaxis: Summary report–second 
National Institute of Allergy and Infec-
tious Disease/Food Allergy and Anaphy-
laxis Network symposium. Ann Emerg 
Med. 2006;47(4):373–380.
22. Simons FE, Ardusso LR, Bilo MB, Cardona 
V, Ebisawa M, El-Gamal YM, etal. Inter-
national consensus on (ICON) anaphy-
laxis. World Allergy Organ J. 2014;7(1):9.
23. Matsumura T, Mitani S, Fukayama H. 
Sugammadex-induced 
anaphylaxis 
involving sudden onset of severe abdom-
inal pain. J Clin Anesth. 2019;57:119–
120.
24. Rose MA, Green SL, Crilly HM, Kola-
wole H. Perioperative anaphylaxis grad-
ing system: 'making the grade.' Br J 
Anaesth. 2016;117(5):551–553.
25. Mertes PM, Alla F, Trechot P, Auroy Y, 
Jougla E. Groupe d'Etudes des Reac-
tions Anaphylactoides P. Anaphylaxis 
during anesthesia in France: an 8-year 
national survey. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 
2011;128(2):366–373.
26. Tacquard C, Collange O, Gomis P, 
Malinovsky JM, Petitpain N, Demoly P, 
etal. Anaesthetic hypersensitivity reactions 
in France between 2011 and 2012: The 
10th GERAP Epidemiologic Survey. Acta 
Anaesthesiol Scand. 2017;61(3):290–299.
27. Sadleir PH, Clarke RC, Bunning DL, 
Platt PR. Anaphylaxis to neuromus-
cular blocking drugs: Incidence and 
cross-reactivity in Western Australia 
from 2002 to 2011. Br J Anaesth. 
2013;110(6):981–987.
28. Mertes PM, Ebo DG, Garcez T, Rose M, 
Sabato V, Takazawa T, etal. Compara-
tive epidemiology of suspected periop-
erative hypersensitivity reactions. Br J 
Anaesth. 2019;123(1):e16–e28.
29. Harper NJN, Cook TM, Garcez T, Farmer 
L, Floss K, Marinho S, etal. Anaesthesia, 
surgery, and life-threatening allergic 
reactions: Epidemiology and clinical 
features of perioperative anaphylaxis in 
the 6th National Audit Project (NAP6). 
Br J Anaesth. 2018;121(1):159–171.
30. Reddy JI, Cooke PJ, van Schalkwyk 
JM, Hannam JA, Fitzharris P, Mitchell 
SJ. Anaphylaxis is more common 
with rocuronium and succinylcholine 
than with atracurium. Anesthesiology. 
2015;122(1):39–45.
31. Magorian T, Flannery KB, Miller RD. 
Comparison of rocuronium, succinylcho-
line, and vecuronium for rapid-sequence 
induction of anesthesia in adult patients. 
Anesthesiology. 1993;79(5):913–918.
32. Phillips S, Stewart PA, Bilgin AB. A sur-
vey of the management of neuromuscu-
lar blockade monitoring in Australia and 
New Zealand. Anaesth Intensive Care. 
2013;41(3):374–379.
33. Naguib M, Kopman AF, Lien CA, Hunter 
JM, Lopez A, Brull SJ. A survey of 
current management of neuromuscular 
block in the United States and Europe. 
Anesth Analg. 2010;111(1):110–119.
34. Sundman E, Witt H, Olsson R, Ekberg O, 
Kuylenstierna R, Eriksson LI. The inci-
dence and mechanisms of pharyngeal 
and upper esophageal dysfunction in 
partially paralyzed humans: Pharyn-
geal videoradiography and simultaneous 
manometry after atracurium. Anesthesi-
ology. 2000;92(4):977–984.
35. Jonsson M, Wyon N, Lindahl SG, 
Fredholm BB, Eriksson LI. Neuro-
muscular 
blocking 
agents 
block 
carotid body neuronal nicotinic ace-
tylcholine receptors. Eur J Pharmacol. 
2004;497(2):173–180.
36. Kopman AF, Yee PS, Neuman GG. Rela-
tionship of the train-of-four fade ratio 
to clinical signs and symptoms of resid-
ual paralysis in awake volunteers. Anes-
thesiology. 1997;86(4):765–771.
37. Kirmeier E, Eriksson LI, Lewald H, Jons-
son Fagerlund M, Hoeft A, Hollmann M, 
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
184
etal. Post-anaesthesia pulmonary com-
plications after use of muscle relaxants 
(POPULAR): A multicentre, prospective 
observational study. Lancet Respir Med. 
2019;7(2):129–140.
38. Murphy GS, Szokol JW, Marymont JH, 
Greenberg SB, Avram MJ, Vender JS. 
Residual neuromuscular blockade and 
critical respiratory events in the pos-
tanesthesia care unit. Anesth Analg. 
2008;107(1):130–137.
39. Viby-Mogensen J, Jensen NH, Engbaek 
J. Tactile and visual evaluation of the 
response to train-of-four nerve stimula-
tion. Anesthesiology. 1985;63:440–443.
40. Dhonneur G, Kirov K, Motamed C, 
Amathieu R, Kamoun W, Slavov V, etal. 
Post-tetanic count at adductor pollicis 
is a better indicator of early diaphrag-
matic recovery than train-of-four count 
at corrugator supercilii. Br J Anaesth. 
2007;99(3):376–379.
41. Kopman AF, Eikermann M. Antago-
nism of non-depolarising neuromuscu-
lar block: Current practice. Anaesthesia. 
2009;64(s1):22–30.
42. El-Orbany MI, Joseph NJ, Salem MR. The 
relationship of posttetanic count and 
train-of-four responses during recov-
ery from intense cisatracurium-induced 
neuromuscular blockade. Anesth Analg. 
2003;97(1):80–84.
43. Bowdle A, Bussey L, Michaelsen K, 
Jelacic S, Nair B, Togashi K, etal. 
A comparison of a prototype electro-
myograph vs. a mechanomyograph and 
an acceleromyograph for assessment of 
neuromuscular blockade. Anaesthesia. 
2020;75(2):187–195.
44. Donati F, Meistelman C, Plaud B. Vecu-
ronium neuromuscular blockade at 
the adductor muscles of the larynx 
and adductor pollicis. Anesthesiology. 
1991;74(5):833–837.
45. Thilen SR, Hansen BE, Ramaiah R, Kent 
CD, Treggiari MM, Bhananker SM. Intra-
operative neuromuscular monitoring site 
and residual paralysis. Anesthesiology. 
2012;117(5):964–972.
46. Murphy GS, Szokol JW, Marymont 
JH, Greenberg SB, Avram MJ, Vender 
JS, etal. Intraoperative acceleromyo-
graphic monitoring reduces the risk of 
residual neuromuscular blockade and 
adverse respiratory events in the pos-
tanesthesia care unit. Anesthesiology. 
2008;109(3):389–398.
47. Srivastava A, Hunter JM. Reversal of 
neuromuscular block. Br J Anaesth. 
2009;103(1):115–129.
48. Legendre P, Ali DW, Drapeau P. Recovery 
from open channel block by acetylcho-
line during neuromuscular transmission in 
zebrafish. J Neurosci. 2000;20(1):140–148.
49. Fuchs-Buder T, Meistelman C, Alla F, 
Grandjean A, Wuthrich Y, Donati F. 
Antagonism of low degrees of atracu-
rium-induced neuromuscular blockade: 
Dose-effect relationship for neostigmine. 
Anesthesiology. 2010;112(1):34–40.
50. Paredes S, Porter SB, Porter IE, Renew JR. 
Sugammadex use in patients with end-
stage renal disease: A historical cohort 
study. Can J Anaesth. 2020;67:1789–
1797 December.
51. Sacan O, White PF, Tufanogullari B, 
Klein K. Sugammadex reversal of 
rocuronium-induced 
neuromuscular 
blockade: A comparison with neostig-
mine-glycopyrrolate and edrophonium-
atropine. Anesthesia and Analgesia. 
2007;104(3):569–574.
52. Lee C, Jahr JS, Candiotti KA, Warriner B, 
Zornow MH, Naguib M. Reversal of pro-
found neuromuscular block by sugam-
madex administered three minutes after 
rocuronium: A comparison with spon-
taneous recovery from succinylcholine. 
Anesthesiology. 2009;110(5):1020–1025.
53. Curtis R, Lomax S, Patel B. Use of sug-
ammadex in a “can’t intubate, can’t 
ventilate” situation. Br J Anaesth. 
2012;108(4):612–614.
54. Brueckmann B, Sasaki N, Grobara P, Li 
MK, Woo T, de Bie J, etal. Effects of 
sugammadex on incidence of postopera-
tive residual neuromuscular blockade: 
A randomized, controlled study. Br J 
Anaesth. 2015;115(5):743–751.
55. Kotake Y, Ochiai R, Suzuki T, Ogawa 
S, Takagi S, Ozaki M, etal. Reversal 
with sugammadex in the absence of 
monitoring did not preclude residual 
neuromuscular block. Anesth Analg. 
2013;117(2):345–351.
56. Le Corre F, Nejmeddine S, Fatahine C, 
Tayar C, Marty J, Plaud B. Recurari-
zation after sugammadex reversal 
in an obese patient. Can J Anaesth. 
2011;58(10):944–947.
57. De Kam PJ, Grobara P, Prohn M, Hop-
pener F, Kluft C, Burggraaf J, etal. 
Effects of sugammadex on activated 
partial thromboplastin time and pro-
thrombin time in healthy subjects. Int 
J Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2014;52(3):227–
236.
58. Rahe-Meyer N, Fennema H, Schulman 
S, Klimscha W, Przemeck M, Blobner M, 
etal. Effect of reversal of neuromuscular 
blockade with sugammadex versus usual 
care on bleeding risk in a randomized 
study of surgical patients. Anesthesiol-
ogy. 2014;121(5):969–977.
59. Binczak M, Fischler M, Le Guen M. Effi-
cacy of sugammadex in preventing skin 
test reaction in a patient with confirmed 
rocuronium anaphylaxis: A case report. 
A A Pract. 2019;13(1):17–19.
60. Bhavani SS. Severe bradycardia and asys-
tole after sugammadex. Br J Anaesth. 
2018;121(1):95–96.
61. Saito I, Osaka Y, Shimada M. Transient 
third-degree AV block following sugam-
madex. J Anesth. 2015;29(4):641.
62. Hunter JM, Naguib M. Sugammadex-
induced bradycardia and asystole: 
How great is the risk? Br J Anaesth. 
2018;121(1):8–12.
63. King A, Naguib A, Tobias JD. Bradycar-
dia in a pediatric heart transplant recipi-
ent: Is it the sugammadex? J Pediatr 
Pharmacol Ther. 2017;22(5):378–381.
185
Chapter
A major concern within the specialty of anesthesiology 
is the impact of general anesthesia and sedative drugs 
on neurodevelopment and cognition across the life 
span. Although definitive conclusions cannot be made, 
anesthesia providers should follow the progress of our 
knowledge regarding long-term effects of anesthesia on 
the developing central nervous system (CNS). Neuronal 
cell death and neurocognitive impairments after general 
anesthesia have been unequivocally demonstrated in 
laboratory animal models.1 This public health concern 
has prompted the Food and Drug Administration to issue 
a Drug Safety Communication “warning that repeated 
or lengthy use of general anesthetic and sedation drugs 
during surgeries or procedures in children younger than 3 
years of age or in pregnant women during their third tri-
mester may affect the development of children’s brains”2
(also see Chapter 34). However, this is not a new concern.
In 1953 Eckenhoff warned about an abnormal inci-
dence of postoperative personality changes in children.3
Since then, preclinical reports on juvenile animal models 
unequivocally demonstrate a causal effect of general 
anesthesia on subsequent neurotoxic and neurocognitive 
dysfunction.4 In addition, in 1955 Bedford wrote about 
behavioral changes in the elderly after general anesthesia.5
Anesthetic drugs are potent modulators of the CNS 
and render patients insensate to painful procedures and 
surgery.6 Although the exact molecular mechanisms 
that produce immobility, analgesia, and amnesia are not 
completely known, most anesthetic and sedative drugs 
are either γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) receptor agonists, 
N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) glutamate receptor antag-
onists, or a combination of the two. General anesthesia 
and sedation can be achieved by inhaled or intravenous 
administration of specific drugs. Both GABA agonists 
ANESTHETIC DRUGS AS A CAUSE FOR 
NEURODEGENERATION AND LONG-TERM 
NEUROCOGNITIVE DEFICITS
Basic Science of Anesthetic-Induced 
Developmental Neurotoxicity
Age-Dependent Vulnerability of Anesthetic
Characterization of AIDN
Relevant Anesthetic Durations and 
Concentrations
Anesthetic and Sedative Drugs
Alleviation of AIDN
CLINICAL EVIDENCE FOR NEUROTOXICITY
INTRAOPERATIVE COURSE AND 
NEUROCOGNITIVE OUTCOMES
Arterial Blood Pressure
Hypocapnia and the Brain
Oxygen Management
Temperature
CONCLUSION
ANESTHETIC 
NEUROTOXICITY*
Mary Ellen McCann, Sulpicio G. Soriano
12
*This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health 
grant 1-R01 HD06 1136–01A1 (MEM) and the Boston Children's 
Hospital Endowed Chair in Pediatric Neuroanesthesia (SGS).
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
186
progenitor cells, which proliferate and differentiate into 
neurons or glial cells. As neurons undergo terminal dif-
ferentiation into a postmitotic state, they can no longer 
replicate. Dendrites and axons extend from the cell body 
to form functional synapses with other neurons. CNS 
neural development (up to 70%) is regulated by early 
elimination during the embryonal stage and programmed 
cell death after birth. Redundant neural progenitor cells 
and neurons that do not migrate properly or make syn-
apses are physiologically pruned by apoptosis.15
Critical periods of plasticity during brain develop-
ment are modulated by environmental cues and have 
been implicated in perceptual development.16 Likewise, 
the perioperative environment can influence brain devel-
opment. Anesthetic drugs are powerful modulators of 
neuronal circuits and have an impact on the constant 
flux of CNS development and remodeling in both health 
and disease states. Because neurogenesis is ongoing 
throughout life, from the fetus to the elderly, these neu-
ral progenitor cells are vulnerable to the toxic effects of 
anesthetic drugs. Exposure to isoflurane produces neu-
ronal cell death in brain regions where neural progenitor 
cells reside.17 Therefore susceptibility to AIDN extends 
from the fetal period to late adulthood.
Brain growth spurt in most species is likely the time 
of maximal susceptibility to AIDN. This time corresponds 
with the time of maximal synaptogenesis. The growth 
spurt of the human brain occurs in the last trimester of 
gestation until about 3 to 4 years of age. Neuroinformatic 
mapping of the development of corticospinal tracts across 
species demonstrates that 7-day-old rat pups (the most 
common laboratory animal model) are neurodevelopmen-
tally closer to 20- to 22-week-old human fetuses.18 The 
timing of maximal brain growth during development is 
species dependent. Rodents are altricial species, and much 
of their neurodevelopment occurs postnatally. This time 
period occurs from about postnatal day 6 through postna-
tal day 21. Simian species, including humans, are usually 
considered precocial and typically have a longer gestation 
because offspring are born at a relatively advanced stage 
of development. Rhesus monkeys are susceptible to anes-
thetic-induced neuroapoptosis when exposed as fetuses or 
up to day 6 of life.19 21 Exposure of pregnant rats to anes-
thetics results in increased apoptosis in the brains of the 
fetuses.22 Administration of anesthetics to neonatal rodents 
leads to increased apoptosis and stunted axonal growth 
and dendritic arborization. In contrast, anesthetic exposure 
in juvenile rat models does not increase apoptosis but leads 
to enhanced dendritic formation and synaptic density.23
Characterization of AIDN
Pathologic Apoptosis
Accelerated apoptosis is the hallmark of AIDN (Table 12.1). 
Although an essential process in controlling neural devel-
opment, the apoptotic pathway is also activated by cellular 
and NMDA antagonists have been implicated in causing 
anesthetic-induced developmental neurotoxicity (AIDN). 
Both the short-term and long-term neurocognitive effects 
of general anesthesia should be considered.
ANESTHETIC DRUGS AS A CAUSE FOR 
NEURODEGENERATION AND LONG-TERM 
NEUROCOGNITIVE DEFICITS
Basic Science of Anesthetic-Induced 
Developmental Neurotoxicity
Determining the root cause of the neurotoxic effect of CNS 
depressant drugs on the developing brain is complicated 
by the myriad of molecular targets and the still unknown 
mechanistic pathway to achieve general anesthesia. AIDN 
has been demonstrated in laboratory models, both invivo 
and invitro, by exposure to most anesthetic and sedative 
drugs commonly administered to pediatric patients (also 
see Chapter 34). A comparable pattern of neurodegenera-
tion and impaired neurocognitive development has been 
described with the perinatal administration of inhibitory 
drugs.7 AIDN was first described more than 40 years ago 
in fetal and postnatal rats exposed to halothane,8 but its 
impact was not fully publicized to both the scientific and 
lay community until a 1999 report that emphasized that 
ketamine increased neurodegeneration in neonatal rat 
pups.9 Subsequently, it was found that the combination 
of commonly used anesthetic drugs, isoflurane, nitrous 
oxide, and midazolam, not only induced neuroapoptosis 
but resulted in deficits in hippocampal synaptic function 
and learning behavior.10
Anesthesia removes sensory input and suppresses nor-
mal neural traffic, which in turn diminishes the trophic 
support required for neurogenesis and context-dependent 
modulation of neuroplasticity. However, several reports 
have described neuronal cell death mechanisms such as 
excitotoxicity, mitochondrial dysfunction, aberrant cell 
cycle reentry, trophic factor dysregulation, and disrup-
tion of cytoskeletal assembly.11-13 Although GABA acts 
as an inhibitory drug in the mature brain, it is an excita-
tory agent during early stages of brain development 
because of the preponderance of the immature Na/K/2Cl 
transporter protein NKCC1, which produces a chloride 
influx leading to neuron depolarization. Therefore GABA 
remains excitatory until the GABA receptors are switched 
to the normal inhibitory mode, when the mature chloride 
transporter, KCC2, is expressed, which actively transports 
chloride out of the neural cell.14
Age-Dependent Vulnerability of Anesthetic
Neural development progresses through several steps 
that include neurogenesis, neuronal morphogenesis, and 
synaptogenesis. Neurogenesis starts with the creation of 
II
Chapter 12 Anesthetic Neurotoxicity
187
developing neurons of trophic support for axonal out-
growth. Isoflurane also induces apoptosis of oligodendro-
cytes in fetuses and neonate rhesus monkeys.20
Anesthetic Effects on Spinal Cord
General anesthetic exposure (isoflurane, nitrous oxide) 
in very young rat pups causes an increase in apoptosis 
in the spinal cord, with a preponderance of injury in the 
ventral horns.26 However, no motor functional disabilities 
were detected in exposed rats. Postnatal day 3 rat pups 
that received an intrathecal injection of ketamine had 
increased apoptosis and microglial activation on histo-
logic examination of their spinal cords and deranged spi-
nal function at adulthood.27 Intrathecal local anesthetic 
(bupivacaine) in the same population did not cause an 
increase in apoptosis.28
Neuroinflammation and Alzheimer-Related 
Neuropathology
Activation of neuroinflammatory cascades may influence 
the development of postoperative cognitive dysfunction 
(also see Chapter 35).29 Surgical trauma clearly activates 
neuroinflammation. Therefore the administration of anes-
thetic and analgesic drugs during surgery and painful 
procedures should minimize this response. However, sevo-
flurane increases markers of neuroinflammation in young, 
but not adult, mice.30 It is unclear if the impact of surgical 
trauma and anesthetic exposure are additive in inducing 
neuroinflammation. Preclinical reports demonstrate that 
surgery and general anesthesia increased expression of 
β-amyloid, a biologic precursor of Alzheimer disease.31
Therefore neuroinflammation and Alzheimer disease neu-
ropathology is a potent combination that could diminish 
neurocognitive function.
Neurocognitive Function
Decrements in neurocognitive function clearly occur 
after fetal and neonatal exposure to anesthetic drugs in 
rodents. Standard behavioral measures in rodents include 
the Morris water navigation test, radial arm maze, star-
tle, prepulse inhibition of the startle reflex, and odor 
recognition testing. Behavioral tests were also described 
in rhesus monkeys exposed to ketamine or sevoflurane 
with operant test battery or human intruder paradigm, 
respectively.19 32 The operant test battery is a measure of 
motivation and recognition memory, whereas the human 
intruder paradigm is a test for emotional reactivity. Both 
reports demonstrated a diminution of performance at an 
older age after neonatal exposure to these drugs.
Exposure to anesthetic drugs also adversely affects 
neurobehavioral assessments of elderly rats. Six- and 
20-month-old rats anesthetized with isoflurane and 
nitrous oxide equally developed persistent deficits in the 
radial arm maze test, which confirms that exposure to 
anesthetic drugs can lead to neurobehavioral functional 
consequences at a later age.33
stress. Such stresses include glucocorticoids, heat, radia-
tion, starvation, infection, hypoxia, pain, and anesthetics. 
Apoptosis is almost always executed by caspase enzymes, 
which are cysteine-dependent aspartate proteases that 
play an integral part in programmed cell death. The two 
main pathways are the extrinsic and intrinsic pathways. 
The extrinsic pathway is mediated by death receptors on 
the cell membrane wall, whereas the intrinsic pathway is 
dependent on mitochondrial activation.
Impeded Neurogenesis
Anesthetics affect neurogenesis in animals in an age-
dependent manner. Isoflurane causes loss of neural stem 
cells and reduced neurogenesis in neonatal cohorts but 
a transient increase in neurogenesis in older cohorts.24
Based on both invivo and invitro evidence, general 
anesthetics may decrease the pool of neural stem cells, 
especially in juveniles and adults.
Altered Dendritic Development
Dendritic spines are small protrusions of the neurons that 
typically receive input from a single synapse of an axon 
and are essential components of synaptogenesis. Exposure 
to ketamine and isoflurane decreases synapse and spine 
density in very young infant rats. As noted earlier, juvenile 
rats exposed to anesthetic drugs had an increase in dendritic 
spine formation.23 The implications of a decrease in den-
dritic spine formation at a very young age and an increase 
in slightly older animals are unclear. Taken together, the 
impact of anesthetics on dendritic morphogenesis clearly 
differs with the age at which exposure occurs.
Aberrant Glial Development
The glial cells within the CNS form the scaffolding, which 
guides the migration and synaptogenesis of the neurons 
during development. Astrocytes are impaired during neural 
development by exposure to isoflurane.25 This anesthetic 
interferes with the release of brain-derived neurotrophic 
factor (BDNF) by astrocytes, which in turn deprive the 
Feature
Comment (see text for details)
Pathologic 
apoptosis
The hallmark of AIDN
Can be induced by extrinsic or 
intrinsic pathways
Impeded 
neurogenesis
Effect of anesthetics on 
neurogenesis is age-dependent
Altered dendritic 
development
Anesthetics affect dendritic 
morphogenesis in age-dependent 
manner
Aberrant glial 
development
Isoflurane can interfere with 
release of trophic factors by astrocytes
Table 12.1
Key Features of Anesthetic-Induced 
Developmental Neurotoxicity (AIDN)
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
188
children. Several nonspecific drugs that have neuroprotec-
tive properties (lithium, melatonin, estrogen, erythropoietin, 
estradiol, and dexmedetomidine) alleviate AIDN. Dexme-
detomidine mitigates isoflurane-induced neuroapoptosis 
and behavioral impairment.36 However, high doses of dex-
medetomidine can induce neuroapoptosis.37 The neuropro-
tective effect of dexmedetomidine probably induces cell 
survival signaling pathways at clinical doses. Finally, an 
enhanced and stimulating environment mitigates neurobe-
havioral deficits after neonatal exposure to sevoflurane.30 38
CLINICAL EVIDENCE FOR NEUROTOXICITY
Taken together, three factors appear to induce AIDN in 
laboratory models: (1) susceptibility during a critical 
period of development, (2) large dose of the anesthetic, 
and (3) prolonged duration of exposure. Extrapolation of 
these laboratory data to the human neonate is problem-
atic. A rat brain develops over a matter of weeks, whereas 
a human brain develops over years. Six hours of anesthe-
sia in a neonatal rat pup may equate to weeks in a human 
neonate. With the exception of sedation in intensive care 
patients, this extreme condition is not common in clinical 
practice. Therefore uncovering the effect of an equivalent 
exposure on the neurologic outcome in a human neonate 
is difficult. Prolonged and repetitive exposure and expo-
sure at a young age to general anesthesia cause neuroa-
poptosis and neurodevelopmental delays in laboratory 
animals. Children who need frequent examinations under 
anesthesia or radiation treatments for cancer theoreti-
cally are at increased risk for the neurotoxic effects of 
general anesthesia.39
The implication that general anesthesia may be harmful 
to children is limited to retrospective epidemiologic analy-
ses (also see Chapter 34). This evidence may be confounded 
by the effects of surgery and the effects of the underlying 
comorbid conditions. Although control for obvious con-
founders has been attempted, the retrospective nature of 
these investigations makes it impossible to control for all 
the known and unknown confounders. There have been 
several epidemiologic studies originating from the Mayo 
Clinic. A retrospective cohort study of over 5000 children 
born from 1976 through 1982 found more reading, written 
language, and math learning disabilities in the 593 patients 
who were exposed to anesthesia before the age of 4 years.40
Risk factors included more than one anesthetic exposure 
and general anesthesia lasting longer than 2 hours. The 
Mayo Anesthesia Safety in Kids (MASK) study evaluated 
a more recent cohort of 997 children and demonstrated 
negligible deficits in singly exposed patients. However, 
although children who had multiple exposures to anes-
thesia and surgery did not have significant reductions in 
their IQ or operant test battery (tasks thought to represent 
specific brain functions), a secondary analysis did reveal a 
pattern of deficits in several neuropsychological tests.41 42
Relevant Anesthetic Durations and 
Concentrations
The duration of exposure may be more relevant than the 
concentration of exposure, although both are important. 
Almost all the animal studies involved an anesthetic 
exposure of at least 4 hours, with some trials exposing 
primates to 24 hours of continuous anesthesia. Exposures 
of less than 1 hour, regardless of the animal studied, did 
not cause increased neuroapoptosis. There is inconsist-
ency about the relative neurotoxic potential of individual 
volatile anesthetics and whether anesthetics given in 
combinations are more neurotoxic than solitary anesthet-
ics because of the higher minimum alveolar concentra-
tion (MAC) exposure in combination.
Anesthetic and Sedative Drugs
GABAergic general anesthetics act on the GABAA
receptor. Although GABA is inhibitory in the mature 
brain, it is an excitatory agent during early stages of 
brain development. The immature Na/K/2Cl transporter 
protein NKCC1 produces a chloride influx leading to 
neuron depolarization. As a consequence, GABA remains 
excitatory until the GABA neurons switch to the normal 
inhibitory mode, when the mature chloride transporter, 
KCC2, is expressed, which actively transports chloride 
out of the neural cell.14 This switch begins around the 
15th postnatal week in term human infants but is not 
complete until about 1 year of age.
The NMDA glutamate receptor (NMDAR) is found in 
neurons and is activated when glutamate, glycine, or 
D-serine binds to it. It is critical for synaptic plasticity, 
which is needed for learning and memory. Structurally the 
NMDAR is a protein composed of four subunits, two GluN1 
(formerly called NR1) and two GluN2 (formerly called NR2). 
Ketamine, which is a noncompetitive NMDAR antagonist, 
has been associated with AIDN in animals and causes an 
upregulation of the GluN1 subunit.34
In general, opioids do not increase neuroapoptosis, but 
under some experimental conditions, repeated morphine 
administration over 7 days is associated with increased 
apoptosis in the sensory cortex and amygdala of neonatal 
rats.35 However, a single dose of morphine given to post-
natal day 7 rat pups did not increase neuroapoptosis. These 
areas of the brain are not affected by volatile and intrave-
nous anesthetics, which preferentially affect the learning 
and memory areas (hippocampus) of developing brains.
Alleviation of AIDN
Several molecular mechanisms for anesthetic-induced 
apoptosis have been elucidated. This finding has led to 
studies designed to determine whether there are clinically 
available neuroprotective strategies that can ameliorate the 
negative effects of general anesthetics on developing young 
II
Chapter 12 Anesthetic Neurotoxicity
189
exposure on subsequent neurocognitive domains in chil-
dren. The GAS study is the only prospective randomized 
controlled trial to date comparing the effects of general 
anesthesia with regional anesthesia for inguinal hernia 
surgery in early infancy.53 This study found no evidence 
that 1 hour of sevoflurane anesthesia in infancy increases 
the risk of adverse neurodevelopmental outcomes at 2 
years of age compared with awake-regional anesthesia. 
The primary outcome, which was a full-scale IQ test 
done at age 5 years, confirmed no significant differences 
(mean difference of 0.23 [95% confidence interval (CI) 
−2.59 to 3.06]) on the full-scale intelligence quotient 
(FSIQ) of the Wechsler Preschool and Primary Scale of 
Intelligence.54 The PANDA study prospectively examined 
the impact of inguinal hernia surgery in infants younger 
than 36 months of age. An extensive battery of neuro-
cognitive tests was used to compare each anesthetized 
infant with a sibling who had no anesthesia exposure.55
When compared with a sibling cohort naïve to surgery 
and general anesthesia, there was no significant differ-
ence in the tested neurocognitive domains. Both negative 
studies only examined the impact of short exposures to 
general anesthesia and surgery. These findings are con-
sistent with the lack of AIDN after exposures of short 
duration in laboratory animals. Furthermore, the neuro-
cognitive assessments in all the clinical reports were per-
formed in childhood and adolescence, not at adulthood. 
Therefore the relationship between prolonged exposure to 
anesthetic drugs and neurocognitive performance in later 
stages of the life span needs to be addressed in future 
investigations.
On the other end of the age spectrum, elderly patients 
are at increased risk of developing postoperative cogni-
tive dysfunction after surgery and anesthesia (also see 
Chapter 35).56
INTRAOPERATIVE COURSE AND 
NEUROCOGNITIVE OUTCOMES
Anesthetic drugs are not clinically administered in a 
vacuum. The developing CNS is an exquisitely sensitive 
internal milieu. Because critical periods of plasticity during 
brain development are modulated by the environment,19
the perioperative environment has the potential to influ-
ence brain development. Anesthetic drugs are powerful 
modulators of neuronal circuits and have an impact on the 
constant flux of CNS development and remodeling in both 
health and disease states. Therefore nonphysiologic expo-
sure to various drugs and stressors (painful stimuli, mater-
nal deprivation, hypoglycemia, hypoxia, and ischemia) 
during these critical periods of development may lead to 
neuronal injury and altered neuroplasticity.57 The potential 
contribution of surgical lesion, genetic syndromes, coex-
isting medical conditions, and therapeutic interventions 
should be considered.58
A prospective evaluation of 28 children exposed to anes-
thesia before 1 year of age revealed deficits in measures 
of long-term recognition memory, but no differences in 
familiarity, IQ, and Child Behavior Checklist scores.43
A database of over 200,000 children developed using 
the New York State Medicaid billing codes revealed that 
children undergoing inguinal hernia repair at less than 1 
year of age had almost a threefold increase in diagnoses 
relating to developmental and behavioral issues, which 
was significantly higher than nonanesthetic-exposed sib-
lings.44 The general consensus is that there is an increased 
risk to children who have had two or more anesthetic 
exposures A subsequent report based on this cohort 
revealed increased utilization of attention deficit hyperac-
tivity disorder medications in the exposed group.45
A prospective analysis of an obstetrical cohort from 
Raines, Australia, found that even a single exposure to 
general anesthesia was related to decreased performance 
on receptive and expressive language and cognitive test-
ing performed at age 10 years.46 The Avon Longitudinal 
Study of Parents and Children, a prospective cohort 
study of 13,433 children born in Southwest England, 
revealed significantly lower motor and social linguistic 
performance, but not neurocognitive measures, in those 
exposed to general anesthesia and surgery in early child-
hood (less than 4 years old).47
Large database clinical investigations from Canada and 
Sweden reveal that exposure to surgery and anesthesia at an 
age older than 2 to 4 years increased the odds ratio of cogni-
tive deficits, though not to the extent of previously published 
retrospective reports from smaller populations.48–50 Scrutiny 
of these large datasets reveals a lower percentage in aca-
demic achievement scores for toddlers undergoing ear, nose, 
and throat surgery. This finding suggests that early derange-
ments in hearing and speech may have an impact on subse-
quent cognitive domains as assessed by school performance.
Other studies have cast doubt on the association between 
exposure to general anesthesia at a young age and later 
school problems. A study from the Netherlands evaluating 
the educational achievements of 1143 identical twin pairs 
found that twin pairs in which any member of the twin pair 
was exposed to general anesthesia had lesser educational 
achievements than unexposed twin pairs.51 However, the 
educational achievements of discordant twin pairs (one 
twin exposed, one twin nonexposed) were similar to each 
other, meaning that the receipt of general anesthesia did not 
appear to be a relevant factor. Similarly, a large cohort study 
of 2689 children born in Denmark between 1986 and 1990 
who underwent inguinal herniorrhaphy as infants were 
matched to control subjects who were randomly selected 
from an age-matched sample representing 5% of the popu-
lation.52 This study found no statistically significant differ-
ences between the exposed and nonexposed children after 
adjusting for known confounders.
Two published large prospective cohort studies sup-
port the contention that there is no impact of anesthetic 
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
190
stimulation. Prolonged inductions of anesthesia or surgi-
cal preparation times may lead to protracted periods of 
hypotension in neonates.
Hypocapnia and the Brain
The partial arterial carbon dioxide pressure (Paco2) is an 
important modulator of the cerebral blood flow (CBF), 
with its main effect on cerebral arteries (also see Chapter 
30). Hypocapnia results in vasoconstriction of cerebral 
vessels, leading to decreases in CBF. Hypocapnia-induced 
vasoconstriction may alter neuronal nuclear membranes 
and increase nuclear Ca2+ influx through ischemia-
induced tissue hypoxia and free radical generation, 
through alterations in the NMDAR or by changes in 
cerebral energy metabolism, leading to apoptotic cell 
death. Hypocapnia, which leads to cerebral alkalosis, 
not only decreases cerebral perfusion but also decreases 
the ability of hemoglobin to release oxygen. Premature 
infants may be particularly susceptible to the effects of 
hypocapnia. In general, it is recommended to keep the 
end-tidal CO2levels above 35 mm Hg in infants and chil-
dren undergoing general anesthesia.
Oxygen Management
Excessive administered oxygen delivered during general 
anesthesia can lead to an increased production of reac-
tive oxygen species (ROS), causing cell stress and apop-
tosis. Ordinarily, there is a balance between ROS and 
cell antioxidants. This balance is easily overwhelmed 
in young infants because their antioxidant defenses are 
not well developed at birth. During the last stages of 
fetal development, there is an increase in endogenous 
production of antioxidants in addition to an increase 
in maternal-fetal transfer of antioxidants in order to 
prepare the fetus for the relatively hyperoxic environ-
ment after birth compared with the relatively hypoxic 
fetal environment. Premature infants are at greater risk 
than term infants from oxygen damage because they are 
deficient in both of the previous factors. The antioxi-
dant enzymes involved include superoxide dismutase, 
catalase, and glutathione peroxidase. These enzymes 
convert reactive superoxide radicals to hydrogen per-
oxide and then to water. Hyperoxia in young animals 
leads to neuroapoptosis, presumably by oxidative stress 
and inflammation.
Hypoxia and anoxia can cause brain ischemia. Neu-
rons begin to lose their electrochemical gradients, and 
there is an influx of calcium into the cytosol as a result 
of glutamate release from synaptic vesicles. This leads 
to early necrotic cell death. This is heralded by nuclear 
swelling, mitochondrial collapse, and inflammation. A 
proportion of neurons that are stressed by ischemia will 
not die immediately, but will go on to die an apoptotic 
death sometime after the ischemic stress is eliminated.
In anesthetized or sedated patients undergoing sur-
gery or painful procedures, respectively, hemodynamic 
and metabolic changes may influence the neurocogni-
tive outcomes of patients exposed to general anesthesia. 
These influences could work in concert with the neuro-
toxic potential of general anesthetics or independently to 
cause poor neurocognitive outcomes. Some of the factors 
that are implicated in causing poor outcomes in babies 
receiving neonatal intensive care may be important to 
infants undergoing general anesthesia. These factors 
include perioperative blood pressure, carbon dioxide 
tensions, hyperoxia or hypoxia, temperature, and serum 
glucose levels (Table 12.2).
Arterial Blood Pressure
Determining the optimal arterial blood pressure man-
agement for very young infants is complicated by the 
many definitions for hypotension in the neonate and 
young infant. Two commonly used definitions are a 
mean arterial blood pressure (MAP) below the fifth or 
tenth percentile for age or a MAP less than the infant's 
gestational age in weeks for infants who were born 
premature. Furthermore, normal arterial blood pressures 
for very young infants rapidly increase during the first 
6 weeks of life and thereafter are fairly constant for the 
first year of life. Maintaining arterial blood pressure 
within the limits of cerebral autoregulation is optimal 
for cerebral protection, although sustaining adequate 
cerebral perfusion less than the limits of cerebral 
autoregulation is sometimes necessary. The lower limits 
of cerebral autoregulation in neonates are likely variable 
and not precisely known, and a wide range of variability 
likely exists. Most general anesthetics cause some degree 
of hypotension, which can be ameliorated by surgical 
Factor
Comment (see text for details)
Arterial blood 
pressure
Interpatient variability in lower 
limits of cerebral autoregulation
Carbon dioxide 
tension
Hypocapnia causes cerebral 
vasoconstriction
Hyperoxia or 
hypoxia
Hyperoxia produces reactive oxygen 
species
Hypoxia can cause cerebral ischemia
Temperature
Mild hypothermia is protective in 
neonate with prior ischemic injury
Hyperthermia with prior ischemic injury is 
associated with neurocognitive disability
Serum glucose
Extremes of hypoglycemia and 
hyperglycemia are associated with adverse 
outcomes
Table 12.2
Intraoperative Factors Influencing 
Neurocognitive Outcomes
II
Chapter 12 Anesthetic Neurotoxicity
191
1. McCann ME, Soriano SG. Does gen-
eral anesthesia affect neurodevelopment 
in infants and children? BMJ. 2019 
Dec 9;367:l6459. doi:10.1136/bmj.l6459 
PMID: 31818811.
2. Rappaport B, Mellon RD, Simone A, 
Woodcock J. Defining safe use of 
anesthesia in children. N Engl J Med. 
2011;364:1387–1390.
3. Eckenhoff JE. Relationship of anesthesia 
to postoperative personality changes in 
children. Am J Dis Child. 1953;86:587–591.
4. Xie Z, Vutskits L. Lasting impact of gen-
eral anaesthesia on the brain: Mecha-
nisms and relevance. Nat Rev Neurosci. 
2016;17(11):705–717.
5. Bedford PD. Adverse cerebral effects 
of anaesthesia on old people. Lancet. 
1955;269:259–263.
6. Hemmings HC Jr, Riegelhaupt PM, Kelz 
MB, Solt K, Eckenhoff RG, Orser BA, 
Goldstein PA. Towards a comprehensive 
understanding of anesthetic mechanisms 
of action: A decade of discovery. Trends 
Pharmacol Sci. 2019;40(7):464–481 Jul.
7. Bittigau P, Sifringer M, Genz K, etal. 
Antiepileptic drugs and apoptotic neu-
rodegeneration in the developing brain. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002;99(23):
15089–15094.
8. Quimby KL, Katz J, Bowman RE. 
Behavioral consequences in rats from 
chronic exposure to 10 ppm halothane 
during early development. Anesth 
Analg. 1975;54:628–633.
9. Ikonomidou C, Bosch F, Miksa M, etal. 
Blockade of NMDA receptors and apop-
totic neurodegeneration in the develop-
ing brain. Science. 1999;283:70–74.
10. Jevtovic-Todorovic V, Hartman RE, Izu-
mi Y, etal. Early exposure to common 
anesthetic agents causes widespread 
neurodegeneration in the developing rat 
brain and persistent learning deficits. J 
Neurosci. 2003;23:876–882.
11. Sanchez V, Feinstein SD, Lunardi N, 
etal. General anesthesia causes long-
term impairment of mitochondrial mor-
phogenesis and synaptic transmission 
in developing rat brain. Anesthesiology. 
2011;115:992–1002.
12. Soriano SG, Liu Q, Li J, etal. Ketamine 
activates cell cycle signaling and apop-
tosis in the neonatal rat brain. Anesthe-
siology. 2010;112:1155–1163.
13. Head BP, Patel HH, Niesman IR, etal. 
Inhibition of p75 neurotrophin recep-
tor 
attenuates 
isoflurane-mediated 
neuronal apoptosis in the neonatal cen-
tral nervous system. Anesthesiology. 
2009;110:813–825.
14. Ben-Ari Y. Excitatory actions of GABA 
during development: The nature of the nur-
ture. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2002;3:728–739.
15. Buss RR, Sun W, Oppenheim RW. Adap-
tive roles of programmed cell death dur-
ing nervous system development. Annu 
Rev Neurosci. 2006;29:1–35.
16. Hensch TK. Critical period plasticity in 
local cortical circuits. Nat Rev Neurosci. 
2005;6:877–888.
17. Hofacer RD, Deng M, Ward CG, etal. 
Cell-age specific vulnerability of neu-
rons to anesthetic toxicity. Ann Neurol. 
2013;73:695–704.
18. Clancy B, Kersh B, Hyde J, etal. Web-
based method for translating neurode-
velopment from laboratory species to 
humans. Neuroinformatics. 2007;5:79–94.
19. Paule MG, Li M, Allen RR, etal. Keta-
mine anesthesia during the first week 
of life can cause long-lasting cognitive 
deficits in rhesus monkeys. Neurotoxicol 
Teratol. 2011;33:220–230.
20. Creeley CE, Dikranian KT, Dissen GA, 
etal. Isoflurane-induced apoptosis of 
neurons and oligodendrocytes in the 
fetal rhesus macaque brain. Anesthesiol-
ogy. 2014;120:626–638.
21. Raper J, Alvarado MC, Murphy KL, 
etal. Multiple anesthetic exposure in 
infant monkeys alters emotional reactiv-
ity to an acute stressor. Anesthesiology. 
2015;123(5):1084–1092.
22. Wang S, Peretich K, Zhao Y, etal. 
Anesthesia-induced 
neurodegenera-
tion in fetal rat brains. Pediatr Res. 
2009;66:435–440.
23. Briner A, De Roo M, Dayer A, etal. Vola-
tile anesthetics rapidly increase dendritic 
spine density in the rat medial prefrontal 
cortex during synaptogenesis. Anesthe-
siology. 2010;112:546–556.
24. Stratmann G, Sall JW, May LD, etal. 
Isoflurane differentially affects neuro-
genesis and long-term neurocognitive 
function in 60-day-old and 7-day-old 
rats. Anesthesiology. 2009;110:834–848.
25. Ryu YK, Khan S, Smith SC, Mintz CD. 
Isoflurane impairs the capacity of astro-
cytes to support neuronal development 
in a mouse dissociated coculture model. J 
Neurosurg Anesthesiol. 2014;26:363–368.
26. Sanders RD, Xu J, Shu Y, etal. General 
anesthetics induce apoptotic neurodegen-
eration in the neonatal rat spinal cord. 
Anesth Analg. 2008;106:1708–1711.
27. Walker SM, Westin BD, Deumens R, 
etal. Effects of intrathecal ketamine in 
the neonatal rat: Evaluation of apopto-
sis and long-term functional outcome. 
Anesthesiology. 2010;113:147–159.
28. Yahalom B, Athiraman U, Soriano SG, 
etal. Spinal anesthesia in infant rats: 
Development of a model and assessment 
of neurologic outcomes. Anesthesiology. 
2011;114:1325–1335.
29. Vacas S, Degos V, Feng X, Maze M. 
The neuroinflammatory response of 
REFERENCES
Temperature
Temperature maintenance during anesthesia is one of the 
challenges of pediatric anesthesia (also see Chapter 34). 
Infants have a large skin surface area/body mass ratio 
and a high basal metabolic rate, which accelerate radiant 
and evaporative heat loss. In addition, reduced vasocon-
striction and decreased subcutaneous fat increase their 
radiant and conductive heat losses during procedures. 
Infants who are hypothermic at the conclusion of anes-
thesia may not have the energy stores to both rewarm 
themselves and spontaneously ventilate, necessitating 
postoperative ventilation in these infants. However, mild 
hypothermia (core temperature 32 to 34°C) is neuropro-
tective in neonates who have suffered prior hypoxic-
ischemic injury. Hyperthermia in these same neonates 
was associated with more neurocognitive disabilities 
when these children underwent testing at age 18 months.
CONCLUSION
Accumulating evidence from laboratory investigations 
definitively demonstrates that anesthetic and sedative 
drugs are potent modulators of CNS development and 
function throughout the life span, which in turn can lead 
to neuroapoptosis, altered dendritic formation, synap-
togenesis, and subsequent neurocognitive deficits. Yet 
evidence from retrospective clinical reports in pediatric 
and elderly surgical populations is inconclusive.
Because anesthetic and sedative drugs are essential 
in the management of surgical patients, the problem of 
AIDN must be eventually addressed. In the meantime, 
anesthesia providers should be sensitive to the possibility 
that brain development in younger years and its decline 
in older patients can be an issue for perioperative care 
and identify contributory factors.59
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
192
postoperative cognitive decline. Br Med 
Bull. 2013;106:161–178.
30. Shen X, Dong Y, Xu Z, etal. Selec-
tive anesthesia-induced neuroinflamma-
tion in developing mouse brain and 
cognitive impairment. Anesthesiology. 
2013;118:502–515.
31. Xu Z, Dong Y, Wang H, etal. Age-depend-
ent postoperative cognitive impairment 
and Alzheimer-related neuropathology 
in mice. Sci Rep. 2014;4:3766.
32. Raper J, Alvarado MC, Murphy KL, Bax-
ter MG. Multiple anesthetic exposure in 
infant monkeys alters emotional reactiv-
ity to an acute stressor. Anesthesiology. 
2015;123:1084–1092.
33. Culley DJ, Baxter MG, Yukhananov 
R, Crosby G. Long-term impairment 
of acquisition of a spatial memory 
task following isoflurane-nitrous oxide 
anesthesia in rats. Anesthesiology. 
2004;100:309–314.
34. Wang C, Sadovova N, Hotchkiss C, 
etal. Blockade of N-methyl-D-aspartate 
receptors by ketamine produces loss of 
postnatal day 3 monkey frontal corti-
cal neurons in culture. Toxicol Sci. 
2006;91:192–201.
35. Bajic D, Commons KG, Soriano SG. 
Morphine-enhanced apoptosis in selec-
tive brain regions of neonatal rats. Int J 
Dev Neurosci. 2013;31:258–266.
36. Sanders RD, Xu J, Shu Y, etal. Dex-
medetomidine attenuates isoflurane-
induced neurocognitive impairment in 
neonatal rats. Anesthesiology. 2009;110:
1077–1085.
37. Liu JR, Yuki K, Baek C, etal. Dex-
medetomidine-induced neuroapoptosis 
is dependent on its cumulative dose. 
Anesth Analg. 2016;123(4):1008–1017.
38. Shih J, May LD, Gonzalez HE, etal. 
Delayed 
environmental 
enrichment 
reverses sevoflurane-induced memory 
impairment in rats. Anesthesiology. 
2012;116:586–602.
39. Banerjee P, Rossi MG, Anghelescu DL, 
etal. Association between anesthe-
sia exposure and neurocognitive and 
neuroimaging outcomes in long-term 
survivors of childhood acute lympho-
blastic leukemia. JAMA Oncol. 2019 Oct 
1;5(10):1456–1463.
40. Wilder RT, Flick RP, Sprung J, etal. 
Early exposure to anesthesia and learning 
disabilities in a population-based birth 
cohort. Anesthesiology. 2009;110:796–
804.
41. Warner DO, Zaccariello MJ, Katusic SK, 
etal. Neuropsychological and behavio-
ral outcomes after exposure of young 
children to procedures requiring general 
anesthesia: The Mayo Anesthesia Safety 
in Kids (MASK) study. Anesthesiology. 
2018;129(1):89–105.
42. Zaccariello MJ, Frank RD, Lee M, etal. 
Patterns of neuropsychological changes 
after general anaesthesia in young chil-
dren: Secondary analysis of the Mayo 
Anesthesia Safety in Kids study. Br J 
Anaesth. 2019;122(5):671–681.
43. Stratmann G, Lee J, Sall JW, etal. 
Effect of general anesthesia in infancy 
on long-term recognition memory in 
humans and rats. Neuropsychopharma-
cology. 2014;39:2275–2287.
44. Dimaggio C, Sun L, Li G. Early child-
hood exposure to anesthesia and risk of 
developmental and behavioral disorders 
in a sibling birth cohort. Anesth Analg. 
2011;113:1143–1151.
45. Ing C, Ma X, Sun M, etal. Exposure to 
surgery and anesthesia in early childhood 
and subsequent use of attention deficit 
hyperactivity disorder medications. Anesth 
Analg. 2020;131(3):723–733.
46. Ing C, DiMaggio C, Whitehouse A, 
etal. Long-term differences in language 
and cognitive function after child-
hood exposure to anesthesia. Pediatrics. 
2012;130:e476–e485.
47. Walkden GJ, Gill H, Davies NM, Peters 
AE, Wright I, Pickering AE. Early child-
hood general anesthesia and neurode-
velopmental outcomes in the Avon 
Longitudinal Study of Parents and 
Children Birth cohort. Anesthesiology. 
2020;133(5):1007–1020 Nov 1.
48. O'Leary JD, Janus M, Duku E, etal. 
A population-based study evaluat-
ing the association between surgery 
in early life and child development at 
primary school entry. Anesthesiology. 
2016;125:272–279.
49. Graham MR, Brownell M, Chateau DG, 
etal. Neurodevelopmental assessment in 
kindergarten in children exposed to gen-
eral anesthesia before the age of 4 years: 
A retrospective matched cohort study. 
Anesthesiology. 2016;125(4):667–677.
50. Glatz P, Sandin RH, Pedersen NL, etal. 
Association of anesthesia and surgery 
during childhood with long-term aca-
demic performance. JAMA Pediatr. 
2017;171(1):e163470.
51. Bartels M, Althoff RR, Boomsma DI. Anes-
thesia and cognitive performance in chil-
dren: No evidence for a causal relationship. 
Twin Res Hum Genet. 2009;12:246–253.
52. Hansen TG, Pedersen JK, Henneberg 
SW, etal. Academic performance in 
adolescence after inguinal hernia repair 
in infancy: a nationwide cohort study. 
Anesthesiology. 2011;114(5):1076–1085.
53. Davidson AJ, Disma N, de Graaff JC, etal. 
GAS Consortium Neurodevelopmental 
outcome at 2 years of age after general 
anaesthesia and awake-regional anaes-
thesia in infancy (GAS): An internation-
al multicentre, randomised controlled 
trial. Lancet. 2015;387(10015):239–250.
54. McCann ME, de Graaff JC, Dorris L, 
etal. GAS Consortium Neurodevelop-
mental outcome at 5 years of age after 
general anaesthesia or awake-regional 
anaesthesia in infancy (GAS): An inter-
national, multicentre, randomised, con-
trolled equivalence trial. Lancet. 2019 
Feb 16;393(10172):664–677.
55. Sun LS, Li G, Miller TL, etal. Associa-
tion between a single general anesthesia 
exposure before age 36 months and neu-
rocognitive outcomes in later childhood. 
JAMA. 2016;315:2312–2320.
56. Berger M, Nadler JW, Browndyke J, 
etal. Postoperative cognitive dysfunc-
tion: Minding the gaps in our knowledge 
of a common postoperative complica-
tion in the elderly. Anesthesiol Clin. 
2015;33(3):517–550.
57. McCann ME, Lee JK, Inder T. Beyond 
anesthesia toxicity: Anesthetic consid-
erations to lessen the risk of neonatal 
neurological injury. Anesth Analg. 2019 
Nov;129(5):1354–1364.
58. Jacola LM, Anghelescu DL, Hall L, Russell 
K, Zhang H, Wang F, Peters JB, Rossi M, 
Schreiber JE, Gajjar A. Anesthesia expo-
sure during therapy predicts neurocognitive 
outcomes in survivors of childhood medul-
loblastoma. J Pediatr. 2020;223:141–147.
59. Ing C, Warner DO, Sun L. Anesthesia and 
developing brains: Unanswered questions 
and proposed paths forward. Anesthesiol-
ogy. 2022;136(3):500–512.
Section
III
PREOPERATIVE 
PREPARATION AND 
INTRAOPERATIVE 
MANAGEMENT
Chapter 13
PREOPERATIVE EVALUATION, 195
Chapter 14
CHOICE OF ANESTHETIC TECHNIQUE, 221
Chapter 15 
ANESTHESIA DELIVERY SYSTEMS, 229
Chapter 16
AIRWAY MANAGEMENT, 253
Chapter 17
SPINAL, EPIDURAL, AND CAUDAL 
ANESTHESIA, 289
Chapter 18
PERIPHERAL NERVE BLOCKS, 318
Chapter 19
PATIENT POSITIONING AND ASSOCIATED 
RISKS, 336
Chapter 20
ANESTHETIC MONITORING, 351
Chapter 21
POINT-OF-CARE ULTRASOUND, 383
Chapter 22
ACID–BASE BALANCE AND BLOOD GAS 
ANALYSIS, 400
Chapter 23
HEMOSTASIS, 414
Chapter 24
FLUID MANAGEMENT, 437
Chapter 25
BLOOD THERAPY, 445
195
Chapter
High-quality anesthesia care begins with the preoperative 
evaluation. The goals of preoperative evaluation include 
understanding the proposed surgery, assessing the risk of 
coexisting medical conditions, deciding whether additional 
testing is needed to prepare the patient for the procedure, 
discussing options for anesthesia care, and understanding 
and addressing patient concerns. Preoperative (or preanes-
thesia) evaluation can be defined as the process of clinical 
assessment that precedes the delivery of anesthesia care 
for surgery and for nonsurgical procedures.1 The American 
Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) developed standards for 
preanesthesia care, listed in Box 13.1 2
Settings for preoperative evaluation include both out-
patient (e.g., in-person or virtual preoperative evaluation 
clinic) and inpatient (e.g., a patient preadmitted before 
surgery or already an inpatient in the emergency depart-
ment, hospital ward, or intensive care unit). Most patients 
undergoing elective surgery are evaluated as outpatients 
at varying time intervals before the date of surgery. The 
timing of preoperative evaluation with respect to the 
proposed date of surgery has practical implications for 
preoperative consultation, testing, and communication 
between providers and patients.
This chapter will focus on the preoperative evaluation 
of an individual patient before a surgical or nonsurgical 
procedure requiring anesthesia care. This process is part 
of the specialty's contribution to perioperative medicine 
(also see Chapter 42), which includes preoperative assess-
ment, nonsurgical patient optimization, the surgical 
procedure itself, and postoperative care until the patient 
can return to their primary care and other long-term 
providers after surgery.
HISTORY AND PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
The preoperative history and physical follow the same basic 
structure as a general medical encounter. However, each ele-
ment has perioperative implications that must be explored 
HISTORY AND PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
PREOPERATIVE EVALUATION OF COMMON 
COEXISTING DISEASES
Neurologic
Cardiovascular
Pulmonary
Renal
Liver
Endocrine
Hematologic
Infectious Disease
Geriatrics
PREOPERATIVE TESTING
Rationale for Selective Testing
Pregnancy Testing
Preoperative Transfusion Testing
RISK ASSESSMENT
ASA Physical Status
MEDICATION MANAGEMENT
NPO GUIDELINES
INFORMED CONSENT FOR ANESTHESIA
PREOPERATIVE EVALUATION CLINICS
Enhanced Recovery Pathways
Preoperative Optimization
Inpatient Preoperative Evaluation
PREOPERATIVE 
EVALUATION
Manuel C. Pardo, Jr..
13
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
196
further. For example, the history of present illness begins 
with the following: the patient is a (age)-year old (sex/gen-
der) with (surgical diagnosis) who is scheduled for (proposed 
procedure) with (surgeon/proceduralist) on (proposed date of 
surgery) at (health care facility). Some implications of these 
seven initial elements are described in Table 13.1
The past medical history includes a discussion of cur-
rent medical conditions and past hospitalizations. Certain 
medical conditions have significant perioperative impli-
cations for management and will be discussed later. The 
review of current medications should include prescription 
and nonprescription medications, topical medications, 
vitamins, and herbal preparations. If the patient has aller-
gies, the date and nature of the reaction are helpful in 
determining their relevance. For example, even though 
10% of the U.S. population has a history of penicillin 
allergy, few have clinically significant reactions.3
The past surgical and anesthetic history is of par-
ticular importance in the preoperative evaluation. Prior 
anesthesia records can indicate the presence of difficult 
airway management, intraoperative hemodynamic or 
respiratory issues, or postoperative nausea and vomiting. 
For patients undergoing the same procedure on a repeat 
basis (e.g., endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatog-
raphy [ERCP] or electroconvulsive therapy [ECT]), the 
anesthesia medications administered should be noted 
as well. The patient's prior experience with regional 
anesthesia can be discussed, which is relevant for pro-
cedures amenable to regional anesthesia and analgesia 
(also see Chapters 17 and 18).
The social history includes a discussion of risk fac-
tors for disease, such as tobacco use, alcohol use, and 
substance use. Social circumstances also contribute to a 
patient's risk of morbidity or mortality after surgical pro-
cedures. Social determinants of health are defined by the 
World Health Organization as the nonmedical factors that 
influence health outcomes, including the conditions in 
which people are born, grow, work, live, and age and the 
wider set of forces and systems shaping the conditions of 
daily life.4 Specific factors include housing, transporta-
tion, education, employment, and access to care.
Family history of reactions to anesthesia often include 
nonspecific descriptions. Potential complications of most 
relevance for future anesthesia care include malignant 
hyperthermia or atypical plasma pseudocholinesterase 
(also see Chapters 7 and 11).
The review of systems is designed to elicit symptoms 
not already discussed in the history of present illness or 
past medical history. In the preoperative evaluation the 
review of systems should include a discussion of weight 
loss (relevant to nutritional status and frailty), func-
tional status (described further later), screening for sleep 
apnea (e.g., STOP-BANG score, described in Chapter 48), 
and baseline cognitive function (for elderly patients, as 
described in Chapter 35).
The physical examination of a preoperative patient 
includes determination of vital signs, weight, and overall 
patient appearance. In the outpatient setting these vital 
signs serve as a reasonable baseline, although a single 
elevated blood pressure is insufficient for the diagnosis 
of hypertension. Table 13.2 describes the physical exami-
nation for a preoperative patient. Based on the patient's 
history, additional physical examination and documenta-
tion may be indicated. The American Society of Anes-
thesiologists (ASA) Practice Advisory for Preanesthesia 
Evaluation recommends that, at a minimum, a prean-
esthetic physical examination should include an airway 
examination, a pulmonary examination (including lung 
auscultation), and a cardiovascular examination.1
During the COVID-19 pandemic, the use of telehealth 
visits increased, leading to fewer in-person outpatient 
preoperative evaluations and a decrease in physical 
examinations until the date of surgery. The use of video 
and digital home monitoring devices can facilitate a vir-
tual focused physical examination.5
PREOPERATIVE EVALUATION OF COMMON 
COEXISTING DISEASES
The patient history and review of past medical records 
may reveal the presence of coexisting medical condi-
tions. The following section reviews common conditions 
Box 13.1 American Society of Anesthesiologists Basic 
Standards for Preanesthesia Care
An anesthesiologist shall be responsible for determining 
the medical status of the patient and developing a plan of 
anesthesia care. The anesthesiologist, before the delivery of 
anesthesia care, is responsible for:
1. Reviewing the available medical record.
2. Interviewing and performing a focused examination of the 
patient to:
2.1 Discuss the medical history, including previous 
anesthetic experiences and medical therapy.
2.2 Assess those aspects of the patient’s physical 
condition that might affect decisions regarding 
perioperative risk management.
3. Ordering and reviewing pertinent available tests and 
consultations as necessary for the delivery of anesthesia care.
4. Ordering appropriate preoperative medications.
5. Ensuring that consent has been obtained for the 
anesthesia care.
6. Documenting in the chart that the above has been 
performed.
These standards apply to all patients who receive anesthesia 
care. Under exceptional circumstances, these standards may 
be modified. When this is the case, the circumstances shall be 
documented in the patient’s record.
American Society of Anesthesiologists. Basic Standards for 
Preanesthesia Care. Developed by Committee on Standards and 
Practice Parameters (CSPP). Last affirmed: December 13, 2020 
(original approval: October 14, 1987).
AL GRAWANY
III
Chapter 13 Preoperative Evaluation
197
HPI Element
Anesthetic Considerations
Age
Extremes of age are associated with changes in physiology (also see Chapters 34 and 35).
Sex/Gender
Some anesthetic complications, such as postoperative nausea and vomiting, are more likely in female patients.
Surgical Diagnosis
The surgical diagnosis may be associated with medical issues that have anesthetic implications. For 
example, a patient with severe back pain scheduled for spinal fusion may be receiving long-term opiate 
medications. A patient with small bowel obstruction may have electrolyte abnormalities and hypovolemia.
Proposed Procedure
The surgical procedure has implications for anesthesia choice. For example, extremity surgery can 
typically be performed with general or regional anesthesia. Certain procedures may benefit from 
regional anesthesia for postoperative pain management (also see Chapter 40). The risk of major adverse 
cardiovascular events is greater in vascular, intraperitoneal, and intrathoracic procedures, which may 
alter the risk/benefit ratio of further workup for coronary artery disease. Nonoperating room procedures 
(NORA) have different implications (also see Chapter 38).
Surgeon
At a given health care facility, different surgeons performing the same procedure may have different 
preferences for patient management and participation in enhanced recovery pathways.
Proposed Date of 
Surgery
Earlier anesthesiologist access may allow time for necessary preoperative testing and consultation, 
especially for a patient with severe systemic disease undergoing major surgery.
Health Care Facility
Procedures performed in a free-standing ambulatory facility likely have different resources in the event of 
postoperative complications (also see Chapter 37). Access to an intensive care unit and blood bank may 
be required depending on the proposed surgery and patient's coexisting diseases.
Table 13.1
History of Present Illness (HPI) With Anesthetic Considerations
Physical Examination 
Component
Anesthetic Considerations
Vital Signs
Markedly abnormal vital signs require a focused and rapid evaluation. In an outpatient preoperative 
clinic the patient may even require transfer to an emergency department for further care.
Weight
This is part of the assessment of nutrition and frailty. Patients with obesity are at greater risk for many 
perioperative complications (also see Chapter 29).
Overall Appearance
For inpatients scheduled for emergency procedures, the overall appearance of distress may be a clue 
to impending hemodynamic instability or respiratory compromise.
Airway
The basic elements include determination of mouth opening, pharyngeal space, cervical spine extension, 
and submandibular space/compliance. Airway examination is described in detail in Chapter 16
Pulmonary
The lung examination is particularly important in patients with pulmonary disease or heart failure 
(also see Chapters 26 and 27).
Cardiovascular
The location, timing, intensity, and radiation of heart murmurs should be noted. Quiet systolic 
murmurs are unlikely to be associated with severe valvular disease. Peripheral pulses should be 
palpated, especially if arterial line placement is being considered.
Abdomen
Abdominal distension and obesity are associated with reduced lung/chest wall compliance during 
general anesthesia and mechanical ventilation. For patients with liver disease, the presence of ascites 
is a marker of disease severity (also see Chapter 28).
Musculoskeletal
In addition to evaluating for extremity edema (a potential sign of deep venous thrombosis or heart 
failure), consider evaluating range of motion of joints that will be affected by intraoperative patient 
positioning (also see Chapter 19).
Neurologic/Psychiatric
Neurologic changes such as weakness or numbness should be documented at baseline. For patients 
undergoing regional anesthesia, this baseline documentation is particularly important if postoperative 
changes are detected. Psychiatric illnesses, if severe, may affect the patient's ability to consent for 
surgery and anesthesia.
Skin
Skin lesions should be noted, because pressure injuries related to positioning may occur (also see Chapter 19). 
If regional anesthesia is planned, inspection of the skin near sites of planned needle insertion is required.
Table 13.2
Physical Examination in Preoperative Evaluation
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
198
encountered in preoperative evaluation, organized by 
organ system. Many conditions are addressed by evidence-
based clinical practice guidelines from anesthesiology and 
other specialties. However, substantial clinical judgment 
is still required to determine how guidelines apply to an 
individual patient. In many instances clinical practice 
guidelines provide advice based on expert opinion and 
not necessarily evidence from clinical trials. In addition, 
practice guidelines must be considered in conjunction with 
patient preferences, although it is the anesthesia provider's 
responsibility to emphasize appropriate evidence when 
presenting management options to the patient.
Additional discussion of the pathophysiology and 
anesthetic implications of coexisting disease may be 
found in other sources.6
Neurologic
Preoperative evaluation of patients with an intracranial 
mass lesion is discussed in Chapter 30. Patients with 
epilepsy syndromes are treated with antiepileptic drugs, 
which should be continued perioperatively unless the 
patient is undergoing epilepsy surgery, in which case the 
management of the antiepileptic drugs should be coordi-
nated with the neurosurgery team. Patients with a history 
of acute ischemic stroke may be receiving antiplatelet or 
anticoagulant therapy for secondary prevention. Preoper-
ative management of these medications is discussed later.
Parkinson Disease
Parkinson disease is the second most common neuro-
degenerative disorder, characterized by bradykinesia, 
rigidity, and tremor. Patients with Parkinson disease have 
a greater risk of perioperative morbidity and mortality 
related to the cardiovascular (e.g., orthostatic hypoten-
sion, autonomic dysfunction), pulmonary (e.g., dyspha-
gia, impaired cough, aspiration pneumonia), neurologic 
(e.g., bradykinesia and fall risk, insufficient respiratory 
muscle strength), and infectious (e.g., increased risk of 
urinary tract and bacterial infections) implications of the 
disease.7 Issues to address in the preoperative evalua-
tion include the presence of comorbidities and treatment 
regimen, which may include both pharmacologic and 
deep brain stimulation. Important aspects of preoperative 
medication management include continuing the patient's 
home medication regimen as closely as possible, which is 
typically a strict schedule.8 Continuing the home medica-
tion schedule will help avoid exacerbation of Parkinson 
disease symptoms on the day of surgery. This is particu-
larly important for levodopa, which has a half-life of 
only 1 to 2 hours. Although patients must follow nil per 
os (NPO) guidelines, the Parkinson disease medications 
should be allowed with a sip of water. For procedures 
requiring general anesthesia, it is recommended that 
monoamine oxidase-B inhibitors (e.g., rasagiline, sele-
giline) be stopped 1 to 2 weeks before surgery to reduce 
the risk of drug interactions with opioids and the risk of 
serotonin syndrome.8
Cardiovascular
Several specialty societies have published clinical practice 
guidelines on perioperative cardiovascular evaluation and 
management of patients undergoing noncardiac surgery, 
including the American College of Cardiology/American 
Heart Association (ACC/AHA),9 the European Society of 
Cardiology and European Society of Anaesthesiology,10
and the Canadian Cardiovascular Society.11 The 2014 ACC/
AHA practice guideline includes a stepwise approach to 
perioperative cardiac assessment and addresses coronary 
artery disease, heart failure, cardiomyopathy, valvular heart 
disease, arrhythmias and conduction disorders, pulmonary 
vascular disease, and adult congenital heart disease.
This section will review the following cardiovascu-
lar conditions commonly encountered in preoperative 
evaluation of the patient undergoing noncardiac surgery: 
coronary artery disease (also discussed in Chapter 26), 
hypertension, the patient receiving anticoagulant therapy 
(for mechanical heart valve, atrial fibrillation, or venous 
thromboembolism), and the patient receiving antiplatelet 
therapy (for coronary artery disease or stroke).
The following conditions are discussed in Chapter 26
and will not be addressed here: valvular heart disease, 
cardiac conduction and rhythm disturbances, cardiac 
implantable electronic devices, heart failure, hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy, and pulmonary hypertension.
Coronary Artery Disease
Because ischemic heart disease is the leading cause of 
death in the world and a risk factor for perioperative 
mortality, preoperative assessment of coronary artery 
disease is an important part of the preoperative evalu-
ation. Cardiovascular risk factors (hypertension, dyslipi-
demia, diabetes mellitus, obesity, chronic kidney disease) 
are present in 45% of patients aged 45 years or older 
undergoing noncardiac surgery in the United States.12
Important concepts in the evaluation of patients with 
coronary artery disease include ruling out acute coronary 
syndrome, which includes unstable angina, ST-segment 
elevation myocardial infarction, and non–ST-segment-
elevation myocardial infarction—these conditions require 
guideline-directed medical therapy by a cardiologist.
A stepwise approach for perioperative cardiac assess-
ment from the 2014 ACC/AHA perioperative clinical 
practice guideline is shown in Fig. 13.1. Key concepts of 
this approach include use of a risk calculator to estimate 
the risk of major adverse cardiac events and using func-
tional capacity to help determine the need for additional 
testing. An example of the metabolic equivalents for 
common physical activities is listed in Table 13.3. How-
ever, subjective assessment of functional status based on 
patient history may not be as accurate as a more formal 
III
Chapter 13 Preoperative Evaluation
199
Patient scheduled for surgery with
known or risk factors for CAD*
(Step 1)
Emergency
Yes
Yes
ACS†
(Step 2)
No
No
Estimated perioperative risk of MACE
based on combined clinical/surgical risk
(Step 3)
Low risk (<1%)
(Step 4)
Elevated risk
(Step 5)
Moderate
or greater
(≥4 METs) functional
capacity
Moderate/Good
(≥4–10 METs)
No further
testing
(Class IIb)
No further
testing
(Class III: NB)
Proceed to
surgery
Poor OR unknown
functional capacity
(<4 METs):
Will further testing impact
decision making OR
perioperative care?
(Step 6)
Proceed to surgery
according to GDMT
OR alternate strategies
(noninvasive treatment,
palliation)
(Step 7)
No or
unknown
No
If
normal
If
abnormal
Coronary revascularization
according to existing CPGs
(Class I)
Yes
Pharmacologic
stress testing
(Class IIa)
Excellent
(>10 METs)
No further
testing
(Class IIa)
Proceed to
surgery
Clinical risk stratification
and proceed to surgery
Evaluate and treat
according to GDMT†
*See Sections 2.2, 2.4, and 2.5 in the
full-text CPG for recommendations for
patients with symptomatic HF, VHD,
or arrhythmias.
†See UA/NSTEMI and STEMI CPGs
(Table 2).
Fig. 13.1 ACC/AHA stepwise approach to perioperative cardiac assessment for CAD. Step 1: In patients scheduled for surgery with risk 
factors for or known CAD determine the urgency of surgery. If an emergency, then determine the clinical risk factors that may influence 
perioperative management and proceed to surgery with appropriate monitoring and management strategies based on the clinical 
assessment. Step 2: If the surgery is urgent or elective, determine if the patient has an ACS. If yes, then refer patient for cardiology evaluation 
and management according to GDMT. Step 3: If the patient has risk factors for stable CAD, then estimate the perioperative risk of MACE 
on the basis of the combined clinical/surgical risk. This estimate can use the American College of Surgeons NSQIP risk calculator or RCRI. 
Step 4: If the patient has a low risk of MACE (<1%), then no further testing is needed and the patient may proceed to surgery. Step 5: If the 
patient is at elevated risk of MACE, then determine functional capacity with an objective measure or scale such as the DASI. If the patient 
has moderate, good, or excellent functional capacity (≥4 METs), then proceed to surgery without further evaluation. Step 6: If the patient 
has poor (<4 METs) or unknown functional capacity, then the clinician should consult with the patient and perioperative team to determine 
whether further testing will affect patient decision making (e.g., decision to perform original surgery or willingness to undergo CABG or 
PCI, depending on the results of the test) or perioperative care. If yes, then pharmacologic stress testing is appropriate. In those patients 
with unknown functional capacity, exercise stress testing may be reasonable to perform. If the stress test is abnormal, consider coronary 
angiography and revascularization, depending on the extent of the abnormal test. The patient can then proceed to surgery with GDMT or 
consider alternative strategies, such as noninvasive treatment of the indication for surgery (e.g., radiation therapy for cancer) or palliation. If 
the test is normal, proceed to surgery according to GDMT. Step 7: If testing will not affect decision making or care, then proceed to surgery 
according to GDMT or consider alternative strategies, such as noninvasive treatment of the indication for surgery (e.g., radiation therapy for 
cancer) or palliation. ACS, Acute coronary syndrome; CABG, coronary artery bypass graft; CAD, coronary artery disease; CPG, clinical practice 
guideline; DASI, Duke Activity Status Index; GDMT, guideline-directed medical therapy; HF, heart failure; MACE, major adverse cardiac 
event; MET, metabolic equivalent; NB, no benefit; NSQIP, National Surgical Quality Improvement Program; PCI, percutaneous coronary 
intervention; RCRI, Revised Cardiac Risk Index; STEMI, ST-elevation myocardial infarction; UA/NSTEMI, unstable angina/non–ST-elevation 
myocardial infarction; VHD, valvular heart disease. (From in Fleisher LA, Fleischmann KE, Auerbach AD, et al. 2014 ACC/AHA guideline on 
perioperative cardiovascular evaluation and management of patients undergoing noncardiac surgery: A report of the American College of 
Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014;64[22]:e77–e137, Fig. 1.)
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
200
activity scale such as the Duke Activity Status Index 
(DASI).13 Table 13.4 lists the questions asked on the DASI 
scale.14 One prospective cohort study recommended a 
DASI score of 34 as a threshold for identifying patients 
at risk for cardiac complications (i.e., patients with DASI 
score greater than 34 are at lower risk).15
Several calculators can estimate the risk of periopera-
tive cardiovascular events. Examples include the Revised 
Cardiac Risk Index,16 the American College of Surgeons 
National Surgical Quality Improvement Program (NSQIP) 
risk calculator,17 and the Cardiovascular Risk Index 
(CVRI).18 These risk calculators are compared in Table 13.5
Category of Activity
Description of Activity
METs
Home activities
Cooking or food preparation
2.5
Cleaning, sweeping carpet or floors
3.3
Sweeping garage, sidewalk, or outside of house
4.0
Raking lawn
4.0
Yard work, general, moderate effort
4.0
Walking
Walking within house
2.0
Walking 2.5 mph, level surface
3.0
Stair climbing, slow pace
4.0
Walking 3.5 mph, level surface
4.3
Walking, climbing hills, no load
6.3
Running
Running 4 mph (13 min/mile)
6
Running 6.7 mph (9 min/mile)
10.5
Bicycling
Bicycling, <10 mph, leisure, to work or for pleasure
4.0
Bicycling, 14–15.9 mph, racing or leisure, fast vigorous effort
10.0
Gym/exercise
Yoga, Hatha
2.5
Yoga, Power
4.0
Bicycling, stationary, 51–89 watts, light-to-moderate effort
4.8
Elliptical trainer, moderate effort
5.0
Aerobic dance, low impact
5.0
Aerobic dance, high impact
7.3
Bicycling, stationary, RPM/Spin bike class
8.5
Other sports
Golf, using power cart
3.5
Golf, walking, carrying clubs
4.3
Skiing, downhill, alpine or snowboarding, moderate effort, general, active time only
5.3
Tennis, doubles
6.0
Swimming, leisurely, not lap swimming, general
6.0
Skiing, cross country, 2.5 mph, slow or light effort, ski walking
6.8
Soccer, casual, general
7.0
Rollerblading, in-line skating 9 mph, recreational pace
7.5
Rock or mountain climbing
8.0
Tennis, singles
8.0
Rope jumping, slow pace (<100 skips/min)
8.8
Swimming laps, freestyle, fast, vigorous effort
9.8
Table 13.3
Metabolic Equivalents of Common Physical Activities
From 2011 Compendium of Physical Activities. Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise. https://links.lww.com/MSS/A82.
III
Chapter 13 Preoperative Evaluation
201
Activity
Weight
Can you …
1. Take care of yourself, that is, eating, dressing, bathing, or using the toilet?
2.75
2. Walk indoors, such as around your house?
1.75
3. Walk a block or two on level ground?
2.75
4. Climb a flight of stairs or walk up a hill?
5.50
5. Run a short distance?
8.00
6. Do light work around the house like dusting or washing dishes?
2.70
7. Do moderate work around the house like vacuuming, sweeping floors, or carrying in groceries?
3.50
8. Do heavy work around the house like scrubbing floors or lifting or moving heavy furniture?
8.00
9. Do yardwork like raking leaves, weeding, or pushing a power mower?
4.50
10. Have sexual relations?
5.25
11. Participate in moderate recreational activities like golf, bowling, dancing, doubles tennis, or throwing a baseball 
or football?
6.00
12. Participate in strenuous sports like swimming, singles tennis, football, basketball, or skiing?
7.50
Table 13.4
Duke Activity Status Index (DASI)
Positive responses are added to get a total score, which ranges from 0 to 58.2.
From Hlatky MA, Boineau RE, Higginbotham MB, et al. A brief self-administered questionnaire to determine functional capacity (the Duke 
Activity Status Index). Am J Cardiol. 1989;64(10):651–654.
Risk Score or 
Calculator
Criteria
Comments
Revised Cardiac 
Risk Index (RCRI)
High-risk type of surgery (intraperitoneal, 
intrathoracic, or supra-inguinal vascular), 
ischemic heart disease, history of congestive 
heart failure, history of cerebral vascular disease, 
insulin therapy for diabetes, preoperative serum 
creatinine >2.0 mg/dL
Each element is worth 1 point. Rate of major cardiac 
complications of 1% occurred with 1 point.
From Lee TH, Marcantonio ER, Mangione CM, et al. 
Derivation and prospective validation of a simple 
index for prediction of cardiac risk of major noncardiac 
surgery. Circulation. 1999;100(10):1043–1049.
Cardiovascular Risk 
Index (CVRI)
Age ≥75, hemoglobin less than 12 mg/dL, any 
history of heart disease, symptoms of angina or 
dyspnea, vascular surgery, emergency surgery
Each element is worth 1 point. Outcomes assessed 
included risk of death, MI, or stroke. Risk of MI was 
1% with CVRI score of 2.
From Dakik HA, Chehab O, Eldirani M, et al. A new 
index for pre-operative cardiovascular evaluation. 
J Am Coll Cardiol. 2019;73(24):3067–3078.
NSQIP Surgical 
Risk Calculator
20 elements including procedure, age, sex, 
functional status, emergency case, ASA class, 
and presence of the following medical issues: 
steroid use, ascites, sepsis, ventilator dependence, 
disseminated cancer, diabetes, hypertension on 
medications, CHF, dyspnea, smoking status, COPD, 
dialysis, acute renal failure, and BMI.
Online risk calculator at:
https://riskcalculator.facs.org/RiskCalculator/
Provides risk estimates compared with average for a 
variety of outcomes, including serious complications, 
any complications, cardiac complications, discharge 
to nursing or rehabilitation facility, and death.
From Bilimoria KY, Liu Y, Paruch JL, et al. 
Development and evaluation of the universal ACS 
NSQIP surgical risk calculator: A decision aid and 
informed consent tool for patients and surgeons. 
J Am Coll Surg. 2013;217(5):833–842e1-e3.
Table 13.5
Risk Scores and Calculators to Predict Adverse Cardiac Events
ASA, American Society of Anesthesiologists; BMI, body mass index; CHF, congestive heart failure; COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; 
MI, myocardial infarction.
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
202
Hypertension
Hypertension is a major cause of death worldwide and 
is a risk factor for cardiovascular disease, stroke, and 
end-stage renal disease. As a perioperative risk factor, 
hypertension is most significant when end-organ damage 
is present. There have been no high-quality randomized 
trials on specific blood pressure targets before major 
surgery. However, general recommendations for the treat-
ment of hypertension in patients undergoing surgical 
procedures are provided in the 2017 ACC Guideline for 
the Prevention, Detection, Evaluation, and Management 
of High Blood Pressure in Adults, listed in Box 13.2 19
Perioperative management of chronic therapy with angio-
tensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors or angiotensin 
receptor blockers (ARBs) is an area of controversy. These 
medications have clearly been associated with intraop-
erative hypotension. However, a 2018 metaanalysis did 
not demonstrate a difference in mortality, major cardiac 
events, stroke, or acute kidney injury when comparing 
patients who withheld ACE inhibitor or ARB therapy on 
the morning of surgery with those who continued them.20
The Patient Receiving Anticoagulant Therapy
Patients with the following disorders may be receiving 
anticoagulation therapy: mechanical heart valve, atrial 
fibrillation, and venous thromboembolism. Perioperative 
management of anticoagulation therapy includes the 
following risk–benefit analysis: balancing the risk of a 
thrombotic event with discontinuation of anticoagulation 
therapy (e.g., embolic stroke, new venous thromboembo-
lism, or pulmonary embolism) compared with the risk of 
bleeding with surgery or an anesthetic intervention (e.g., 
neuraxial block). The risk of perioperative thromboem-
bolism can be estimated as indicated in Table 13.6 21
A 2012 evidence-based clinical practice guideline 
from the American College of Chest Physicians (ACCP) 
recommended situations in which patients on vitamin 
K antagonist (VKA) therapy should receive bridging 
therapy during interruption of VKA therapy.21 Patients 
with mechanical heart valves, atrial fibrillation, or 
venous thromboembolism at high risk for thromboembo-
lism (as described in Table 13.6) should receive bridging 
anticoagulation when VKA therapy must be interrupted 
before surgery. The rationale for bridging is that a VKA 
(e.g., warfarin) must be stopped for approximately 5 days 
before the anticoagulant effects abate completely. As the 
anticoagulant effect wanes, the patient's thromboembo-
lism risk increases, thus potentially requiring “bridging" 
with a short-acting anticoagulant such as subcutaneous 
low-molecular-weight heparin or subcutaneous unfrac-
tionated heparin.
For patients with low risk for thromboembolism, 
the 2012 ACCP guidelines suggest no bridging, and for 
patients at moderate risk for thromboembolism, the need 
for bridging is based on an assessment of individual 
patient and surgery-related risk factors, such as the risk of 
surgical bleeding and the ability to obtain local hemosta-
sis.21 For example, endoscopic or urologic procedures that 
do not involve a biopsy can often be performed without 
interrupting anticoagulation. By contrast, procedures 
such as neurosurgical or cardiothoracic procedures pose a 
higher risk of bleeding with residual anticoagulant effects. 
Table 13.7 provides examples of surgical and other inva-
sive procedures with their estimated risk of surgical bleed-
ing.22 In addition, although some procedures are unlikely 
to require blood transfusion, they may involve the risk 
of bleeding in an enclosed space or in an area in which 
local hemostasis is difficult to achieve (e.g., ophthalmo-
logic posterior chamber procedure, intracranial or spinal 
procedures, neuraxial block). The surgeon or procedural-
ist should be consulted if there are unresolved questions 
about the bleeding risk of a procedure for a given patient.
Since the 1950s, the VKA warfarin was adminis-
tered when oral anticoagulation was needed for the 
prevention of stroke in patients with atrial fibrillation. 
In 2010 the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) 
approved dabigatran (Pradaxa), a direct oral anticoagu-
lant (DOAC) whose mechanism of action is direct throm-
bin inhibition, to reduce the risk of stroke and systemic 
embolism in patients with nonvalvular atrial fibrilla-
tion (also see Chapter 23). Advantages of DOACs over 
warfarin include more predictable pharmacokinetics, 
fewer drug interactions, and lower risk of intracranial 
bleeding. In addition, because the DOACs have relatively 
short half-lives, bridging anticoagulation is not usually 
Box 13.2 Recommendations for Treatment of 
Hypertension in Patients Undergoing Surgical Procedures
1. In patients with hypertension undergoing major surgery 
who have been on β-blockers chronically β-blockers 
should be continued.
2. In patients with hypertension undergoing planned elective 
major surgery it is reasonable to continue medical therapy 
for hypertension until surgery.
3. In patients with hypertension undergoing major surgery 
discontinuation of ACE inhibitors or ARBs perioperatively 
may be considered.
4. In patients with planned elective major surgery and SBP 
of 180 mm Hg or higher or DBP of 110 mm Hg or higher 
deferring surgery may be considered.
5. For patients undergoing surgery, abrupt preoperative 
discontinuation of β-blockers or clonidine is potentially 
harmful.
6. β-Blockers should not be started on the day of surgery in 
β-blocker–naïve patients.
ACE, Angiotensin-converting enzyme; ARB, angiotensin receptor blocker.
From Whelton PK, Carey RM, Aronow WS, et al. 2017 ACC/AHA/
AAPA/ABC/ACPM/AGS/APhA/ASH/ASPC/NMA/PCNA guideline for 
the prevention, detection, evaluation, and management of high blood 
pressure in adults: Executive summary: A report of the American 
College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on 
Clinical Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2018;138(17):e426–e483, 
Table 11.5.
III
Chapter 13 Preoperative Evaluation
203
recommended when DOACs are discontinued before 
surgery. Disadvantages of DOACs include the require-
ment for dose adjustment in patients with chronic 
kidney disease (CKD). A related pharmacokinetic issue 
is that the DOAC discontinuation date before a surgical 
procedure depends on the procedural bleeding risk and 
the patient's creatinine clearance.23 See Table 13.8 for 
an example.
Although clinical practice guidelines provide rec-
ommendations for the interruption of anticoagulation, 
they do not replace clinician judgment for an indi-
vidual patient. Each patient has a different risk profile 
and procedural risk; patient and provider preferences 
may also influence recommendations for when to hold 
anticoagulant therapy. Challenging situations include a 
patient with known venous thromboembolism (and/or 
pulmonary embolism) and a contraindication to antico-
agulation or interruption of anticoagulation in the <3 
month treatment window (e.g., a patient scheduled for 
urgent intracranial tumor surgery). In settings like this 
expert opinion suggests that inferior vena cava (IVC) 
filter placement be considered.24
After the 2012 ACCP perioperative antithrombotic 
guidelines were published, additional clinical trials were 
performed in patients with atrial fibrillation. A 2015 
randomized trial evaluated over 1800 patients with 
chronic atrial fibrillation receiving warfarin therapy 
who were undergoing an elective surgery or other 
Indication for VKA Therapy
Risk 
Stratum
Mechanical Heart Valve
Atrial Fibrillation
VTE
Higha
Any mitral valve prosthesis
CHADS2 score of 5 or 6
(see score at the bottom)
Recent (within 3 mo) VTE
Severe thrombophilia (e.g., 
deficiency of protein C, protein S, 
or antithrombin; antiphospholipid 
antibodies; multiple abnormalities)
Any caged-ball or tilting disc aortic valve 
prosthesis
Recent (within 3 mo) stroke 
or TIA
Severe thrombophilia (e.g., 
deficiency of protein C, protein S, 
or antithrombin; antiphospholipid 
antibodies; multiple abnormalities)
Recent (within 6 mo) stroke or TIA
Rheumatic valvular heart 
disease
Moderate
Bileaflet aortic valve prosthesis and one 
or more of the following risk factors: 
atrial fibrillation, prior stroke or transient 
ischemic attack, hypertension, diabetes, 
congestive heart failure, age >75 yr
CHADS2 score of 3 or 4
VTE within the past 3–12 mo
Nonsevere thrombophilia (e.g., 
heterozygous factor V Leiden or 
prothrombin gene mutation)
Recurrent VTE
Active cancer (treated within 6 mo or 
palliative)
Low
Bileaflet aortic valve prosthesis without 
atrial fibrillation and no other risk factors 
for stroke
CHADS2 score of 0–2 
(assuming no prior stroke or 
TIA)
VTE >12 mo previous and no other 
risk factors
Table 13.6
Risk Stratification for Perioperative Thromboembolism
aHigh-risk patients may also include those with a prior stroke or transient ischemic attack occurring >3 mo before the planned surgery and 
a CHADS2 score <5, those with prior thromboembolism during temporary interruption of VKAs, or those undergoing certain types of surgery 
associated with an increased risk for stroke or other thromboembolism (e.g., cardiac valve replacement, carotid endarterectomy, major vascular 
surgery).
CHADS2, Congestive heart failure, hypertension, age ≥75 years, diabetes mellitus, and prior stroke or TIA. If present, each item is counted as 1 
point except prior stroke or TIA, which is counted as 2 points; total score is sum of the points.
Douketis JD, Spyropoulos AC, Spencer FA, et al. Perioperative management of antithrombotic therapy: Antithrombotic Therapy and Prevention of 
Thrombosis, 9th ed: American College of Chest Physicians Evidence-Based Clinical Practice Guidelines. Chest. 2012;141(2 Suppl):e326S–e350S, 
Table 1.
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
204
High bleeding risk procedures 
(30-day risk of major bleed 
>2%)a
•Major surgery with extensive tissue injury
•Cancer surgery, especially solid tumor resection
•Major orthopedic surgery, including shoulder replacement surgery
•Reconstructive plastic surgery
•Urologic or gastrointestinal surgery, especially anastomosis surgery
•Transurethral prostate resection, bladder resection, or tumor ablation
•Nephrectomy, kidney biopsy
•Colonic polyp resection
•Bowel resection
•Percutaneous endoscopic gastrotomy (PEG) placement, endoscopic retrograde
cholangiopancreatography (ERCP)
•Surgery in highly vascular organs (kidneys, liver, spleen)
•Cardiac, intracranial, or spinal surgery
•Any major operation (procedure duration >45 min)
•Neuraxial anesthesiab
Low/moderate bleeding risk 
proceduresc (30-day risk of major 
bleed 0%–2%)
•Arthroscopy
•Cutaneous/lymph node biopsies
•Foot/hand surgery
•Coronary angiographyd
•Gastrointestinal endoscopy ± biopsy
•Colonoscopy ± biopsy
•Abdominal hysterectomy
•Laparoscopic cholecystectomy
•Abdominal hernia repair
•Hemorrhoidal surgery
•Bronchoscopy ± biopsy
•Epidural injections
Minimal bleeding risk 
procedurese (30-day risk of major 
bleed ~0%)
•Minor dermatologic procedures (excision of basal and squamous cell skin cancers, actinic
keratoses, and premalignant or cancerous skin nevi)
•Ophthalmologic (cataract) procedures
•Minor dental procedures (dental extractions, restorations, prosthetics, endodontics),
dental cleanings, fillings
•Pacemaker or cardioverter-defibrillator device implantation
Table 13.7
Risk Stratification of Surgical Bleeding Risk
aNo residual anticoagulant effect at time of procedure (i.e., 4–5 drug half-life interruption preprocedure).
bIncludes spinal and epidural anesthesia, consider not only absolute major bleed event rate but catastrophic consequences of a major bleed.
cSome residual anticoagulant effect allowed (i.e., 2–3 drug half-life interruption preprocedure).
dRadial approach may be considered minimal bleed risk compared with femoral approach.
eProcedure can be safely done under full-dose anticoagulation (may consider holding direct oral anticoagulant dose day of procedure to avoid 
peak anticoagulant effects).
From Spyropoulos AC, Brohi K, Caprini J, et al. SSC Subcommittee on Perioperative and Critical Care Thrombosis and Haemostasis of the 
International Society on Thrombosis and Haemostasis. Scientific and Standardization Committee Communication: Guidance document on the 
periprocedural management of patients on chronic oral anticoagulant therapy: Recommendations for standardized reporting of procedural/
surgical bleed risk and patient-specific thromboembolic risk. J Thromb Haemost. 2019;17(11):1966–1972, Table 1.
invasive procedure requiring interruption of warfarin.25
One group of patients received bridging anticoagula-
tion with low-molecular-weight heparin, whereas the 
other group received no bridging. In terms of arterial 
thromboembolism risk, the no-bridging group was 
noninferior to the bridging group; the incidence of 
major bleeding was lower in the no-bridging group. 
The American College of Cardiology published the 2017 
ACC Expert Consensus Decision Pathway for Periproce-
dural Management of Anticoagulation in Patients With 
Nonvalvular Atrial Fibrillation.26 The pathway includes 
a suggested algorithm for the bridge versus no-bridge 
decision-making process in this patient population 
(Fig. 13.2).
The Patient Receiving Antiplatelet Therapy
Coronary artery disease and stroke represent the top two 
causes of mortality worldwide. These patients may receive 
antiplatelet therapy for pharmacologic prevention of arte-
rial thrombotic events. As with anticoagulant therapy, 
perioperative management involves balancing the risks 
of ischemia and thrombosis with the risk of bleeding. 
Antiplatelet agents can be used for primary and second-
ary prevention of thrombosis, either as monotherapy or 
III
Chapter 13 Preoperative Evaluation
205
as dual antiplatelet therapy (DAPT). Primary prevention 
is indicated in patients at higher risk of atherosclerotic 
cardiovascular disease but not at increased bleeding 
risk.27 Secondary prevention with antiplatelet agents may 
include patients with stable coronary artery disease, acute 
coronary syndromes, postcoronary artery bypass graft 
(CABG) or percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI), post-
transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR), peripheral 
arterial disease, carotid artery disease, and stroke.
Management of antiplatelet therapy in the periopera-
tive period involves several considerations (Box 13.3). An 
algorithm for the perioperative management of antiplatelet 
therapy in patients with coronary artery disease is shown 
in Fig. 13.3 28 For patients who have received PCI and 
are treated with DAPT, the American College of Cardiol-
ogy published 2016 guidelines that recommend delaying 
elective noncardiac surgery for 30 days after bare-metal 
stent (BMS) implantation and optimally 6 months after 
drug-eluting stent (DES) implantation.29 Even after this 
high-risk period for stent thrombosis, the decision about 
duration of DAPT requires individual consideration of 
the risk/benefit ratio and patient preference. The duration 
of DAPT most commonly refers to the duration of P2Y12
inhibitor therapy; aspirin therapy is almost always recom-
mended indefinitely in patients with known CAD.29
Pulmonary
This section will focus on predicting postoperative pul-
monary complications (PPCs). The following pulmonary 
conditions are addressed in other chapters: asthma (see 
Drug
Renal Function
Low Procedural 
Bleeding Risk 
(Interval Between 
Last Dose and 
Procedure)
High Procedural 
Bleeding 
Risk (Interval 
Between Last 
Dose and 
Procedure)
Very High Procedural 
Bleeding Risk (e.g., 
Cardiothoracic, 
Intracranial, Neuraxial; 
Interval Between Last 
Dose and Procedure)
Resumption of DOAC
Rivaroxaban 
(Xarelto)
CrCl ≥30 mL/
min
t1/2 = 8–9 hr
CrCl 15–29 mL/
min
t1/2 = 9–10 hr
CrCl <5 mL/min 
or on HD
t1/2 = unknown
24 hr (last dose 
2 days prior)
48 hr (last dose 
3 days prior)
>96 hr (last dose 
>5 days prior)
48 hr (last dose 
3 days prior)
72 hr (last dose 
4 days prior)
>96 hr (last dose 
>5 days prior)
72 hr (last dose 4 days 
prior)
120 hr (last dose 6 days 
prior)
>120 hr (last dose 
>6 days prior)
•Low bleed risk:
consider resuming 
no sooner than 
1 day postop
•High/very high risk:
consider resuming 
2–3 days postop
•For all patients:
discuss timing with 
proceduralist
Table 13.8
Example of DOAC Periprocedural Management: Rivaroxaban
CrCl, Creatinine clearance; DOAC, direct oral anticoagulant; ESRD, end-stage renal disease; HD, hemodialysis; t1/2, half-life. 
Periprocedural management of other DOACs will vary depending on drug pharmacokinetics. For patients with ESRD on DOACs, consider 
consultation with institutional hematology or anticoagulation service.
From Douketis JD, Spyropoulos AC, Anderson JM, et al. The Perioperative Anticoagulant Use for Surgery Evaluation (PAUSE) study for patients 
on a direct oral anticoagulant who need an elective surgery or procedure: Design and rationale. Thromb Haemost. 2017;117(12):2415–2424. 
Erratum in: Thromb Haemost. 2018;118(9):1679–1680, and author's institutional guidelines (University of California, San Francisco).
Chapter 27), chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (see 
Chapters 27 and 42), cigarette smoking and smoking ces-
sation (see Chapter 42), obstructive sleep apnea and use 
of the STOP-BANG score for screening (see Chapters 42
and 48), and pulmonary hypertension (see Chapters 26
and 27).
PPCs occur commonly and are associated with increased 
patient mortality. The estimated incidence of PPC after 
major surgery ranges from <1% to 23%, based on the defi-
nition used for PPCs.30 Table 13.9 provides definitions for 
PPC from a 2015 European task force.31
Multiple risk prediction models can be used to pro-
vide preoperative risk stratification; however, most were 
developed from retrospective databases or are focused 
on a single adverse pulmonary outcome. There is lack 
of agreement between comparative studies, and many 
prediction models are complex and impractical for rou-
tine clinical use.30 One prospective observational study 
developed a score to predict postoperative respiratory 
failure, listed in Table 13.10.32 This score may be use-
ful in counseling individual patients about their risk of 
PPCs, including the possibility of postoperative intensive 
care unit (ICU) care. Currently, there are no high-quality, 
evidence-based perioperative interventions to reduce the 
risk of PPCs. However, there is moderate-quality evidence 
for the potential benefit of lung-protective intraoperative 
ventilation and goal-directed hemodynamic/fluid therapy 
and low-quality evidence for enhanced recovery path-
ways, prophylactic mucolytics, postoperative noninvasive 
ventilation, prophylactic respiratory physiotherapy, and 
epidural analgesia.33
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
206
Renal
The perioperative implications of renal disease are 
addressed in Chapter 28, including a discussion of pre-
operative risk factors for postoperative renal dysfunction, 
renal function tests, and pathophysiology of end-stage 
renal disease.
Liver
Diseases of the liver can affect nearly all organ systems. 
Chapter 28 describes the end-organ implications of cirrhosis, 
Fig. 13.2 Algorithm for Anticoagulation Bridging in Patients With Nonvalvular Atrial Fibrillation.
(From Doherty JU, Gluckman TJ, Hucker WJ, et al. 2017 ACC expert consensus decision pathway for 
periprocedural management of anticoagulation in patients with nonvalvular atrial fibrillation: A report 
of the American College of Cardiology Clinical Expert Consensus Document Task Force. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2017;69[7]:871–898, Figure 4.)
the pathophysiology of end-stage liver disease, and compli-
cations such as ascites and hepatorenal syndrome. Pre-
operative evaluation of liver disease, including use of the 
Child–Turcotte–Pugh score and Model of End-Stage Liver 
Disease (MELD) score, is also addressed in Chapter 28.
Endocrine
Common endocrine disorders are discussed in Chapter 29. 
This section will address the preoperative medication 
management of patients with diabetes mellitus in more 
detail.
III
Chapter 13 Preoperative Evaluation
207
Diabetes Mellitus
Diabetes mellitus is a risk factor for postoperative com-
plications. Hyperglycemia is associated with cardiovas-
cular events and with infectious complications, including 
wound infection, pneumonia, and sepsis. Long-term glu-
cose control can be assessed by checking the hemoglobin 
A1C (HbA1C). Although higher levels of HbA1C are associ-
ated with worse outcomes, there are no data showing that 
postponing surgery to improve glucose control is benefi-
cial. However, depending on the degree of glucose imbal-
ance and the nature of the proposed surgery, individual 
patients can be counseled about whether postponing 
surgery is warranted to achieve better glucose control.
Preoperative evaluation of a patient with diabetes 
includes a review of the type of diabetes; current phar-
macotherapy; current glycemic control; and presence of 
long-term complications of diabetes such as gastropa-
resis, neuropathy, cardiovascular disease, and periph-
eral vascular disease. After evaluating the adequacy 
of glucose control (including frequency of both severe 
hypoglycemia and hyperglycemia), a plan for periopera-
tive medication management can be developed. General 
recommendations are provided in Table 13.11 34 35 Key 
management principles include avoiding hypoglycemia 
during the period when the patient is NPO beginning the 
night before surgery; the patient with type 1 diabetes 
must always be receiving basal insulin to prevent the 
development of diabetic ketoacidosis.
Hematologic
Preoperative anemia, including the potential role 
of a preoperative anemia clinic, is addressed in 
Chapter 42. Thrombocytopenia (defined as plate-
let count <150 × 109/L) may be discovered when a 
patient obtains a preoperative complete blood count 
Fig. 13.3 Algorithm for perioperative management of antiplatelet therapy in patients with coronary 
artery disease. ACC/AHA, American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association; ACS, acute 
coronary syndrome; ADP, adenosine diphosphate; ASA, aspirin; BMS, bare-metal stents; CAD,
coronary artery disease; DAPT, dual antiplatelet therapy; DES, drug-eluting stent; ESC, European 
Society of Cardiology; PCI, percutaneous coronary intervention; PTCA, percutaneous transluminal 
coronary angioplasty. (From Filipescu DC, Stefan MG, Valeanu L, et al. Perioperative management of 
antiplatelet therapy in noncardiac surgery. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol. 2020;33[3]:454–462, Figure 1. 
Adapted from Oprea AD, Popescu WM. Perioperative management of antiplatelet therapy. Br J Anaesth. 
2013;111[Suppl 1]:i3–i17.)
Box 13.3 Considerations for Perioperative Antiplatelet 
Therapy
1. What was the original indication for antiplatelet therapy 
(e.g., primary or secondary prevention)?
2. Did the patient complete the recommended duration of 
antiplatelet therapy?
3. What is the thrombotic risk of temporary stoppage of 
antiplatelet therapy around the time of the procedure?
4. Does the procedure require interruption of antiplatelet 
therapy to reduce bleeding risk?
5. What strategies can be used to decrease thrombotic risk 
in patients undergoing nonelective procedures?
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
208
primarily for determination of hematocrit. The rela-
tionship between platelet count and bleeding risk is 
not linear and depends also on patient factors and 
qualitative platelet function. Based primarily on expert 
opinion and low-quality evidence, commonly used 
platelet threshold for major nonneuraxial surgery is 
>50 × 109/L; for surgery on the brain or posterior eye, 
the recommended threshold is 100 × 109/L.36
Infectious Disease
Two infectious disease issues of relevance to preoperative 
evaluation will be discussed here: prevention of surgical 
site infection (SSI) and prevention of infective endocar-
ditis (IE).
Surgical Site Infection
SSI is the most common postoperative complication 
in surgical patients and is associated with increased 
morbidity and mortality. The impact of an SSI is par-
ticularly burdensome in patients undergoing total hip or 
knee arthroplasty and other surgeries involving exten-
sive medical implants. Two factors related to SSI can be 
addressed in the preoperative setting: glycemic control 
and antiseptic prophylaxis. The 2017 Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention (CDC) Guideline for the Preven-
tion of Surgical Site Infection recommends implementing 
perioperative glycemic control using a blood glucose 
target of less than 200 mg/dL in patients with and with-
out diabetes.37 Other organizations recommend a slightly 
lower maximum blood glucose target of 180 mg/dL.34
There is no consensus recommendation for the optimal 
Complication
Definition
Respiratory 
infection
Patient has received antibiotics for a 
suspected respiratory infection and 
met one or more of the following 
criteria: new or changed sputum, new 
or changed lung opacities, fever, white 
blood cell count >12 × 109 /L
Respiratory 
failure
Postoperative PaO2 <8 kPa (60 mm Hg) 
on room air, a PaO2:F O2 ratio <40 kPa 
(300 mm Hg), or arterial oxyhemoglobin 
saturation measured with pulse 
oximetry <90% and requiring oxygen 
therapy
Pleural effusion
Chest radiograph changes (detailed in 
reference)
Atelectasis
Lung opacification with a shift of the 
mediastinum, hilum, or hemidiaphragm 
toward the affected area and 
compensatory overinflation in the 
adjacent nonatelectatic lung
Pneumothorax
Air in the pleural space with no vascular 
bed surrounding the visceral pleura
Bronchospasm
Newly detected expiratory wheezing 
treated with bronchodilators
Aspiration 
pneumonitis
Acute lung injury after the inhalation of 
regurgitated gastric contents
Table 13.9
Definition of Postoperative Pulmonary 
Complications
From Jammer I, Wickboldt N, Sander M, et al. Standards for 
definitions and use of outcome measures for clinical effectiveness 
research in perioperative medicine: European Perioperative Clinical 
Outcome (EPCO) definitions: A statement from the ESA-ESICM Joint 
Taskforce on Perioperative Outcome Measures. Eur J Anaesthesiol. 
2015;32(2):88–105.
Risk Factor
Risk Score 
Points
Patient-Related Factors
Preoperative SpO2 ≥96%
0
Preoperative SpO2 91%–95%
7
Preoperative SpO2 ≤90%
10
Respiratory symptoms (at least 1)
10
History of congestive heart failure—None
0
History of congestive heart failure—NYHA I
3
History of congestive heart failure—NYHA ≥II
8
History of chronic liver disease
7
Procedure-Related Factors
Emergency procedure
12
Surgical incision
•Peripheral
0
•Closed intrathoracic/closed upper
abdominal
3
•Open upper abdominal
7
•Intrathoracic open
12
Duration of surgery ≤2 hr
0
Duration of surgery >2–3 hr
5
Duration of surgery >3 hr
10
Table 13.10
Predictors of Postoperative Respiratory 
Failure (PERISCOPE-PRF) Score
NYHA, New York Heart Association; PRF, postoperative respiratory 
failure (defined as new-onset hypoxemia appearing within the first 5 
postoperative days)
The incidence (and 95% confidence interval) of PRF by sum of risk 
score points:
Low (<12 points): 1.1% (0.7–1.5)
Intermediate (12–22 points): 4.6% (3.4–5.6)
High (23 or more points): 18.8% (15.8–21.8)
Adapted from Canet J, Sabaté S, Mazo V, et al. PERISCOPE group. 
Development and validation of a score to predict postoperative 
respiratory failure in a multicentre European cohort: A prospective, 
observational study. Eur J Anaesthesiol. 2015;32(7):458–470, Table 3.
III
Chapter 13 Preoperative Evaluation
209
HbA1C goal for the prevention of SSI in patients with and 
without diabetes.
The CDC guideline also advises patients to shower or 
bathe with soap or an antiseptic agent on at least the 
night before the operative day.37 There was no specific 
recommendation regarding the following factors: optimal 
timing of the preoperative shower, total number of soap 
or antiseptic agent applications, or use of chlorhexidine 
gluconate washcloths.
Infective Endocarditis
IE is an uncommon but potentially life-threatening infec-
tion. Since the 1950s, the AHA has made recommenda-
tions for the prevention of IE. Earlier versions of these 
guidelines included a list of cardiac conditions for which 
prophylaxis was recommended, in addition to a list of so-
called bacteremia-inducing dental or surgical procedures 
in which prophylaxis was recommended. The list of 
procedures included dental and oral surgeries, surgeries 
involving intestinal or respiratory mucosa, and genital-
urinary tract surgeries. In 2007 the AHA made several 
major changes to its IE prevention guidelines including 
a narrower list of procedures and cardiac conditions.38
Box 13.4 describes the key guidelines, and Box 13.5 lists 
the cardiac conditions with the highest risk of adverse 
outcomes from endocarditis.38 39 Antimicrobial prevention 
regimens for a dental procedure include oral amoxicillin; 
or intravenous (IV) ampicillin, cefazolin, or ceftriaxone.38
Geriatrics
Advancing age is associated with many physiologic changes 
and increased likelihood of coexisting diseases. Chapter 35
describes the perioperative implications of issues that arise 
more frequently in this patient population, including cog-
nitive function and decision-making capacity, functional 
capacity, malnutrition, and frailty.
Frailty
In older adults the syndrome of frailty is increasingly preva-
lent and associated with adverse health outcomes. Geriatri-
cians defined frailty as a syndrome of decreased reserve and 
resistance to stressors resulting from cumulative declines 
across multiple physiologic systems, causing vulnerability 
to adverse outcomes. Multiple diagnostic tools are used 
to assess frailty, as described in Chapter 35. Severity of 
frailty syndrome is correlated with postoperative mortality 
and many postoperative complications.40 However, a 2017 
systematic review found that few interventions have been 
tested to improve the outcomes of frail patients undergoing 
surgery, and most available studies had substantial risk of 
bias.41 For example, although postoperative exercise therapy 
after cardiac or orthopedic surgery was associated with 
improved outcomes, there have been no high-quality rand-
omized trials of preoperative exercise in frail older patients 
that evaluate meaningful long-term postoperative outcomes.
PREOPERATIVE TESTING
There are two types of preoperative tests: routine and 
selective. A routine test is intended to discover a disease 
or disorder in an asymptomatic patient. Selective preop-
erative tests are ordered after consideration of specific 
information in the patient's history or medical records. 
The ASA Practice Advisory for Preanesthesia Evaluation 
states that preoperative tests should not be ordered rou-
tinely.1 Selective tests can be used to guide or optimize 
perioperative decision making and management.
Historically, routine preoperative testing was common 
practice, even for procedures with very low risk of com-
plications. However, despite multiple specialty society 
guidelines recommending against it, routine preoperative 
Patient Type
Medication Strategy
Patient on oral glucose-
lowering agents only
Hold oral agents on AM of 
surgery.
Patients on SGLT2 
inhibitors
Must discontinue SGLT2 
inhibitors 3–4 days before 
surgery to reduce the risk of 
“euglycemic DKA.”
Patients with DM type 
2 on oral agents and 
insulin therapy
Hold oral agents on AM of 
surgery; for long-acting insulin 
given the evening before surgery, 
reduce dose by 25%a; do not give 
short-acting insulin on AM of 
surgery.
Patients with known 
DM type 1 on 
intermittent insulin 
therapy
Must have basal insulin at all 
times to prevent DKA or other 
metabolic abnormalities. Reduce 
long-acting insulin dose by 25% 
on evening before surgery; on AM 
of surgery, may give correctional 
rapid-acting insulin every 2–4 hr 
to correct hyperglycemia.
Patients with DM type 
1 on insulin pump 
therapy
Need to determine if insulin pump 
can be used perioperatively at 
the health care facility (based on 
anticipated length and stress of 
surgical procedure and proximity 
of pump to surgical field).
Table 13.11
Perioperative Medication Management for 
Patients With Diabetes Mellitus
aNote: The very long-acting insulin degludec (Tresiba) has a duration 
of action up to 42 hours and may require dose reduction for an 
additional day before surgery.
From American Diabetes Association Professional Practice 
Committee. 16. Diabetes Care in the Hospital: Standards of Medical 
Care in Diabetes—2022. Diabetes Care. 2022;45(Suppl 1):S244–
S253; Janež A, Guja C, Mitrakou A, et al. Insulin therapy in adults 
with type 1 diabetes mellitus: A narrative review. Diabetes Ther. 
2020;11(2):387–409.
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
210
testing frequently occurs in patients undergoing cata-
ract extraction—one of the safest outpatient procedures 
performed today.42 The increasing focus on health care 
value (also see Chapter 1) has led to initiatives such 
as the American Board of Internal Medicine (ABIM) 
Foundation's Choosing Wisely campaign, which aims to 
promote conversations between clinicians and patients to 
help them choose care that is supported by evidence, is 
not duplicative, is free from harm, and is truly necessary. 
The ABIM Foundation has worked with other specialty 
societies to identify treatments that were overused and 
did not provide benefit for patients.43 Some examples of 
Choosing Wisely recommendations relevant to preopera-
tive testing are provided in Table 13.12
Rationale for Selective Testing
Although there is no evidence for explicit decision 
parameters for selective testing, the general principles 
are described in Box 13.6. Table 13.13 describes specialty 
society recommendations for several selected preopera-
tive tests.1 9 44
Pregnancy Testing
Patients may present for surgery with early undetected 
pregnancy. Although some practices require all females 
of childbearing age to undergo a urine pregnancy test on 
the day of surgery, this is a controversial issue. Ethically, 
the patient has the right to decide whether to have preg-
nancy screening before receiving anesthesia. The ASA 
Practice Advisory for Preanesthesia Evaluation states 
that pregnancy testing may be offered to female patients 
of childbearing age for whom the result would alter the 
patient's management.1 A 2016 ASA statement provided 
additional recommendations, stating that pregnancy test-
ing should not be mandatory and recommending that 
preanesthetic educational materials should ideally be 
developed and given to patients to allow them to make 
an informed decision.45
Preoperative Transfusion Testing
Blood product transfusions are commonly administered 
during surgery (also see Chapter 25). Because the process 
Box 13.4 Prevention of Infective Endocarditis (IE)—Key 
AHA Guidelines
•Bacteremia resulting from daily activities is much more
likely to cause IE than bacteremia associated with a 
dental procedure.
•Antibiotic prophylaxis is not recommended based solely
on an increased lifetime risk of acquisition of IE.
•IE prophylaxis is only recommended for patients with the
high-risk conditions (see Box 13.5).
•Antibiotic prophylaxis is reasonable for all dental
procedures that involve manipulation of gingival tissues 
or the periapical region of teeth or perforation of oral 
mucosa only for patients with underlying cardiac 
conditions associated with the highest risk of adverse 
outcome from IE (see Box 13.5).
•Antibiotic prophylaxis is reasonable for procedures on
the respiratory tract or infected skin, skin structures, or 
musculoskeletal tissue only for patients with underlying 
cardiac conditions associated with the highest risk of 
adverse outcome from IE (see Box 13.5).
•Antibiotic prophylaxis solely to prevent IE is not
recommended for gastrourinary or gastrointestinal tract 
procedures.
Note: A 2021 scientific statement from the American Heart 
Association did not recommend any revisions to the 2007 IE 
prevention guidelines.
From Wilson W, Taubert KA, Gewitz M, et al. Prevention of infective 
endocarditis: Guidelines from the American Heart Association: 
A guideline from the American Heart Association Rheumatic 
Fever, Endocarditis, and Kawasaki Disease Committee, Council on 
Cardiovascular Disease in the Young, and the Council on Clinical 
Cardiology, Council on Cardiovascular Surgery and Anesthesia, and 
the Quality of Care and Outcomes Research Interdisciplinary Working 
Group. Circulation. 2007;116(15):1736–1754. Erratum in: Circulation. 
20079;116(15):e376–e377; Wilson WR, Gewitz M, Lockhart PB, et al. 
Prevention of viridans group streptococcal infective endocarditis: 
A scientific statement from the American Heart Association. 
Circulation. 2021;143(20):e963–e978. Erratum in: Circulation. 
2021;144(9):e192.
Box 13.5 Cardiac Conditions Associated With the 
Highest Risk of Adverse Outcome From Endocarditis for 
Which Prophylaxis With Dental Procedures Is Reasonable
•Prosthetic cardiac valve or prosthetic material used for
cardiac valve repair
•Previous infective endocarditis (IE)
•Congenital heart disease (CHD)a
•Unrepaired cyanotic CHD, including palliative shunts
and conduits
•Completely repaired congenital heart defect with
prosthetic material or device, whether placed by 
surgery or by catheter intervention, during the first 6 
months after the procedureb
•Repaired CHD with residual defects at the site or
adjacent to the site of a prosthetic patch or prosthetic 
device (which inhibits endothelialization)
•Cardiac transplantation recipients who develop cardiac
valvulopathy
aExcept for the conditions listed, antibiotic prophylaxis is no longer 
recommended for any other form of CHD.
bProphylaxis is reasonable because endothelialization of prosthetic 
material occurs within 6 months after the procedure.
From Wilson W, Taubert KA, Gewitz M, et al. Prevention of infective 
endocarditis: Guidelines from the American Heart Association: 
A guideline from the American Heart Association Rheumatic 
Fever, Endocarditis, and Kawasaki Disease Committee, Council on 
Cardiovascular Disease in the Young, and the Council on Clinical 
Cardiology, Council on Cardiovascular Surgery and Anesthesia, and 
the Quality of Care and Outcomes Research Interdisciplinary Working 
Group. Circulation. 2007;116(15):1736–1754, Table 3. Erratum in: 
Circulation. 2007;116(15):e376–377.
III
Chapter 13 Preoperative Evaluation
211
of antibody screening and crossmatching takes time, 
the preoperative evaluation process includes a decision 
whether to perform blood type and antibody screening, 
crossmatch for a specified quantity of red blood cells, 
or preparation of other blood products such as plasma 
or platelets. The implications of under-ordering or over-
ordering transfusion tests are described in Table 13.14
Historically, clinicians frequently overestimated the 
amount of blood that should be prepared for a given 
surgical case. The concept of the maximum surgi-
cal blood order schedule (MSBOS) was developed to 
compensate for this frequent overestimation; the goal 
was not to rigidly control clinician transfusion deci-
sions.46 The MSBOS was created by analyzing data on 
the mean number of blood units actually transfused 
intraoperatively and immediately postoperatively for 
common operations, organized by surgical service. The 
result is a recommendation for one of the following for 
a given surgical procedure: (1) no transfusion testing, 
(2) type and screen only, or (3) type and crossmatch 
for a specified number of packed red blood cell (PRBC) 
units. The MSBOS is institution specific; institutions use 
different processes to update the MSBOS as new surgi-
cal procedures are performed.47 Table 13.15 provides an 
example of MSBOS recommendations for a few selected 
procedures. However, MSBOS recommendations do not 
reflect patient factors such as anemia or coagulopathy 
(e.g., disease or medication related) or surgical bleeding 
risk for a given patient. Nevertheless, the MSBOS repre-
sents a reasonable starting point for deciding whether to 
order a type and screen or type and crossmatch before 
elective surgery.
RISK ASSESSMENT
The assessment of a patient's perioperative risks is an 
important goal of preoperative evaluation. Tools for risk 
stratification can be divided into two types: risk scores 
and risk prediction models.48 Examples of risk scores 
include ASA Physical Status (discussed later) and the 
Revised Cardiac Risk Index.16 Although risk scores are 
simple to use and provide comparative information rela-
tive to other patients, they are not designed to provide 
individualized risk prediction. Risk prediction models 
such as the NSQIP surgical risk calculator require much 
more information to generate a multivariable risk assess-
ment; the NSQIP calculator has only been validated in 
specific types of surgery. The practical considerations of 
individual risk assessment are listed in Box 13.7. Clini-
cal judgment and the input of other specialty clinicians 
may be required to address the unique circumstance of a 
given patient.
ASA Physical Status
The ASA Physical Status classification system was devel-
oped in the 1940s to facilitate collection of statistical 
data in anesthesia.49 Although the ASA Physical Status 
classification was not designed or developed to predict 
perioperative risk in an individual patient, many stud-
ies have examined the correlation between ASA Physi-
cal Status and outcomes in the aggregate. Whereas the 
Specialty Society
Preoperative Testing 
Recommendation
American Society of 
Anesthesiologists
Do not obtain baseline laboratory 
studies in patients without 
significant systemic disease (ASA I 
or II) undergoing low-risk surgery—
specifically complete blood count, 
basic or comprehensive metabolic 
panel, coagulation studies when 
blood loss (or fluid shifts) is/are 
expected to be minimal.
American Society of 
Anesthesiologists
Do not obtain baseline diagnostic 
cardiac testing (transthoracic/
transesophageal echocardiography 
[TTE/TEE]) or cardiac stress testing 
in asymptomatic stable patients with 
known cardiac disease (e.g., CAD, 
valvular disease) undergoing low- or 
moderate-risk noncardiac surgery.
Society of General 
Internal Medicine
Do not perform routine preoperative 
testing before low-risk surgical 
procedures.
American College of 
Surgeons
Avoid admission or preoperative 
chest x-rays for ambulatory patients 
with unremarkable history and 
physical examination.
American Academy 
of Ophthalmology
Do not perform preoperative medical 
tests for eye surgery unless there are 
specific medical indications.
American College of 
Cardiology
Avoid performing stress testing, 
coronary calcium scoring, or 
advanced cardiac imaging as part 
of preoperative cardiovascular risk 
assessment in patients scheduled for 
low-risk noncardiac surgery.
Table 13.12
Choosing Wisely Recommendations 
Relevant to Preoperative Testing
From Clinician Lists. Choosing Wisely. An Initiative of the ABIM 
Foundation. https://www.choosingwisely.org/clinician-lists/
Box 13.6 Rationale for Preoperative Testing
1. Diagnosis of a disorder that may affect perioperative 
anesthesia management
2. Assessment of a known medical condition that may affect 
perioperative care
3. Formulation of plans for perioperative anesthesia care
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
212
initial description of the physical state system included 
numerous examples of each class, subsequent iterations 
from 1945 to 2014 omitted case examples, only provid-
ing a brief description of each class. The simplicity of the 
ASA Physical Status led to widespread use among many 
nonanesthesia clinicians and administrators. For exam-
ple, the ASA Physical Status class has been used to make 
decisions regarding (1) inpatient versus ambulatory care 
locations for individual patients, (2) whether to transfer 
a patient to another facility, (3) assigning anesthesia 
providers to a given patient's case, and (4) staffing ratios 
when anesthesiologists cover multiple anesthetizing 
locations.49 In addition, ASA Physical Status is used as a 
billing modifier by many insurers.
Despite these many uses of the ASA Physical Status, 
there have been issues with interrater reliability, includ-
ing both underclassification and overclassification. In 
2014 the ASA added case examples to the classifica-
tion system in an effort to increase interrater reliability. 
However, subsequent studies have suggested that these 
changes were not associated with improved accuracy in 
classifying patients.50 A 2020 update of the ASA Physi-
cal Status classification system included even more case 
descriptions, including pediatric and obstetric examples 
(Table 13.16).
Since 1963 the ASA Physical Status classification has 
included an E category denoting emergency surgery. This 
is now defined as a condition in which a delay in treat-
ment will lead to a significant increase in the threat to 
life or body part; however, the exact duration or severity 
of the emergency diagnosis required to meet the E des-
ignation is not specified. According to the ASA, the final 
assignment of Physical Status classification is made on 
the day of anesthesia care by the anesthesiologist after 
evaluating the patient.
MEDICATION MANAGEMENT
Preoperative medication management is a critically 
important aspect of preoperative evaluation, especially 
in the outpatient setting. Because the U.S. FDA has 
approved over 19,000 prescription drugs for market-
ing—with approximately 50 new drugs approved each 
year—relatively few medications have been the subject of 
clinical trials to determine the ideal perioperative man-
agement approach. A general strategy for deciding how 
to manage a patient's chronic medications is listed in 
Box 13.8. Medications already discussed in this chapter 
include those for coronary artery disease, hypertension, 
Test
Recommendation
Reference
Electrocardiogram (ECG)
Preoperative resting 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG) is reasonable 
for patients with known coronary heart disease, significant 
arrhythmia, peripheral arterial disease, cerebrovascular disease, or 
other significant structural heart disease, except for those undergoing 
low-risk surgery.
ACC/AHA Guideline 
on Perioperative 
Cardiovascular Evaluation9
Electrocardiogram (ECG)
An ECG may be indicated for patients with known cardiovascular risk 
factors or for patients with risk factors identified in the course of a 
preanesthesia evaluation.
ASA Practice Advisory for 
Preanesthesia Evaluation1
Preanesthesia chest 
radiograph
The decision to perform a chest radiograph in the preoperative, 
preintervention, hospital admission, and asymptomatic outpatient 
settings should principally derive from a need to investigate a clinical 
suspicion for acute or unstable chronic cardiopulmonary disease that 
could influence patient care. Selective ordering is recommended, 
including in patients of advanced age or otherwise at increased risk.
American College of 
Radiology44
Preanesthesia hemoglobin 
or hematocrit
Factors to consider include type and invasiveness of procedure, 
patients with liver disease, extremes of age, history of anemia, 
bleeding, and other hematologic disorders.
ASA Practice Advisory for 
Preanesthesia Evaluation1
Preanesthesia coagulation 
studies
Factors to consider include bleeding disorders, renal dysfunction, liver 
dysfunction, and type and invasiveness of procedure.
ASA Practice Advisory for 
Preanesthesia Evaluation1
Preanesthesia serum 
chemistries
Clinical characteristics to consider include likely perioperative 
therapies, endocrine disorders, risk of renal and liver dysfunction, and 
use of certain medications or alternative therapies.
ASA Practice Advisory for 
Preanesthesia Evaluation1
Preanesthesia urinalysis
Urinalysis is not indicated except for specific procedures (e.g., 
prosthesis implantation, urologic procedures) or when urinary tract 
symptoms are present.
ASA Practice Advisory for 
Preanesthesia Evaluation1
Table 13.13
Recommendations for Ordering Selective Preoperative Tests
III
Chapter 13 Preoperative Evaluation
213
anticoagulant therapy (for mechanical heart valve, atrial 
fibrillation, venous thromboembolism), antiplatelet ther-
apy (for coronary artery disease and stroke), and diabetes 
mellitus. Many institutions develop their own guidelines 
to ensure consistency for their perioperative clinicians, 
primarily based on expert opinion.51
NPO GUIDELINES
Fasting guidelines are commonly provided during the 
preoperative evaluation process. The rationale for pre-
operative fasting before surgery is to reduce the risk of 
pulmonary aspiration of gastric contents. Common prac-
tice includes withholding liquids and solids for specific 
periods before surgery and possibly prescribing pharma-
cologic agents to reduce gastric volume and pH. Patient 
conditions that may increase the risk of regurgitation and 
pulmonary aspiration include gastroesophageal reflux 
disease, dysphagia, and other gastrointestinal motility 
and metabolic disorders (e.g., diabetes mellitus with gas-
troparesis). Clear liquids empty from the stomach more 
rapidly than solid food or nonclear liquids. The ASA has 
published Practice Guidelines for Preoperative Fasting, 
listed in Table 13.17 52 For patients with risk factors for 
pulmonary aspiration, there may be a role for gastroin-
testinal stimulants (e.g., metoclopramide), pharmacologic 
blockade of gastric acid secretion (proton pump inhibitors 
or histamine H2 blockers), or preoperative clear antacids 
(e.g., sodium citrate). Additional fasting instructions may 
be given to patients managed in an enhanced recovery 
pathway, such as encouraging consumption of a clear 
carbohydrate liquid until 2 hours before surgery (also see 
Chapter 14).
Clinical Situation
Implications
Transfusion testing 
not ordered, patient 
needs urgent 
intraoperative PRBC 
transfusion
•
If patient needs transfusion 
sooner than the time required 
for blood type and crossmatching 
(45 min or more), the patient may 
need emergency-release blood, 
which may increase likelihood of 
transfusion reaction.
•
If patient's antibody screen 
detects the presence of 
alloantibodies, the time required 
for crossmatching can increase 
significantly (by many hours), 
also leading to requirement for 
emergency-release blood, and 
increased risk of transfusion 
reaction.
Preoperative type 
and crossmatch 
for 2 units PRBC 
ordered for 
procedure with low 
bleeding risk
•
Two units of PRBCs are 
crossmatched and “reserved” for 
that patient on the day of surgery.
•
Those 2 PRBC units are not 
available to other patients during 
that time.
Preoperative type 
and screen ordered 
for procedure with 
minimal bleeding 
risk
•
Time and equipment for 
laboratory personnel to perform 
test represents low-value, 
potentially wasteful use of 
resources.
Table 13.14
Implications of Preoperative Transfusion 
Testing
PRBC, Packed red blood cells.
Surgical Procedure
Blood Product and Testing 
Recommendation
Hand carpal tunnel release, 
open
None
Laparoscopic 
cholecystectomy
None
Laparoscopic Nissen 
fundoplication
Type and screen
Spine posterior 
laminectomy, <2 segments
Type and screen
Partial nephrectomy, 
laparoscopic
Type and crossmatch for 
2 units PRBC
Spine posterior fusion, 
7–12 segments
Type and crossmatch for 
5 units PRBC
Hepatectomy, total right 
lobectomy
Type and crossmatch for 
6 units PRBC
Table 13.15
Sample MSBOS Recommendations for Given 
Surgical Procedures
MSBOS, Maximum surgical blood order schedule; PRBC, packed red 
blood cells.
Examples from author's institution (University of California, San 
Francisco).
Box 13.7 Preoperative Risk Considerations in Individual 
Patients
1. Does the patient have increased perioperative risk 
compared with a healthy patient? If so, for what 
outcomes?
2. Should additional testing be pursued to evaluate risks 
further?
3. Can the patient’s perioperative risks be reduced with 
additional therapy?
4. Based on the patient’s perioperative risks and potential 
mitigating therapy, should the following aspects of 
the proposed surgical procedure be changed: timing 
of surgery, location of surgery (e.g., ambulatory 
surgery center versus facility with inpatient capability), 
assignment of subspecialty-trained anesthesia care 
team, intraoperative invasive monitoring, postoperative 
intensive care monitoring?
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
214
ASA Physical Status 
Classification
Definition
Adult Examples 
(including but not 
limited to)
Pediatric Examples 
(including but not 
limited to)
Obstetric Examples 
(including but not 
limited to)
ASA I
A normal healthy 
patient
Healthy, nonsmoking, no 
or minimal alcohol use
Healthy (no acute or 
chronic disease), normal 
BMI percentile for age
ASA II
A patient with 
mild systemic 
disease
Mild diseases only 
without substantive 
functional limitations. 
Current smoker, 
social alcohol drinker, 
pregnancy, obesity 
(30 < BMI < 40), well-
controlled DM/HTN, mild 
lung disease
Asymptomatic congenital 
cardiac disease, well-
controlled dysrhythmias, 
asthma without 
exacerbation, well-
controlled epilepsy, non–
insulin-dependent DM, 
abnormal BMI percentile 
for age, mild/moderate 
OSA, oncologic state in 
remission, autism with mild 
limitations
Normal pregnancy,a well 
controlled gestational 
HTN, controlled 
preeclampsia without 
severe features, diet-
controlled gestational 
DM.
ASA III
A patient with 
severe systemic 
disease
Substantive functional 
limitations; one or 
more moderate to 
severe diseases. Poorly 
controlled DM or 
HTN, COPD, morbid 
obesity (BMI ≥40), 
active hepatitis, alcohol 
dependence or abuse, 
implanted pacemaker, 
moderate reduction of 
ejection fraction, ESRD 
undergoing regularly 
scheduled dialysis, 
history (>3 mo) of MI, 
CVA, TIA, or CAD/stents.
Uncorrected stable 
congenital cardiac 
abnormality, asthma 
with exacerbation, poorly 
controlled epilepsy, insulin-
dependent DM, morbid 
obesity, malnutrition, severe 
OSA, oncologic state, renal 
failure, muscular dystrophy, 
cystic fibrosis, history of 
organ transplantation, 
brain/spinal cord 
malformation, symptomatic 
hydrocephalus, premature 
infant PCA <60 weeks, 
autism with severe 
limitations, metabolic 
disease, difficult airway, 
long-term parenteral 
nutrition, full-term infants 
<6 weeks of age
Preeclampsia with 
severe features, 
gestational DM with 
complications or high 
insulin requirements, a 
thrombophilic disease 
requiring anticoagulation.
ASA IV
A patient with 
severe systemic 
disease that is a 
constant threat 
to life
Recent (<3 mo) MI, 
CVA, TIA, or CAD/
stents, ongoing cardiac 
ischemia or severe valve 
dysfunction, severe 
reduction of ejection 
fraction, shock, sepsis, 
DIC, ARDS, or ESRD not 
undergoing regularly 
scheduled dialysis
Symptomatic congenital 
cardiac abnormality, 
congestive heart failure, 
active sequelae of 
prematurity, acute hypoxic-
ischemic encephalopathy, 
shock, sepsis, DIC, 
automatic implantable 
cardioverter-defibrillator, 
ventilator dependence, 
endocrinopathy, severe 
trauma, severe respiratory 
distress, advanced 
oncologic state.
Preeclampsia with severe 
features complicated by 
HELLP or other adverse 
event, peripartum 
cardiomyopathy with 
ejection fraction 
<40, uncorrected/
decompensated heart 
disease, acquired or 
congenital.
TABLE 13.16
ASA Physical Status Classification
Continued
III
Chapter 13 Preoperative Evaluation
215
INFORMED CONSENT FOR ANESTHESIA
Informed consent is the process of providing a patient 
with information that allows them to make an informed 
choice about their care. Certain aspects of anesthesia 
practice differ from the consent process for the surgical 
procedure.53 Often, the anesthesia provider does not meet 
the patient until the day of surgery. For many types of 
surgery, there is not a real option for no treatment (i.e., 
no anesthesia), but there may be decisions regarding 
the type of anesthesia and approaches to postoperative 
pain management. Patient competence, or capacity for 
consent, includes their ability to understand the informa-
tion provided, retain it, and use it to reach an informed 
decision. It is possible that analgesic and anxiolytic 
drugs administered by anesthesia providers can affect the 
patient's ability to retain information preoperatively and 
postoperatively. This reinforces the importance of docu-
menting the informed consent discussion in the medical 
record at the time consent is obtained.
In terms of how much information should be disclosed 
to the patient during the consent process, the most com-
monly applied standard is the reasonable person standard. 
That is, disclosure of information should be consistent 
ASA Physical Status 
Classification
Definition
Adult Examples 
(including but not 
limited to)
Pediatric Examples 
(including but not 
limited to)
Obstetric Examples 
(including but not 
limited to)
ASA V
A moribund 
patient who is 
not expected to 
survive without 
the operation
Ruptured abdominal/
thoracic aneurysm, 
massive trauma, 
intracranial bleed 
with mass effect, 
ischemic bowel in 
the face of significant 
cardiac pathology or 
multiple organ/system 
dysfunction
Massive trauma, intracranial 
hemorrhage with mass effect, 
patient requiring ECMO, 
respiratory failure or arrest, 
malignant hypertension, 
decompensated congestive 
heart failure, hepatic 
encephalopathy, ischemic 
bowel or multiple organ/
system dysfunction.
Uterine rupture.
ASA VI
A declared 
brain-dead 
patient whose 
organs are being 
removed for 
donor purposes
aAlthough pregnancy is not a disease, the parturient' s physiologic state is significantly altered from when the woman is not pregnant; hence the 
assignment of ASA 2 for a woman with uncomplicated pregnancy.
bThe addition of “E” denotes emergency surgery. An emergency is defined as existing when delay in treatment of the patient would lead to a 
significant increase in the threat to life or body part.
ASA Physical Status Classification System. Developed by Committee on Economics. Last amended December 13, 2020 (original approval: 
October 15, 2014). https://www.asahq.org/standards-and-guidelines/asa-physical-status-classification-system
ARDS, Acute respiratory distress syndrome; BMI, body mass index; CAD, coronary artery disease; COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease; CVA, cerebrovascular accident; DIC, disseminated intravascular coagulation; DM, diabetes mellitus; ECMO, extracorporeal membrane 
oxygenation; ESRD, end-stage renal disease; HTN, hypertension; MI, myocardial infarction; OSA, obstructive sleep apnea; PCA, patient-controlled 
analgesia; TIA, transient ischemic attack.
TABLE 13.16
ASA Physical Status Classification—cont'd
Box 13.8 Perioperative Medication Management 
Strategy
Questions to consider about a specific medication include the 
following:
1. What condition is being treated with the medication? 
What are the potential complications of therapy 
interruption and the expected time course of the 
complications?
2. Are there non-oral routes of administration for the 
medication that can be administered perioperatively?
3. Are there medication effects that can cause surgical 
issues such as impaired wound healing, increased risk of 
surgical bleeding, or increased risk of infection?
4. Are there medication effects that affect end-organ function, 
including the cardiovascular (e.g., heart rate, blood pressure, 
cardiac rhythm), pulmonary (e.g., hypercarbia, hypoxemia, 
bronchospasm), central nervous system (e.g., psychotropic, 
antiepileptic drugs), or renal systems?
with what a hypothetical reasonable person would want 
in order to make a decision. For a routine anesthetic, 
information discussed should include the patient's medi-
cal condition, procedures that will be performed, risks 
and other consequences of care, and postoperative pain 
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
216
management. For procedures that do include options, 
such as postoperative pain management with an epidural 
versus IV patient-controlled analgesia (PCA), additional 
details and a risk–benefit discussion should be pursued. 
For patients with coexisting diseases associated with 
increased perioperative risks, those risks should be dis-
cussed as well. The level of detail in the risk discussion 
should be tailored to the patient circumstances, including 
their preferences for information, comorbidity concerns, 
and the planned surgical procedure. Although the U.S. 
Joint Commission does not require a separate written 
consent form for anesthesia, some institutions do require 
this for all anesthetics or for certain procedures such as 
obstetric anesthesia.
Another challenge in the informed consent process is 
the wide variability in patient preferences, values, and 
expectations of care. A systematic review of anesthesi-
ologist-to-patient communication found that informed 
consent, including a discussion of risks and benefits, 
is highly variable and that patient comprehension of 
risks, benefits, and alternatives was poor when measured 
objectively.54 In addition, discussions about postoperative 
critical care were rare, including goals of care discussions 
for a significant postoperative complication.
PREOPERATIVE EVALUATION CLINICS
Anesthesiologist-directed preoperative evaluation clinics 
are designed to facilitate early anesthesiologist access 
to patients, in addition to increased preoperative coun-
seling, increased communication between providers 
and patients, anesthesiologist involvement in protocol 
development, and coordination of postoperative care. 
A well-designed anesthesiologist-directed preoperative 
evaluation clinic can reduce surgical cancellations 
caused by inadequate preoperative preparation, reduce 
costs associated with unnecessary testing, and reduce 
preoperative consultations with other providers.55 A 
2016 large database retrospective review also found that 
a visit to a preoperative evaluation clinic before elective 
surgery was associated with a reduction of in-hospital 
postoperative mortality.56 For a learner rotating in an 
outpatient anesthesiology preoperative clinic, a sug-
gested approach to evaluation of a patient is described 
in Box 13.9
Enhanced Recovery Pathways
Multidisciplinary enhanced recovery pathways (also 
called enhanced recovery after surgery [ERAS]) are 
increasingly used for patients undergoing many types of 
surgery, including colorectal, orthopedic, hepatic, pan-
creatic, and gynecologic57 (also see Chapter 14). ERAS 
pathways are developed in a multidisciplinary fashion; 
the local implementation almost always includes a preop-
erative component that may be initiated in a preoperative 
evaluation encounter.
Preoperative Optimization
The timing of preoperative evaluation with respect to 
the date of surgery influences the interventions that 
can be offered to patients to improve their periopera-
tive outcomes. Most commonly, the date of surgery is a 
priority (especially from the perspective of the surgeon 
and patient), and the preoperative evaluation takes place 
less than 2 weeks—and often only days—before the sur-
gical date. Thus the opportunity to manage coexisting 
diseases is limited. The paradigm shift to expand the 
focus of anesthesia and perioperative care beyond the 
narrow time window around the date of surgery is rep-
resented by the term perioperative medicine, the focus 
of Chapter 42. One example is the transformation of a 
conventional preanesthesia clinic to a preoperative opti-
mization clinic, to which patients are referred 14 to 90 
days before surgery. The initial multidisciplinary clinic 
evaluation determines whether optimization is required 
for certain predefined issues such as anemia, malnutri-
tion, complex pain, smoking, frailty, or coagulation.58 If 
present, optimization of these conditions is managed by 
an integrated, but sometimes independent, preoperative 
optimization clinic staffed by physicians or advanced 
practice providers.
A related concept is prehabilitation, which refers to 
interventions that enhance functional capacity to enable 
Ingested Material
Minimum Fasting Period
Clear liquidsa
2 hr
Breast milk
4 hr
Infant formula
6 hr
Nonhuman milk
6 hr
Light mealb
6 hr
Fried foods, fatty foods, 
or meat
Additional fasting time (e.g., 8 or 
more hours) may be needed
Table 13.17
ASA Preoperative Fasting Recommendations
aExamples of clear liquids include water, fruit juices without pulp, 
carbonated beverages, clear tea, and black coffee.
bA light meal typically consists of toast and clear liquids. Meals 
that include fried or fatty foods or meat may prolong gastric 
emptying time. Both the amount and type of food ingested must be 
considered when determining an appropriate fasting period.
From Practice guidelines for preoperative fasting and the use of 
pharmacologic agents to reduce the risk of pulmonary aspiration: 
Application to healthy patients undergoing elective procedures: 
An updated report by the American Society of Anesthesiologists 
Task Force on Preoperative Fasting and the Use of Pharmacologic 
Agents to Reduce the Risk of Pulmonary Aspiration. Anesthesiology. 
2017;126(3):376–393.
Guidelines are intended for healthy patients of all ages undergoing 
elective procedures. They are not intended for women in labor.
III
Chapter 13 Preoperative Evaluation
217
better tolerance of a stressful event. Prehabilitation pro-
grams typically focus on several goals: (1) improved 
physical fitness, (2) dietary interventions to counteract 
the catabolic state and support anabolism with exercise, 
(3) antistress interventions to foster resilience and self-
efficacy, and (4) cessation of adverse health habits (e.g., 
alcohol use disorder, smoking).59 Several examples are 
described in Chapter 42
Inpatient Preoperative Evaluation
Although much of this chapter has focused on outpa-
tient preoperative evaluation, the principles apply to 
the inpatient who requires urgent or emergency surgery. 
However, the time course of evaluation may need to be 
significantly compressed. At one extreme, a patient who 
sustained blunt trauma in a motor vehicle collision may 
be brought to the operating room within minutes of 
arrival in the emergency department. An example of a 
patient group who requires surgery within 24 to 48 hours 
is the elderly patient with an acute hip fracture. Many 
patients have multiple comorbidities, including frailty; 
cognitive impairment; cardiovascular disease, includ-
ing hypertension, heart failure, thromboembolic disease 
requiring anticoagulation; and anemia. The risk of death 
with acute hip fracture is lower for patients who undergo 
early surgery, defined in most studies as less than 24 to 
48 hours after presentation to the emergency depart-
ment.60 In this setting the preoperative assessment must 
be thorough but should not generally include testing or 
consultation that leads to delayed surgery. Exceptions 
include conditions such as acute coronary syndrome 
or ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction. Condi-
tions that can be addressed in a 24-hour period include 
occult hypovolemia, anemia, hypoxemia, electrolyte dis-
turbances, and correction of anticoagulant effects (e.g., 
vitamin K for the patient on warfarin therapy).60 ERAS 
pathways for the patient with hip fracture are associ-
ated with decreased time to surgery, decreased length of 
stay, and decreased overall complication rate.61 Although 
individual studies report different preoperative ERAS 
elements for the patient with hip fracture, most include 
multimodal opiate-sparing analgesia (often with regional 
analgesia), short periods of fasting, and standardized 
nursing care.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The editors and publisher would like to thank Drs. 
Rebecca Gerlach and Bobbie Jean Sweitzer for contribut-
ing to this chapter in the previous edition of this work. 
It has served as the foundation for the current chapter.
Box 13.9 Suggested Approach to Outpatient 
Preoperative Evaluation
1.
Receive patient assignment (at a minimum, patient 
name, proposed surgery and surgery date).
2.
Review existing medical records, including pertinent 
laboratory or other diagnostic tests.
3.
Review pending tests and orders from surgeon.
4.
Conduct patient history and physical.
5.
Decide whether further preoperative testing is 
indicated.a
6.
Provide medication management instructions to 
patient.a
7.
Provide NPO instructions to patient.
  8.
Describe perioperative course and engage in informed 
consent discussion with patient.
9.
Communicate issues relevant to perioperative care with 
patient, surgeon, and patient’s existing care providers 
(e.g., pending cardiovascular evaluation or other 
medical evaluation).a
10.
Communicate with appropriate anesthesia clinical 
leads regarding special anesthesia concerns (e.g., 
anticipated difficult airway management, critical end-
organ disease requiring subspecialty anesthesia care or 
equipment).*
aFor a trainee, the level of supervision required for this decision 
should be determined at the program level.
REFERENCES
1. American Society of Anesthesiologists 
Task Force on Preanesthesia Evalua-
tion: Practice advisory for preanesthesia 
evaluation: An updated report by the 
American Society of Anesthesiologists 
Task Force on Preanesthesia Evaluation. 
Anesthesiology. 2012 Mar;116(3):522–
538. doi:10.1097/ALN.0b013e31823c1067. 
PMID: 22273990.
2. American Society of Anesthesiologists. 
Basic Standards for Preanesthesia Care. 
Developed By Committee on Standards 
and Practice Parameters (CSPP). Last 
Affirmed: December 13, 2020 (original 
approval: October 14, 1987). https://
www.asahq.org/standards-and-guide-
lines/basic-standards-for-preanesthesia-
care. Accessed February 1, 2022.
3. Shenoy ES, Macy E, Rowe T, Blumenthal 
KG. Evaluation and management of pen-
icillin allergy: A review. JAMA. 2019 Jan 
15;321(2):188–199. PMID: 30644987. 
doi:10.1001/jama.2018.19283.
4. WHO 
SDH. 
https://www.who.int/
health-topics/social-determinants-of-
health#tab=tab_1. Accessed February 6, 
2022.
5. Benziger CP, Huffman MD, Sweis 
RN, Stone NJ. The Telehealth Ten: A 
guide for a patient-assisted virtual 
physical examination. Am J Med. 2021 
Jan;134(1):48–51. 
doi:10.1016/j.
amjmed.2020.06.015. Epub 2020 Jul 18. 
PMID: 32687813; PMCID: PMC7368154.
6. Hines RL, Jones SB (eds.): Stoelting's 
anesthesia and coexisting disease. Phila-
delphia: Elsevier; 2021.
7. Roberts DP, Lewis SJG. Considerations 
for general anaesthesia in Parkinson's 
disease. J Clin Neurosci. 2018 Feb;48:34–
41. doi:10.1016/j.jocn.2017.10.062. Epub 
2017 Nov 10. PMID: 29133106.
8. Katus L, Shtilbans A. Perioperative 
management of patients with Par-
kinson's disease. Am J Med. 2014 
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
218
Apr;127(4):275–280. 
doi:10.1016/j.
amjmed.2013.11.014. Epub 2013 Dec 11. 
PMID: 24333200.
9. Fleisher LA, Fleischmann KE, Auerbach 
AD, etal. 2014 ACC/AHA guideline on 
perioperative cardiovascular evaluation 
and management of patients under-
going noncardiac surgery: A report 
of the American College of Cardiol-
ogy/American Heart Association Task 
Force on Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 2014 Dec 9;64(22):e77–e137. 
doi:10.1016/j.jacc.2014.07.944. 
Epub 
2014 Aug 1. PMID: 25091544.
10. Kristensen SD, Knuuti J, Saraste A, etal. 
2014 ESC/ESA guidelines on non-cardi-
ac surgery: Cardiovascular assessment 
and management: The Joint Task Force 
on Non-Cardiac Surgery: Cardiovascular 
assessment and management of the 
European Society of Cardiology (ESC) 
and the European Society of Anaesthe-
siology (ESA). Eur Heart J. 2014 Sep 
14;35(35):2383–2431. doi:10.1093/eur-
heartj/ehu282. Epub 2014 Aug 1. PMID: 
25086026.
11. Duceppe E, Parlow J, MacDonald P, 
etal. Canadian Cardiovascular Soci-
ety Guidelines on Perioperative Cardiac 
Risk Assessment and Management for 
Patients Who Undergo Noncardiac Sur-
gery. Can J Cardiol. 2017 Jan;33(1):17–
32. doi:10.1016/j.cjca.2016.09.008. Epub 
2016 Oct 4. Erratum in: Can J Cardiol. 
2017 Dec;33(12):1735. PMID: 27865641.
12. Smilowitz NR, Gupta N, Guo Y, etal. 
Trends in cardiovascular risk factor and 
disease prevalence in patients undergo-
ing non-cardiac surgery. Heart. 2018 
Jul;104(14):1180–1186. 
doi:10.1136/
heartjnl-2017-312391. Epub 2018 Jan 5. 
PMID: 29305561; PMCID: PMC6102124.
13. Wijeysundera DN, Pearse RM, Shulman 
MA, etal. METS Study Investigators. 
Assessment of functional capacity before 
major non-cardiac surgery: An interna-
tional, prospective cohort study. Lan-
cet. 2018 Jun 30;391(10140):2631–2640. 
doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(18)31131-0. 
PMID: 30070222.
14. Hlatky MA, Boineau RE, Higginbotham 
MB, etal. A brief self-administered 
questionnaire to determine function-
al capacity (the Duke Activity Sta-
tus Index). Am J Cardiol. 1989 Sep 
15;64(10):651–654. doi:10.1016/0002-
9149(89)90496-7. PMID: 2782256.
15. Wijeysundera DN, Beattie WS, Hillis 
GS, etal. Integration of the Duke Activ-
ity Status Index into preoperative risk 
evaluation: A multicentre prospec-
tive cohort study. Br J Anaesth. 2020 
Mar;124(3):261–270. 
doi:10.1016/j.
bja.2019.11.025. Epub 2019 Dec 19. 
PMID: 31864719.
16. Lee TH, Marcantonio ER, Mangione CM, 
etal. Derivation and prospective valida-
tion of a simple index for prediction of 
cardiac risk of major noncardiac surgery. 
Circulation. 1999 Sep 7;100(10):1043–
1049. PMID: 10477528. doi: 10.1161/01.
cir.100.10.1043.
17. Bilimoria KY, Liu Y, Paruch JL, etal. 
Development and evaluation of the uni-
versal ACS NSQIP Surgical Risk Calcula-
tor: A decision aid and informed consent 
tool for patients and surgeons. J Am Coll 
Surg. 2013 Nov;217(5):833–842e1-3. 
doi:10.1016/j.jamcollsurg.2013.07.385 
Epub 2013 Sep 18. PMID: 24055383; 
PMCID: PMC3805776.
18. Dakik HA, Chehab O, Eldirani M, etal. A 
new index for pre-operative cardiovas-
cular evaluation. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2019 
Jun 25;73(24):3067–3078. doi:10.1016/j.
jacc.2019.04.023. PMID: 31221255.
19. Whelton PK, Carey RM, Aronow WS, 
etal. 2017 ACC/AHA/AAPA/ABC/
ACPM/AGS/APhA/ASH/ASPC/NMA/
PCNA guideline for the prevention, 
detection, evaluation, and manage-
ment of high blood pressure in adults: 
Executive summary: A report of the 
American College of Cardiology/Ameri-
can Heart Association Task Force on 
Clinical Practice Guidelines. Circula-
tion. 2018 Oct 23;138(17):e426–e483. 
doi:10.1161/CIR.0000000000000597. 
PMID: 30354655.
20. Hollmann C, Fernandes NL, Biccard BM. 
A systematic review of outcomes associ-
ated with withholding or continuing 
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibi-
tors and angiotensin receptor block-
ers before noncardiac surgery. Anesth 
Analg. 
2018 
Sep;127(3):678–687. 
doi:10.1213/ANE.0000000000002837. 
PMID: 29381513.
21. Douketis JD, Spyropoulos AC, Spencer 
FA, etal. Perioperative management of 
antithrombotic therapy: Antithrombotic 
Therapy and Prevention of Thrombosis, 
9th ed: American College of Chest Phy-
sicians Evidence-Based Clinical Prac-
tice Guidelines. Chest. 2012 Feb;141(2 
Suppl):e326S–e350S. 
doi:10.1378/
chest.11-2298. Erratum in: Chest. 2012 
Apr;141(4):1129. 
PMID: 
22315266; 
PMCID: PMC3278059.
22. Spyropoulos AC, Brohi K, Caprini J, etal. 
SSC Subcommittee on Perioperative and 
Critical Care Thrombosis and Haemostasis 
of the International Society on Thrombo-
sis and Haemostasis. Scientific and Stand-
ardization Committee Communication: 
Guidance document on the periprocedural 
management of patients on chronic oral 
anticoagulant therapy: Recommendations 
for standardized reporting of procedural/
surgical bleed risk and patient-specific 
thromboembolic risk. J Thromb Haemost. 
2019 Nov;17(11):1966–1972. doi:10.1111/
jth.14598. Epub 2019 Aug 22. PMID: 
31436045.
23. Douketis JD, Spyropoulos AC, Ander-
son JM, etal. The Perioperative 
Anticoagulant Use for Surgery Evalu-
ation (PAUSE) study for patients on a 
direct oral anticoagulant who need an 
elective surgery or procedure: Design 
and rationale. Thromb Haemost. 2017 
Dec;117(12):2415–2424. 
doi:10.1160/
TH17-08-0553. Epub 2017 Dec 6. 
Erratum in: Thromb Haemost. 2018 
Sep;118(9):1679-1680. PMID: 29212129.
24. Kaufman JA, Barnes GD, Chaer RA, 
etal. Society of Interventional Radiolo-
gy Clinical Practice Guideline for Inferi-
or Vena Cava Filters in the Treatment of 
Patients With Venous Thromboembolic 
Disease: Developed in collaboration with 
the American College of Cardiology, 
American College of Chest Physicians, 
American College of Surgeons Commit-
tee on Trauma, American Heart Associa-
tion, Society for Vascular Surgery, and 
Society for Vascular Medicine. J Vasc 
Interv Radiol. 2020 Oct;31(10):1529–
1544. 
doi:10.1016/j.jvir.2020.06.014. 
Epub 2020 Sep 9. PMID: 32919823.
25. Douketis JD, Spyropoulos AC, Kaatz S, 
etal. Perioperative bridging anticoagu-
lation in patients with atrial fibrillation. 
N Engl J Med. 2015 Aug 27;373(9):823–
833. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1501035. Epub 
2015 Jun 22. PMID: 26095867; PMCID: 
PMC4931686.
26. Doherty JU, Gluckman TJ, Hucker WJ, 
etal. 2017 ACC Expert Consensus Deci-
sion Pathway for Periprocedural Man-
agement of Anticoagulation in Patients 
With Nonvalvular Atrial Fibrillation: 
A report of the American College of 
Cardiology Clinical Expert Consen-
sus Document Task Force. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 2017 Feb 21;69(7):871–898. 
doi:10.1016/j.jacc.2016.11.024. 
Epub 
2017 Jan 9. PMID: 28081965.
27. Arnett DK, Blumenthal RS, Albert MA, 
etal. 2019 ACC/AHA guideline on the 
primary prevention of cardiovascu-
lar disease: A report of the American 
College of Cardiology/American Heart 
Association Task Force on Clinical 
Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2019 
Sep 10;140(11):e596–e646. doi:10.1161/
CIR.0000000000000678. Epub 2019 
Mar 17. Erratum in: Circulation. 2019 
Sep 10;140(11):e649-e650. Erratum in: 
Circulation. 2020 Jan 28;141(4):e60. 
Erratum in: Circulation. 2020 Apr 
21;141(16):e774. 
PMID: 
30879355; 
PMCID: PMC7734661.
28. Filipescu DC, Stefan MG, Valeanu L, 
Popescu WM. Perioperative manage-
ment of antiplatelet therapy in noncar-
diac surgery. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol. 
2020 Jun;33(3):454–462. doi:10.1097/
ACO.0000000000000875. 
PMID: 
32371645.
29. Levine GN, Bates ER, Bittl JA, etal. 2016 
ACC/AHA guideline focused update on 
duration of dual antiplatelet therapy in 
patients with coronary artery disease: 
III
Chapter 13 Preoperative Evaluation
219
A report of the American College of 
Cardiology/American Heart Association 
Task Force on Clinical Practice Guide-
lines: An update of the 2011 ACCF/
AHA/SCAI guideline for percutaneous 
coronary intervention, 2011 ACCF/AHA 
guideline for coronary artery bypass 
graft surgery, 2012 ACC/AHA/ACP/
AATS/PCNA/SCAI/STS guideline for the 
diagnosis and management of patients 
with stable ischemic heart disease, 2013 
ACCF/AHA guideline for the manage-
ment of ST-elevation myocardial infarc-
tion, 2014 AHA/ACC guideline for the 
management of patients with non-ST-
elevation acute coronary syndromes, 
and 2014 ACC/AHA guideline on perio-
perative cardiovascular evaluation and 
management of patients undergoing 
noncardiac surgery. Circulation. 2016 
Sep 6;134(10):e123–e155. doi:10.1161/
CIR.0000000000000404. Epub 2016 Mar 
29. Erratum in: Circulation. 2016 Sep 
6;134(10):e192-4. PMID: 27026020.
30. Miskovic A, Lumb AB. Postoperative 
pulmonary complications. Br J Anaesth. 
2017 Mar 1;118(3):317–334. doi:10.1093/
bja/aex002. PMID: 28186222.
31. Jammer I, Wickboldt N, Sander M, etal. 
Standards for definitions and use of 
outcome measures for clinical effective-
ness research in perioperative medicine: 
European Perioperative Clinical Out-
come (EPCO) definitions: A statement 
from the ESA-ESICM Joint Taskforce on 
Perioperative Outcome Measures. Eur 
J Anaesthesiol. 2015 Feb;32(2):88–105. 
doi:10.1097/EJA.0000000000000118. 
PMID: 25058504.
32. Canet J, Sabaté S, Mazo V, etal. PERI-
SCOPE group. Development and validation 
of a score to predict postoperative res-
piratory failure in a multicentre European 
cohort: A prospective, observational study. 
Eur J Anaesthesiol. 2015 Jul;32(7):458–
470. doi:10.1097/EJA.0000000000000223. 
PMID: 26020123.
33. Odor PM, Bampoe S, Gilhooly D, 
etal. Perioperative interventions for 
prevention of postoperative pulmo-
nary complications: Systematic review 
and meta-analysis. BMJ. 2020 Mar 
11;368:m540. doi:10.1136/bmj.m540. 
PMID: 32161042; PMCID: PMC7190038.
34. American Diabetes Association Profes-
sional Practice Committee. Diabetes care 
in the hospital: Standards of Medical 
Care in Diabetes-2022. Diabetes Care. 
2022 Jan 1;45(Supplement_1):S244–
S253. doi:10.2337/dc22-S016. PMID: 
34964884.
35. Janež A, Guja C, Mitrakou A, etal. 
Insulin therapy in adults with type 1 
diabetes mellitus: A narrative review. 
Diabetes Ther. 2020 Feb;11(2):387–409. 
doi:10.1007/s13300-019-00743-7. Epub 
2020 Jan 4. PMID: 31902063; PMCID: 
PMC6995794.
36. Nagrebetsky A, Al-Samkari H, Davis 
NM, etal. Perioperative thrombocy-
topenia: Evidence, evaluation, and 
emerging therapies. Br J Anaesth. 
2019 Jan;122(1):19–31. doi:10.1016/j.
bja.2018.09.010. Epub 2018 Oct 25. 
PMID: 30579402.
37. Berríos-Torres SI, Umscheid CA, Bratzler 
DW, etal. Healthcare Infection Con-
trol Practices Advisory Committee. Cent-
ers for Disease Control and Prevention 
Guideline for the Prevention of Surgical 
Site Infection, 2017. JAMA Surg. 2017 
Aug 1;152(8):784–791. doi:10.1001/jama-
surg.2017.0904. Erratum in: JAMA Surg. 
2017 Aug 1;152(8):803. PMID: 28467526.
38. Wilson W, Taubert KA, Gewitz M, 
etal. Prevention of infective endo-
carditis: Guidelines from the American 
Heart Association: A guideline from 
the American Heart Association Rheu-
matic Fever, Endocarditis, and Kawasaki 
Disease Committee, Council on Cardio-
vascular Disease in the Young, and the 
Council on Clinical Cardiology, Council 
on Cardiovascular Surgery and Anes-
thesia, and the Quality of Care and 
Outcomes Research Interdisciplinary 
Working Group. Circulation. 2007 Oct 
9;116(15):1736–1754. doi: 10.1161/CIR-
CULATIONAHA.106.183095. Epub 2007 
Apr 19. Erratum in: Circulation. 2007 Oct 
9;116(15):e376–e377. PMID: 17446442.
39. Wilson WR, Gewitz M, Lockhart PB, 
etal. Prevention of viridans group 
streptococcal infective endocarditis: A 
scientific statement from the Ameri-
can Heart Association. Circulation. 2021 
May 18;143(20):e963–e978. doi:10.1161/
CIR.0000000000000969. Epub 2021 Apr 
15. Erratum in: Circulation. 2021 Aug 
31;144(9):e192. PMID: 33853363.
40. Buigues C, Juarros-Folgado P, Fernández-
Garrido J, etal. Frailty syndrome and 
pre-operative risk evaluation: A system-
atic review. Arch Gerontol Geriatr. 2015 
Nov-Dec;61(3):309–321. doi:10.1016/j.
archger.2015.08.002. Epub 2015 Aug 4. 
PMID: 26272286.
41. McIsaac DI, Jen T, Mookerji N, etal. 
Interventions to improve the outcomes 
of frail people having surgery: A sys-
tematic review. PLoS One. 2017 Dec 
29;12(12):e0190071. doi:10.1371/jour-
nal.pone.0190071. PMID: 29287123; 
PMCID: PMC5747432.
42. Chen CL, Lin GA, Bardach NS, etal. 
Preoperative medical testing in Medicare 
patients undergoing cataract surgery. N 
Engl J Med. 2015 Apr 16;372(16):1530–
1538. 
doi:10.1056/NEJMsa1410846. 
PMID: 25875258; PMCID: PMC5536179.
43. Clinician Lists. Choosing Wisely. An Ini-
tiative of the ABIM Foundation. https://
www.choosingwisely.org/clinician-lists/. 
Accessed February 16, 2022.
44. Routine Chest Radiography. Ameri-
can 
College 
of 
Radiology 
ACR 
Appropriateness Criteria. Date of origin 
2000. Last review 2015. https://www.
acr.org/Clinical-Resources/ACR-Appro-
priateness-Criteria. Accessed February 
16, 2022.
45. American Society of Anesthesiologists. 
Pregnancy Testing Prior to Anesthesia 
and Surgery. Developed By: Committee 
on Quality Management and Departmen-
tal Administration. Last amended Octo-
ber 13, 2021 (original approval October 
26, 
2016). 
https://www.asahq.org/
standards-and-guidelines/pregnancy-
testing-prior-to-anesthesia-and-surgery. 
Accessed February 16, 2022.
46. Friedman BA, Oberman HA, Chadwick 
AR, Kingdon KI. The maximum surgical 
blood order schedule and surgical blood 
use in the United States. Transfusion. 1976 
Jul-Aug;16(4):380–387. 
doi:10.1046/
j.1537-2995.1976.16476247063.x. PMID: 
951737.
47. White MJ, Hazard SW 3rd, Frank 
SM, etal. The evolution of perio-
perative 
transfusion 
testing 
and 
blood ordering. Anesth Analg. 2015 
Jun;120(6):1196–1203. 
doi:10.1213/
ANE.0000000000000619. 
PMID: 
25988630.
48. Moonesinghe SR, Mythen MG, Das P, 
etal. Risk stratification tools for pre-
dicting morbidity and mortality in adult 
patients undergoing major surgery: 
Qualitative systematic review. Anes-
thesiology. 2013 Oct;119(4):959–981. 
doi:10.1097/ALN.0b013e3182a4e94d. 
PMID: 24195875.
49. Horvath B, Kloesel B, Todd MM, 
etal. The evolution, current value, 
and future of the American Society of 
Anesthesiologists Physical Status clas-
sification system. Anesthesiology. 2021 
Nov 1;135(5):904–919. doi:10.1097/
ALN.0000000000003947. 
PMID: 
34491303.
50. Fielding-Singh V, Willingham MD, 
Grogan T, Neelankavil JP. Impact of 
the addition of examples to the Ameri-
can Society of Anesthesiologists Physi-
cal Status classification system. Anesth 
Analg. 
2020 
Mar;130(3):e54–e57. 
doi:10.1213/ANE.0000000000004482. 
PMID: 31651457.
51. Muluk V, Cohn SL, Whinney C. Peri-
operative 
medication 
management. 
UpToDate. https://www.uptodate.com/
contents/perioperative-medication-
management#H1. Accessed February 18, 
2022.
52. Practice guidelines for preoperative 
fasting and the use of pharmacologic 
agents to reduce the risk of pulmo-
nary aspiration: Application to healthy 
patients undergoing elective procedures: 
An updated report by the American 
Society of Anesthesiologists Task Force 
on Preoperative Fasting and the use 
of pharmacologic agents to reduce the 
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
220
risk of pulmonary aspiration. Anes-
thesiology. 2017 Mar;126(3):376–393. 
doi:10.1097/ALN.0000000000001452. 
PMID: 28045707.
53. Tait AR, Teig MK, Voepel-Lewis T. 
Informed consent for anesthesia: A 
review of practice and strategies for 
optimizing the consent process. Can 
J Anaesth. 2014 Sep;61(9):832–842. 
doi:10.1007/s12630-014-0188-8. Epub 
2014 Jun 5. PMID: 24898765.
54. Tylee MJ, Rubenfeld GD, Wijeysundera D, 
Sklar MC, Hussain S, Adhikari NKJ. Anes-
thesiologist to patient communication: A 
systematic review. JAMA Netw Open. 
2020 Nov 2;3(11):e2023503. doi:10.1001/
jamanetworkopen.2020.23503. PMID: 
33180130; PMCID: PMC7662141.
55. Kash B, Cline K, Menser T, Zhang Y. The Peri-
operative Surgical Home (PSH) A Compre-
hensive Literature Review for the American 
Society of Anesthesiologists. https://www.
asahq.org/~/media/sites/psh/files/pshlitre-
view.pdf. Accessed February 18, 2022.
56. Blitz JD, Kendale SM, Jain SK, Cuff 
GE, Kim JT, Rosenberg AD. Preop-
erative evaluation clinic visit is associ-
ated with decreased risk of in-hospital 
postoperative mortality. Anesthesiology. 
2016 Aug;125(2):280–294. doi:10.1097/
ALN.0000000000001193. 
PMID: 
27433746.
57. Esper SA, Holder-Murray J, Subra-
maniam K, etal. Enhanced recovery 
protocols reduce mortality across eight 
surgical specialties at academic and uni-
versity-affiliated community hospitals. 
Ann Surg. 2020 Nov 18. doi:10.1097/
SLA.0000000000004642. Epub ahead of 
print PMID: 33214486.
58. Aronson S, Murray S, Martin G, etal. 
Roadmap for transforming preoperative 
assessment to preoperative optimization. 
Anesth Analg. 2020 Apr;130(4):811–819. 
doi:10.1213/ANE.0000000000004571. 
PMID: 31990733.
59. Carli F. Prehabilitation for the anesthesiolo-
gist. Anesthesiology. 2020 Sep;133(3):645–
652. doi:10.1097/ALN.0000000000003331. 
PMID: 32358253.
60. Boddaert J, Raux M, Khiami F, Riou B. 
Perioperative management of elderly 
patients with hip fracture. Anesthe-
siology. 2014 Dec;121(6):1336–1341. 
doi:10.1097/ALN.0000000000000478. 
PMID: 25299743.
61. Liu SY, Li C, Zhang PX. Enhanced recovery 
after surgery for hip fractures: A systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Perioper Med 
(Lond). 2021 Sep 13;10(1):31. doi:10.1186/
s13741-021-00201-8. PMID: 34511117; 
PMCID: PMC8436561.
221
Chapter
The decision-making process regarding anesthetic tech-
nique begins with the proposed surgical procedure and 
incorporates the patient's coexisting diseases and prefer-
ences for care. The ultimate responsibility for anesthetic 
choice lies with the anesthesia provider. Once the anes-
thesia type is selected, additional management details 
such as choice and sequence of medications must be 
planned. The anesthesia provider must have the ability to 
implement a range of anesthetic plans and be prepared to 
address unexpected events that may necessitate a sudden 
change in plan.
TYPES OF ANESTHESIA
Choices for anesthesia include (1) general anesthesia, (2) 
regional anesthesia, and (3) monitored anesthesia care 
(MAC).
General anesthesia is a drug-induced, reversible state 
characterized by unconsciousness, amnesia, immobil-
ity, and control of the autonomic nervous system (ANS) 
responses to noxious stimulation.1 Control of the ANS 
responses can be construed as “analgesia,” but pain 
requires conscious perception. The term nociception
refers to the propagation of impulses through the sensory 
system with noxious or harmful stimuli; antinociception 
can be considered another goal of general anesthe-
sia.2 Modern approaches to general anesthesia involve 
administration of a combination of medications, such as 
hypnotic drugs (see Chapters 7 and 8), neuromuscular 
blocking drugs (see Chapter 11), and analgesic drugs (see 
Chapter 9).
Regional anesthesia includes neuraxial (spinal, epi-
dural, caudal) anesthesia (see Chapter 17) and periph-
eral nerve blocks (see Chapter 18). With a cooperative 
patient, regional anesthesia may ensure the appropri-
ate immobility and analgesia required for surgery, 
without exposing the patient to the risks of general 
anesthesia.
TYPES OF ANESTHESIA
CHOOSING AN APPROPRIATE 
ANESTHETIC TECHNIQUE
PRACTICAL ASPECTS OF ANESTHESIA 
CHOICE
General Anesthesia
Regional Anesthesia
Monitored Anesthesia Care
CHOICE OF ANESTHETIC 
TECHNIQUE
Manuel C. Pardo, Jr.
14
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
222
The term monitored anesthesia care was created by 
the American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) in the 
1980s to replace the term standby anesthesia and to 
facilitate professional fee billing. The original descrip-
tion of MAC referred to the anesthesiologist providing 
anesthesia services to a patient receiving local anesthesia 
or no anesthesia at all.3 The ASA currently defines MAC 
as “a specific anesthesia service performed by a quali-
fied anesthesia provider, for a diagnostic or therapeutic 
procedure.”4 MAC may include varying levels of sedation, 
analgesia, and anxiolysis. The anesthesia provider of MAC 
must be prepared to convert to general anesthesia if nec-
essary. The ASA has described a continuum of depth of 
sedation that includes progressive levels of sedation and 
a definition of general anesthesia (Table 14.1). The preop-
erative evaluation, monitoring, and other anesthesia care 
standards apply equally to the patient receiving MAC.
CHOOSING AN APPROPRIATE ANESTHETIC 
TECHNIQUE
Factors identified in the preoperative evaluation can 
indicate that general anesthesia may be the most appro-
priate anesthetic choice (Box 14.1). If general anesthesia 
is not chosen, other anesthetic options include regional 
anesthesia or MAC.
Certain patient or procedure characteristics may preclude 
safe regional anesthesia (Box 14.2). The planned location of 
the surgical incision and operative field is a major factor in 
determining whether regional anesthesia can provide surgi-
cal analgesia (Fig. 14.1). Depending on the level of sedation 
Box 14.1 Clinical Settings Appropriate for General 
Anesthesia
Pain (nociception) of surgical procedure cannot be addressed 
with local, topical, or regional anesthesia
Surgical procedure requires secure airway (e.g., procedure 
compromises airway integrity, oxygenation, or ventilation)
Patient or procedure characteristics that are not suitable for 
regional anesthetic (see Box 14.2)
Patient or procedure characteristics that are not suitable for 
monitored anesthesia care (e.g., risk of airway, respiratory, 
or cardiovascular compromise)
Box 14.2 Situations in Which Regional Anesthesia May 
Not Be Appropriate
Preferences and experience of the patient, anesthesia 
provider, and surgeon
Need for an immediate postoperative neurologic examination 
in the anatomic area affected by the regional anesthetic
Coagulopathy
Preexisting neurologic disease (e.g., multiple sclerosis, 
neurofibromatosis)
Infected or abnormal skin at the planned cutaneous puncture site
Specific Considerations for Neuraxial Anesthesia
Hypovolemia increases the risk for significant hypotension
Coagulopathy (including anticoagulant and antiplatelet 
medication therapy) increases risk of epidural hematoma
Increased intracranial pressure may result in cerebral 
herniation with intentional or inadvertent dural puncture
Minimal Sedation 
(Anxiolysis)
Moderate Sedation/Analgesia 
(“Conscious Sedation”)
Deep Sedation/Analgesia General Anesthesia
Responsiveness
Normal response to 
verbal stimulation
Purposefula response to verbal or 
tactile stimulation
Purposefula response 
after repeated or painful 
stimulation
Unarousable even with 
painful stimulus
Airway
Unaffected
No intervention required
Intervention may be 
required
Intervention often 
required
Spontaneous 
ventilation
Unaffected
Adequate
May be inadequate
Frequently inadequate
Cardiovascular 
function
Unaffected
Usually maintained
Usually maintained
May be impaired
Table 14.1
Continuum of Depth of Sedation: Definition of General Anesthesia and Levels of Sedation/Analgesia
aReflex withdrawal from a painful stimulus is NOT considered a purposeful response.
Minimal Sedation (Anxiolysis) is a drug-induced state during which patients respond normally to verbal commands.
Moderate Sedation/Analgesia (“Conscious Sedation”) is a drug-induced depression of consciousness during which patients respond 
purposefully to verbal commands, either alone or accompanied by light tactile stimulation.
Deep Sedation/Analgesia is a drug-induced depression of consciousness during which patients cannot be easily aroused but respond 
purposefully after repeated or painful stimulation.
General Anesthesia is a drug-induced loss of consciousness during which patients are not arousable, even by painful stimulation.
From American Society of Anesthesiologists. Continuum of Depth of Sedation: Definition of General Anesthesia and Levels of Sedation/
Analgesia. Last amended October 23, 2019. (https://www.asahq.org/standards-and-guidelines/continuum-of-depth-of-sedation-definition-of-
general-anesthesia-and-levels-of-sedationanalgesia. Accessed February 27, 2022.)
required, a regional technique may allow surgical anesthe-
sia with complete preservation of upper airway reflexes, 
even in the patient at risk for aspiration of gastric contents.
III
Chapter 14 Choice of Anesthetic Technique
223
If the analgesic requirements for the planned procedure 
can be met with local or topical anesthesia, or if the planned 
procedure is not associated with pain (e.g., a diagnostic 
radiology procedure such as magnetic resonance imaging), 
MAC may be the most appropriate choice. The anesthetic 
risks associated with MAC are not necessarily different from 
general or regional anesthesia. An ASA closed claims study 
of patient injury documented a comparable incidence of 
injury severity with MAC compared with general anesthe-
sia.5 In patients receiving MAC respiratory depression from 
sedative drugs (e.g., propofol, benzodiazepines, opioids) is 
an important mechanism of injury.
Fig. 14.2 provides a summary of the decision-making 
process in choosing an appropriate anesthetic for an 
individual patient.
Anesthetic techniques can be combined to meet patient 
or surgical goals. For example, a patient with subarach-
noid hemorrhage who requires diagnostic cerebral angi-
ography may initially receive MAC. If the imaging reveals 
a cerebral aneurysm requiring endovascular coiling, the 
anesthesia provider may be asked to convert to general 
anesthesia to provide patient immobility and control of 
ventilation during the procedure.
Neuraxial and peripheral nerve blockade may be com-
bined with general anesthesia to provide long-lasting post-
operative analgesia after a surgical procedure that may not 
be amenable to regional anesthesia alone (also see Chapter 
40). A 2018 Cochrane review evaluated randomized clinical 
trials comparing local anesthetics and regional anesthesia 
with conventional analgesia in preventing persistent post-
operative pain.6 The authors found moderate-quality evi-
dence that regional anesthesia reduces the risk of persistent 
postoperative pain after thoracotomy and cesarean section 
and low-quality evidence for a similar benefit of regional 
anesthesia after breast cancer surgery.
A 2017 systematic review and metaanalysis analyzed 
contemporary (2010–2016) observational and randomized 
trials of neuraxial and combined neuraxial/general 
anesthesia compared with general anesthesia for major 
truncal and lower limb surgery.7 Neuraxial anesthesia 
(alone or combined with general anesthesia) was not 
associated with reduced 30-day mortality compared with 
general anesthesia. However, there was moderate-quality 
evidence that pulmonary complications were reduced 
with neuraxial anesthesia compared with general anes-
thesia and moderate-quality evidence that neuraxial 
and neuraxial/general anesthesia were associated with 
reduced need for intensive care unit (ICU) admission.
The choice of anesthesia type is only one component 
of a patient's perioperative care plan. Increasingly, mul-
tidisciplinary enhanced recovery pathways have been 
used for patients undergoing a variety of surgeries, 
including colorectal, orthopedic, hepatic, pancreatic, and 
gynecologic.8 Many studies have demonstrated improved 
outcomes with enhanced recovery pathways, including 
decreased hospital length of stay, decreased morbidity, 
A
B
Fig. 14.1 Anatomic regions potentially amenable to peripheral nerve or neuraxial block. (A) Peripheral 
nerve block: Green areas indicate where complete surgical analgesia can typically be provided. 
(B) Neuraxial block: Blue areas indicate where complete surgical analgesia can typically be provided.
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
224
and faster return to work. Table 14.2 provides an exam-
ple of an enhanced recovery protocol used for patients 
scheduled for resection of colorectal cancer.9
PRACTICAL ASPECTS OF 
ANESTHESIA CHOICE
General Anesthesia
If general anesthesia is chosen, the anesthesia provider 
must then determine a plan for premedication, airway 
management, induction of anesthesia, maintenance of 
anesthesia, and postoperative analgesia (Table 14.3).
Preoxygenation, also called denitrogenation, is the 
deliberate replacement of nitrogen in the patient's func-
tional residual capacity (FRC) with oxygen. Eight vital 
capacity breaths of 100% oxygen over 60 seconds, or 
tidal volume breathing of 100% oxygen for 3 minutes, 
replaces roughly 80% of the FRC with oxygen. This pro-
vides a crucial margin of safety during periods of apnea 
or upper airway obstruction that can occur with induc-
tion of general anesthesia. Adequate preoxygenation can 
delay or eliminate the onset of hypoxemia during the 
period between the intravenous induction of anesthesia 
and the start of controlled ventilation.
An inhaled induction of anesthesia is often chosen 
for pediatric patients in whom preinduction placement 
of an intravenous catheter is impractical (also see Chap-
ter 34). Also, it may be indicated in the patient who is 
anticipated to have a difficult airway to manage, because 
spontaneous respiratory efforts are preserved with an 
inhaled induction of anesthesia. However, inhaled anes-
thetics ablate protective airway reflexes and pharyngeal 
muscular tone, so this method will not be suitable for all 
patients in whom difficulties with airway management 
are anticipated. Sevoflurane is the most commonly used 
anesthetic for inhaled induction of anesthesia because 
of its low pungency, high potency (permitting delivery 
of high-inspired oxygen concentration), and rapidity of 
onset.
Intravenous induction of anesthesia is the most 
common technique in the adult patient. Pharmacologic 
options include propofol, thiopental, etomidate, keta-
mine, and a benzodiazepine–opioid combination (also see 
Chapters 8 and 9). After the patient loses consciousness, 
Fig. 14.2 An approach to determining the anesthetic plan based on surgical procedure, patient's 
coexisting diseases, and patient preferences. If general anesthesia is selected as the primary anesthetic, 
regional block may be performed as well for postoperative analgesia. When regional anesthesia is the 
primary anesthetic, additional sedation is administered along the continuum of depth of sedation (see 
Table 14.1).
III
Chapter 14 Choice of Anesthetic Technique
225
Protocol
Preoperative
No bowel preparation
Preoperative carbohydrate loading (clear carbohydrate liquid) 2 hours before surgery
Enoxaparin antithrombotic prophylaxis
Intraoperative
Laparoscopic approach to surgery
Balanced IV fluids <2500 mL on day of surgery
TAP block, standard anesthesia protocol for GA
PONV prophylaxis: dexamethasone, ondansetron, metoclopramide
Postoperative
Avoiding opioids, multimodal analgesia (oral when possible, including acetaminophen, NSAIDs)
No nasogastric tube postoperatively
Postoperative oxygen 4–6 L/min
Early oral feeding (oral nutritional supplement 4 hours postoperatively, light diet POD 1, full diet POD2)
Urinary catheter removed POD 1
Full mobilization POD 1
Table 14.2
Sample Enhanced Recovery Protocol for Laparoscopic Surgery for Patient With Nonmetastatic Colorectal Cancer
GA, General anesthesia; NSAIDs, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs; POD, postoperative day; PONV, postoperative nausea and vomiting; TAP,
transversus abdominis plane.
From Pisarska M, Torbicz G, Gajewska N, et al. Compliance with the ERAS protocol and 3-year survival after laparoscopic surgery for non-
metastatic colorectal cancer. World J Surg. 2019;43(10):2552–2560.
Premedication
Airway 
Management
Induction of 
Anesthesia
Maintenance of 
Anesthesiaa
Postoperative 
Analgesia
Management 
options
- Anxiolysis
- Disease-specific 
(e.g., nonparticulate 
antacid for active 
GERD symptoms, 
bronchodilator 
for symptomatic 
asthma)
- Facemask
- SGA
- Endotracheal 
intubationa
1. Awake
2. Postinduction
- Intravenous
- Inhaled
- One-drug
- Two-drug
- Multimodal
- Nonopioid 
medications: 
acetaminophen, 
gabapentin, NSAIDs, 
ketamine, lidocaine 
infusion
- Local anesthetic 
infiltration
- Regional anesthesia
- Opioids—IV a nd/
or oral
Table 14.3
General Anesthesia: Detailed Planning
aSee text for details.
GERD; Gastroesophageal reflux disease; NSAIDs, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs; SGA, supraglottic airway.
ventilation via a mask is initiated. The anesthesia pro-
vider may then choose to administer an inhaled anes-
thetic to increase the depth of anesthesia before airway 
instrumentation. If tracheal intubation is planned, a neu-
romuscular blocking drug is usually given to facilitate 
direct laryngoscopy (also see Chapter 11).
Sometimes an intravenous rapid-sequence induction (RSI) 
is indicated. RSI is performed in patients at increased risk 
for aspiration of gastric contents (e.g., clinically significant 
gastroesophageal reflux disease, delayed gastric emptying, 
unknown fasting state, or a known full stomach). The goal of 
RSI is to minimize the time between onset of unconsciousness 
and tracheal intubation and reduce the risk of regurgitation by 
applying cricoid pressure. The sequence of events involves (1) 
preoxygenation; (2) intravenous administration of a hypnotic 
(e.g., propofol); (3) immediate administration a of a rapid-
onset neuromuscular blocking drug (e.g., succinylcholine 1.0 
to 1.5 mg/kg or rocuronium 1.0 to 1.2 mg/kg); (4) application 
of cricoid pressure (using a force of 30 newtons, approxi-
mately 7 pounds); (5) avoidance of ventilation via a mask; 
(6) tracheal intubation; and (7) release of cricoid pressure 
after confirmation of correct endotracheal tube placement. 
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
226
Though ventilation via a mask is generally avoided with 
RSI, the use of positive pressure less than 20 cm H2O 
(called modified RSI) should minimize the risk of gastric 
insufflation and may be needed if the patient develops 
hypoxemia before tracheal intubation. Although RSI 
with cricoid pressure has been used for several decades 
and is a standard approach, a 2015 metaanalysis did not 
demonstrate a measurable impact of cricoid pressure on 
clinical outcomes during RSI.10
Airway management techniques (e.g., direct laryngos-
copy, supraglottic airway placement) are implemented after 
the intravenous or inhaled induction of anesthesia. How-
ever, if the anesthesia provider anticipates difficulty with 
ventilation via a mask or tracheal intubation, then tracheal 
intubation should be initiated before induction of anesthesia 
(i.e., awake intubation) (also see Chapter 16).
After induction of anesthesia and appropriate air-
way management, anesthesia is maintained typically 
by administration of a combination of anesthetic drugs, 
each titrated to achieve the desired anesthetic goal while 
minimizing side effects.1 2 In principle, one anesthetic (e.g., 
propofol or a potent inhaled agent) can be used for main-
tenance of anesthesia. However, a large dose is typically 
required to control ANS responses to surgical stimulation. 
For example, the minimum alveolar concentration (MAC) 
to block the adrenergic response to incision (heart rate and 
mean arterial pressure within 15% of preincision value), 
called MAC-BAR, is approximately 1.3 MAC for isoflurane 
and desflurane in 60% nitrous oxide (total MAC of 1.9).11
The use of two drugs to maintain anesthesia represents 
an approach called balanced anesthesia. Most commonly, 
an opioid is added to propofol or an inhaled anesthetic 
to provide control of ANS nociceptive responses to sur-
gical stimulation. For example, when a patient receiving 
inhaled anesthesia with desflurane or isoflurane receives 
fentanyl 1.5 mcg/kg 5 minutes before surgical incision, 
the MAC-BAR decreases to 0.4 MAC plus 60% nitrous 
oxide (total MAC of 1). However, opioids have many side 
effects, including life-threatening respiratory depres-
sion (also see Chapter 9). The opioid epidemic provided 
additional incentive to examine perioperative opioid use, 
including intraoperative administration.
The concept of multimodal analgesia for acute post-
operative pain management (also see Chapter 40) led to 
increased interest in multimodal general anesthesia, which 
involves simultaneously addressing multiple targets in 
the nociceptive system.2 Table 14.4 summarizes a rational 
strategy to implement multimodal general anesthesia. A 
key goal is to make multimodal pain control a key objec-
tive postoperatively. Currently, there are no studies on the 
impact of multimodal general anesthesia on persistent 
postoperative opioid use or other clinical outcomes.
The postoperative disposition of the patient also 
influences anesthetic choice for maintenance and emer-
gence from anesthesia. Patients undergoing outpatient 
surgery require special attention to the prevention of 
postoperative and postdischarge nausea and vomiting 
(also see Chapter 37). This may involve selection of a less 
emetogenic anesthetic maintenance drug (e.g., propofol) 
or administration of multiple antiemetic drugs (also see 
Chapter 39).
Regional Anesthesia
Superficial and deep operations on the extremities, 
particularly the distal extremities, may be amenable to 
peripheral nerve block (see Chapter 18). Because surgi-
cal anesthesia may be achieved without sedation, this 
technique is particularly attractive in patients for whom 
systemic disease (e.g., severe pulmonary disease, cardio-
vascular disease, or renal failure) may present a significant 
challenge during general anesthesia. Unlike neuraxial 
anesthesia, the localized sympathectomy resulting from 
peripheral nerve block rarely results in systemic hypoten-
sion. However, peripheral nerve blockade as the primary 
anesthetic technique requires patient cooperation and 
may be inappropriate in patients with dementia, acute 
intoxication, or other conditions associated with altered 
mental status. Peripheral nerve blockade may be difficult 
to accomplish or may result in an inadequate, “patchy” 
block. If surgical anesthesia is not achieved with a periph-
eral nerve block, the anesthesia provider is faced with the 
options of supplementing the block with local anesthesia, 
administering intravenous analgesics and hypnotics, post-
poning surgery and reattempting the block at a later time, 
or converting to general anesthesia.
Neuraxial anesthesia can provide excellent operating 
conditions in the lower extremities and lower abdomen. 
Higher levels of neuraxial blockade (e.g., midthoracic to 
high thoracic) with surgical anesthesia concentrations 
of local anesthetic (e.g., epidural 2% lidocaine) result 
in more profound sympathectomy and increased risk of 
hypotension, which may require infusion of vasoactive 
medications to maintain hemodynamic stability. How-
ever, analgesic concentrations of local anesthetic (e.g., 
epidural 0.1% ropivacaine) are commonly given via tho-
racic epidural catheter to provide postoperative analgesia 
after open thoracic surgery and abdominal surgery. The 
smaller concentration of local anesthetic required for 
analgesia (as opposed to surgical anesthesia) results in 
decreased incidence of hypotension.
Postoperative disposition of the patient also influences 
medication choice or type of regional anesthesia. Patients 
undergoing ambulatory surgery who receive spinal anes-
thesia may have a prolonged recovery time if they receive 
long-acting local anesthetics. Ambulatory surgical patients 
undergoing procedures associated with significant post-
operative pain may benefit from a long-lasting peripheral 
nerve block or nerve catheter placement.12
The anesthesia provider may choose to administer 
sedation to improve patient comfort during a procedure 
performed with regional anesthesia, although the term 
III
Chapter 14 Choice of Anesthetic Technique
227
MAC would not be used if the primary anesthetic was a 
regional technique.
Monitored Anesthesia Care
Pharmacologic sedation using opioids or hypnotic med-
ications is often provided as a component of MAC (also 
see Chapters 8 and 9). Nonpharmacologic approaches 
such as video or audio distraction or verbal reassurance 
can also complement a MAC technique. The ASA depth 
of sedation continuum can be used to choose the level of 
sedation that is most appropriate for the patient under-
going MAC. Local or topical anesthesia administered by 
the surgeon is commonly used during MAC to provide 
adequate analgesia for the procedure. The anesthesia 
provider must track the total dose of local anesthetic 
and be alert for signs of local anesthetic toxicity (also 
see Chapter 10). The injection of local anesthetic near 
sensitive areas (e.g., face, eyes) may initially require a 
deeper level of sedation until the injection is complete.
The most dangerous anesthetic risk during MAC is 
respiratory depression from excessive sedation. The man-
ifestations of respiratory depression include upper airway 
obstruction, hypoventilation, and hypoxemia. During 
MAC, end-tidal capnography can be accomplished with 
a nasal cannula that has a dedicated sampling line 
Component of Anesthesia
Primary Druga
Secondary Drugb
Antinociceptionc d
Opioids (e.g., remifentanil)
Propofol
Ketamine (NMDA antagonist)
Sevoflurane
Dexmedetomidine (α2 agonist)
Lidocaine (antiinflammatory, sodium channel 
blockade)
NSAID (antiinflammatory)
Unconsciousness (and amnesia)e
Propofol
Ketamine
Sevoflurane (inhaled anesthetic)
Remifentanil
Dexmedetomidine
Magnesium (NMDA agonist)
NMBA (decrease proprioception)
Immobility
NMBA
Magnesium (smooth muscle relaxant)
Propofol (central muscle relaxation)
Sevoflurane (central muscle relaxation)
Table 14.4
Multimodal General Anesthesia Strategy
aPrimary: drug that explicitly maintains that component of anesthesia
bSecondary: drug that “implicitly” (i.e., additionally) contributes
cSimultaneous use of antinociceptive drugs creates opioid-sparing effect
dIn the absence of an antinociception monitor heart rate and blood pressure changes are used as a measure of nociceptive response.
eElectroencephalogram (EEG) monitoring is essential to track the level of unconsciousness and guide the dose of hypnotics.NMBA,
Neuromuscular blocking agent; NMDA, N-methyl-D-aspartic acid; NSAIDs, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs.
Adapted from Brown EN, Pavone KJ, Naranjo M. Multimodal general anesthesia: Theory and practice. Anesth Analg. 2018;127(5):1246–1258, Table 1.
attached. However, capnography monitoring is less 
reliable in this setting, and the absence of increased 
end-tidal CO2 does not guarantee the adequacy of venti-
lation. The medications typically used for sedation dur-
ing MAC (benzodiazepines, opioids, propofol) produce 
dose-dependent respiratory depression. Ketamine and 
dexmedetomidine are less likely to cause hypoventilation 
but have other potential side effects and may have syn-
ergistic sedative effects with other hypnotic medications 
(also see Chapter 8).
A 2021 retrospective study examined over 1000 MAC 
cases that required conversion to general anesthesia.13
Common reasons for conversion included patient intol-
erance (manifested by patient movement, disinhibition, 
patient discomfort), patient-related complications (e.g., 
hemodynamic instability, aspiration, coughing, hypox-
emia), or procedural factors (e.g., change in procedure, 
surgical request, bleeding, extended surgical time).
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The editors and publisher would like to thank Dr. Eliza-
beth Whitlock for contributing to this chapter in the 
previous edition of this work. It has served as the foun-
dation for the current chapter.
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
228
REFERENCES
1. Egan TD, Svensen CH. Multimodal gen-
eral anesthesia: A principled approach to 
producing the drug-induced, reversible 
coma of anesthesia. Anesth Analg. 2018 
Nov;127(5):1104–1106. 
doi:10.1213/
ANE.0000000000003743. 
PMID: 
30335656.
2. Brown EN, Pavone KJ, Naranjo M. 
Multimodal general anesthesia: The-
ory and practice. Anesth Analg. 2018 
Nov;127(5):1246–1258. 
doi:10.1213/
ANE.0000000000003668. 
PMID: 
30252709; PMCID: PMC6203428.
3. Cohen NA, McMichael JP. What’s new 
in … Definitions of monitored anesthesia 
care. ASA Newsl. 2004;68(6):22–26.
4. American Society of Anesthesiologists. 
Position on Monitored Anesthesia Care. 
Last Amended: October 17, 2018. https://
www.asahq.org/standards-and-guidelines/
position-on-monitored-anesthesia-care
Accessed December 22, 2021
5. Bhananker SM, Posner KL, Cheney 
FW, etal. Injury and liability associ-
ated with monitored anesthesia care: A 
closed claims analysis. Anesthesiology. 
2006;104(2):228–234.
6. Weinstein EJ, Levene JL, Cohen MS, 
Andreae DA, Chao JY, Johnson M, Hall 
CB, Andreae MH. Local anaesthetics and 
regional anaesthesia versus conventional 
analgesia for preventing persistent post-
operative pain in adults and children. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2018 Jun 
20;6(6):CD007105. doi: 10.1002/14651858.
CD007105.pub4. PMID: 29926477; PMCID: 
PMC6377212.
7. Smith LM, Cozowicz C, Uda Y, Memt-
soudis SG, Barrington MJ. Neuraxial and 
combined neuraxial/general anesthesia 
compared to general anesthesia for major 
truncal and lower limb surgery: A systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Anesth Analg. 
2017 Dec;125(6):1931–1945. doi:10.1213/
ANE.0000000000002069. PMID: 28537970.
8. Esper SA, Holder-Murray J, Subrama-
niam K, Boisen M, Kenkre TS, Meister 
K, Foos S, Wong H, Howard-Quijano 
K, Mahajan A. Enhanced recovery pro-
tocols reduce mortality across eight 
surgical specialties at academic and uni-
versity-affiliated community hospitals. 
Ann Surg. 2020 Nov 18. doi:10.1097/
SLA.0000000000004642. Epub ahead of 
printPMID: 33214486.
9. Pisarska M, Torbicz G, Gajewska N, 
Rubinkiewicz M, Wierdak M, Major P, 
Budzyński A, Ljungqvist O, Pędziwiatr 
M. Compliance with the ERAS Pro-
tocol and 3-year survival after lap-
aroscopic surgery for non-metastatic 
colorectal cancer. World J Surg. 2019 
Oct;43(10):2552–2560. 
doi:10.1007/
s00268-019-05073-0 PMID: 31286185.
10. Algie CM, Mahar RK, Tan HB, etal. 
Effectiveness and risks of cricoid pres-
sure during rapid sequence induction 
for endotracheal intubation. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev. 2015;11:CD011656.
11. Daniel M, Weiskopf RB, Noorani M, Eger 
2nd EI. Fentanyl augments the blockade 
of the sympathetic response to incision 
(MAC-BAR) produced by desflurane and 
isoflurane: Desflurane and isoflurane 
MAC-BAR without and with fentanyl. 
Anesthesiology. 1998 Jan;88(1):43–49. 
doi:10.1097/00000542-199801000-
00009. PMID: 9447854.
12. Ilfeld BM. Continuous peripheral nerve 
blocks: An update of the published 
evidence and comparison with novel, 
alternative analgesic modalities. Anesth 
Analg. 
2017 
Jan;124(1):308–335. 
doi:10.1213/ANE.0000000000001581. 
PMID: 27749354.
13. Kim S, Chang BA, Rahman A, Lin HM, 
DeMaria Jr S, Zerillo J, Wax DB. Analy-
sis of urgent/emergent conversions from 
monitored anesthesia care to general 
anesthesia with airway instrumentation. 
BMC Anesthesiol. 2021 Jun 29;21(1):183. 
doi:10.1186/s12871-021-01403-9 PMID: 
34187367; PMCID: PMC8240303.
229
Chapter
THE ANESTHESIA WORKSTATION
FUNCTIONAL ANATOMY OF THE 
ANESTHESIA WORKSTATION
Gas Supply System
Anesthetic Vaporizers
ANESTHETIC BREATHING CIRCUITS
ANESTHESIA VENTILATORS
SCAVENGING SYSTEMS
CHECKING YOUR ANESTHESIA 
WORKSTATION
Item 1: Verify Auxiliary Oxygen Cylinder and 
Self-Inflating Manual Ventilation Device Are 
Available and Functioning (Daily)
Item 2: Verify Patient Suction Is Adequate to 
Clear the Airway (Every Case)
Item 3: Turn On Anesthesia Delivery System 
and Confirm That AC Power Is Available 
(Daily)
Item 4: Verify Availability of Required Monitors 
and Check Alarms (Every Case)
Item 5: Verify That Pressure Is Adequate on 
the Spare Oxygen Cylinder Mounted on the 
Anesthesia Machine (Daily)
Item 6: Verify That Piped Gas Pressures Are 50 
psig or Higher (Daily)
Item 7: Verify That Vaporizers Are Adequately 
Filled and, If Applicable, That the Filler Ports 
Are Tightly Closed (Every Case)
Item 8: Verify That No Leaks Are Present in the 
Gas Supply Lines Between the Flowmeters and 
the Common Gas Outlet (Daily)
Item 9: Test Scavenging System Function (Daily)
Item 10: Calibrate, or Verify Calibration of, the 
Oxygen Monitor and Check the Low Oxygen 
Alarm (Daily)
Item 11: Verify Carbon Dioxide Absorbent Is Not 
Exhausted (Every Case)
ANESTHESIA DELIVERY 
SYSTEMS
Stephen D. Weston
15
Item 12: Perform Breathing System Pressure 
and Leak Testing (Every Case)
Item 13: Verify That Gas Flows Properly Through 
the Breathing Circuit During Both Inspiration 
and Exhalation (Every Case)
Item 14: Document Completion of Checkout 
Procedures
Item 15: Confirm Ventilator Settings and 
Evaluate Readiness to Deliver Anesthesia 
Care (Anesthesia Time-Out)
THE ANESTHESIA WORKSTATION
In the decades after the first public demonstration of 
ether anesthesia in 1846 the anesthesia delivery system 
consisted of handheld devices ranging from ether- or 
chloroform-soaked cloths to more sophisticated inhalers 
that could regulate the administered dose of anesthetic.1
The modern anesthesia workstation remains at its core 
a device for delivering inhaled anesthesia, but incor-
porates many additional functions focused on safety 
and ease of use (Table 15.1). The sheer number of tasks 
and solutions for which the anesthesia workstation is 
designed explains its complexity. Many innovations 
in workstation design aim to enhance patient safety. 
American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) closed 
claims analysis of adverse anesthetic outcomes related 
to anesthetic gas delivery equipment shows a decrease 
in such claims from 4% in the 1970s to approximately 
1% in 2000–2011.2 Further, the severity of the events 
leading to the claims has decreased, with more reports of 
awareness under anesthesia and fewer involving death 
or permanent brain injury.
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
230
Function
Description
Safety Feature
Inhaled anesthetic delivery
Deliver volatile anesthetic gas at precise 
concentrations.
Allow rebreathing of the exhaled anesthetic 
gases after removing carbon dioxide.
Continuously display inspired and exhaled 
anesthetic concentration.
Continuously display inspired and exhaled 
carbon dioxide concentration.
Oxygen delivery
Individually meter oxygen and two or more 
other breathing gases, while continuously 
enriching the inhaled gas with anesthetic 
vapors.
Continuously measure and display the inspired 
oxygen concentration.
Prevent hypoxic gas mixtures caused by 
operator error or gas supply failure.
Provide a breathing circuit manual oxygen flush 
feature.
Possess a backup supply of oxygen.
Display gas pipeline and backup tank supply 
pressures.
Facilitate ventilation of 
patient’s lungs
Ventilate the patient manually (“bag” 
ventilation) with adjustable breathing circuit 
pressure.
Ventilate the patient mechanically, with 
sophisticated ventilator modes comparable to 
the ICU.
Measure and display ventilatory parameters 
such as respiratory rate, tidal volume, and 
airway pressure.
Remove excess anesthetic 
gases
Eliminate (“scavenge”) excess gas from the 
patient’s breathing circuit and remove this gas 
from the room.
Information display
Provide an integrated platform for displaying 
anesthetic, hemodynamic, and respiratory 
parameters and for collecting this data into an 
electronic medical record.
ICU, Intensive care unit.
Table 15.1 Functions of the Modern Anesthesia Workstation
Anesthesia providers must be aware of the operational 
characteristics and “functional anatomy” of their anes-
thesia workstations. There is increased variation among 
anesthesia workstations, with operational and preuse 
checkout procedures becoming more divergent, thus 
mandating device-specific familiarity. Contemporary 
machines have automated preuse checkout procedures, 
but machines can pass automated checkouts despite the 
presence of unsafe conditions.3
Although providing a detailed description of each 
component of the anesthesia machine is beyond the 
scope of this chapter, starting with a generic approach 
provides a suitable foundation for understanding a 
specific workstation model. It is worth emphasizing that 
if there is any doubt about the correct functioning of an 
anesthesia workstation, and there is difficulty with ven-
tilation or oxygenation, then ventilating the patient from 
an alternative source of oxygen such as an E-cylinder 
is often appropriate. Trouble-shooting of the anesthesia 
machine can commence once the patient is safe.
FUNCTIONAL ANATOMY OF THE 
ANESTHESIA WORKSTATION
Gas Supply System
Although modern anesthesia workstations are often 
largely electronically controlled, the interior of the anes-
thesia machine remains a pneumatic system, a place 
where breathing gases are delivered from their supply 
III
Chapter 15 Anesthesia Delivery Systems
231
sources, measured and mixed, passed through (or by) an 
anesthetic vaporizer, and delivered to the patient’s breath-
ing circuit. Although the details of this gas supply system 
may differ between the various manufacturers’ anesthesia 
workstations, their overall schematic is similar. The gas 
supply system of a typical contemporary workstation 
with electronic controls is depicted in Fig. 15.1
High-Pressure Section: Auxiliary E-Cylinder Inlet
During normal operation, the high-pressure section of the 
anesthesia machine is not active, because the hospital’s 
central gas supply system serves as the primary gas source 
for the machine. However, it is a requirement to have at 
least one attachment for an oxygen cylinder to serve as a 
backup source of oxygen in case of failure of the hospital 
supply source. The cylinders are mounted to the anesthe-
sia machine by the hanger yoke assembly. Each hanger 
yoke is also equipped with the Pin Index Safety System 
(PISS), which is a safeguard to reduce the risk of a medi-
cal gas cylinder error caused by interchanging cylinders 
(Fig. 15.2). Two metal pins on the yoke assembly are 
arranged to project precisely into corresponding holes on 
the cylinder head–valve assembly of the tank. Each gas 
or combination of gases has a specific pin arrangement.4
The maximum pressure in E-cylinders full of oxygen is 
approximately 2200 pounds per square inch gauge (psig). 
Filters
Air
pipeline
supply
50–55 psig
N2O
pipeline
supply
50-55 psig
N2O
O2
pipeline
supply
50-55 psig
O2 high-pressure section
Auxiliary O2
flowmeter
O2:N2O
proportioning
system
55
55
55
Fresh gas outlet
(to breathing circuit)
Anesthetic
vaporizer
Low-pressure section
Digital
flow sensors
Flow
control
valves
Secondary
pressure
regulators
Analog
cylinder
pressure
gauges
Cylinder
supply
Digital tank
pressure
gauges
Oxygen flush
valve
O2
Air
Digital pipeline
pressure gauges
Check
valves
2000
750
2000
SORC
0.0
0.0
0.0
Fig. 15.1 Anesthesia workstation gas supply system represented by the Dräger Apollo anesthesia 
workstation. The high-pressure system extends from the gas cylinders to the high-pressure regulators 
(dashed lines around O2 high-pressure section only). The intermediate-pressure section extends from 
the high-pressure regulators to the flow control valves and includes the tubing and components 
originating from the pipeline inlets. The low-pressure section (dashed lines) extends from the flow 
control valves to the breathing circuit. See text for additional details. (From Dräger Medical. Instructions 
for Use: Apollo. Telford, PA: Dräger Medical; 2012.)
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
232
Yoke
plug
Indexing
pins
Gas label
All positions
Oxygen
Air
Nitrous oxide
A
B
Fig. 15.2 E-cylinder hanger yoke assembly. (A) Standard E-cylinder hanger yoke assembly highlighting 
the gas-specific indexing pins, sealing gasket, and yoke plug. The yoke plug should be inserted when 
a tank is not in place. (B) Pin Index Safety System holes machined into the cylinder head–valve 
mechanism of the compressed gas cylinders. (From Yoder M. Gas supply systems. In: Understanding 
Modern Anesthesia Systems. Telford, PA: Dräger Medical; 2009.)
(The gauge pressure is the pressure above the ambient 
atmospheric pressure.) The full tank pressure is 750 psig 
for nitrous oxide and 2200 psig for air. These pressures are 
much higher than the normal hospital pipeline supply pres-
sure of 50 to 55 psig. A high-pressure regulator therefore 
reduces the variable high pressure in the E-cylinder to a 
lower, nearly constant pressure output to the intermediate-
pressure section of the anesthesia machine.
Three points about the safe use of the auxiliary oxy-
gen E-cylinder system should be noted. First, checking 
the E-cylinders is not part of an automatic machine 
checkout. The anesthesia provider must manually open 
each cylinder and check the pressure gauges on the 
front of the machine. Second, it is imperative to keep 
the auxiliary E-cylinders closed during normal opera-
tion using pipeline gases, as an open oxygen cylinder 
may allow the anesthesia provider to be unaware of 
catastrophic pipeline failure. If the oxygen tank is 
already open when pipeline failure occurs, the “low 
oxygen pressure” alarm, which is a high-intensity 
alarm, will not sound until the auxiliary tank is already 
depleted. Finally, in case of known or suspected pipeline 
contamination or crossover (e.g., from nitrous oxide in 
the oxygen pipeline) leading to delivery of a hypoxic 
gas mixture, backup oxygen from the E-cylinder will 
not flow unless the anesthesia machine is disconnected 
from the pipeline, because the system is designed to 
preferentially draw from the pipeline as long as it is 
adequately pressured.5,6
Calculation of remaining gas volume in an oxygen 
E-cylinder based on its pressure has practical implica-
tions for patient care in the setting of failed pipeline 
oxygen supply in the operating room or for patient 
transport within the hospital. A full oxygen E-cylinder 
contains 650 L of oxygen at 2200 psig. Because oxygen is 
a compressed gas, the gauge pressure is directly propor-
tional to the amount of oxygen in the tank. For example, 
at 1100 psig, there is half a tank left (325 L of oxygen) 
remaining. Because nitrous oxide is a compressed liquid, 
the relationship between its pressure and volume is dif-
ferent. A full nitrous oxide E-cylinder contains about 
1600 L of gas at 750 psig. As the nitrous oxide gas flows 
out of the cylinder, further liquid is vaporized and the 
pressure in the tank remains unchanged. Therefore the 
pressure of a nitrous oxide tank remains at 750 psig until 
there is no more liquid in the tank, at which point the 
pressure begins to fall. By this point, at least 75% of the 
tank has been depleted.
III
Chapter 15 Anesthesia Delivery Systems
233
Intermediate-Pressure Section
Gas Pipeline Inlet: Central Gas Supply Source
Three gases are typically piped into the operating room 
by the hospital’s central gas supply system: oxygen, air, 
and nitrous oxide, all at 50 to 55 psig. The pipeline sup-
ply terminates with one of two types of connector: the 
Diameter Index Safety System (DISS) connector system 
or the quick coupler system. Within each type, the con-
nectors for oxygen, air, and nitrous oxide are mutually 
incompatible. DISS connectors rely on matching diam-
eters in the male and female connections to properly seat 
and thread the connection.4 Quick couplers use pins and 
corresponding slots on the male and female ends, respec-
tively, in order to ensure correct connections. Because 
these connectors can be plugged together or released with 
a simple twisting motion, they are especially appealing 
for equipment that needs to be moved between locations. 
In both systems the wall plates and hoses are color-coded 
for ease of identification: green for oxygen, yellow for 
air, and blue for nitrous oxide.
Oxygen Flush Valve
The oxygen flush valve allows manual delivery of a high 
flow rate of 100% oxygen directly to the patient’s breath-
ing circuit. The oxygen flush valve may be employed to 
overcome circuit leaks or to rapidly increase the inhaled 
oxygen concentration. Flow from the oxygen flush valve 
bypasses the anesthetic vaporizers and enters the low-
pressure circuit downstream at a rate between 35 and 
75 L/min.
Oxygen flushing during the inspiratory phase of 
positive-pressure ventilation can produce barotrauma if 
the anesthesia machine does not incorporate a fresh gas 
decoupling feature or an appropriately adjusted inspira-
tory pressure limiter. A defective or damaged valve can 
stick in the fully open position and result in barotrauma. 
Oxygen flow from a valve sticking in a partially open 
position can dilute the inhaled anesthetic agent con-
centration, potentially resulting in awareness under 
anesthesia.7
Pneumatic Safety Systems
Within the intermediate-pressure section of the machine 
there are two safety systems that minimize the risk of 
delivery of a hypoxic gas mixture in case the oxygen 
pressure decreases significantly. The oxygen supply fail-
ure alarm sensor provides an audible and visual warning 
to the clinician if the oxygen pressure drops below a 
manufacturer-specified minimum. This alarm cannot be 
silenced until the pressure is restored to the minimum 
value (e.g., by opening the oxygen E-cylinder on the 
machine). In addition, the oxygen supply failure protec-
tion device, sometimes called the “fail-safe valve,” affects 
the flow of other gases when oxygen supply pressure is 
low. The fail-safe valve either shuts off (binary valve) or 
reduces (proportional valve) the flow of other gases such 
as nitrous oxide or air. The term fail-safe as it pertains 
to these valves is a misnomer: only the inspired oxy-
gen concentration monitor in the breathing circuit and 
clinical acumen can protect the patient from hypoxic gas 
delivery.
Auxiliary Oxygen Flowmeter
Auxiliary oxygen flowmeters are commonly encountered 
on anesthesia workstations, serving as a convenience 
feature for low-flow oxygen. Because the flowmeter is 
usually operational even when the machine is off, the 
auxiliary oxygen flowmeter can also serve as a safety 
feature because it allows the use of an oxygen delivery 
source (e.g., a manual resuscitation bag) in the case of 
a system power failure. The source of oxygen for the 
auxiliary flowmeter is the same as for the other oxygen 
flow control valves. In cases of suspected hospital oxy-
gen pipeline contamination or crossover switching to an 
E-cylinder that is not part of the anesthesia machine is 
imperative.
Low-Pressure Section
The purpose of the high- and intermediate-pressure sec-
tions of the anesthesia workstation is to deliver a reliable 
source of breathing gases at a stable and known working 
pressure to the low-pressure section of the gas supply 
system. The clinician interfaces with the low-pressure 
section of the gas supply system, shaping its output to 
deliver a known composition of gas and anesthetic to 
the breathing circuit. The low-pressure section of the 
gas supply system begins at the flow control valves and 
ends at the outlet of the fresh gas line (see Fig. 15.1). 
Key components include the flow control valves, the 
flowmeters or flow sensors, the vaporizer manifold, and 
the anesthetic vaporizers. The breathing circuit, including 
the circle system, breathing bag, and ventilator, will be 
treated separately.
Flow Control Assemblies
The flow control valves on the anesthesia workstation 
allow the operator to select a total fresh gas flow of 
known composition that enters the low-pressure section 
of the anesthesia workstation. These valves are there-
fore an important anatomic landmark: they separate 
the intermediate-pressure section from the low-pressure 
section. After leaving the flowmeters, the mixture of 
gases travels through a common manifold and may be 
directed through an anesthetic vaporizer if selected. The 
total fresh gas flow and the anesthetic vapor then travel 
toward the common gas outlet, or fresh gas outlet (see 
Fig. 15.1).
Newer anesthesia workstations are increasingly 
equipped with electronic flow sensors instead of flow 
tubes. These systems may employ conventional control 
knobs or an entirely electronic interface to control gas 
flow. Numerous flow sensor technologies can be applied, 
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
234
such as hot-wire anemometers, a differential pressure 
transducer method, or mass flow sensors. Regardless 
of the mechanism of flow measurement, these systems 
depend on electrical power to display the gas flow. 
When system electrical power is totally interrupted, some 
backup mechanical means usually exists.
Mechanical flow control and flow display remain 
common, even on some newer workstations, either as 
primary or especially as backup systems. The flow control 
valve assembly consists of a flow control knob, a tapered 
needle valve, a valve seat, and a pair of valve stops.6 For 
safety, the oxygen flow control knob is typically distinc-
tively fluted, larger in diameter, and may project beyond 
the control knobs of the other gases.
The flow control valve regulates the amount of flow 
that enters a tapered glass flow tube. A mobile indicator 
float inside the calibrated flow tube indicates the amount 
of flow passing through the annular space between the 
float and the flow tube. The indicator float hovers freely 
in an equilibrium position in the tube, where the upward 
force resulting from gas flow equals the downward force 
on the float resulting from gravity. The viscosity and 
density of the particular gas determine its behavior in 
the glass tube, and therefore the calibration on these 
flowmeters is gas-specific. The flow tube has historically 
been a very fragile component of the anesthesia work-
station. Flow tube leaks are a potential hazard because 
the flowmeters are located downstream from hypoxia-
preventing safety devices, except the breathing circuit 
oxygen analyzer.6
Proportioning Systems
On anesthesia workstations with electronically controlled 
gas flow, the machine is programmed to prevent the user 
from selecting a hypoxic gas mixture for delivery to the 
fresh gas outlet. For manually controlled flowmeters, the 
concern is that a user could mistakenly select oxygen 
and nitrous oxide flows that result in a hypoxic mixture. 
A proportioning system prevents this by means of a 
pneumatic-mechanical interface between the oxygen and 
nitrous oxide flows or a mechanical link between the 
oxygen and nitrous oxide flow control valves. Propor-
tioning systems can override flows set by the anesthesia 
provider, either decreasing nitrous oxide flow or increas-
ing oxygen flow in order to maintain a nonhypoxic fresh 
gas flow. The specific devices and designs used to accom-
plish this control vary among manufacturers. As always, 
the presence of a functioning oxygen analyzer in the 
patient’s breathing circuit is the best and final protection 
against delivery of a hypoxic gas mixture.
Vaporizer Mount and Interlock System
The vaporizer mounts on modern anesthesia worksta-
tions allow for detachment and replacement of the 
anesthetic vaporizers by the workstation operator. The 
benefits of detachable vaporizer mountings include ease 
of maintenance, the need for fewer vaporizer positions on 
the workstation, and the ability to remove the vaporizer 
in the setting of malignant hyperthermia.8 This ability 
to remove and reintroduce an element to the pneumatic 
structure of the low-pressure section of the anesthesia 
machine brings an increased potential for leaks or fresh 
gas flow obstruction as a result of an inappropriately 
seated vaporizer or other connection-related failures. 
After adding or changing a vaporizer on the anesthesia 
machine, the operator should make sure it is properly 
seated.
The vaporizer interlock device ensures that fresh gas 
cannot flow through more than one vaporizer at a time. 
The design of vaporizer interlock devices varies signifi-
cantly. These devices are not immune from failure, with 
anesthetic overdose as a potential consequence.
Anesthetic Vaporizers
The inhaler used by William T. G. Morton in the first 
public demonstration of ether anesthesia was effective, 
but there was no way to regulate its output concentra-
tion or compensate for changes in temperature caused 
by the vaporization of the liquid anesthetic. Modern 
variable bypass–type vaporizers are temperature com-
pensated and can maintain precise outputs accurately 
over a wide range of input gas flow rates. The intro-
duction of desflurane to the clinical setting required an 
even more sophisticated vaporizer design to handle the 
unique physical properties of this agent (also see Chap-
ter 7). Vaporizers incorporating computerized control 
technology emerged in “cassette” vaporizer systems. 
An injection-type vaporizer has also been introduced, 
spraying precise amounts of liquid anesthetic agent into 
the fresh gas stream. Before discussing any of these 
systems, certain physical chemical principles are briefly 
reviewed to facilitate an understanding of the operating 
principles, construction, and design of contemporary 
anesthetic vaporizers.
Physics
When a gas exists within a container, the gas molecules 
collide with the walls and exert a force. The pressure 
within the container is the force per unit area exerted on 
the walls. According to the ideal gas law, that pressure 
is directly proportional to the number of molecules of 
gas present within the space, directly proportional to the 
temperature, and inversely proportional to the volume 
of the container that confines a gas. When a mixture of 
ideal gases exists in a container, each gas creates its own 
pressure, which is the same pressure as if the individual 
gas occupied the container alone. The total pressure may 
be calculated by simply adding together the pressures 
of each gas—Dalton’s law of partial pressures. At sea 
level, the ambient pressure is 760 mm Hg, which equals 
1 atmosphere (atm) or 101.325 kilopascals (kPa).
III
Chapter 15 Anesthesia Delivery Systems
235
In the clinical setting oxygen and anesthetic concen-
trations are typically specified as a volume percent. Vol-
ume percent is simply the percentage of volume occupied 
by the gas relative to the sum of all gases present, which 
is the same as the proportion of an individual gas by its 
partial pressure (mm Hg) as a percentage of the total 
pressure (under idealized conditions encountered in the 
operating room). Thus although the partial pressure of 
“room air” oxygen is lower at elevation (129 mm Hg in 
Denver, Colorado) than it is at sea level (160 mm Hg), it 
remains approximately 21% at both altitudes.
Volatile liquids such as inhaled anesthetic agents 
are characterized by a high propensity to evaporate, 
or vaporize. When a volatile liquid is exposed to air or 
other gases, molecules at the liquid surface with suf-
ficient kinetic energy escape and enter the vapor phase. 
If a volatile anesthetic is placed within a contained 
space, such as an anesthetic vaporizer, molecules will 
continue to escape into the vapor phase until the rate at 
which molecules evaporate is equal to the rate of return 
to the liquid phase (a process known as condensation). 
When this equilibrium is reached, the composition of the 
vapor remains constant and it is said to be “saturated” 
with anesthetic, and the anesthetic molecules in the gas 
phase bombard the walls of the container, creating a 
partial pressure known as the saturated vapor pressure,
or simply vapor pressure. Liquids with a higher tendency 
to evaporate and generate higher vapor pressures are 
described as “more volatile.”
Vapor pressure is a physical property of a substance, 
with each substance having its own unique value at any 
given temperature (Fig. 15.3). Vapor pressure is temperature 
dependent and is not affected by changes in atmospheric 
pressure. Evaporation is diminished at colder temperatures 
because fewer molecules possess sufficient kinetic energy 
to escape into the vapor phase. Conversely, at warmer 
temperatures, evaporation is enhanced and vapor pressure 
increases. Because vapor pressure values are unique to 
each liquid anesthetic agent, anesthetic vaporizers must be 
constructed in an agent-specific manner.8
Energy is required for a molecule of volatile anesthetic 
to evaporate into the gas phase—that energy is absorbed 
from the surroundings in the form of heat The amount 
of energy required to change 1 gram of a particular liquid 
into vapor at a constant temperature during evaporation 
is referred to as the latent heat of vaporization. In a well-
insulated container the energy for vaporization must 
come from the liquid itself. In the absence of an outside 
heat source, the temperature of the remaining liquid 
decreases as vaporization progresses. This cooling effect 
can lead to significant reductions in vapor pressure, and 
therefore of volatile anesthetic molecules moving into the 
gas phase. Unless the evaporative cooling effect of the 
liquid anesthetic agent is mitigated and compensated for, 
vaporizer output will decrease.
The boiling point of a liquid is defined as the tempera-
ture at which vapor pressure equals atmospheric pressure 
and the liquid begins to boil. The boiling point of most 
contemporary volatile anesthetic agents is not relevant to 
vaporizer design under most clinical situations. Desflu-
rane, however, boils at a temperature commonly encoun-
tered in clinical settings and has a high saturated vapor 
pressure (Table 15.2). These properties mandate a special 
vaporizer design to control agent delivery.
0
200
400
600
1000
800
1200
1400
1600
65
0
5
10
15
Temperature (°C)
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
Vapor pressure (mm Hg)
Desflurane
Halothane
Sevoflurane
Isoflurane
Enflurane
Water
Fig. 15.3 Vapor pressure versus temperature curves for desflurane, isoflurane, halothane, enflurane, 
sevoflurane, and water. Note that the curve for desflurane differs dramatically from that of the other 
contemporary inhaled anesthetic agents. Also note that all inhaled agents are more volatile than water. 
Dashed line indicates 1 atm (760 mm Hg) of pressure, which illustrates the boiling point at sea level 
(normal boiling point). (From inhaled anesthetic package insert equations and Susay SR, Smith MA, 
Lockwood GG. The saturated vapor pressure of desflurane at various temperatures. Anesth Analg.
1996;83:864–866.)
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
236
Property
Halothane
Isoflurane
Sevoflurane
Desflurane
SVP* @ 20°C (mm Hg)
243
238
157
669
SVC† @ 20°C at 1 atm‡ (v/v%)
32
31
21
88
MAC§ at age 40 yr (v/v%)
0.75
1.2
1.9
6.0
MAPP¶ (mm Hg)
5.7
9.1
14.4
45.6
Boiling point @1 atm (°C)
50.2 (122.4°F)
48.5 (119.3°F)
58.6 (137.3°F)
22.8 (73°F)
*SVP, Saturated vapor pressure. From anesthetic prescribing information.
†SVC, Saturated vapor concentration: the percentage of anesthetic agent relative to ambient pressure within an equilibrated (saturated) 
container (SVP/ambient pressure).
‡1 atm, 1 atmosphere = ambient pressure at sea level (760 mm Hg).
§MAC, Minimum alveolar concentration: the alveolar concentration that produces immobility in response to a noxious stimulus in 50% of 
subjects. The denominator is approximately sea level pressure (760 mm Hg).
¶MAPP, Minimum alveolar partial pressure. The alveolar partial pressure that produces immobility in response to a noxious stimulus in 50% 
of subjects (the numerator in the MAC calculation). Not affected by altitude. Calculated as MAC (fraction) × 760 mm Hg (i.e., for isoflurane = 
0.012 × 760 mm Hg). × 760 mm Hg (i.e., for isoflurane = 0.012 × 760 mm Hg).
v/v%, Volume percent.
Table 15.2 Physical Properties of Inhaled Volatile Anesthetic Agents
Modern Vaporizer Types
The saturated vapor pressure of volatile anesthetic 
agents, even at normal operating room temperatures, 
results in gas concentrations that greatly exceed those 
used clinically, so these concentrations must be diluted 
to safe ranges. Virtually all modern vaporizers are out-
of-circuit, and their controlled output is introduced into 
the breathing circuit through a fresh gas line. Specific 
types of vaporizers currently include the variable bypass 
vaporizer, the dual-circuit vaporizer, the cassette vapor-
izer, and the injection vaporizer.
Variable Bypass Vaporizers
Variable bypass refers to the method of carefully regu-
lating the concentration of vaporizer output by diluting 
gas fully saturated with anesthetic agent with a larger 
flow of gas. A diagram of a variable bypass vaporizer 
is shown in Fig. 15.4. Variable bypass vaporizers are 
agent-specific, flow-over, temperature-compensated, and 
pressure-compensated. The concentration control dial 
determines the ratio of the fresh gas flow that continues 
through the bypass chamber to the flow diverted into 
the vaporizing chamber. A temperature-compensating 
device, either an expansion element or temperature-
sensitive bimetallic strip, further adjusts that ratio, for 
example, by increasing the amount of flow into the 
vaporizing chamber as the temperature falls. Vaporizer 
concentration control dials are labeled to set vaporizer 
output in terms of volume percent, and the vaporizers 
are calibrated at sea level. Because the physical proper-
ties and clinical concentrations of each agent are unique, 
the diverting ratios are specific to each agent and dial 
setting. Variable bypass vaporizers can be used to deliver 
halothane, isoflurane, sevoflurane, and older agents, but 
not desflurane, because of this agent’s unique physical 
properties.
An ideal variable bypass vaporizer would maintain 
a constant concentration output at a given setting 
regardless of variables such as the fresh gas flow rate, 
temperature, intermittent backpressure from the breath-
ing circuit, carrier gas composition, and barometric 
pressure. Modern vaporizers generally have excellent 
performance characteristics, with minimal variation in 
clinical performance in conditions encountered in an 
operating room.
Understanding the influence of barometric pressure 
on variable bypass vaporizer output can help to illustrate 
concepts regarding vaporizer function. Perhaps surpris-
ingly, the “depth of anesthesia” administered at a given 
dial setting on a variable bypass vaporizer is relatively 
independent of atmospheric pressure. (This is not neces-
sarily true with other vaporizer types.) A liquid’s vapor 
pressure is independent of barometric pressure; therefore 
as altitude increases and barometric pressure declines, the 
partial pressure of anesthetic agent in the variable bypass 
vaporizing chamber remains constant despite a decline 
in the partial pressures of other constituent breathing 
gases and the total ambient pressure. The vaporizer 
output’s concentration (volume percent) of anesthetic is 
significantly greater than the dial setting, but the partial 
pressure delivered is close to what it would be at that 
dial setting at sea level. And because anesthetic depth is 
determined by the partial pressure of volatile agents in 
the brain, the clinical impact is minor. Although inhaled 
anesthetics are rarely used in hyperbaric conditions, 
similar considerations would apply.
Contemporary variable bypass vaporizers incorporate 
many features to minimize or eliminate hazards once 
III
Chapter 15 Anesthesia Delivery Systems
237
associated with these devices. Misfilling of anesthetic 
vaporizers with the wrong agent can result in an over-
dose or underdose of volatile anesthetic. Agent-specific, 
keyed filling devices help prevent misfilling. Overfilling 
is minimized by locating the filler port at the maximum 
safe liquid level. Tipping of a variable bypass vaporizer 
can allow the liquid agent to enter the bypass chamber 
and cause an extremely high output. Modern vaporizers 
are firmly secured to a manifold on the anesthesia work-
station to prevent tipping.
Vaporizers and the vaporizer–machine interface are 
potential sources of gas leaks that can result in patient 
awareness during inhaled anesthesia. Loose filler caps, 
filler plugs, and drain valves are probably the most 
common sources of leaks. Another common source of 
gas leak occurs at the junction of the vaporizer and the 
mounting bracket or manifold, where broken mount-
ing assemblies or foreign bodies can compromise the 
seal between the vaporizer and its point of attachment. 
Gas leaks can also occur within the vaporizer itself 
as a result of mechanical failure. Assessment for low-
pressure system leaks, including the vaporizer mount, 
is addressed in the section “Checking Your Anesthesia 
Workstation.”
Although rarely reported, contamination of anesthetic 
vaporizer contents has occurred, including organic con-
taminants and bacteria.9
Desflurane Dual-Gas Blender
Because of its unique physical characteristics, a vari-
able bypass vaporizer cannot be used for desflurane. 
First, the vapor pressure of desflurane is 669 mm Hg 
at 20°C (68°F), nearly 1 atm, and significantly higher 
than all other contemporary inhaled anesthetic agents. 
If desflurane were placed in a variable bypass vapor-
izer, prohibitively high bypass chamber flow rates would 
be required to dilute the vaporizing chamber output to 
clinical concentrations. Second, desflurane’s moderate 
potency means that the amount of desflurane vaporized 
over a given period is considerably greater than for other 
inhaled anesthetics. The concomitantly greater cooling 
would be difficult to compensate for without an external 
heat source. Finally, desflurane’s boiling point of 22.8°C 
(73°F) at 1 atm can be encountered in normal operating 
Inlet
Hot
Cold
Wick
Baffle
system
Liquid
anesthetic
Temperature-
compensating valve
Concentration
control dial
Machine outlet
check valve
Fig. 15.4 Simplified schematic of a variable bypass vaporizer. Rotation of the concentration control 
dial diverts a portion of the total fresh gas flow through the vaporizing chamber, where wicks saturated 
with liquid anesthetic ensure a large gas–liquid interface for efficient vaporization. A temperature-
compensating valve diverts more or less fresh gas flow through the vaporizing chamber to offset the 
effects of changes in temperature on the vapor pressure of the liquid anesthetic. Gases saturated with 
the vapor of the liquid anesthetic join gases that have passed through the bypass chamber for delivery 
to the machine outlet check valve (if present). When the concentration control dial is in the off position, 
no fresh gas inflow enters the vaporizing chamber. (Modified from Chakravarti S, Basu S. Modern 
anaesthesia vapourisers. Ind J Anaesth. 2013;57[S];464–471.)
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
238
Concentration
control valve
Vaporizer
outlet
Working
pressure
Working
pressure
Pressure
regulating
valve
Sump
shut-off
valve
Sump at 39°C
Desflurane
gas
Control
electronics
Fresh gas
from
flowmeter
assembly
Desflurane
liquid
CE
R2
R1
Differential
pressure
transducer
Fig. 15.5 Simplified schematic of Tec 6 desflurane vaporizer (Datex-Ohmeda, Madison, WI). See text for 
details. (From Andrews JJ. Operating Principles of the Ohmeda Tec 6 Desflurane Vaporizer: A Collection 
of Twelve Color Illustrations. Washington, DC: Library of Congress; 1996.)
room conditions. If the anesthetic agent were to boil 
within a variable bypass–type vaporizer, the output 
would be uncontrollable.
By outward appearance, the desflurane “vaporizer” is 
similar to variable bypass vaporizers, but its design and 
operating principles are radically different (Fig. 15.5). 
The desflurane vaporizers are electrically heated, ther-
mostatically controlled, constant temperature, pressur-
ized, electromechanically coupled, dual-circuit, gas vapor 
blenders. The desflurane sump is heated above the liquid’s 
boiling point, providing a source of pressurized desflu-
rane vapor that is the starting point of a second gas 
circuit parallel to the fresh gas flow. The vapor’s pressure 
is then downregulated, and a conventional concentration 
control dial is used to control the flow of vapor to mix 
with the fresh gas.
The desflurane blender behaves differently from the 
variable bypass vaporizer at altitude. Because of its 
design, the delivered desflurane concentration is rela-
tively stable as barometric pressure drops, and thus the 
delivered partial pressure of desflurane is lower. At alti-
tude, therefore, the anesthesia provider must compensate 
by increasing the set desflurane concentration by a factor 
equal to the percentage decrease in barometric pressure 
compared with sea level. Furthermore, use of nitrous 
oxide at low flows can decrease the output from the des-
flurane blender independently of atmospheric pressure.
Cassette Vaporizers
Cassette vaporizer systems use a permanent control 
unit housed within the workstation and interchangeable 
cassettes containing anesthetic liquid to serve as vapor-
izing chambers. A variety of agent-specific cassettes are 
available; they are color-coded for the operator and also 
magnetically coded to allow the anesthesia machine to 
identify which cassette has been inserted. For anesthet-
ics other than desflurane, the cassette vaporizing system 
acts as a computer-controlled variable bypass vaporizer. 
The flow through the vaporizing chamber is controlled 
by a central processing unit, such that compensation for 
temperature, carrier gas concentration, and flow rates 
can be carried out precisely. When the pressure inside 
the cassette’s vaporizing chamber rises above the pres-
sure in the bypass chamber, as when room temperature 
is above desflurane’s boiling point of 22.8°C (73°F), then 
the function of the cassette changes to become a vapor 
injector. A check valve between the bypass chamber and 
the vaporizing chamber closes so that no fresh gas enters 
the vaporizing chamber and anesthetic vapor does not 
travel retrograde uncontrolledly into the fresh gas. Under 
computer control, pure desflurane vapor is injected to 
achieve the desired concentration.
Injection-Type Vaporizers
Some anesthesia workstations use injection-type vapor-
izers. Liquid anesthetic is injected into a heated vaporiz-
ing chamber that may also contain a heated evaporative 
surface. The vaporizing chamber may serve as a source 
of vapor that is metered into the fresh gas, or the fresh 
gas flow may transit the chamber to be enriched with 
anesthetic vapor. Design details differ by manufacturer. 
In all cases the process is under microprocessor control.
ANESTHETIC BREATHING CIRCUITS
Fresh gas departs from the supply system and enters 
the anesthetic breathing circuit through the fresh gas 
III
Chapter 15 Anesthesia Delivery Systems
239
line. The primary functions of the breathing circuit are 
to deliver oxygen and other gases to the patient and to 
eliminate carbon dioxide (CO2). The breathing system 
must contain a low-resistance conduit for gas flow, a 
reservoir that can meet the patient’s inspiratory flow 
demand, and an expiratory port or valve to vent excess 
gas. Circle system breathing circuits have an absorber to 
eliminate CO2 and are the most common circuits used in 
anesthesia. Circuits without CO2 absorbers are variations 
on the Mapleson circuits; these are commonly used by 
anesthesia providers during patient transport, procedural 
sedation, airway management out of the operating room, 
and as “T-pieces” on intubated patients.
Circle Breathing Systems
The circle breathing system is so named because it allows 
circular, unidirectional flow of gas facilitated by one-way 
valves (Fig. 15.6). The main advantage of the circle system 
is that anesthetic gas is conserved and rebreathed. The 
capability to rebreathe exhaled gases is a unique aspect of 
circle systems as compared with intensive care unit (ICU) 
ventilators, in which the entirety of each exhaled breath is 
vented into the room. To allow safe rebreathing of exhaled 
gases, CO2 must be efficiently removed. Waste gas, which 
is composed of excess carrier gas, anesthetic agent, and 
CO2, must be scavenged and eliminated. The essential 
components that allow these functions are reviewed here.
Fresh Gas Inlet
Fresh gas, in the composition selected by the anesthe-
sia provider as described earlier, flows into the circle 
system from the common gas outlet of the anesthesia 
machine. In “bag” mode when the mechanical ventila-
tor is not selected, the fresh gas enters the circuit in 
a continuous fashion. During mechanical ventilation, 
various mechanisms exist to decouple the fresh gas 
during inspiration.
Unidirectional Valves
Two one-way valves are essential elements of the cir-
cle breathing system. The two limbs of the breathing 
circuit are connected to the valves, thereby creating 
an inspiratory and expiratory limb. The valves permit 
positive-pressure breathing and ensure that gas is not 
rebreathed until it has passed through the CO2 absorber. 
If a unidirectional valve sticks in the open position, 
inappropriate rebreathing of CO2 may occur. Capnogra-
phy may help with diagnosis, as each valve demonstrates 
a characteristic CO2 waveform when incompetent.10 If 
the expiratory valve sticks shut, total occlusion of the 
circuit, with resultant breath stacking and barotrauma, 
can occur. Assessing for proper unidirectional valve 
function should be part of the anesthesia workstation 
preuse checkout procedure. Anesthesia workstations are 
constructed so that either valve function and motion 
can be visibly assessed, or malfunction is indicated by 
the workstation.
Corrugated Breathing Circuit Tubing
The breathing circuit tubing serves as a conduit for 
delivery of gases to and from the patient. This large-bore 
tubing, which accounts for most of the volume within the 
circle system, is designed to provide minimal resistance 
and resist kinking. These circuits are compliant, such that 
some of the volume intended for delivery to the patient is 
lost to distention of the tubing. Many modern worksta-
tions perform a compliance test to compensate for this 
effect. This compliance testing should be performed with 
the actual circuit that will be used for anesthesia delivery. 
If circuit length will be increased using an extension, the 
compliance, leak, and flow tests should be performed 
with the extension in place.
Y-Piece
The Y-piece is the most distal part of the breathing circuit 
(i.e., nearest the patient), the point at which the inspira-
tory and expiratory limbs merge. It has a 15-mm inner 
diameter to connect to an endotracheal tube or elbow 
connector and a 22-mm outer diameter to connect to a 
facemask. The dead space in the circle breathing system 
begins at the Y-piece and continues on the side con-
nected to the patient. The gas sampling port is located at 
or near the Y-piece to allow monitoring of both inspira-
tory and expiratory gases.
B
Exhalation
check valve
Inhalation
check valve
APL
valve
Bag/vent
selector switch
Fresh gas
inlet 
CO2
canister
Expiratory
limb 
Y-piece
Inspiratory
limb 
V
Fig. 15.6 Schematic diagram of the components of a circle 
anesthesia breathing system. Rotation of the bag/vent selector 
switch permits substitution of an anesthesia machine ventilator 
(V) for the reservoir bag (B). The volume of the reservoir bag 
is determined by the fresh gas inflow and adjustment of 
the adjustable press-limiting (APL) valve. (From Brockwell RC, 
Andrews JJ. Delivery systems for inhaled anesthetics. In: Barash 
PG, Cullen BF, Stoelting RK, eds. Clinical Anesthesia. Philadelphia, 
PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2006:557–594).
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
240
Adjustable Pressure-Limiting Valve
The adjustable pressure-limiting (APL) valve, also known 
as a “pop-off” or pressure relief valve, is an operator-
adjustable relief valve that vents excess breathing circuit 
gas to the scavenging system and provides control of 
the breathing system pressure during spontaneous and 
manual modes of ventilation. When fully open, the APL 
valve allows for spontaneous breathing at atmospheric 
pressure. When the APL valve is partially closed, the 
spontaneously breathing patient will receive continuous 
positive airway pressure (CPAP). At greater degrees of 
closure, the APL valve facilitates delivery of assisted 
or controlled breaths by manual compression of the 
reservoir bag. Switching to a ventilator mode excludes, 
or closes, the APL valve.
Anesthesia Reservoir Bag or “Breathing Bag”
The anesthesia reservoir bag, or “breathing bag,” pro-
vides several important functions, including (1) serv-
ing as a reservoir for exhaled gas and excess fresh gas, 
(2) providing a means of delivering manual ventilation or 
assisting spontaneous breathing, (3) serving as a visual 
or tactile means of monitoring a patient’s spontaneous 
breathing efforts, and (4) partially protecting the patient 
from excessive positive pressure in the breathing sys-
tem. The reservoir bag is the most compliant part of the 
breathing system, and is designed to distend well beyond 
its nominal volume at a plateau pressure less than 60 
cm H2O. Classically, the reservoir bag was excluded from 
the breathing circuit when the ventilator was in use. On 
some contemporary workstations, however, the reservoir 
bag is integral to circuit function during mechanical 
ventilation, where it serves as an exhaled and fresh gas 
reservoir.
Carbon Dioxide Absorbent
Circle breathing systems require a means of CO2 removal 
from the exhaled gases to avoid rebreathing and hyper-
capnia. Although increasing the fresh gas inflow to 
high levels can dilute out most CO2 in the circle system, 
this is a very inefficient way to conduct an anesthetic. 
Characteristics of an ideal CO2 absorbent include a lack 
of reactivity with common anesthetics, an absence of 
toxicity, low resistance to airflow, minimal dust produc-
tion, low cost, ease of handling, and high efficiency. It 
should also be easy to assess for absorbent depletion 
(i.e., a diminished ability to remove CO2). Finally, the 
container that houses the absorbent should be easy to 
remove and replace, should maintain breathing circuit 
integrity if quickly replaced during use, and should 
impose minimal risk of causing breathing system leaks 
or obstruction.
CO2 is removed from the breathing circuit through a 
series of reactions in the absorber canister, transform-
ing CO2 into water, heat, and other by-products. Most 
absorbents use calcium hydroxide [Ca(OH)2] to react with 
BOX 15.1
Carbon Dioxide Absorber Reactions 
(Net and Sequential)
CO2 Reaction With Soda Lime
Net reaction:
CO2 + Ca(OH)2 → CaCO3 + H2O + heat
Sequential reactions:
1. CO2 (gas) + H2O (liquid) ⇄ H2CO3 (aqueous)
2. H2CO3 + 2NaOH (or KOH) → Na2CO3 (or K2CO3) +
2H2O + heat
3. Na2CO3 (or K2CO3) + Ca(OH)2 → CaCO3 + 2NaOH* 
(or KOH*) + heat
*Note: NaOH and KOH are catalysts in this reaction 
mechanism (they are neither created nor destroyed).
CO2 Reaction With Lithium Hydroxide Monohydrate
2LiOH · H2O + CO2 + heat → Li2CO3 + 3H2O
the exhaled CO2, producing insoluble calcium carbon-
ate (CaCO3) (Box 15.1). However, because CO2 does not 
react quickly with Ca(OH)2, water and small amounts 
of stronger base catalysts are required to speed up the 
reaction.
Soda lime, a mixture of Ca(OH)2, water, and small 
amounts of strong base, is a traditional absorbent. CO2
reacts with liquid water to yield carbonic acid (H2CO3). 
Second, the strong base additives NaOH and KOH react 
quickly with H2CO3 to yield the soluble salts sodium 
carbonate (Na2CO3) and potassium carbonate (K2CO3). All 
available active strong base is quickly depleted. Third, 
the carbonates react with Ca(OH)2 to yield insoluble 
CaCO3. This step regenerates the strong base catalysts. 
By-products of the entire process are water and heat.
Volatile anesthetic agents can interact with the strong 
bases found in calcium hydroxide–based absorbents to 
form degradation products. Sevoflurane can undergo a 
base-catalyzed degradation into a substance known as 
compound A, which is nephrotoxic in rats at concen-
trations that can occur in the breathing circuit during 
clinical conditions. No human data show a relation-
ship between sevoflurane use and postoperative renal 
dysfunction. The sevoflurane package insert states that 
patient exposure should not exceed 2 MAC-hours at flow 
rates between 1 and 2 L/min in order to minimize risk 
from compound A. Flow rates less than 1 L/min are not 
officially recommended, although these recommenda-
tions predate several studies demonstrating safety at 
lower flow rates.11
Strong-base-containing absorbents that are extremely 
dry (desiccated) can also degrade inhaled anesthetics to 
clinically significant concentrations of carbon monoxide 
(CO), reaching blood carboxyhemoglobin levels of 35% 
or greater.12 A typical scenario would be the first case on 
III
Chapter 15 Anesthesia Delivery Systems
241
a Monday morning, after high continuous gas flows had 
accidentally been left on throughout the weekend and des-
iccated the absorbent. Desiccation of absorbent is unlikely 
to occur during anesthesia delivery because CO2 absorp-
tion produces water and patients exhale humidified gas.
Many newer absorbents have trace or no KOH or 
NaOH. Lithium hydroxide (LiOH)–based absorbents do 
not require these catalysts at all. LiOH is a strong base 
and reacts quickly with CO2 (see Box 15.1). Although 
liquid water is not required to generate carbonic acid as 
in the classic Ca(OH)2 reaction, some water molecules 
are still required for the CO2 reaction with LiOH. LiOH 
absorbent produces essentially no CO or compound A 
and maintains excellent CO2 absorption.
Some chemical reactions within the absorbent can-
ister are exothermic, and fires within the circle system 
circuit have been reported, though rarely.13 Extreme 
heat has been especially noted with desiccated absor-
bents, particularly a now-discontinued formulation called 
Baralyme and sevoflurane. LiOH absorbents that are not 
hydrated before shipping (anhydrous) are also potentially 
a risk. The degree of desiccation cannot be ascertained 
by inspection.
Conventional absorbents contain an indicator dye, 
ethyl violet, that allows anesthesia personnel to visually 
assess the functional integrity of the absorbent. When 
the absorbent is fresh, the pH exceeds 10 and the dye is 
colorless. As the absorbent becomes exhausted, the pH 
drops below 10 and the dye becomes purple, indicating 
that the absorptive capacity of the material has been 
exhausted. Unfortunately, ethyl violet may not always 
be a reliable indicator. For example, color reversion 
(purple back to white) can occur with some absorbents 
because of the strong base catalysts. Many newer indica-
tors are resistant to color reversion.
The size and shape of the absorptive granules are 
designed to maximize surface area while minimizing resist-
ance to airflow. The smaller the granule size, the greater 
the surface area that is available for absorption. However, 
as particle size decreases, airflow resistance increases. 
As the absorbent granules settle in their canisters, small 
passageways inevitably form. These passages allow gas 
to flow preferentially through low-resistance areas. This 
phenomenon, known as channeling, may substantially 
decrease the functional absorptive capacity for CO2.
Additional Components of the Circle Breathing Systems
Several additional components are added to the circle 
breathing system circuit. Although not conceptually 
essential to the function of the circle system, they are 
critical for patient safety.
Filters and Heat and Moisture Exchangers
The normal warming and humidifying function of the 
upper airway is often bypassed by an artificial airway dur-
ing anesthesia. The use of heat and moisture exchangers 
(HMEs) within the anesthesia breathing circuit is a com-
mon practice. HMEs function by absorbing warmth and 
moisture as exhaled gas moves through in one direction 
and then returning that warmth and humidity to the next 
breath as the inspired gas moves through in the other 
direction. HMEs therefore only function when placed 
between the Y-connector and the patient.
Filters are used to prevent the transmission of 
microbes from the patient to the machine and hence 
potentially to other patients. The filter should have an 
efficiency rating higher than 95% for particle sizes of 
0.3 μm. Such filters are often placed on the expiratory 
limb of the anesthesia circuit where it connects to the 
anesthesia machine, and many circuit manufacturers 
ship their circuits with this filter already in place. During 
the COVID-19 pandemic, the Anesthesia Patient Safety 
Foundation recommended the addition of a second filter 
at the Y-connector for COVID-positive patients.14 This 
not only serves as an extra layer of protection against 
contaminating the interior of the anesthesia machine 
but also puts a filter near the patient, allowing for the 
patient’s exhaled gases to be filtered during disconnects, 
for example, when moving the operating room table. The 
use of a heat and moisture exchanging filter (HMEF) at 
this site in the patient circuit achieves the functions of 
both HMEs and filters.
The disposition of the gas sampled by the gas analyzer 
via the gas sampling line may affect decision making 
about filter configuration. Some workstations send the 
sampled gas directly to the scavenge; for these, sampling 
at the patient Y-connector is appropriate. Other worksta-
tions return the sampled gas to the circle system. The 
advantage of returning the sampled gas to the circuit 
is that it reduces loss of volatile anesthetic to scavenge. 
However, in this configuration it is recommended that 
there be a filter between the patient and the gas sam-
ple port.14 Degradation of the CO2 waveform can occur, 
especially with pediatric patients. There is an additional 
filter at the machine side, typically as part of the sample 
gas line water trap. The efficiency of the filter should be 
verified with the manufacturer.
Heated Humidifiers
Active humidification systems, such as heated-wire cir-
cuits with vaporizers or a long water-saturated wick, 
are more commonly found in ICU ventilators, but also 
exist in circle-system configurations. These systems can 
help prevent intraoperative hypothermia; disadvantages 
include added cost and complexity. Generally, they are 
not commonly used except in pediatric patients or during 
longer surgeries. Appropriate filters must also be in place 
when heated humidifiers are used.
Inspired Oxygen Concentration Monitor
There must be an oxygen sensor monitoring the oxygen 
concentration in the inspiratory limb or at the Y-piece of 
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
242
the breathing circuit. A low oxygen concentration alarm 
must sound within 30 seconds if the inspired oxygen 
concentration drops below a set limit, which cannot be 
adjusted to less than 18%. The oxygen sensor is truly the 
patient’s last line of defense from receiving a hypoxic gas 
mixture. Galvanic cell oxygen analyzers are often used for 
this purpose, but they require daily calibration. A com-
mon location for galvanic sensors is on the housing of 
the inspiratory unidirectional valve. Modern anesthesia 
workstations increasingly use side-stream multigas ana-
lyzers sampling from the Y-piece as the exclusive inspira-
tory oxygen monitor. Paramagnetic oxygen analysis is 
typically used in these monitors; these sensors require 
less frequent calibration.
Flow Sensors
At a minimum, an anesthesia workstation must have 
a sensor for exhaled gas flow and tidal volume. Some 
workstations also use flow sensor measurements as a 
feedback signal to maintain stable tidal volume delivery 
at varying fresh gas flow rates. A variety of technologies 
are used to achieve flow measurement.
Breathing Circuit Pressure Sensors
Anesthesia workstations must continuously display pres-
sure in the breathing system. Operator-adjustable alarms 
must be present for high pressure and for continuous posi-
tive pressure lasting 15 seconds or longer. An alarm must 
also sound for sustained negative pressure. Finally, when 
automatic ventilation is in use, the machine must sound an 
alarm whenever the breathing pressure falls below a preset 
or adjustable threshold pressure for more than 20 seconds, 
alerting the operator to potential disconnection.
The location of pressure sensors in the breathing system 
varies. They are often located in the nondisposable portion 
of either the inspiratory or expiratory limb near one of the 
unidirectional valves. Breathing circuit pressure may not 
accurately represent the patient’s airway pressure, as the 
pressure transduction occurs far from the patient.
Circle System Function
The circle system is designed to allow rebreathing of 
gases. The extent of rebreathing, and therefore the con-
servation of exhaled gases, depends on the fresh gas flow 
rate. A circle system operated in a semiopen manner con-
notes a high fresh gas flow rate with minimal rebreathing 
and high venting of waste gas through the APL valve 
or the waste gas valve of the ventilator. By contrast, 
contemporary circle systems are usually operated in a 
semiclosed manner, meaning that significant rebreath-
ing occurs, but some waste flow is vented through the 
APL or waste gas valve of the ventilator. There is no 
universally accepted definition of low-flow anesthesia, 
but this is usually accepted to mean a technique where 
fresh gas flow is less than 1 to 2 L/min fresh gas flow. The 
advantages of low-flow anesthesia include the decreased 
use of volatile anesthetic agents, improved temperature 
and humidity control, and reduced environmental pol-
lution. The disadvantages include difficulty in rapidly 
adjusting anesthetic depth and the theoretical possibility 
of accumulating unwanted exhaled gases or anesthetic 
degradation products.
A closed system is one in which the rate of oxygen 
inflow exactly matches metabolic demand, rebreath-
ing is complete, and no waste gas is vented (APL valve 
remains closed). A volatile anesthetic agent is added to 
the breathing circuit in liquid form in precise amounts 
or is initially introduced through the vaporizer. Closed-
circuit anesthesia maximizes the advantages of low-
flow anesthesia. However, the technical demands of the 
technique relative to the benefits make it impractical 
for routine use with contemporary equipment; thus it is 
rarely employed.
In the circle system the concentration of the patient’s 
inspired gases can differ significantly from the concen-
tration of the gases in the fresh gas flow. The volume 
of the circle system is filled with a combination of 
the patient’s exhaled gases (after removal of CO2) plus 
the fresh gas flow that is added. As the fresh gas flow 
rate decreases, the proportion of the circuit that is made 
up of the patient’s exhaled gas increases. For example, 
the patient’s exhaled gas will have a lower oxygen con-
centration than the inhaled, and at low fresh gas flow, 
this exhaled oxygen concentration will have a greater 
contribution to the circuit concentration than the fresh 
gas concentration. Therefore the inspired oxygen con-
centration reaching the patient will be lower than the 
fresh gas oxygen concentration that is first entering the 
circuit. This phenomenon is most obvious at low fresh 
gas flows and low oxygen concentration in the fresh gas 
flow. In addition, at low fresh gas flows, any changes in 
the oxygen or anesthetic concentrations by the provider 
will be slow to take effect, because of the lesser relative 
contribution of the fresh gas to the total circuit volume.
Oxygen has a relatively constant uptake (related to 
metabolism) compared with volatile anesthetics, whose 
uptake depends on the gradient between the alveolar and 
blood levels of anesthetic. Early in an inhaled anesthetic, 
a large proportion of the volatile agent in the inspired 
breath will be taken up by the patient, with little exhaled 
back into the circuit (also see Chapter 7). To maintain the 
desired level of anesthetic, the anesthesia provider will 
either select a higher concentration of anesthetic vapor 
in the fresh gas flow to reach the desired concentration 
of inspired anesthetic or use higher fresh gas flows so 
that the effect of the exhaled gas on inspired concentra-
tion is minimized. As the tissues become saturated with 
anesthetic, the uptake of anesthetic agent decreases, and 
the exhaled concentration of agent is similar to the fresh 
gas concentration of agent.
Circle breathing systems have several disadvantages. 
They have a complex design that may consist of ten 
III
Chapter 15 Anesthesia Delivery Systems
243
or more individual connections, setting the stage for 
misconnections, disconnections, obstructions, and leaks. 
The patient’s work of breathing can be increased by the 
various valves and circuit components. The large and 
compliant circle breathing system may compromise tidal 
volume delivery during controlled ventilation because of 
compressible volume. Finally, there are the complications 
associated with the CO2 absorbers as outlined earlier.
Because of this complexity, troubleshooting anesthesia 
workstation ventilation issues can be difficult. If there are 
concerns about the adequacy of patient ventilation (e.g., 
hypoventilation, circuit disconnection, elevated breath-
ing circuit pressures), prepare to immediately switch to 
manual ventilation with a self-inflating resuscitation 
bag. After reestablishing ventilation (and considering 
administration of intravenous [IV] anesthesia if inhaled 
anesthesia was the primary anesthetic), troubleshooting 
of the anesthesia workstation can commence.
Mapleson Breathing Systems
Mapleson described and analyzed five different breath-
ing circuits, designated A through E, that are classically 
referred to by his name (Fig. 15.7). The Mapleson F sys-
tem, more commonly referred to as the Jackson–Rees sys-
tem, and the Bain system (a modification of the Mapleson 
D, Fig. 15.8) were added later. The Mapleson systems 
share certain features with the circle breathing system: 
they accept fresh gas flow, supply the patient with gas 
from a reservoir to meet inspiratory flow and volume 
requirements, and eliminate CO2. They differ from the cir-
cle system by having bidirectional gas flow and lacking 
an absorber. To eliminate CO2 and prevent rebreathing, 
these systems depend on an appropriate rate of fresh gas 
inflow. All the circuits except for the Mapleson E version 
use a bag as an additional reservoir.
Even though the components and their arrangement 
are simple, functional analysis of the Mapleson systems 
is complex. The amount of CO2 rebreathing with each 
system is affected by multiple factors, including the 
fresh gas inflow rate, minute ventilation, and ventila-
tion mode (spontaneous or controlled). For example, in 
spontaneous ventilation the Mapleson A is most efficient 
(requires the least fresh gas flow to prevent rebreathing), 
but it is the least efficient in controlled ventilation. The 
other Mapleson systems do not exhibit such a marked 
difference between spontaneous and controlled ventila-
tion. The summary of relative efficiencies in spontaneous 
ventilation is A > DFE > CB, whereas during controlled 
ventilation it is DFE > BC > A.15
A
B
C
D
E
F
FGF
FGF
FGF
FGF
FGF
FGF
Fig. 15.7 Schematic diagrams of the Mapleson breathing 
systems A through F. FGF, Fresh gas flow. (Modified from 
Willis BA, Pender JW, Mapleson WW. Rebreathing in a T-piece: 
Volunteer and theoretical studies of Jackson-Rees modification 
of Ayre’s T-piece during spontaneous respiration. Br J Anaesth. 
1975;47:1239–1246.)
Reservoir bag
Overflow
valve
Face mask
Fresh gas inlet
Corrugated tubing
(A)
(B)
(C)
Fig. 15.8 Schematic diagram of the Bain breathing system. 
Fresh gas flow (FGF) enters a narrow tube (A) located within 
the larger corrugated expiratory limb. The overflow valve (B) 
is an adjustable pressure-limiting valve located near the FGF 
inlet and reservoir bag (C). (Modified from Bain JA, Spoerel 
WE. A streamlined anaesthetic system. Can Anaesth Soc J.
1972;19:426–435.)
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
244
Oxygen
reservoir
Expiratory
port
Room air
intake
Oxygen inflow
Self-inflating
reservoir bag
1
Oxygen
reservoir
2
3
4
Inspiratory
port
A
B
Fig. 15.9 Self-inflating manual resuscitator. (A) Flow of gas during inspiration. (1) Nonrebreathing valve, (2) bag inlet valve, (3) pop-off 
or pressure-limiting valve (standard for pediatric and infant devices), and (4) outflow or excess-oxygen venting valve. (B) Flow of gas 
during expiration. See text for details. (Redrawn after Dorsch JA, Dorsch SE. The anesthesia machine. In: Dorsch JA, Dorsch SE, eds. 
Understanding Anesthesia Equipment. 5th ed. Baltimore, MD: Williams & Wilkins; 2008:83, Chapter 10 Manual Resuscitators; and Lien 
S, Verreault DJ, Alston TA. Sustained airway pressure after transient occlusion of a valve venting a self-inflating manual resuscitator. J Clin 
Anesth. 2013;25[5]:424–425.)
Mapleson systems have low resistance to gas flow 
because they are small and contain few parts. Changes 
in the fresh gas flow composition result in similar rapid 
changes in the breathing circuit. In addition, the volatile 
anesthetic agents within a Mapleson breathing circuit 
have no chance of degradation because of the absence of 
a CO2 absorber. However, given their need for higher gas 
flows to prevent rebreathing, they are not as economical 
with regard to carrier gas and volatile anesthetic usage 
as the circle system. Conservation of heat and humidity 
is less efficient. Finally, scavenging of waste gas can be 
challenging.
Self-Inflating Manual Resuscitators
Although rarely used for delivery of inhaled anesthetics 
in modern practice, the self-inflating manual resuscitation 
bag is an essential part of every anesthesia workstation. 
The key feature of this device is a compressible reservoir, 
typically made of silicone, that automatically expands 
upon release (Fig. 15.9). Unlike the Mapleson circuits, the 
self-inflating manual resuscitator may be used for hand 
ventilation in the absence of a pressurized oxygen or air 
source. These devices are ubiquitous for patient transport, 
cardiopulmonary resuscitation, and emergency back-up 
should the anesthesia workstation ventilator or pressurized 
oxygen supply fail.
The manual resuscitator possesses two one-way valves. 
A nonrebreathing valve located between the bag and the 
patient is closed during exhalation to direct exhaled gas 
flow out of the expiratory port. An inlet valve between 
the reservoir and the oxygen source is open during exha-
lation (bag recoil) to allow the bag to refill with oxygen 
or room air. Depending on design, a pop-off valve may be 
present to limit the peak inspiratory pressure, which can 
easily reach high levels with these devices. Oxygen tubing
and oxygen reservoirs exist in a variety of designs, but 
generally allow the delivered fraction of inspired oxygen 
to be increased.
III
Chapter 15 Anesthesia Delivery Systems
245
ANESTHESIA VENTILATORS
Today’s anesthesia workstation ventilators incorporate 
many capabilities of ICU ventilators, including a multi-
plicity of ventilation modes and the ability to allow for 
patient triggering of the ventilator. ICU ventilators are 
open circuit, using entirely fresh gas for each breath, and 
venting all exhaled gas into the patient’s room. The anes-
thesia workstation, on the other hand, must also incorpo-
rate a means of collecting and redelivering the patient’s 
exhaled gas in the semiclosed circle breathing system, pre-
senting unique engineering challenges in the design and 
control of the anesthesia ventilator. Historically the most 
common solution to this challenge has been the inclusion 
of a bellows in the anesthesia workstation. Alternatives to 
the bellows design will be discussed as well.
Bellows Ventilators
In bellows ventilators the bellows serves as a volume 
reservoir for breathing gas, and the ventilator uses “a 
bag in a bottle” design to deliver breaths. The bellows are 
housed in a rigid, airtight housing, and pressurized gas 
flows into the housing, thereby compressing the bellows. 
As the bellows is compressed, the breathing gas is deliv-
ered to the patient. A mixture of the patient’s exhalation 
and fresh gas flowing into the breathing circuit refill the 
bellows. Once the bellows is refilled, excess circuit gas is 
vented to the scavenging system during the expiratory 
pause. Figs. 15.10 and 15.11 illustrate the inspiratory 
and expiratory phases of mechanical ventilation with 
an ascending bellows ventilator. Note that the bellows 
ventilator uses pressurized gas from the intermediate-
pressure section of the anesthesia machine to drive the 
bellows. Even though the ventilator is pneumatically 
driven, all modern anesthesia ventilators are under elec-
tronic control.
Standing or ascending bellows rise on exhalation; in 
case of circuit leak or disconnection, the bellows will fall, 
alerting the anesthesia provider. Hanging or descending
bellows ventilators are less commonly used because the 
bellows appear to rise and fall normally even with a com-
plete circuit disconnect. The source of the drive gas for 
the bellows may be either oxygen or air, depending on the 
design of the workstation. Knowing the type of gas used 
to drive the bellows ventilator can be important in oxy-
gen failure emergencies or austere conditions. If oxygen 
Pop-off
valve
Exhalation
valve
Fresh gas
inflow
APL
valve
Ventilator
drive gas
Bellows
housing
Bellows
falls
Pressure
transducer
port
Inspiratory
valve
(open)
Expiratory
valve
(closed)
Inspiratory
flow sensor
CO2
absorber
Galvanic
oxygen
sensor
Scavenger
outlet
Bag-ventilator
selector switch
Expiratory
flow sensor
Fig. 15.10 Inspiratory phase of ventilation with an ascending bellows ventilator. The ventilator drive gas circuit is located outside the 
bellows, and the patient’s breathing circuit is inside the bellows. During the inspiratory phase, the electronically controlled ventilator 
driving gas enters the bellows chamber and causes the pressure to increase, thereby compressing the bellows, which delivers gas to the 
patient’s lungs. The drive gas also closes the exhalation valve and prevents the breathing gas from escaping into the scavenging system. 
Compensation for the impact of fresh gas flow on tidal volume accuracy is accomplished by monitoring the inhaled tidal volumes and 
adjusting ventilator drive gas volumes accordingly. APL, Adjustable pressure-limiting; CO2, carbon dioxide. (Image courtesy Dr. Michael 
A. Olympio, modified with his permission; Adapted from Datex-Ohmeda. Aisys Anesthesia Machine: Technical Reference, Madison, Wis., 
2005, Datex-Ohmeda.)
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
246
is used as the drive gas, then the amount of oxygen con-
sumed by the anesthesia machine will equal the amount 
of oxygen selected for fresh gas flow plus an amount 
approximately equal to the minute ventilation being 
delivered by the ventilator. Whereas a full E-cylinder 
(650 L capacity) can provide 10 hours of use with oxygen 
fresh gas flow of 1 L per minute and manual ventilation 
through the circle system, that same E-cylinder will pro-
vide less than a 2-hour supply in an adult patient when 
oxygen is used as the ventilator drive gas.
Mechanically Driven Piston Ventilators
Mechanically driven, electronically controlled piston-
type ventilators use a computer-controlled stepper motor 
instead of compressed drive gas to deliver tidal volume. 
The piston operates much like the plunger of a syringe 
in a cylinder of essentially zero compliance. The ventila-
tor has primary control over the volume displaced in the 
circuit and uses the data from pressure sensors to create 
pressure control breaths; the computerized controls can 
support a variety of ventilator modes.
In a bellows ventilator the breathing bag is excluded 
from the circuit during mechanical ventilation. In con-
trast, with a piston ventilator, the breathing bag acts as 
the reservoir for rebreathing. The ventilator employs a 
fresh gas decoupling valve to exclude fresh gas from being 
added to the tidal volume during inspiration. During 
Pop-off
valve
Exhalation
valve
Fresh gas
inflow
Bellows
rises
Inspiratory
valve
(closed)
Expiratory
valve
(open)
Drive gas
vents out
scavenger
outlet
CO2
absorber
Fig. 15.11 Expiratory phase of ventilation with an ascending bellows ventilator. In the early expiratory phase the patient is able to 
exhale into the bellows because the ventilator exhalation valve is now open, thus allowing the drive gas in the bellows housing to vent 
through the scavenger outlet. The pop-off or ventilator relief valve prevents bellows gas from escaping at this point so the bellows can 
fill. In the late expiratory phase positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) is provided by pressurization of the bellows housing and pressure 
modulation of the expiratory valve. (Courtesy Dr. Michael A. Olympio; modified with his permission. Adapted with permission from Datex-
Ohmeda. Aisys Anesthesia Machine: Technical Reference. Madison, WI: Datex-Ohmeda; 2005.)
inspiration, the fresh gas is added to the breathing bag. 
During the expiratory phase, the breathing bag initially 
fills with exhaled gas; then, as the piston returns to its 
starting position, the fresh gas decoupling valve opens, 
and fresh gas flow plus gas from the breathing bag refill 
the piston chamber. Although the piston tends to be fully 
or partially concealed from view, the movement of the 
breathing bag can provide visual feedback of circuit dis-
connect or leak.
Other Anesthesia Ventilator Systems
There are other approaches to mechanical ventilation 
among anesthesia workstation manufacturers. One work-
station uses a novel device called a volume reflector
(essentially a long plastic tube with a volume of a little 
more than 1 L) coiled compactly to fit in the anesthesia 
workstation.16 The volume reflector is functional and “in-
circuit” during all modes of ventilation. It is interposed 
between the patient and the breathing bag or ventila-
tor, acting as a volume reservoir while simultaneously 
preventing mixing between the gas at the two ends of 
the tube.
A number of newer ICU ventilators use turbine tech-
nology to generate mechanical ventilation. Turbine venti-
lators use mechanical energy to spin a small turbine (fan) 
at very high speeds to create pressure and flow. One 
manufacturer has designed an anesthesia workstation 
III
Chapter 15 Anesthesia Delivery Systems
247
around a turbine mechanical ventilator.16 The major 
advantage of the turbine is that it can be placed directly 
within the circle system. Unlike piston-driven ventila-
tion, the turbine is primarily a pressure generator. The 
ventilator uses flow sensors and electronic controls to 
generate a number of modes of mechanical ventilation, 
including volume and pressure control, pressure support, 
and airway pressure release ventilation.
Target-Controlled Inhalational Anesthesia
Traditionally, anesthesia providers directly control the 
composition and rate of the fresh gas flow. That is, they 
do not control the inspired concentration of oxygen, 
anesthetic vapor, or other gases; nor do they control the 
expired concentration of these gases. Rather, they control 
only that portion of gas that is added to the circle sys-
tem every minute, namely, the fresh gas flow. The fresh 
gas mixes with the gases already in the circle breathing 
system, and thus there may be a significant difference 
between the composition of the fresh gas flow and the 
composition of the inspired (or expired) gases. As the 
fresh gas flow is decreased, there is potentially a greater 
difference between the fresh gas composition and the 
actual inspired composition.
On anesthesia workstations where the flow control 
valves and the anesthetic vaporizers are under electronic 
control, it is possible to implement target-controlled 
inhalational anesthesia. The targets subject to control are 
the end-tidal anesthetic agent and the end-tidal oxygen 
concentration. Currently, several major manufactur-
ers have target-controlled systems available. The major 
advantage of the target control is reduced consumption 
of anesthetic agent. These systems rely on proprietary 
algorithms, and depending, for example, on how fast the 
algorithm tries to achieve the desired anesthetic depth, 
the target-controlled system might actually prioritize 
rapid achievement of a set anesthetic agent (requiring 
high initial fresh gas flow with high anesthetic agent 
use) over reducing fresh gas flow and anesthetic agent 
consumption.17 The benefits of low-flow anesthesia could 
be realized by a vigilant anesthesia provider, but at the 
expense of significant manipulation of the anesthesia 
machine’s settings.
Although the target-controlled modes of inhalational 
anesthesia seem likely to reduce anesthetic agent use and 
to provide an additional layer of patient safety in low-
flow anesthesia, none are currently approved by the U.S. 
Food and Drug Administration.
Fresh Gas Flow Compensation and Fresh Gas Decoupling
On older bellows-type anesthesia workstations, the portion 
of fresh gas flow that occurred during an inspiratory cycle 
was added to the set tidal volume, leading to variation in 
tidal volume depending on the set fresh gas flow. Newer 
workstations have engineering features that provide com-
pensation of fresh gas flow to maintain stable tidal volume 
delivery. Broadly speaking, the workstation will either 
exclude the fresh gas from the inspiratory limb of the 
circuit during inspiration or it will use electronic controls 
to compensate for the fresh gas flow’s contribution. The 
precise manner in which this is accomplished accounts for 
much of the variation in breathing system design.
SCAVENGING SYSTEMS
Scavenging is the collection and subsequent removal of 
waste anesthetic gases from both the anesthesia machine 
and the anesthetizing location. Scavenging is required 
because the fresh gas flow rates used during most anes-
thetic regimens deliver more volatile anesthetic agents 
and nitrous oxide than necessary, in addition to more 
oxygen than is being consumed. Without scavenging, 
therefore, operating room personnel could be exposed 
to anesthetic gases, and there could be an increased risk 
of an oxygen-rich environment supporting combustion.
Scavenging systems may be active or passive. In 
active systems the scavenging system is connected to 
a vacuum source, such as the hospital’s suction system. 
Passive systems simply vent the waste gas into a heat-
ing, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC) system or 
through a hose to the building’s exterior. Passive systems 
are less common in contemporary operating rooms and 
will not be discussed further here. Scavenging systems 
may also be open or closed. An open scavenging system 
allows for room air to be entrained into the flow of waste 
gas, whereas a closed system does not.18
Waste anesthetic gases are vented from the anesthesia 
system either through the APL valve or through a venti-
lator relief valve. However, the following circumstances 
can lead to waste anesthetic gases entering the operat-
ing room: poor facemask fit, endotracheal tube leak, or 
breathing circuit or anesthesia workstation leak. Ventila-
tor drive gas in contemporary bellows-type ventilators 
(in addition to the flow from the reflector gas module on 
volume reflector machines) is vented via the scavenging 
system as well. This is significant because under condi-
tions of high fresh gas flow and high minute ventilation, 
the gases flowing into the scavenging interface may 
overwhelm the evacuation system and pollute the room.
An open, active scavenging interface uses a reservoir, 
typically a canister, that is open to the operating room 
atmosphere. Waste anesthesia gas is discharged into the 
bottom of the canister, and waste gas vacuum is used to 
create a continuous flow from the canister into the hos-
pital central vacuum system (Fig. 15.12). The continuous 
flow rate must be higher than the overall rate at which 
gas is discharged from the machine, but because of the 
reservoir, the system can tolerate intermittent discharges 
into the waste gas system that briefly exceed that rate. 
When the amount of waste gas being discharged from 
the anesthesia workstation is less than the continual flow 
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
248
in the scavenging system, then the balance of that flow 
is obtained from entrained room air. Daily workstation 
preuse checkout must ensure adequate vacuum flow so 
that waste gas does not spill out into the room through 
the relief ports. The open system does not require posi-
tive- or negative-pressure relief valves because the can-
ister is open to the atmosphere.
In a closed, active scavenging system the waste gas is 
discharged from the anesthesia machine into a reservoir 
bag. The bag is connected to continuous suction and dis-
charges waste gas to the evacuation system. With peak 
discharge of waste gas (as at patient exhalation), the bag 
will expand, subsequently emptying during the inspira-
tory phase. The operator must adjust the vacuum control 
valve so that the reservoir bag remains properly inflated, 
neither overdistended nor completely deflated. A closed, 
active scavenging system requires at least two valves. If 
the scavenging system pressure exceeds a preset pressure, 
gas is vented to the operating room through the positive-
pressure relief valve. If the scavenging system pressure 
is too negative, then room air is entrained through the 
negative-pressure relief valve. Some systems have addi-
tional backup valves.
Scavenging systems minimize operating room pollu-
tion, yet they add complexity to the anesthesia system. 
Excessive vacuum applied to a scavenging system can 
cause undesirable negative pressures within the breath-
ing system. Obstruction of scavenging pathways can 
cause excessive positive pressure in the breathing circuit. 
Even when the patient is protected from barotrauma 
by positive-pressure relief valves, alarm conditions can 
contribute to potentially unsafe conditions, in addition 
to provider stress and case delay. Inadequate vacuum 
From
breathing
circuit
Exhaust
valve
Gas-collecting
assembly
Transfer
tubing
Scavenging
interface
Vacuum
adjustment
Disposal
tubing
Disposal
assembly
Waste gas
vacuum line
Room air
entrainment
APL
bypass
valve
APL
valve
Fig. 15.12 Schematic of an open, active acavenging system. Waste gas is intermittently discharged into the bottom of the canister. The 
waste gas vacuum line terminates at the bottom of the canister as well. The canister acts as a reservoir when the instantaneous rate of 
waste gas discharge into the canister exceeds the instantaneous rate of waste gas removal, as during patient exhalation. But the vacuum 
is set high enough that room air is entrained through most of the respiratory cycle, ensuring clearance of all waste gas. APL, Adjustable 
pressure-limiting. (From Brockwell RC, Andrews JJ. Delivery systems for inhaled anesthetics. In: Barash PG, Cullen BF, Stoelting RK, eds. 
Clinical Anesthesia. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2006:557–594.)
to the interface can cause venting of waste gas into the 
operating room.
CHECKING YOUR ANESTHESIA 
WORKSTATION
A complete preanesthesia checkout procedure (PAC) must 
be performed each day before the anesthesia worksta-
tion is first used, and an abbreviated version should 
be performed before each subsequent case. Evidence 
suggests that anesthesia providers frequently do not 
perform a complete PAC and may miss faults even when 
explicitly looking for them on a sabotaged machine.19,20
Furthermore, all contemporary anesthesia workstations 
have automated checkout procedures, none of which can 
assure that the basic safety requirements for safe delivery 
of anesthetic care have been met. In their 2008 Recom-
mendations for Pre-Anesthesia Checkout Procedures21
the ASA suggests that many anesthesia providers are not 
fully aware of what elements are checked by the auto-
mated procedures. Even review of user’s manuals does 
not always make it obvious.
The ASA’s Recommendations for Pre-Anesthesia 
Checkout Procedures is summarized in Table 15.3. These 
recommendations focus on ensuring the availability of 
key equipment and assessing the function of that equip-
ment. There are 15 items that must be completed daily or 
whenever the anesthesia workstation is moved to a new 
location. An eight-item subset of these must be repeated 
before each subsequent anesthetic procedure. The impor-
tance of these items for the safe delivery of anesthesia 
care cannot be overemphasized.
III
Chapter 15 Anesthesia Delivery Systems
249
Items to Be Completed Daily
Item #
Task
1
Verify that auxiliary oxygen cylinder and self-inflating manual ventilation device are available and 
functioning
2
Verify that patient suction is adequate to clear the airway
3
Turn on the anesthesia delivery system and confirm that AC power is available
4
Verify the availability of required monitors, including alarms
5
Verify that pressure is adequate on the spare oxygen cylinder mounted on the anesthesia machine
6
Verify that the piped gas pressures are ≥50 psig
7
Verify that vaporizers are adequately filled and, if applicable, that the filler ports are tightly closed
8
Verify that the gas supply lines have no leaks between the flowmeters and the common gas outlet
9
Test the scavenging system function
10
Calibrate, or verify the calibration of, the oxygen monitor, and check the low-oxygen alarm
11
Verify that carbon dioxide absorbent is not exhausted
12
Perform breathing system pressure and leak testing
13
Verify that gas flows properly through the breathing circuit during both inspiration and exhalation
14
Document the completion of checkout procedures
15
Confirm the ventilator settings, and evaluate readiness to deliver anesthesia care (anesthesia time-out)
Items to Be Completed Before Each Procedure
2
Verify that patient suction is adequate to clear the airway
4
Verify the availability of required monitors, including alarms
7
Verify that vaporizers are adequately filled and, if applicable, that the filler ports are tightly closed
11
Verify that carbon dioxide absorbent is not exhausted
12
Perform breathing system pressure and leak testing
13
Verify that gas flows properly through the breathing circuit during both inspiration and exhalation
14
Document the completion of checkout procedures
15
Confirm the ventilator settings, and evaluate readiness to deliver anesthesia care (anesthesia time-out)
Table 15.3 Summary Recommendations of the 2008 Pre-anesthesia Checkout Procedures
Modified from Sub-Committee of American Society of Anesthesiologists Committee on Equipment and Facilities. Recommendations for Pre-
anesthesia Checkout Procedures. 2008.
Item 1: Verify Auxiliary Oxygen Cylinder and 
Self-Inflating Manual Ventilation Device Are 
Available and Functioning (Daily)
The anesthesia provider must always be prepared to keep 
the patient alive without the assistance of the anesthesia 
machine. The most important safety check in any anes-
thesia location before commencing the day’s procedures 
is the presence of a self-inflating manual ventilation 
device and a source of oxygen that is separate from the 
anesthesia workstation and hospital pipeline oxygen sup-
ply. These items must be present at every anesthetizing 
location. Note that the presence of a non–self-inflating 
Mapleson-type breathing circuit is not adequate to meet 
this item. The auxiliary oxygen tank, typically an E-cyl-
inder, should be checked to make sure it is full and also 
for the presence of an attached flowmeter and a means 
to open the cylinder valve.
Item 2: Verify Patient Suction Is Adequate to 
Clear the Airway (Every Case)
Adequate suction with tubing of appropriate length and 
an oral suctioning tool are necessary before the start of 
any case. Although this is often changed by an anesthe-
sia technician or other personnel during room turnovers, 
the provider must verify this item before commencing 
the anesthetic.
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
250
be the primary source of oxygen for the anesthetic then 
oxygen supply sufficient for the entire expected duration 
of the anesthetic is required.
Item 6: Verify That Piped Gas Pressures Are 
50 psig or Higher (Daily)
A daily check of adequate pipeline pressures is specified 
in the Recommendations for Pre-Anesthesia Checkout 
Procedures. A more detailed daily preuse check of the 
pipeline system may be part of institutional protocols. 
For example, a quick daily inspection of connections, 
supply hoses, gas pressures, and the presence of more 
than 90% oxygen in the inspiratory limb greatly mini-
mizes risk. An important safety item on all machines is 
an audible and visual alarm that warns the operator of 
diminishing oxygen supply pressure. The only way to 
evaluate this safety device is to disconnect the wall oxy-
gen supply and shut off the oxygen supply tank in order 
to generate the alarm condition. The 2008 Recommenda-
tions do not mandate this maneuver.
Item 7: Verify That Vaporizers Are Adequately 
Filled and, If Applicable, That the Filler Ports 
Are Tightly Closed (Every Case)
The anesthesia provider should verify that there is an 
adequate supply of anesthetic agent in the vaporizer if 
an inhaled anesthetic is planned. High and low agent 
alarms are recommended when providing an inhaled 
anesthetic. Loose filler caps on the vaporizer may intro-
duce a breathing system leak that is missed during other 
parts of the precheck.
Item 8: Verify That No Leaks Are Present in the 
Gas Supply Lines Between the Flowmeters and 
the Common Gas Outlet (Daily)
The anesthesia workstation should be thoroughly investi-
gated daily for the possibility of leaks in the low-pressure 
system, from the flow control valves, through the vapor-
izers, and to the common gas outlet. Unfortunately, the 
procedures for performing this item, sometimes called the 
low-pressure leak test, are different for different anesthe-
sia workstations, emphasizing the importance of machine 
familiarity and local protocols.
Two areas of the low-pressure leak test deserve 
emphasis. First, some anesthesia workstations include an 
outlet check valve. The implication of this check valve 
is that positive pressure in the breathing circuit cannot
be used to check for leaks upstream in the low-pressure 
system (internal to the machine), because the pressure 
will not be transmitted past the check valve. On these 
machines, a negative pressure test must be performed, as 
described in the user’s manuals. Second, most vaporizer 
Item 3: Turn On Anesthesia Delivery System 
and Confirm That AC Power Is Available (Daily)
Contemporary anesthesia workstations have backup bat-
tery power if wall power should fail. If a case is inadvert-
ently started on battery backup power, the first obvious 
sign of power failure can be catastrophic system shut-
down when the backup batteries are exhausted. Before 
commencing the day’s anesthetic procedures, functioning 
AC power should be verified.
Item 4: Verify Availability of Required Monitors 
and Check Alarms (Every Case)
The ASA Recommendations include in this item both 
the presence of monitoring supplies (blood pressure 
cuffs of appropriate sizes, pulse oximetry probes, etc.), 
functional tests of critical monitoring equipment (pulse 
oximeter and capnography), and functional tests of 
alarm conditions. The importance of an audible alarm 
is emphasized.
The ASA Recommendations include functional tests 
of alarm conditions that may be difficult to carry out. 
Before commencing an anesthetic, one should ensure 
the presence of a pulse oximeter signal and an end-tidal 
CO2 signal and the presence of an audible alarm when 
that signal is discontinued. This may be done by placing 
the pulse oximeter on the anesthesia provider to check 
for function and then removing to check for alarm, and 
similarly by blowing into the circuit sample line to test 
capnometry function and for alarm condition when dis-
continued. In practice, many anesthesia providers assess 
the function of these critical monitors by placing them 
on the patient and do not necessarily test for the alarm 
function before each case.
Item 5: Verify That Pressure Is Adequate on 
the Spare Oxygen Cylinder Mounted on the 
Anesthesia Machine (Daily)
In addition to verifying the presence of a separate source 
of cylinder oxygen, the anesthesia provider should verify 
the presence of an adequately filled oxygen cylinder 
mounted on the anesthesia workstation. Verification 
of oxygen cylinder pressure is accomplished by open-
ing the oxygen cylinder or cylinders on the back of the 
machine and evaluating the tank gauge pressure.
As discussed earlier, if the tank is to be used in the 
setting of a suspected oxygen pipeline contamination, 
the pipeline supply must be disconnected from the 
machine for tank gas to flow into the gas supply system. 
Furthermore, the spare oxygen tank should remain closed 
when using pipeline oxygen to prevent inadvertent emp-
tying of this important emergency supply. In situations 
where there is no pipeline oxygen and the cylinder is to 
III
Chapter 15 Anesthesia Delivery Systems
251
leaks are not detected unless the vaporizer is set to on. 
Therefore a thorough low-pressure leak test can require 
testing multiple vaporizers, depending on machine con-
figuration. Some automated machine checks may have 
the ability to test for leaks in the vaporizer, but many 
do not.
Item 9: Test Scavenging System Function (Daily)
For every anesthesia machine, the evaluation of the 
scavenging system is a manual maneuver. No automated 
checks are conducted. Given the multiplicity of scavenge 
configurations, local protocols and provider familiarity 
are necessary.
Item 10: Calibrate, or Verify Calibration of, 
the Oxygen Monitor and Check the Low 
Oxygen Alarm (Daily)
The oxygen concentration analyzer is one of the most 
important monitors on the anesthesia workstation. It is 
the only monitor positioned to detect oxygen delivery 
problems downstream from the flow control valves and 
the only monitor that detects the actual oxygen con-
centration delivered to the patient. Whether or not the 
oxygen sensor requires calibration, the function of the 
low-oxygen concentration alarm should be tested daily. 
This may be done by manually setting the low oxygen 
concentration alarm limit to more than 21% while expos-
ing the analyzer to room air, thereby generating the 
alarm condition.
Item 11: Verify Carbon Dioxide Absorbent Is 
Not Exhausted (Every Case)
Before each anesthetic, the absorbent should be assessed 
for color change characteristic of absorbent exhaustion. 
Some exhausted absorbents may pass visual inspection. 
The presence of inspired CO2 on capnography during the 
case is an important indicator for identifying exhausted 
absorbent.
Item 12: Perform Breathing System Pressure 
and Leak Testing (Every Case)
This PAC item verifies that positive pressure can be devel-
oped and sustained in the breathing circuit and that the 
APL (“pop-off”) valve properly relieves pressure in the 
circuit. It is not rare for either the disposable breathing 
circuit components or the fixed anesthesia machine com-
ponents to leak. Therefore a leak check of the breathing 
system is of paramount importance before every case. 
This test can be easily performed manually by occluding 
the Y-piece on an assembled circuit, closing the APL 
valve, and using the O2 flush button to pressurize the 
circuit. The circuit passes the leak test if it holds pressure 
for at least 10 seconds. The flow into the circuit during 
this test must be off.
On many modern anesthesia machines, breathing 
circuit leak testing is an automated feature, although 
manual steps are still required for test preparation. 
Circuit compliance is also automatically assessed on 
some machines during this phase to guide ventilator 
tidal volume delivery. Therefore the test should be 
performed with the circuit that is going to be used. 
The APL valve should also be assessed at this time by 
opening it widely after the pressure test and ensuring 
that the breathing circuit pressure decreases rapidly 
to zero.
Item 13: Verify That Gas Flows Properly 
Through the Breathing Circuit During Both 
Inspiration and Exhalation (Every Case)
Problems with unidirectional valves are difficult to 
discover during the PAC. A functional test has been 
described whereby a test lung is placed at the Y-piece, 
and the anesthesia provider assesses inspiratory and 
expiratory flow by alternately compressing the breath-
ing bag and the test lung. The valves can be visually 
inspected during this so-called flow test. Obstructed 
valves can also be felt during the to-and-fro breathing. 
Undetected circuit obstructions are particularly ominous 
and can manifest dramatically and sometimes immedi-
ately after induction. Subtle circuit obstruction may not 
be appreciable except by capnometry.
Automated machine checks may not assess for (or 
detect) obstruction to flow within the breathing circuit. 
A number of complications and near-misses involving an 
obstructed breathing circuit have been reported despite 
the performance of the automated circuit check.3
A full checkout procedure with a test lung is uncom-
mon in this era of automated machine checks. If this test 
is omitted, providers must be cognizant of the fact that 
unidirectional valve malfunction and breathing circuit 
obstruction have not been ruled out before starting the 
case.
Item 14: Document Completion of Checkout 
Procedures
Documentation of completion of the anesthetic check-
out procedure by providers should occur within the 
anesthetic record. Currently, no guidance is available 
regarding where anesthesia or biomedical technician 
documentation of checkout procedures should occur. 
However, it would be prudent to maintain a detailed 
departmental log as a quality assurance tool.
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
252
Item 15: Confirm Ventilator Settings and 
Evaluate Readiness to Deliver Anesthesia Care 
(Anesthesia Time-Out)
The last step in the PAC is an “anesthesia time-out,” dur-
ing which the anesthesia provider confirms the following 
six items before the induction of anesthesia: (1) moni-
tors are functional; (2) capnogram tracing is present; (3) 
oxygen saturation by pulse oximetry is being measured; 
(4) flowmeter and ventilator settings are properly work-
ing; (5) manual/ventilator switch is set to manual; and 
(6) vaporizer is adequately filled.
The final preinduction checklist focuses on the anes-
thesia workstation and does not include everything 
the provider might wish to verify immediately before 
REFERENCES
1. Thompson PW, Wilkinson DJ. Devel-
opment of anaesthetic machines. Br J 
Anaesthesia. 1985;57(7):640–648.
2. Mehta SP, Eisenkraft JB, Posner KL, 
Domino KB. Patient injuries from 
anesthesia gas delivery equipment: A 
closed claims update. Anesthesiology
2013;119:788–795. 
https://doi.
org/10.1097/ALN.0b013e3182a10b5e
3. Yang KK, Lewis IH. Mask induction 
despite circuit obstruction: An unrec-
ognized hazard of relying on auto-
mated machine check technology. A & A 
Case Rep. 2014;2:143–146. https://doi.
org/10.1213/XAA.0000000000000026
4. Malayaman SN, Mychaskiw G II, Ehren-
werth J. Medical gases: Storage and 
Supply. In: Ehrenwerth J, Eisenkraft JB, 
Berry JM, eds. Anesthesia Equipment: 
Principles and Applications, 2nd ed. 
Philadelphia, PA: Saunders; 2013:3–24.
5. Anderson WR, Brock-Utne JG. Oxygen 
pipeline supply failure: A coping strat-
egy. J Clin Monit. 1991;7:39–41.
6. Eisenkraft JB. The anesthesia machine 
and workstation. In: Ehrenwerth J, 
Eisenkraft JB, Berry JR, eds. Anesthesia 
Equipment: Principles and Applications, 
2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders; 
2013:25–63.
7. Mun SH, No MY. Internal leakage of 
oxygen flush valve. Korean J Anes-
thesiol. 2013;64:550–551. https://doi.
org/10.4097/kjae.2013.64.6.550
8. Eisenkraft JB. Anesthesia vaporizers. In: 
Ehrenwerth J, Eisenkraft JB, Berry JM, 
eds. Anesthesia Equipment: Principles 
and Applications, 2nd ed. Philadelphia, 
PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:64–94.
9. Wallace AW. Sevoflurane contamina-
tion: Water accumulation in sevoflu-
rane vaporizers can allow bacterial 
growth in the vaporizer. A&A Case Rep. 
2016;6:399–401. https://doi.org/10.1213/ 
XAA.0000000000000330
10. Kaczka DW, Chitilian HV, Vidal Melo 
MF. Respiratory monitoring. In: Grop-
per MA, ed. Miller’s Anesthesia, 9th ed. 
Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:1298–
1339.
11. Feldman JM, Hendrickx J, Kennedy 
RR. Carbon dioxide absorption during 
inhalation anesthesia: A modern prac-
tice. Anesth Analg. 2020. https://doi.
org/10.1213/ANE.0000000000005137
12. Berry PD, Sessler DI, Larson MD. 
Severe carbon monoxide poisoning 
during desflurane anesthesia. Anesthe-
siology. 1999;90:613–616. https://doi.
org/10.1097/00000542-199902000-00036
13. Laster M, Roth P, Eger EI. Fires from the 
interaction of anesthetics with desiccated 
absorbent. Anesth Analg. 2004;99:769–
774. Table of contents. https://doi.
org/10.1213/01.ANE.0000136553.69002.
C9
14. Feldman J, Loeb R, Philip J. FAQ on 
anesthesia 
machine 
use, 
protec-
tion, and decontamination during the 
COVID-19 pandemic. Anesth Patient 
Safety Found. 2020. https://www.apsf.
org/faq-on-anesthesia-machine-use-
protection-and-decontamination-during-
the-covid-19-pandemic/ accessed 1.15.21.
15. Kaul T, Mittal G. Mapleson’s breathing sys-
tems. Indian J Anaesth. 2013;57:507. htt-
ps://doi.org/10.4103/0019-5049.120148
16. Bokoch MP, Weston SD. Inhaled anes-
thetics: Delivery systems. In: Gropper 
MA, ed. Miller’s Anesthesia, 9th ed. 9th 
edition Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020. 
572–637.
17. Wetz AJ, Mueller MM, Walliser K, Foest 
C, Wand S, Brandes IF, Waeschle RM, 
Bauer M. End-tidal control vs. manu-
ally controlled minimal-flow anesthe-
sia: A prospective comparative trial. 
Acta Anaesthesiol Scand. 2017;61:1262–
1269. https://doi.org/10.1111/aas.12961
18. Eisenkraft JB, McGregor DG. Waste 
anesthetic gases and scavenging sys-
tems. In: Ehrenwerth J, Eisenkraft JB, 
Berry JM, eds. Anesthesia Equipment: 
Principles and Applications, 2nd ed. 
Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 
2013:125–147.
19. Larson ER, Nuttall GA, Ogren BD, Sev-
erson DD, Wood SA, Torsher LC, Oliver 
WC, Marienau MES. A prospective study 
on anesthesia machine fault identifica-
tion. Anesth Analg. 2007;104:154–156. 
https://doi.org/10.1213/01.ane.00002502
25.96165.4b
20. O’Shaughnessy SM, Mahon P. Com-
pliance with the automated machine 
check. Anaesthesia. 2015;70:1005–1006. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/anae.13159
21. American Society of Anesthesiolo-
gists, 2008. Recommendations for Pre-
Anesthesia Checkout Procedures.
induction of anesthesia, such as medications, equipment 
for an anticipated difficult airway, and so on. Some 
providers rely on other final check mnemonic devices. 
Regardless of the specific steps, a final checklist that 
verifies the presence and function of key safety items is 
fundamental to the safe delivery of anesthesia.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The editor and publisher would like to thank Dr. Patricia 
Roth for contributing a chapter on this topic in the prior 
edition of this work. It has served as the foundation of 
the current chapter.
253
Chapter
AIRWAY MANAGEMENT IN INFANTS AND 
CHILDREN
Airway Management Differences Between 
Infants and Adults
Managing the Normal Airway in Infants and 
Children
Preanesthetic Medication and Parental 
Presence During Induction of Anesthesia
Induction of Anesthesia
Direct Laryngoscopy and Endotracheal 
Intubation
Airway Equipment
Managing the Difficult Airway in Infants and 
Children
Tracheal Extubation in Infants and Children
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY OF THE UPPER 
AIRWAY
Nasal Cavity
Oral Cavity and Pharynx
Larynx
Trachea
AIRWAY ASSESSMENT
History and Anatomic Examination
Physical Examination Findings
Additional Airway Investigations
AIRWAY MANAGEMENT TECHNIQUES
Facemask Ventilation
Preoxgenation
Supraglottic Airways
Endotracheal Intubation
Rapid Sequence Induction of Anesthesia With 
Cricoid Pressure
Difficult Airway Management
Direct Laryngoscopy
Video Laryngoscopy
Endotracheal Tube Stylets, Introducers, and 
Airway Exchange Catheters
Flexible Fiber-Optic Endotracheal Intubation
Awake Fiber-Optic Endotracheal Intubation
Fiber-Optic Intubation Techniques
Rigid Fiber-Optic Intubating Stylets
INVASIVE AIRWAY ACCESS
Cricothyrotomy
Transtracheal Jet Ventilation
Retrograde Endotracheal Intubation
Endotracheal Extubation
COMPLICATIONS
Complications During Laryngoscopy and 
Endotracheal Intubation
Complications After Endotracheal Extubation
AIRWAY MANAGEMENT
Maytinee Lilaonitkul, Andrew Infosino
16
Expertise in airway management is the cornerstone of 
safe anesthesia practice. The past decades have seen 
an evolution of airway management, notably with the 
adoption of supraglottic airway (SGA) devices in the 
early 1990s and, more recently, the rapid uptake of video 
laryngoscopy as a first-line technique in the management 
of both routine and difficult airways and as an educa-
tional training tool for novice learners. The recognition 
of the significant role of human factors and nontechnical 
skills in difficult and emergent airway management has 
also led to the increased use of cognitive aids, checklists, 
and simulation-based training to enhance patient safety.
Difficult or failed airway management is a major 
factor in anesthesia-related morbidity and mortality.1,2
Expertise in safe airway management requires (1) knowl-
edge of the anatomy and physiology of the airway, (2) 
a thorough history and physical examination focused 
on the airway, (3) proficiency with the range of airway 
devices, (4) individualized primary and backup airway 
management plans, (5) effective team communication, 
and (6) application of cognitive aids and guidelines such 
as the American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) dif-
ficult airway algorithm (Fig. 16.1).1
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
254
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY OF THE 
UPPER AIRWAY
Nasal Cavity
Air is warmed and humidified as it passes through the 
nares during normal breathing before it enters the larynx, 
the trachea, and then the lower airways. Resistance to 
airflow through the nasal passages is twice that through 
the mouth and accounts for approximately 50% to 75% 
of total airway resistance.3
The majority of the sensory innervation of the nasal 
cavity is derived from the ethmoidal branch of the 
ophthalmic nerve and branches of the maxillary divi-
sion of the trigeminal nerve from the sphenopalatine 
ganglion.3
Oral Cavity and Pharynx
The oral cavity is bordered superiorly by the hard 
and soft palates, posteriorly by the faucial arches just 
anterior to the tonsils, and laterally by the buccal 
mucosa. The tongue occupies the majority of the floor 
of the oral cavity. The pharynx connects the nasal 
and oral cavities to the larynx and esophagus. The 
pharynx is composed of the nasopharynx, orophar-
ynx, and hypopharynx. The nasopharynx is separated 
from the oropharynx by the soft palate. The epiglottis 
demarcates the border between the oropharynx and 
the hypopharynx (Fig. 16.2). Airway resistance may 
be increased by prominent lymphoid tissue in the 
nasopharynx. The tongue is the predominant cause of 
airway resistance in the oropharynx. Obstruction by the 
Fig. 16.1 Difficult airway algorithm: Adult patients. (1) The airway manager’s choice of airway strategy and techniques should be 
based on their previous experience; available resources, including equipment, availability, and competency of help; and the context 
in which airway management will occur. (2) Low- or high-flow nasal cannula and head elevated position throughout procedure. 
Noninvasive ventilation during preoxygenation. (3) Awake intubation techniques include flexible bronchoscope, video laryngoscopy, 
direct laryngoscopy, combined techniques, and retrograde wire-aided intubation. (4) Other options include but are not limited to 
alternative awake technique, awake elective invasive airway, alternative anesthetic techniques, induction of anesthesia (if unstable 
or cannot be postponed) with preparations for emergency invasive airway, and postponing the case without attempting the previous 
options. (5) Invasive airway techniques include surgical cricothyrotomy, needle cricothyrotomy with a pressure-regulated device, large-
bore cannula cricothyrotomy, or surgical tracheostomy. Elective invasive airway techniques include the previous options and retrograde 
wire-guided intubation and percutaneous tracheostomy. Also consider rigid bronchoscopy and extracorporeal membrane oxygenation 
(ECMO). (6) Consideration of size, design, positioning, and first- versus second-generation supraglottic airways may improve the ability 
to ventilate. (7) Alternative difficult intubation approaches include but are not limited to video-assisted laryngoscopy, alternative 
laryngoscope blades, combined techniques, intubating the supraglottic airway (with or without flexible bronchoscopic guidance), flexible 
bronchoscopy, introducer, and lighted stylet or lightwand. Adjuncts that may be employed during intubation attempts include tracheal 
tube introducers, rigid stylets, intubating stylets, or tube changers and external laryngeal manipulation. (8) Includes postponing the 
case or postponing the intubation and returning with appropriate resources (e.g., personnel, equipment, patient preparation, awake 
intubation). (9) Other options include but are not limited to proceeding with procedure using facemask or supraglottic airway ventilation. 
Pursuit of these options usually implies that ventilation will not be problematic. (From Apfelbaum JL, Hagberg CA, Connis RT, et al. 2022 
American Society of Anesthesiologists practice guidelines for management of the difficult airway. Anesthesiology. 2021. doi: 10.1097/
ALN.0000000000004002. Epub ahead of print. PMID: 34762729.)
tongue is increased by relaxation of the genioglossus 
muscle during anesthesia.
Branches of the maxillary division of the trigeminal 
nerve that innervate the mouth include the greater and 
lesser palatine nerves and the lingual nerve. The greater 
and lesser palatine nerves provide most of the sensa-
tion to the superior border of the oral cavity and the 
tonsils, and the lingual nerve provides sensation to the 
anterior two-thirds of the tongue. The posterior third 
of the tongue, the soft palate, and the oropharynx are 
innervated by the glossopharyngeal nerve (cranial nerve 
IX). The internal branch of the superior laryngeal nerve, 
which is a branch of cranial nerve X (vagus), provides 
sensory innervation to the hypopharynx, including the 
base of the tongue, posterior surface of the epiglottis, 
aryepiglottic folds, and arytenoids.3
Larynx
The adult larynx is located at the level of the third to 
sixth cervical vertebrae. One of its primary functions is to 
protect the distal airways by closing during swallowing 
to prevent aspiration. This protective mechanism, when 
exaggerated, becomes laryngospasm. The larynx is com-
posed of a cartilaginous framework connected by fascia, 
muscles, and ligaments. There are three unpaired and three 
paired cartilages. The unpaired cartilages are the epiglottis, 
thyroid, and cricoid, and the paired cartilages are the aryt-
enoids, corniculates, and cuneiforms. The cricoid cartilage 
is shaped like a signet ring, wider in the cephalocaudal 
dimension posteriorly, and is the only cartilage that is a 
full ring structure. The vocal cords are formed by the thy-
roarytenoid ligaments and are the narrowest portion of the 
III
Chapter 16 Airway Management
255
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
256
adult airway (Fig. 16.3A and B). An understanding of the 
motor and sensory innervation of the nasal, oropharyn-
geal, and laryngeal structures is important for performing 
anesthesia of the upper airway (Table 16.1).
Trachea
The trachea extends from the larynx to the carina, which 
overlies the fifth thoracic vertebra. An adult trachea is 
Fig. 16.2 Functional anatomy of the upper airway: Sagittal section 
through the head and neck showing the subdivisions of the 
pharynx. (From Redden RJ. Anatomic considerations in anesthesia. 
In: Hagberg CA, ed. Handbook of Difficult Airway Management. 
Philadelphia: Churchill Livingstone; 2000:7, Fig. 1.6.)
Nerve
Sensory
Motor
Superior laryngeal, internal 
division
Epiglottis
Base of tongue
Supraglottic mucosa
Thyroepiglottic joint
Cricothyroid joint
None
Superior laryngeal, external 
division
Anterior subglottic mucosa
Cricothyroid muscle
Recurrent laryngeal
Subglottic mucosa
Thyroarytenoid muscle
Lateral cricoarytenoid muscle 
Interarytenoid muscle
Posterior cricoarytenoid muscle
Table 16.1
Motor and Sensory Innervation of Larynx
10 to 15 cm long and supported by 16 to 20 horseshoe-
shaped cartilages. The sensory innervation of the trachea 
is from the recurrent laryngeal nerve, a branch of cranial 
nerve X (vagus).
AIRWAY ASSESSMENT
History and Anatomic Examination
Airway assessment is the first step to formulate an airway 
management plan.4 A comprehensive assessment consists 
of a medical and surgical history of the patient's airway, a 
review of previous anesthetic and medical records, and a 
physical examination of the airway.1 History of worsening 
airway symptoms or pathology, obstructive sleep apnea, 
and the risk of aspiration should be elicited in detail.5,6
Various congenital and acquired disease states are associ-
ated with difficult airway management (Tables 16.2 and 
16.3). Of note, a history of neck irradiation is the most sig-
nificant predictor of inability to mask ventilate.7 Patients 
who have a history of difficult airway management may 
have been informed by their previous anesthesia provider. 
Patients' difficult airway specifics should be documented 
in the medical record, and the patient should be given 
written documentation and/or a notification bracelet. 
The anesthetic record should contain a description of the 
airway difficulties, the grade of laryngeal view, and the 
airway management techniques used.1
Physical Examination Findings
Single physical examination features and bedside airway 
evaluation tests have a low sensitivity and specificity for 
predicting a difficult airway (Table 16.4). Evaluating the 
tests in combination offers greater predictive value.8–10
Examination of the oropharyngeal space, submandibular 
III
Chapter 16 Airway Management
257
A
B
Fig. 16.3 (A) Lateral view of the larynx. (B) Superior view through the laryngeal inlet. (A from Gray's 
Anatomy for Students, 4th ed. 1049. 1041, Fig. 8.209B. B from Miller's Anesthesia, 9th ed, vol. 1. p. 1377, 
Fig. 44.6, from Redden RJ. Anatomic considerations in anesthesia. In: Hagberg CA, ed. Handbook of 
Difficult Airway Management. Philadelphia: Churchill Livingstone; 2000, p. 8, Fig. 1.8.)
Syndrome
Description
Trisomy 21
Small mouth, large tongue, small subglottic diameter
Laryngospasm is common
Goldenhar 
(oculoauriculovertebral 
anomalies)
Mandibular hypoplasia and cervical spine abnormality
Klippel–Feil
Reduced neck mobility resulting from cervical vertebral fusion
Pierre Robin
Small mouth, large tongue, and mandibular hypoplasia
Treacher Collins (mandibular 
dysostosis)
Severe facial deformity, relative macroglossia, and mandibular hypoplasia
Turner
Reduced neck mobility, high arched palate, mandibular hypoplasia, temporomandibular joint 
contracture, and short trachea
Table 16.2
Congenital Syndromes Associated With Difficult Laryngoscopy and Endotracheal Intubation
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
258
Pathologic State
Difficulty
Infection
Epiglottitis (infectious)
Laryngoscopy may worsen obstruction
Abscess (submandibular, 
retropharyngeal, Ludwig angina)
Distortion of the airway renders mask ventilation or endotracheal intubation extremely difficult
Croup, bronchitis, pneumonia
Airway irritability with a tendency for cough, laryngospasm, bronchospasm
Papillomatosis
Airway obstruction
Tetanus
Trismus renders oral endotracheal intubation impossible
Trauma
Traumatic foreign body
Airway obstruction
Cervical spine injury
Neck manipulation may traumatize the spinal cord
Basilar skull fracture
Nasotracheal intubation attempts may result in intracranial tube placement
Maxillary or mandibular injury
Airway obstruction, difficult facemask ventilation, and endotracheal intubation
Cricothyroidotomy may be necessary with combined injuries
Laryngeal fracture
Airway obstruction may worsen during instrumentation
Endotracheal tube may be misplaced outside the larynx
Laryngeal edema (after 
intubation)
Irritable airway
Narrowed laryngeal inlet
Soft tissue neck injury (edema, 
bleeding, subcutaneous 
emphysema)
Anatomic distortion of the upper airway
Airway obstruction
Neoplasia
Neoplastic upper airway tumors 
(pharynx, larynx)
Inspiratory obstruction with spontaneous ventilation
Lower airway tumors (trachea, 
bronchi, mediastinum)
Airway obstruction may not be relieved by endotracheal intubation
Lower airway is distorted
Radiation therapy
Fibrosis can make mask ventilation and laryngoscopy difficult
Immune disorder
Inflammatory rheumatoid 
arthritis
Mandibular hypoplasia, temporomandibular joint arthritis, immobile cervical vertebrae, 
laryngeal rotation, and cricoarytenoid arthritis make laryngoscopy difficult
Ankylosing spondylitis
Fusion of the cervical spine may make direct laryngoscopy difficult
Temporomandibular joint 
syndrome
Limited mouth opening
Scleroderma
Tight skin and temporomandibular joint involvement make mouth opening difficult
Sarcoidosis
Airway obstruction (lymphoid tissue)
Angioedema
Obstructive swelling can make ventilation and endotracheal intubation difficult
Endocrine
Acromegaly
Large tongue and overgrown mandible can make mask ventilation and laryngoscopy difficult
Diabetes mellitus
Decreased mobility of the atlanto-occipital joint may make laryngoscopy difficult
Hypothyroidism
Large tongue and abnormal soft tissue (myxedema) make ventilation and laryngoscopy difficult
Thyromegaly
Goiter may produce extrinsic airway compression or deviation
Obesity
Increased upper airway soft tissue can make mask ventilation and laryngoscopy difficult
Table 16.3
Pathologic States That Influence Airway Management
III
Chapter 16 Airway Management
259
Physical Exam Findings
Mask 
Ventilation
SGA 
Ventilation
Intubation
Cricothyroid Membrane 
Access
High BMI (>30 kg/m2) and increased neck 
circumference (>40 cm)
•
•
•
•
Male sex
•
•
Female sex
•
Edentulous
•
•
Prominent upper incisors
•
•
Reduced interincisor gap (<3 cm)
•
•
Mallampati class III or IV
•
•
Limited ability to protrude lower mandible
•
•
Limited cervical spine mobility
•
•
•
Reduced neck tissue compliance secondary to 
previous irradiation
•
•
•
Thyromental distance <6 cm
•
Beard
•
BMI, Body mass index
Table 16.4
Preoperative Airway Physical Examination Findings Associated With Difficult Airway Management
space and compliance, and cervical spine mobility, in 
addition to evaluation of patients' body habitus can help 
to identify increased risk of difficult airway management. 
Recognition of patients who may be difficult in terms of 
laryngoscopy and intubation, in addition to difficult mask, 
SGA placement, or surgical airway can highlight the need 
for further evaluation and preparation.1
Oropharyngeal Space
The Mallampati test is used to evaluate the oropharyn-
geal space and its predicted effect on ease of direct 
laryngoscopy and endotracheal intubation.11 For the 
modified Mallampati score, the observer should be at 
eye level with the patient holding the head in a neutral 
position, opening the mouth maximally, and protruding 
the tongue without phonating. The airway is classified 
according to what structures are visible (Fig. 16.4).12
There is a correlation between a modified Mallampati 
score of 3 and 4 with difficult laryngoscopy.
Class I: The soft palate, fauces, uvula, and tonsillar pillars 
are visible.
Class II: The soft palate, fauces, and uvula are visible.
Class III: The soft palate and base of the uvula are visible.
Class IV: The soft palate is not visible.
In conjunction with the Mallampati examination, the 
interincisor gap, the size and position of the maxillary 
and mandibular teeth, and the conformation of the pal-
ate can be assessed.1 An interincisor gap of less than 3 
to 4.5 cm correlates with difficulty achieving a line of 
view on direct laryngoscopy.10 Maxillary prominence or 
a receding mandible also correlates with a poor laryn-
goscopic view. Overbite results in a reduction in the 
effective interincisor gap when the patient's head and 
neck are optimally positioned for direct laryngoscopy. 
A narrow or highly arched palate is another airway 
examination finding that is associated with a potential 
difficult airway.1
The submandibular space is the area into which the 
soft tissues of the pharynx must be displaced to obtain 
a line of vision during direct laryngoscopy. Anything 
that limits the submandibular space or compliance of the 
tissue will decrease the amount of anterior displacement 
that can be achieved. Micrognathia limits the pharyngeal 
space (tongue positioned more posterior) and the space in 
which the soft tissues need to be displaced. This causes 
the glottic structures to be anterior to the line of vision 
during direct laryngoscopy.
The extent of an individual's ability to prognath the 
mandible is another correlate of the visualization of glot-
tic structures on direct laryngoscopy. The upper lip bite 
test (ULBT) classification system is as follows (class III is 
associated with a difficult intubation)10:
Class I: Lower incisors can bite above the vermilion 
border of the upper lip.
Class II: Lower incisors cannot reach vermilion border.
Class III: Lower incisors cannot bite the upper lip.13
Ludwig angina, tumors or masses, radiation scarring, 
burns, and previous neck surgery are conditions that can 
decrease submandibular compliance.1
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
260
Thyromental/Sternomental Distance
A thyromental distance (mentum to thyroid cartilage) 
less than 6 to 7 cm correlates with a poor laryngoscopic 
view. This is typically seen in patients with a receding 
mandible or a short neck, which creates a more acute 
angle between the oral and pharyngeal axes and limits 
the ability to bring them into alignment. This distance 
is often estimated in fingerbreadths. Three ordinary fin-
gerbreadths approximate this distance. The sternomental 
distance can also be used—it should measure more than 
12.5 to 13.5 cm.10
Atlanto-occipital Extension/Cervical Spine Mobility
Extension of the head on the atlanto-occipital joint is 
important for aligning the oral and pharyngeal axes 
to obtain a line of vision during direct laryngoscopy 
(Fig. 16.5). Flexion of the lower neck, by elevating the head 
approximately 10 cm, aligns the laryngeal and pharyngeal 
axes. These two maneuvers place the head in the “sniffing” 
position and bring the three axes into optimal alignment. 
In this position the patient's ear canal is aligned with the 
sternal notch. Atlanto-occipital extension is quantified by 
the angle traversed by the occlusal surface of the maxil-
lary teeth when the head is fully extended from the neutral 
position. More than 30% limitation of atlanto-occipital 
joint extension from a norm of 35 degrees, or less than 
80 degrees of extension/flexion, is associated with an 
increased incidence of difficult endotracheal intubation.14 15
Body Habitus/Other Examination Findings
A retrospective analysis of almost 700 patients with dif-
ficult mask ventilation combined with difficult laryngo-
scopy identified 12 independent risk factors: Mallampati 
III or IV, neck radiation changes or neck mass, male sex, 
limited thyromental distance, presence of teeth, body 
mass index (BMI) ≥30 kg/m2, age ≥46 years, presence of 
Class I
Class II
Class III
Class IV
Fig. 16.4 Mallampati classification. (From Samsoon GLT, Young JRB. Difficult tracheal intubation: A 
retrospective study. Anaesthesia. 1987;42:487–490, used with permission.)
beard, thick neck, unstable cervical spine or limited neck 
extension, and limited jaw protrusion.16,17
Cricothyroid Membrane
When routine airway management techniques have 
failed, ventilation is not adequate, and endotracheal 
intubation is unsuccessful, invasive airway control 
through the cricothyroid membrane is indicated (see 
Fig. 16.1).1 Correctly identifying the cricothyroid mem-
brane before airway instrumentation is important, espe-
cially in patients with difficult airways. The cricothyroid 
membrane can be identified by first locating the thyroid 
cartilage, then sliding the fingers down the neck to 
the membrane, which lies just below. Alternatively, in 
patients who do not have a prominent thyroid cartilage 
identification of the cricoid cartilage can be achieved 
by palpating the neck at the sternal notch and sliding 
the fingers cephalad until a cartilage that is wider and 
higher (cricoid cartilage) than those below is felt. The 
superior border of the cricoid cartilage demarcates the 
inferior border of the cricothyroid membrane. Ultrasound 
imaging can help to identify the cricothyroid membrane 
and any overlying vascular structures.18,19 Predictors of 
difficulty identifying the cricothyroid membrane include 
female sex, age less than 8 years, presence of large neck 
circumference, reduced cervical spine mobility, a dis-
placed airway, overlying neck malformation, irradiated 
neck, and previous tracheostomy.19,20
Additional Airway Investigations
Further imaging can be helpful, especially for patients 
with known upper airway pathologies. Plain radiograph 
may identify the size, shape, and location of foreign 
bodies in the airway and tracheal compression or devia-
tion. Computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance 
III
Chapter 16 Airway Management
261
imaging (MRI) can offer a more detailed evaluation of 
complex airway pathologies and allow for multidiscipli-
nary airway planning with the surgeon.
Preoperative nasal endoscopy can help to assess 
the degree of airway swelling, the nature of periglottic 
lesions, and the extent of anatomy distortion caused by 
airway pathologies.4
AIRWAY MANAGEMENT TECHNIQUES
Facemask Ventilation
Ventilation via a facemask is a vital airway manage-
ment skill. Prospectively identifying patients at risk for 
difficult facemask ventilation and developing proficient 
facemask ventilation skills are fundamental to the prac-
tice of anesthesia. Facemasks are available in a variety of 
sizes. When a facemask is properly sized, the top will sit 
on the bridge of the nose and the bottom will sit between 
the lower lip and the chin.
Fig. 16.5 Schematic diagram showing alignment of the oral axis (OA), pharyngeal axis (PA), and 
laryngeal axis (LA) in four different head positions. Each head position is accompanied by an inset that 
magnifies the upper airway (the oral cavity, pharynx, and larynx) and superimposes, as a variously bent 
bold dotted line, the continuity of these three axes with the upper airway. (A) The head is in a neutral 
position with a marked degree of nonalignment of the OA, PA, and LA. (B) The head is resting on a large 
pad that flexes the neck on the chest and aligns the LA with the PA. (C) Extension of the head on the 
neck without concomitant elevation of the head. (D) Combination of the head resting on a pad (which 
flexes the neck on the chest) and extension of the head on the neck, which brings all three axes into 
alignment (sniffing position).
The incidence of difficult facemask ventilation 
ranges from 1% to 8%, depending on the definition 
used.1,20,21 Causes include inadequate mask seal, exces-
sive gas leak, or excessive resistance to the ingress or 
egress of gas. In addition, difficult facemask ventila-
tion can develop after multiple laryngoscopy attempts. 
Patients with difficult facemask ventilation can develop 
hypoxemia, hypercarbia, and aspiration of gastric con-
tents, resulting in hypoxic brain damage or death.2,21
Independent variables associated with difficult face-
mask ventilation include (1) age older than 55 years, (2) 
BMI higher than 30 kg/m2, (3) a beard, (4) lack of teeth, 
(5) a history of snoring or obstructive sleep apnea, (6) 
Mallampati class III to IV, (7) history of neck radiation, 
(8) male sex, (9) limited ability to protrude the mandi-
ble, and (10) history of an airway mass or tumor.20,21
Another analysis, using more stringent criteria for 
“impossible” mask ventilation (defined as inability to 
establish face mask ventilation despite multiple airway 
adjuvants and two-hand mask ventilation), identified 
five independent predictors: (1) neck radiation changes, 
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
262
(2) male sex, (3) sleep apnea, (4) Mallampati III or IV, 
and (5) presence of a beard.7
Preoxgenation
Preoxygenation (breathing 100% oxygen) via facemask 
is important before the induction of anesthesia and 
allows for a longer duration of apnea without desatura-
tion during airway management. A healthy adult, who 
is not obese, can be apneic for approximately 9 minutes 
after preoxygenation before significant desaturation 
occurs. Obesity, pregnancy, and other conditions that 
significantly decrease functional residual capacity (FRC) 
or increase oxygen consumption decrease the time to 
desaturation (Fig. 16.6).22
Several techniques of preoxygenation can achieve the 
goal of reaching an end-tidal oxygen level above 90%. 
Eight deep breaths in 60 seconds are equivalent to three 
minutes of tidal volume breathing of 100% oxygen.23 Pre-
oxygenation in a 25-degrees head-up position or ramping 
position with the patient's head raised so that the ear is 
at the level of the sternal notch helps to reduce depend-
ent atelectasis, improve ventilation/perfusion matching, 
decrease time to oxygen desaturation during apnea, 
and improve the direct laryngoscopy view, especially in 
obese patients (Fig 16.7).24 25 The addition of noninvasive 
positive-pressure ventilation is another technique that can 
improve preoxygenation, especially in obese patients.26
After induction of anesthesia, the facemask should be 
held to the patient's face with the fingers of the anesthe-
sia provider's left hand lifting the mandible (chin lift, jaw 
thrust) to the facemask. Pressure on the submandibular 
soft tissue should be avoided because it can cause airway 
obstruction. The anesthesia provider's left thumb and 
index finger apply counterpressure on the facemask. Ante-
rior pressure on the angle of the mandible (jaw thrust), 
atlanto-occipital joint extension, and chin lift combine to 
maximize the pharyngeal space. Differential application 
of pressure with individual fingers can improve the seal 
attained with the facemask. The anesthesia provider's right 
hand is used to generate positive pressure by squeezing 
the reservoir bag of the anesthesia breathing circuit. Ven-
tilating pressure should ideally be less than 20 cm H2O to 
minimize insufflation of the stomach.
Managing Inadequate Facemask Ventilation
Signs of inadequate facemask ventilation include absent 
or minimal chest rise, absent or inadequate breath 
sounds, cyanosis, insufflation of the stomach, low oxy-
gen saturation, absent or inadequate exhaled carbon 
dioxide, and hemodynamic changes associated with 
hypoxemia or hypercarbia.1
Time of VE = 0, minutes
90
100
60
70
80
0
1
0
Obese
127 kg
Adult
Normal
10 kg
Child
Normal
70 kg
Adult
Moderately III
70 kg Adult
2
3
4
5
6
7
6.8
8.5
10.2
8
9
10
SaO2, %
TIME TO HEMOGLOBIN DESATURATION WITH INITIAL FAO2 = 0.87
Mean time to recovery
of twitch height from
1 mg/kg succinylcholine i.v.
50%
10%
90%
Fig. 16.6 The oxygen saturation (SaO2) versus time of apnea of various types of patients. The time 
to reach an SaO2 of 80% was 8.7 minutes in a healthy 70-kg adult but was 3.1 minutes in an obese 
patient. FAO2, Alveolar fraction of oxygen; VE, minute ventilation. (From Benumof JL, Dagg R, Benumof 
R. Critical hemoglobin desaturation will occur before return to an unparalyzed state following 1 mg/kg 
intravenous succinylcholine. Anesthesiology. 1997;87[4]:979–982.)
III
Chapter 16 Airway Management
263
Inadequate facemask ventilation is usually the result of 
decreased compliance and increased resistance. Oral and 
nasal airways are designed to create an air passage by 
displacing the tongue from the posterior pharyngeal wall. 
The distal tip of the oral and nasal airway should be at the 
angle of the mandible when the proximal end is aligned 
with the mouth or the nose, respectively. An oral airway 
may generate a gag reflex or cause laryngospasm in an 
awake or lightly anesthetized patient. Nasal airways are 
better tolerated during lighter levels of anesthesia, but are 
relatively contraindicated in patients who have coagulation 
or platelet abnormalities or have basilar skull fractures.
Presence of a beard or lack of teeth may result in an 
inadequate seal between the patient's face and the mask, 
making it difficult to deliver positive pressure. If the 
patient is amenable, shaving or trimming a beard can 
improve facemask seal. If a patient's dentures are well 
adhered, allowing them to be left in place or use of an oral 
airway can improve facemask seal in edentulous patients.
If oral and nasal airways do not optimize ventila-
tion with a facemask, a two-handed facemask technique 
should be used. The anesthesia provider uses the right 
hand to mirror the hand position of the left to improve 
facemask seal and jaw thrust. A second person can assist 
by ventilating the patient with the reservoir bag. In spite 
of corrective measures, if difficult or impossible facemask 
ventilation continues, intubation or placement of an SGA 
should be attempted.1
Supraglottic Airways
SGAs have become central to airway management 
in anesthesia practice. SGAs consist of a mask-like 
cuff connected to an airway tube, which can be con-
nected to the anesthesia breathing circuit. The distal 
tip of the cuff should be against the upper esophageal 
Fig. 16.7 A comparison between supine and ramped position in an obese patient. In a supine position 
(left) the ear is below the level of the sternal notch. In a ramped position (right), the red line indicates 
that the ear canal is at the same level as the sternal notch, and the face is parallel with the ceiling.
sphincter (cricopharyngeus muscle), the lateral edges 
rest in the piriform sinuses, and the proximal end 
seats posterior to the base of the tongue (Fig. 16.8). 
Newer SGAs have additional built-in features such 
as bite blocks, conduits for orogastric tube place-
ment, enhanced cuff designs to improve seal, and in 
some cuff pressure monitors. Other features that may 
differ between types of SGAs include the location 
(perilaryngeal or pharyngeal) and mechanism of seal 
(inflatable cuff or preshaped cuffless device). SGAs are 
sized according to the patient's weight, and sizes vary 
by manufacturer (Tables 16.5–16.7).
SGAs can be used as the primary mode of airway 
management, especially in ambulatory surgery, or as a 
conduit for endotracheal intubation or for rescue ven-
tilation during difficult airway management. SGAs are 
easier and quicker to place than endotracheal tubes and 
do not require laryngoscopy. The majority of SGAs are 
available in sizes for infant, pediatric, and adult patients. 
Advantages include fewer hemodynamic changes with 
insertion and removal, less coughing and bucking with 
removal, no need for muscle relaxants, preserved laryn-
geal competence and mucociliary function, and less 
laryngeal trauma.27
Many of the factors that result in difficult mask ven-
tilation and intubation do not overlap with those that 
influence SGA success (see Table 16.4). SGAs may still 
be successful when other oxygenation or ventilation 
techniques have failed.28 Difficult SGA placement or 
failure has been associated with small mouth opening, 
supraglottic or extraglottic disease, fixed cervical spine 
deformity, use of cricoid pressure, poor dentition/eden-
tulous or large incisors, male sex, surgical table rotation, 
and increased BMI.28a,29 The incidence of failed SGA 
placement, defined as an airway event requiring LMA 
Unique removal and tracheal intubation, is 1.1%.29
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
264
Fig. 16.8 Proper positioning of supraglottic airways within the 
oropharynx. The distal tip of the supraglottic airway cuff should 
rest on the upper esophageal sphincter, the lateral edges rest 
in the piriform sinuses, and the proximal end seats posterior 
to the base of the tongue. (From https://www.uptodate.
com/contents/supraglottic-devices-including-laryngeal-
mask-airways-for-airway-management-for-anesthesia-in-
adults?search=supraglottic%20airway&source=search_result&
selectedTitle=1∼150&usage_type=default&display_rank=1)
LMA Size
Weight (kg)
Maximum Oral Endotracheal 
Tube Size (mm)
1
<5
3.0 uncuffed
1.5
5–10
4.0 uncuffed, 3.5 cuffed
2
10–20
4.5 uncuffed, 4.0 cuffed
2.5
20–30
4.5 cuffed
3
30–50
5.5 cuffed
4
50–70
5.5 cuffed
5
70–100
6.5 cuffed
6
>100
6.5 cuffed
Table 16.5
Appropriate-Size Laryngeal Mask Airway (LMA) 
Based on Patient Weight and Maximum Oral 
Endotracheal Tube Sizes
Air-Q Size
Weight (kg)
Maximum Oral 
Endotracheal Tube Size
0.5
<4
4.0
1
4–7
4.5
1.5
7–17
5.0
2.0
17–30
5.5
2.5
30–50
6.5
3.5
50–70
7.5
4.5
70–100
8.5
Table 16.6
Appropriate-Size Air-Q Masked Intubating 
Laryngeal Airway Size Recommendations and 
Maximum Cuffed Oral Endotracheal Tube Sizes
i-gel Size
Weight (kg)
Maximum Oral Endotracheal 
Tube Size (mm)
1
2–5
N/A
1.5
5–12
N/A
2
10–25
N/A
2.5
25–35
N/A
3
30–60
6.0
4
50–90
7.0
5
>90
8.0
Table 16.7
Appropriate-Size i-gel Supraglottic Airways 
and Maximum Oral Endotracheal Tube Sizes
Despite rapid advances in the design of SGAs, aspira-
tion remains a concern, and their use is contraindicated 
in patients at high risk for regurgitation of gastric 
contents. Although there have been numerous studies 
where SGAs have been successfully used in nonsupine 
positions, obesity, long surgical time, and intraabdominal 
or airway procedures, one must consider the risk versus 
benefit of use in these situations.27 After placement of 
an SGA, it is important to confirm correct positioning 
by observing normal capnograph trace, auscultation of 
breath sounds, and ensuring adequate tidal volume is 
achieved with minimal oropharyngeal leak at positive-
pressure breaths under 20 cm H2O.
Unsuccessful placement may result from inadequate 
depth of anesthesia, downfolding of the epiglottis block-
ing the airway passage, or excessive air leak caused by 
inadequate seal. Maneuvers such as increasing depth of 
anesthesia during insertion, repositioning the patient's 
head or SGA, adjusting the amount of air in the cuff, 
and upsizing or downsizing the SGA can help to over-
come these problems. One should consider converting 
to an endotracheal tube if problems persist despite these 
maneuvers. Intubation through these devices can be 
facilitated by use of an intubation catheter or a fiber-
optic bronchoscope.
About 20% to 25% of patients report a sore throat after 
SGA placement, which is usually self-resolving.30 Other 
reported complications from using SGAs in patients with 
III
Chapter 16 Airway Management
265
difficult airways include bronchospasm, postoperative 
swallowing difficulties, respiratory obstruction, laryngeal 
nerve injury, edema, and hypoglossal nerve paralysis.1
The risk of pulmonary aspiration increases with gastric 
inflation, high airway pressures, and poor SGA position-
ing over the glottis.6
Laryngeal Mask Airways (LMAs)
LMA Unique
The LMA Unique is the single-use version of the reusable 
LMA Classic. The LMA Unique consists of a flexible shaft 
connected to a polyvinylchloride (Unique) oval-shaped 
mask that seals around the laryngeal inlet (Fig. 16.9). 
Before placement, the cuff should be deflated, the device 
should be lubricated, and the patient's head should be 
positioned in the sniffing position. The LMA Uniques 
are designed to be inserted by holding the shaft between 
the index finger and thumb, with the tip of the index 
finger at the junction of the mask and the tube. Upward 
pressure against the hard palate is applied as they are 
advanced toward the larynx until resistance is felt. The 
LMA Unique can be used as a conduit for endotracheal 
intubation. Table 16.5 lists the largest endotracheal tubes 
that can be used for each size of the LMA Unique.
LMA Fastrach
The LMA Fastrach is available in reusable and single-use 
models. It was designed to obviate the problems encoun-
tered when attempting to blindly intubate the trachea 
through the LMA Unique or Classic. The LMA Fastrach 
is used with a specialized endotracheal tube that exits 
the laryngeal mask at a different angle than a standard 


Fig. 16.9 (A) Reusable LMA Airway. (B) Single-use LMA Unique. 
(Image courtesy Teleflex Incorporated. © [2021] Teleflex 
Incorporated. All rights reserved.)
A
B
Airway tube
Gastric drain
tube orifice
Bite block
Fig. 16.10 (A) Reusable LMA Proseal Airway. (B) Single-use LMA Supreme Airway. Features include a 
gastric drain, built-in bite block, and modified cuffs for improved airway seal. (Image courtesy Teleflex 
Incorporated. © [2021] Teleflex Incorporated. All rights reserved.)
endotracheal tube and results in better alignment with 
the airway.
LMA ProSeal/LMA Supreme
The reusable LMA ProSeal and single-use LMA Supreme 
are modifications of the LMA Classic (Fig. 16.10). They 
both have an improved oropharyngeal seal without 
increasing mucosal pressure, which allows for ventila-
tion with higher airway pressures when compared with 
the LMA Classic/Unique.31 They both also have a second 
lumen that opens at the distal tip of the mask to act as 
an esophageal vent to keep gases and fluid separate from 
the airway and facilitate placement of an orogastric tube. 
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
266
This is designed to decrease the risk of regurgitation and 
aspiration of gastric contents. The LMA Supreme also has 
an added seal at the esophageal sphincter to help reduce 
risk of gastric insufflation during ventilation. The place-
ment of an orogastric tube can help to confirm proper 
placement of these devices. Both devices also have a 
built-in bite block to decrease the chance of obstruction 
of the airway tube.
LMA Flexible
The LMA Flexible has a wire-reinforced, flexible airway 
tube that allows it to be positioned away from the surgi-
cal field while minimizing loss of seal. This can be useful 
for procedures involving the head and neck. Insertion of 
the LMA Flexible can be more difficult compared with 
other SGAs. Using a stylet or introducer may help with 
insertion of this device.
Air-Q Intubating Laryngeal Airways
The Air-Q intubating laryngeal airways (ILAs) are SGAs 
that can be used either as a primary airway or as an 
intermediary channel for intubation of the trachea 
(Fig. 16.11). They have an elliptical, inflatable, cuffed 
mask and a slightly curved airway tube with a detach-
able connector and an incorporated bite block. Several 
features serve to aid intubation: a short shaft, no aperture 
bars within the mask, a detachable connector so that the 
wide lumen of the shaft can be used for intubation, and 
a distal airway tube shaped to direct an endotracheal tube 
toward the larynx.27 When used as a conduit for intuba-
tion, each size of the Air-Q laryngeal airway has a cor-
responding maximum cuffed endotracheal tube size (see 
Table 16.6). After an endotracheal tube is placed, removal 
of the Air-Q device is aided by a removal stylet. A newer 
model called Air-Q Self-Pressurizing (AirQsp) also has 
an added feature of a self-pressurizing cuff thatinflates 
during positive-pressure ventilation and deflates during 
exhalation.
Fig. 16.12 The i-gel ® is a single-use supraglottic airway 
device composed of a soft, gel-like, noninflatable cuff that is 
designed to form an anatomic seal over the laryngeal inlet. It 
has a widened, flattened stem with a rigid bite block that acts 
as a buccal stabilizer to reduce rotation and malpositioning, and 
a port for gastric tube insertion. (From Gabbott DA, Beringer R. 
The iGEL supraglottic airway: A potential role for resuscitation? 
Resuscitation. 200773[1]:161–162.)
Fig. 16.11 Air-Q ® disposable supraglottic airways in adult and 
pediatric sizes. The removable color-coded connector allows for 
intubation with a standard endotracheal tube. (Image courtesy 
Cookgas, St. Louis, MO.)
i-gel Supraglottic Airways
The i-gel is a single-use SGA device composed of a soft, 
gel-like, noninflatable cuff that is designed to form an 
anatomic seal over the laryngeal inlet. One advantage 
of the i-gel is a lower reported incidence of postopera-
tive sore throat.32 It has a widened, flattened stem with a 
rigid bite block that acts as a buccal stabilizer to reduce 
rotation and malpositioning and a port for gastric tube 
insertion (Fig. 16.12). The i-gel has a wide-bore airway 
channel designed to facilitate endotracheal intubation 
with fiber-optic guidance.27,32 Adult sizes can accom-
modate endotracheal tube sizes from 6.0 to 8.0 mm (see 
Table 16.7).
Endotracheal Intubation
Endotracheal intubation by direct laryngoscopy is the 
most common method of securing the airway during 
general anesthesia (Box 16.1). Equipment and drugs 
used for endotracheal intubation include a properly sized 
endotracheal tube, laryngoscope, functioning suction 
catheter, appropriate anesthetic drugs, monitoring equip-
ment, and equipment for providing positive-pressure 
ventilation of the lungs with oxygen.
Proper positioning is crucial to successful direct laryn-
goscopy. Alignment of the oral, pharyngeal, and laryn-
geal axes is necessary for creating a line of vision from 
the lips to the glottic opening (see Fig. 16.5). Elevation of 
the patient's head 8 to 10 cm with pads under the occiput 
(shoulders remaining on the table) and extension of the 
head at the atlanto-occipital joint serve to align these 
axes. The height of the operating table should be adjusted 
so that the patient's face is near the level of the standing 
anesthesia provider's xiphoid cartilage.
III
Chapter 16 Airway Management
267
The laryngoscopic view obtained is classified accord-
ing to the Cormack and Lehane classification system. 
Grade III or IV views are associated with difficult intuba-
tion (Fig. 16.13).33
Rapid-Sequence Induction of Anesthesia With 
Cricoid Pressure
Rapid-sequence induction with cricoid pressure should 
be considered in patients with increased risk for regur-
gitation of gastric contents. Rapid-sequence induction 
involves the rapid induction of anesthesia and neuromus-
cular blockade followed immediately by direct laryngos-
copy and intubation. Cricoid pressure (Sellick maneuver) 
is used to prevent spillage of gastric contents into the 
pharynx during the period from induction of anesthesia 
to successful placement of a cuffed endotracheal tube. 
It can be applied by an assistant exerting downward 
external pressure with the thumb and index finger on the 
cricoid cartilage to displace the cartilaginous cricothyroid 
ring posteriorly and thus compress the underlying upper 
esophagus against the cervical vertebrae (Fig. 16.14). The 
magnitude of downward external pressure (30 newtons 
is recommended) that needs to be exerted on the cricoid 
cartilage to reliably occlude the esophagus is difficult to 
judge. The use of cricoid pressure has been questioned 
for several reasons, including the following: (1) there is 
a lack of validation in models other than cadavers; (2) 
Box 16.1
Indications for Endotracheal Intubation
•Provide a patent airway
•Prevent inhalation (aspiration) of gastric contents
•Need for frequent suctioning
•Facilitate positive-pressure ventilation of the lungs
•Operative position other than supine
•Operative site near or involving the upper airway
•Airway maintenance by mask difficult
aspiration can occur despite the use of cricoid pressure; 
(3) cricoid pressure can cause relaxation of the lower 
esophageal sphincter, which can favor regurgitation; 
(4) cricoid pressure may increase the difficulty of mask 
ventilation or worsen the laryngoscopic view; and (5) 
MRI has shown that the esophagus may be lateral and 
not directly posterior to the cricoid cartilage in patients, 
resulting in inadequate esophageal compression.34 35
Other MRI studies have suggested that although the 
esophagus is laterally displaced in some patients, the 
hypopharynx is the structure that is being compressed 
by cricoid pressure, and the cricoid and hypopharynx 
move together as a unit. Even if lateral movement occurs, 
there is compression of this structure. The use of cricoid 
pressure remains controversial.35 Cricoid pressure can be 
released if it impedes oxygenation, ventilation, or visu-
alization of the glottis.
Difficult Airway Management
Difficult airway management includes difficult mask or 
SGA ventilation, laryngoscopy, or endotracheal intuba-
tion. Difficult laryngoscopy is defined as the inability 
to visualize any portion of the vocal cords; difficult 
endotracheal intubation is defined as the inability to 
intubate despite multiple attempts and has been reported 
to occur in up to 7% of patients.20 Failed intubation of the 
trachea occurs in about 1 in 2000 patients in an elective 
setting and can result in catastrophic patient outcome.2
Closed malpractice claims related to difficult intubation 
between 2000 and 2012 showed that inadequate airway 
planning and inappropriate management (73%) were the 
main factors leading to patient harm. Large studies indi-
cate that the most common failures included perseveration 
on failed techniques, failure to use an SGA for rescue oxy-
genation, delay in calling for help, and delay in attempting 
a surgical airway.6 36 These studies highlight the impor-
tance of nontechnical skills such as situational awareness, 
communication, and teamwork in managing the difficult 




Fig. 16.13 Four grades of laryngoscopic view. Grade I: Most of the glottis is visible. Grade II: Only the 
posterior portion of the glottis is visible. Grade III: The epiglottis but no part of the glottis can be seen. 
Grade IV: No airway structures are visualized. (From Cormack RS, Lehane J. Difficult tracheal intubation 
in obstetrics. Anaesthesia. 1984;39[11]:1105–1111.)
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
268
airway. Cognitive aids such as difficult airway algorithms 
should be used (see Fig. 16.1). The communication and 
teamwork necessary for managing difficult airways can 
be improved using role-playing exercises or simulation.
A comprehensive airway history and assessment is 
crucial for developing an airway management plan for 
each patient. The following management options in 
patients with anticipated or history of difficult airway 
should be considered: (1) awake endotracheal intubation, 
(2) noninvasive initial intubation techniques, (3) video 
laryngoscopy as an initial approach to intubation, and (4) 
maintaining spontaneous ventilation.1 A patient's risk of 
aspiration and ability to cooperate with airway manage-
ment should be considered when making an initial plan, 
and a difficult airway cart should be immediately avail-
able. In addition to routine preoxygenation and optimal 
patient positioning, the use of apneic oxygenation tech-
niques after induction of anesthesia can delay the onset 
of hypoxia and allow more time for safe airway manipu-
lation in patients with difficult airways. One approach is 
the application of nasal cannula oxygen with flow rates 
up to 15 L/min. In patients at higher risk for desaturation 
during airway management high-flow nasal cannula can 
be used, with warmed and humidified oxygen delivered 
at flow rates of 30 to 70 L/min.37
Direct Laryngoscopy
The laryngoscope is traditionally held in the anesthesia 
provider's left hand. If not opened by extension of the 
head, the patient's mouth may be manually opened by 
counterpressure of the right thumb on the mandibu-
lar teeth and right index finger on the maxillary teeth 
(“scissoring”). Simultaneously with insertion of the 
laryngoscope blade, the patient's lower lip can be rolled 



Fig. 16.14 Cricoid pressure is provided by an assistant exerting 
downward pressure with the thumb and index finger on 
the cricoid cartilage (approximately 5-kg pressure) so that the 
cartilaginous cricothyroid ring is displaced posteriorly and the 
esophagus is thus compressed (occluded) against the underlying 
cervical vertebrae.
away with the anesthesia provider's left index finger to 
prevent damage by the laryngoscope blade. The blade is 
then inserted on the right side of the patient's mouth and 
then moved to the midline, and the tongue is shifted to 
the left. Pressure on the teeth or gums must be avoided as 
the blade is advanced forward and centrally toward the 
epiglottis. The anesthesia provider's wrist is held rigid as 
the laryngoscope is lifted along the axis of the handle to 
cause anterior displacement of the soft tissues and bring 
the laryngeal structures into view. The handle should not 
be rotated as it is lifted to prevent damaging the patient's 
upper teeth or gums. Manipulation of the patient's thy-
roid cartilage externally on the neck, commonly using 
backward upward rightward pressure (BURP), may facili-
tate exposure of the glottic opening.20
The endotracheal tube is held in the anesthesia provid-
er's right hand like a pencil and introduced into the right 
side of the patient's mouth with the natural curve directed 
anteriorly. The endotracheal tube should be advanced 
toward the glottis from the right side of the mouth, as mid-
line insertion usually obscures visualization of the glottic 
opening. The tube is advanced until the proximal end of 
the cuff is 1 to 2 cm past the vocal cords, which should 
place the distal end of the tube midway between the vocal 
cords and carina. Some endotracheal tubes also have a 
vocal cord marker to guide optimal depth of insertion. At 
this point, the laryngoscope blade is carefully removed 
from the patient's mouth. The cuff of the endotracheal 
tube is inflated with air to create a seal against the tracheal 
mucosa. This seal facilitates positive-pressure ventilation 
of the lungs and decreases the likelihood of aspiration of 
pharyngeal or gastric contents. A cuff manometer can be 
used to confirm cuff pressures between 20 and 30 cm H2O 
to minimize the likelihood of mucosal ischemia resulting 
from prolonged pressure on the tracheal wall (Fig. 16.15).
After endotracheal cuff inflation, the anesthesia 
provider must rapidly confirm correct placement in the 
trachea. Detecting end-tidal CO2 with capnography is the 
gold standard for confirming endotracheal intubation 
rather than inadvertent esophageal intubation. Symmet-
ric chest rise with manual ventilation and bilateral breath 
sounds are necessary to confirm endotracheal intubation 
rather than endobronchial intubation. Palpation of the 
endotracheal tube cuff while applying pressure in the 
suprasternal notch can also help confirm endotracheal 
rather than endobronchial intubation.
After confirmation of correct placement, the endotra-
cheal tube should be secured in position with tape. In 
adults taping the endotracheal tube at the patient's lips 
corresponding to the 21- to 23-cm markings on the 
endotracheal tube usually places the distal end of the 
endotracheal tube in the mid-trachea.
The success rate of endotracheal intubation using 
direct laryngoscopy in patients without a predicted dif-
ficult intubation is higher than 99%, and in patients with 
predicted difficult intubation is 84%.38,39
III
Chapter 16 Airway Management
269
Choice of Direct Laryngoscope Blade
The major advantages of a curved laryngoscope blade, 
such as a Macintosh blade, is that the larger flange 
improves the ability to shift the tongue to the left, 
thereby improving visualization of the glottic inlet and 
creating more space to pass the endotracheal tube. The 
major advantage of a straight blade, such as a Miller 
blade, is that it has a smaller profile, which can be ben-
eficial in patients with a smaller mouth opening.
The tip of the curved blade is advanced into the 
space between the base of the tongue and the pharyn-
geal surface of the epiglottis into the vallecula, which 
elevates the epiglottis and exposes the glottic opening 
(Fig. 16.16A). The tip of the straight blade is passed 
beneath the laryngeal surface of the epiglottis (see Fig. 
16.16B). Forward and upward movement of the blade 
exerted along the axis of the laryngoscope handle 
Fig. 16.15 Posey ® 8199 Cufflator endotracheal tube inflator and 
manometer. (Image courtesy Posey Company, Arcadia, CA.)
directly elevates the epiglottis to expose the glottic 
opening.
Laryngoscope blades are numbered according to their 
size. A Macintosh 3 and Miller 2 are the standard intu-
bating blades for adult patients. The Macintosh 4 and 
Miller 3 blades can be used for larger adult patients.
Video Laryngoscopy
Video laryngoscopy plays an important role in both 
routine and difficult airway management. Video laryn-
goscopy is now often used as the initial approach for 
patients with predicted difficult airways. Studies have 
demonstrated higher first-pass intubation success rates 
when compared with direct laryngoscopy.40 This has led 
to its rapid adoption in the emergency and critical care 
settings. The ability to view the intubation process in real 
time on a remote screen also makes video laryngoscopy 
an invaluable tool for teaching and as a means of com-
munication and raising situational awareness among 
team members in the operating room.
Video laryngoscopy can help obtain a view of the 
larynx by providing indirect visualization of the glot-
tic opening without alignment of the oral, pharyngeal, 
and tracheal axes and enable endotracheal intubation in 
patients who have conditions that can make traditional 
laryngoscopy difficult or impossible (e.g., limited mouth 
opening, inability to flex or extend the neck).
Video laryngoscopes consist of a handle, a light 
source, and a blade with a video camera at the distal 
end to enable the glottis to be visualized indirectly on a 
video monitor. Depending on the model and manufac-
turer, the video monitor may be a stand-alone unit or 
a smaller screen that is attached directly to the handle. 
Manufacturers are now offering single-use models that 
eliminate the need for reprocessing. Some video laryn-
goscopes offer a disposable blade that fits over a reus-
able handle/camera.
Video laryngoscopes are also recommended for intu-
bating patients with respiratory infections that are trans-
missible via aerosol or respiratory droplets such as tuber-
culosis or coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). Video 
laryngoscopy allows the intubator to be farther away from 
the patient's face when compared with direct laryngos-
copy. This reduces the intubator's risk of exposure to air-
way secretions, contamination, and potential infection.41,42
Video laryngoscope blades are offered in curved 
Macintosh-style blades, straight Miller-style blades, and 
angulated blades. The Macintosh-style or Miller-style 
blades can be used for direct laryngoscopy or by viewing 
the monitor. These blades are inserted using the standard 
direct laryngoscopy techniques with or without a stylet 
in the endotracheal tube. The view obtained by looking 
at the monitor usually offers a slightly improved view 
compared with looking directly in the patient's mouth 
because the camera is more distally located and provides 
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
270
a wider visual field. The advantage of these blades is user 
familiarity with the blade type and a display that can be 
used for instructional purposes.40
The angulated blades allow for visualization of the 
glottic structures with minimal flexion or extension of the 
patient's head and neck. They are also useful in patients 
with anterior larynxes.40 The tip of the laryngoscope blade 
may be placed in the vallecula or be used to lift the epiglot-
tis directly. These blades usually require a preshaped stylet 
that matches the curvature of the blade and are usually 
inserted midline in the mouth. An endotracheal tube with 
the preshaped stylet is advanced using direct visualization 
in the pharynx until it can be seen on the monitor, after 
which the tube is advanced into the trachea close to the 
blade, based on the image on the monitor. A limitation of 
these devices is difficulty directing the endotracheal tube 
into the glottis despite good glottic visualization. This usu-
ally occurs when the video laryngoscope is inserted too 
deeply. Withdrawing the blade slightly, although often giv-
ing a poorer laryngoscopic view, can improve the ability to 
direct the endotracheal tube through the glottic opening.
Video laryngoscopy can be performed on awake 
patients with difficult airways after topical application of 
local anesthetic to the airway.43 Selected video laryngo-
scopes are described in the following sections.
GlideScope
GlideScope offers both a reusable Titanium line and 
a single-use Spectrum line of video laryngoscopes 




Fig. 16.16 Schematic diagram depicting the proper position of the laryngoscope blade for exposure of 
the glottic opening. (A) The distal end of the curved blade is advanced into the space between the base 
of the tongue and the pharyngeal surface of the epiglottis. (B) The distal end of the straight blade 
is advanced beneath the laryngeal surface of the epiglottis. Regardless of blade design, forward and 
upward movement exerted along the axis of the laryngoscope handle, as denoted by the arrows, serves 
to elevate the epiglottis and expose the glottic opening.
handles and blades. The Titanium line comes with curved 
Macintosh-style blade in a MAC T3 and MAC T4 size, 
comparable to a typical Macintosh 3 or 4 blade, in addi-
tion to angulated blades in LoPro T3 and T4 sizes. The 
GlideScope Spectrum is a single-use line that comes with 
a typical curved Macintosh blade in a DVM S3 and S4 
size and an angulated blade in LoPro S3 and S4 sizes 
(Fig. 16.17). These angulated blades are anatomically 
shaped with a fixed (60-degree) angle and should be used 
with the GlideRite rigid stylet, as this stylet matches the 
shape of the blade. The blades have a fog-resistant video 
camera embedded in the undersurface that transmits the 
digital image to a high-resolution color monitor that can 
be mounted on a pole. Recommended GlideScope blades 
for pediatric and adult patients are listed in Table 16.8.
The GlideScope is associated with improved glottic 
visualization compared with direct laryngoscopy, espe-
cially in patients with potential difficult airways.38,44
One study showed the overall success rate with the Gli-
deScope to be 96% in patients with predicted difficult 
airways and 94% when used as a rescue device for failed 
direct laryngoscopy, suggesting the advantage of GlideS-
cope for use in these situations.45
C-MAC
The C-MAC (KARL STORZ Endoscopy) comes in a reus-
able model with a variety of stainless steel blades, with 
a camera located on the distal end of the blade that dis-
plays on a high-definition monitor. The reusable blades 
III
Chapter 16 Airway Management
271
come in several sizes and styles, including a Macintosh 
3, Macintosh 4, and adult angulated D-blade for dif-
ficult airways (Fig. 16.18). They have a lateral guide for 
an oxygen or suction catheter. The interface between 
the laryngoscope blade and the monitor allows for easy 
interchange of different blades. There is also a newer 
C-MAC Five S single-use line of video laryngoscopes 
with a C-MAC S Imager Camera that fits inside a single-
use plastic handle/blade. The single-use C-MAC comes in 
Macintosh 3, Macintosh 4, and angulated adult D-blades. 
Reusable
AVL
Single use
Titanium
Titanium
AVL & Ranger
Ranger
LoPro S3
LoPro S4
MAC S3
MAC S4
LoPro T3
LoPro T4
MAC T3
MAC T4
GVL Stat 0
GVL Stat 1
GVL Stat 2
GVL Stat 2.5
GVL Stat 3
GVL Stat 4
GVL 2
GVL 3
GVL 4
GVL 3
GVL 4
Fig. 16.17 Comparison of the single-use and reusable GlideScope® blades in different sizes and styles. 
(Used with permission, ©Verathon Inc.)
A
C
B
Fig. 16.18 Comparison of the different C-MAC® blade types. 
(A) Macintosh-style blade, (B) Miller-style blade, and (C) D-blade. 
(© KARL STORZ SE & Co. KG, Germany.)
Age Group
Weight
Model
Premature 
infants
<2.5 kg
GlideScope GVL 0
C-MAC Miller 0
Neonates
2.5-5 kg
GlideScope GVL 1
C-MAC Miller 1
Infants/
toddlers
5–15 kg
GlideScope GVL 2
C-MAC Miller 1
Small children
15–30 kg
GlideScope GVL 2.5 
C-MAC Macintosh 2 
McGrath MAC 2
Children/
teenagers
30–70 kg
GlideScope GVL 3
GlideScope Titanium S3/T3
C-MAC Macintosh 3
C-MAC D Blade Pediatric
McGrath MAC 3
Teenagers/
adults
>70 kg
GlideScope GVL 4
GlideScope Titanium S4/T4
C-MAC Macintosh 4 
C-MAC D Blade Adult
McGrath MAC 4
Table 16.8
Video Laryngoscopes Suitable for Infants, 
Children, Teenagers, and Adults
In difficult airway situations using the D-blade improves 
the glottic view and has intubation success rates similar 
to the GlideScope when compared with direct laryngos-
copy.44,46 Recommended C-MAC blades for pediatric and 
adult patients are listed in Table 16.8.
McGrath Scope
The McGrath video laryngoscope is a portable device 
that consists of a reusable handle and light source with 
a small color display that can rotate and swivel that is 
directly attached to the handle. The handle and camera 
fit into single-use polycarbonate blades. These blades are 
available in Macintosh 3, Macintosh 4, and an angulated 
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
272
adult-sized X-blade. Recommended McGrath blades for 
pediatric and adult patients are listed in Table 16.8
Endotracheal Tube Stylets, Introducers, and 
Airway Exchange Catheters
A variety of endotracheal tube stylets, introducers, and 
airway exchange catheters (AECs) may be used in selected 
patients to facilitate difficult endotracheal intubation, 
endotracheal tube exchange, and SGA exchange for an 
endotracheal tube. In addition, AECs can provide an airway 
conduit to assist with reintubation. Some of the devices 
have a hollow lumen and connectors to allow jet ventila-
tion. Ventilation through the lumen should be used only in 
emergency situations because of the high risk of complica-
tions, including barotrauma, pneumothorax, pneumome-
diastinum, and subcutaneous emphysema. When using 
intubating stylets in a patient with a difficult airway, intu-
bation is successful in 78% to 100% of patients.1 Complica-
tions of intubating stylets include bleeding, oropharyngeal 
trauma, tracheal trauma, and sore throat. Complications of 
endotracheal tube exchangers include tracheal/bronchial 
laceration and gastric perforation.1
Stylet
Stylets are made from plastic-coated, malleable metal 
that is used to stiffen and provide curvature to an 
endotracheal tube. Stylets can help facilitate placement 
of the endotracheal tube through the glottis. The tip 
of the stylet should not protrude past the end of the 
endotracheal tube to minimize the potential for airway 
trauma. The stylet should be carefully removed after 
successful intubation. Endotracheal tube stylet sizes are 
listed in Table 16.9
Gum Elastic Bougie
A gum elastic bougie is a solid, 60-cm long, 15 Fr intro-
ducer with a 40-degree curve approximately 3.5 cm from 
the distal tip. It is used to facilitate intubation in patients 
with a poor laryngoscopic view. It is passed under the 
epiglottis and into the glottis. A characteristic bump-
ing or clicking is felt in most tracheal placements as the 
bougie is advanced down the tracheal cartilages, but is 
not felt in esophageal placements. An endotracheal tube 
is then advanced over the bougie and into the airway and 
the bougie is removed.
Frova Intubating Introducer
The Frova Intubating Introducer has a distal angulated 
tip and an internal channel to accommodate a stiffening 
rod or allow jet ventilation. It is available in a pediatric 
(35 cm long, 8 Fr) and an adult (65 cm long, 14 Fr) size. 
The pediatric introducer can be used with endotracheal 
tubes from 3.0 mm to 5.5 mm. The adult introducer 
can be used with endotracheal tubes 6.0 mm and larger. 
The Frova Intubating Introducer is inserted in a similar 
Age (yr)
Weight 
(kg)
Endotracheal 
Tube ID (mm)
Suction 
Catheter 
(Fr)
Stylet 
(Fr)
Premature <1.5
2.5
6
6
Premature 1.5–2.5
3.0
6
6
Newborn
3.5
3.5
8
6
1
10
4.0
8
6
2–3
15
4.5
10
6
4–6
20
5.0
10
10
7–9
30
5.5
12
10
10–12
40
6.0
14
10
13–15
50
6.5
14
14
>16
>60
7.0
18
14
Table 16.9
Endotracheal Tube, Suction Catheter, and 
Stylet Size Based on Age and Weight
Fr, French; ID, internal diameter.
manner to the gum elastic bougie for patients with poor 
laryngoscopic views (Fig. 16.19A).
Aintree Intubation Catheter
The Aintree Intubation Catheter (AIC) is 56-cm long, 19 
Fr diameter, and has a large 4.7-mm lumen. It comes 
with two Rapi-Fit adapters. One is for jet ventilation, 
and the other for connection to an anesthesia circuit or 
Ambu bag.
The AIC can also be used to exchange SGAs for 
endotracheal tubes size 7.0 mm or larger. The AIC is 
threaded onto a fiber-optic bronchoscope and then 
placed in the lumen of the SGA and advanced as a unit 
through the vocal cords into the trachea. The fiber-optic 
bronchoscope is then removed from the AIC. With the 
AIC in the trachea, the SGA is carefully removed, and 
an endotracheal tube is then placed over the AIC into 
the trachea. Finally, the AIC is removed (see Fig. 16.19B).
Cook Airway Exchange Catheter
Cook AECs are 83 cm in length and are available in 11, 
14, and 19 Fr sizes. They are designed for endotracheal 
tube exchange. These catheters are hollow and can allow 
for jet ventilation or oxygenation through an anes-
thesia circuit or Ambu bag using Rapi-Fit adapters in 
emergency situations.47 For orotracheal intubation, AEC 
insertion of 20 to 22 cm depth, and for nasotracheal 
intubation, insertion of 27 to 30 cm depth is sufficient 
for tube exchange and can help avoid complications. If 
placed deeper, there is a risk of bronchial perforation or 
pneumothorax. To help with placement of an endotra-
cheal tube over an AEC, laryngoscopy can displace 
tissues. Using a smaller endotracheal tube may also facil-
itate the use of AECs. They can also be left in the trachea 
III
Chapter 16 Airway Management
273
after endotracheal tube removal to help with reintubation 
if necessary in patients with difficult airways. The Cook 
extra-firm, soft-tip AEC is designed for double-lumen 
tube exchange. It is 100 cm in length and available in 11 
or 14 Fr sizes.
Flexible Fiber-Optic Endotracheal Intubation
Fiber-optic intubation can be useful for difficult airway 
management. Fiber-optic intubation can be performed 
through the nose or mouth in awake, sedated, or anes-
thetized patients. The decision to perform fiber-optic 
endotracheal intubation in an awake versus an anesthe-
tized patient is dependent on the risk of a difficult airway 
and the cooperation of the patient. Fiber-optic endotra-
cheal intubation may be advantageous in patients with 
unstable cervical spines. The technique does not require 
movement of the patient's neck and can be performed in 
an awake patient, thereby allowing for evaluation of the 
patient's neurologic function after endotracheal intuba-
tion and surgical positioning.
Patients who have sustained an injury to the upper 
airway from either blunt or penetrating trauma are at 
risk for the endotracheal tube creating a false passage 
by exiting the airway through the disrupted tissue dur-
ing direct laryngoscopy. By performing a fiber-optic 
intubation, not only can the injury be assessed but the 
endotracheal tube can also be placed beyond the level 
of the injury, thus minimizing the risk of subcutaneous 
emphysema.
A disadvantage of fiber-optic endotracheal intubation 
is that it requires time to set up and prepare the patient's 
airway. Blood and secretions can easily obscure the view 
of the fiber-optic bronchoscope; therefore administration 
of an antisialagogue is recommended, and suctioning 
may be necessary. Infections, hematomas, edema, or 
masses in the upper airway may make fiber-optic intuba-
tion more difficult. Inflating the cuff of the endotracheal 
tube to hold the pharyngeal walls open may be helpful. 
An SGA may be an effective conduit by providing a 
direct channel to the glottis and minimizing the blood 
A
B
Fig. 16.19 (A) Frova Intubating Introducer. (B) Aintree Intubation Catheter. (Images courtesy Cook 
Medical, Bloomington, IN.)
and secretions that may be obscuring the fiber-optic 
bronchoscope.
Awake Fiber-Optic Endotracheal Intubation
Awake fiber-optic intubation should be considered if 
there is a history of a difficult airway or an unstable 
cervical spine. Performing intubation before induction 
of anesthesia allows for continuation of spontaneous 
breathing, preservation of muscle tone, preservation of 
airway reflexes, and assessment of neurologic function 
after intubation. This is especially important in patients 
who are at risk for difficult mask ventilation or pulmo-
nary aspiration of gastric contents. Patient cooperation is 
critical to this technique.
Awake fiber-optic intubation can be performed 
through the nose or mouth. In general, the nasal route is 
easier because the angle of curvature of the endotracheal 
tube naturally approximates that of the patient's upper 
airway. The risk of inducing bleeding is more frequent 
when the nasal route is used and therefore relatively con-
traindicated in patients at risk for bleeding, such as those 
with platelet abnormalities or coagulation disorders.
Patient Preparation
The procedure should be fully explained to the patient, 
and an antisialagogue should be administered (glycopyr-
rolate 0.2–0.4 mg intravenously). The patient should be 
monitored throughout the procedure, and sedation can be 
carefully administered.
Airway Anesthesia
Airway anesthesia is achieved by topical application of 
a local anesthetic or by specific nerve blocks. Topical 
airway anesthesia can be achieved by spraying (atom-
izing or nebulizing) or direct application (ointment, 
gels, or gargling solutions). Several commercial devices 
are available to assist with topical application of local 
anesthetic. The larger particle size of a spray tends to 
cause it to be deposited in the pharynx, with only a 
small proportion reaching the trachea. The small particle 
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
274
size of a nebulized spray is carried more effectively into 
the trachea and the smaller airways. Lidocaine is the 
preferred topical local anesthetic because of its broad 
therapeutic window. Usually, 1% and 2% solutions are 
used for nerve blocks and infiltration, whereas 4% solu-
tions are used topically.48 Benzocaine is less preferred, 
as it can cause methemoglobinemia even in therapeutic 
doses. Tetracaine has a very narrow therapeutic window, 
and the maximum allowable dose (1.2 mg/kg) can easily 
be exceeded.
Nose and Nasopharynx
To minimize the potential risk of bleeding from the nasal 
mucosa, 0.05% oxymetazoline hydrochloride (HCl) spray 
should be administered for vasoconstriction. Phenyle-
phrine nasal spray should be avoided because of the 
potential for systemic absorption and phenylephrine 
toxicity. Topical anesthesia of the nasal mucosa can be 
achieved using lidocaine solution applied directly on 
soaked cotton-tipped swabs or pledgets or by nasal air-
ways covered in lidocaine ointment.
Tongue and Oropharynx
Topical anesthesia can be achieved by spraying, direct 
application, or bilateral blocks of the glossopharyngeal 
nerve at the base of each anterior tonsillar pillar. The 
patient can gargle with 2% viscous lidocaine solution, 
or 4% lidocaine solution can be atomized or nebulized 
to the oropharynx. Care should be taken to ensure that 
the total dose of lidocaine is less than 7 mg/kg to mini-
mize the risk of local anesthetic toxicity. Approximately, 
2 mL of 2% lidocaine injected at a depth of 0.5 cm is 
sufficient to block the glossopharyngeal nerves on each 
side. Aspiration with the syringe before injecting the 
local anesthetic solution is necessary to ensure that 
the needle is not intravascular or through the tonsillar 
pillar.
Larynx and Trachea
Anesthesia of the larynx and trachea to prevent coughing 
during the procedure may be achieved by atomizing or 
nebulizing lidocaine as described earlier or by superior 
laryngeal nerve block or transtracheal block.
Superior Laryngeal Nerve Block
The superior laryngeal nerves lie between the greater 
cornu of the hyoid bone and the superior cornu of the 
thyroid cartilage as they traverse the thyrohyoid mem-
brane to the submucosa of the piriform sinus. Blockade of 
these nerves, which must be done bilaterally, begins with 
cleaning the overlying skin with antiseptic solution. The 
cornu of the hyoid bone or the thyroid cartilage may be 
used as a landmark. A 22- to 25-G needle is “walked” off 
the cephalad edge of the thyroid cartilage or the caudal 
edge of the hyoid bone, and approximately 2 to 3 mL of 
2% lidocaine is injected on each side.
Transtracheal Block
For a transtracheal block, the skin is prepared with 
antiseptic solution and a 20-G intravenous (IV) catheter 
is advanced through the cricothyroid membrane while 
simultaneously aspirating with an attached syringe filled 
with 4 mL of 2% lidocaine. When air is aspirated, the 
catheter is advanced into the trachea and the needle is 
withdrawn. The syringe is reattached to the catheter, 
aspiration of air is reconfirmed, and the local anesthetic 
solution is rapidly injected at end expiration to enhance 
spread in the trachea and proximal bronchial trees during 
inspiration.
Fiber-Optic Intubation Techniques
Nasal fiber-optic intubation of the trachea involves the 
use of a lubricated endotracheal tube. The diameter of 
the fiber-optic bronchoscope should be at least 1.5 mm 
smaller than the internal diameter of the endotracheal 
tube. Softening the endotracheal tube in warm water 
before use makes it less likely to cause mucosal trauma 
or submucosal tunneling. The endotracheal tube is 
advanced through the nose into the pharynx by aiming 
posteriorly. If resistance is met at the back of the naso-
pharynx, 90 degrees of counterclockwise rotation allows 
the endotracheal tube to pass less traumatically because 
the bevel then faces the posterior pharyngeal wall. Suc-
tion should be immediately available throughout the 
procedure to minimize secretions.
For oral fiber-optic intubation, using a channeled oral 
airway that fits an endotracheal tube can help keep the 
fiber-optic scope midline and create space in the oro-
pharynx. Having an assistant gently extend the tongue 
out of the patient's mouth can help by elevating the 
epiglottis. The endotracheal tube can either be advanced 
in the mouth with the fiber-optic bronchoscope or can 
be secured at the top of the scope and advanced after the 
fiber-optic bronchoscope has entered the trachea. Infla-
tion of the endotracheal tube cuff during advancement of 
the fiber-optic bronchoscope in the pharynx can create 
an enlarged pharyngeal space and help keep the optics of 
the fiber-optic bronchoscope from being obscured. The 
inflated cuff can also angle the tip of the endotracheal 
tube more anteriorly to facilitate advancing the broncho-
scope through the vocal cords. If this technique is used, 
it is important to deflate the cuff before advancing the 
endotracheal tube into the trachea.
After the fiber-optic bronchoscope has passed 
through the vocal cords, the tracheal rings and carina 
should be identified. The scope should be placed 4 
to 5 cm above the carina, and the endotracheal tube 
should be advanced into the trachea over the bron-
choscope. Resistance to advancement often means that 
the endotracheal tube is impacted on an arytenoid, and 
the endotracheal tube should be rotated and gently 
advanced. The fiber-optic bronchoscope can be used 
III
Chapter 16 Airway Management
275
to confirm the appropriate depth of endotracheal tube 
placement before it is withdrawn. Resistance to remov-
ing the fiber-optic bronchoscope may indicate that the 
bronchoscope has inadvertently passed through the 
Murphy eye of the endotracheal tube or kinked in the 
pharynx. In both instances the endotracheal tube and 
the scope must be withdrawn together to avoid damag-
ing the fiber-optic bronchoscope.
Fiber-Optic Endotracheal Intubation After Induction of 
General Anesthesia
Asleep fiber-optic intubation technique is employed 
when the patient is not cooperative or when mask ven-
tilation is not anticipated to be difficult. Fiber-optic 
intubation during general anesthesia can be done either 
through the nose or the mouth and with the patient 
breathing spontaneously or under controlled ventilation. 
Supplemental oxygen can be delivered via nasal cannula 
or a nasal airway connected to the anesthesia breathing 
circuit with a 15-mm connector during the procedure.
In anesthetized patients the soft tissues of the phar-
ynx are relaxed and limit space for visualization with 
the fiber-optic bronchoscope, which can be overcome 
by using jaw thrust, specialized oral airways, inflating 
the endotracheal tube cuff in the pharynx, or applying 
traction on the tongue. It is helpful to have a second 
anesthesia provider available to assist during fiber-optic 
intubation.
Endoscopy Mask
The single-use endoscopy mask is designed with a port 
that will accommodate an endotracheal tube and a fiber-
optic bronchoscope through a diaphragm. This device 
allows for spontaneous or controlled ventilation while 
fiber-optic nasal or oral intubation is being performed.
Rigid Fiber-Optic Intubating Stylets
Both the Bonfils (Karl Storz) and Levitan FPS (Clarus 
Medical) are rigid intubating stylets with an incorporated 
fiber-optic imaging, allowing visualization of the glottis 
from the tip of the endotracheal tube via an attached 
eyepiece or video screen. Endotracheal tubes are loaded 
onto the shaft and advanced into the trachea. The Bonfils 
has a 40-cm, nonmalleable, metal shaft with a 40-degree 
curve at the distal end (Fig. 16.20). The Levitan FPS 
is a 30-cm, semimalleable intubating stylet that was 
developed for use in the emergency department. Both 
devices can be used with or without the aid of direct 
laryngoscopy in the management of normal and difficult 
airways. Their slim profiles make them advantageous for 
use in patients with limited mouth opening or cervical 
spine mobility. Studies indicate that both the Bonfils and 
Levitan are comparable in terms of success rate and time 
to intubation but demonstrate a high failure rate among 
novice users.49 50
INVASIVE AIRWAY ACCESS
In situations when intubation is not successful and it 
is not possible to ventilate or oxygenate via mask or 
SGA, emergency invasive airway access should be used 
per the difficult airway algorithm (see Fig. 16.1).1 Inva-
sive airway access consists of percutaneous or surgical 
cricothyrotomy or transtracheal jet ventilation via the 
cricothyroid membrane. Relative contraindications to 
these techniques include disease of the anterior aspect 
of the neck (tumors, infection, stenosis), laryngeal or 
tracheal disruption, or coagulopathy.
Cricothyrotomy
An emergency cricothyrotomy can be a lifesaving pro-
cedure when one is unable to intubate and ventilate. 
A planned cricothyrotomy can also be used as a first-
line technique to secure an airway when a noninvasive 
technique is not possible because of factors such as 
facial trauma, upper airway bleeding, or upper airway 
obstruction. A cricothyrotomy is best performed with the 
patient in the sniffing position to optimize the ability 
to identify the cricothyroid membrane. A percutaneous 
cricothyrotomy uses the Seldinger technique. A needle is 
advanced at a 90-degree angle through the cricothyroid 
membrane while aspirating with an attached syringe. 
A change in resistance is felt as a pop when the needle 
enters the trachea and air is aspirated. The needle should 
be directed caudally at a 30- to 45-degree angle. A guide-
wire is then advanced through the needle, followed by 
removal of the needle, a small incision adjacent to the 
wire, and placement of a combined dilator and airway of 
adequate caliber (>4 mm). Finally, the wire and dilator 
are removed, leaving the airway in place.
The surgical cricothyrotomy involves a vertical or 
horizontal skin incision, followed by a horizontal inci-
sion through the cricothyroid membrane through which 
a standard endotracheal tube or tracheostomy tube is 
placed. A tracheal hook, dilator, AEC, or bougie can assist 
in placement of the airway. A surgical cricothyrotomy 
can also be valuable as a rescue technique if a percu-
taneous cricothyrotomy is unsuccessful. Commercial 
percutaneous and surgical cricothyrotomy kits are avail-
able that require minimal assembly for use in emergency 
circumstances.
Both percutaneous and surgical cricothyrotomies have 
similar success rates, and the choice of technique should 
be based on the individual practitioner's knowledge and 
proficiency.51,52
When one is unable to intubate and ventilate, it is 
important to make the decision to perform cricothyroi-
dotomy early. Potential complications include bleeding; 
infection; subglottic stenosis; and injury to the larynx, 
trachea, or esophagus.17,52
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
276
Transtracheal Jet Ventilation
Transtracheal jet ventilation via the cricothyroid mem-
brane is another potentially lifesaving procedure when 
one is unable to intubate and ventilate. The cricothyroid 
membrane is identified and punctured at a 90-degree 
angle with a catheter over a needle connected to a 
syringe. When air is aspirated, the catheter should be 
advanced off the needle into the trachea at a 30- to 
45-degree angle caudally. After reconfirming correct 
placement by aspiration of air, the catheter is then con-
nected to a high-pressure oxygen source. Commercially 
available products contain kink-resistant catheters and 
specialized tubing for high-pressure (50 psi) ventilation. 
Potential complications include pneumothorax, pneu-
momediastinum, bleeding, infection, and subcutaneous 
emphysema.
Retrograde Endotracheal Intubation
Retrograde endotracheal intubation can be performed 
without identification of the glottic inlet. It has been 
used in cases of anticipated and unanticipated difficult 
airway management, particularly when there is bleeding, 
airway trauma, decreased mouth opening, or limited neck 
movement.
The cricothyroid membrane is punctured with a nee-
dle with a syringe attached as described earlier. After 
confirming that the needle is in the trachea, the syringe 
is detached and a guidewire is threaded through the nee-
dle in a cephalad direction and then retrieved from the 
mouth with a forceps. An endotracheal tube is threaded 
over the wire until it stops on impact with the anterior 
wall of the trachea. Tension on the guide can be relaxed 
to allow the endotracheal tube to pass farther into the 
trachea before removing the wire. Commercially avail-
able kits have improved this technique by adding a 
guiding catheter that fits over the wire and inside the 
endotracheal tube.
Endotracheal Extubation
Endotracheal extubation after general anesthesia 
requires skill and judgment. It is generally safest 
to extubate when the patient is fully awake. Any 
residual neuromuscular blockade should be reversed, 
and 100% O2 should be administered before extuba-
tion. The oropharynx should be suctioned and a bite 
block placed to prevent the patient from biting and 
occluding the endotracheal tube. Extubation criteria 
include spontaneous respirations with adequate min-
ute ventilation, satisfactory oxygenation and acid–
base status, hemodynamic stability, and the ability to 
follow commands. Endotracheal extubation during a 
light level of anesthesia (as evidenced by disconjugate 
gaze, breath-holding, or coughing) increases the risk 
of laryngospasm. Patients who are obese or have a 
history of obstructive sleep apnea may benefit from 
positioning with the head-of-bed elevated for extuba-
tion.53 54 Before extubation, the endotracheal tube cuff 
should be deflated. Immediately after endotracheal 
extubation, 100% O2 should be delivered by face-
mask, and confirmation of adequate ventilation and 
oxygenation should be assessed by clinical signs and 
capnography.
Deep endotracheal extubation, before the return of 
protective airway reflexes, is generally associated with 
Fig. 16.20 The Bonfils intubation endoscope with incorporated fiber-optic imaging, allowing 
visualization of the glottis from the tip of the endotracheal tube via an attached eyepiece. (© KARL 
STORZ SE & Co. KG, Germany.)
III
Chapter 16 Airway Management
277
less coughing and attenuated hemodynamic effects on 
emergence. This may be preferred in patients at risk from 
adverse effects of increased intracranial or intraocular 
pressure, bleeding into the surgical wound, or wound 
dehiscence. The relative contraindications to deep extu-
bation include previous difficult facemask ventilation 
or endotracheal intubation; high risk of aspiration; 
restricted access to the airway; obstructive sleep apnea 
or morbid obesity; and a surgical procedure that may 
have resulted in airway edema, bleeding, or irritability. 
Deep extubation may also predispose to airway obstruc-
tion from decreased upper airway tone from anesthetic 
agents.
A plan for reintubation should be made in patients at 
risk of failed extubation and those with difficult airways 
(Fig. 16.21). High-risk patients include those with airway 
edema, morbid obesity, and respiratory insufficiency.17
Deflating the endotracheal tube cuff and confirming the 
presence or absence of a cuff leak can help determine if 
significant airway edema is present. Extubation over an 
AEC or insertion of SGA before extubation provides a 
conduit to reintubation and allows for oxygenation and/
or ventilation if necessary.1 54 Extubation of the trachea 
is always elective, and postponing extubation may be 
appropriate in some cases when the patient has increased 
risk for requiring reintubation.
COMPLICATIONS
Complications of endotracheal intubation are rare and 
can be categorized as those occurring (1) during laryn-
goscopy and endotracheal intubation, (2) while the 
endotracheal tube is in place, and (3) after endotracheal 
extubation (Box 16.2).
Complications During Laryngoscopy and 
Endotracheal Intubation
Laryngoscopy and intubation can lead to a sore throat 
in up to 40% of patients.55 Care should be taken dur-
ing laryngoscopy to minimize trauma. Use of larger 
endotracheal tubes and overinflating endotracheal tube 
cuffs may also increase the likelihood of sore throat. 
Sore throat is usually self-limiting and resolves in 24 
to 72 hours.
One of the most common complications of laryngos-
copy is dental damage (incidence 1 in 4500 patients).56
Patients at increased risk for dental damage include those 
with preexisting poor dentition or fixed dental work. 
Use of a plastic shield placed over the upper teeth may 
help in selected patients but will decrease the interinci-
sor distance and may make laryngoscopy more difficult. 
Other possible complications from laryngoscopy include 
oral or pharyngeal injury; lip lacerations and bruises; 
and laryngeal, arytenoid, esophageal, or tracheal damage. 
The risk for airway trauma is increased in patients with 
difficult airways that require multiple laryngoscopies for 
intubation.
Laryngoscopy and intubation cause stimulation of the 
sympathetic nervous system, which can cause systemic 
hypertension, tachycardia, and increased intracranial pres-
sure. These physiologic responses can cause adverse 
effects, especially in patients with preexisting hypertension, 
ischemic heart disease, or certain neurologic conditions.
Aspiration is another potential complication that can 
occur during laryngoscopy. Patients at greater risk for 
aspiration include those who have not fasted, have symp-
tomatic gastroesophageal reflux, have delayed gastric 
emptying, or are morbidly obese. Notably, aspiration is 
the most common cause of death among major anesthe-
sia airway complications.6
Accidental esophageal intubation, if unrecognized, 
can result in the inability to oxygenate and ventilate the 
patient and can lead to significant morbidity and mortal-
ity. This highlights the importance of using capnography 
to confirm correct placement of the endotracheal tube 
immediately after intubation. If the endotracheal tube is 
inserted too deep, this will result in endobronchial intu-
bation. This can lead to ventilation of only one lung and 
result in increased shunting and inadequate oxygenation. 
Kinking of the endotracheal tube or obstruction from 
secretions or blood in the endotracheal tube can lead 
to inadequate oxygenation and ventilation. The risk of 
accidental extubation intraoperatively can be minimized 
by noting the proper insertion depth and adequately 
securing the endotracheal tube. When the position of 
the patient (e.g., turning prone or lateral) is changed, 
the correct position of the endotracheal tube should be 
reconfirmed.
Complications After Endotracheal Extubation
One-third of adverse airway events occur during emer-
gence or recovery from anesthesia.6 Many are the result 
of inadequate oxygenation and ventilation after extuba-
tion. Causes include laryngeal edema, laryngospasm, 
or bronchospasm. Most laryngospasm episodes can be 
treated with the application of positive pressure through 
a facemask and jaw thrust. Severe laryngospasm may 
require the administration of propofol or muscle relax-
ants such as rocuronium or succinylcholine. Excessive 
endotracheal cuff pressures can cause damage to the tra-
cheal mucosa and result in airway edema. This may pro-
gress to destruction of cartilaginous rings and subsequent 
fibrous scar formation and tracheal stenosis, especially if 
there is prolonged endotracheal intubation with excessive 
cuff pressures. Using high-volume, low-pressure cuffs 
and keeping cuff pressures less than 25 cm H2O can help 
prevent these complications.
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
278
AIRWAY MANAGEMENT IN INFANTS AND 
CHILDREN (ALSO SEE CHAPTER 34)
Airway Management Differences Between 
Infants and Adults
Understanding the differences between the infant and 
adult airway is critical to proper airway management in 
pediatric anesthesia (Box 16.3). The anatomic and physi-
ologic differences between the infant airway and the 
adult airway decrease as children grow and resolve by 
about 12 to 14 years of age.
The larynx in infants is located higher in the neck than 
in adults. In infants the larynx is typically at the level of 
C3–C4, and in adults the larynx is usually at the level of 
C4–C5. The higher larynx in infants causes the tongue to 
shift more superiorly, closer to the palate. As a result, the 
tongue more easily apposes the palate, which can cause 
airway obstruction. An infant's tongue is also larger in 
proportion to the size of the mouth than in adults. The 
relatively large size of the tongue makes direct laryngos-
copy more difficult and can contribute to obstruction of 
the upper airway during sedation, inhalation induction of 
anesthesia, and emergence from anesthesia. Jaw thrust or 
an oral airway can shift the tongue to a more anterior 
position and resolve upper airway obstruction. A nasal 
airway can also be beneficial in these situations.
The epiglottis in an infant's airway is often described 
as relatively larger, stiffer, and more omega-shaped 
than an adult epiglottis. More importantly, an infant's 
epiglottis is typically angled in a more posterior posi-
tion, thereby blocking the view of the vocal cords during 
Plan
Assess airway and general risk factors
Prepare
Optimize patient and other factors
Recovery/HDU/ICU
*Advanced techniques: require training and experience
“At risk” extubation
Ability to oxygenate uncertain
Reintubation potentially difficult
and/or general risk factors present
Advanced Techniques*
1 Laryngeal mask exchange
2 Remifentanil technique
3 Airway exchange catheter
Awake
extubation
Postpone
extubation
Tracheostomy
Optimize patient factors
Cardiovascular
Respiratory
Metabolic/temperature
Neuromuscular
Optimize other factors
Location
Skilled help/assistance
Monitoring
Equipment
DAS Extubation Guidelines: “At risk” algorithm
Step 1
Plan extubation
Step 3
Perform
extubation
Step 4
Postextubation
care
Key question: is it safe to remove the tube?
Safe transfer
Handover/communication
O2 and airway management
Observation and monitoring
General medical and surgical management
Analgesia
Staffing
Equipment
Documentation
Yes
No
Step 2
Prepare for
extubation
Fig. 16.21 The Difficult Airway Society (DAS) extubation guidelines for at-risk patients. HDU,
High-dependency unit; ICU, intensive care unit. (From Mitchell V, Dravid R, Patel A, et al. Difficult Airway 
Society guidelines for the management of tracheal extubation. Anaesthesia. 2012;67[3]:318–340.)
III
Chapter 16 Airway Management
279
direct laryngoscopy. In infants and small children it is 
often necessary to lift the epiglottis with the tip of the 
blade of the laryngoscope to visualize the vocal cords in 
order to successfully intubate the trachea.
An infant's airway is funnel-shaped, with a relatively 
large thyroid cartilage above and a relatively narrow 
cricoid cartilage below. The cricoid cartilage is the nar-
rowest portion of an infant's airway, whereas the vocal 
cords are the narrowest portion of an adult's airway. 
The cricoid cartilage is circular, allowing correctly sized 
uncuffed endotracheal tubes to successfully seal and pro-
tect the airway from aspiration.
An infant's head and occiput are proportionally 
larger than an adult's. The proper position for direct 
Box 16.2
Complications of Endotracheal Intubation
During Direct Laryngoscopy and Endotracheal 
Intubation
Dental and oral soft tissue trauma
Systemic hypertension and tachycardia
Cardiac dysrhythmias
Myocardial ischemia
Inhalation (aspiration) of gastric contents
While the Endotracheal Tube Is in Place
Endotracheal tube obstruction
Endobronchial intubation
Esophageal intubation
Endotracheal tube cuff leak
Pulmonary barotrauma
Nasogastric distention
Accidental disconnection from the anesthesia breathing 
circuit
Tracheal mucosa ischemia
Accidental extubation
Complications After Endotracheal Extubation
Laryngospasm
Inhalation (aspiration) of gastric contents
Pharyngitis (sore throat)
Laryngitis
Laryngeal or subglottic edema
Laryngeal ulceration with or without granuloma formation
Tracheitis
Tracheal stenosis
Vocal cord paralysis
Arytenoid cartilage dislocation
Box 16.3
The Infant Airway Versus the Adult Airway
•Larynx positioned higher in the neck
•Tongue larger relative to mouth size
•Epiglottis larger, softer, and angled more posteriorly
•Head and occiput larger relative to body size
•Short neck
•Narrow nares
•Cricoid ring is the narrowest region
laryngoscopy and endotracheal intubation in an adult 
is often described as the sniffing position with the head 
elevated and the neck flexed at C6–C7 and extended at 
C1–C2 (see Fig. 16.5). An infant or small child, on the 
other hand, requires a shoulder or neck roll to prevent 
the hyperflexion caused by their relatively larger occiput 
in order to establish an optimal position for facemask 
ventilation and direct laryngoscopy. An infant's nares 
are relatively smaller than an adult's and can offer sig-
nificant resistance to airflow and increase the work of 
breathing, especially when there are secretions, edema, 
or bleeding.
Oxygen consumption per kilogram is much higher 
in infants than in adults. This results in a much shorter 
allowable time for intubation before the infant desatu-
rates, even after adequate preoxygenation. This can be a 
significant issue, especially in difficult intubations.
Managing the Normal Airway in Infants and 
Children
A complete history and a focused physical examination 
are the first steps in managing the pediatric airway.
History
The history should include whether there were any 
problems with previous anesthetics; prior anesthetic 
records should be reviewed if they are available. A his-
tory of snoring should prompt additional questioning 
about whether the infant or child has obstructive sleep 
apnea. Obstructive sleep apnea can lead to respiratory 
obstruction during the induction and emergence phases 
of anesthesia and in the postoperative period, especially 
if opioids are used for pain management. Syndromes 
involving mandibular hypoplasia can make aligning 
the oral, pharyngeal, and laryngeal axes difficult dur-
ing direct laryngoscopy and may require alternative 
approaches to airway management. Syndromes involving 
cervical spine abnormalities can limit flexion and exten-
sion and can also make laryngoscopy and intubation 
challenging (see Table 16.2).
Physical Examination
It is often difficult to perform a complete physical 
examination on infants and children, as they may be 
afraid or unwilling to cooperate. Asking a child to look 
up at the sky and then down at the floor is one way 
of assessing neck extension and flexion. If there are 
any masses, tumors, or abscesses in the neck or upper 
airway that compromise neck flexion, extension, or 
breathing function, further evaluation is important and 
should include CT to evaluate the location and degree of 
any airway compromise. Children will often voluntarily 
open their mouths to enable determination of a Mallam-
pati classification. If an infant or child is uncooperative, 
examining the profile of an infant or child can indicate 
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
280
whether the thyromental distance is short and whether 
the patient has micrognathia or a hypoplastic mandible.
The parent(s) and the child should be directly asked 
whether there are any loose teeth. If loose teeth are 
identified, care should be taken to avoid dislodging 
these teeth during airway management. Very loose teeth 
can be removed before proceeding with airway manage-
ment to prevent accidental dislodgement and possible 
aspiration.
Preanesthetic Medication and Parental 
Presence During Induction of Anesthesia
Parental presence during induction of anesthesia is 
increasingly becoming the standard approach for pedi-
atric patients. Parental presence can minimize the need 
for preanesthetic medication in infants and children. If 
parental presence during induction of anesthesia is used, 
it is important to designate a member of the periopera-
tive team to escort the parents from the operating room 
to the waiting area after the induction of anesthesia is 
completed and to address any worries parents may have 
after witnessing the induction.
Anxious parents can transfer their anxiety to their 
children. Thus preoperative anxiety in either the child 
or the parents can result in a child that is uncoopera-
tive, upset, or crying during the induction of anesthesia. 
Preoperative anxiety has been associated with posthos-
pitalization behavioral changes, including nightmares, 
separation anxiety, enuresis, eating disorders, and temper 
tantrums. The “unpleasant” induction experience can 
also result in increased anxiety during subsequent anes-
thetics.57 58
Preoperative clinic visits or telephone consultations 
should spend adequate time addressing any questions 
or concerns about anesthesia. The anesthesia provider 
should also assess and address any anxiety in the child 
or the parents during the preoperative consultation on 
the day of surgery. Child-life services can be extremely 
useful preoperatively by using age-appropriate play 
therapy and preoperative instruction. Older children and 
teenagers can be coached to reduce their anxiety and 
taught coping skills. The goal is to decrease anxiety and 
prepare both pediatric patients and their parents for their 
perioperative anesthesia experience.
Preanesthetic medication can facilitate the induction 
of anesthesia in very anxious children. Preanesthetic 
medication is often not necessary in infants younger 
than 6 months because stranger anxiety does not usually 
develop until 6 to 9 months of age. If the child has an 
IV catheter in place, midazolam can be administered in 
small doses and titrated to effect.
If the child does not have an IV catheter in place, 
midazolam syrup can be given orally in a dose of about 
0.5 mg/kg up to a maximum dose of about 20 mg. If the 
child is uncooperative with taking midazolam orally, it 
can also be given intranasally, intramuscularly, or rec-
tally. In cases in which older children are uncooperative, 
agitated, or violent it may be necessary to administer 
intramuscular ketamine in a dose of about 3 mg/kg to 
facilitate IV catheter placement and the induction of 
anesthesia.
Induction of Anesthesia
IV induction of anesthesia with propofol is usually safer 
and quicker than an inhaled induction of anesthesia. 
After the infant or child loses consciousness and the 
ability to ventilate with a facemask is verified, either an 
SGA device can be inserted or a neuromuscular block-
ing drug can be given to facilitate direct laryngoscopy 
and endotracheal intubation. Although it is possible to 
perform laryngoscopy on infants and children without 
a neuromuscular blocking drug by using higher doses of 
sevoflurane or propofol, using a neuromuscular blocking 
drug such as rocuronium can facilitate laryngoscopy and 
intubation, decrease the incidence of laryngospasm, and 
decrease the amount of anesthetic agents required for 
laryngoscopy.
When the infant or child does not have an IV catheter 
in place, inhaled induction of anesthesia can be per-
formed. Beginning the induction of anesthesia with the 
odorless mixture of nitrous oxide and oxygen through 
a facemask then slowly increasing the concentration of 
sevoflurane is a common approach in a cooperative child. 
Young children who are uncooperative and crying can be 
induced with 8% sevoflurane. When the infant or child 
becomes unconscious, the nitrous oxide should be turned 
off to administer 100% oxygen to adequately preoxygen-
ate before inserting an SGA or an endotracheal tube. An 
IV catheter should then be placed. Once the ability to 
ventilate the patient has been confirmed, either an SGA 
device can be inserted or a neuromuscular blocking drug 
can be given to facilitate laryngoscopy and endotracheal 
intubation.
Direct Laryngoscopy and Endotracheal 
Intubation
When performing direct laryngoscopy and endotracheal 
intubation in infants and children, it is important to 
appropriately position the infant or child with a roll 
under the neck or shoulders. The oropharynx should be 
visualized as divided into three compartments: (1) the 
tongue swept to the left by the laryngoscope blade, (2) 
the laryngoscope blade in the middle of the mouth, and 
(3) the endotracheal tube entering from the right side of 
the mouth. External pressure at the level of the thyroid 
or cricoid cartilage is sometimes necessary to bring the 
vocal cords into view.
Once the trachea is intubated, correct positioning of 
the endotracheal tube should be confirmed by end-tidal 
III
Chapter 16 Airway Management
281
CO2, by watching the chest rise and fall, and by auscul-
tation of both right and left lungs. Because the trachea 
in infants and children is short, it is easy to accidentally 
intubate a main bronchus. The correct depth of a cuffed 
endotracheal tube can be estimated by palpating the 
endotracheal tube cuff in the suprasternal notch. The 
correct tracheal depth of an uncuffed endotracheal tube 
can be estimated by placing the double line at the distal 
end of the endotracheal tube at the vocal cords while 
performing direct laryngoscopy. In infants and children 
it is especially important to reconfirm that the endotra-
cheal tube is correctly positioned by listening for equal 
bilateral breath sounds after securing the endotracheal 
tube and whenever there is a change in the patient's 
position.
Airway Equipment
Nasal and Oral Airways
Nasal and oral airways can sometimes be useful in pedi-
atric patients to relieve airway obstruction, especially 
during facemask ventilation at the beginning or end of 
anesthesia. The nasal airway should be carefully placed 
through one of the nares after lubricating its exterior. 
The nasal airway must be long enough to pass through 
the nasopharynx but short enough that it still remains 
above the glottis.
Oral airways relieve airway obstruction by displacing 
the tongue anteriorly. Too large an oral airway will either 
obstruct the glottis or may cause coughing, gagging, or 
laryngospasm in a patient who is not deeply anesthe-
tized. Too small an oral airway will push the tongue 
posteriorly and make the airway obstruction worse. Oral 
airways should be placed with care to prevent trauma to 
the teeth and oropharynx.
Supraglottic Airways
SGAs are placed in the patient's oropharynx to facili-
tate oxygenation and ventilation; they can also deliver 
inhalational anesthetics. They can be used for both 
routine airway management and difficult airway situa-
tions. In difficult airway situations they can be used as 
rescue devices to oxygenate/ventilate and can be used 
as conduits for fiber-optic intubation. Although SGAs 
are ideally suited for situations in which the patient 
is breathing spontaneously, they can also be used to 
deliver positive-pressure ventilation. Care must be 
taken when using positive-pressure ventilation when 
using SGAs to minimize peak inspiratory pressure. 
Patients who have lung disease or whose peak inspira-
tory pressures are higher than normal are poor candi-
dates for an SGA. In these patients air may leak into the 
esophagus, resulting in distention of the stomach and 
increase the risk for emesis and aspiration. As SGAs 
do not protect the airway from aspiration, they should 
not be routinely used in patients with full stomachs or 
those at increased risk for aspiration. Many types of 
SGAs are available for infants and children, including 
the LMA, air-Q ILAs, i-gel, Portex Soft Seal, and Ambu 
AuraStraight.
Laryngeal Mask Airways
LMA Unique SGAs are available in seven sizes (1, 
1.5, 2, 2.2, 3, 4, 5, and 6) appropriate for a range of 
pediatric patients. The LMA Supreme has an additional 
lumen that is designed to vent the esophagus and is 
available in the same seven sizes. The appropriate size 
LMA is most easily determined by using the weight of 
the infant or child, and the recommended weight is 
listed on the package and on the shaft of the LMA (see 
Table 16.5). An LMA that is too large will be more dif-
ficult to place. An LMA that is too small will not form 
a good seal, making positive-pressure ventilation more 
challenging.
After the LMA has been inserted and its cuff has been 
inflated, correct positioning should be confirmed by aus-
cultation of breath sounds and by end-tidal CO2. Ideally, 
the cuff of the LMA should be inflated with just enough 
air to allow positive-pressure ventilation. Overinflation 
of the LMA cuff has been associated with mucosal dam-
age and postoperative sore throat and may not decrease 
the leak pressure. Ideally, the pressure in the cuff of the 
LMA should be adjusted and measured with a manometer 
(see Fig. 16.15).59 A cuff pressure of 30 to 40 cm H2O 
may be necessary to prevent a circuit leak with positive-
pressure ventilation.
Air-Q Intubating Laryngeal Airways
Air-Q ILAs are another type of SGA device used for 
infants and children. Their major advantage is a design 
that facilitates endotracheal intubation with standard 
oral endotracheal tubes. The Air-Q airway shaft has a 
large diameter allowing for easier intubation with the 
appropriately sized endotracheal tube. The Air-Q single-
use ILA is available in six sizes (1, 1.5, 2, 2.5, 3.5, and 
4.5) appropriate for a range of pediatric patients. The 
air-Q Blocker has an additional lumen that is designed 
to vent the esophagus and is available in sizes 2.5, 3.5, 
and 4.5. Determining the appropriate size is most easily 
estimated by using the weight of the infant or child (see 
Table 16.6).
i-gel Supraglottic Airways
i-gel SGAs are made from a thermoplastic elastomer 
and have a soft, gel-like, noninflatable cuff. They have 
an integral bite block and a gastric channel for protec-
tion against aspiration (except for size 1). i-gel SGAs are 
available in seven sizes (1, 1.5, 2, 2.5, 3, 4, and 5). The 
appropriate size is most easily estimated by using the 
weight of the infant or child (see Table 16.7).
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
282
Endotracheal Tubes
The appropriately sized endotracheal tube for infants and 
children can be estimated by using the following formula 
for uncuffed endotracheal tubes:
Age
endotracheal tube (ID) size



16
4
To adapt this formula to cuffed endotracheal tubes, it 
is necessary to subtract half a size from the calculated 
size because the cuff is located on the outside of the 
endotracheal tube. Endotracheal tubes a half size larger 
and a half size smaller than calculated should also be 
available. An appropriately sized suction catheter should 
always be available to suction secretions, blood, or fluid 
from the endotracheal tube (see Table 16.9).
Cuffed Versus Uncuffed Endotracheal Tubes
Although uncuffed endotracheal tubes have historically 
been used in infants and smaller children, cuffed endotra-
cheal tubes are being increasingly used, especially for 
short-term intubation in the operating room setting. Cuffed 
endotracheal tubes have the cuff on the outside, which adds 
to the external diameter and may necessitate using a 0.5-
mm internal diameter smaller than using an uncuffed tube. 
The smaller internal diameter cuffed tube has more resist-
ance to airflow and increases the work of breathing. This is 
less significant today, as modern ventilators are better able 
to accurately deliver tidal volumes at appropriate pressures 
for small infants and decrease their work of breathing. 
Using cuffed endotracheal tubes minimizes the need for 
repeated laryngoscopy, allows for lower fresh gas flows, 
decreases the amount of inhalational anesthetic used, and 
decreases the concentrations of anesthetic gases detectable 
in operating rooms. Using cuffed endotracheal tubes does 
not increase the incidence of postextubation croup when 
compared with the use of uncuffed endotracheal tubes.60,61
When cuffed endotracheal tubes are used in infants 
and children, the cuff pressure should be measured and 
adjusted to maintain a cuff pressure of approximately 20 
to 25 cm H2O. A leak pressure may be used to approxi-
mate a cuff pressure, but ideally the cuff pressure should 
be measured directly with a manometer (see Fig. 16.15), 
as this will most closely correlate with the pressure of 
the cuff on the tracheal mucosa. If the cuff pressure is 
too low, it will be difficult to ventilate the patient with 
positive pressure. If the cuff pressure is too high, this 
can cause tracheal mucosal injury, postoperative sore 
throat, and postextubation croup.61 In rare cases, often 
involving prolonged intubation, cuff pressures that are 
too high can result in tracheal stenosis. If nitrous oxide 
is used during the case, or in cases in which there is the 
potential for significant airway edema the cuff pressure 
should be monitored periodically during the case. The 
cuff pressure should be measured and recorded in the 
anesthesia record.
When uncuffed endotracheal tubes are used in infants 
and children, the leak pressure should be checked. The 
correct size uncuffed endotracheal tube is one that 
results in a leak pressure of approximately 20 to 25 cm 
H2O. If the uncuffed tube is too large, the leak pressure 
will be too high. In this situation the endotracheal tube 
should be replaced with a smaller one to prevent tracheal 
mucosal injury, postextubation croup, and the possibil-
ity of subsequent tracheal stenosis. If the uncuffed tube 
is too small, the leak pressure will be too low. In this 
situation it will be difficult to ventilate the patient with 
positive pressure, and the endotracheal tube should be 
replaced with a larger one or with a cuffed endotracheal 
tube. The leak pressure should be measured and docu-
mented in the anesthesia record.
Microcuff Endotracheal Tubes
Microcuff pediatric endotracheal tubes offer several 
distinct advantages over conventional pediatric cuffed 
endotracheal tubes. Microcuff endotracheal tubes have a 
cuff made from a microthin polyurethane membrane that 
is 10 μm thick. The cuff is also cylindrical, rather than 
round or oval. These tubes seal the airway at lower cuff 
pressures than conventional endotracheal tubes, reducing 
the potential for tracheal mucosal edema and postex-
tubation croup; however, using Microcuff endotracheal 
tubes does not eliminate the incidence of postextubation 
croup. The appropriately sized endotracheal tube must be 
used, and the inflation pressure should be measured.62
The cuff on the Microcuff endotracheal tube is also 
shorter and placed closer to the tip of the endotracheal 
tube, which decreases the chances of the cuff herniat-
ing above the vocal cords. The Microcuff endotracheal 
tube has an intubation depth mark indicating the correct 
depth for insertion, increasing the probability of correct 
placement. Microcuff endotracheal tubes are available in 
sizes ranging from 3.0 to 7.0 mm, in 0.5-mm increments.
Stylets
Using a stylet stiffens the endotracheal tube and makes 
it easier to manipulate during direct laryngoscopy and 
endotracheal intubation. The appropriately sized stylet 
should always be immediately available (see Table 16.9).
Laryngoscopes
In general, a straight-blade laryngoscope is easier to use 
in infants and small children than a curved blade because 
of its smaller profile. The smaller tip of the straight blade 
more effectively lifts the epiglottis than the curved blade. 
However, curved blades have a larger flange that retracts 
the tongue to the left more effectively and may be useful 
in patients with larger-than-normal tongues (e.g., Beck-
with–Wiedemann syndrome, trisomy 21).
In infants younger than 1 year a Miller 1 straight 
laryngoscope blade is most useful. In children between 1 
and 3 years of age a size 1.5 straight laryngoscope blade, 
III
Chapter 16 Airway Management
283
such as a Wis-Hipple, is recommended. A longer straight 
laryngoscope blade such as a Miller 2 is appropriate for 
most children between 3 and 10 years of age. The tra-
cheas of children older than 11 years are often more eas-
ily intubated with a curved laryngoscope blade, such as a 
Macintosh 2 or 3. Both straight and curved laryngoscope 
blades of various sizes should be available.
Video Laryngoscopy
Video laryngoscopes are useful tools for managing both 
the unexpected and expected difficult pediatric intuba-
tion. Video laryngoscopes have a camera and a light 
source near the tip of the blade and a separate video 
display. Although direct laryngoscopy requires a direct 
line of sight to the glottic opening and vocal cords, video 
laryngoscopy allows the anesthesia provider to view the 
glottic opening indirectly, without the need for aligning 
the oral, pharyngeal, and laryngeal axes (see Fig. 16.5). 
Thus the major advantage of video laryngoscopy over 
direct laryngoscopy is the ability to see “around the cor-
ner” to view the glottic opening and vocal cords, even in 
patients with limited neck extension, hypoplastic mandi-
bles, or “anterior” airways.
Video laryngoscopy is easier to learn than fiber-optic 
bronchoscopy because it mimics the skills of direct 
laryngoscopy. Video laryngoscopy is an excellent tool 
for teaching laryngoscopy for both routine and difficult 
airways because both the learner and instructor can view 
the monitor at the same time.
Video laryngoscopy requires adequate mouth opening 
to allow space both for placing the video laryngoscope 
for an optimal view and for manipulating the endotra-
cheal tube so that it is able to pass through the vocal 
cords. Video laryngoscopy has been shown in studies to 
improve the ability to see the glottic opening and vocal 
cords in pediatric patients with both normal and dif-
ficult airways and is associated with higher first-attempt 
success rates and shorter median intubation times than 
direct laryngoscopy, without increasing complication 
rates.63,64
GlideScope Video Laryngoscopes
The GlideScope video laryngoscopes are available in both 
reusable and single-use models (see Fig. 16.17). Digital 
cameras are mounted at the tips of the blades, and the 
video image is viewed on a separate high-resolution 
monitor. Recommended reusable GlideScopes for pedi-
atric patients are the Titanium models because of their 
excellent optics. The reusable Titanium GlideScopes 
include Macintosh-style curved blades (MAC T3 and MAC 
T4) and angulated blades (LoPro T2, T3, and T4). The 
smallest reusable Titanium blade (LoPro T2) can be used 
in infants as small as 3 kg. The single-use Spectrum Glid-
eScopes are available in a wide variety of pediatric-sized 
blades, including straight blades (Miller S0 and Miller 
S1), Macintosh-style curved blades (DVM S3 and S4), and 
angulated blades (LoPro S1, S2, S3, and S4). The Miller 
S0 blade can even be used in premature infants under 3 
kg. See Table 16.8 for recommended GlideScopes based 
on patient weight.
C-MAC Video Laryngoscopes
The C-MAC video laryngoscope is also available in both 
reusable and single-use models. The reusable model 
consists of a camera with a wide-angle lens mounted at 
the tip of a reusable stainless steel blade, with a video 
display on a separate high-resolution monitor. Recom-
mended reusable C-MAC blades for pediatric patients 
include straight blades (Miller 0 and Miller 1), Macintosh-
style curved blades (MAC 0, 2, 3, and 4) and angulated 
D-blades (pediatric D and adult D) (see Fig 16.18). The 
pediatric D-blade is designed for children but is too large 
for small infants. The newer C-MAC Five S single-use 
line of video laryngoscopes consists of a video display, 
a light source, and the C-MAC S Imager Camera that fits 
inside a single-use plastic handle and blade. The single-
use C-MAC Five S laryngoscopes come in fewer blade 
sizes and are currently available with Miller 0, Miller 1, 
Macintosh 3, Macintosh 4, and angulated adult D-blades. 
See Table 16.8 for recommended C-MAC video laryngo-
scope blades based on patient weight.
McGrath MAC Video Laryngoscopes
The McGrath MAC video laryngoscope consists of a reus-
able video laryngoscope that is inserted into a single-
use, plastic, curved blade, with a video display mounted 
on the handle of the laryngoscope. The McGrath video 
laryngoscope blades are available in Macintosh-style 
curved blades (MAC 1, MAC 2, MAC 3, and MAC 4) and 
in an angulated X3 blade. See Table 16.8 for recom-
mended McGrath video laryngoscopes based on patient 
weight.
Fiber-Optic Bronchoscopy
A flexible fiber-optic bronchoscope is another tool for 
managing a difficult pediatric airway. It is particularly 
valuable when the patient's mouth opening or neck 
mobility is limited. Disadvantages of a fiber-optic 
bronchoscope include a limited field of vision and the 
potential for blood or secretions to obscure the view. 
The smallest fiber-optic bronchoscopes are 2.2 mm in 
diameter and can be used for endotracheal tubes as small 
as 3.0 mm internal diameter. These small bronchoscopes 
do not have a suction channel and have fewer fiber-
optic bundles and inferior optics compared with larger 
bronchoscopes. In general, the fiber-optic bronchoscope 
should be at least 1 mm smaller in outside diameter than 
the internal diameter of the endotracheal tube.
Infants and children are unlikely to be able to coop-
erate with an awake fiber-optic intubation. Therefore 
it is often easier to perform an asleep fiber-optic intu-
bation. Some anesthesia providers prefer to maintain 
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
284
spontaneous ventilation during fiber-optic intubation, 
especially if there is concern about the ability to ventilate 
the patient's lungs with a facemask. Oxygenation via 
nasal cannula in infants and children can increase the 
time available for fiber-optic intubation. Neuromuscular 
blockade can provide better viewing conditions, as there 
is no movement, less fogging of the bronchoscope, and 
less chance of laryngospasm. Using a swivel adaptor with 
a bronchoscopy port allows either continued spontane-
ous ventilation or assisted positive-pressure ventilation 
through the facemask.
For nasal fiber-optic laryngoscopy and endotracheal 
intubation, a vasoconstrictor, such as oxymetazoline 
hydrochloride 0.05% nasal spray, should be administered 
to the nasal mucosa to prevent or minimize nasal bleed-
ing, which makes viewing the glottis and vocal cords more 
challenging. Phenylephrine should not be administered for 
vasoconstriction to the nasal mucosa of infants and small 
children because of the risk of phenylephrine toxicity.
For oral fiber-optic laryngoscopy and endotracheal 
intubation, an SGA can provide an excellent channel 
directly to the vocal cords by shielding the broncho-
scope from secretions and blood. It is recommended to 
select the largest endotracheal tube that will easily fit 
through the SGA and the largest bronchoscope that will 
fit through the endotracheal tube. If an SGA is used as 
a conduit for oral fiber-optic laryngoscopy and endotra-
cheal intubation, it can be left in place until the end of 
the procedure.
Managing the Difficult Airway in Infants and 
Children
The same general principles for managing a normal pedi-
atric airway apply to managing both an unexpected and 
an expected difficult pediatric airway. Anesthesia provid-
ers should be familiar with algorithms for managing dif-
ficult pediatric airways.65 66 It is unlikely that infants and 
children will cooperate with procedures such as an awake 
fiber-optic endotracheal intubation. Therefore, it is often 
necessary to induce anesthesia and manage the airway 
with the patient asleep. Infants and children desaturate 
much more rapidly than adults because their oxygen con-
sumption per kilogram is much higher than adults. This 
time constraint presents an additional challenge when 
managing difficult airways in infants and children.
Unexpected Difficult Airway
When an unexpected difficult airway occurs in pediatric 
patients, the most important first step is to call for an 
additional anesthesia colleague to help (Fig. 16.22). A 
surgeon adept in surgical airway management should 
also be called, as an emergent surgical airway may be 
necessary. A pediatric difficult airway cart should be 
obtained, which should include appropriately sized video 
laryngoscopes; fiber-optic bronchoscopes; and supraglot-
tic, nasal, and oral airways. It is critical that the anesthe-
sia provider not persist with repeated attempts at direct 
laryngoscopy. This can result in trauma to the upper 
Fig. 16.22 Difficult airway infographic: Pediatric patient example. (A) Time out for identification of the airway management plan. 
A team-based approach with identification of the following is preferred: the primary airway manager and backup manager and 
role assignment, the primary equipment and the backup equipment, and the person(s) available to help. Contact an ECMO team/
otolaryngologic surgeon if noninvasive airway management is likely to fail (e.g., congenital high airway obstruction, airway tumor). (B) 
Color scheme. The colors represent the ability to oxygenate/ventilate: green, easy oxygenation/ventilation; yellow, difficult or marginal 
oxygenation/ventilation; and red, impossible oxygenation/ventilation. Reassess oxygenation/ventilation after each attempt, and move 
to the appropriate box based on the results of the oxygenation/ventilation check. (C) Nonemergency pathway (oxygenation/ventilation 
adequate for an intubation known or anticipated to be challenging): deliver oxygen throughout airway management; attempt airway 
management with the technique/device most familiar to the primary airway manager; select from the following devices: supraglottic 
airway, video laryngoscopy, flexible bronchoscopy, or a combination of these devices (e.g., flexible bronchoscopic intubation through 
the supraglottic airway); other techniques (e.g., lighted stylets or rigid stylets may be used at the discretion of the clinician); optimize 
and alternate devices as needed; reassess ventilation after each attempt; limit direct laryngoscopy attempts (e.g., one attempt) with 
consideration of standard blade video laryngoscopy in lieu of direct laryngoscopy; limit total attempts (insertion of the intubating device 
until its removal) by the primary airway manager (e.g., three attempts) and one additional attempt by the secondary airway manager; 
after four attempts, consider emerging the patient and reversing anesthetic drugs if feasible. Clinicians may make further attempts if 
the risks and benefits to the patient favor continued attempts. (D) Marginal/emergency pathway (poor or no oxygenation/ventilation 
for an intubation known or anticipated to be challenging): treat functional (e.g., airway reflexes with drugs) and anatomic (mechanical) 
obstruction; attempt to improve ventilation with facemask, tracheal intubation, and supraglottic airway as appropriate; if all options fail, 
consider emerging the patient or using advanced invasive techniques. (E) Consider a team debrief after all difficult airway encounters: 
identify processes that worked well and opportunities for system improvement and provide emotional support to members of the team, 
particularly when there is patient morbidity or mortality. Developed in collaboration with the Society for Pediatric Anesthesia and the 
Pediatric Difficult Intubation Collaborative: John E. Fiadjoe, MD, Thomas Engelhardt, MD, PhD, FRCA, Nicola Disma, MD, Narasimhan 
Jagannathan, MD, MBA, Britta S. von Ungern-Sternberg, MD, PhD, DEAA, FANZCA, and Pete G. Kovatsis, MD, FAAP. (From Apfelbaum JL, 
Hagberg CA, Connis RT, et al. 2022 American Society of Anesthesiologists practice guidelines for management of the difficult airway. 
Anesthesiology. 2021. doi: 10.1097/ALN.0000000000004002. Epub ahead of print. PMID: 34762729.)
III
Chapter 16 Airway Management
285
airway, edema, and bleeding. In most situations an SGA 
should be inserted for rescue oxygenation and ventilation 
while allowing time to obtain additional personnel and 
airway equipment. If blood or significant secretions are in 
the airway, a video laryngoscope is a better option than a 
pediatric fiber-optic bronchoscope for viewing the glottis 
and intubating the trachea. SGAs can serve as a conduit 
for fiber-optic intubation by providing a channel that 
prevents blood and secretions from obscuring the view.
Expected Difficult Airway
An expected difficult airway in pediatric patients should 
be approached with caution. Only preanesthetic medica-
tions that have minimal ventilatory depressant effects, 
such as midazolam or dexmedetomidine, should be used. 
These preanesthetic medications should be adminis-
tered in a location with pulse oximetry monitoring and 
appropriate airway equipment, including suction and a 
method of delivering oxygen with positive pressure.
An additional anesthesia colleague and a surgeon capable 
of establishing a surgical airway should be in the operating 
room before beginning the induction of anesthesia. In cer-
tain patients it may be more appropriate to proceed directly 
to a strategy other than direct laryngoscopy for managing 
the airway (i.e., SGA, fiber-optic intubation, video laryngos-
copy, or surgical airway). The history and physical examina-
tion may indicate situations in which direct laryngoscopy 
will not be successful, such as a patient in halo traction.
Tracheal Extubation in Infants and Children
Deep Versus Awake Extubation
There is no consensus as to whether deep or awake extu-
bation is the better approach in pediatric patients. The 
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
286
limited number of studies support that deep extubation 
may decrease the risk of overall airway complications, 
including cough and desaturation, but may increase 
airway obstruction compared with awake extubation in 
pediatric patients after general anesthesia.67–69
Postextubation Stridor
Infants and small children are at higher risk than adults 
for stridor after endotracheal extubation. Postextubation 
stridor occurs most commonly when an uncuffed endotra-
cheal tube that is too large or a cuffed endotracheal tube 
that is overinflated is used. The resulting pressure on the 
tracheal mucosa causes venous congestion and edema. 
In severe cases the arterial blood supply can be compro-
mised, causing mucosal ischemia. As resistance to flow 
through the airway is inversely proportional to the radius 
of the lumen to the fourth power, 1 mm of edema in a 
pediatric airway is much more significant than 1 mm of 
edema in an adult airway. Other risk factors for postex-
tubation stridor include multiple endotracheal intubation 
attempts, unusual positioning of the head during surgery, 
increased duration of surgery, and procedures involving 
the upper airway, such as rigid bronchoscopy. Of note, 
patients with trisomy 21 tend to have narrower subglottic 
areas and tracheas and are at higher risk for postextuba-
tion stridor. Smaller endotracheal tubes should be used 
for these patients.
An infant or child with postextubation stridor usually 
presents with respiratory distress in the postanesthesia 
care unit. Nasal flaring, retractions, an increased respira-
tory rate, audible stridor, and decreased oxygen satura-
tion are common clinical findings.
Treatment of postextubation stridor depends on the 
degree of respiratory distress. Mild symptoms can be 
managed with humidified oxygen and prolonged obser-
vation in the postanesthesia care unit. Severe cases may 
require aerosolized racemic epinephrine and postopera-
tive observation in an intensive care unit. Patients whose 
respiratory distress is severe and not relieved with these 
measures may need to be emergently reintubated with a 
smaller endotracheal tube.
Obstructive Sleep Apnea
Infants and children with obstructive sleep apnea are at 
significant risk for airway obstruction and respiratory dis-
tress in the postoperative period. At baseline, these infants 
and children hypoventilate, resulting in hypercapnia and 
often arterial hypoxemia when they sleep. Residual inhaled 
anesthetics or residual neuromuscular blockade can depress 
airway reflexes, decrease skeletal muscle tone, and reduce 
respiratory drive. Opioids must be carefully titrated both 
intraoperatively and postoperatively, as they can depress 
ventilatory drive and decrease upper airway tone.
Awake, rather than deep, tracheal extubation in patients 
with obstructive sleep apnea is safer. All infants and chil-
dren with obstructive sleep apnea should be monitored 
postoperatively with pulse oximetry, and high-risk patients 
should be monitored in an intensive care unit setting.
Laryngospasm
Infants and children are more prone to laryngospasm than 
older children and adults. Laryngospasm most commonly 
occurs during either inhalational induction of anesthesia 
or emergence from anesthesia, often after extubation or 
removal of an SGA. Most laryngospasm episodes in pedi-
atric patients can be treated successfully with continuous 
positive-pressure ventilation via facemask with 100% oxy-
gen while applying a chin lift and jaw thrust. The positive 
pressure may have to be as high as 50 to 60 cm H2O to 
successfully break the laryngospasm. If positive pressure 
is not successful and the infant or child is desaturating or 
bradycardic, further intervention is necessary. If there is IV 
access, laryngospasm can be treated with 0.6 to 1.0 mg/
kg of IV propofol. If laryngospasm persists, 0.2 to 0.3 mg/
kg of IV rocuronium can be administered. If there is no 
IV access, laryngospasm should be treated with 0.6 to 1.0 
mg/kg of intramuscular rocuronium or 1.5 to 2.0 mg/kg of 
intramuscular succinylcholine.70
Extubation After a Difficult Intubation
Tracheal extubation of an infant or child after a difficult 
intubation should be considered carefully because reintuba-
tion can be more difficult than the initial intubation. These 
patients should be extubated fully awake and after neuro-
muscular blockade is fully reversed. Appropriate equipment 
and personnel for urgent reintubation should be available.
Postoperative factors that can further compromise res-
piratory function must also be considered when extubat-
ing infants or children with difficult airways. For example, 
postoperative pain, especially if there is splinting from 
an abdominal or thoracic incision, may compromise res-
piratory function. Postoperative pain requiring significant 
opioid use will also compromise breathing by decreasing 
respiratory drive. Regional anesthesia can decrease the use 
of opioids and may allow earlier extubation.
Edema of the airway from surgical trauma, position-
ing, or excessive fluid administration can significantly 
affect the ability to extubate infants and children with 
difficult airways and can make emergency reintubation 
more difficult. These patients should remain intubated 
until the edema has resolved. Fiber-optic laryngoscopy 
is an excellent tool for examining the SGA in the intu-
bated infant or child for determining whether there is 
any significant residual airway edema.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The editors and publisher would like to thank Dr. Kerry 
Klinger for contributing to this chapter in the previous 
editions of this work. It has served as the foundation for 
the current chapter.
III
Chapter 16 Airway Management
287
REFERENCES
1.
Apfelbaum JL, Hagberg CA, Con-
nis RT, etal. 2022 American Society 
of Anesthesiologists Practice Guide-
lines for Management of the Dif-
ficult Airway. Anesthesiology. 2021. 
doi:10.1097/ALN.0000000000004002 
Nov 11Epub ahead of print. PMID: 
34762729 Apfelbaum JL, Hagberg CA, 
Caplan RA, etal. Practice guide-
lines for management of the difficult 
airway: an updated report by the 
American Society of Anesthesiolo-
gists Task Force on Management of 
the Difficult Airway. Anesthesiology. 
2013;118(2):251–270.
2.
Cook 
TM, 
MacDougall-Davis 
SR. 
Complications and failure of air-
way management. Br J Anaesth. 
2012;109(suppl1):i68–i85.
3.
Sahin-Yilmaz A, Naclerio RM. Anato-
my and physiology of the upper airway. 
Proc Am Thorac Soc. 2011;8(1):31–39.
4.
Crawley SM, Dalton AJ. Predicting 
the difficult airway. Br J Anaesth. 
2015;15(5):253–257.
5.
Nagappa M, Wong DT, Cozowicz 
C, etal. Is obstructive sleep apnea 
associated with difficult airway? Evi-
dence from a systematic review and 
meta-analysis of prospective and ret-
rospective cohort studies. PLoS One. 
2018;13(10):e0204904.
6.
Cook TM, Woodall N, Frerk C. Fourth 
National Audit Project. Major com-
plications of airway management in 
the UK: Results of the Fourth National 
Audit Project of the Royal College of 
Anaesthetists and the Difficult Air-
way Society. Part 1: Anaesthesia. Br J 
Anaesth. 2011;106(5):617–631.
7.
Kheterpal S, Martin L, Shanks AM, 
etal. Predictors and outcomes of 
impossible mask ventilation: A review 
of 50,000 anesthetics. Anesthesiology. 
2009;110(4):891–897.
8.
Roth D, Pace NL, Lee A, etal. Bedside 
tests for predicting difficult airways: 
An abridged Cochrane diagnostic test 
accuracy systematic review. Anaesthe-
sia. 2019;74(7):915–928.
9.
Baker P. Assessment before air-
way management. Anesthesiol Clin. 
2015;33(2):257–278.
10.
Khan ZH, Mohammadi M, Rasouli MR, 
etal. The diagnostic value of the upper 
lip bite test combined with sterno-
mental distance, thyromental distance, 
and interincisor distance for prediction 
of easy laryngoscopy and intubation: 
A prospective study. Anesth Analg. 
2009;109(3):822–824.
11.
Mallampati SR, Gatt SP, Gugino LD, 
etal. A clinical sign to predict dif-
ficult tracheal intubation: A pro-
spective study. Can Anaesth Soc J. 
1985;32(4):429–434.
12.
Samsoon G, Young J. Difficult tra-
cheal intubation: A retrospective study. 
Anaesthesia. 1987;42(5):487–490.
13.
Khan ZH, Kashfi A, Ebrahimkhani E. A 
comparison of the upper lip bite test (a 
simple new technique) with modified 
Mallampati classification in predicting 
difficulty in endotracheal intubation: 
A prospective blinded study. Anesth 
Analg. 2003;96(2):595–599.
14.
El-Ganzouri AR, McCarthy RJ, Tuman 
KJ, etal. Preoperative airway assess-
ment: Predictive value of a multi-
variate risk index. Anesth Analg. 
1996;82(6):1197–1204.
15.
Bellhouse CP, Dore C. Criteria for 
estimating likelihood of difficulty of 
endotracheal intubation with the Mac-
intosh laryngoscope. Anaesth Intensive 
Care. 1988;16(3):329–337.
16.
Kheterpal S, Healy D, Aziz MF, etal. 
Incidence, predictors, and outcome of 
difficult mask ventilation combined 
with difficult laryngoscopy: A report 
from the Multicenter Perioperative 
Outcomes 
Group. 
Anesthesiology. 
2013;119(6):1360–1369.
17.
Law JA, Broemling N, Cooper RM, 
etal. The difficult airway with recom-
mendations for management—part 2—
the anticipated difficult airway. Can J 
Anesth. 2013;60(11):1119–1138.
18.
Siddiqui N, Yu E, Boulis S, You-Ten KE. 
Ultrasound is superior to palpation in 
identifying the cricothyroid membrane 
in subjects with poorly defined neck 
landmarks: A randomized clinical trial. 
Anesthesiology. 
2018;129(6):1132–
1139.
19.
Kristensen MS, Teoh WH, Rudolph SS. 
Ultrasonographic identification of the 
cricothyroid membrane: Best evidence, 
techniques, and clinical impact. Br J 
Anaesth. 2016;117(Suppl 1):i39–i48.
20.
Law JA, Broemling N, Cooper RM, etal. 
The difficult airway with recommenda-
tions for management—part 1—difficult 
tracheal intubation encountered in an 
unconscious/induced patient. Can J 
Anesth. 2013;60(11):1089–1118.
21.
El-Orbany M, Woehlck HJ. Diffi-
cult mask ventilation. Anesth Analg. 
2009;109(6):1870–1880.
22.
Benumof JL, Dagg R, Benumof R. 
Critical hemoglobin desaturation will 
occur before return to an unpara-
lyzed state following 1 mg/kg intrave-
nous succinylcholine. Anesthesiology. 
1997;87(4):979–982.
23.
Bouroche G, Bourgain JL. Preoxygena-
tion and general anesthesia: A review. 
Minerva Anestesiol. 2015;81(8):910–
920.
24.
Dixon BJ, Dixon JB, Carden JR, etal. 
Preoxygenation is more effective in 
the 25 degrees head-up position than 
in the supine position in severe-
ly obese patients: A randomized 
controlled 
study. 
Anesthesiology. 
2005(102):1110–1115.
25.
Collins JS, Lemmens HJ, Brodsky 
JB, etal. Laryngoscopy and morbid 
obesity: A comparison of the “sniff“ 
and “ramped” positions. Obes Surg. 
2004;14(9):1171–1175.
26.
Futier E, Constantin JM, Pelosi P, etal. 
Noninvasive ventilation and alveolar 
recruitment maneuver improve respira-
tory function during and after intuba-
tion of morbidly obese patients: A 
randomized controlled study. Anesthe-
siology. 2011;114(6):1354–1363.
27.
Hernandez MR, Klock PA Jr, Ovas-
sapian A. Evolution of the extraglottic 
airway: A review of its history, appli-
cations, and practical tips for success. 
Anesth Analg. 2012;114(2):349–368.
28.
Timmermann A. Supraglottic airways 
in difficult airway management: Suc-
cesses, failures, use and misuse. Anaes-
thesia. 2011;66(suppl 2):45–56.
28a. Law JA, Broemling N, Cooper RM, 
etal. The difficult airway with recom-
mendations for management—part 2—
the anticipated difficult airway. Can J 
Anesth. 2013;60(11):1119–1138.
29.
Ramachandran 
SK, 
Mathis 
MR, 
Tremper KK, etal. Predictors and 
clinical outcomes from failed laryn-
geal mask airway unique: A study 
of 15,795 patients. Anesthesiology. 
2012;116(6):1217–1226.
30.
L'Hermite J, Dubout E, Bouvet S, etal. 
Sore throat following three adult supra-
glottic airway devices: A randomised 
controlled trial. Eur J Anaesthesiol. 
2017;34(7):417–424.
31.
Wong DT, Yang JJ, Jagannathan 
N. Brief review: The LMA supreme 
supraglottic airway. Can J Anesth J. 
2012;59(5):483–493.
32.
de Montblanc J, Ruscio L, Mazoit JX. 
Benhamou D. A systematic review and 
meta-analysis of the i-gel(®) vs laryn-
geal mask airway in adults. Anaesthe-
sia. 2014;69(10):1151–1162.
33.
Cormack R, Lehane J. Difficult tracheal 
intubation in obstetrics. Anaesthesia. 
1984;39(11):1105–1111.
34.
Smith KJ, Dobranowski J, Yip G, etal. 
Cricoid pressure displaces the esopha-
gus: An observational study using 
magnetic resonance imaging. Anesthe-
siology. 2003;99(1):60–64.
35.
Salem MR, Khorasani A, Zeidan A, 
Crystal GJ. Cricoid pressure controver-
sies: Narrative review. Anesthesiology. 
2017;126(4):738–752.
36.
Joffe AM, Aziz MF, Posner KL, Duggan 
LV, Mincer SL, Domino KB. Manage-
ment of difficult tracheal intubation: A 
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
288
closed claims analysis. Anesthesiology. 
2019;131(4):818–829.
37.
Patel A, Nouraei SA. Transnasal 
Humidified Rapid-Insufflation Venti-
latory Exchange (THRIVE): A physi-
ological method of increasing apnoea 
time in patients with difficult airways. 
Anaesthesia. 2015;70(3):323–329.
38.
Griesdale DE, Liu D, McKinney J, Choi 
PT. Glidescope® video-laryngoscopy 
versus direct laryngoscopy for endotra-
cheal intubation: A systematic review 
and meta-analysis. Can J Anesth. 
2012;59(1):41–52.
39.
Aziz MF, Dillman D, Fu R, Brambrink 
AM. Comparative effectiveness of the 
C-MAC video laryngoscope versus 
direct laryngoscopy in the setting of 
the predicted difficult airway. Anesthe-
siology. 2012;116(3):629–636.
40.
Paolini J, Donati F, Drolet P. Review 
article: Video-laryngoscopy: Another 
tool for difficult intubation or a new 
paradigm in airway management? Can 
J Anesth. 2013;60(2):184–191.
41.
De Jong A, Pardo E, Rolle A, Bodin-
Lario S, Pouzeratte Y, Jaber S. Airway 
management for COVID-19: A move 
towards universal videolaryngoscope? 
Lancet Respir Med. 2020;8(6):555.
42.
Zeidan A, Bamadhaj M, Al-Faraidy M, 
Ali M. Videolaryngoscopy intubation 
in patients with COVID-19: How to 
minimize risk of aerosolization? Anes-
thesiology. 2020;133:481–483.
43.
Rosenstock CV, Thogersen B, Afshari 
A, etal. Awake fiberoptic or awake 
video laryngoscopic tracheal intu-
bation in patients with anticipated 
difficult airway management: A ran-
domized clinical trial. Anesthesiology. 
2012;116(6):1210–1216.
44.
Serocki G, Neumann T, Scharf E, 
etal. Indirect videolaryngoscopy with 
C-MAC D-blade and GlideScope: A 
randomized, 
controlled 
compari-
son in patients with suspected dif-
ficult airways. Minerva Anestesiol. 
2013;79(2):121–129.
45.
Aziz MF, Healy D, Kheterpal S, etal. 
Routine clinical practice effectiveness 
of the Glidescope in difficult airway 
management: An analysis of 2,004 
Glidescope intubations, complications, 
and failures from two institutions. 
Anesthesiology. 2011;114(1):34–41.
46.
Hoshijima H, Mihara T, Maruyama 
K, etal. C-MAC videolaryngoscope 
versus Macintosh laryngoscope for tra-
cheal intubation: A systematic review 
and meta-analysis with trial sequential 
analysis. J Clin Anesth. 2018;49:53–62.
47.
Duggan LV, Law JA, Murphy MF. Brief 
review: Supplementing oxygen through 
an airway exchange catheter: Efficacy, 
complications, and recommendations. 
Can J Anesth. 2011;58(6):560–568.
48.
Simmons ST, Schleich AR. Airway 
regional anesthesia for awake fiberop-
tic intubation. Reg Anesth Pain Med. 
2002;27(2):180–192.
49.
Webb A, Kolawole H, Leong S, 
Loughnan TE, Crofts T, Bowden C. 
Comparison of the Bonfils and Levitan 
optical stylets for tracheal intubation: 
A clinical study. Anaesth Intensive 
Care. 2011;39(6):1093–1097.
50.
Thong SY, Wong TG. Clinical uses 
of the Bonfils Retromolar Intubation 
Fiberscope: A review. Anesth Analg. 
2012;115(4):855–866.
51.
Kristensen MS, Teoh WH, Baker PA. 
Percutaneous 
emergency 
airway 
access; prevention, preparation, tech-
nique and training. Br J Anaesth. 
2015;114(3):357–361.
52.
Hamaekers A, Henderson J. Equipment 
and strategies for emergency tracheal 
access in the adult patient. Anaesthe-
sia. 2011;66(suppl 2):65–80.
53.
Mitchell V, Dravid R, Patel A, etal. Dif-
ficult airway society guidelines for the 
management of tracheal extubation. 
Anaesthesia. 2012;67(3):318–340.
54.
Cavallone LF, Vannucci A. Review arti-
cle: Extubation of the difficult airway 
and extubation failure. Anesth Analg. 
2013;116(2):368–383.
55.
Hagberg C, Georgi R, Krier C. Complica-
tions of managing the airway. Best Pract 
Res Clin Anaesthesiol. 2005;19(4):641–
659.
56.
Warner ME, Benenfeld SM, Warner MA, 
etal. Perianesthetic dental injuries: 
Frequency, outcomes, and risk factors. 
Anesthesiology. 1999;90(5):1302–1305.
57.
Kain ZN, Mayes LC, Caldwell-Andrews 
AA, Karas DE, McClain BC. Preop-
erative anxiety, postoperative pain, and 
behavioral recovery in young chil-
dren undergoing surgery. Pediatrics. 
2006;118(2):651–658.
58.
Kain ZN, Caldwell-Andrews AA, 
Maranets I, etal. Preoperative anxiety 
and emergence delirium and postop-
erative maladaptive behaviors. Anesth 
Analg. 2004;99(6):1648–1654.
59.
Wong JG, Heaney M, Chambers NA, 
Erb TO, von Ungern-Sternberg BS. 
Impact of laryngeal mask airway cuff 
pressures on the incidence of sore 
throat in children. Paediatr Anaesth. 
2009;19(5):464–469.
60.
Weiss M, Dullenkopf A, Fischer JE, 
etal. European Paediatric Endotracheal 
Intubation Study Group. Prospective 
randomized controlled multi-centre 
trial of cuffed or uncuffed endotracheal 
tubes in small children. Br J Anaesth. 
2009;103(6):867–873.
61.
Liu J, Zhang X, Gong W, etal. Correla-
tions between controlled endotracheal 
tube cuff pressure and postprocedural 
complications: A multicenter study. 
Anesth Analg. 2010;111(5):1133–1137.
62.
Sathyamoorthy M, Lerman J, Laksh-
minrusimha S, Feldman D. Inspira-
tory stridor after tracheal intubation 
with a MicroCuff(R) tracheal tube in 
three young infants. Anesthesiology. 
2013;118(3):748–750.
63.
Smereka J, Madziala M, Dunder D, 
Makomaska-Szaroszyk E, Szarpak L. 
Comparison of Miller laryngoscope 
and UEScope videolaryngoscope for 
endotracheal intubation in four pedi-
atric airway scenarios: A randomized, 
crossover simulation trial. Eur J Pedi-
atr. 2019;178(6):937–945.
64.
Park R, Peyton JM, Fiadjoe JE, etal. 
PeDI Collaborative Investigators; PeDI 
Collaborative Investigators. The effica-
cy of GlideScope® videolaryngoscopy 
compared with direct laryngoscopy in 
children who are difficult to intubate: 
An analysis from the paediatric dif-
ficult intubation registry. Br J Anaesth. 
2017 Nov 1;119(5):984–992.
65.
Krishna SG, Bryant JF, Tobias JD. Man-
agement of the difficult airway in the 
pediatric patient. J Pediatr Intensive 
Care. 2018;7(3):115–125.
66.
Weiss M, Engelhardt T. Proposal for the 
management of the unexpected diffi-
cult pediatric airway. Paediatr Anaesth. 
2010;20(5):454–464.
67.
Koo CH, Lee SY, Chung SH, Ryu JH. 
Deep vs. awake extubation and LMA 
removal in terms of airway complica-
tions in pediatric patients undergoing 
anesthesia: A systemic review and 
meta-analysis. J Clin Med. 2018 Oct 
14;7(10):353.
68.
Von Ungern-Sternberg BS, Davies K, 
Hegarty M, Erb TO, Habre W. The 
effect of deep vs. awake extubation on 
respiratory complications in high-risk 
children undergoing adenotonsillecto-
my: A randomised controlled trial. Eur 
J Anaesthesiol. 2013;30(9):529–536.
69.
Baijal RG, Bidani SA, Minard CG, 
Watcha MF. Perioperative respiratory 
complications following awake and 
deep extubation in children under-
going adenotonsillectomy. Paediatr 
Anaesth. 2015;25(4):392–399.
70.
Orliaguet GA, Gall O, Savoldelli GL, 
Couloigner V. Case scenario: Peri-
anesthetic management of laryngo-
spasm in children. Anesthesiology. 
2012;116(2):458–471.
289
PRINCIPLES
Spinal, epidural, and caudal blocks are collectively referred 
to as central neuraxial blocks. Significant procedural, 
physiological, and pharmacological differences exist 
between the techniques, but all blocks result in some com-
bination of sympathetic, sensory, and motor blockade. Spi-
nal anesthesia requires a small amount of drug to produce 
rapid, profound, reproducible, but finite neuraxial block-
ade. In contrast, epidural anesthesia typically progresses 
more slowly, is commonly prolonged using a catheter, and 
requires a comparatively larger volume of local anesthetic, 
which may be associated with systemic side effects and 
complications unknown to spinal anesthesia. Combined spi-
nal and epidural techniques blur some of these differences 
but add flexibility to clinical care.
PRINCIPLES
PRACTICE
EVIDENCE
ANATOMY
Spinal Nerves
Blood Supply
Anatomic Variations
MECHANISM OF ACTION
Drug Uptake and Distribution
Drug Elimination
PHYSIOLOGIC EFFECTS
Cardiovascular
Central Nervous System
Respiratory
Gastrointestinal
Renal
INDICATIONS
Neuraxial Anesthesia
Neuraxial Analgesia
CONTRAINDICATIONS
Absolute
Relative
SPINAL ANESTHESIA
Factors Affecting Block Height
Duration of the Block
Pharmacology
Technique
Monitoring of the Block
EPIDURAL ANESTHESIA
Factors Affecting Epidural Block Height
Pharmacology
Technique
COMBINED SPINAL-EPIDURAL ANESTHESIA
Technique
SPINAL, EPIDURAL, AND 
CAUDAL ANESTHESIA
Alan J.R. Macfarlane, David W. Hewson, 
Richard Brull
17
1The editors and publisher would like to thank Drs. Kenneth 
Drasner, Merlin D. Larson, and Vincent Chan for contributing 
to this chapter in previous editions of this work. It has served as 
the foundation for the current chapter.
CAUDAL ANESTHESIA
Pharmacology
Technique
COMPLICATIONS
Neurological
Cardiovascular
Respiratory
Infection
Wrong-Route Drug Delivery
Backache
Nausea and Vomiting
Urinary Retention
Pruritus
Shivering
Complications Unique to Epidural Anesthesia
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
290
EVIDENCE
The impact of neuraxial anesthesia and analgesia on 
perioperative morbidity and mortality is a challenging 
and ongoing matter of investigation. In brief, when com-
pared with systemic opioid analgesia, epidural analgesia 
is superior and improves respiratory outcomes in adults 
undergoing noncardiac surgery.1 However, recent evidence 
suggests cardiovascular complications such as myocardial 
infarction may be increased when epidural analgesia is 
combined with general anesthesia.2 Overall, all outcome 
benefits appear to be greatest when neuraxial anesthesia is 
used alone rather than combined with general anesthesia.2
ANATOMY
The spinal cord is continuous with the medulla oblongata 
proximally and terminates distally in the conus medullaris 
as the filum terminale (fibrous extension) and cauda equina 
(neural extension) (Fig. 17.1). This distal termination varies 
from L3 in infants to the lower border of L1 in adults.
The spinal cord lies within the bony vertebral canal 
and is surrounded by three membranes: from innermost 
to outermost, the pia mater, the arachnoid mater, and the 
dura mater (Fig. 17.2). The pia mater is a highly vascular 
PRACTICE
Central neuraxial blocks are widely used in surgery, 
obstetrics, acute postoperative pain management, and the 
field of chronic pain. A single-injection spinal or epidural 
is commonly used to provide anesthesia for surgery to 
the lower abdomen, pelvic organs (e.g., prostate), and 
lower limbs, as well as for cesarean deliveries. Continu-
ous catheter-based epidural infusions are most often used 
for obstetric labor analgesia and to provide postoperative 
pain relief after major thoracoabdominal or lower limb 
surgery. When epidural analgesia is used as a component 
of enhanced recovery after surgery protocols, this must 
be balanced against possible motor block and a reduc-
tion in mobility. Caudal blocks are mostly performed for 
surgical anesthesia and analgesia in children (also see 
Chapter 34) and for therapeutic analgesia in adults with 
chronic pain (also see Chapter 44). Indwelling long-term 
spinal catheters may be inserted for chronic malignant and 
nonmalignant pain.
Dura mater
Dura mater (cut)
Arachnoid
Dorsal root
Pia mater (overlying
surface of spinal cord)
L2
L1
T12
T11
T10
T9
T8
Conus medullaris
Dorsal root (spinal)
ganglion
Cauda equina
Filum terminale internum
Ventral root
Fig. 17.1 Terminal spinal cord and cauda equina. (From 
Bridenbaugh PO, Greene NM, Brull SJ. Spinal [subarachnoid] 
blockade. In Cousins MJ, Bridenbaugh PO, eds. Neural Blockade 
in Clinical Anesthesia and Management of Pain. Philadelphia: 
Lippincott-Raven; 1998:203–242.)
Pia mater
Spinal nerve
Arachnoid
Dura mater
Epidural fat
Interspinous
ligament
Spinous
process
Supraspinous
ligament
Ligamentum
flavum
Aorta
Lumbar
artery
Spinal cord
Intervertebral
disk
Transverse
process
Fig. 17.2 The spine in an oblique view. (From Afton-Bird G. 
Atlas of regional anesthesia. In Miller RD, ed. Miller’s Anesthesia. 
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2005.)
III
Chapter 17 Spinal, Epidural, and Caudal Anesthesia
291
The ligamentum flavum (Latin for “yellow ligament”) 
also extends from the foramen magnum to the sacral 
hiatus and is composed of right and left ligamenta flava, 
which join to form an acute midline angle (see Fig. 17.2).3
At some vertebral levels (particularly in the cervical and 
high thoracic spine), midline gaps in the continuity of the 
ligamentum flavum may exist.4 Ligament thickness, dis-
tance from the ligament to the dura, and skin-to-dura dis-
tance also show significant interindividual variability. The 
vertebral canal is triangular and largest in cross-sectional 
area at the lumbar levels, whereas it is circular and small-
est in area at the thoracic levels. Immediately posterior to 
the ligamentum flavum are either the lamina of vertebral 
bodies or the interspinous ligaments (which connect the 
spinous processes). Finally there is the supraspinous liga-
ment, which extends from the seventh cervical vertebra to 
the sacrum and attaches to the vertebral spinous processes 
(see Fig. 17.2).
There are 7 cervical, 12 thoracic, and 5 lumbar 
vertebrae and a sacrum (Fig. 17.3). The vertebral arch, 
spinous process, pedicles, and laminae form the posterior 
elements of the vertebra, and the vertebral body forms 
the anterior element (Fig. 17.4). The vertebrae are joined 
anteriorly by fibrocartilaginous joints with central discs 
containing the nucleus pulposus and posteriorly by the 
zygapophyseal (facet) joints. Thoracic spinous processes 
are angulated more steeply caudad as opposed to the 
almost horizontal angulation of the lumbar spinous 
processes. These differences are clinically important for 
needle insertion and advancement (Fig. 17.5).
membrane that closely invests the spinal cord and brain. 
The arachnoid mater is a delicate, nonvascular membrane 
and is the principal barrier to drugs crossing into (and 
out of) the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). The dura mater is 
a tough fibroelastic membrane. CSF resides in the suba-
rachnoid (or intrathecal) space between the pia mater and 
the arachnoid mater.
Surrounding the dura from the foramen magnum to the 
sacral hiatus is the epidural space. The epidural space is 
bounded anteriorly by the posterior longitudinal ligament, 
laterally by the pedicles and intervertebral foramina, and 
posteriorly by the ligamentum flavum. Contents include 
nerve roots, fat, areolar tissue, lymphatics, and blood vessels.
Cervical
Lumbar
Sacral
Coccyx
Thoracic
Fig. 17.3 The vertebral column from a lateral view exhibits four 
curvatures. (From Covino BG, Scott DB, Lambert DH. Handbook 
of Spinal Anaesthesia and Analgesia. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 
1994:12–24.)
Spinous process
Transverse
process
Lamina
Superior articular
process
Pedicle
Vertebral
foramen
(spinal canal)
Vertebral
body
Fig. 17.4 Typical thoracic vertebra. (From Covino BG, Scott DB, 
Lambert DH. Handbook of Spinal Anaesthesia and Analgesia. 
Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1994.)
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
292
T6
T7
L2
L3
A    
B
C
90°
40°
Fig. 17.5 Lumbar and thoracic epidural technique. The cephalad 
(acute) angle of needle insertion during thoracic epidural 
cannulation may provide a slightly longer distance of “needle 
travel” before entering the epidural space (A). In contrast, 
during lumbar epidural cannulation (B) the distance traveled is 
modified by a more perpendicular angle of needle insertion (C). 
(From Brull R, Macfarlane AJR, Chan VWS. Spinal, epidural and 
caudal anesthesia. In Miller RD, Cohen NH, Eriksson LI, et al, 
eds. Miller's Anesthesia. 8th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders Elsevier; 
2015:Fig. 56.9.)
Ventral ramus
Dorsal ramus
Ventral root
Dura mater
Arachnoid
Pia mater
Spinal nerve
Dorsal root
Dorsal roots
Ventral roots
Dorsal root
ganglion
Fig. 17.6 The spinal cord and nerve roots. (From Covino BG, Scott DB, Lambert DH. Handbook of Spinal 
Anaesthesia and Analgesia. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1994:19.)
The sacral canal contains the terminal portion of the 
dural sac, which typically ends at S2 in adults and lower 
in children. The sacral canal also contains a venous plexus.
Spinal Nerves
Dorsal (afferent) and ventral (efferent) nerve roots merge 
distal to the dorsal root ganglion to form spinal nerves 
(Fig. 17.6). There are 31 pairs of spinal nerves (8 cervi-
cal, 12 thoracic, 5 lumbar, 5 sacral, and 1 coccygeal). 
The nerves pass through the intervertebral foramen, 
ensheathed by the dura, arachnoid, and pia, which, respec-
tively, become the epineurium, the perineurium, and the 
endoneurium. Preganglionic sympathetic fibers originate 
in the intermediolateral gray columns between T1 and L2 
and pass via the ventral nerve root to the paravertebral 
sympathetic ganglia and more distant plexuses (Fig. 17.7).
Blood Supply
Two posterior spinal arteries supply the posterior one-
third of the spinal cord, whereas the anterior two-thirds 
of the spinal cord are supplied by a single anterior spinal 
artery (Fig. 17.8). One of the largest anastomotic feeder 
arteries to the anterior system is the artery of Adamkie-
wicz, which arises from the aorta and enters an interver-
tebral foramen between T7 and L4 on the left. Infarction 
in the territory of the anterior spinal artery leads to 
anterior spinal artery syndrome, classically manifesting 
as motor weakness and loss of pain and temperature 
sensation below the affected spinal level, but with reten-
tion of proprioception and vibratory sense because of the 
III
Chapter 17 Spinal, Epidural, and Caudal Anesthesia
293
time. Similarly, the epidural space is more segmented 
and less uniform than previously believed, which may be 
a factor in the unpredictability of drug spread. Finally, 
contents of the epidural space also vary and can influ-
ence the volume of local anesthetic required.
MECHANISM OF ACTION
Administration of local anesthetics to the neuraxis 
disrupts nerve transmission within the spinal cord, the 
spinal nerve roots, and the dorsal root ganglia. Nerves 
in the subarachnoid space are easily anesthetized, even 
with a small dose of local anesthetic, compared with the 
extradural nerves, which are often ensheathed by dura 
preserved blood supply to the dorsal columns. Ischemia 
and infarction may result from profound systemic hypo-
tension, thrombosis or emboli, vasculopathy, trauma, or 
as a consequence of surgery to the aorta.
Longitudinal anterior and posterior spinal veins com-
municate with segmental anterior and posterior radicular 
veins before draining into the internal vertebral venous 
plexus in the medial and lateral components of the epi-
dural space. These drain into the azygous system.
Anatomic Variations
Variations exist in size and structure of the spinal nerve 
roots and CSF volume, both of which may contribute to 
variability in spinal block quality, height, and regression 
Thoracolumbar spinal cord
(T1-L2)
Prevertebral (collateral) ganglion
(e.g., celiac ganglion)
Dorsal root
Dorsal ramus
Paravertebral
sympathetic
ganglion
Ventral
ramus
Gray ramus
communicans
White ramus
communicans
Ventral root
Splanchnic nerve
Sympathetic chain
Sympathetic efferents
Visceral afferents
Added neuron
Fig. 17.7 Cell bodies in the thoracolumbar portion of the spinal cord (T1–L2) give rise to the peripheral 
sympathetic nervous system. Preganglionic efferent fibers travel in the ventral root and then via the white 
ramus communicans to paravertebral sympathetic ganglia or more distant sites such as the celiac ganglion. 
Afferent fibers travel via the white ramus communicans to join somatic nerves, which pass through the dorsal 
root to the spinal cord.
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
294
the most resistant to local anesthetic blockade. Clinical 
onset of spinal blockade usually follows this pattern, 
with block regression occurring in the reverse order.5
Maximum block height varies according to each sensory 
modality, termed differential sensory block. Therefore 
cold sensation (also an approximate level of sympathetic 
blockade) is most cephalad and is, on average, one to 
two spinal segments higher than the level of pinprick 
anesthesia, which in turn is one to two segments higher 
than anesthesia to touch.
Drug Uptake and Distribution
Local anesthetic injected directly into the CSF diffuses 
from areas of high concentration toward other segments 
of the spinal cord.6 Local anesthetic diffuses through the 
pia mater and penetrates through the spaces of Virchow-
Robin (extensions of the subarachnoid space accompany-
ing the blood vessels that invaginate the spinal cord from 
the pia mater) to reach the deeper dorsal root ganglia. 
A portion of the subarachnoid drug diffuses outward to 
enter the epidural space, and some is taken up by the 
blood vessels of the pia and dura maters.
Drug penetration and uptake are directly proportion-
ate to the drug mass, CSF drug concentration, contact 
surface area, lipid content (high in spinal cord and 
myelinated nerves), and local tissue vascular supply, but 
inversely related to nerve root cross-sectional area.
Epidural drug uptake and distribution are more 
complex. Some of the injected local anesthetic (<20%) 
traverses the dura into the CSF7 and some is absorbed 
into the plasma compartment, but the majority spreads 
by bulk flow longitudinally and circumferentially within 
the epidural space and is taken up by epidural fat. 
Factors that may enhance the distribution of local anes-
thetic within the epidural space are small epidural space 
cross-sectional area (resulting in greater spread in the 
thoracic levels), decreased epidural space compliance, 
decreased epidural fat content, decreased local anesthetic 
leakage through the intervertebral foramina (e.g., in the 
elderly and those with spinal stenosis), and increased 
epidural venous engorgement (e.g., during pregnancy).8
The direction of drug spread also varies with the verte-
bral level. Spread is mostly cephalad in the lumbar and 
low thoracic region, but caudad after a high thoracic 
injection.8
Drug Elimination
No local anesthetic drug metabolism takes place in the 
CSF. Regression of neural blockade arises primarily from 
a decline in CSF and/or epidural drug concentration 
resulting from vascular absorption. Local anesthetics 
with higher lipid solubility (e.g., bupivacaine) form a 
depot within epidural fat, thereby slowing this process.
mater (the “dural sleeve”). The speed of neural blockade 
depends on the size, surface area, and degree of myelina-
tion of the nerve fibers exposed to the local anesthetic. 
Small preganglionic sympathetic fibers (B fibers, 1 to 
3 μm, moderately myelinated) are most sensitive to local 
anesthetic blockade. Unmyelinated polymodal (“slow” 
pain) C fibers (0.3 to 1 μm) are blocked more readily 
than the myelinated A-delta pinprick sensation fibers 
(1 to 4 μm) responsible for cold sensation, which in 
turn are blocked more readily than heavily myelinated 
A-beta fibers (5 to 12 μm) conducting touch sensation. 
Large myelinated A-alpha motor fibers (12 to 20 μm) are 
Vertebral artery
Deep cervical artery
Superior intercostal artery
Intercostal arteries
Anterior and
posterior spinal
arteries
Anterior and
posterior radicular
arteries
Aorta
Aorta
Lumbar arteries
Fig. 17.8 Arterial blood supply to the spinal cord. (Modified 
from Covino BG, Scott DB, Lambert DH. Handbook of Spinal 
Anaesthesia and Analgesia. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1994:24.)
III
Chapter 17 Spinal, Epidural, and Caudal Anesthesia
295
Central Nervous System
Spinal anesthesia–induced hypotension may decrease 
cerebral blood flow (CBF) in older patients and those 
with preexisting hypertension. However, in studies that 
demonstrated a decrease in cerebral perfusion12 there 
was no postoperative change in cognitive function in any 
of the patients. Nevertheless avoiding hypotension would 
seem prudent. Spinal anesthesia has been shown to result 
in significant patient sedation in the absence of systemic 
sedatives caused by decreased afferent stimulation of the 
reticular activating system.13 Intravenous sedative and 
hypnotic drug doses should be reduced accordingly in the 
context of concomitant neuraxial blockade.
Respiratory
Alterations in pulmonary variables during lumbar and 
low thoracic neuraxial block are usually of little clinical 
importance. A decrease in vital capacity follows a reduc-
tion in expiratory reserve volume related to paralysis of 
the abdominal muscles necessary for forced exhalation 
and cough rather than a decrease in phrenic or diaphrag-
matic function. These changes are more marked in obese 
patients and those with severe respiratory disease.14 In 
the postoperative setting of thoracoabdominal surgery 
the analgesic benefits of neuraxial techniques render 
improvements in respiratory function that outweigh the 
modest changes described earlier arising from the block-
ade itself.14
Gastrointestinal
Neuraxial blockade from T5 to L1 disrupts splanchnic sym-
pathetic innervation to the gastrointestinal tract, result-
ing in increased colonic mucosal blood flow and motility 
because of unopposed parasympathetic (vagal) activity. 
These local effects may be opposed by the direct arterial 
blood pressure–dependent effect on intestinal perfu-
sion caused by thoracic epidural-induced hypotension.15
Correction of systemic hypotension by vasopressor 
therapy (e.g., norepinephrine) reverses impaired colonic 
perfusion. The impact of neuraxial analgesia on clinically 
relevant gastrointestinal outcomes such as anastomotic 
healing and postoperative ileus remains an area of ongo-
ing research and some controversy.
Renal
Despite a predictable decrease in renal blood flow accom-
panying neuraxial blockade, this decrease is of little 
physiologic importance. The belief that neuraxial blocks 
frequently cause urinary retention is questionable (see 
“Complications”).
PHYSIOLOGIC EFFECTS
Neuraxial anesthesia causes blockade of the sympathetic 
and somatic (sensory and motor) nervous systems. The 
physiologic effects of epidural anesthesia are similar to 
those of spinal anesthesia, with the exception that local 
anesthetic blood levels reach concentrations sufficient 
enough to produce systemic effects on their own.
Cardiovascular
Blockade of the peripheral (T1–L2) and cardiac (T1–T4) 
sympathetic fibers reduces systemic vascular resistance 
(SVR) and, to a much lesser extent, cardiac output, com-
monly resulting in arterial hypotension after spinal or 
epidural blockade. The degree to which arterial blood 
pressure decreases with either spinal or epidural tech-
nique depends on multiple factors.
Systemic Vascular Resistance
The vasodilatory changes depend on both baseline sym-
pathetic tone (i.e., higher baseline sympathetic nervous 
system activity in older patients equates to a greater 
SVR reduction and consequent hypotension compared 
with younger patients)9 and the extent of the sympathec-
tomy (i.e., the height of the block). The sympathectomy 
typically extends two to six dermatomes cephalad to the 
sensory block level with spinal anesthesia but the same 
level with epidural anesthesia.10
Cardiac Output
Cardiac output is the product of heart rate and stroke 
volume, and it is generally either maintained or slightly 
decreased during the onset of spinal anesthesia. Venous 
and arterial vasodilation reduces preload (venous return) 
and afterload (SVR), respectively. Because 75% of the 
total blood volume resides in the venous system, the 
venodilation effect predominates and stroke volume is 
reduced. Despite a compensatory baroreceptor-mediated 
sympathetic response (vasoconstriction and increased 
heart rate) above the level of blockade, the reduction in 
venous return and right atrial filling reduce signal output 
from intrinsic atrial and great vein chronotropic stretch 
receptors,10 thereby increasing parasympathetic activity. 
The two opposing responses result in a minimal change 
in heart rate unless neuraxial anesthesia is extended to 
the T1 level when blockade of the cardioaccelerator fib-
ers (in addition to a marked reduction in venous return) 
may result in severe bradycardia and even asystole. The 
Bezold-Jarisch reflex can also cause profound brady-
cardia and circulatory collapse after spinal anesthesia, 
especially in the presence of hypovolemia, when a small 
end-systolic left ventricular volume may trigger a mech-
anoreceptor-mediated bradycardia.11
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
296
increase susceptibility to injury after neuraxial anesthesia 
or analgesia (the double-crush phenomenon), the risk–
benefit ratio of performing neuraxial techniques should 
be considered carefully in patients with preexisting cen-
tral or peripheral neurologic diseases. Chronic low back 
pain without neurologic deficit is not a contraindication 
to neuraxial blockade.
Spinal Stenosis
There is an association between the presence of spinal 
stenosis and nerve injury after neuraxial techniques.24
When suspected nerve injury occurs in patients with 
underlying spinal stenosis, the relative causative con-
tributions of neuraxial needling, local anesthetic mald-
istribution, surgical positioning, and natural history 
of cord or nerve root impingement from the stenosis 
itself are often unclear. Asymptomatic and undiagnosed 
spinal stenosis is relatively common in the elderly, and 
the vast majority undergo neuraxial blockade without 
incident.
Previous Spine Surgery
Previous spine surgery does not predispose patients to an 
increased risk of neurologic complications.24 However, in 
the presence of scar tissue, adhesions, hardware, or bone 
grafts, needle access to the CSF or epidural space and 
epidural catheter insertion may be challenging or impos-
sible. In addition, the resultant spread of local anesthetic 
in the CSF or epidural space in particular can be unpre-
dictable and incomplete.
Multiple Sclerosis
Because of the demyelinating pathology, patients with 
multiple sclerosis (MS) may be more sensitive to neu-
raxial local anesthetics and exhibit a prolonged motor 
and sensory blockade. There is no conclusive evidence 
that neuraxial blockade itself worsens MS symptoms, and 
neuraxial techniques are not absolutely contraindicated 
in this patient group.25
Spina Bifida
Depending on the severity of the neural tube defect, the 
potential for traumatic needle injury to the spinal cord 
may be increased. The spread of local anesthetic in the 
CSF and epidural space (if present) can also be markedly 
variable. In any of these circumstances a careful evalu-
ation of neurologic status must first be undertaken and 
noted along with documentation of the discussion of the 
risks and benefits.
Cardiac (Also See Chapter 26)
Aortic Stenosis or Fixed Cardiac Output
The potential rapid and significant reduction in SVR 
after spinal anesthesia risks dangerous decreases in 
coronary perfusion in afterload-dependent patients.26
In the presence of aortic stenosis, neuraxial anesthesia 
INDICATIONS
Neuraxial Anesthesia
Single-injection spinal anesthesia is useful for procedures 
of known duration involving the lower limbs, perineum, 
pelvis, or lower abdomen. It is especially useful when 
patients wish to remain conscious or when one or more 
comorbid conditions, such as severe respiratory disease 
or an airway that may be difficult to manage, increases 
the risks of general anesthesia. Epidural anesthesia allows 
for more prolonged surgical anesthesia by catheter-based 
local anesthetic delivery. Indwelling catheter-based spi-
nal anesthesia is less conventional, but may be useful 
when insertion of an epidural catheter is challenging or 
in the setting of severe cardiac disease when the reliabil-
ity of a single-shot spinal anesthetic must be combined 
with the hemodynamic stability of low-dose incremental 
adminstration.
Neuraxial Analgesia
Spinal or epidural local anesthetics, along with other addi-
tives such as opioids, provide excellent-quality, long-
lasting intraoperative and postoperative analgesia for 
labor and delivery16 (also see Chapter 33), hip17 or knee 
replacement18 (also see Chapter 32), laparotomy,19 thora-
cotomy (also see Chapter 27),20 and even after cardiac 
surgery (also see Chapter 26).21 Neuraxial local anesthetics 
may also be used in the management of chronic pain 
(also see Chapter 44).
CONTRAINDICATIONS
Absolute
Absolute contraindications to neuraxial blockade are 
patient refusal, localized infection at the needle insertion 
site and allergy to any of the drugs to be administered. A 
patient's inability to maintain stillness during needle punc-
ture (which could expose neural structures to traumatic 
injury),22 as well as increased intracranial pressure (which 
may predispose to brainstem herniation)23 are also conside-
red strong contraindications to a neuraxial technique.
Relative
Relative contraindications can be approached by system 
and must be weighed against the potential benefits of 
neuraxial blockade.
Neurologic
Myelopathy or Peripheral Neuropathy
Although preexisting central or peripheral neurologic 
deficit has never been definitively demonstrated to 
III
Chapter 17 Spinal, Epidural, and Caudal Anesthesia
297
must be considered on an individual patient basis in the 
context of disease severity, left ventricular function, 
and case urgency. Invasive continuous blood pressure 
monitoring, concurrent vasopressor infusion, and/or 
a catheter-based neuraxial anesthetic with repeated 
small doses of local anesthetic facilitate hemodynamic 
control.
Hypovolemia
An exaggerated hypotensive response because of vaso-
dilatory effects may occur, and euvolemia should be tar-
geted before and during neuraxial anesthesia to minimize 
relative hypotension.
Hematologic
Thromboprophylaxis and Antithrombotic and 
Thrombolytic Therapy
Catastrophic cases of epidural (or subdural) hematoma 
and permanent paralysis after neuraxial techniques in 
patients on various anticoagulant medications, including 
low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH), have occurred. 
The American Society of Regional Anesthesia and 
Pain Medicine (ASRA) guidelines regarding neuraxial 
techniques (including catheter removal) in patients 
receiving antiplatelet, heparin, anti–factor Xa, and 
direct oral anticoagulation agents should be consulted 
before practitioners undertake a neuraxial technique.27
Herbal medications can have an impact on coagulation 
pathways, and the time from herbal discontinuation to 
normal hemostasis is 24 hours for ginseng, 36 hours 
for ginkgo, and 7 days for garlic.27 It is not currently 
deemed necessary to discontinue these medications 
before surgery or anesthesia, although they may have a 
confounding impact if other anticoagulant medications 
are administered.
Patients who have received therapeutic fibrinolytic 
or thrombolytic therapy within the preceding 48 hours 
should not undergo spinal or epidural techniques because 
of the risk of epidural hematoma.
Inherited Coagulopathy
Hemorrhagic complications after neuraxial techniques in 
patients with known hemophilia, von Willebrand disease, 
or idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura are infrequent 
when factor levels are more than 0.5 IU/mL for factor 
VIII, von Willebrand factor, and ristocetin cofactor activ-
ity, or when the platelet count is more than 50 × 109/L 
before block performance. The minimum safe factor 
levels and platelet count for neuraxial blockade remain 
undefined in both the obstetric and general populations, 
and an individual risk–benefit assessment is required in 
all cases.28
Infection
Concerns exist regarding iatrogenic seeding of active sys-
temic infection to the neuraxis, particularly if a catheter 
is left in situ. This concern, along with the risk of pro-
found hypotension secondary to vasodilation from sym-
pathectomy, may be sufficient reason to avoid neuraxial 
techniques in patients with significant fever, evidence of 
ongoing bacteremia, or septic shock. Patients with evi-
dence of systemic infection may safely undergo neuraxial 
anesthesia once a response to antibiotic therapy has been 
demonstrated.29
SPINAL ANESTHESIA
Factors Affecting Block Height
The dermatomal levels required for various surgical proce-
dures are outlined in Fig. 17.9. Intraabdominal structures 
such as the peritoneum (T4), bladder (T10), and uterus 
(T10) have a spinal segment innervation more cephalad 
than the corresponding skin incision used to operate on 
these structures. Drug, patient, and procedural factors can 
all affect the distribution of local anesthetic spread within 
the intrathecal space,30 but not all are controllable by the 
anesthesia provider, leading to significant interpatient var-
iability (Table 17.1). Ultimately baricity, dose, and patient 
positioning are most important.
Drug Factors
Baricity
Baricity is the ratio of the density of a local anesthetic 
solution to the density of CSF. It is conventionally 
defined at 37°C because density varies inversely with 
temperature. Plain bupivacaine 0.5%, for example, may 
be isobaric at 24°C but is slightly hypobaric at 37°C. 
The density of CSF is 1.00059 g/mL. Local anesthetic 
solutions that have the same density as CSF are termed 
isobaric, those that have a higher density than CSF are 
termed hyperbaric, and those with a lower density are 
termed hypobaric. Dextrose and sterile water are com-
monly added to render local anesthetic solutions either 
hyperbaric or hypobaric, respectively. Hyperbaric solu-
tions have a more predictable spread,31 preferentially 
moving to the dependent regions of the intrathecal 
space. Hypobaric solutions spread to nondependent 
regions, whereas isobaric solutions tend not to be 
influenced by gravity. The administration of hyperbaric 
local anesthetic to patients in the lateral decubitus 
position will therefore preferentially affect the depend-
ent side. The natural curvatures of the vertebral column 
influence local anesthetic spread in patients placed 
in the horizontal supine position immediately after 
intrathecal administration. Hyperbaric local anesthetics 
injected at the L3–L4 or L4–L5 interspace will spread 
from the height of the lumbar lordosis down toward the 
trough of the thoracic kyphosis, resulting in a higher 
level of anesthetic effect than isobaric or hypobaric 
solutions.30
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
298
C2
C2
C3
C4
C5
C6
C7
C7
C8
T1
T2
T3
T4
T5
T6
T7
T8
T9
T10
T11
T12
L1
L2
L3
L4
L5
S1
S2
S3
Sensory level anesthesia necessary for surgical procedures
Sensory level
S2-S5
L2-L3 (knee)
L1-L3 (inguinal ligament)
T10 (umbilicus)
T4 (nipple)
T6-T7 (xiphoid process)
Hemorrhoidectomy
Foot surgery
Lower extremity surgery
Hip surgery
Transurethral resection
of the prostate
Vaginal delivery
Upper abdominal surgery
Cesarean section
Lower abdominal surgery
Appendectomy
Type of surgery
S4
S5
S1 S2
L5
L2
L3
C3
C4
C5
T1
T2
T3
T4
T5
T6
T7
T8
T9
T10
T11
T12
L1
L2
L3
L4
L5
L5
C6
C5
C6
T1
C6
C7
C8
L5
S1
S1
L4
L4
L4
S2
Fig. 17.9 Areas of sensory innervation by spinal nerves and the sensory level required for various surgical 
procedures. Note that the thoracic nerves supply the thorax and abdomen and the lumbar and sacral 
nerves supply the lower limb. (Modified from Veering BT, Cousins MJ. Epidural neural blockade. In Cousins 
MJ, Bridenbaugh PO, Carr DB, et al., eds. Neural Blockade in Clinical Anesthesia and Management of Pain. 
Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven; 2009:241–295.)
III
Chapter 17 Spinal, Epidural, and Caudal Anesthesia
299
Dose
Dose (i.e., mass), volume, and concentration are inextri-
cably linked (volume × concentration = dose), but dose is 
the most reliable determinant of local anesthetic spread 
(and thus block height) of isobaric and hypobaric solu-
tions.32 Hyperbaric local anesthetic injections are primar-
ily influenced by baricity.
The choice of local anesthetic or additive drugs (other 
than opioids) does not influence spread if all other fac-
tors are controlled. Opioids may increase the extent of 
spread,30 possibly as a result of pharmacologic enhance-
ment at the extremes of the spread, where the local 
anesthetic effect alone would have been subclinical.33
Patient Factors
Many patient factors can influence the number of spinal 
levels anesthetized from a spinal anesthetic. These factors 
include height, weight, age, and gender.
Although lumbosacral CSF pressure is fairly constant, 
the CSF volume varies between patients, which influences 
peak block height and regression.34 Although block height 
varies inversely with CSF volume, CSF volume itself does 
not correlate well with simple anthropomorphic measure-
ments other than body weight.34 The increased abdominal 
mass in obese patients and possible increased epidural 
fat may decrease CSF volume and therefore increase the 
spread of local anesthetic and block height.35
CSF density varies with gender, menopausal status, 
and pregnancy (also see Chapter 33), but the clinical rel-
evance of these factors is probably unimportant.
Advanced age is associated with increased block 
height (also see Chapter 35). In older patients CSF volume 
decreases, whereas its specific gravity increases. Further-
more, neuronal sensitivity to local anesthetics increases 
with age.36
Factors
More Important
Less Important
Not Important
Drug factors
Dose
Baricity
Volume
Concentration
Temperature of injection
Viscosity
Additives other than opioids
Patient 
factors
CSF volume
Advanced age
Pregnancy
Weight
Height
Spinal anatomy
Intraabdominal pressure
Menopause
Gender
Procedure 
factors
Patient position
Epidural injection 
following spinal injection
Level of injection (hypobaric more than hyperbaric)
Fluid currents
Needle orifice direction
Needle type
Table 17.1
Factors Affecting Spinal Local Anesthetic Distribution and Block Height
CSF, Cerebrospinal fluid.
Modified from Greene NM. Distribution of local anesthetic solutions within the subarachnoid space. Anesth Analg. 1985;64(7):715–730.
In the lateral position the broader shoulders of males 
relative to their hips make this position slightly more 
head-up, whereas the reverse is true in females. Despite 
this, whether males actually have reduced cephalad 
spread as compared with females in the lateral position 
is not clear.
Variations of the spine such as scoliosis can make 
needle insertion more difficult but have little effect on 
local anesthetic spread if the patient is turned supine. 
Kyphosis, however, in a supine patient may affect the 
spread of a hyperbaric solution.
During pregnancy, spread of local anesthetic is 
enhanced by changes in the lumbar lordosis and by 
the volume and density of CSF, by twin pregnancies 
compared with singletons, by intraabdominal pressure 
increases (possibly), and by a progesterone-mediated 
increase in neuronal sensitivity (also see Chapter 33).
Procedure Factors
The spread of local anesthetic within the subarachnoid 
space appears to stop 20 to 25 minutes after injection; 
thus positioning of the patient is most important dur-
ing this period, particularly in the initial few minutes. A 
head-up tilt can reduce the cephalad spread of hyperbaric 
solutions, whereas flexion of the hips and Trendelenburg 
positioning flatten the lumbar lordosis and increase ceph-
alad spread in most circumstances.37 A “saddle block” in 
which only the sacral nerve roots are anesthetized can be 
achieved with a small dose of hyperbaric local anesthetic 
while the patient remains sitting for up to 30 minutes. 
Block height is more extensive with hypobaric solutions 
if they are administered to patients who are in the sitting 
position.
The specific needle design and orifice orientation may 
affect block characteristics. With hypobaric solutions, 
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
300
part by the pKa (dissociation ionization constant), lipid 
solubility, and protein binding of the local anesthetic 
solution. The choice and dose of local anesthetic depend 
on both the required duration and location of surgery. 
Table 17.2 shows a range of local anesthetics commonly 
used for spinal anesthesia with corresponding doses, 
onset times, and durations of action.
Short- and Intermediate-Acting Local Anesthetics
Procaine is an ester local anesthetic and one of the oldest 
spinal anesthetics. It is not commonly used because of a 
more frequent failure rate than lidocaine, significantly 
more nausea, and a slower time to recovery.
Chloroprocaine is an ultra–short-acting ester that 
is rapidly metabolized by pseudocholinesterase with 
minimal systemic or fetal effects. Preservative-free 
chloroprocaine is of interest in ambulatory surgery 
because of its reliable, short-duration spinal anesthe-
sia,42 with a faster recovery time than procaine, lido-
caine, and bupivacaine. Transient neurologic symp-
toms (TNS; discussed later, under “Complications") can 
occur, albeit at a considerably lesser rate (0.6%) than 
lidocaine (14%).43
Articaine is an ester metabolized by nonspecific cho-
linesterases and has been widely used for dental nerve 
blocks. It has not been used in spinal anesthesia.
Lidocaine is a hydrophilic, relatively poorly protein-
bound amide local anesthetic with a rapid onset and 
intermediate duration. Because of an association with 
both permanent nerve injury and TNS, the use of intrath-
ecal lidocaine has declined.
cephalad alignment of the orifice of Whitacre, but not 
Sprotte, needles produces higher spread.38 The orientation 
of the needle orifice does not appear to affect the spread 
of hyperbaric solutions. When directing the needle orifice 
to one side (and using hyperbaric anesthetic), a more 
marked unilateral block is achieved, again when using a 
Whitacre rather than a Quincke needle.39
The level of injection does not affect block height 
with hyperbaric solutions. With isobaric solutions, the 
block height is generally higher the more cephalad 
the injection.40 Injection rate and barbotage (repeated 
aspiration and reinjection of CSF) of isobaric and 
hyperbaric solutions have not consistently been shown 
to affect block height. The injection of local anesthetic 
or even saline into the epidural space after a spinal 
anesthetic increases the block height and is discussed 
later.
Duration of the Block
Duration is affected primarily by the dose,41 the intrinsic 
properties of the local anesthetic (which affect elimina-
tion from the subarachnoid space), and the use of addi-
tives (if applicable). Hyperbaric solutions have a shorter 
duration of action than isobaric solutions.41
Pharmacology
The clinical effects of intrathecal local anesthetics are 
mediated by drug uptake, distribution, and elimination 
from the CSF. These variables in turn are dictated in 
Local Anesthetic Mixture
Dose (mg)
Duration (min)
Onset (min)
To T10
To T4
Plain
Epinephrine (0.2 mg)
Lidocaine 5% (with/without dextrose)
40–75
75–100
60–150b
20%–50%
3–5
Mepivacaine 1.5% (no dextrose)
30–45c
60–80d
120–180e
−
2–4
Chloroprocaine 3% (with/without dextrose)
30–40
40–60
40–90f
N/R
2–4
Bupivacaine 0.5%–0.75% (no dextrose)
10–15
12–20
130–230g
20%–50%
4–8
Levobupivacaine 0.5% (no dextrose)
10–15
12–20
140–230g
−
4–8
Ropivacaine 0.5%–1% (with/without dextrose)
12–18
18–25
80–210h
−
3–8
Table 17.2
Dose, Block Height, Onset Times, and Duration of Commonlya Used Spinal Anesthetics
aLidocaine is not commonly used now.
bRegression to T12.
cNote peak with these doses was T12 and not in all cases.
dMedian peak block height in this study with 60 mg was T5, not T4.
eRegression to S1 for block duration.
fRegression to L1.
gRegression to L2.
hRegression to S2.
From Brull R, Macfarlane AJR, Chan VWS. Spinal, epidural and caudal anesthesia. In Miller RD, Cohen NH, Eriksson LI, et al., eds. Miller's 
Anesthesia. 8th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders Elsevier; 2015:1696, Table 56.4.
N/R, Not recommended.
Note that duration depends on how the regression of the block is measured, which varies widely between studies.
III
Chapter 17 Spinal, Epidural, and Caudal Anesthesia
301
administered and the physicochemical properties of the 
opioid, particularly lipid solubility. Highly lipid-soluble 
drugs such as fentanyl and sufentanil have a more rapid 
onset and shorter duration of action than more hydro-
philic opioids. Greater lipid solubility also results in rapid 
uptake into both blood vessels (with a resultant systemic 
effect) and fatty tissue. The spread of lipophilic opioids 
within the CSF is therefore more limited than hydrophilic 
opioids such as (preservative-free) morphine, which 
demonstrate greater spread as a result of slower uptake 
and elimination from the CSF. As a result, hydrophilic 
opioids have a more frequent risk of late respiratory 
depression. The extent of neural tissue and vascular 
uptake also affects the potency of intrathecal opioids. For 
example, the relative intrathecal to intravenous potency 
of morphine is 200:1 to 300:1, whereas for fentanyl and 
sufentanil it is only 10:1 to 20:1.47 Other side effects of 
intrathecal opioids are discussed under “Complications.”
Hydrophilic Opioids
Preservative-free morphine is widely used, providing 
analgesia for up to 24 hours.48 Analgesic benefit with 
minimal side effects is achieved with 100 μg for cesar-
ean delivery (also see Chapter 33). The most efficacious 
dose for major orthopedic surgery is less clear,49 but side 
effects increase without improvement in analgesia with 
doses of 300 μU or more, and in fact it has been sug-
gested to avoid spinal opioids in arthroplasty surgery 
to reduce adverse effects. Spinal opioids alone are com-
monly given as a simple alternative to epidural local 
anesthetic–based analgesia. For major abdominal surgery 
or thoracotomies, 500 μg or more may be used, but the 
optimal dose that balances analgesia versus the risk of 
adverse effects remains unclear.
Diamorphine is a lipid-soluble prodrug that crosses 
the dura faster than morphine and is cleared from the 
CSF more quickly than morphine. It is converted to mor-
phine and 6-monoacetyl morphine, both of which are 
μ-agonists with a relatively long duration of action.
Hydromorphone is not commonly used for spinal 
analgesia and does not provide any advantage compared 
with morphine.
Meperidine is an opioid of intermediate lipid solu-
bility, but it also has some local anesthetic properties. 
Although it has been administered as the sole intrathe-
cal anesthetic in both obstetric and general surgery, it is 
rarely used. The neurotoxicity profile is unclear.
Lipophilic Opioids
Fentanyl and sufentanil are used frequently in obstetrics 
for labor analgesia and cesarean delivery (see Chapter 33). 
Fentanyl is useful in ambulatory surgery because of its 
rapid onset time of 10 to 20 minutes and relatively short 
duration of 2 to 3 hours. It is also preferred to longer-
acting opioids in the elderly or patients at risk of late 
respiratory depression.
Prilocaine is an amide local anesthetic with an inter-
mediate duration of action. It is rarely associated with TNS 
and may be used in the ambulatory surgery setting (also 
see Chapter 37). In large doses (>600 mg; not used in spinal 
anesthesia) prilocaine can result in methemoglobinemia.
Mepivacaine is an amide local anesthetic, but the inci-
dence of TNS after hyperbaric mepivacaine was similar 
to that of lidocaine.43 TNS occur less frequently with the 
isobaric preparation.
Long-Acting Local Anesthetics
Tetracaine is an ester packaged either as niphanoid crys-
tals or as an isobaric 1% solution. A 0.5% hyperbaric 
preparation can be created for perineal and abdominal 
surgery. Tetracaine is usually combined with a vaso-
constrictor additive because the duration of tetracaine 
alone can be unreliable. Although such combinations can 
provide up to 5 hours of anesthesia, the addition of phe-
nylephrine in particular has been associated with TNS.
Bupivacaine is a highly protein-bound amide with 
a slow onset because of its relatively high pKa and a 
duration of action of 2.5 to 3 hours.44 Doses as low as 
4 to 5 mg of bupivacaine are used in ambulatory proce-
dures.45 Bupivacaine is rarely associated with TNS.
Levobupivacaine is the pure S(−) enantiomer of race-
mic bupivacaine. Although levobupivacaine's potency 
appears to be slightly less than bupivacaine, the majority 
of clinical studies using identical doses of levobupiv-
acaine and bupivacaine have found no significant differ-
ence in clinical efficacy for spinal anesthesia. Levobupi-
vacaine is less cardiotoxic than bupivacaine, but this is 
only a theoretical risk in spinal anesthesia.
Ropivacaine is another highly protein-bound amide 
local anesthetic. With the same pKa (8.1) as bupivacaine, 
it has a medium speed of onset and a long duration of 
action, but is less potent. The proposed advantages of spi-
nal ropivacaine are less cardiotoxicity and greater motor-
sensory block differentiation, resulting in less motor 
block. When given in an equivalent dose to bupivacaine, 
there is slightly less motor block and earlier recovery 
with ropivacaine.46
Spinal Additives
A variety of medications may exert a direct analgesic 
effect on the spinal cord and nerve roots or prolong the 
quality and/or duration of sensory and motor blockade. 
The coadministration of such drugs often allows a reduc-
tion in the dose of local anesthetic, with the advantage of 
reducing motor blockade with faster recovery while still 
producing the same degree of analgesia.
The pharmacology of intrathecal opioid administra-
tion is complex because of a combination of direct spinal 
cord dorsal horn opioid receptor activation, cerebral opi-
oid receptor activation after CSF transport, and periph-
eral and central systemic opioid effects after vascular 
uptake. The effect at each site depends on both the dose 
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
302
Vasoconstrictors
Epinephrine and phenylephrine can prolong sensory and 
motor blockade when added to local anesthetics. The 
α1-adrenergic-mediated vasoconstriction reduces sys-
temic local anesthetic uptake, and epinephrine may also 
enhance analgesia via a direct α2-adrenergic-mediated 
effect. Tetracaine, lidocaine, and bupivacaine spinal 
anesthesia can all be prolonged by epinephrine. Although 
there are no human data to support the theory, there is a 
concern that potent vasoconstrictive action places neural 
blood supply at risk.
α2-Agonists
Intrathecal clonidine, dexmedetomidine, and epinephrine 
all act on prejunctional and postjunctional α2–adrenergic 
receptors in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord. Clonidine 
prolongs sensory and motor blockade by approximately 
1 hour and improves analgesia. It can cause non–dose-
related hypotension and sedation lasting up to 8 hours, 
however. Dexmedetomidine is approximately 10-fold 
more α2-receptor selective than clonidine and appears to 
prolong motor and sensory block without hemodynamic 
compromise.
Other Drugs
Intrathecal neostigmine prolongs motor and sensory 
blockade and reduces postoperative analgesic require-
ments, but its benefits are limited by nausea, vomiting, 
bradycardia, and, in higher doses, lower extremity weak-
ness. Midazolam also prolongs sensory and motor block-
ade. However, animal data suggest that midazolam may 
be neurotoxic. Intrathecal ketamine, adenosine, tramadol, 
magnesium, and nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs 
are unlikely to have any clinical value.
Technique
Technique can be classified into a series of steps: prepara-
tion, position, projection, and puncture (i.e., the four Ps).
Preparation
Informed consent must be obtained and thoroughly 
documented, including disclosure of proposed ben-
efits, relevant risks, and possible alternative techniques. 
Resuscitation equipment must be immediately available, 
intravenous access should be secured, and noninvasive 
monitoring is necessary.
The most important characteristics of a spinal needle 
are the shape of the tip and the needle diameter. Needle 
tips either cut (Pitkin and Quincke-Babcock) or spread 
(Whitacre, Sprotte, and Pencan) the dura (Fig. 17.10). In 
the latter group needles have a conical, pencil-point tip 
that provides better tactile sensation and reduces the inci-
dence of post–dural puncture headache. Using smaller-
gauge cutting, but not pencil point, needles appears to 
reduce the incidence of post–dural puncture headache.50
The failure rate is increased with 29-gauge needles,51 so 
pencil-point needles of 25 gauge, 26 gauge, or 27 gauge 
probably represent the optimal needle choice.
Strict aseptic technique is of utmost importance. One 
of the most common organisms responsible for bacterial 
meningitis after spinal anesthesia is the oral commensal 
Streptococcus viridans, emphasizing the purpose of wear-
ing a mask during the performance of spinal anesthesia. 
A combination of chlorhexidine and alcohol together is 
the most effective skin cleanser.52 Chlorhexidine must be 
allowed to dry completely before skin puncture because 
chlorhexidine is profoundly neurotoxic and may cause 
arachnoiditis.
Current consensus guidelines recommend that neurax-
ial blocks be performed with the patient awake,22 because 
general anesthesia or heavy sedation prevent a patient 
from expressing warning signs of pain or paresthesia if 
the needle is in close proximity to nerve tissue. In circum-
stances when the risks of performing the technique awake 
outweigh the benefits (for example, in a patient with 
severe movement disorder risking accidental and sudden 
needle-to-nerve contact) the practitioner and patient may 
agree that the procedure is best performed asleep.
Position
The two most common patient positions to facilitate the 
performance of spinal anesthesia are lateral decubitus 
and sitting. The prone position is rarely used. The choice 
of a particular position depends on patient, procedural, 
and practitioner preferences. The lateral decubitus posi-
tion facilitates coadministration of intravenous anxiolytic 
medication if required and may be more comfortable for 
certain patients. Patients are placed with their back paral-
lel to the edge of the operating table, thighs flexed onto 
the abdomen, with the neck flexed to allow the forehead 
to be as close as possible to the knees in an attempt to 
widen the spaces between spinous processes and posterior 
vertebral elements. Whenever possible, the patient should 
be positioned such that spread of hypobaric, isobaric, or 
hyperbaric solution to the operative site is optimized.
Identification of the midline may be easier when the 
patient is placed in the sitting position, especially when 
obesity or scoliosis render midline anatomy difficult to 
examine. An assistant helps maintain the patient in a 
vertical plane while asking the patient to comfortably 
flex their neck, relax their shoulders, and curve or “push 
out” their back in an attempt to widen the spaces between 
spinous processes and posterior vertebral elements. Hypo-
tension may be more common in the sitting position.
Projection and Puncture
The spinal cord terminates at the level of L1–L2, so 
needle insertion above this level should be avoided. The 
intercristal line is the line drawn between the two iliac 
crests and corresponds, with imperfect reliability, to the 
level of the L4 vertebral body or the L4–L5 interspace.53
III
Chapter 17 Spinal, Epidural, and Caudal Anesthesia
303
Front view
Side view
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Fig. 17.10 Comparative needle configuration for (1) 18-gauge Tuohy, (2) 20-gauge Quincke, (3) 22-gauge 
Quincke, (4) 24-gauge Sprotte, (5) 25-gauge Polymedic, (6) 25-gauge Whitacre, and (7) 26-gauge Gertie Marx. 
(From Schneider MC, Schmid M. Postdural puncture headache. In Birnbach DJ, Gatt SP, Datta S, eds. Textbook 
of Obstetric Anesthesia. Philadelphia: Churchill Livingstone; 2000:487–503.)
Once the appropriate space (usually L3–L4, L2–L3, or L4–
L5) has been selected, subcutaneous local anesthetic is 
infiltrated and an introducer needle is inserted at a slight 
cephalad angle of 10 to 15 degrees through the skin, 
subcutaneous tissue, and supraspinous ligament to reach 
the interspinous ligament. Depending on the habitus of 
the patient, the introducer needle may not be sufficiently 
long to reach the interspinous ligament, or conversely 
in slender patients, it may directly puncture the dura 
if inserted to the hub. The spinal needle, with its bevel 
parallel to the midline, is advanced slowly through the 
introducer until the characteristic change in resistance is 
noted as the needle tip passes through the ligamentum 
flavum and dura into the intrathecal space, when a subtle 
“click” or “pop” sensation often occurs. The stylet is then 
removed, and clear CSF should appear at the needle hub. 
If the CSF does not flow, the needle might be obstructed, 
and rotation in 90-degree increments can be undertaken 
until CSF appears. If CSF does not appear in any quad-
rant, the needle should be advanced a few millimeters 
and rechecked. If CSF still has not appeared, the needle 
should be withdrawn and the insertion steps repeated. A 
common reason for failure is insertion of the needle off 
the midline. After CSF is freely obtained, the anesthetic 
dose is injected at a rate of approximately 0.2 mL/sec. 
After completion of the injection, CSF can be aspirated 
into the syringe and reinjected into the subarachnoid 
space to reconfirm needle tip location.
The paramedian approach may be useful in the setting 
of diffuse calcification of the interspinous ligament. A 
skin wheal is raised 1 cm lateral and 1 cm caudad to the 
corresponding spinous process. The spinal introducer and 
needle are inserted 10 to 15 degrees off the sagittal plane 
in a cephalomedial plane (Fig. 17.11). If the needle con-
tacts bone, it is redirected slightly in a cephalad direction 
and the needle “walked up” the lamina. The characteristic 
feel of the ligamentum flavum and dura is possible, but 
with this approach the needle is not passing through the 
supraspinous and interspinous ligaments.
Use of Ultrasonography
Ultrasonography of the lumbar spine can accurately 
identify the intervertebral levels, the midline spinous pro-
cess, the midline interspinous window, the paramedian 
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
304
(CSE) technique or when previous spinal surgery may 
hinder reliable epidural spread. Spinal microcatheters 
exist, but small-gauge catheters (less than 24 g in par-
ticular) have been associated with cauda equina syn-
drome,56 probably because of lumbosacral pooling of 
local anesthetic. Catheter-over-the-needle devices are 
also available for use with continuous spinal anesthesia, 
with the advantage of minimizing leakage of CSF around 
the catheter, but they may be more difficult to insert.
The terms unilateral spinal anesthesia and selec-
tive spinal anesthesia overlap slightly, but both refer 
to small-dose techniques that capitalize on baricity and 
patient positioning to hasten recovery. For example, 4 to 
5 mg of hyperbaric bupivacaine with unilateral position-
ing can be adequate for knee arthroscopy. In selective 
spinal anesthesia minimal local anesthetic doses are used 
with the goal of anesthetizing only the sensory fibers to 
the specific surgical site.57
interlaminar window, and the depth to the intrathecal 
space.53 Ultrasound facilitates identification of the opti-
mal location for spinal needle insertion and estimation 
of the skin-to-intrathecal space distance and thereby 
can reduce procedural failure rates.54 Ultrasound is most 
useful in patients with difficult surface landmarks (e.g., 
obesity), spine disorders (e.g., scoliosis), or previous spine 
surgery.
Special Spinal Techniques
Continuous spinal anesthesia allows incremental dosing 
of local anesthetic to achieve (or maintain) spinal anes-
thesia at a desired vertebral level with better hemody-
namic stability than a single-shot spinal injection.55 This 
approach is useful in controlling arterial blood pressure 
in patients with severe aortic stenosis or pregnant women 
with complex cardiac disease. It may also be used in 
prolonged cases rather than the combined spinal-epidural 
10°–15°
L4
1 cm
1 cm
Fig. 17.11 Vertebral anatomy of the midline and paramedian approaches to central neuraxis blocks. The 
midline approach highlighted in the inset requires anatomic projection in only two planes: sagittal and 
horizontal. The paramedian approach shown in the inset and in the posterior view requires an additional 
oblique plane to be considered, although the technique may be easier in patients who are unable to cooperate 
in minimizing their lumbar lordosis. The paramedian needle is inserted 1 cm lateral and 1 cm caudad to the 
caudad edge of the more superior vertebral spinous process. The paramedian needle is inserted approximately 
15 degrees off the sagittal plane, as shown in the inset. (Courtesy the Mayo Foundation, Rochester, MN.)
III
Chapter 17 Spinal, Epidural, and Caudal Anesthesia
305
the same epidural spread of anesthesia in pregnant 
patients, in part because of engorgement of epidural veins 
secondary to increased abdominal pressure (also see Chap-
ter 33). Continuous positive airway pressure increases the 
spread of a thoracic epidural block, although the influence 
of intermittent positive pressure ventilation is unclear.
Procedure Factors
The level of injection is the most important procedural 
factor that affects epidural block height. In the upper cer-
vical region spread of injectate is mostly caudal; in the 
midthoracic region spread is equally cephalad and caudal; 
and in the low thoracic region, spread is primarily ceph-
alad.59 After a lumbar epidural, spread is more cephalad 
than caudal. Some studies suggest that the total number 
of segments blocked is less in the lumbar region compared 
with thoracic levels for a given volume of injectate. Patient 
position affects lumbar epidural injections, with preferential 
spread and faster onset to the dependent side in the lateral 
decubitus position. The Trendelenburg position increases 
cephalad spread in obstetric patients. Needle bevel direction 
and speed of injection do not appear to significantly influ-
ence the spread of a bolus injection.
Pharmacology
Local anesthetics for epidural use may be classified into 
short-, intermediate- and long-acting drugs. A single 
bolus dose of local anesthetic can provide surgical anes-
thesia ranging from 45 minutes up to 4 hours depending 
on the type administered and the use of any additives 
(Table 17.4). Most commonly, however, an epidural 
catheter is left in situ so that additional local anesthetic 
can be administered to extend, strengthen, or titrate the 
anesthesia or analgesia.
Monitoring of the Block
Once the spinal anesthetic has been administered, the 
onset, extent, and quality of the sensory and motor 
blocks must be assessed, and heart rate and arterial blood 
pressure should be monitored due to resultant sympa-
thetic blockade. Cold sensation and pinprick representing 
C fibers and A-delta fibers, respectively, are used most 
often to assess sensory block. Loss of sensation to cold 
usually occurs first, verified using ethyl chloride spray, 
ice, or alcohol, followed by the loss of sensation to pin-
prick, verified using a needle that does not pierce the 
skin. Finally, loss of sensation to touch occurs. The modi-
fied Bromage scale (Box 17.1) is most commonly used 
to measure motor block, although this represents only 
lumbosacral motor fibers.58 Confirming that the level of 
loss of sensation to cold or pinprick is two to three seg-
ments above the expected level of surgical stimulus and 
the presence of a motor block are commonly considered 
indicators of adequate surgical anesthesia.
EPIDURAL ANESTHESIA
Factors Affecting Epidural Block Height
Drug Factors
The volume and total dose of local anesthetic injected into 
the epidural space are the most important drug-related 
factors that affect block height. As a general principle, 1 
to 2 mL of solution should be injected per segment to be 
blocked. Bicarbonate, epinephrine, and opioids influence 
the onset, quality, and duration of analgesia and anesthe-
sia, but do not affect spread (Table 17.3).
Patient Factors
Age can influence epidural block height. Up to 40% less 
volume may be required in thoracic epidurals in the 
elderly, possibly because of decreased leakage of local 
anesthetic through intervertebral foramina, decreased 
compliance of the epidural space, or an increased sensitiv-
ity of the nerves (also see Chapter 35). Only the extremes 
of patient height influence local anesthetic spread in the 
epidural space. Weight is not well correlated with epidural 
block height. Less local anesthetic is required to produce 
Box 17.1 Modified Bromage Scale
0 No motor block
1 Inability to raise extended leg; able to move knees and feet
2 Inability to raise extended leg and move knee; able to 
move feet
3 Complete block of motor limb
From Brull R, Macfarlane AJR, Chan VWS. Spinal, epidural and caudal 
anesthesia. In Miller RD, Cohen NH, Eriksson LI, et al., eds. Miller's 
Anesthesia. 8th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders Elsevier; 2015. Box 56.1.
Factors
More 
Important
Less 
Important
Not 
Important
Drug factors Volume
Dose
Concentration
Additives
Patient 
factors
Elderly age
Pregnancy
Weight
Height
Pressure in 
adjacent body 
cavities
Procedure 
factors
Level of 
injection
Patient 
position
Speed of 
injection
Needle orifice 
direction
From Visser WA, Lee RA, Gielen MJM. Factors affecting the 
distribution of neural blockade by local anesthetics in epidural 
anesthesia and a comparison of lumbar versus thoracic epidural 
anesthesia. Anesth Analg. 2008;107(2):708–721.
Table 17.3
Factors Affecting Epidural Local Anesthetic 
Distribution and Block Height
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
306
Drug
Conc. (%)
Onset (min)
Duration - Plain 
(min)
Duration - 1:200,000 
Epinephrine (min)
Chloroprocaine
3
10–15
45–60
60–90
Lidocaine
2
15
80–120
120–180
Mepivacaine
2
15
90–140
140–200
Bupivacaine
0.5–0.75
20
165–225
180–240
Etidocaine
1
15
120–200
150–225
Ropivacaine
0.75–1.0
15–20
140–180
150–200
Levobupivacaine
0.5–0.75
15–20
150–225
150–240
Table 17.4
Comparative Onset Times and Analgesic Durations of Local Anesthetics Administered Epidurally in 20- to 30-mL 
Volumes
Data from Cousins MJ, Bromage PR. Epidural neural blockade. In Cousins MJ, Bridenbaugh PO, eds. Neural Blockade in Clinical Anesthesia and 
Management of Pain. Philadelphia: JB Lippincott; 1988:255; Brown DL. Spinal, epidural and caudal anesthesia. In Miller RD, Cohen NH, Eriksson 
LI, et al., eds. Miller's Anesthesia. 7th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders Elsevier; 2010:1611–1638.
Short-Acting and Intermediate-Acting Local Anesthetics
Procaine is not commonly used because the resultant 
block can be unreliable and of poor quality.
Chloroprocaine is available in 2% and 3% preservative-
free solutions. Before preservative-free preparations, 
large volumes of chloroprocaine had been associated with 
deep, burning lumbar back pain.60 This was thought to 
be secondary to the ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid that 
chelated calcium and caused a localized hypocalcemia.
Articaine is not widely used for epidural anesthesia 
and has not been studied extensively.
Lidocaine is available in 1% and 2% solutions. Unlike 
spinal anesthesia, TNS is not commonly associated with 
epidural lidocaine.
Prilocaine is available in 2% and 3% solutions. The 
2% solution produces a sensory block with minimal 
motor block. In large doses prilocaine is associated with 
methemoglobinemia.
Mepivacaine is available as 1%, 1.5%, and 2% preserv-
ative-free solutions. The 2% preparation has an onset time 
similar to that for lidocaine of approximately 15 minutes, 
but a slightly longer duration (up to 200 minutes with 
epinephrine).
Long-Acting Local Anesthetics
Tetracaine is not widely used because of unreliable block 
height and, in larger doses, systemic toxicity.
Bupivacaine is available in 0.25%, 0.5%, and 0.75% 
preservative-free solutions. More dilute concentrations 
such as 0.125% to 0.25% can be used for analgesia. 
However, disadvantages include cardiac and central 
nervous system toxicity and potential motor block from 
larger doses.
Levobupivacaine administered epidurally has the same 
clinical characteristics as bupivacaine but is less cardiotoxic. 
Liposomal bupivacaine is not licensed for epidural use.
Ropivacaine is available in 0.2%, 0.5%, 0.75%, and 
1.0% preservative-free preparations. It is associated with 
a superior safety profile compared with bupivacaine, with 
a higher seizure threshold and less cardiotoxicity.
Epidural Additives
Vasoconstrictors
Epinephrine reduces vascular absorption of local anes-
thetics in the epidural space. The effect is greatest with 
lidocaine,61 mepivacaine, and chloroprocaine (up to 50% 
prolongation); less with bupivacaine and levobupiv-
acaine; and limited with ropivacaine, which already has 
intrinsic vasoconstrictive properties (see Table 17.4). 
Epinephrine itself may also have some analgesic ben-
efits because of absorption into CSF and dorsal horn 
α2-receptor activation. Phenylephrine is used less widely 
and is less effective than epinephrine.
Opioids
Opioids synergistically enhance the analgesic effects 
of epidural local anesthetics without prolonging motor 
block. A combination of local anesthetic and opioid 
reduces the dose-related adverse effects of each drug 
independently. Opioid-related side effects are dose-
dependent, and there appears to be a therapeutic ceiling 
effect above which only side effects increase. Opioids 
may also be administered to the epidural space without 
local anesthetic. Epidural opioids cross the dura and 
arachnoid membrane to reach the CSF and spinal cord 
dorsal horn. Lipophilic opioids, such as fentanyl and 
sufentanil, partition into epidural fat and therefore are 
found in lower concentrations in CSF than hydrophilic 
opioids, such as morphine and hydromorphone. Fentanyl 
and sufentanil are also readily absorbed into the sys-
temic circulation, which may be their principal analgesic 
mechanism.
AL GRAWANY
III
Chapter 17 Spinal, Epidural, and Caudal Anesthesia
307
dural puncture and guide the catheter cephalad. The 
catheter is made of a flexible, calibrated, radiopaque 
plastic with either a single end hole or multiple side 
orifices near the tip. Multiple orifice catheters improve 
analgesia and lead to fewer catheter reinsertions com-
pared with single-orifice devices.66
Position
The sitting and lateral decubitus positions necessary 
for epidural puncture are the same as those for spinal 
anesthesia, and success rates are comparable. As with 
spinal anesthesia, epidurals are ideally performed with 
the patient awake.22
Projection and Puncture
Important surface landmarks include the intercristal line 
(corresponding to the L4–L5 interspace), the inferior 
angle of the scapula (corresponding to the T7 vertebral 
body), the root of the scapular spine (T3), and the verte-
bra prominens (C7) (Fig. 17.12). Ultrasonography may be 
useful to identify the desired level.
A variety of needle approaches to the epidural space 
exist: midline, paramedian, modified paramedian (Taylor 
approach), and caudal. A midline approach, in which the 
angle of approach is only slightly cephalad, is commonly 
chosen for lumbar and low thoracic approaches. In the 
midthoracic region the approach should be more ceph-
alad because of the significant downward angulation of 
the spinous processes (see Fig. 17.5). The needle should 
be advanced in a controlled fashion with the stylet in 
place through the supraspinous ligament and into the 
interspinous ligament, at which point the stylet can be 
removed and the loss-of-resistance syringe attached. 
This method may increase the chance of a false loss of 
resistance, possibly because of midline defects in the 
interspinous ligament.
Epidural morphine can be administered as a bolus 
(duration of up to 24 hours) or continuously. The optimal 
bolus analgesic dose that minimizes side effects is 2.5 to 
3.75 mg.62 Hydromorphone is more hydrophilic than fen-
tanyl but more lipophilic than morphine and has a dura-
tion of 18 hours. Epidural fentanyl and sufentanil have 
a faster onset but a shorter duration (only 2 to 3 hours). 
Diamorphine is available in the United Kingdom. An 
extended-release liposomal formulation of morphine is 
available for single-shot epidural administration and 
offers prolonged analgesia compared with morphine, 
potentially avoiding the need for continuous local anes-
thetic infusion via indwelling catheter.
α2-Agonists
Epidural clonidine prolongs sensory block to a longer 
extent than motor block and reduces both epidural local 
anesthetic and opioid requirements. Clonidine may also 
reduce immune stress and cytokine response, but side 
effects include hypotension, bradycardia, dry mouth, and 
sedation. Epidural dexmedetomidine can reduce intraop-
erative anesthetic requirements, improve postoperative 
analgesia, and prolong both sensory and motor block.
Other Drugs
Ketamine, neostigmine, midazolam, tramadol, dexa-
methasone, and droperidol have all been studied but are 
not commonly used.
Carbonation and Bicarbonate
Both carbonation of the solution and adding bicarbonate 
increase the solution pH and therefore the nonionized 
free-base proportion of local anesthetic. Although this 
increases the speed of epidural block onset by producing 
more rapid intraneural diffusion, this apparent advantage 
must be weighed against the risk of drug error when mix-
ing solutions for epidural administration and the extra 
preparation time this inevitably incurs.63–65
Technique
Preparation
Patient preparation as previously described for spinal 
anesthesia must equally be applied to epidural anesthesia, 
namely consent, monitoring, resuscitation equipment, 
and intravenous access. Sterility is arguably even more 
important than spinal anesthesia because a catheter is 
often left in situ. The nature and the duration of surgery 
must be understood so that the epidural may be inserted 
at the appropriate level (Table 17.5) and the appropriate 
drugs chosen. The risks and benefits will vary depending 
on the severity of patient comorbid conditions. Tuohy 
needles are most commonly used (see Fig. 17.10). They 
are usually 16 or 18g and have a shaft marked in 1-cm 
intervals with a 15- to 30-degree curved, blunt Huber 
needle tip designed to both reduce the risk of accidental 
Nature of 
Surgery
Suggested Level 
of Insertion
Remarks
Hip surgery
Lower extremity
Obstetric analgesia
Lumbar L2–L5
Colectomy, 
anterior resection
Upper abdominal 
surgery
Lower thoracic
T6–T8
Spread more cranial 
than caudal
Thoracic
T2–T6
Midpoint of surgical 
incision
Table 17.5
Suggested Epidural Insertion Sites for 
Common Surgical Procedures
Modified from Visser WA, Lee RA, Gielen MJM. Factors affecting 
the distribution of neural blockade by local anesthetics in epidural 
anesthesia and a comparison of lumbar versus thoracic epidural 
anesthesia. Anesth Analg. 2008;107(2):708–721.
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
308
Air or saline (or a combination) is commonly used to 
detect a loss of resistance when identifying the epidural 
space (Fig. 17.13). Each involves intermittent or constant 
gentle pressure applied to the plunger of the syringe 
while the needle tip is advanced in a controlled manner 
though the ligamentum flavum. Usually the ligamentum 
flavum is identified as a tougher structure with increased 
resistance, and when the epidural space is subsequently 
entered, the pressure applied to the syringe plunger 
allows the fluid to flow with minimal resistance into the 
epidural space. Air is considered less reliable in identify-
ing the epidural space, resulting in a higher chance of 
inadequate block,67 and may cause both pneumocepha-
lus (which can result in headaches) and even venous air 
embolism in rare cases. Fluid inserted through the epi-
dural needle before catheter insertion can also reduce the 
risk of epidural vein cannulation by the catheter.68 How-
ever, saline injection can make it more difficult to detect 
an accidental dural puncture because the appearances of 
saline and CSF may be similar to the naked eye (although 
they can be distinguished on glucose or protein testing).
With the hanging-drop technique, a drop of solution 
such as saline is placed within the hub of the needle after the 
needle is placed in the ligamentum flavum. When the needle 
tip reaches the epidural space, the solution is “sucked in” as 
a result of subatmospheric pressure inside the epidural space.
When a lumbar midline approach is used, the depth 
from skin to the ligamentum flavum in most patients is 
between 3 and 6 cm. Ultrasonography can predict this 
depth before needle insertion. When the epidural space 
is identified, the depth should be noted, the syringe 
removed from the Tuohy needle, and a catheter gently 
threaded to leave 4 to 6 cm in the space. The catheter 
should be easy to thread, and some patients experience a 
very transient “pop” or “click” as the catheter is advanced 
within the epidural space. Less than 4 cm in length in 
the epidural space may increase the risk of catheter 
dislodgement and inadequate analgesia. Threading more 
catheter increases the likelihood of catheter malposition, 
Posterior
superior
iliac spine
Iliac
crest
Inferior angle
of scapula
S2
L4
L1
C7
T7
Fig. 17.12 Surface landmarks are a guide to the vertebral level. (From Brown DL, ed. Atlas of Regional 
Anesthesia. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1992.)
unilateral blockade, or complications.69 The Tsui test can 
be used to confirm catheter tip location using a special 
electrically conducting catheter.70 This stimulates the spi-
nal nerve roots with a low electrical current resulting in 
twitches of the corresponding muscles.
Paramedian Approach
The paramedian approach is particularly useful in the 
mid- to high-thoracic region, where the angulation of 
the spinous processes is steeper and the posterior spaces 
between vertebrae narrower. The Tuohy needle should be 
inserted 0.5 to 1 cm lateral to the inferior tip of the spinous 
process corresponding to the vertebra above the desired 
interspace. The needle is then advanced perpendicular in 
all planes to the skin until the lamina is contacted and then 
redirected medially and cephalad to enter the ligamentum 
flavum and, after loss of resistance, the epidural space. 
The Taylor approach is a modified paramedian approach 
via the L5–S1 interspace, which may be useful in trauma 
patients who cannot tolerate or are not able to maintain 
a sitting position. The needle is inserted 1 cm medial and 
1 cm caudad to the posterior superior iliac spine and is 
angled medially and cephalad at a 45- to 55-degree angle.
Before initiating an epidural local anesthetic infusion, 
the catheter should be aspirated gently to check for blood 
or CSF and a test dose administered to exclude intrathe-
cal or intravascular catheter placement. A test dose typi-
cally consists of a very small dose of local anesthetic that 
otherwise would produce evidence of motor or sensory 
blockade if injected intrathecally, but does not readily pro-
duce evidence of somatic blockade when injected into the 
epidural space. Some practitioners advocate the addition 
of epinephrine to the test dose because a resultant tachy-
cardia may warn of intravascular catheter placement.
Use of Ultrasonography
As with spinal anesthesia, preprocedural ultrasound 
imaging can assist in the siting of epidural anesthesia in 
patients whose surface landmarks are difficult to discern 
III
Chapter 17 Spinal, Epidural, and Caudal Anesthesia
309
skin-to-dura distance, and reduce the rate of lumbar 
epidural block failure rate.54 Moreover, neuraxial ultra-
sonography by experienced practitioners may improve 
block efficacy.71 Real-time guidance is a more challeng-
ing technique. Real-time ultrasound-guided epidural 
needle insertion is relatively easier in the pediatric 
population because of limited ossification of the vertebral 
column. The epidural catheter tip, dural displacement, 
and extent of cranial spread of a fluid bolus can all be 
visualized.
COMBINED SPINAL-EPIDURAL 
ANESTHESIA
CSE anesthesia allows the flexibility of a rapid-onset spi-
nal block, and the epidural catheter allows anesthesia or 
analgesia to be extended as the spinal block resolves. This 
is particularly useful in obstetrics (also see Chapter 33). 
Another advantage is the ability to administer a low 
dose of intrathecal local anesthetic and, if necessary, use 
the epidural catheter to extend the block. Adding either 
local anesthetic or saline alone to the epidural space via 
the catheter compresses the dural sac and increases the 
block height. This latter technique of epidural volume 
extension (EVE) allows smaller doses of intrathecal 
local anesthetic to be used while significantly hastening 
motor recovery.72 This sequential technique also provides 
greater hemodynamic stability for high-risk patients.
Technique
Most commonly the epidural needle is placed first, fol-
lowed by either a “needle-through-needle” technique using 
specific needle equipment (Fig. 17.14) or a separate spinal 
needle insertion at the same or a different interspace. The 
separate needle insertion technique73 has the advantage of 
being able to confirm that the epidural catheter is func-
tional before spinal anesthesia is administered but does 
theoretically risk shearing the in situ epidural catheter.
CAUDAL ANESTHESIA
Caudal anesthesia involves the deposition of medica-
tion into the epidural space via the sacral hiatus. Caudal 
anesthesia is popular in pediatric anesthesia (also see 
Chapter 34). In adults the extent of cephalad spread of 
local anesthetic from the sacral hiatus is mostly limited 
to the lumbosacral roots; therefore caudal anesthesia is 
most useful when sacral anesthetic spread is desired (e.g., 
perineal procedures), where a spinal surgery scar may 
prevent a lumbar anesthetic technique, or more com-
monly, in chronic pain and cancer pain management 
(also see Chapter 44). Both fluoroscopy and ultrasonog-
raphy can help guide correct needle placement.
Noncompressed
air bubble
Compressed
air bubble
Fluid
Ligamentum ﬂavum
Fig. 17.13 Loss-of-resistance technique. The needle is inserted 
into the ligamentum flavum, and a syringe containing saline and 
an air bubble is attached to the hub. After compression of the air 
bubble is obtained by applying pressure on the syringe plunger, 
the needle is carefully advanced until its entry into the epidural 
space is confirmed by the characteristic loss of resistance to 
syringe plunger pressure and the fluid enters the space easily. 
(From Afton-Bird G. Atlas of regional anesthesia. In Miller RD, ed. 
Miller's Anesthesia. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2005.)
or who have spinal deformities. Sonographic imaging 
of the thoracic spine is more challenging than that of 
the lumbar spine because of narrower interspinous and 
interlaminar windows. Nonetheless, ultrasound scan-
ning before needle insertion (i.e., prescanning) can help 
identify the optimal site for needle insertion, predict the 
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
310
After the sacral hiatus is identified, subcutaneous local 
anesthetic is infiltrated and the caudal needle (or Tuohy 
needle if a catheter is to be placed) is inserted at an angle 
of approximately 45 degrees to the sacrum. A decrease 
in resistance to needle insertion (or loss of resistance if a 
Tuohy needle is used) should be appreciated as the nee-
dle tip passes through the sacrococcygeal ligament and 
enters the caudal epidural space. The needle tip should 
be advanced no more than approximately 1 to 2 cm into 
the caudal epidural space and, in adults, never beyond 
the S2 level (approximately 1 cm inferior to the posterior 
superior iliac spine), which is the level to which the dural 
sac extends. Additional needle advancement increases 
the risk of dural puncture and intrathecal injection of 
medication. Before injection of any drugs, aspiration 
to see if CSF can be withdrawn should be performed 
and a test dose administered to exclude intravascular or 
intrathecal placement.
Pharmacology
The local anesthetics used for caudal anesthesia are 
similar to those described for epidural anesthesia and 
analgesia. In adults approximately twice the lumbar epi-
dural dose is required to achieve a similar block with the 
caudal approach.
Technique
Patient preparation as described before applies equally 
to caudal anesthesia. The prone position, lateral decubi-
tus position, and the knee–chest position may be used. 
Caudal anesthesia requires identification of the sacral 
hiatus, where the two sacral cornua are joined by the 
sacrococcygeal ligament (an extension of the ligamentum 
flavum). The hiatus can be approximated as the apex of 
an equilateral triangle whose base is formed by the two 
posterior superior iliac spines (Fig. 17.15).
Spinal and epidural "needle through needle"
"Back-eye" Tuohy needle
Luer slip-hubs
Needle
Tuohy needle
Cauda
equina
Dura
"Back eye"
Spinal needle
Ligamentum
flavum
Epidural catheter
B
A
Fig. 17.14 (A) A spinal needle and epidural needle are used for the combined spinal-epidural technique. (B) 
Tuohy needle with a “back eye” that permits placement of the spinal needle directly into the subarachnoid 
space (left panel) and subsequent threading of the epidural catheter into the epidural space after removal of 
the spinal needle. (Modified from Veering BT, Cousins MJ. Epidural neural blockade. In Cousins MJ, Bridenbaugh 
PO, Carr DB, et al., eds. Neural Blockade in Clinical Anesthesia and Management of Pain. Philadelphia: Lippincott-
Raven; 2009:241–295.)
III
Chapter 17 Spinal, Epidural, and Caudal Anesthesia
311
patient or procedural risk factors, such as anticoagulation 
medication or poor aseptic technique. Epidural (including 
CSE) anesthesia is associated with a more frequent rate of 
nerve injury compared with spinal anesthesia.75 Further, 
neuraxial anesthesia performed in adults for the purposes 
of perioperative anesthesia or analgesia is associated with 
an increased likelihood of neurological complications 
compared with that performed in the obstetric, pediatric, 
and chronic pain settings.76 Radicular pain or paresthesia 
occurring during any neuraxial procedure should warn 
the practitioner of possible needle-to-nerve contact and 
prompt immediate needle withdrawal.
Paraplegia
The overall frequency of paraplegia after neuraxial anes-
thetic techniques is reported to be approximately 2 to 4.2 per 
100,000, but there are markedly different incidences depend-
ing on individual procedural risk factors.76 A variety of 
mechanisms can lead to paraplegia after neuraxial blockade, 
including direct needle trauma, vertebral canal hematoma, 
epidural abscess, periprocedural hypotension of the spinal 
cord circulation, adhesive arachnoiditis, or maladministra-
tion of neurotoxic medications. Disruption of normal cord 
blood supply and resultant ischemic injury are thought to be 
the final common pathway for many of these injuries.
Epidural Hematoma
Bleeding within the vertebral canal resulting in an 
epidural (or subdural) hematoma can cause ischemic 
compression of the spinal cord or nerve roots and lead 
to permanent neurologic deficit if not recognized and 
evacuated expeditiously. In the 2009 UK national audit 
the incidence of epidural hematoma was found to be 1 
in 19,500 epidural anesthetics, but there were no cases of 
hematoma after 360,000 spinals.76 Overall, the incidence 
of epidural hematoma is approximately 0.7 per 100,000 
neuraxial anesthetics.76 Many risk factors have been asso-
ciated with the development of an epidural hematoma, 
including difficult or traumatic needle or catheter inser-
tion, use of larger needles (the risk is higher with epidural 
than with spinal techniques), coagulopathy, female sex, 
and advanced age. Radicular back pain, prolonged block-
ade longer than the expected duration of the neuraxial 
technique, and bladder or bowel dysfunction are features 
commonly associated with a space-occupying lesion 
within the vertebral canal and should prompt immediate 
clinical review and magnetic resonance imaging on an 
urgent basis, given that surgical hematoma evacuation is 
a time-critical intervention to prevent permanent harm.
Epidural Abscess
Staphylococcal infections arising from organisms on the 
patient's skin are one of the most common epidural-
related infections, which usually present with insidious 
back pain, tenderness, progressive neurological deficit, 
and systemic symptoms of infection. The presence of 
COMPLICATIONS
Clear distinction should be made between the physiologi-
cal effects of the neuraxial technique and complications, 
which imply some harm to the patient.74 The material 
risks associated with neuraxial anesthesia must be inti-
mately understood and respected because catastrophic 
injury is not unknown.
Neurological
Serious neurological complications associated with neu-
raxial anesthesia are rare, but suspected nerve injury aris-
ing from neuraxial techniques should prompt immediate 
attention and risk stratification to guide further investiga-
tion, including emergent imaging if necessary. The reported 
incidence of nerve injury after neuraxial techniques varies 
greatly depending on the presence or absence of specific 
1
2
3
Insertion
45°
Fig. 17.15 Caudal technique. Palpating fingers locate the sacral 
cornua by using the equilateral triangle. Needle insertion is 
completed by insertion and withdrawal in a stepwise fashion 
(inset, so-called “1-2-3 insertion”) until the needle can be 
advanced into the caudal canal and the solution can be injected 
easily (without creation of a subcutaneous “lump” of fluid). 
(From Brull R, Macfarlane AJR, Chan VWS. Spinal, epidural and 
caudal anesthesia. In Miller RD, Cohen NH, Eriksson LI, et al., 
eds. Miller's Anesthesia. 8th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders Elsevier; 
2015:Fig. 56.10.)
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
312
begin within 3 days of the procedure, and approximately 
two-thirds start within the first 48 hours. Spontaneous reso-
lution usually occurs within 7 days in the majority of cases, 
but a minority of patients still have symptoms at 6 months.
Conservative management for post–dural puncture 
headache includes supine positioning, hydration, caf-
feine, and oral analgesics. The use of sumatriptan has 
varying effects. Epidural blood patch is the definitive 
therapy,80 with a single patch resulting in a 90% initial 
improvement rate and persistent resolution of symptoms 
in 61% to 75% of cases. A blood patch is ideally per-
formed 24 hours after dural puncture and subsequent to 
the development of classic post–dural puncture headache 
symptoms. Prophylactic bedrest or epidural blood patch-
ing are not efficacious. It is recommended to insert the 
blood patch needle at or caudad to the level of the dural 
puncture, with 20 mL of blood being a reasonable starting 
target volume.81 A second epidural blood patch may be 
performed 24 to 48 hours later if the first is ineffective.
Total Spinal Anesthesia
Total spinal anesthesia is characterized by rapidly pro-
gressive bradycardia, hypotension, loss of consciousness, 
apnea, and cardiac arrest caused by inadvertent spread of 
local anesthetic to the cervical nerve roots and brainstem. 
Although rare, total spinal anesthesia can occur after any 
inadvertent intrathecal injection of large volumes of local 
anesthetic. Management is supportive of the resulting 
respiratory and cardiovascular compromise.
Transient Neurological Symptoms
TNS are characterized by bilateral or unilateral pain in 
the buttocks radiating to the legs or, less commonly, 
isolated buttock or leg pain. Symptoms occur within 
24 hours of the resolution of an otherwise uneventful 
spinal anesthetic and are not associated with any neu-
rological deficits or laboratory abnormalities. Pain can 
be mild or severe but typically resolves spontaneously 
in less than 1 week. TNS are more likely after intrathe-
cal lidocaine and mepivacaine and are far less frequent 
with bupivacaine.82 The phenomenon is related to the 
concentration of lidocaine, the addition of dextrose or 
epinephrine, and solution osmolarity. TNS are less com-
monly associated with epidural procedures. The risk also 
appears more likely in the lithotomy position for surgery. 
Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs are the first line of 
treatment, but opioids may be required.
Cardiovascular
Hypotension
Hypotension is more likely with peak block height higher 
than or equal to T5, age of 40 years or older, baseline sys-
tolic blood pressure less than 120 mm Hg, combined spi-
nal and general anesthesia, spinal puncture at or above 
the L2–L3 interspace, and the addition of phenylephrine 
a concomitant systemic infection, diabetes, immuno-
compromised states, and prolonged maintenance of an 
epidural (or spinal) catheter are risk factors. The rate of 
serious neuraxial infection is less than 3 per 100,00077 for 
spinal anesthesia, whereas infectious complications after 
epidural techniques may be at least twice as common.76
Obstetric patients appear less likely to develop deep 
infections related to epidural analgesia. Chlorhexidine in 
an alcohol base solution is the most effective antiseptic 
for the purposes of neuraxial techniques, and scrupulous 
attention to aseptic technique is a prerequisite for all 
neuraxial procedures.
Post–Dural Puncture Headache
Headache is relatively common and results from unin-
tentional or intentional puncture of the dura membrane. 
The incidence is approximately 0.5% in spinal anesthesia 
and is minimized by using smaller-gauge, noncutting-tip 
spinal needles and orientating the needle bevel parallel 
with the axis of the spine. In obstetrics accidental dural 
puncture during epidural insertion may occur in around 
1.5% of patients, with approximately two-thirds of these 
patients subsequently developing a post–dural puncture 
headache.78 Additional risk factors for post–spinal punc-
ture headache are listed in Box 17.2
The loss of CSF through the dura may cause traction 
on pain-sensitive intracranial structures as the brain loses 
support and sags (Fig. 17.16). This loss of CSF may also 
initiate compensatory yet painful intracerebral vasodilation 
to offset the decreased intracranial pressure.79 The char-
acteristic feature of a post–dural puncture headache is a 
frontal or occipital headache that worsens with the upright 
or seated posture and is relieved by lying supine. Associ-
ated symptoms can include nausea, vomiting, neck pain, 
dizziness, tinnitus, diplopia, hearing loss, cortical blindness, 
cranial nerve palsies, and even seizures. Symptoms usually 
Box 17.2
Relationships Among Variables 
and Post–Dural Puncture Headache
Factors That Can Increase the Incidence of Headache 
After Spinal Puncture
•Age: Younger, more frequent
•Sex: Females > males
•Needle size: larger > smaller
•Needle bevel: less when the needle bevel is placed in the
long axis of the neuraxis
•Pregnancy: more when pregnant
•Dural punctures: more with multiple punctures
Factors That Do Not Increase the Incidence of 
Headache After Spinal Puncture
•Continuous spinal infusion
•Timing of ambulation
From Brull R, Macfarlane AJR, Chan VWS. Spinal, epidural and caudal 
anesthesia. In Miller RD, Cohen NH, Eriksson LI, et al., eds. Miller's 
Anesthesia. 8th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders Elsevier; 2015:Box 56.2.
III
Chapter 17 Spinal, Epidural, and Caudal Anesthesia
313
A
B
Fig. 17.16 Anatomy of a “low-pressure” headache. (A) A T1-weighted sagittal magnetic resonance image 
demonstrates a “ptotic brain” manifested as tonsillar herniation below the foramen magnum, forward 
displacement of the pons, absence of the suprasellar cistern, kinking of the chiasm, and fullness of the 
pituitary gland. (B) A comparable image of the same patient after an epidural blood patch and resolution of the 
symptoms demonstrates normal anatomy. (From Drasner K, Swisher JL. In Brown DL, ed. Regional Anesthesia 
and Analgesia. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1996.)
respiratory rate and sedation score, for the first 24 hours 
after the administration of intrathecal morphine is recom-
mended. A low oxygen saturation can be a late sign, par-
ticularly if supplemental oxygen is being used. Respiratory 
depression is reduced with use of intrathecal morphine 
doses less than 0.3 mg.86 Patients with sleep apnea can 
be particularly sensitive, and considerable caution must 
be exercised in this group.87 Older patients also have a 
more frequent risk of respiratory depression, and therefore 
the dose of neuraxial opioids should be reduced (also see 
Chapter 35). Coadministration of systemic sedatives also 
increases this risk.
Infection
Bacterial meningitis is a rare but potentially catastrophic 
complication, most commonly arising after intrathecal 
transmission of oral bacteria such as S. viridans during 
spinal anesthesia. Facemasks should therefore be worn 
during all neuraxial procedures. Epidural abscess is 
described earlier.
Wrong-Route Drug Delivery
Small-bore medical connection syringe systems carry an 
inherent risk of inadvertent wrong-route drug adminis-
tration by the administration of a drug intended for the 
to the local anesthetic. Hypotension is also independently 
associated with chronic alcohol consumption, history of 
hypertension, body mass index (BMI), and the urgency of 
surgery.83 Nausea is a common symptom of hypotension 
in the setting of neuraxial anesthesia; other symptoms 
include vomiting, dizziness, and dyspnea.
Bradycardia
The mechanism has been described earlier, but factors that 
may increase the likelihood of exaggerated bradycardia 
include baseline heart rate less than 60 beats/min, age 
of 40 years or younger, male sex, nonemergency status, 
β-adrenergic blockade and prolonged duration of surgery.84
Respiratory
The risk of respiratory depression associated with neurax-
ial opioids is dose-dependent, with a reported frequency 
that can be as high as 3% after the administration of 
0.8 mg of intrathecal morphine.85 Respiratory depression 
may stem from rostral spread of opioids within the CSF to 
the chemosensitive respiratory centers in the brainstem. 
With lipophilic anesthetics, respiratory depression is gen-
erally an early phenomenon occurring within the first 30 
minutes (and has not been reported after 2 hours), whereas 
with intrathecal morphine, late respiratory depression may 
occur up to 24 hours after injection. Monitoring, including 
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
314
opioid administered, although reducing the dose reduces the 
likelihood of pruritus, and lipophilic agents (such as fenta-
nyl) will result in a shorter duration of itching. Naloxone, 
naltrexone, or the partial agonist nalbuphine can be used 
for treatment. Ondansetron and propofol are also useful 
antipruritic therapies.
Shivering
The rate of shivering is as frequent as 55%93 and is more 
related to epidural than to spinal anesthesia. One postu-
lated cause is the relatively cold temperature of the epi-
dural injectate, which can affect the thermosensitive basal 
sinuses. The addition of neuraxial opioids, specifically 
fentanyl and meperidine, reduces the likelihood of shiver-
ing.93 Prewarming the patient with a forced air warmer 
and avoiding the administration of cold epidural and 
intravenous fluids also reduce the incidence of shivering.
Complications Unique to Epidural Anesthesia
Intravascular Injection
Epidural anesthesia can produce local anesthetic systemic 
toxicity (LAST, see Chapter 10), primarily through the 
unintentional administration of drug into an epidural 
vein. The frequency of vascular puncture by needle or 
catheter is approximately 10%, with rates highest in the 
obstetric population, in whom these vessels are relatively 
dilated.94 Seizures related to epidural anesthesia may be 
as frequent as 1%.77 In obstetrics (also see Chapter 33) 
the likelihood of intravascular injection is decreased by 
placing the patient in the lateral position during nee-
dle and catheter insertion, administering fluid through 
the epidural needle before catheter insertion, using 
a single-orifice rather than multiorifice catheter or a 
wire-embedded polyurethane compared with polyamide 
epidural catheter, and advancing the catheter less than 6 
cm into the epidural space. The paramedian approach and 
the use of a smaller-gauge epidural needle or catheter 
does not reduce the risk of epidural vein cannulation.
Using epinephrine mixed with local anesthetic as a test 
dose can be unreliable, and so prevention of LAST should 
always involve observation for blood flow through the 
epidural catheter under the influence of gravity when 
first inserted and both aspiration of the catheter and 
incremental administration of the local anesthetic before 
every dose.
Subdural Injection
The subdural extraarachnoid space is a potential space 
between the arachnoid and dura mater.95 Infrequently 
(and unbeknown to the provider and patient) the Tuohy 
needle tip and/or catheter tip can enter into the subdural 
space, with subsequent local anesthetic administration 
resulting in a higher-than-expected block developing 15 
intravascular compartment into the epidural or intrathe-
cal space or vice versa. Such errors can have catastrophic 
consequences, including death. The International Organi-
zation for Standardization (ISO) has published a group of 
standards for medical small-bore connectors, including 
ISO 80369-6:2016, which addresses connectors (so-called 
NR-Fit) for neuraxial applications and peripheral nerve 
blocks.
Backache
There is no association between epidural analgesia and 
new-onset back pain up to 6 months postpartum.
Nausea and Vomiting
Nausea and vomiting may be secondary to either direct 
exposure of the chemoreceptor trigger zone in the 
brain to emetogenic drugs (e.g., opioids), hypotension, 
or gastrointestinal hyperperistalsis secondary to unop-
posed parasympathetic activity. Nausea or vomiting 
after spinal anesthesia is more likely with the addition 
of phenylephrine or epinephrine to the local anesthetic, 
peak block height of T5 or higher, baseline heart rate 
more rapid than 60 beats/min, history of motion sick-
ness, and the development of hypotension during spinal 
anesthesia. Intrathecal morphine has the highest risk 
of opioid-induced nausea or vomiting, whereas fenta-
nyl and sufentanil carry the lowest risk.88 Again these 
side effects are dose-dependent. Using less than 0.1 mg 
morphine reduces the risk without compromising the 
analgesic effect.
Urinary Retention
Urinary retention can occur in as many as one-third 
of patients after neuraxial anesthesia. Local anesthetic 
blockade of the S2, S3, and S4 nerve roots inhibits uri-
nary function as the detrusor muscle is weakened. Neu-
raxial opioids can further complicate urinary function 
by suppressing detrusor contractility and reducing the 
sensation of urge.89 Spontaneous return of normal blad-
der function is expected once the sensory level regresses 
to less than S2–S3. Along with male sex and age (pos-
sibly the result of sex and age-specific pathologies such 
as benign prostatic hypertrophy), long-acting local 
anesthetics and intrathecal morphine are also linked to 
urinary retention after neuraxial anesthesia.90
Pruritus
Pruritus can be distressing and is the most common side 
effect related to the intrathecal administration of opioids, 
with rates between 30% and 100%.91 Parturients are at par-
ticular risk.92 The incidence is not dependent on the type of 
III
Chapter 17 Spinal, Epidural, and Caudal Anesthesia
315
Sympathetic blockade may also be relatively spared 
for the same reason, although cases are described with 
hypotension from partial sympathectomy. The treatment 
is symptomatic, and the catheter should be removed and 
resited.
to 30 minutes after injection. With a subdural block, the 
motor block will be modest compared with the extent 
of sensory blockade, because the subdural space is rela-
tively more capacious in the posterior and lateral aspects, 
leading to sparing of the anterior motor nerve roots.96
REFERENCES
1. Pöpping DM, Elia N, Van Aken HK, etal. 
Impact of epidural analgesia on mortal-
ity and morbidity after surgery. Ann 
Surg. 2014;259:1056–1067.
2. Smith LM, Cozowicz C, Uda Y, Memt-
soudis SG, Barrington MJ. Neuraxial and 
combined neuraxial/general anesthesia 
compared to general anesthesia for 
major truncal and lower limb surgery: 
A systematic review and meta-analysis. 
Anesth Analg. 2017;125:1931–1934.
3. Reina MA, Lirk P, Puigdellívol-Sánchez 
A, Mavar M, Prats-Galino A. Human 
lumbar ligamentum flavum anatomy 
for epidural anesthesia. Anesth Analg. 
2016;122:903–907.
4. Lirk P, Kolbitsch C, Putz G, etal. Cervical 
and high thoracic ligamentum flavum 
frequently fails to fuse in the midline. 
Anesthesiology. 2003;99:1387–1390.
5. Liu S, Kopacz DJ, Carpenter RL. Quanti-
tative assessment of differential sensory 
nerve block after lidocaine spinal anes-
thesia. Anesthesiology. 1995;82:60–63.
6. Greene NM. Distribution of local anes-
thetic solutions within the subarachnoid 
space. Anesth Analg. 1985;64:715–730.
7. Clement R, Malinovsky JM, Le Corre 
P, Dollo G, Chevanne F, Le Verge R. 
Cerebrospinal fluid bioavailability and 
pharmacokinetics of bupivacaine and 
lidocaine after intrathecal and epi-
dural administrations in rabbits using 
microdialysis. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 
1999;289:1015–1021.
8. Visser WA, Lee RA, Gielen MJM. Fac-
tors affecting the distribution of neural 
blockade by local anesthetics in epidural 
anesthesia and a comparison of lum-
bar versus thoracic epidural anesthesia. 
Anesth Analg. 2008;107:708–721.
9. Rooke GA, Freund PR, Jacobson AF. 
Hemodynamic response and change in 
organ blood volume during spinal anes-
thesia in elderly men with cardiac dis-
ease. Anesth Analg. 1997;85:99–105.
10. Greene NM. Physiology of spinal anesthe
sia. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins; 
1981. 3rd ed.
11. Crystal GJ, Salem MR. The Bainbridge 
and the “reverse” Bainbridge reflexes: 
History, physiology and clinical rele-
vance. Anesth Analg. 2012;114:520–532.
12. Minville V, Asehnoune K, Salau S, etal. 
The effects of spinal anesthesia on 
cerebral blood flow in the very elderly. 
Anesth Analg. 2009;108:1291–1294.
13. Pollock J, Neal JM, Liu SS, Burkhead D, 
Polissar N. Sedation during spinal anes-
thesia. Anesthesiology. 2000;93:728–734.
14. Groeben H. Epidural anesthesia and 
pulmonary function. J Anesth. 2006;
20:290–299.
15. Freise H, Fischer LG. Intestinal effects of 
thoracic epidural anesthesia. Curr Opin 
Anaesthesiol. 2009;22:644–648.
16. Hawkins JL. Epidural analgesia for labor 
and delivery. N Engl J Med. 2010;
362:1503–1510.
17. Macfarlane AJR, Prasad GA, Chan 
VWS, Brull R. Does regional anaes-
thesia improve outcome after total hip 
arthroplasty? A systematic review. Br J 
Anaesth. 2009;103:335–345.
18. Macfarlane AJR, Prasad GA, Chan 
VWS, Brull R. Does regional anesthe-
sia improve outcome after total knee 
arthroplasty?. Clin Orthop Relat Res. 
2009;467:2379–2402.
19. Nishimori M, Low JHS, Zheng H, Bal-
lantyne JC. Epidural pain relief ver-
sus systemic opioid-based pain relief 
for abdominal aortic surgery. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev. 2012(7):CD005059.
20. Joshi GP, Bonnet F, Shah R, etal. 
The comparative effects of postopera-
tive analgesic therapies on pulmonary 
outcome: Cumulative meta-analyses of 
randomized, controlled trials. Anesth 
Analg. 2008;107:1026–1040.
21. Svircevic V, van Dijk D, Nierich AP, 
etal. Meta-analysis of thoracic epi-
dural anesthesia versus general anesthe-
sia for cardiac surgery. Anesthesiology. 
2011;114:271–282.
22. Neal JM, Barrington MJ, Brull R, etal. 
The Second ASRA Practice Advisory 
on Neurologic Complications Associ-
ated With Regional Anesthesia and Pain 
Medicine: Executive summary 2015. Reg 
Anesth Pain Med. 2015;40(5):401–430.
23. Hilt H, Gramm HJ, Link J. Changes 
in intracranial pressure associated with 
extradural anaesthesia. Br J Anaesth. 
1986;58:676–680.
24. Hebl JR, Horlocker TT, Kopp SL, Schroeder 
DR. Neuraxial blockade in patients with 
preexisting spinal stenosis, lumbar disk 
disease, or prior spine surgery: Efficacy 
and neurologic complications. Anesth 
Analg. 2010;111:1511–1519.
25. Perlas A, Chan VWS. Neuraxial anes-
thesia and multiple sclerosis. Can J 
Anaesth. 2005;52:454–458.
26. McDonald SB. Is neuraxial blockade 
contraindicated in the patient with aor-
tic stenosis?. Reg Anesth Pain Med. 
2004;29:496–502.
27. Horlocker TT, Vandermeuelen E, Kopp 
SL, Gogarten W, Leffert LR, Benzon 
HT. Regional anesthesia in the patient 
receiving antithrombotic or thrombolytic 
therapy: American Society of Regional 
Anesthesia and Pain Medicine Evidence-
Based Guidelines (fourth edition). Reg 
Anesth Pain Med. 2018;43:263–309.
28. Choi S, Brull R. Neuraxial techniques in 
obstetric and non-obstetric patients with 
common bleeding diatheses. Anesth 
Analg. 2009;109:648–660.
29. Wedel DJ, Horlocker TT. Regional anes-
thesia in the febrile or infected patient. 
Reg Anesth Pain Med. 2006;31:324–333.
30. Hocking G, Wildsmith JAW. Intrathecal 
drug spread. Br J Anaesth. 2004;93:568–
578.
31. Tetzlaff JE, O'Hara J, Bell G, etal. 
Influence of baricity on the outcome 
of spinal anesthesia with bupivacaine 
for lumbar spine surgery. Reg Anesth. 
1995;20:533–537.
32. Van Zundert AA, Grouls RJ, Korsten HH, 
Lambert DH. Spinal anesthesia: Volume 
or concentration—what matters? Reg 
Anesth. 1996;21:112–118.
33. Sarantopoulos C, Fassoulaki A. Systemic 
opioids enhance the spread of sensory 
analgesia produced by intrathecal lido-
caine. Anesth Analg. 1994;79:94–97.
34. Carpenter RL, Hogan QH, Liu SS, etal. 
Lumbosacral cerebrospinal fluid volume is 
the primary determinant of sensory block 
extent and duration during spinal anes-
thesia. Anesthesiology. 1998;89:24–29.
35. Taivainen T, Tuominen M, Rosenber PH. 
Influence of obesity on the spread of spi-
nal analgesia after injection of plain 0.5% 
bupivacaine at the L3-4 or L4-5 inter-
space. Br J Anaesth. 1990;64:542–546.
36. Veering BT. The role of ageing in local 
anaesthesia. Pain Rev. 1999;6:167–173.
37. Kim JT, Shim JK, Kim SH, etal. Tren-
delenburg position with hip flexion 
as a rescue strategy to increase spinal 
anaesthetic level after spinal block. Br J 
Anaesth. 2007;98:396–400.
38. Urmey WF, Stanton J, Bassin P, Sharrock 
NE. The direction of the Whitacre needle 
aperture affects the extent and duration 
of isobaric spinal anesthesia. Anesth 
Analg. 1997;84:337–341.
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
316
39. Casati A, Fanelli G, Cappelleri G, etal. 
Effects of spinal needle type on lateral 
distribution of 0.5% hyperbaric bupiv-
acaine. Anesth Analg. 1998;87:355–359.
40. Sanderson P, Read J, Littlewood DG, 
etal. Interaction between baricity (glu-
cose concentration) and other factors 
influencing intrathecal drug spread. Br J 
Anaesth. 1994;73:744–746.
41. Malinovsky JM, Renaud G, Le Corre P, 
etal. Intrathecal bupivacaine in humans: 
Influence of volume and baricity of solu-
tions. Anesthesiology. 1999;91:1260–
1266.
42. Goldblum E, Atchabahian A. The use of 
2-chloroprocaine for spinal anaesthesia. 
Acta Anaesthesiol Scand. 2013;57:545–552.
43. Zaric D, Pace NL. Transient neurologic 
symptoms (TNS) following spinal anaes-
thesia with lidocaine versus other local 
anaesthetics. Cochrane Database Syst 
Rev. 2009(2):CD003006.
44. Casati A, Vinciguerra F. Intrathecal 
anesthesia. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol. 
2002;15:543–551.
45. Nair GS, Abrishami A, Lermitte J, Chung 
F. Systematic review of spinal anaes-
thesia using bupivacaine for ambula-
tory knee arthroscopy. Br J Anaesth. 
2009;102:307–315.
46. Whiteside JB, Burke D. Comparison of 
ropivacaine 0.5% (in glucose 5%) with 
bupivacaine 0.5% (in glucose 8%) for 
spinal anaesthesia for elective surgery. 
Br J Anaesth. 2003;90:304–308.
47. Hamber EA, Viscomi CM. Intrathecal 
lipophilic opioids as adjuncts to surgical 
spinal anesthesia. Reg Anesth Pain Med. 
1999;24:255–263.
48. Meylan N, Elia N, Lysakowski C, Tramèr 
MR. Benefit and risk of intrathecal 
morphine without local anaesthetic in 
patients undergoing major surgery: 
Meta-analysis of randomized trials. Br J 
Anaesth. 2009;102:156–167.
49. Murphy PM, Stack D, Kinirons B, 
Laffey JG. Optimizing the dose of 
intrathecal morphine in older patients 
undergoing hip arthroplasty. Anesth 
Analg. 2003;97:1709–1715.
50. Zorrilla-Vaca A, Healy RZ-VC. Finer 
gauge of cutting but not pencil-point 
needles correlate with lower incidence 
of post-dural puncture headache: A 
meta-regression analysis. J Anesth. 
2016;30:855–863.
51. Flaatten H, Rodt SA, Vamnes J, etal. 
Postdural puncture headache. A compar-
ison between 26- and 29-gauge needles 
in young patients. Anaesthesia. 1989;
44:147–149.
52. Hebl JR. The importance and impli-
cations of aseptic techniques during 
regional anesthesia. Reg Anesth Pain 
Med. 2006;31:311–323.
53. Chin KJ, Karmakar MK, Peng P. Ultra-
sonography of the adult thoracic and 
lumbar spine for central neuraxial block-
ade. Anesthesiology. 2011;114:1459–
1485.
54. Perlas A, Chaparro LE, Chin KJ. Lumbar 
neuraxial ultrasound for spinal and 
epidural anesthesia: A systematic review 
and meta-analysis. Reg Anesth Pain 
Med. 2016;41:251–260.
55. Moore JM. Continuous spinal anesthesia. 
Am J Ther. 2009;16:289–294.
56. Rigler ML, Drasner K, Krejcie TC, etal. 
Cauda equina syndrome after continu-
ous spinal anesthesia. Anesth Analg. 
1991;72:275–281.
57. Vaghadia H, Viskari D, Mitchell GW, 
Berrill A. Selective spinal anesthesia for 
outpatient laparoscopy. I: characteristics 
of three hypobaric solutions. Can J 
Anaesth. 2001;48:256–260.
58. Bromage PR. A comparison of the hydro-
chloride and carbon dioxide salts of 
lidocaine and prilocaine in epidural anal-
gesia. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand Suppl. 
1965;16:55–69.
59. Visser WA, Liem TH, van Egmond J, 
Gielen MJ. Extension of sensory block-
ade after thoracic epidural administra-
tion of a test dose of lidocaine at three 
different levels. Anesth Analg. 1998;
86:332–335.
60. Stevens RA, Urmey WF, Urquhart BL, 
Kao TC. Back pain after epidural anes-
thesia with chloroprocaine. Anesthesiol-
ogy. 1993;78:492–497.
61. Marinacci AA. Neurological aspects 
of complications of spinal anesthesia, 
with medicolegal implications. Bull Los 
Angeles Neurol Soc. 1960;25:170–192.
62. Sultan P, Gutierrez MC, Carvalho B. 
Neuraxial morphine and respiratory 
depression: Finding the right balance. 
Drugs. 2011;71:1807–1819.
63. Hillyard SG, Bate TE, Corcoran TB, 
Paech MJ, O'Sullivan G. Extending epi-
dural analgesia for emergency Cae-
sarean section: A meta-analysis. Br J 
Anaesth. 2011;107:668–678.
64. Covino BG, Scott DB, McClure JH. 
Handbook of Epidural Anaesthesia and 
Analgesia. Fribourg, Switzerland: Medi-
globe; 1999.
65. Morison DH. Alkalinization of local anaes-
thetics. Can J Anaesth. 1995;42:1076–1079.
66. Segal S, Eappen S, Datta S. Superior-
ity of multi-orifice over single-orifice 
epidural catheters for labor analgesia 
and cesarean delivery. J Clin Anesth. 
1997;9:109–112.
67. Murphy JD, Ouanes JPP, Togioka BM, 
etal. Comparison of air and liquid 
for use in loss-of-resistance technique 
during labor epidurals: A meta-analysis. 
J Anesth Clin Res. 2011;2:175.
68. Mhyre JM, Lou VH, Greenfield M, etal. 
A systematic review of randomized con-
trolled trials that evaluate strategies to 
avoid epidural vein cannulation during 
obstetric epidural catheter placement. 
Anesth Analg. 2009;108:1232–1242.
69. Afshan G, Chohan U, Khan FA, etal. 
Appropriate length of epidural catheter 
in the epidural space for postoperative 
analgesia: Evaluation by epidurography. 
Anaesthesia. 2011;66:913–918.
70. Tsui BC, Gupta S, Finucane B. Confir-
mation of epidural catheter placement 
using nerve stimulation. Can J Anaesth. 
1998;45:640–644.
71. Grau T, Leipold RW, Conradi R, Martin 
E, Motsch J. Efficacy of ultrasound 
imaging in obstetric epidural anesthesia. 
J Clin Anesth. 2002;14:169–175.
72. Lew E, Yeo SW, Thomas E. Combined 
spinal-epidural anesthesia using epi-
dural volume extension leads to faster 
motor recovery after elective cesarean 
delivery: A prospective, randomized, 
double-blind study. Anesth Analg. 2004;
98:810–814.
73. Rawal N. Combined spinal-epidural 
anaesthesia. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol. 
2005;18:518–521.
74. Mackey D. Physiologic effects of regional 
block. In: Brown DL, ed. Regional Anes-
thesia and Analgesia. Philadelphia: WB 
Saunders; 1996.
75. Brull R, McCartney CJL, Chan VWS, El-
Beheiry H. Neurological complications 
after regional anesthesia: contempo-
rary estimates of risk. Anesth Analg. 
2007;104:965–974.
76. Cook TM, Counsell D, Wildsmith JAW. 
Royal College of Anaesthetists Third 
National Audit Project. Major complica-
tions of central neuraxial block: Report 
on the Third National Audit Project of 
the Royal College of Anaesthetists. Br J 
Anaesth. 2009;102:179–190.
77. Auroy Y, Benhamou D, Bargues L, 
etal. Major complications of regional 
anesthesia in France. Anesthesiology. 
2002;97:1274–1280.
78. Choi PT, Galinski SE, Takeuchi L, etal. 
PDPH is a common complication of 
neuraxial blockade in parturients: A 
meta-analysis of obstetrical studies. Can 
J Anaesth. 2003;50:460–469.
79. Turnbull DK, Shepherd DB. Post-dural 
puncture headache: Pathogenesis, pre-
vention and treatment. Br J Anaesth. 
2003;91:718–729.
80. Harrington BE. Postdural puncture head-
ache and the development of the epi-
dural blood patch. Reg Anesth Pain Med. 
2004;29:136–163.
81. Paech MJ, Doherty DA, Christmas T, 
Wong CA. Epidural Blood Patch Trial 
Group. The volume of blood for epidural 
blood patch in obstetrics: A randomized, 
blinded clinical trial. Anesth Analg. 
2011;113:126–133.
82. Gozdemir M, Muslu B, Sert H, etal. 
Transient neurological symptoms after 
spinal anaesthesia with levobupivacaine 
AL GRAWANY
III
Chapter 17 Spinal, Epidural, and Caudal Anesthesia
317
5 mg/ml or lidocaine 20 mg/ml. Acta 
Anaesthesiol Scand. 2010;54:59–64.
83. Hartmann B, Junger A, Klasen J, etal. 
The incidence and risk factors for hypo-
tension after spinal anesthesia induction: 
An analysis with automated data collec-
tion. Anesth Analg. 2002;94:1521–1529.
84. Lesser JB, Sanborn KV, Valskys R, Kuroda 
M. Severe bradycardia during spinal and 
epidural anesthesia recorded by an anes-
thesia information management system. 
Anesthesiology. 2003;99:859–866.
85. Gwirtz KH, Young JV, Byers RS, etal. The 
safety and efficacy of intrathecal opioid 
analgesia for acute postoperative pain: 
Seven years’ experience with 5969 surgi-
cal patients at Indiana University Hospital. 
Anesth Analg. 1999;88:599–604.
86. Gehling MTM. Risks and side-effects 
of intrathecal morphine combined with 
spinal anaesthesia: A meta-analysis. 
Anaesthesia. 2009;64:643–651.
87. Horlocker TT, Burton AW, Connis RT, 
etal., American Society of Anesthesi-
ologists Task Force on Neuraxial Opioids 
Practice guidelines for the prevention, 
detection and management of respira-
tory depression associated with neuraxial 
opioid administration. Anesthesiology. 
2009;110:218–230.
88. Borgeat A, Ekatodramis G, Schenker CA. 
Postoperative nausea and vomiting in 
regional anesthesia: A review. Anesthe-
siology. 2003;98:530–547.
89. Kuipers PW, Kamphuis ET, van Venrooij 
GE, etal. Intrathecal opioids and lower uri-
nary tract function: A urodynamic evalua-
tion. Anesthesiology. 2004;100:1497–1503.
90. Baldini G, Bagry H, Aprikian A, Carli F. 
Postoperative urinary retention: Anes-
thetic and perioperative considerations. 
Anesthesiology. 2009;110:1139–1157.
91. Rathmell JP, Lair TR, Nauman B. 
The role of intrathecal drugs in the 
treatment of acute pain. Anesth Analg. 
2005;101(5 suppl):S30–SS4.
92. Kumar K, Singh SI. Neuraxial opioid-
induced pruritus: An update. J Anaesthe-
siol Clin Pharmacol. 2013;29:303–307.
93. Crowley LJ, Buggy DJ. Shivering and 
neuraxial anesthesia. Reg Anesth Pain 
Med. 2008;33:241–252.
94. Bell DN, Leslie K. Detection of intra-
vascular epidural catheter placement: 
A review. Anaesth Intensive Care. 
2007;35:335–341.
95. Reina MA, Collier CB, Prats-Galino A, 
Puigdellívol-Sánchez A, Machés FDAJ. 
Unintentional subdural placement of 
epidural catheters during attempted epi-
dural anesthesia: An anatomic study 
of spinal subdural compartment. Reg 
Anesth Pain Med. 2011;36:537–541.
96. Ralph C, Williams M. Subdural or epi-
dural?. Anaesthesia. 1996;51:175–177.
318
Chapter
INTRODUCTION
The Role of Regional Anesthesia
Peripheral nerve blocks can provide surgical anesthesia and 
postoperative pain relief (Table 18.1). The main emphasis of 
this chapter will be on ultrasound guidance for peripheral 
nerve blocks. However, paresthetic-based techniques and 
nerve stimulation also are possible for nerve localization. In 
addition, ultrasound guidance and nerve stimulation tech-
nologies can be combined for some regional blocks.
Preparation to Perform a Regional Nerve Block
Foundation of Knowledge
To perform safe and effective peripheral nerve blocks, an 
understanding of peripheral neuroanatomy, ultrasound 
technology, local anesthetic pharmacology, and risks 
associated with peripheral nerve blocks is needed.
Patient and Surgeon Factors
The willingness of the patient and the surgeon, in addi-
tion to the anatomic location of the surgery, must be 
taken into consideration when incorporating peripheral 
nerve blocks into an anesthetic plan. A thorough preop-
erative review of the patient's medical history, including 
any comorbid diseases, allergies, prior neuropathy, and 
concurrent anticoagulation medications, must be per-
formed to rule out any contraindications in providing a 
peripheral nerve block.
Monitors and Equipment
Peripheral nerve blocks may be performed preoperatively 
in a dedicated block area or in the operating room. The 
patient must have a functional peripheral intravenous 
line and monitoring equipment, including pulse oximetry, 
electrocardiogram (ECG), and noninvasive blood pressure 
machine. Supplemental oxygen, emergency medications, 
and airway equipment must be readily accessible. Sedation 
INTRODUCTION
The Role of Regional Anesthesia
Preparation to Perform a Regional Nerve Block
ULTRASOUND BASICS
Basic Ultrasound Physics
Echogenic Properties of Nerves and Tissue
Ergonomics and Transducer Manipulation
Regional Block Technique
Peripheral Nerve Catheters
CERVICAL PLEXUS BLOCK
UPPER EXTREMITY BLOCKS
Brachial Plexus
Intercostobrachial Nerve Block
LOWER EXTREMITY BLOCKS
Femoral Nerve
Sciatic Nerve
Ankle Block
CHEST AND ABDOMEN BLOCKS
Intercostal Nerve Block
Transversus Abdominis Plane Block
INTRAVENOUS REGIONAL ANESTHESIA 
(BIER BLOCK)
Selection of Local Anesthetic
Characteristics of the Block
Risks
PERIPHERAL NERVE
BLOCKS
Edward N. Yap, Andrew T. Gray
18
III
Chapter 18 Peripheral Nerve Blocks
319
rate of systemic absorption, epinephrine can reduce peak 
plasma levels of local anesthetic. Practitioners may also 
add perineural steroids (e.g., preservative-free dexametha-
sone) to local anesthetics to prolong regional blocks.1 Con-
siderations for the choice of local anesthetic solution for 
intravenous regional anesthesia are different from those 
for peripheral nerve blocks (see the later discussion under 
“Intravenous Regional Anesthesia [Bier Block]”).
Regional Block Checklist
A standardized regional block checklist should be 
reviewed before performing a peripheral nerve block to 
improve safety.2 3 The checklist should include surgical 
consent, site marking, allergies, anticoagulation status, 
proposed peripheral nerve block, local anesthetic dose, 
side of the block, monitors implemented, emergency 
equipment available, and sedation plan.
Risks and Prevention
Infection
Infectious risk associated with a peripheral nerve block 
or placement of a peripheral nerve catheter is rare.4
However, an infection can cause significant morbidity 
and may lead to permanent neurologic injury. By per-
forming proper hand hygiene, using maximal barriers 
during nerve block and catheter placement, and provid-
ing antiseptic solution at the site of insertion, the rate of 
infection can be reduced.
Hematoma
The risk of developing a hematoma depends on the loca-
tion of the peripheral nerve block being performed, the 
proximity to vascular structures, and vascular compress-
ibility. With the use of ultrasound and proper aspiration 
technique, vascular puncture can be reduced.5 A review 
of the patient's medical history with an emphasis on any 
anticoagulation medications is important. The American 
Society of Regional Anesthesia and Pain Medicine pro-
vides guidelines on anticoagulation management.6
Local Anesthetic Systemic Toxicity (Also See Chapter 10)
Local anesthetic systemic toxicity (LAST) secondary to 
local anesthetic absorption can range from mild symp-
toms to major neurologic and cardiovascular toxicity. 
may be indicated, depending on the patient's anxiety and 
magnitude of pain.
The patient, ultrasound machine, and anesthesia pro-
vider must be positioned in a way to optimize the nerve 
block being performed. For most blocks, the provider is 
positioned on the ipsilateral side and the ultrasound on 
the contralateral side of the block region. The choice of 
the ultrasound probe (Fig. 18.1) and needle is depend-
ent on the location of the peripheral nerve block; the 
addition of placing a catheter will depend on the type of 
surgery being performed, the duration of hospital stay, 
and patient and surgeon preference.
Choice of Local Anesthetic
The choice of local anesthetic for peripheral nerve block-
ade depends on several factors, including the desired onset, 
duration, and degree of conduction block (see Chapter 10). 
Lidocaine and mepivacaine, 1% to 1.5%, produce surgi-
cal anesthesia in 10 to 20 minutes that lasts 2 to 3 hours. 
Ropivacaine 0.5% and bupivacaine 0.375% to 0.5% have 
a slower onset and produce less motor blockade, but the 
effect lasts for at least 6 to 8 hours. The addition of epi-
nephrine 1:200,000 (5 μg/mL) can serve as a marker for 
intravascular injection and can increase the duration of a 
conduction block. In addition, through a decrease in the 
Fig. 18.1 Ultrasound transducers for regional blocks. (From Gray AT. Atlas of Ultrasound-Guided Regional 
Anesthesia. 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier-Saunders; 2018:21.)
Origin
Specific Block
Cervical plexus
Superficial
Brachial plexus
Interscalene
Supraclavicular
Infraclavicular
Axillary
Lumbar plexus
Lateral femoral cutaneousa
Femoral
Adductor canal
Saphenous
Obturatora
Sacral plexus
Proximal sciatic
Popliteal sciatic
Table 18.1
Examples of Peripheral Nerve Blocks
aNot covered in this chapter.
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
320
crystals in the transducer that convert electrical currents 
into mechanical pressure waves and vice versa, send-
ing and receiving ultrasound echoes to thereby generate 
images.
As ultrasound waves pass through different body 
tissues, the resistance to the propagation of ultrasound 
waves, or acoustic impedance, changes depending on the 
density of the tissue. Solid tissues have denser particles 
that effectively reflect waves that will be received by the 
transducer, displayed as brighter or hyperechoic struc-
tures. Less dense tissue does not reflect ultrasound waves 
as effectively, displayed as darker or hypoechoic struc-
tures. Tissues that do not reflect any ultrasound waves 
are considered anechoic.
Improving image resolution, or the ability to dis-
tinguish one structure from another, will optimize 
performance of peripheral nerve blocks. Increasing the 
frequency of the ultrasound wave will improve resolu-
tion of the image but will decrease the penetration of the 
ultrasound waves. Decreasing the frequency will lower 
the resolution but will improve the penetration to deeper 
tissue because there is less attenuation. Increasing the 
receiver gain (i.e., amplification of the returning echo 
signal) can to some extent compensate for attenuation.
Echogenic Properties of Nerves and Tissue
Peripheral nerves can be recognized on ultrasound scans 
by their fascicular echotexture. Central nerves (such as 
the cervical ventral rami) and very small nerves (such as 
the phrenic nerve) have a monofascicular or oligofascicu-
lar appearance (Fig. 18.2). Most peripheral nerves have a 
A variety of factors, including patient risk factors, con-
current medications, total local anesthetic dose, and 
anatomic location of the peripheral nerve block, play a 
role in the risk of LAST. There is no single measure to 
prevent LAST; however, using the smallest effective dose, 
an incremental injection, aspiration before injection, an 
intravascular marker (i.e., epinephrine), and ultrasound 
guidance may decrease the risk. Lipid emulsion resuscita-
tion remains the cornerstone of therapy to treat patients 
with LAST.7 8
Nerve Injury
Nerve injury may result from direct needle trauma, 
inadvertent intraneural injection, or drug neurotoxicity. 
Serious neurologic injury from a peripheral nerve block 
is rare; however, the rate of transient paresthesia that 
resolves within days to weeks postoperatively is substan-
tially higher.9 11 The use of ultrasound to identify nerves, 
limiting the injection pressure, and patient feedback may 
help decrease the rate of nerve injury, although clinical 
outcome data are limited.
Wrong-Sided Block
Wrong site, wrong procedure, and wrong patient periph-
eral nerve blocks are potentially serious medical errors 
that are inherent risks in performing any medical proce-
dure.12 Although rare, this complication can be reduced 
by having a universal protocol that includes a checklist 
to ensure the correct patient, the proper surgery site, and 
correct laterality (Table 18.2).
ULTRASOUND BASICS
An understanding of ultrasound imaging and transducer 
manipulation is important in providing safe and effective 
peripheral nerve blocks.
Basic Ultrasound Physics
Ultrasound imaging uses sound waves with frequency 
greater than 20 kHz. The use of ultrasound for medical 
purposes was first recognized in the 1930s. Since then, 
improvements in technology have paved the way to pro-
duce real-time images to help in diagnostics and inter-
ventions. Medical ultrasound machines use piezoelectric 
Adverse Event
Approximate Incidence
Anesthetic systemic toxicity
1 in 20005
Peripheral nerve injury
1 in 1000
Wrong side/site block
1 in 10,000
Table 18.2
Approximate Incidence of Adverse Events 
During Peripheral Nerve Blocks
Lateral
Brachial
plexus
Phrenic n.
SCM
ASM
Skin
MSM
Fig. 18.2 This sonogram of the right side of the neck shows 
the roots of the brachial plexus as they pass between the 
anterior and middle scalene muscles. The core of these large 
peripheral nerves is less echogenic than the surrounding muscle. 
The phrenic nerve is a small hypoechoic structure seen on 
the anterior surface of the anterior scalene muscle. ASM,
Anterior scalene muscle; MSM, middle scalene muscle; SCM,
sternocleidomastoid muscle.20
III
Chapter 18 Peripheral Nerve Blocks
321
regional blocks, the soft tissue will allow the transducer 
to rock back and reduce the angle of insonation, thereby 
improving needle tip visibility. Visual inspection is a good 
technique before using ultrasound guidance or if needle 
lineups are difficult.15 Most practitioners compress adjacent 
veins while introducing the needle to reduce the chance of 
venous puncture.
Regional Block Technique
There are multiple approaches to peripheral nerve blocks. 
Most blocks can be performed with a short-axis view of 
the nerve to be blocked. This view is stable for nerves 
with a relatively straight path. The in-plane technique, 
with the entire needle shaft and tip within the plane 
of imaging, is often used to guide needle placement 
(Fig. 18.3). Alternatively, the out-of-plane approach 
can be used so that the needle tip crosses the plane of 
imaging as an echogenic dot. The quality of imaging 
and identification of structures are more important than 
approach. Differences in outcomes have been difficult to 
show when comparing various approaches to blocks in 
clinical studies.
Peripheral Nerve Catheters
Catheters can be placed adjacent to peripheral nerves 
for postoperative analgesia by infusion of dilute local 
anesthetic solutions. Continuous peripheral nerve blocks 
polyfascicular appearance, which consists of a collection 
of small round hypoechoic dots (from the nerve fasci-
cles or nerve fiber content) surrounded by hyperechoic 
stroma (from the nerve connective tissue). This pattern 
can be referred to as “honeycomb” or “bunch of grapes.” 
Although we use the term nerve fascicles, it is understood 
that only a subset of the total number of fascicles will 
be evident on an ultrasound scan because thin layers of 
connective tissue that divide fascicles cannot be resolved 
on the image.13 Nerves have a relatively constant cross-
sectional area along their course, which helps distinguish 
these anatomic structures from adjacent tendons.
Ergonomics and Transducer Manipulation
Proper ergonomics are essential for ultrasound-guided 
interventions. It is important to maintain proper posture and 
position to reduce anesthesia provider fatigue (e.g., optimize 
patient position, bed height, and position of the display). A 
comfortable grip on the ultrasound transducer and resting 
the ulnar aspect of the transducer hand on the patient will 
promote stability. There are five basic transducer manipula-
tion techniques to help optimize the ultrasound image: slid-
ing, tilting, rocking, rotation, and compression. Peripheral 
nerves exhibit anisotropy, which means that the reflected 
echoes depend on the angle of insonation.14 The transducer 
can be tilted to maximize the returning echoes from the 
peripheral nerve. Slide and rotate the transducer to find 
the needle tip while maintaining nerve visibility. For some 
SAX OOP
SAX IP
LAX OOP
LAX IP
Fig. 18.3 Approaches to regional block with ultrasound. LAX IP, Long-axis imaging, in-plane needle approach; 
LAX OOP, long-axis imaging, out-of-plane needle approach; SAX IP, short-axis imaging, in-plane needle 
approach; SAX OOP, short-axis imaging, out-of-plane needle approach. (From Gray AT. Atlas of Ultrasound-
Guided Regional Anesthesia. 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018:30.)
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
322
cervical plexus block is used most often to provide anes-
thesia in conscious patients undergoing carotid endarter-
ectomy. Although combined superficial and deep cervical 
plexus blocks have traditionally been used for this surgi-
cal procedure, a superficial block alone is often sufficient.
UPPER EXTREMITY BLOCKS
Brachial Plexus
The brachial plexus is a network of nerves that is com-
posed of five nerve roots (C5, C6, C7, C8, and T1) that 
provide both motor control and sensory input for almost 
the entire upper extremity (Fig. 18.5). The skin over the 
shoulder is supplied by the supraclavicular nerves of 
the cervical plexus, and the medial aspect of the arm is 
supplied by the intercostobrachial branch of the second 
intercostal nerve (Fig. 18.6). The C5–T1 nerve roots form 
ventral rami and trunks in the space between the anterior 
and middle scalene muscles in the cervical region and 
then pass over the first rib and under the clavicle. The 
trunks form three anterior and three posterior divisions, 
which recombine to create three cords in the infraclav-
icular region. These cords divide into terminal branches 
in the axillary region. The location of the surgery, experi-
ence of the anesthesia provider, and patient factors, such 
as body habitus, help determine where along the brachial 
plexus a peripheral nerve block should be performed 
(Table 18.3).
Interscalene Block
An interscalene block targets the ventral rami of the 
brachial plexus (derived from C5, C6, C7, C8, and T1 
nerve roots) and is therefore suited for surgeries that 
involve the distal clavicle, shoulder, and upper arm.16 18
The interscalene block can spare the inferior trunk (from 
C8 and T1, partly the ulnar distribution of the brachial 
plexus) and thus is not always suitable for distal forearm 
and hand surgeries.
An interscalene block is traditionally performed near 
the C6 vertebral level, where the brachial plexus emerges 
in between the anterior and middle scalene muscles. The 
patient's head is turned toward the contralateral side 
of the block to help expose the interscalene groove. A 
linear ultrasound probe is placed in a transverse plane at 
the C6 vertebral level, providing a short-axis view of the 
brachial plexus. Anatomic structures that are identified 
should be the middle scalene muscle, anterior scalene 
muscle, sternocleidomastoid muscle, and brachial plexus 
(Fig. 18.7). The obtained view has a “stoplight” appear-
ance of the brachial plexus that refers typically to a 
monofascicular C5 and bifascicular C619 ventral rami as 
aligned in a parallel fashion from superficial to deep.
Using the in-plane technique, the needle is inserted 
from the lateral to medial direction through the middle 
can be used in the hospital setting to facilitate vigor-
ous early joint mobilization after orthopedic surgery. 
They can also be used to provide potent analgesia for 
outpatient surgery. For placement of these catheters, the 
peripheral nerve should be located with an ultrasound in 
a fashion similar to that for a single-injection block. A 
large-bore needle (e.g., 17-gauge Tuohy) is used for the 
block and placed at the desired location, and then the 
catheter is threaded through the needle. Injection of a 
local anesthetic or dextrose solution immediately before 
catheter placement can be useful by creating more space 
adjacent to the nerve. Similar to an intravenous catheter, 
there are some catheter systems that thread the catheter 
over the needle after placement of the catheter–needle 
system at the desired location. Peripheral nerve catheters 
are more prone to dislodgment than epidural catheters 
because movement of skin near the catheter entry point 
is more likely.
CERVICAL PLEXUS BLOCK
The cervical plexus is formed by the second, third, and 
fourth cervical nerves. With the patient's head turned to 
the opposite side, the superficial cervical plexus can be 
blocked by infiltration of local anesthetic solution just 
deep to the platysma and investing fascia of the neck 
along the posterior lateral border of the sternocleido-
mastoid muscle (Fig. 18.4). The anesthesia produced by a 
cervical plexus block includes the area from the inferior 
surface of the mandible to the level of the clavicle. A 
Lesser
occipital n.
Great
auricular n.
Transverse
cervical n.
Supraclavicular n.
Sternocleido-
Fig. 18.4 Anatomic landmarks and method of needle placement 
for a superficial cervical plexus block. With the patient's head 
turned to the side, local anesthetic is infiltrated along the 
posterolateral border of the sternocleidomastoid muscle. 
(Modified from Brown DL, Factor DA, eds. Regional Anesthesia 
and Analgesia. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1996:245.)
III
Chapter 18 Peripheral Nerve Blocks
323
ROOTS
C5
C6 
Superior
Middle
Lateral
Posterior
Medial
Inferior
C7
C8
T1
TRUNKS
DIVISIONS
CORDS
BRANCHES
Musculocutaneous n.
Axillary n.
Radial n.
Median n.
Ulnar n.
Medial brachial cutaneous n.
Medial antebrachial cutaneous n.
Fig. 18.5 Roots, trunks, divisions, cords, and branches of the right brachial plexus. (Modified from Johnson RL, 
Kopp SL, Kessler J, Gray AT. Peripheral nerve blocks and ultrasound guidance for regional anesthesia. In Gropper 
MA, ed. Miller's Anesthesia. 9th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:1459.)
C5
C6
Upper lateral
brachial
cutaneous n.
Cutaneous
branches of
radial n.
Radial n.
Ulnar n.
Ulnar n.
Median n.
Lateral antebrachial
cutaneous n.
Medial brachial
cutaneous n. and
intercostobrachial n.
Medial antebrachial
cutaneous n.
T1
C6
C8
C7
C8
C7
C8
A
B
Fig. 18.6 (A) Cutaneous distribution of the cervical and thoracic roots of the upper extremity. (B) Cutaneous 
distribution of the peripheral nerves of the upper extremity. (Modified from Johnson RL, Kopp SL, Kessler J, et al. 
Peripheral nerve blocks and ultrasound guidance for regional anesthesia. In Gropper MA, ed. Miller's Anesthesia. 
9th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:1724, 1459.
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
324
Technique
Level
Advantage
Potential Drawback(s)
Interscalene
Roots/trunks
Shoulder coverage
Hemidiaphragmatic paresis
Inferior trunk sparing
Supraclavicular
Trunks/divisions
Overall completeness
Pneumothorax risk
Infraclavicular
Cords
Catheter placement
Deep to pectoral muscles
Axillary
Branches
Shallow block
Musculocutaneous nerve sparing
Table 18.3
Techniques for Brachial Plexus Block
Fig. 18.7 The brachial plexus passes between the anterior and middle scalene muscles and joins the subclavian 
artery as it passes over the first rib (left, lower drawing). Interscalene block of the brachial plexus is performed with 
the patient supine and the head turned to the contralateral side (left, upper drawing). The interscalene groove 
is imaged with high-frequency ultrasound (right, upper sonogram). The needle advances from lateral to medial 
within the plane of imaging. Interscalene block is performed by infiltrating local anesthetic around the roots of 
the brachial plexus as they pass between the anterior and middle scalene muscles (right, lower sonogram). ASM,
Anterior scalene muscle; BP, brachial plexus; LA, local anesthetic; MSM, middle scalene muscle; SCA, subclavian 
artery; SCM, sternocleidomastoid muscle.
scalene muscle toward the brachial plexus. Once the 
needle passes into the brachial plexus fascia sheath, 
local anesthetic is injected. To ensure an adequate block, 
spread of the local anesthetic should be seen along the 
cervical ventral rami.
The interscalene block has the potential risk of Horner 
syndrome, recurrent laryngeal nerve block, epidural or 
subarachnoid injection, vertebral artery injection, and 
pneumothorax. The risk of transient phrenic nerve block 
and resultant hemidiaphragmatic paresis can be reduced 
with interscalene injections lower in the neck with a 
smaller volume and lower concentration of local anes-
thetic.20,21
Supraclavicular Block
Supraclavicular block of the brachial plexus is achieved 
by injecting 20 to 30 mL of local anesthetic solution 
around the brachial plexus, where it is usually tightly 
III
Chapter 18 Peripheral Nerve Blocks
325
The needle approaches in plane from cephalad to cau-
dad (lateral to medial) for an infraclavicular block. After 
a skin wheal of local anesthetic is placed, the needle is 
directed toward the space between the lateral cord and 
the axillary artery. The goal of the infraclavicular block 
is to spread the local anesthetic around the axillary artery 
in a U-shape, as this will assure blockade of all three 
wall-hugging cords of the brachial plexus.
The advantages of the infraclavicular block are the 
close proximity of the brachial plexus to the artery, 
relatively consistent anatomy, and a stable site for place-
ment of a continuous peripheral nerve catheter. Because 
of the close proximity to the clavicle and the depth of 
the block, performing this block can be challenging in 
some patients.
Axillary Block
The axillary block targets the terminal branches of the 
brachial plexus in the axilla: the median, ulnar, radial, 
and musculocutaneous nerves. The axillary block is suit-
able for surgeries of the elbow, forearm, wrist, and hand.
The axillary block is typically performed with a linear 
transducer using a short-axis view of the nerves and ves-
sels in the axilla and an in-plane approach (Fig. 18.9). 
The patient is positioned supine with the arm to be 
blocked abducted and externally rotated. The ultrasound 
image should display the axillary artery and vein(s); ter-
minal branches of the brachial plexus; conjoint tendon; 
and the biceps, triceps, and coracobrachialis muscles.22
The relation of the terminal branches to the axillary 
artery is usually as follows: median (superficial), ulnar 
(medial), radial (posterior), and musculocutaneous (lat-
eral, traversing through the coracobrachialis muscle). The 
block is performed with a 5- to 7-cm needle, approach-
ing in plane from cephalad to caudad (lateral to medial) 
toward the branches of the brachial plexus. The goal is 
to surround each terminal branch of the brachial plexus 
with local anesthetic, often leading to local anesthetic 
spread circumferentially around the axillary artery. The 
musculocutaneous nerve can be targeted separately after 
block of the other branches of the brachial plexus.23
The advantages of this block include a lower risk of 
complications when compared with other brachial plexus 
blocks (e.g., no risk of concomitant phrenic nerve block or 
pneumothorax). The axillary block is also a simpler block 
to perform, given its superficial nature. The disadvantages 
include the potential risk of intravascular injection and 
hematoma, given the proximity of the axillary artery and 
veins, unsuitability for a peripheral nerve catheter, and 
lack of coverage for the upper arm and shoulder.
Intercostobrachial Nerve Block
The intercostobrachial nerve is a thoracic nerve (derived 
from T2 and T3) that provides cutaneous innervation to 
the medial half of the arm. This block may be used as a 
bundled and adjacent to the subclavian artery, just ceph-
alad to the clavicle. Pneumothorax is the most common 
serious complication of a supraclavicular block (about a 
1% incidence) and can be manifested initially as cough, 
dyspnea, or pleuritic chest pain. Block of the phrenic 
nerve occurs frequently (50% of procedures) but gener-
ally causes no clinically significant symptoms. Bilateral 
supraclavicular blocks are not recommended for fear 
of bilateral pneumothorax or phrenic nerve paralysis. 
Likewise, patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease may not be ideal candidates for a supraclavicular 
block. Advantages of a supraclavicular block are rapid 
onset and ability to perform the block with the arm at 
the side of the patient. The increased risk for pneumo-
thorax may limit the use of supraclavicular block for 
outpatients. Because of these risks, many practitioners 
have advocated the use of ultrasound imaging to guide 
supraclavicular blocks.
The supraclavicular block can be performed with a 
similar technique to interscalene blocks described pre-
viously. The ultrasound probe is moved closer to the 
clavicle and faces caudally to facilitate imaging of the 
brachial plexus adjacent to the subclavian artery and 
over the first rib. The broad first rib serves as a backstop 
to prevent advancement of the needle toward the thorax. 
In this location almost all practitioners utilize the in-
plane technique because of the proximity of the pleura. 
The goal is to have local anesthetic distribute underneath 
the inferior trunk of the brachial plexus, although evi-
dence now suggests that multiple injections are necessary 
for complete brachial plexus anesthesia.
Infraclavicular Block
The infraclavicular block targets the medial, lateral, and 
posterior cords of the brachial plexus and is suitable for 
surgeries of the arm below the shoulder. The cords of 
the brachial plexus are named in relation to the axil-
lary artery as the plexus travels underneath the clavicle 
toward the axilla.
The infraclavicular block is performed with the short-
axis in-plane approach (Fig. 18.8). A linear or curvilinear 
ultrasound transducer with a small footprint may be 
used. The choice of needle is dependent on the patient's 
body habitus and whether a continuous catheter will be 
placed. The patient is positioned supine with the arm 
abducted, elbow flexed, and arm externally rotated if 
possible. This will retract the clavicle and straighten 
the neurovascular bundle. The ultrasound transducer is 
placed medial to the coracoid process in a parasagittal 
plane (about halfway between the supraclavicular and 
axillary regions). Key structures to identify on the ultra-
sound image are the pectoral major and minor muscles, 
axillary artery and vein, and cords of the brachial plexus. 
Although the cords of the brachial plexus may be visual-
ized around the axillary artery, they can be difficult to 
delineate on the ultrasound image.
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
326
Local
anesthetic
Needle tip
Lateral (cephalad)
Axillary
artery
Pectoralis
major
Pectoralis
minor
Lateral (cephalad)
Brachial
plexus
Axillary
artery
Axillary
vein
SA
BP
LC
MC
PC
PMa
PMi
Fig. 18.8 Technique of infraclavicular block. (Left) With the patient supine and the arm abducted and externally 
rotated, an ultrasound transducer is placed inferior to the clavicle to visualize the subclavian artery and adjacent 
cords of the brachial plexus. A needle is advanced caudally within the plane of imaging until its tip lies within the 
fascial sheath that surrounds the brachial plexus deep to the axillary artery. In the sonograms (right) the needle tip 
passes between the lateral and medial cords of the brachial plexus and injects local anesthetic that surrounds the 
three cords. BP, Brachial plexus; LC, lateral cord; MC, medial cord; PC, posterior cord; PMa, pectoralis major muscle; 
PMi, pectoralis minor muscle; SA, subclavian artery. (Sonograms from Gray AT. Atlas of Ultrasound-Guided Regional 
Anesthesia. 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018:97, 98.)
AL GRAWANY
III
Chapter 18 Peripheral Nerve Blocks
327
exiting the pelvis under the inguinal ligament. Femoral 
nerve block is suitable for surgeries of the anterior thigh 
(e.g., quadriceps tendon surgery) and provides analgesia 
for hip, femur, and knee surgeries.
The femoral nerve block is typically performed distal 
to the point at which the femoral nerve passes under the 
inguinal ligament (Fig. 18.11). The nerve block is per-
formed with a 5- to 7-cm echogenic needle with a linear 
transducer and short-axis in-plane approach. The patient 
is positioned supine, and the transducer is placed in a 
transverse plane 1 to 2 cm distal to the inguinal ligament. 
Important structures to identify in the ultrasound image 
are the femoral artery and vein, femoral nerve, sartorius 
and iliopsoas muscles, and the fascia lata and fascia iliaca 
(which can be difficult to delineate). The femoral nerve 
is lateral to the femoral artery and is a flat oval or trian-
gular polyfascicular structure under both the fascia lata 
and fascia iliaca. The needle is advanced from lateral to 
medial toward the lateral corner of the femoral nerve, and 
typically two “pops” can be felt as the needle is advanced 
through the fascia lata and fascia iliaca. Once the needle 
tip is under the fascia iliaca and adjacent to the femoral 
nerve, local anesthetic is injected to surround the nerve.
The advantage of femoral nerve block is its reliability 
in providing analgesia to the anterior thigh and medial 
leg. It is a good location for a peripheral nerve catheter 
because it is away from the thigh tourniquet and surgical 
supplement to brachial plexus blocks to improve toler-
ance of an arm tourniquet or to improve surgical condi-
tions for proximal arm surgery. The intercostobrachial 
nerve can be blocked by subcutaneous infiltration in the 
medial half of the arm with 2 to 3 mL of local anesthetic.
LOWER EXTREMITY BLOCKS
The lower extremity nerves originate from the lumbar 
and sacral plexuses (Fig. 18.10). The lumbar plexus is 
composed of the first four lumbar nerves (L1–L4). Lower 
extremity nerves that arise from the lumbar plexus include 
the lateral femoral cutaneous, femoral, and obturator 
nerves. The sacral plexus is composed of the first four 
sacral nerves (S1–S4) and receives contributions from L4 
and L5. This plexus gives rise to the sciatic nerve.
Femoral Nerve
Femoral Nerve Block
The femoral nerve is the largest branch of the lumbar 
plexus and derives from the ventral rami of L2–L4. This 
nerve provides motor innervation to the quadriceps 
and sensation from the anterior thigh and medial leg. 
The femoral nerve descends through the psoas muscle 
and then travels between the psoas and iliacus muscles, 
Skin
RN
UN
Lateral
A
LA
LA
Needle
MCN
MN
MN
UN
RN
AA
MCN
Fig. 18.9 Axillary block. The arm is abducted 90 degrees. Key structures in the right axilla are visualized with a 
high-frequency ultrasound transducer. The arrangement of the branches of the brachial plexus around the axillary 
artery is shown in the inset. The sonogram shows the block needle advancing from lateral within the plane of 
imaging. The needle tip passes deep to the artery and injects local anesthetic that surrounds the radial nerve. 
Additional injections ensure local anesthetic spread around the ulnar and median nerves. A and AA, Axillary artery; 
LA, local anesthetic; MCN, musculocutaneous nerve; MN, median nerve; RN, radial nerve; UN, ulnar nerve.
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
328
L1
Lateral femoral
cutaneous n.
L2
L2
L3
L4
L5
L5
S1
S2
S1
S2
S3
S4
S5
L3
L4
L4
L1
L2
L3
L5
Tibial n.
POSTERIOR
ANTERIOR
POSTERIOR
ANTERIOR
A
B
Posterior femoral
cutaneous n.
Femoral n.
Obturator n.
Saphenous
(femoral) n.
Superficial
peroneal n.
Sural n.
Deep
peroneal n.
Common
peroneal n.
Fig. 18.10 (A) Cutaneous distribution of the lumbosacral nerves. (B) Cutaneous distribution of the peripheral 
nerves of the lower extremity. Note that the cutaneous distribution of the obturator nerve is highly variable but 
shown here on the medial aspect of the thigh. (Modified from Horlocker TT, Kopp SL, Wedel DJ. Nerve blocks. 
In Miller RD, ed. Miller's Anesthesia. 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015:1738.)
Needle
Lateral
FN
LA
FA
Skin
FN
FA
Fig. 18.11 Femoral nerve block. The femoral nerve runs over the surface of the iliopsoas muscle as it passes 
under the inguinal ligament. The iliac fascia invests the femoral nerve and iliopsoas muscle, which is anatomically 
separate from the femoral sheath. Femoral nerve block is performed with short-axis imaging of the femoral nerve 
and artery. In the sonogram the block needle passes from lateral to medial, deep to the fascia iliaca, and injects 
local anesthetic that surrounds the femoral nerve. FA, Femoral artery; FN, femoral nerve; LA, local anesthetic.
III
Chapter 18 Peripheral Nerve Blocks
329
(Fig. 18.12). A short-axis in-plane approach with a lin-
ear transducer is used. A 5- to 7-cm echogenic needle is 
appropriate for this block. The adductor canal block is 
performed midthigh, where the superficial femoral artery 
is near the middle of the undersurface of the sartorius 
muscle belly. The subsartorial nerves may be visible 
just lateral to the superficial femoral artery; however, in 
many cases these nerves are difficult to discern. The goal 
is to direct the needle from lateral to medial and anterior 
to posterior and achieve local anesthetic spread under 
the thick fascia that covers the posterior surface of the 
sartorius muscle, lateral to the superficial femoral artery.
The saphenous nerve is a terminal branch of the 
femoral nerve that carries sensory nerve fibers from the 
medial aspect of the leg, ankle, and foot. Depending on 
the desired location of blockade, the saphenous nerve can 
be blocked at the thigh, leg, or ankle. Many practition-
ers use the adductor canal approach described earlier to 
block the saphenous nerve in the thigh.
site. Its predictable and shallow anatomy makes it a rela-
tively easy block to master. However, femoral nerve block 
does cause quadriceps muscle weakness, which may not 
be favorable for early mobilization and may increase the 
risk of falls postoperatively.24
Adductor Canal and Saphenous Nerve Blocks
The adductor canal block targets distal branches of the 
femoral nerve as they travel deep to the sartorius muscle 
in the thigh. Sensory nerves from the femoral nerve are 
still present near the adductor canal (e.g., the saphenous 
nerve and infrapatellar nerve). However, many motor 
nerves have already branched off and innervated their 
corresponding muscles (all except the nerves to the 
vastus medialis muscle). Therefore the advantage of the 
adductor canal block includes analgesia for knee surgery, 
with minimal quadriceps muscle weakness.25 26
The patient is positioned supine with the leg to be 
blocked slightly externally rotated and bent at the knee 
Sartorius
Anterior
Saphenous
nerve
Femoral
artery
Sartorius
Local
anesthetic
Anterior
Saphenous
nerve
Femoral
artery
FA
SM
SN
VM
Fig. 18.12 Saphenous nerve block near the adductor canal. With the patient supine and leg externally rotated, 
the medial thigh is scanned in axial section with high-frequency ultrasound. The needle advances from anterior to 
posterior within the plane of imaging. The saphenous nerve is not always visible, but it courses with the superficial 
femoral artery, deep to the sartorius muscle. Local anesthetic surrounds the saphenous nerve. FA, Femoral artery; 
SM, sartorius muscle; SN, saphenous nerve; VM, vastus medialis muscle. (Sonograms from Gray AT. Atlas of 
Ultrasound-Guided Regional Anesthesia. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2012.)
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
330
needle is advanced from lateral to medial, with the goal 
of local anesthetic distribution around both components 
of the sciatic nerve, creating a “donut” of local anesthetic 
around each nerve. After injection, the transducer can be 
slid distally to verify tracking of the local anesthetic with 
the common peroneal and tibial nerves as they separate 
in the distal popliteal fossa.
Ankle Block
All five peripheral nerves that supply the foot can 
be blocked (ankle block) at the level of the malleoli 
(Fig. 18.15). The tibial nerve is the major nerve to the 
sole of the foot. This nerve lies on the heel side of the 
posterior tibial artery and can be blocked by infiltrating 3 
to 5 mL of local anesthetic solution in a fanning pattern 
around this artery. The sural nerve innervates the lateral 
side of the foot and can be blocked by injecting 5 mL of 
local anesthetic solution in the groove between the lateral 
malleolus and the calcaneus near the small saphenous 
vein. The saphenous nerve innervates the medial aspect of 
the foot. Infiltration of 5 mL of local anesthetic solution 
anterior to the medial malleolus near the great saphen-
ous vein blocks this nerve. The deep peroneal nerve 
innervates the webbing between the first and second toes 
and is blocked by injecting 5 mL of local anesthetic solu-
tion adjacent to the anterior tibial artery. Alternatively, 
if arterial pulsation is absent, the deep peroneal nerve 
can also be blocked deep to the extensor hallucis longus 
tendon and extensor retinaculum. The dorsum of the foot 
is innervated by the superficial peroneal nerve. The super-
ficial branches of this nerve are blocked by injecting a 
subcutaneous ridge of local anesthetic between the medial 
and lateral malleoli over the anterior surface of the foot. 
Because the foot does not have a generous blood supply, 
systemic toxicity after an ankle block is rare.
CHEST AND ABDOMEN BLOCKS
Peripheral nerve blocks for the chest and abdomen 
can provide intraoperative and postoperative analgesia, 
reduce systemic pain medications, improve patient sat-
isfaction, and improve patient discharge times from the 
postanesthesia care unit.
Intercostal Nerve Block
Intercostal nerve blocks target the ventral rami of the 
thoracic spinal nerves. The intercostal nerves travel infe-
rior to the associated rib within the subcostal groove and 
inferior to the accompanying intercostal vein and artery. 
At the angle of the ribs, these nerves travel in the space 
between the internal intercostal and innermost intercos-
tal muscles. These blocks are beneficial for thoracic and 
upper abdominal surgery, in addition to after chest wall 
Sciatic Nerve
Proximal Sciatic Nerve Block
The sciatic nerve is the largest branch of the sacral plexus 
and consists of the L4, L5, and S1–S4 spinal nerves. It 
provides motor and sensory innervation of the posterior 
thigh and most of the leg. As the sciatic nerve exits the 
pelvis via the greater sciatic foramen, it travels along 
the posterior thigh anterior to the gluteus maximus and 
biceps femoris and posterior to the adductor magnus 
muscles. The sciatic nerve block is suitable for surgeries 
involving the posterior thigh, lower leg, foot, and ankle 
and can also improve analgesia after knee surgery.
There are three main approaches to the sciatic nerve 
block: the anterior, the transgluteal, and the subglu-
teal approaches. Only the transgluteal approach will be 
described here. For the transgluteal approach, the patient 
is placed in the lateral position with the block leg up and 
the leg slightly flexed at the hip (Fig. 18.13). A trans-
verse, short-axis in-plane approach with a low-frequency 
linear or curvilinear transducer and a 10-cm echogenic 
needle are used for the block. The sciatic nerve can reli-
ably be located traveling halfway between the greater 
trochanter of the femur and the ischial tuberosity, deep 
to the gluteus maximus muscle. The nerve at this level 
appears as a hyperechoic, polyfascicular triangular struc-
ture. The needle is directed lateral to medial and posterior 
to anterior toward the lateral border of the sciatic nerve. 
The goal is to place the needle below the fascial plane 
of the gluteus maximus muscle and have the local anes-
thetic spread around the nerve.
The advantages of the sciatic nerve block are the 
reliable posterior thigh and leg analgesia for the surger-
ies mentioned previously. This location is away from 
the thigh tourniquet or surgical site for placement of a 
continuous peripheral nerve catheter. Disadvantages of 
the sciatic nerve block include hamstring weakness, foot 
drop, and potential procedural discomfort and difficulty 
caused by the depth of the block.
Popliteal Block of the Sciatic Nerve
The popliteal block targets the sciatic nerve as it enters 
the popliteal fossa, at which point the nerve divides into 
its common peroneal and tibial nerve components. This 
block is commonly used for foot and ankle surgery, usu-
ally combined with a saphenous nerve block to cover the 
medial aspect of the leg. The patient is placed in lateral 
position with the block leg elevated and knee extended.27
A transverse, short-axis in-plane approach is used with 
a linear transducer and a 5- to 7-cm echogenic needle 
(Fig. 18.14). The ultrasound transducer is placed in the 
popliteal fossa, locating the sciatic nerve posterior to 
the popliteal vein and artery. The nerve is blocked at the 
bifurcation of the sciatic nerve into the tibial and com-
mon peroneal nerves, which can be located by sliding the 
ultrasound transducer along the course of the nerves. The 
III
Chapter 18 Peripheral Nerve Blocks
331
A
Greater
trochanter
Posterior
superior
iliac spine
Piriformis m.
Sciatic n.
Sacral hiatus
B
Sciatic
nerve
Sciatic
nerve
Medial
Ischial
tuberosity
Ischial
tuberosity
C
Greater
trochanter
Medial
Local
anesthetic
D
Fig. 18.13 Sciatic nerve block. (A) Patient positioning. (B) Anatomic landmarks. (C and D) The sciatic nerve lies 
beneath a point 5 cm caudad along a perpendicular line that bisects a line joining the posterior iliac spine and the 
greater trochanter of the femur. This point is also usually the intersection of that perpendicular line with a line 
joining the greater trochanter and the sacral hiatus. (C and D from Gray AT. Atlas of Ultrasound-Guided Regional 
Anesthesia. 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018:188.)
trauma. However, because of the proximity of the pleura, 
there is a potential risk of a pneumothorax. LAST is pos-
sible because of the high-peak plasma levels after injec-
tion, in addition to the need for multiple nerve blocks for 
adequate dermatomal coverage of the surgical incision.
For this block, the patient is positioned prone, and 
a linear transducer placed in a short-axis parasagittal 
plane is used at the midscapular line. A 5-cm echogenic 
needle is used to inject 3 to 5 mL of local anesthetic at 
each level, proceeding in a caudad to cephalad direction. 
The ultrasound image should demonstrate the intercostal 
muscles, pleura, and adjacent ribs and their acoustic 
shadows. The goal of the block is to have spread of 
local anesthetic in between the innermost and internal 
intercostal muscles along the inferior border of the rib. 
Intercostal nerves also can be blocked more centrally by 
injecting just deep to the erector spinae muscle at the 
lateral edge of the transverse process. 28,29
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
332
TN
CPN
A
Common
peroneal nerve
Medial
Tibial
nerve
B
Common
peroneal nerve
Medial
Local
anesthetic
Tibial
nerve
Local
anesthetic
C
Fig. 18.14 Popliteal block of the sciatic nerve. (A) The patient is positioned supine with the leg elevated to 
allow the popliteal fossa to be scanned from below with high-frequency ultrasound. (B and C) The block needle 
passes from the lateral thigh through the biceps femoris muscle and injects local anesthetic around the tibial 
and common peroneal nerves. CPN, Common peroneal nerve; TN, tibial nerve. (B and C from Gray AT. Atlas of 
Ultrasound-Guided Regional Anesthesia. 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018:197.)
Transversus Abdominis Plane Block
The transversus abdominis plane (TAP) block is an 
abdominal wall field block targeting the ventral rami of 
the thoracic and lumbar spinal nerves (T7–L1) as they 
travel in the plane between the transversus abdominis 
and internal oblique muscles. The block provides anal-
gesia for lower abdominal surgery and may help with 
laparoscopic surgery. Because the block relies on a large 
volume of local anesthetic for appropriate spread, there is 
some risk of local anesthetic toxicity. There also is a small 
potential for intraperitoneal and intrahepatic injection.
For this block, the patient is positioned supine, and 
a linear transducer is placed in a transverse plane at the 
midaxillary line (Fig. 18.16). The ultrasound image should 
demonstrate the external oblique, internal oblique, and 
transversus abdominis muscles. A 7- to 10-cm echogenic 
needle is used to inject at least 20 mL of local anesthetic per 
III
Chapter 18 Peripheral Nerve Blocks
333
Fig. 18.16 Transversus abdominis plane (TAP) block. (A) For 
the classic posterior TAP block, the patient is in the supine 
position with the transducer placed near the midaxillary 
line between the costal margin and pelvic brim. (B and C) 
The needle travels through the external oblique and internal 
oblique muscles to enter the fascial plane between the internal 
oblique and underlying transversus abdominis muscles. The 
injection should be performed near the posterior border of the 
transversus abdominis muscle so that the injection distributes 
with well-defined margins where the nerves enter the plane. 
EO, external oblique; IO, internal oblique; LA, local anesthetic; 
TA, transversus abdominis. (A, Redrawn from Gray AT. Atlas of 
Ultrasound-Guided Regional Anesthesia. 3rd ed. Philadelphia: 
Elsevier; 2018:273.)
side. The needle is directed in the anterior to posterior direc-
tion, with the goal of local anesthetic distribution between 
the transversus abdominis and internal oblique muscles.
INTRAVENOUS REGIONAL ANESTHESIA 
(BIER BLOCK)
Intravenous regional anesthesia (or Bier block, named 
after August Bier) is a method of producing anesthesia 
of the arm or leg. This anesthetic technique is used for 
surgical procedures with minimal postoperative pain 
Tibialis
anterior
tendon
Dorsalis
pedis a.
Tibia
Fibula
Extensor
hallucis
longus
tendon
Superficial
peroneal n.
Sural n.
and small
saphenous v.
Deep
peroneal n.
Saphenous
v. and n.
Posterior
tibial v. and a.
Tibial n.
Achilles
tendon
Fig. 18.15 Cross-sectional anatomy for an ankle block. An ankle 
block is performed by injecting local anesthetic solution at five 
separate nerve locations. The superficial peroneal nerve, sural 
nerve, and saphenous nerve are usually blocked by subcutaneous 
infiltration because they may have already branched as they 
cross the ankle joint. The tibial and deep peroneal nerves require 
deeper injection adjacent to the accompanying blood vessels 
(the posterior tibial and anterior tibial arteries, respectively). 
Because the block needle approaches the ankle from many 
angles, it is convenient to elevate the foot by supporting the calf. 
(Modified from Brown DL, Factor DA, eds. Regional Anesthesia and 
Analgesia. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1996.)
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
334
of local anesthetic are recommended because preservatives 
have been associated with thrombophlebitis.
Characteristics of the Block
The onset of anesthesia rapidly follows the intravenous 
administration of local anesthetic solution into the isolated 
extremity. The duration of surgical anesthesia depends on 
the time that the tourniquet is inflated and not on the local 
anesthetic drug selected. Technically, a regional intrave-
nous anesthesia block is easier and faster to perform than 
a brachial plexus block or lower extremity block and is 
readily applicable to all age groups.
Risks
The principal risk associated with intravenous regional 
anesthesia is the potential systemic toxicity that may occur 
when the tourniquet is deflated and large amounts of local 
anesthetic solution from the previously isolated part of the 
extremity enter the systemic circulation. Local anesthetic 
levels peak approximately 2 to 5 minutes after tourniquet 
deflation. One approach to reducing the risk of toxicity 
is to keep the tourniquet inflated for at least 20 minutes, 
even if the surgical procedure is completed in less time. If 
40 minutes have elapsed, the tourniquet can be deflated in 
a single maneuver. If surgical duration is between 20 and 40 
minutes, the tourniquet can be deflated, reinflated immedi-
ately, and finally deflated after 1 minute. This method will 
reduce the peak plasma level of local anesthetic. Limitation 
of extremity movement (including avoidance of extremity 
elevation) after release of the tourniquet is also useful for 
minimizing local anesthetic blood levels.
If the extremity is not adequately exsanguinated, the 
skin will have a blotchy appearance after injection of the 
local anesthetic. In this situation the quality of the block 
and surgical field will be poor.
and duration of 2 hours or less. The technique involves 
intravenous injection of large volumes of dilute local 
anesthetic into an extremity after exsanguination and 
isolation of the circulation by a tourniquet. Contrain-
dications to Bier block include contraindications to a 
tourniquet (e.g., sickle cell disease, ischemic vascular 
disease, or infection in the extremity). Lacerations to 
the blocked arm may cause escape of local anesthetic, 
and patients with fractures may experience pain during 
exsanguination of the extremity. Tourniquet pain and 
the maximum allowable tourniquet time limit the dura-
tion of the block.
To perform the Bier block, a small peripheral intrave-
nous catheter (e.g., 22 g) is placed in the distal portion 
of the extremity being blocked (Fig. 18.17). The extrem-
ity is then exsanguinated by wrapping with an Esmarch 
bandage from distal to proximal, and then a tourniquet 
is inflated to 250 to 275 mm Hg (at least 100 mm Hg 
above the patient's systolic blood pressure). Plain local 
anesthetic solution (40 to 50 mL for adult arms) is injected 
through the intravenous catheter and then the catheter 
is removed. Patients may begin experiencing pain at the 
tourniquet site after 45 minutes; a double-tourniquet 
technique may be employed to help mitigate this. With a 
double tourniquet, the proximal cuff is initially inflated, 
and once the patient experiences pain, the distal cuff is 
inflated over the anesthetized arm and the proximal cuff 
deflated.
Selection of Local Anesthetic
Commonly used local anesthetic solutions for intravenous 
regional anesthesia are 0.5% lidocaine or chloroprocaine 
(plain solutions without epinephrine). Bupivacaine is 
avoided because of potential systemic toxicity, which can 
include malignant ventricular cardiac dysrhythmias lead-
ing to refractory cardiac arrest. Preservative-free solutions 
A
B
Fig. 18.17 (A) Placement and securing of a small intravenous catheter. (B) Exsanguination of the arm with 
an Esmarch bandage before inflation of the tourniquet and injection of the local anesthetic solution through 
the catheter.
III
Chapter 18 Peripheral Nerve Blocks
335
REFERENCES
1. Albrecht E, Reynvoet M, Fournier N, 
Desmet M. Dose-response relationship 
of perineural dexamethasone for inter-
scalene brachial plexus block: A ran-
domised, controlled, triple-blind trial. 
Anaesthesia. 
2019;74(8):1001–1008. 
PMID: 30973188.
2. Mulroy MF, Weller RS, Liguori GA. 
A checklist for performing regional 
nerve blocks. Reg Anesth Pain Med. 
2014;39:195–199.
3. Henshaw DS, Turner JD, Dobson SW, 
etal. Preprocedural checklist for regional 
anesthesia: Impact on the incidence of 
wrong site nerve blockade (an 8-year 
perspective). Reg Anesth Pain Med. 2019 
Jan 13.
4. Alakkad H, Naeeni A, Chan VW, etal. 
Infection related to ultrasound-guided 
single-injection peripheral nerve block-
ade: A decade of experience at Toronto 
Western hospital. Reg Anesth Pain Med. 
2015;40:82–84.
5. Barrington MJ, Kluger R. Ultrasound 
guidance reduces the risk of local 
anesthetic systemic toxicity following 
peripheral nerve blockade. Reg Anesth 
Pain Med. 2013;38:289–297.
6. Horlocker TT, Vandermeuelen E, Kopp 
SL, Gogarten W, Leffert LR, Benzon 
HT. Regional anesthesia in the patient 
receiving antithrombotic or thrombolytic 
therapy: American Society of Regional 
Anesthesia and Pain Medicine Evidence-
Based Guidelines (fourth edition). Reg 
Anesth Pain Med. 2018;43(3):263–309. 
PMID: 29561531.
7. Weinberg GL. Lipid emulsion infusion: 
Resuscitation for local anesthetic and 
other drug overdose. Anesthesiology. 
2012;117:180–187.
8. Fettiplace MR, Weinberg G. The mech-
anisms underlying lipid resuscita-
tion therapy. Reg Anesth Pain Med. 
2018;43(2):138–149. PMID: 29356774.
9. Sites BD, Taenzer AH, Herrick MD, etal. 
Incidence of local anesthetic systemic 
toxicity and postoperative neurologic 
symptoms associated with 12,668 ultra-
sound-guided nerve blocks: An analysis 
from a prospective clinical registry. Reg 
Anesth Pain Med. 2012;37:478–482.
10. Neal JM, Barrington MJ, Brull R, etal. 
The Second ASRA Practice Advisory 
on Neurologic Complications Associ-
ated With Regional Anesthesia and Pain 
Medicine: Executive summary 2015. Reg 
Anesth Pain Med. 2015;40(5):401–430.
11. Lam KK, Soneji N, Katzberg H, etal. 
Incidence and etiology of postopera-
tive 
neurological 
symptoms 
after 
peripheral nerve block: A retrospective 
cohort study. Reg Anesth Pain Med. 
2020;45(7):495–504. PMID: 32471926.
12. Hudson ME, Chelly JE, Lichter JR. 
Wrong-site nerve blocks: 10 yr experi-
ence in a large multihospital health-care 
system. Br J Anaesth. 2015;114:818–824.
13. Silvestri E, Martinoli C, Derchi LE, etal. 
Echotexture of peripheral nerves: Cor-
relation between US and histologic find-
ings and criteria to differentiate tendons. 
Radiology. 1995;197:291–296.
14. Soong J, Schafhalter-Zoppoth I, Gray AT. 
The importance of transducer angle to 
ultrasound visibility of the femoral nerve. 
Reg Anesth Pain Med. 2005;30:505.
15. Lam NC, Fishburn SJ, Hammer AR, etal. A 
randomized controlled trial evaluating the 
see, tilt, align, and rotate (STAR) maneuver 
on skill acquisition for simulated ultra-
sound-guided interventional procedures. 
J Ultrasound Med. 2015;34(6):1019–1026.
16. Kapral S, Greher M, Huber G, etal. 
Ultrasonographic guidance improves the 
success rate of interscalene brachial 
plexus blockade. Reg Anesth Pain Med. 
2008;33:253–258.
17. Kim DH, Lin Y, Beathe JC, etal. Superior 
trunk block: A phrenic-sparing alterna-
tive to the interscalene block: A rand-
omized controlled trial. Anesthesiology. 
2019;131(3):521–533. PMID: 31283740.
18. Auyong DB, Hanson NA, Joseph RS, 
etal. Comparison of anterior suprascap-
ular, supraclavicular, and interscalene 
nerve block approaches for major out-
patient arthroscopic shoulder surgery: A 
randomized, double-blind, noninferiority 
trial. Anesthesiology. 2018;129(1):47–57. 
PMID: 29634491.
19. Franco CD, Williams JM. Ultrasound-
guided interscalene block: Reevalu-
ation of the “stoplight” sign and 
clinical implications. Reg Anesth Pain Med. 
2016;41(4):452–459. PMID: 27203394.
20. Kessler J, Schafhalter-Zoppoth I, Gray 
AT. An ultrasound study of the phrenic 
nerve in the posterior cervical triangle: 
Implications for the interscalene brachial 
plexus block. Reg Anesth Pain Med. 
2008;33:545–550.
21. Gautier P, Vandepitte C, Ramquet C, 
etal. The minimum effective anes-
thesia volume of 0.75% ropivacaine 
in 
ultrasound-guided 
interscalene 
brachial plexus block. Anesth Analg. 
2011;113:951–955.
22. Gray AT. The conjoint tendon of the 
latissimus dorsi and teres major: An 
important landmark for ultrasound-
guided axillary block. Reg Anesth Pain 
Med. 2009;34:179–180.
23. Schafhalter-Zoppoth I, Gray AT. The 
musculocutaneous nerve: Ultrasound 
appearance for peripheral nerve block. 
Reg Anesth Pain Med. 2005;30:385–390.
24. Ilfeld BM. Single-injection and continu-
ous femoral nerve blocks are associated 
with different risks of falling. Anesthe-
siology. 2014;121:668–669.
25. Andersen HL, Gyrn J, Møller L, etal. 
Continuous saphenous nerve block as 
supplement to single-dose local infiltra-
tion analgesia for postoperative pain 
management after total knee arthroplasty. 
Reg Anesth Pain Med. 2013;38:106–111.
26. Machi AT, Sztain JF, Kormylo NJ, etal. 
Discharge readiness after tricompart-
ment knee arthroplasty: Adductor 
canal versus femoral continuous nerve 
blocks—A dual-center, randomized trial. 
Anesthesiology. 2015;123(2):444–456.
27. Gray AT, Huczko EL. Schafhalter-Zop-
poth I. Lateral popliteal nerve block with 
ultrasound guidance. Reg Anesth Pain 
Med. 2004;29:507–509.
28. Forero M, Adhikary SD, Lopez H, Tsui C, 
Chin KJ. The erector spinae plane block: 
A novel analgesic technique in thoracic 
neuropathic pain. Reg Anesth Pain Med. 
2016;41(5):621–627. PMID: 27501016.
29. Nielsen MV, Moriggl B, Hoermann R, 
Nielsen TD, Bendtsen TF, Børglum J. 
Are single-injection erector spinae plane 
block and multiple-injection costo-
transverse block equivalent to thoracic 
paravertebral block?. Acta Anaesthesiol 
Scand. 2019;63(9):1231–1238. PMID: 
31332775.
336
Chapter
Patient positioning in the operating room facilitates sur-
gical procedures; however, positioning can be a source 
of patient injury and can alter intraoperative physiology. 
Positioning injuries during surgery remain a significant 
source of perioperative morbidity. Anesthesia providers 
share a critical responsibility for the proper positioning of 
patients in the operating room.1 This chapter will review 
general physiologic changes during positioning, com-
monly used intraoperative positions, specific positioning 
concerns, and common intraoperative positioning-related 
injuries. Most literature regarding positioning injuries 
focuses on peripheral nerve injuries and pressure-related 
injuries.
PHYSIOLOGIC ASPECTS OF POSITIONING
Physiologic responses play an essential role in blunt-
ing hemodynamic changes that would otherwise occur 
from positional changes in our day-to-day lives. Central, 
regional, and local mechanisms are involved. When a 
person reclines from an upright to a supine position, 
venous return to the heart increases and this increases 
preload, stroke volume, and cardiac output. These 
changes cause a brief increase in arterial blood pres-
sure, which in turn activates afferent baroreceptors from 
the aorta (via the vagus nerve) and within the walls of 
the carotid sinuses (via the glossopharyngeal nerve) to 
decrease sympathetic outflow and increase parasympa-
thetic impulses to the sinoatrial node and myocardium. 
This parasympathetic outflow counters the increase in 
arterial blood pressure from increased preload, and as 
a result, systemic arterial blood pressure is maintained 
within a narrow range during postural changes in the 
nonanesthetized setting.
Central, regional, and local physiologic responses are 
important in maintaining hemodynamics when changing 
positions during the course of daily activities. During 
various types of anesthesia, some of these responses can 
PHYSIOLOGIC ASPECTS OF POSITIONING
GENERAL POSITIONING PRINCIPLES
Supine
Lithotomy
Lateral Decubitus
Prone
Sitting
POSITIONING FOR ROBOTIC-ASSISTED 
SURGERY
PRESSURE INJURIES
BITE INJURIES
PERIPHERAL NERVE INJURIES
Ulnar Nerve
Brachial Plexus
Other Upper Extremity Nerves
Lower Extremity Nerves
EVALUATION AND TREATMENT OF 
PERIOPERATIVE NEUROPATHIES
PERIOPERATIVE EYE INJURY AND VISUAL 
LOSS
ANESTHESIA OUTSIDE THE OPERATING 
ROOM
CONCLUSION
PATIENT POSITIONING 
AND ASSOCIATED RISKS
Kristine E.W. Breyer
19
AL GRAWANY
III
Chapter 19 Patient Positioning and Associated Risks
337
be blunted, which can change a patient's hemodynamic 
responses to positional changes.
Pulmonary physiology is also altered by positional 
changes, which are further exaggerated during anesthe-
sia. For example, when nonanesthetized people lie down, 
their functional residual capacity (FRC) decreases as a 
result of the diaphragm shifting upward. In anesthetized 
patients, the decrease in FRC is more dramatic, and often 
closing capacity exceeds FRC, leading to increases in 
ventilation-perfusion (V/Q) mismatching and hypox-
emia. Furthermore, positioning that limits diaphragmatic 
movement pushes on the chest wall or abdomen, causing 
intrapulmonary shunting from atelectasis.
GENERAL POSITIONING PRINCIPLES
Proper positioning requires the cooperation of anesthesia 
providers, surgeons, and nurses to ensure patient well-
being and safety while permitting surgical exposure. 
Positioning also involves maintaining spine and extrem-
ity neutrality, proper padding, and securing the patient 
to prevent inadvertent changes in position. Patients often 
remain in the same position for long periods; therefore 
prevention of positioning-related complications often 
requires compromise and judgment. During normal sleep, 
we change positions, which prevents prolonged compres-
sion and excessive stretch. During anesthesia, patients 
lose the ability to both sense injury and change position, 
increasing their risk for injury.2
General principles for intraoperative positioning 
include maintaining anatomic neutrality whenever pos-
sible and limiting more extreme positions. Padding is an 
essential part of injury prevention but not always suc-
cessful for pressure injury prevention. Excess padding 
can exert pressure on tissues. Maintaining neutrality 
of the patient's spine and extremities prevents undue 
stretch. Tissues overlying bony prominences, such as the 
heels and sacrum, must be padded to prevent soft tissue 
ischemia caused by pressure. Pay attention to pressure 
created by equipment such as retractors, stop-cocks, 
nasal probes and tubes, esophageal probes and tubes, and 
equipment that enters and exits the sterile field, such as 
x-ray fluoroscopy equipment.
The American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) pub-
lished a 2011 Practice Advisory for Prevention of Periph-
eral Neuropathies that was updated in 2018 to reflect a 
synthesis of updated literature and expert opinion.3 ASA 
practice advisories are not intended as standards or abso-
lute requirements and may be modified based on clinical 
needs and patient factors.
Risk assessment for perioperative nerve injury begins 
with the preoperative history and physical (Box 19.1). 
Ideally, patients are placed in a surgical position that 
they can tolerate when awake. The duration of more 
extreme positions, when necessary, should be limited 
as much as possible. Preexisting neuropathies should 
also be documented, as these may place patients at 
greater risk of “double crush syndrome,” a phenomenon 
in which two subclinical nerve insults occur and result 
in clinically apparent neuropathy.4 The ASA advisory 
recommends documenting intraoperative positioning 
actions to facilitate continuous improvement processes; 
however, the advisory does not specify time intervals for 
documentation of positioning. Postoperative assessment 
in the recovery room and documentation of injury is also 
recommended 3
Supine
The supine position, also called the dorsal decubitus 
position, is the most common position for surgery 
(Fig. 19.1A). In the classic supine position the head, 
neck, and spine all retain neutrality. One or both arms 
can be abducted or adducted alongside the patient. Arm 
abduction should be limited to less than 90 degrees in 
order to prevent brachial plexus injury from the head of 
the humerus pushing into the axilla. The ASA advisory 
recommends against elbow flexion to reduce the risk of 
ulnar neuropathy but noted a lack of consensus on the 
acceptable degree of flexion during the perioperative 
period.3 Elbow extension must be limited to protect the 
median nerve from stretching.
With the arm on an arm board, the hands and fore-
arms should remain in a supinated position or a neutral 
position with the palm toward the body to reduce exter-
nal pressure on the ulnar nerve (see Fig. 19.1B). When 
the arms are adducted, they are usually held alongside 
the body with a “draw sheet” that passes under the body 
and over the arm and is then tucked directly under the 
torso (not the mattress) to ensure that the arm remains 
properly placed next to the body. Finally, padding should 
be placed to protect all bony prominences in addition to 
stopcocks or intravenous lines that may exert pressure on 
the skin during the operation (see Fig. 19.1C).3
Box 19.1
Preoperative History and Physical to Assess 
Risk of Nerve Injury
•Review a patient’s preoperative history and perform a
physical examination to identify body habitus, preexisting 
neurologic symptoms, diabetes mellitus, peripheral 
vascular disease, alcohol dependency, arthritis, and sex 
(e.g., male sex and its association with ulnar neuropathy).
•When judged appropriate, ascertain whether patients can
comfortably tolerate the anticipated operative position.
Advisory recommendations from Practice Advisory for the Prevention 
of Perioperative Peripheral Neuropathies 2018: An Updated 
Report by the American Society of Anesthesiologists Task Force on 
Prevention of Perioperative Peripheral Neuropathies. Anesthesiology. 
2018;128(1):11–26.
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
338
Variations of the Supine Position
Frequently used variations of the supine position 
include the lawn-chair, frog-leg, and Trendelenburg 
positions. The lawn-chair position (see Fig. 19.1D) 
flexes the hips and knees slightly, which reduces stress 
on the back, hips, and knees. This modified supine 
position is often better tolerated by patients who are 
awake or undergoing monitored anesthesia care. The 
legs are placed slightly above the level of the heart, 
which facilitates venous drainage from the lower 
extremities. Furthermore, the xiphoid to pubic dis-
tance is decreased, reducing tension on the abdominal 
A
D
B
C
E
Fig. 19.1 (A) Supine positioning. Note the asymmetry of the base of the table, placing the patient’s 
center of gravity over the base if positioned in the usual direction. (B) Arm position on the arm 
board. Abduction of the arm should be limited to less than 90 degrees whenever possible. The arm 
is supinated, and the elbow is padded. (C) Arm tucked at patient’s side. Arm in neutral position with 
palm to hip. The elbow is padded, and one needs to ensure that the arm is supported. (D) Lawn-chair 
position. Flexion of the hips and knees decreases tension on the back. (E) Trendelenburg position (head 
tilted down) and reverse Trendelenburg position (head tilted up). Shoulder braces should be avoided to 
prevent brachial plexus compression injuries.
musculature. Typically the back of the bed is raised, the 
legs below the knees are lowered to an equivalent angle, 
and a slight Trendelenburg tilt is used to level the hips 
with the shoulders.
The frog-leg position, in which the hips and knees are 
flexed and the hips are externally rotated with the soles 
of the feet facing each other, facilitates procedures to the 
perineum, medial thighs, genitalia, and rectum. The knees 
must be supported in order to minimize stress or disloca-
tion of the hips.
Tilting a supine patient head-down with the pubic 
symphysis as the highest part of the trunk is called the 
III
Chapter 19 Patient Positioning and Associated Risks
339
Trendelenburg position (see Fig. 19.1E). It is named after 
a 19th-century German surgeon who first described its 
use for abdominal surgery. Walter Cannon, a Harvard 
physiologist, is credited with popularizing the use of 
Trendelenburg positioning to improve hemodynamics 
for patients in hypovolemic shock during World War 
I. Trendelenburg positioning is commonly used today 
to increase venous return during hypotension, improve 
exposure during abdominal and laparoscopic surgery, 
and prevent air emboli during central line placement.
The Trendelenburg position does produce hemody-
namic and respiratory changes. Initially, placement of the 
patient head-down causes an autotransfusion from the 
legs with about a 9% from baseline increase in cardiac 
output in 1 minute. However, these changes are not sus-
tained, and within 10 minutes, many hemodynamic vari-
ables, including cardiac output, return to baseline values. 
Nevertheless, Trendelenburg positioning is still part of 
the initial resuscitative efforts to treat hypovolemia. The 
abdominal contents are displaced toward the diaphragm, 
which decreases FRC and can also decrease pulmonary 
compliance, necessitating higher airway pressures dur-
ing mechanical ventilation. Intraocular pressure and 
intracranial pressure (ICP) can also increase. In patients 
with increased ICP and impaired cerebral autoregula-
tion Trendelenburg positioning should be avoided. For 
patients receiving general anesthesia who will be placed 
in the Trendelenburg position, endotracheal intubation 
is strongly recommended over supraglottic airways 
because of the risk of pulmonary aspiration of gastric 
contents. A prolonged head-down position can lead to 
swelling of the face, conjunctivae, larynx, and tongue, 
with an increased potential for postoperative upper air-
way obstruction. An air leak should be verified around 
the endotracheal tube or the larynx visualized before 
extubation.5
Because of gravity, a patient in a steep Trendelenburg 
position may shift or slide excessively. Several measures 
can be used to reduce this risk, including use of non-
sliding mattresses beneath the patient. Caution should 
be applied when shoulder braces are used because of 
considerable risk of compression or stretch injury to the 
brachial plexus; the ASA practice advisory recommends 
against the use of shoulder braces in the steep Trendelen-
burg position whenever possible.3
Conversely, the reverse Trendelenburg position (see 
Fig. 19.1E) tilts the supine patient upward so that the 
head is higher than any other part of the body. This 
position is most often used to facilitate upper abdominal 
surgery. Again, patients must be prevented from slipping 
on the table. Patients in reverse Trendelenburg, particu-
larly those patients who are hypovolemic, are at risk for 
hypotension caused by decreased venous return. Invasive 
arterial blood pressure monitoring should be calibrated 
(i.e., zeroed) at the level of the external auditory meatus 
in order to optimize cerebral perfusion.
Complications
Backache may occur in the supine position, as the normal 
lumbar lordotic curvature is lost during general anes-
thesia with muscle relaxation or a neuraxial blockade. 
Consequently, patients with extensive kyphosis, scoliosis, 
or a previous history of back pain may require extra pad-
ding of the spine or slight flexion at the hip and knee.
The base of the operating room table is asymmetric; 
usually, the patient's torso is placed over the pedestal of 
the table (see Fig 19.1). However, patients are sometimes 
positioned with their torso over the other end of the table 
(so-called reverse orientation) to improve surgical access 
or to permit passage of equipment under the nonpedestal 
end of the table, such as C-arm x-ray devices. This places 
the patient's center of gravity farther away from the most 
stable portion (fulcrum) of the operating room table. This 
shift can cause the operating room table to tilt and tip over, 
especially if bed-lengthening extensions are used or the 
bed is tilted in the Trendelenburg position. In addition, the 
act of unlocking an operating room table to reposition its 
location can change the fulcrum point and lead to table tip-
ping and resultant fall risk for the patient. For patients with 
large body mass, caution is advised when placing them in 
reverse orientation on an operating room table. Operating 
room table weight limits should be strictly observed, as they 
differ substantially with normal versus reverse orientation.
Lithotomy
The lithotomy position (Fig. 19.2A–C) is frequently used 
during gynecologic, rectal, and urologic surgeries. The 
legs are abducted 30 to 45 degrees from the midline, 
the knees are flexed, and the legs are held by supports. 
The patient's hips are flexed to varying degrees depend-
ing on the type of lithotomy required for the procedure: 
standard, low, or high lithotomy. The legs should be 
raised and lowered simultaneously to prevent spine tor-
sion. The lower extremities should be padded to prevent 
compression against the leg rests. The common peroneal 
nerve wraps around the head of the fibula on the lateral 
leg and is at significant risk of injury. The ASA practice 
advisory recommends avoiding prolonged pressure on 
the peroneal nerve at the fibular head.3
The foot section of the operating room table is usually 
lowered or taken away to facilitate the procedure. If the 
arms are on the operating table alongside the patient, 
the hands and fingers may lie near the open edge of the 
lowered section of the table. When the foot of the bed is 
raised again at the end of the procedure, the hand posi-
tion must be verified to avoid a potentially disastrous 
crush injury to the fingers (see Fig. 19.2D). For this rea-
son, positioning the arms on armrests far from the table 
hinge point is always recommended when patients are in 
the lithotomy position.
The lithotomy position causes several physiologic 
changes. When the legs are elevated, preload increases, 
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
340
causing a transient increase in cardiac output. In addi-
tion, the lithotomy position causes the abdominal viscera 
to displace the diaphragm cephalad, reducing lung com-
pliance and potentially resulting in a decreased tidal vol-
ume. Again, the normal lordotic curvature of the lumbar 
spine is lost in this position, potentially aggravating any 
previous lower back pain.
Lower extremity compartment syndrome is a rare but 
devastating complication associated with the lithotomy 
position. It occurs when perfusion to an extremity is 
inadequate because of either restricted arterial flow 
(from leg elevation) or obstructed venous outflow (from 
direct limb compression or excessive hip flexion). This 
results in ischemia, edema, and rhabdomyolysis from 
increased tissue pressure within a fascial compartment. 
In a large retrospective review of over 500,000 surgeries 
the incidence of compartment syndromes was markedly 
higher in the lithotomy (1 in 8720) and lateral decu-
bitus (1 in 9711) positions as compared with the supine 
A
B
C
D
Incorrect
hand position
Fig. 19.2 (A) Lithotomy position. Hips are flexed 80 to 100 degrees with the lower leg parallel to the 
body. Arms are on armrests away from the hinge point of the foot section. (B) Lithotomy position with 
“candy cane” supports. (C) Lithotomy position with correct position of “candy cane” stirrups away 
from lateral fibular head. (D) Improper position of arms in lithotomy position with fingers at risk for 
compression when the lower section of the bed is raised.
(1 in 92,441) position. Long surgical procedure time was 
the only distinguishing characteristic of the surgeries in 
which patients developed lower extremity compartment 
syndromes.6 In a retrospective multicenter review of 185 
urologic patients who were placed in high lithotomy 
position the overall complication rate because of posi-
tioning was 10%. Neurapraxia was the most common 
positioning-related complication (12 of 18 patients). Two 
patients from this cohort had compartment syndrome, 
and for both patients the time in high lithotomy exceeded 
5 hours.7 Therefore it is recommended to periodically 
lower the legs to the level of the body if surgery extends 
beyond several hours.
Lateral Decubitus
In the lateral decubitus position the patient lies on the 
nonoperative side to facilitate surgery in the thorax, 
retroperitoneum, or hip (Fig. 19.3A). The patient must be 
III
Chapter 19 Patient Positioning and Associated Risks
341
well secured to avoid falling or tilting forward or back-
ward. Often a beanbag or bedding roll is used to provide 
stability. A kidney rest can also be used to help secure 
the patient.
The extremities must be carefully positioned to pre-
vent injury. The dependent leg should be somewhat 
flexed, with a pillow or other padding between the knees 
to minimize excessive pressure on bony prominences, 
reduce back strain, and minimize stretch of lower 
extremity nerves. The dependent arm is placed in front 
of the patient on a padded arm board. The nondependent 
arm is often supported over folded bedding or suspended 
with an armrest or foam cradle (see Fig. 19.3B). Neither 
arm should be abducted more than 90 degrees to prevent 
injury to the brachial plexus from the humeral head. 
Additionally, an axillary roll should be placed under-
neath the patient just caudal to the axilla—not placed in 
the axilla itself. The axillary roll prevents compression 
injury to the dependent brachial plexus and dependent 
axillary vascular structures (see Fig. 19.3C). Sometimes 
Keep
axilla clear
Roll
A
B
C
Fig. 19.3 (A) Lateral decubitus position. Note flexion of the lower leg, padding between the legs, and 
proper support of both arms. (B) Lateral decubitus position showing placement of arms and head. Note 
additional padding under headrest to ensure alignment of head with spine. Headrest should be kept 
away from the dependent eye. (C) Use of axillary roll in lateral decubitus position. The roll, in this case 
a bag of intravenous fluid, is placed well away from the axilla to prevent compression of the axillary 
artery and brachial plexus.
an axillary roll is not used if an inflatable beanbag is 
being used for positioning; however, the team must 
ensure that there is no compression in the axilla. With 
invasive arterial monitoring, consider placing the cath-
eter in the dependent arm to detect positioning compres-
sion of the axillary neurovascular structures.
The patient's head must be kept in a neutral position 
to prevent excessive lateral rotation of the neck and 
stretch injuries to the brachial plexus. This positioning 
may require additional head support (see Fig. 19.3B). The 
dependent ear should be checked to avoid folding and 
undue pressure. The eyes should be securely taped before 
repositioning if the patient is asleep. The dependent eye 
must be checked frequently for external compression.
Lastly, the lateral decubitus position changes pul-
monary function. In a patient who is mechanically 
ventilated the combination of the lateral weight of the 
mediastinum and disproportionate cephalad pressure 
of abdominal contents on the dependent diaphragm 
decreases compliance of the dependent lung and favors 
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
342




Fig. 19.4 (A) Prone position with Wilson frame. Arms are 
abducted less than 90 degrees whenever possible. Pressure 
points are padded, and the chest and abdomen are supported 
away from the bed to minimize abdominal pressure and preserve 
pulmonary compliance. A foam head pillow has cutouts for the 
eyes and nose and a slot to permit the endotracheal tube to exit. 
Eyes must be checked frequently. (B) Mirror system for prone 
position. Bony structures of the head and face are supported, 
and monitoring of eyes and airway is facilitated with a plastic 
mirror. (C) Prone position with horseshoe adapter. Head height 
is adjusted to position the neck in a neutral position. (D) Prone 
position, face seen from below. Horseshoe adapter permits 
superior access to airway and visualization of eyes. Width may be 
adjusted to ensure proper support by facial bones.
throughout the case. Facial pressure wounds are a com-
plication of prone positioning. The horseshoe headrest 
supports only the forehead and malar regions and allows 
excellent access to the airway (see Fig. 19.4C and D). 
ventilation of the nondependent lung. Simultaneously, 
pulmonary blood flow to the dependent lung increases 
because of the effect of gravity. This causes ˙V/˙Q mis-
matching and can affect alveolar ventilation and gas 
exchange.
Prone
The prone or ventral decubitus position (Fig. 19.4A) is 
used primarily for surgical access to the posterior fossa of 
the skull, the posterior spine, the buttocks and perirectal 
area, and the lower extremities. When general anesthesia 
is required in the prone position, endotracheal intuba-
tion, intravenous access, Foley catheter, and invasive 
hemodynamic access should all be obtained in the supine 
position first while the patient is still on a gurney. Make 
sure all lines and tubes are very well secured to prevent 
dislodgement during turning and to prevent tube migra-
tion during the case.
Turning the patient from supine to prone requires 
coordination of all operating room providers. The anes-
thesia provider is primarily responsible for coordinating 
the move and for repositioning of the head. An exception 
is in cases in which the head is placed in rigid pin fixa-
tion and the surgeon holds the pin frame. During the turn 
to prone, the head, neck, and spine are maintained in a 
neutral position. Some patients requiring prone position-
ing have unstable spines necessitating surgical operation. 
There are also reports in the literature of cerebrovascular 
events occurring from presumed carotid and vertebral 
artery injury during turning. For some cases when neu-
romonitoring will be used for the surgical procedure 
“preflip,” baseline recordings are obtained before turning 
the patient prone for safety documentation.
To minimize risk of dislodgement, disconnect as 
many monitors and lines as is safe and possible before 
turning the patient from supine to the prone position. 
This is particularly helpful for lines and monitors on 
the side that rotates the farthest (the outside arm). Many 
anesthesia providers disconnect the endotracheal tube 
immediately before turning and reconnect it immedi-
ately after prone positioning to reduce the risk of inad-
vertent extubation.
The position of the head is very important for the 
prone position. In most cases the head is maintained in a 
neutral position using a surgical pillow, horseshoe head-
rest, or Mayfield rigid head pins. Several commercially 
available pillows are specially designed for the prone 
position. Most, including disposable foam versions, sup-
port the forehead, malar regions, and chin with a cutout 
for the eyes, nose, and mouth. The prone position is a risk 
factor for perioperative visual loss, which is discussed 
later. Mirror systems are available to facilitate checking 
face positioning (see Fig. 19.4B). The anesthesia provider 
must ensure that the eyes and nose are free from pres-
sure and document these findings at regular intervals 
III
Chapter 19 Patient Positioning and Associated Risks
343
Rigid fixation pins support the head without any direct 
pressure on the face, allow access to the airway, and hold 
the head firmly in one position that can be finely adjusted 
for optimal neurosurgical exposure (Fig. 19.5A). Patient 
movement must be prevented when the head is held in 


Fig. 19.5 (A) Sitting position with Mayfield head pins. The 
patient is typically semirecumbent rather than sitting, as the 
legs are kept as high as possible to promote venous return. 
Arms must be supported to prevent shoulder traction. Note 
that the head holder support is preferably attached to the back 
section rather than the thigh section of the table so that the 
patient’s back may be adjusted or lowered emergently without 
first detaching the head holder. (B) Sitting position adapted for 
shoulder surgery. Note the absence of pressure over the ulnar 
area of the elbow.
rigid pins; slipping out of the pins can result in scalp 
lacerations, skull fractures, and even cervical spine injury.
Legs should be padded and flexed slightly at the knees 
and hips. Both arms may be positioned to the patient's 
sides, tucked in the neutral position as described for the 
supine patient, or placed next to the patient's head on 
arm boards. Again, the arms should not be abducted 
greater than 90 degrees to prevent excessive stretching 
of the brachial plexus. Extra padding under the elbow 
will be needed to prevent compression of the ulnar nerve. 
Recommendations from the ASA practice advisory on 
protective padding are noted in Box 19.2
The abdomen should hang relatively freely for patients 
in the prone position. This alleviates external pressure on 
the abdomen, which can otherwise cause problems with 
ventilation and hypotension by compressing the inferior 
vena cava and reducing venous return. The thorax should 
be supported by firm rolls or bolsters placed along each 
side from the clavicle to the iliac crest. Multiple commer-
cial rolls and bolsters are available, including the Wilson 
frame (see Fig. 19.4A), Jackson table, Relton frame, and 
Mouradian/Simmons modification of the Relton frame. 
All devices and special operating room tables for the 
prone position serve to minimize abdominal compres-
sion. To prevent tissue injury, pendulous structures (e.g., 
male genitalia and female breasts) should be clear of 
compression; the breasts should be placed medial to the 
bolsters. The lower portion of each roll or bolster must be 
placed under its respective iliac crest to prevent pressure 
injury to the genitalia and to avoid pressure on femoral 
vasculature.
Similar to the supine position, hemodynamics are 
well maintained, and pulmonary function is actually 
superior to the supine position. The FRC is improved 
compared with supine positioning, leading to improved 
oxygenation. For obese patients, pulmonary compliance 
Box 19.2
Recommendations for Protective Padding
•Padded arm boards may be used to decrease the risk of
upper extremity neuropathy.
•Chest rolls in the laterally positioned patient may be used
to decrease the risk of upper extremity neuropathy.
•Padding at the elbow may be used to decrease the risk of
upper extremity neuropathy.
•Specific padding to prevent pressure of a hard surface
against the peroneal nerve at the fibular head may be 
used to decrease the risk of peroneal neuropathy.
•Avoid the inappropriate use of padding (e.g., padding too
tight) to decrease the risk of perioperative neuropathy.
Advisory recommendations from Practice Advisory for the Prevention 
of Perioperative Peripheral Neuropathies 2018: An Updated 
Report by the American Society of Anesthesiologists Task Force on 
Prevention of Perioperative Peripheral Neuropathies. Anesthesiology. 
2018;128(1):11–26.
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
344
is improved in the prone position with the abdomen 
hanging freely. The prone position has been used to 
improve respiratory function and mortality rate in 
patients with acute respiratory distress syndrome8(also 
see Chapter 41).
Proper prone positioning of patients relies on a secure 
table and correct secure attachment of headrest equip-
ment. Horseshoe and rigid fixation pin headrests attach 
to adjustable articulating supports; any slippage or fail-
ure of this bracketing device may lead to complications 
if the head suddenly drops. Jackson tables can actually 
tilt or flip 180 degrees as a result of disengagement of the 
turning locking mechanisms.
Sitting
In the sitting position (see Fig. 19.5B) the patient's head 
and the operative field are located above the level of the 
heart. The sitting position can provide excellent surgical 
exposure for some cervical spine and neurosurgical pro-
cedures, particularly of the posterior fossa and superior 
cervical spine. Blood loss may also be reduced owing 
to decreased venous pressure in the operative field.9 A 
variation of the sitting position, the “beach chair” posi-
tion, has been increasingly used for shoulder surgeries, 
including arthroscopic procedures. This position offers 
access to the shoulder from both the anterior and poste-
rior aspect and potential for great mobility of the arm at 
the shoulder joint.
In the sitting position the patient's head must be ade-
quately fixed. This can be done either with a head strap, 
tape, or rigid fixation. The arms should be supported 
and padded. The anesthesia provider should ensure that 
the shoulders are even or very mildly elevated in order 
to avoid stretch injury between the neck and shoulders. 
The knees are usually slightly flexed for balance and to 
reduce stretching of the sciatic nerve, and the feet are 
also supported and padded.
The most significant complication from the sitting 
position is risk of venous air embolism (VAE). During 
intracranial procedures, a significant amount of air can 
be entrained through the open dural venous sinuses. Low 
venous pressure in the operative field creates a gradi-
ent for air entry into the venous system, similar to the 
risk of venous air entry during central line placement. 
The important fear is the occurrence of a paradoxical 
air embolism. Patients undergoing planned surgery in 
the sitting position should be first evaluated to rule out 
anatomic intracardiac shunts. If an intracardiac shunt is 
present, even small amounts of entrained venous air may 
result in a stroke or myocardial infarction. Transesopha-
geal echocardiography (TEE) studies have documented 
some degree of venous air in most patients undergoing 
neurosurgery in the sitting position, with incidence as 
high as 100%. Clinically significant VAE has a much 
smaller incidence of 0.5% to 3%.9,10 Currently TEE is the 
gold standard for detection of intracardiac shunts. Even 
with screening, contrast echocardiography septal patency 
may not always be detected. A 2014 metaanalysis assess-
ing accuracy of TEE for detection of intracardiac shunts 
compared with autopsy, cardiac catheterization, or sur-
gery found a sensitivity of 89% and specificity of 91% 
for TEE.11
Other means of evaluating for intracardiac shunts 
include transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) and tran-
scranial Doppler (TCD). Recent studies comparing TTE 
or TCD with TEE reveal sensitivities and specificities 
of 46% and 99% for TTE and 97% and 93% for TCD, 
respectively.10–13 Other complications of VAE include 
arrhythmias, acute pulmonary hypertension, and circula-
tory collapse. Preoperative diagnosis of an intracardiac 
shunt is a contraindication to surgery in the sitting posi-
tion. The use of intraoperative TEE or precordial Doppler 
ultrasound may aid in early detection of entrained air.14
Patients are at risk for hypotension from pooling of 
blood in the lower body. The lower extremities are often 
wrapped in Ace bandages or compression stockings. 
Intravenous fluids and vasopressors are usually required 
in order to raise mean arterial pressure. Invasive arterial 
blood pressure monitoring is recommended for these 
cases and should be measured at the level of the external 
auditory meatus in order to optimize cerebral perfusion 
pressure. Central venous catheter (CVC) access is also 
recommended for these cases. Long-arm CVCs provide 
intravenous access without being near the surgical field. 
Multiorifice CVCs offer an advantage over conventional 
CVCs for improved aspiration of air should a VAE occur.
Pneumocephalus occurs in almost all patients under-
going cervical spine or posterior fossa surgery in the 
sitting position if diagnosed on postoperative imaging. 
Clinically significant pneumocephalus is more rare and 
occurs because of the lower pressure of cerebrospi-
nal fluid in the sitting position. Symptomatic patients 
may experience headache, confusion, seizures, or even 
temporary hemiparesis. Patients experiencing any of 
these symptoms need to also be evaluated to rule out 
other postoperative complications, such as intracranial 
bleeding or stroke. Complications from head and neck 
positioning are also a risk of the sitting position. Exces-
sive flexion of the cervical spine can impede cerebral 
venous outflow, contributing to swelling, and can also 
impede cerebral arterial inflow, causing hypoperfusion 
of the brain. Macroglossia can also occur with excessive 
neck flexion. TEE monitoring combined with neck flex-
ion can cause compression of laryngeal structures and 
the tongue. A minimum distance of two fingerbreadths 
between the mandible and the sternum is recommended 
for a normal-sized adult in order to prevent these com-
plications. If preoperative examination reveals that the 
patient has a further decreased range of motion, then 
intraoperative positioning should not extend beyond the 
patient's normal limitations.15
III
Chapter 19 Patient Positioning and Associated Risks
345
POSITIONING FOR ROBOTIC-ASSISTED 
SURGERY
Robotic-assisted surgery (RAS) came into use around 
1999 and has quickly become the norm for many uro-
logic operations.13 14 16 17 RAS is quickly expanding its 
use. A 2020 study analyzed laparoscopic surgical proce-
dures and found an increase in robotic assistance from 
2% in 2012 to 15% in 2018.18 For surgeons, RAS offers 
advantages regarding range of motion and accuracy of 
laparoscopic instrumentation. RAS is now used widely, 
including in operations for hernia repair, colorectal, chol-
ecystectomy, video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery, and 
even some cardiac and head and neck operations.
RAS does introduce some new safety and positioning 
challenges. Laparoscopic instruments are placed through 
ports in the patient and then the robot is docked. Docking 
is the process of physically attaching the robot arms to 
the laparoscopic instruments. This is a critical safety con-
cern. Traditional, or standard, operating tables cannot be 
repositioned once the robot is docked to the laparoscopic 
instruments. Moving a traditional operating table risks 
dislodgement of the laparoscopic instruments in relation-
ship to the patient. At our institution, where traditional 
operating tables are used in conjunction with a robotic-
assist device, our practice is to power off the operating 
table, unplug the bed, and turn off the bed remote control 
to prevent inadvertent bed movement while the robot is 
docked. Some institutions have specialized robotic oper-
ating beds that communicate with the robotic operating 
system. These beds can allow for safe movement of the 
bed while the robot is docked. Review the equipment at 
your institution and highlight safety concerns during 
your surgical timeout.
Once the robot is docked, direct access to the patient 
is limited. The anesthesia provider should place all moni-
tors, intravenous lines, and invasive lines that might be 
required during the case before docking the robot. Many 
robotic urologic and gynecologic operations are per-
formed with the patient in steep Trendelenburg (30–45 
degrees) and lithotomy position, with the arms tucked in 
neutral position bilaterally to the sides. The patient must 
be very well secured to avoid slipping in steep Trende-
lenburg position. Many medical institutions use a nonslip 
mattress (such as a bean bag and foam) on the bed. To 
better secure the patient, chest straps are often placed in 
an X configuration over the chest. Use of shoulder braces 
can also help, although there are case reports of brachial 
plexus injuries because of stretch between the shoulder 
and neck. Consider testing the patient in the planned sur-
gical position before the surgical start to ensure that the 
patient is properly positioned, does not slip, and can tol-
erate positioning from a physiologic standpoint. If shoul-
der braces are employed, monitor for excessive stretch at 
the patient's neck. The endotracheal tube should be well 
secured to avoid migration. Often a metal tray or table is 
placed above the patient's face in order to provide protec-
tion from laparoscopic equipment.15–21
Physiologic changes during robotic surgery are the 
result of both laparoscopic insufflation and the steep 
Trendelenburg positioning, when used. Hemodynamic 
changes are largely caused by laparoscopic insuffla-
tion, whereas changes in respiratory mechanics are also 
affected by positioning. FRC decreases with laparoscopy 
and the addition of steep Trendelenburg, which further 
decreases it. This is caused by the combination of the 
pressure of abdominal contents from laparoscopy and 
Trendelenburg positioning pushing up on the diaphragm. 
It can also be worsened by chest fixation that is applied 
to prevent the patient from slipping off the table. Peak 
and plateau airway pressures may increase as much as 
50% above baseline. Between changes in pulmonary 
compliance, decreased FRC, and the need for increased 
minute ventilation with carbon dioxide insufflation, 
intraoperative mechanical ventilation can be quite chal-
lenging during these cases.15–22
Other complications from robotic laparoscopic surger-
ies include laryngeal edema and optic neuropathy. Con-
sider checking for airway leak at the start and at the end 
of the surgical procedure before extubation.
PRESSURE INJURIES
Pressure injuries are caused by prolonged pressure that 
inhibits capillary blood flow over a bony prominence. In 
animal models damage has been shown to start within 
2 hours with 70 mm Hg force. Classification of pres-
sure ulcers is according to the consensus panel from the 
National Pressure Sore Advisory Panel. Stages range from 
intact, nonblanchable erythema (stage 1) to full-thickness 
tissue loss (stage 4). Muscle damage occurs before skin 
and subcutaneous tissue damage and is likely the result 
of increased oxygen requirements of muscle. In the 
supine position areas most at risk include the sacrum, 
heels, and occiput. In the prone position the chest and 
knees are at greatest risk for pressure injury. For patients 
in the sitting position, the ischial tuberosities are at 
greatest risk.20,23
Most intraoperative pressure injuries (>80%) are 
discovered within 72 hours of surgery and occur most 
often in operations lasting more than 3 hours. Prolonged 
surgical time is associated with greater incidence of pres-
sure injury. Cardiac, thoracic, orthopedic, and vascular 
patients had the highest incidences.
Aside from pressure injuries over bony prominences, 
pressure injuries in the lips, tongue, and nasal alae can 
occur from endotracheal tubes, nasogastric tubes, and 
other medical devices. Ensure that pressure from medical 
devices is minimized. This is particularly important dur-
ing hypotension or hypothermia when the tissue is more 
vulnerable to pressure-induced injuries.
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
346
BITE INJURIES
Transcranial motor-evoked potentials (Tc-MEPs) are 
becoming more commonly used for both spine surgi-
cal procedures and neurosurgical procedures (also see 
Chapter 32). Tc-MEPs involve contraction of the tem-
poralis and masseter muscle, which has been implicated 
in tongue, lip, and even tooth injuries because of biting 
motion. A retrospective review of over 17,000 cases 
employing Tc-MEPs found an overall incidence of 0.14%. 
The tongue was most frequently injured (∼80% of all 
associated injuries).21 24 Severity of injury ranged from 
minor bruising to the necessity of laceration repair by 
suture in 25 of 111 patients. Some medical institutions use 
bite blocks between the right and left molars (“double-bite 
blocks”) for these cases to prevent these injuries. Even so, 
approximately 50% of injured patients did have double-
bite blocks in place. Commercial devices are available, but 
they often are of questionable additional benefit.
PERIPHERAL NERVE INJURIES
Peripheral nerve injury remains a serious perioperative 
complication and a significant source of professional 
liability despite its low incidence. The ASA Closed Claims 
Project database reported on nerve injury in 1990 and 
1999.1 However, malpractice claims cannot be used to 
determine the true incidence of nerve injury. A 2018 
qualitative systematic review estimated the incidence 
of perioperative peripheral nerve injury in a general 
population of surgical patients as <1%, with a higher 
incidence in cardiac, neurosurgery, and some orthopedic 
procedures.4 Injuries occur when peripheral nerves are 
subjected to compression, stretch, ischemia, metabolic 
derangement, and direct trauma/laceration during sur-
gery.25 Because sensation is blocked by unconsciousness 
or regional anesthesia, early warning symptoms of pain 
with normal spontaneous repositioning are absent.1 22 26
Peripheral nerve injury is a complex phenomenon 
with a multifactorial cause. Upper extremity neuropathies 
are more common than lower extremity neuropathies. A 
2019 medicolegal analysis of perioperative nerve inju-
ries cites brachial plexus injuries as the most common 
neuropathies, followed by injury to the ulnar nerve.27
Interestingly the distribution of nerve injury claims has 
changed over time. Spinal cord injury and lumbosacral 
nerve root neuropathy were predominantly associated 
with regional anesthesia. Epidural hematoma and chemi-
cal injury represented 29% of the known mechanisms of 
injury among the claims filed. The injuries were probably 
related to the use of neuraxial block in patients who are 
receiving anticoagulation drugs and the increased usage 
of blocks for chronic pain management.1 23 28 29
There is no direct evidence that positioning or pad-
ding alone can prevent perioperative neuropathies. Most 
injuries, particularly injuries to nerves of the upper 
extremity such as the ulnar nerve and brachial plexus, 
occurred in the presence of adequate positioning and 
padding. Stretch injuries in peripheral nerves are caused 
by compromise of the vascular plexus (vasa nervorum) 
that runs alongside supplying these nerves. This can be 
the result of either an obstruction in venous outflow or 
an obstruction to arterial inflow. Compression injuries 
can manifest in several different ways. Neurapraxia is 
caused by a relatively short ischemia time and usually 
causes only a transient dysfunction. Axonotmesis is a 
demyelinating injury. Neurotmesis is caused by a severed 
or disrupted nerve, and usually deficits are permanent.2
The precise cause of peripheral nerve injuries is often 
not clear, making identification of modifiable factors 
difficult to ascertain. Generally, maintaining neutral 
positioning as much as possible is advised. Stretch, 
overflexion, and overextension should all be avoided. 
Superficial nerves, especially near bony prominences, 
should be padded (common peroneal at fibular head, 
ulnar nerve at elbow). Padding and support should dis-
tribute weight as evenly as possible. Ensure that equip-
ment (such as laparoscopic equipment, C-arms, and other 
x-ray equipment) is never resting directly on the patient.
In a retrospective study of 1000 consecutive spine sur-
geries that used somatosensory evoked potential (SSEP) 
monitoring the incidence of position-related upper 
extremity SSEP changes was calculated and compared for 
five different surgical positions. A modification of arm 
position reversed 92% of upper extremity SSEP changes. 
The incidence of position-related upper extremity SSEP 
changes was significantly more frequent in the prone 
“superman” (7%) and lateral decubitus (7.5%) positions 
compared with the supine arms out, supine arms tucked, 
and prone arms tucked positions (1.8%–3.2%). Reversible 
SSEP changes were not associated with postoperative 
deficits.30 The ASA practice advisory recommendations 
for positioning the upper and lower extremities are listed 
in Boxes 19.3 and 19.4.
Ulnar Nerve
The incidence of ulnar neuropathy from intraoperative 
positioning is estimated between 0.04% and 0.5%,4 but 
the degree of morbidity can be severe. Ulnar deficits 
result in the inability to abduct the fifth finger and cause 
decreased sensation to the fourth and fifth fingers, giving 
the appearance of a “claw” hand.
Multiple studies have attempted to elucidate causes 
and risk factors for ulnar neuropathy. In a large retro-
spective review of perioperative ulnar neuropathy last-
ing longer than 3 months risk factors were patients who 
were either very thin or obese and those with prolonged 
postoperative bedrest. In this study there was no asso-
ciation with intraoperative patient position or anesthetic 
technique. In the ASA Closed Claims Project database 
AL GRAWANY
III
Chapter 19 Patient Positioning and Associated Risks
347
diabetes, alcohol use disorder, cigarette smoking, and 
cancer were found to be risk factors. In this study 9% of 
ulnar injury claims had an explicit mechanism of injury, 
and in 27% of claims, the padding of the elbows was 
explicitly stated.1 25 31
Brachial Plexus
The brachial plexus is susceptible to injury from stretch-
ing and compression because of its superficial course 
in the axilla and proximity to the humeral head. Motor 
and sensory deficits are wide-ranging, although sensory 
deficits in the ulnar nerve distribution are common. 
Injury is most associated with arm abduction more than 
90 degrees, lateral rotation of the head, asymmetric 
retraction of the sternum for internal mammary artery 
dissection during cardiac surgery, and direct trauma. In 
cardiac surgery patients requiring median sternotomy 
brachial plexus injury has been specifically associated 
with the C8–T1 nerve roots. Patients should be positioned 
with the head midline, arms kept at the sides, the elbows 
mildly flexed, and the forearms supinated.
Other Upper Extremity Nerves
Isolated injuries to the radial and median nerves are rare. 
Injury to the radial nerve can cause wrist drop, the inabil-
ity to abduct the thumb, and the inability to extend the 
fingers from the metacarpophalangeal joints. The most 
superficial portion of the radial nerve is in the lower one-
third of the upper arm, where the nerve goes across the 
spiral groove of the humerus. The median nerve is rela-
tively protected, with its most vulnerable location being 
in the antecubital fossa adjacent to veins used for intra-
venous access. The ASA practice advisory recommends 
avoiding the improper use of automated blood pressure 
cuffs on the arm (below the antecubital fossa), when pos-
sible, to reduce the risk of upper extremity neuropathy.3
Lower Extremity Nerves
Injuries to the sciatic and common peroneal nerves occur 
most often in the lithotomy position. The sciatic nerve 
can be injured with stretch from external rotation of the 
leg and also from hyperflexion at the hip. As previously 
BOX 19.3
Recommendations for Positioning the Upper 
Extremities
Positioning Strategies to Reduce Perioperative Brachial 
Plexus Neuropathy
•When possible, limit arm abduction in a supine patient to
90 degrees.
-
The prone position may allow patients to comfortably 
tolerate abduction of their arms to greater than 
90 degrees.
Positioning Strategies to Reduce Perioperative Ulnar 
Neuropathy
•Supine patient with arm on an arm board: Position the
upper extremity to decrease pressure on the postcondylar 
groove of the humerus (ulnar groove).
-
Either supination or the neutral forearm position may 
be used to facilitate this action.
•Supine patient with arms tucked at side: Place the
forearm in a neutral position.
•Flexion of the elbow: When possible, avoid flexion of the
elbow to decrease the risk of ulnar neuropathy.a
Positioning Strategies to Reduce Perioperative Radial 
Neuropathy
•Avoid prolonged pressure on the radial nerve in the spiral
groove of the humerus.
Positioning Strategies to Reduce Perioperative Median 
Neuropathy
•Avoid extension of the elbow beyond the range that
is comfortable during the preoperative assessment to 
prevent stretching of the median nerve.
Periodic Assessment of Upper Extremity Position 
During Procedures
•Periodic perioperative assessments may be performed to
ensure maintenance of the desired position.
aThere is no consensus on an acceptable degree of flexion 
during the perioperative period. Advisory recommendations from 
Practice Advisory for the Prevention of Perioperative Peripheral 
Neuropathies 2018: An Updated Report by the American Society of 
Anesthesiologists Task Force on Prevention of Perioperative Peripheral 
Neuropathies. Anesthesiology. 2018;128(1):11–26.
BOX 19.4
Recommendations for Positioning the Lower 
Extremities
Positioning Strategies to Reduce Perioperative Sciatic 
Neuropathy
•Stretching of the hamstring muscle group: Positions that
stretch the hamstring muscle group beyond the range 
that is comfortable during the preoperative assessment 
may be avoided to prevent stretching of the sciatic nerve.
•Limiting hip flexion: Because the sciatic nerve or its
branches cross both the hip and the knee joints, assess 
extension and flexion of these joints when determining 
the degree of hip flexion.
Positioning Strategies to Reduce Perioperative Femoral 
Neuropathy
•When possible, avoid extension or flexion of the hip to
decrease the risk of femoral neuropathy.
Positioning Strategies to Reduce Perioperative 
Peroneal Neuropathy
•Avoid prolonged pressure on the peroneal nerve at the
fibular head.
Advisory recommendations from Practice Advisory for the Prevention 
of Perioperative Peripheral Neuropathies 2018: An Updated 
Report by the American Society of Anesthesiologists Task Force on 
Prevention of Perioperative Peripheral Neuropathies. Anesthesiology. 
2018;128(1):11–26.
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
348
mentioned, the common peroneal nerve is most at risk for 
injury as it wraps around the head of the fibula. Injury to 
the common peroneal nerve can cause footdrop, inversion 
of the foot, and sensory deficit. A femoral neuropathy 
will present with decreased flexion of the hip, decreased 
extension of the knee, or a loss of sensation over the 
superior aspect of the thigh and medial/anteromedial side 
of the leg. The obturator nerve can be injured during a 
difficult forceps delivery, in the lithotomy position, or by 
excessive flexion of the thigh to the groin. An obturator 
neuropathy will present with inability to adduct the leg 
and decreased sensation over the medial thigh. A cadav-
eric study revealed that abduction of the hips of greater 
than 30 degrees puts significant strain on the obturator 
nerve. This strain was significantly reduced or eliminated 
by adding at least 45 degrees of hip flexion.26 32
According to a prospective study of close to 1000 
patients, the overall incidence of nerve injury in the 
lithotomy position is 1.5%. The obturator nerve was 
most frequently injured, followed closely by the lat-
eral femoral cutaneous nerve and sciatic and peroneal 
nerves. Neuropathy was evident within 4 hours of the 
surgical end time. Symptoms were paresthesias and 
pain, and interestingly no motor weakness was found in 
this study. Length of surgery greater than 2 hours was 
the only risk factor found.33 For 14 of 15 patients with 
nerve injury, the symptoms resolved within 4 months 
of surgery. In a previous retrospective study the same 
authors determined the incidence of lower extremity 
motor neuropathy (greater than 3 months’ duration) in 
patients undergoing surgery in the lithotomy position 
to be 1 in 3608, with the common peroneal nerve being 
most affected.34
EVALUATION AND TREATMENT OF 
PERIOPERATIVE NEUROPATHIES
The ASA practice advisory recommends a simple post-
operative assessment of extremity nerve function in the 
recovery room.3 When a nerve injury becomes apparent 
postoperatively, it is essential that a directed physical 
examination be performed to correlate and document the 
extent of sensory or motor deficits with the preoperative 
examination in addition to any intraoperative events. A 
neurologic consultation can help define the neurogenic 
basis, localize the site of the lesion, and determine the 
severity of injury for guiding prognostication. With 
proper diagnosis and management, most injuries resolve, 
but months to years may be required.
Most sensory neuropathies are transient and require 
only reassurance to the patient with follow-up, whereas 
most motor neuropathies include demyelination of 
peripheral fibers of a nerve trunk (neurapraxia) and gen-
erally take 4 to 6 weeks for recovery. Injury to the axon 
within an intact nerve sheath (axonotmesis) or complete 
nerve disruption (neurotmesis) can cause severe pain and 
disability. When reversible, recovery often takes 3 to 12 
months. Interim physical therapy is recommended to 
prevent contractures and muscle atrophy.
If a new sensory or motor deficit is found postop-
eratively, electrophysiologic evaluation by a neurologist 
within the first week may provide useful information 
concerning the characteristic and temporal pattern of 
the injury. However, another examination after 4 weeks, 
when enough time has elapsed for the electrophysiologic 
changes to evolve, will provide more definitive informa-
tion about the site, nature, and severity of the nerve 
injury. Regardless, electrophysiologic testing must be 
interpreted within the clinical content for which it was 
obtained. No single test can define the cause of injury.
PERIOPERATIVE EYE INJURY AND 
VISUAL LOSS
The incidence of perioperative eye injuries is approxi-
mately 0.05%, and they account for 3% of claims in the 
ASA Closed Claims Project database (also see Chapter 31). 
Greater monetary settlements were associated with ocular 
injuries as compared with nonocular injuries. Periopera-
tive eye injuries include corneal abrasions and postopera-
tive vision loss (POVL).1,31,35
Corneal abrasions are by far the most common type of 
perioperative ocular injury, with an incidence of 0.11% in 
a 2014.36 During general anesthesia, the natural lid reflex 
is abolished and tear production is decreased, which 
places the cornea at risk. Symptoms most commonly 
manifest as sensation of a foreign body in the eye upon 
awakening from anesthesia, photophobia, blurry vision, 
and erythema. Risk factors include increased age, length 
of surgery, prone position, Trendelenburg position, and 
supplemental oxygen delivery in the postanesthesia care 
unit.36 Precautionary measures to reduce the incidence 
of corneal abrasion include early and careful taping of 
the eyelids after induction of anesthesia, care regarding 
dangling objects when leaning over patients, and close 
observation as patients awaken. Ophthalmic ointments 
may add another layer of protection and combat dry eye. 
Patients often try to rub their eyes or nose with pulse oxi-
meter probes, arm boards, and intravenous lines attached 
before they are fully awake.
POVL is a devastating complication that has been 
associated with specific surgeries and patient risk factors. 
The incidence is the lowest for noncardiac surgery and 
ranges up to 0.09% for patients undergoing spine sur-
gery in the prone position.31,35 Ischemic optic neuropa-
thy (ION) and, to a lesser extent, central retinal arterial 
occlusion from direct retinal pressure are the conditions 
most cited as potential causes. Perioperative factors asso-
ciated with an increased risk of ION include prolonged 
hypotension, long duration of surgery, large blood loss, 
III
Chapter 19 Patient Positioning and Associated Risks
349
large-volume crystalloid use, anemia or hemodilution, 
and increased intraocular or venous pressure from the 
prone position. Patient risk factors associated with ION 
include hypertension, diabetes, atherosclerosis, morbid 
obesity, and tobacco use. However, with the exception 
of obvious external compression of the eyes, the cause 
of POVL appears to be multifactorial in nature with no 
consistent underlying mechanism.33 37
In 1999 the ASA Committee on Professional Liability 
established the ASA Postoperative Visual Loss Registry 
to better understand the complication. By 2005 131 cases 
were reported to the registry; 73% of these reported cases 
involved patients undergoing spine surgeries and 9% 
involved cardiac surgery. In a 2006 report of 93 patients 
with POVL after prone spine surgery 89% were diag-
nosed with ION, predominantly posterior, and 11% with 
central retinal artery occlusion (CRAO).38 In patients who 
were diagnosed with ION 66% had documented bilateral 
involvement, of which 42% had eventual improvement in 
vision, although often clinically insignificant. Compared 
with CRAO, patients with ION had significantly higher 
anesthetic duration (9.8 ± 3.1 vs. 6.5 ± 2.2 hours), esti-
mated blood loss (median 2 vs. 0.75 L), and crystalloid 
infusion (9.7 ± 4.7 vs. 4.6 ± 1.7 L). Patients with ION 
were also relatively healthy (64% ASA I and II), and 72% 
were male. In 2006 the ASA issued a practice advisory 
for POVL associated with spine surgery (also see Chapter 
32). Unfortunately, no definite recommendations were 
made concerning the issue of induced hypotension, use 
of vasopressors, or transfusion threshold owing to the 
multifactorial nature and the low incidence of the injury. 
Despite a lack of direct evidence, several suggestions 
were made for high-risk patients undergoing complex 
spine surgery.34 35 38 39
Until the causative factors of this devastating type 
of injury are better defined, patient management strate-
gies will continue to be debated. With regard to patient 
positioning, the anesthesia provider should be aware that 
intraocular pressures are increased in the dependent eye 
in the lateral position and both eyes in the prone position 
in the absence of any external pressure. Eye checks should 
be frequently performed and documented. Time in the 
prone position should be limited whenever possible. For-
tunately, in a retrospective review of 5.6 million patients 
in the National (Nationwide) Inpatient Sample the largest 
U.S. all-payer hospital inpatient care database, the rate of 
POVL decreased from 1996 to 2005, perhaps because of an 
increase in awareness of this complication.36 40
ANESTHESIA OUTSIDE THE OPERATING 
ROOM
Anesthesia care providers are increasingly involved 
with procedures performed in remote locations such as 
for gastrointestinal endoscopy, cardiac catheterization, 
interventional radiology, neuroradiology, magnetic reso-
nance imaging/computed tomography, and office-based 
procedures (also see Chapter 38). Vigilance is particularly 
important outside the operating room to maintain patient 
safety because of the less familiar environment, relative 
lack of positioning equipment, and variability in staff 
and nursing training with regard to patient position-
ing. For example, many locations do not routinely have 
safety straps or arm supports available. In some settings, 
such as magnetic resonance imaging, radiation therapy, 
and computed tomography, the anesthesia provider is 
not continuously in direct proximity to the patient. In 
such an environment, where practice patterns have often 
evolved in the context of nonanesthetized patients, the 
anesthesia provider will be primarily responsible for veri-
fying the safety of each patient's position and for imple-
menting guidelines for patients receiving anesthesia.
CONCLUSION
The positioning of patients during anesthesia care is an 
essential aspect of intraoperative care. Each position has 
different physiologic effects on ventilation and circula-
tion. Despite provider awareness, position-related com-
plications, including peripheral nerve injuries, continue 
to remain a significant source of patient morbidity. The 
entire operative team, including anesthesia providers, 
must work together when positioning each patient to 
ensure the patient's comfort and safety in addition to 
the desired surgical exposure. Ideally, the final position 
should appear natural: a position that the patient would 
comfortably tolerate if awake and not sedated for the 
anticipated duration of the procedure.
REFERENCES
1. Cheney FW, Domino KB, Caplan RA, 
Posner KL. Nerve injury associated with 
anesthesia: A closed claims analysis. 
Anesthesiology. 1999;90(4):1062–1069.
2. Johnson RL, Warner ME, Staff NP, 
Warner MA. Neuropathies after surgery: 
Anatomical considerations of pathologic 
mechanisms. Clin Anat. 2015;28(5):678–
682.
3. Practice Advisory for the Prevention of 
Perioperative Peripheral Neuropathies 
2018: An updated report by the Ameri-
can Society of Anesthesiologists Task 
Force on Prevention of Perioperative 
Peripheral Neuropathies. Anesthesiology. 
2018;128(1):11–26.
4. Chui J, Murkin JM, Posner KL, Domi-
no KB. Perioperative peripheral nerve 
injury after general anesthesia: A quali-
tative systematic review. Anesth Analg. 
2018;127(1):134–143.
5. Geerts BF, van den Bergh L, Stijnen T, 
etal. Comprehensive review: Is it bet-
ter to use the Trendelenburg position or 
passive leg raising for the initial treat-
ment of hypovolemia?. J Clin Anesth. 
2012;24(8):668–674.
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
350
6. Warner ME, LaMaster LM, Thoem-
ing AK, etal. Compartment syndrome 
in surgical patients. Anesthesiology. 
2001;94(4):705–708.
7. Anema JG, Morey AF, McAninch JW, 
etal. Complications related to the high 
lithotomy position during urethral recon-
struction. J Urol. 2000;164(2):360–363.
8. Guérin C, Reignier J, Richard JC, 
PROSEVA Study Group, etal. Prone 
positioning in severe acute respirato-
ry distress syndrome. N Engl J Med. 
2013;368(23):2159–2168.
9. Black S, Ockert DB, Oliver Jr WC, 
etal. Outcome following posterior fossa 
craniectomy in patients in the sitting 
or horizontal positions. Anesthesiology. 
1988;69:49–56.
10. Ganslandt O, Merkel A, Schmitt H, 
etal. The sitting position in neuro-
surgery: Indications, complications and 
results. A single institution experience 
of 600 cases. Acta Neurochir (Wien). 
2013;155(10):1887–1893.
11. Mojadidi MK, Bogush N, Caceres JD, 
etal. Diagnostic accuracy of transesoph-
ageal echocardiogram for the detection 
of patent foramen ovale: A meta-anal-
ysis. Echocardiography. 2014;31(6):
752–758.
12. Mojadidi MK, Roberts SC, Winoker JS, 
etal. Accuracy of transcranial Doppler 
for the diagnosis of intracardiac right-
to-left shunt: A bivariate meta-analysis 
of prospective studies. JACC Cardiovasc 
Imaging. 2014;7(3):236–250.
13. Mojadidi MK, Winoker JS, Roberts SC, 
etal. Accuracy of conventional tran-
sthoracic echocardiography for the diag-
nosis of intracardiac right-to-left shunt: 
A meta-analysis of prospective studies. 
Echocardiography. 
2014;31(9):1036–
1048.
14. Mammoto T, Hayashi Y, Ohnishi Y, etal. 
Incidence of venous and paradoxical 
air embolism in neurosurgical patients 
in the sitting position: Detection by 
transesophageal echocardiography. Acta 
Anaesthesiol Scand. 1998;42:643–647.
15. Warner M. Positioning the head and 
neck. In: Martin JT, Warner MA, eds. 
Positioning in Anesthesia and Surgery. 
3rd ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 
1997.
16. Hu JC, Gu X, Lipsitz SR, etal. Compara-
tive effectiveness of minimally invasive 
vs open radical prostatectomy. JAMA. 
2009;302(14):1557–1564.
17. Wright JD, Ananth CV, Lewin SN, etal. 
Robotically assisted vs laparoscop-
ic hysterectomy among women with 
benign gynecologic disease. JAMA. 
2013;309(7):689–698.
18. Sheetz KH, Claflin J, Dimick JB. Trends 
in the adoption of robotic surgery 
for 
common 
surgical 
procedures. 
JAMA 
Netw 
Open. 
2020 
Jan 
3;3(1):e1918911. 
PMID: 
31922557; 
PMCID: 
PMC6991252. 
doi:10.1001/
jamanetworkopen.2019.18911.
19. Gainsburg DM. Anesthetic concerns 
for robotic-assisted laparoscopic radi-
cal prostatectomy. Minerva Anestesiol. 
2012;78(5):596–604.
20. Hsu RL, Kaye AD, Urman RD. Anesthetic 
challenges in robotic-assisted urologic 
surgery. Rev Urol. 2013;15(4):178–184.
21. Kalmar AF, De Wolf AM, Hendrickx JFA. 
Anesthetic considerations for robotic 
surgery in the steep Trendelenburg posi-
tion. Adv Anesth. 2012;30:75–96.
22. Lestar M, Gunnarsson L, Lagerstrand 
L, etal. Hemodynamic perturbations 
during 
robot-assisted 
laparoscopic 
radical prostatectomy in 45 degrees 
Trendelenburg position. Anesth Analg. 
2011;113(5):1069–1075.
23. Cushing CA, Phillips LG. Evidence-based 
medicine: Pressure sores. Plast Reconstr 
Surg. 2013;132(6):1720–1732.
24. Tamkus A, Rice K. The incidence of 
bite injuries associated with transcra-
nial motor-evoked potential monitoring. 
Anesth Analg. 2012;115(3):663–667.
25. Winfree CJ, Kline DG. Intraoperative 
positioning nerve injuries. Anesthesiol-
ogy. 2009;111:490–497.
26. Welch MB, Brummett CM, Welch TD, 
etal. Perioperative peripheral nerve 
injuries: A retrospective study of 
380,680 cases during a 10-year period 
at a single institution. Anesthesiology. 
2009;111(3):490–497.
27. Grant I, Brovman EY, Kang D, Green-
berg P, Saba R, Urman RD. A medi-
colegal analysis of positioning-related 
perioperative peripheral nerve injuries 
occurring between 1996 and 2015. J 
Clin Anesth. 2019;58:84–90. Epub 2019 
May 22. PMID: 31128482. doi:10.1016/j.
jclinane.2019.05.013.
28. Fitzgibbon DR, Posner KL, Domino 
KB, etal. Chronic pain management: 
American society of Anesthesiologists 
Closed Claims Project. Anesthesiology. 
2004;100(1):98–105.
29. Cheney FW. The American Society of 
Anesthesiologists Closed Claims Pro-
ject: What have we learned, how has it 
affected practice, and how will it affect 
practice in the future? Anesthesiology. 
1999;91(2):552–556.
30. Kamel IR, Drum ET, Koch SA, etal. The 
use of somatosensory evoked potentials 
to determine the relationship between 
patient positioning and impending 
upper extremity nerve injury during 
spine surgery: A retrospective analysis. 
Anesth Analg. 2006;102(5):1538–1542.
31. Warner MA, Warner ME, Martin JT. 
Ulnar neuropathy. Incidence, out-
come, and risk factors in sedated or 
anesthetized patients. Anesthesiology. 
1994;81(6):1332–1340.
32. Litwiller JP, Wells Jr RE, Halliwill JR, 
etal. Effect of lithotomy positions 
on strain of the obturator and lateral 
femoral cutaneous nerves. Clin Anat. 
2004;17(1):45–49.
33. Warner MA, Warner DO, Harper CM, 
etal. Lower extremity neuropathies 
associated with lithotomy positions. 
Anesthesiology. 2000;93(4):938–942.
34. Warner MA, Martin JT, Schroeder DR, 
etal. Lower-extremity motor neuropa-
thy associated with surgery performed 
on patients in a lithotomy position. 
Anesthesiology. 1994;81(1):6–12.
35. Roth S, Thisted RA, Erickson JP, etal. 
Eye injuries after nonocular surgery. A 
study of 60,965 anesthetics from 1988 to 
1992. Anesthesiology. 1996;85(5):1020–
1027.
36. Segal KL, Fleischut PM, Kim C, etal. 
Evaluation and treatment of periop-
erative corneal abrasions. J Ophthalmol. 
2014;2014:901901.
37. Cheng MA, Todorov A, Tempelhoff R, 
etal. The effect of prone position-
ing on intraocular pressure in anes-
thetized 
patients. 
Anesthesiology. 
2001;95(6):1351–1355.
38. Lee LA, Roth S, Posner KL, etal. The 
American Society of Anesthesiologists 
Postoperative Visual Loss Registry: 
Analysis of 93 spine surgery cases with 
postoperative visual loss. Anesthesiol-
ogy. 2006;105(4):652–659 quiz 867–868.
39. American Society of Anesthesiologists 
Task Force on Perioperative Visual Loss. 
Practice advisory for perioperative vis-
ual loss associated with spine surgery: 
An updated report by the American 
Society of Anesthesiologists Task Force 
on Perioperative Visual Loss. Anesthesi-
ology. 2012;116(2):274–285.
40. Shen Y, Drum M, Roth S. The preva-
lence of perioperative visual loss in the 
United States: A 10-year study from 
1996 to 2005 of spinal, orthopedic, car-
diac, and general surgery. Anesth Analg. 
2009;109(5):1534–1545.
351
Chapter
INTRODUCTION
Anesthesiologists have long been at the forefront of 
patient monitoring. This has been of necessity because 
we are responsible for continuously assessing the 
patient's physiologic status and the effects of surgery 
and anesthetic agents. This chapter provides an intro-
duction to the basic function and utility of the wide 
array of monitors employed in modern anesthesia care. 
Monitoring devices will be organized by organ system, 
not by physical property or technique on which that 
monitor derives its information. A detailed review of 
monitoring principles is available in a comprehensive 
text.1
Overview
In 1986 the American Society of Anesthesiologists estab-
lished a set of basic monitoring standards, stating that 
the patient's oxygenation, ventilation, circulation, and 
temperature shall be continually evaluated.2 These stand-
ards are periodically reviewed, affirmed, or updated, most 
recently in 2020. Many clinical situations will require 
additional monitoring. All of the organ systems moni-
tored are perfused by the circulatory system (Fig. 20.1). 
Our monitoring of the patient attempts to continuously 
assess if the patient's state is “normal” or “abnormal” and 
to correct the cause of the abnormality, or at least treat 
the abnormal number generated by our monitor. We must 
understand the limitations of our monitors and how to 
use data from multiple devices to confirm our diagnosis 
and follow our treatment.
INTRODUCTION
Overview
RESPIRATORY SYSTEM
Oxygenation
Ventilation
CIRCULATORY SYSTEM
Measurement of the Electrocardiogram
Blood Pressure and Flow
Measures of Intravascular Volume 
Responsiveness
Central Venous Monitoring: CVP, PAP, and CO
CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM
Processed Electroencephalograph Monitoring
Minimum Alveolar Concentration Alert 
Monitoring
Intracranial Pressure Monitoring
Cerebral Oximetry
PERIPHERAL NERVOUS SYSTEM
Neuromuscular Monitoring
TEMPERATURE
MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING AND 
ADVERSE CONDITIONS
MULTIFUNCTION DISPLAYS AND DECISION 
SUPPORT
ANESTHETIC 
MONITORING
Ryan Paul Davis, Kevin K. Tremper*
20
*Founder and equity holder in AlertWatch, Inc., a University of 
Michigan startup - a decision support alerting software system.
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
352
Lungs
Pulmonary Artery
Pulmonary Veins
LA
Mitral Valve
LV
Aorta
RA
RV
Liver/GI
Aortic Valve
2,
Pulse 
Contour
Venous
Capacitance
CVP
VenaCava
PAP
PCWP
LVSV
LVEDV
LAP
Pulmonic
 Valve
Tricuspid
Valve
~20%Q
~20%Q
~20%Q
~20%Q
~15%Q
Chest Wall
ETCO2
ECG
Major Arteries
SVR
%EF
FiO2
Coronary aa
5% Q
Fig. 20.1 A Summary of Monitors and the Circulation. Anatomic features are listed around the periphery, 
with monitored variables central and underlined (see Table 20.1 for normal values of monitored variables). 
The blood flows in a circuit with a cardiac output of roughly 20% each to the brain, kidneys, liver, GI tract, 
muscle mass, and other organs (skin, etc.). The systemic vascular resistance (SVR) is a calculated variable, 
reflecting the totality of blood flow and pressure. Roughly 70% of the blood is on the venous side. The 
venous capacitance is highly variable and acts as a buffer for changes in volume. Some variables may 
be measured or derived, depending on methodology. aa, Arteries; ABG, arterial blood gas; BIS, bispectral 
index scale; CVP, central venous pressure; DBP, diastolic blood pressure; DBS, double burst stimulation; 
ECG, electrocardiogram; EEG, electroencephalography; EF, ejection fraction; EMG, electromyography; 
ETCO2, end-tidal CO2; FiO2, fraction of inspired oxygen; GI, gastrointestinal; ICP, intracranial pressure; 
III
Chapter 20 Anesthetic Monitoring
353
RESPIRATORY SYSTEM
Oxygen (O2) is a colorless, odorless gas critical for cel-
lular respiration. Lack of delivery of oxygen to tissues 
will result in cellular death. Carbon dioxide (CO2) is a 
consequence of cellular metabolism and must be removed 
from the tissues to maintain acid–base homeostasis. This 
section will review monitors of patient oxygenation and 
ventilation.
Oxygenation
Inspired Oxygen 
Inspired oxygen content, or fraction of inspired O2 (FiO2), 
can be measured by a variety of methods. Anesthesia 
machines most commonly use an amperometric sensor 
to measure O2 in the fresh gas flow. Calibration is recom-
mended, as the sensor, which is basically a fuel cell that 
consumes oxygen and generates current, has “drift” (i.e., 
the readings in a constant concentration of oxygen will 
not be constant). It is a slow responding device, mean-
ing that it cannot be used to measure inspired/expired 
oxygen, as this rapidly changes. An alternative method 
of measuring inspired oxygen uses the fact that oxygen 
is paramagnetic. A paramagnetic oxygen sensor can be 
auto-calibrating, using room air as a source of 21% O2. 
The gradient between the sample and the room air can be 
measured by a pressure transducer or a torsion wire. The 
fast response time allows the measurement of both inspired 
and expired oxygen content. Measuring expired O2 (FeO2) 
concentration during preinduction/preoxygenation also 
allows the determination of complete preoxygenation/
denitrogenation, aiming for FeO2 >85%, in addition to a 
rough estimate of O2 consumption.
Pulse Oximetry
The pulse oximeter provides a continuous noninvasive 
estimate of arterial hemoglobin saturation (SaO2) by 
analyzing light transmitted through living tissue, most 
commonly the finger or ear (Fig. 20.2).3 The physical 
principle known as Beer's law relates the concentra-
tion of a dissolved substance to the log of the ratio of 
the incident and transmitted light intensity through a 
known distance. Oxyhemoglobin and reduced (deoxy)
hemoglobin absorb red and infrared light differently. The 
pulse oximeter contains a light-emitting diode (LED) that 
emits two wavelengths of light (red, 660 nanometers, and 
infrared, 940 nanometers) and a photodiode that meas-
ures light transmission. The device determines the signal 
related to arterial hemoglobin saturation by analyzing 
the pulsatile component of the light absorption tracing, 
hence the name pulse oximeter (Fig. 20.3). The follow-
ing equation is calculated continuously by the device to 
determine the ratio of pulse-added red to pulse-added 
infrared light absorbance:
R
AC
DC
AC
DC
red
red
IR
IR
=
/
/
(Eq. 1)
This ratio (R) of absorbance is empirically calibrated to 
estimate SaO2. That is, the device uses SaO2 data derived 
from human volunteers to determine the relationship 
between the pulse oximeter saturation (SpO2) and the 
ratio of light absorbance, R (Fig. 20.4).
Dyes and Dyshemoglobins
Standard pulse oximeters using two wavelengths of light 
can determine functional saturation, that is, the percent-
age of oxyhemoglobin, HbO2 over HbO2 plus reduced 
hemoglobin, Hb (two equations for two unknowns), using 
two equations:
SaO
HbO
HbO
Hb
2
2
2


(Eq. 2)
Functional Saturation
So
HbO
COHb
MetHb
HbO
Hb
2
2
2




(Eq. 3)
Fractional Saturation
Because pulse oximeters are calibrated using human 
volunteers who have little carboxyhemoglobin or meth-
emoglobin, these forms of hemoglobin are not accounted 
for in a standard pulse oximeter's calculated SaO2 (Eq.2). 
Therefore if either carboxyhemoglobin (e.g., from carbon 
monoxide poisoning) or methemoglobin (e.g., from ben-
zocaine or prilocaine toxicity) is present, the devices will 
produce an erroneous saturation value. These abnormal 
hemoglobins can be measured by use of a multiwavelength 
blood gas cooximeter, which requires a blood sample 
for accurate measurement (Eq. 3). Dyshemoglobinemias 
should be considered in patients with a discrepancy 
between PaO2 on blood gas and SpO2 or in specific clinical 
settings. Carboxyhemoglobin absorbs red light similarly 
to oxyhemoglobin, causing the pulse oximeter reading to 
LA, left atrium; LAP, left atrial pressure; LV, left ventricle; LVEDV, left ventricular end-
diastolic volume; LVSV, left ventricular systolic volume; MAP, mean arterial pressure; PAP, pulmonary artery 
pressure; PCWP, pulmonary capillary wedge pressure; PIP, peak inspiratory pressure; Q, cardiac output; 
RA, right atrium; RR, respiratory rate; RV, right ventricle; SBP, systolic blood pressure; SpO2 arterial O2
saturation; SPV, systolic pressure variation; SSEP, somatosensory evoked potential; TEE, transesophageal 
echocardiography; TOF, train of four; Vt, tidal volume.
Fig. 20.1 (Cont.)
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
354
Fig. 20.3 Tissue Absorbances. As light is transmitted through tissues and detected by the photodiode, 
it is absorbed by all the tissues between the light source and the detector (i.e., skin, muscle, bone, and 
blood). Because the pulse oximeter is designed to determine a signal only related to arterial blood, it 
analyzes only the pulsatile absorbance noted at the top of the figure. The pulse oximeter therefore 
makes the assumption that whatever is pulsing must be arterial blood. In most cases this is true, 
but in some situations (e.g., patient motion) there can be large venous pulsations which can produce 
erroneously low saturation values.
Fig. 20.2 Pulse Oximeter. Pulse oximeters (SpO2) provide an estimate of arterial hemoglobin saturation 
(SaO2) by analyzing the pulsatile absorbance of two frequencies of light (660 and 940 nanometers) emitted 
by light-emitting diodes (LEDs), the light source, and detected by a photodiode on the opposite side of the 
tissue bed of the finger. The photodiode generates a current when it detects any light: the red or infrared 
or room light. For that reason, the photodiode alternates a pulse of red light and room light with a pulse 
of infrared light and the room light. Then, when both LEDs are off, it measures room light alone, then 
subtracts the room light signal from the previous two signals, continuously correcting for changes in room 
light. It thereby derives a signal associated with the pulsing LED signals. The signal may be improved by 
decreasing ambient light by covering the probe with an opaque material.
III
Chapter 20 Anesthetic Monitoring
355
equal the sum of carboxyhemoglobin and oxyhemoglobin, 
thus giving the impression the patient is adequately satu-
rated with oxyhemoglobin even in the presence of severe 
carboxyhemoglobin toxicity. Methemoglobin has a dark 
appearance and absorbs both red and infrared light to 
a high degree, which causes the absorbance ratio R to 
tend toward 1. From the calibration curve, a ratio of 1 
will produce an SpO2 of 85% (see Fig. 20.4). Therefore an 
increasing amount of methemoglobin (especially >20%) 
will cause the pulse oximeter to display readings closer to 
85%. That is, it will produce falsely low values when the 
patient has high SaO2 and falsely high values of 85% when 
the patient is severely hypoxemic. Dyes produce similar 
errors as does methemoglobin (i.e., force the saturation 
towards 85%), although most are cleared from the circula-
tion quickly and the error is only transient. Newer eight-
wavelength pulse oximeters are available which can detect 
three saturations (oxy-, carboxy-, and methemoglobin).4
Motion artifact will also cause the SpO2 value to tend 
toward 85% because the motion artifact produces noise in 
the numerator and denominator of Equation 1. The ratio 
R is forced toward 1.0 like methemoglobin. In fact, any 
situation that results in a small signal-to-noise ratio may 
cause the SpO2 to trend toward 85%.3
Ventilation
The respiratory rate, pattern, and depth are all important 
descriptors of ventilation. Qualitatively, ventilation depth 
and pattern can be observed by chest rise, auscultation, 
or reexpansion of the rebreathing bag on the anesthesia 
machine. In any acute situation where the adequacy of 
ventilation is an issue eliminating monitoring devices 
altogether and going to the source by listening for bilat-
eral clear breath sounds with a stethoscope should be 
done immediately. This may rule out tension pneumo-
thorax, acute bronchospasm, endobronchial intubation, 
pulmonary edema, or absence of ventilation altogether.
Airway Pressures
Increases in peak airway pressure merit investigation, 
as they imply an acute increase in airflow resistance, 
either in the circuit or the patient (e.g., from endotra-
cheal tube [ETT] obstruction or bronchospasm). Increased 
Fig. 20.4 Pulse Oximeter Calibration Curve. Because of all the absorbances between the light source and 
the photo detector, the concentrations of oxyhemoglobin and reduced hemoglobin cannot be measured 
specifically (i.e., the exact path length of the light is unknown). Using the pulse-added absorbance from 
both the infrared and red light source, a ratio of these pulse-added absorbances (Eq. 1) can be empirically 
related to SpO2. That is, volunteer subjects breathe low inspired oxygen concentrations to produce 
hypoxemia while blood samples are obtained for SaO2 measurement. These SaO2 measurements are 
calibrated to the ratio of red to infrared pulsatile absorbance to develop the calibration curve shown, 
which is incorporated into the device. The ratio R ranges from approximately 0.4 to 3.4 as the saturation 
decreases from 100% to 0%. The volunteer data are only available from 100% saturation down to 75%. 
All values lower than that are extrapolated from the data. Note that at approximately an SpO2 of 85%, 
the ratio of the two absorbances is 1.0. Therefore any condition that causes the ratio of pulse-added red 
to pulse-added infrared red light to tend toward 1.0 will produce a saturation of approximately 85%. This 
occurs with motion artifact, dyes, and methemoglobin toxicity.
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
356
peak airway pressure can also be caused by decreases in 
lung or chest wall compliance. If peak airway pressure 
is increased and simultaneously positive end-expiratory 
pressure (PEEP) is increased, this may signify a tension 
pneumothorax, especially if associated with arterial 
hypotension. In this circumstance the hypotension is 
caused by high intrathoracic pressure impeding venous 
return. The mechanical ventilator can be set to produce 
a brief pause at end inspiration, allowing the plateau 
pressure to be measured. External obstruction of an ETT 
(e.g., from a patient biting on the tube or tube kinking) 
can cause an increase in peak inspiratory pressure (PIP) 
with minimal or no increase in the plateau pressure 
(Fig.20.5). This can be easily ruled out by passing a suc-
tion catheter down the ETT. A loss of or abrupt decrease 
in airway pressure is not specific, but can indicate a vari-
ety of major problems, including circuit disconnections, 
leaks, extubation, failure to deliver fresh gases, failure 
to set the ventilator properly, excess scavenging, and 
other anesthesia machine issues.5 Airway pressure can 
be measured with analog gauges or electronic pressure 
transducers, analogous to those used for blood pressure 
measurements.
The difference between plateau pressure and PEEP is 
referred to as the “driving pressure.” The static respira-
tory system compliance equals tidal volume divided by 
driving pressure. Increased focus on driving pressure is 
relevant to the treatment of acute respiratory distress 
syndrome (ARDS), as increases in driving pressure are 
associated with increased mortality.6 In the operating 
room a metaanalysis of 17 randomized controlled trials 
of protective ventilation showed that increased driving 
pressure was associated with the development of postop-
erative pulmonary complications, whereas tidal volume 
and PEEP were not.7 Other studies of mechanical ven-
tilation in the operating room include titration of “best 
PEEP” in patients undergoing elective thoracic surgery8
and open abdominal surgery.9 In these studies the opti-
mum PEEP is defined as the PEEP level resulting in the 
greatest respiratory system compliance or lowest driving 
pressure. Although driving pressure has shown promise 
as a variable to monitor and titrate ventilator settings, it 
cannot be viewed in isolation, given the multiple factors 
that affect the value, interpretation, and changes with 
time.10 Driving pressure will remain a focus of interest 
in the management of mechanically ventilated patients 
inside and outside of the operating room; however, ven-
tilator settings should be individualized to the patient.
Tidal Volume
A 2013 randomized trial of low tidal volume in adult 
patients undergoing abdominal surgery found better pul-
monary outcomes associated with setting tidal volume at 
6 to 8 cc/kg of ideal body weight, in addition to intraop-
erative recruitment maneuvers and PEEP.11 This ventila-
tion strategy is similar to that used in patients with ARDS 
(also see Chapter 41). Once these tidal volumes are set, the 
respiratory rate should be adjusted to maintain an end-
tidal CO2 (ETCO2) in the normal range of 35 to 40 mm Hg. 
Modern ventilators use a variety of modes to achieve this 
tidal volume (Fig. 20.6). Most ventilators have pressure 
limits that will alert when peak pressures are exceeded 
because of increased airway resistance in the circuit or in 
the patient (Fig. 20.7). Monitoring the tidal volume and 
peak airway pressure together will enable the practitioner 
to quickly detect any changes in resistance to airflow 
because of resistance in the system or decreased compli-
ance in the lung or chest wall (Fig. 20.8). Tidal volumes 
can be measured by mechanical vanes rotating in the gas 
stream, pressure gradients across a flow restriction (fixed 
or variable), and hot wire anemometers.
All anesthesia ventilators require a “disconnect” 
alarm, usually tied to the airway pressure reading. Inad-
equate ventilation can occur despite a nominally normal 
pressure. When using pressure-controlled ventilation, a 
significant change in ventilator volume can occur with-
out an alarm condition occurring. Mechanical alarms and 
indicators of ventilation do not ensure tracheal intuba-
tion. An esophageal intubation can return “adequate” 
pressures and volumes, and with transmission of sounds, 
appear to have bilateral breath sounds. With an intact 
circulation, measurement of expired CO2 is the best mon-
itor of ventilation, discussed in detail in the next section.
Capnography/End-Tidal CO2
Capnography is the analysis of the continuous wave-
form of expired CO2. Gas is continuously sampled from 
the ventilator circuit just on the patient side of the “Y” 
connector through a small tube into an infrared ana-
lyzer (also using Beer's law), and the CO2 waveform is 
displayed on the physiologic monitor (Figs. 20.9 and 
20.10). Carbon dioxide generated in the tissues is deliv-
ered to the right heart through the venous system into 
the lungs via the pulmonary arteries. Exchange of the 
CO2 into the alveolar space is fairly efficient because 
CO2 has 20times the solubility in water as does oxy-
gen. Therefore well-perfused alveoli achieve equilibrium 
with CO2 in the blood. During expiration, alveolar gas 
leaves the lungs, exiting the trachea through the ETT, 
where the aspirated gas is sampled by the capnometer, 
producing a peak expired CO2 close to the arterial car-
bon dioxide tension (PaCo2). In healthy patients ETCO2
is usually 3 to 5 mm Hg less than PaCo2 during general 
anesthesia.
A patient's respiratory tidal volume is composed of 
alveolar gas volume and dead space volume. Dead space 
is defined as any portion of the tidal volume that does 
not participate in gas exchange. In healthy patients dead 
space is approximately one-third of the tidal volume. 
Dead space is composed of three subvolumes: apparatus 
dead space, anatomic dead space, and alveolar dead 
space (Fig. 20.9). Because the inspired gas contains no 
III
Chapter 20 Anesthetic Monitoring
357
CO2 (unless the CO2 absorber is malfunctioning and 
allowing rebreathing of CO2 to occur), all these dead 
space gases will not contain CO2. When expiration begins 
in the respiratory cycle, the sampling tube will first detect 
the apparatus dead space, followed by the anatomic dead 
space. Neither of these contains CO2, so the capnogram 
will remain at zero during this initial phase I of the cap-
nogram (Fig. 20.10). As the gas from the alveolar space 
(well-perfused with a CO2 tension roughly the same as 
PaCO2) and the alveolar dead space (with zero CO2) mix 
L
20 cm H2O
0
0
5 sec
Peak
Plateau
PEEP
Airway Resistance Pressure
Alveolar Compliance Pressure or
Driving Pressure
A
B
C
Leak
Flow
Flow
Volume
Volume
Fig. 20.5 Airway Pressure and Flow Volume. (A) Airway pressure in volume control ventilation with an 
expiratory pause demonstrates changes in airway pressure and can help determine the etiology of the 
obstruction. Peak airway pressure or peak inspiratory pressure (PIP) is the highest pressure that occurs 
inside the lung during inspiration. During an inspiratory pause, there is no air movement, so the airway 
pressure drops minimally in patients with normal airway resistance and results in a “plateau” in the airway 
pressure recording, called “plateau pressure.” This plateau pressure reflects the airway pressure in the 
small airways and alveoli during a breath. The difference between plateau pressure and PEEP is called the 
“driving pressure.” The difference between the peak and plateau pressure is caused by resistance within 
the breathing circuit and the patient's airways. When airway pressure increases because of increases in 
airway resistance, the PIP is affected greater than the plateau (e.g., with bronchospasm, endotracheal tube 
kinking). If the plateau pressure increases, other processes reducing lung or chest wall compliance (e.g., 
pulmonary edema, pneumothorax, increased tidal volume) may be the cause. Flow volume loops can also 
be evaluated for changes in ventilator parameters (B). For example, when there is a circuit leak (C), the 
expiratory portion of the flow volume loop will fail to return to the starting point.
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
358
and are detected at the sampling tube, the CO2 waveform 
will rise from zero up to a plateau value, producing a 
rough square wave until inspiration begins and the CO2
waveform immediately returns to zero. The final plateau 
value of the capnogram is the ETCO2, which will approxi-
mately equal the PaCO2 value if there is no alveolar dead 
space. The ETCO2 value will almost always be lower than 
the PaCO2 value. The size of this gradient will be in direct 
proportion to the amount of alveolar dead space in the 
expired volume, relative to the alveolar gas. The greater 
proportion of dead space, the lower the ETCO2 value. For 
example, if the PaCO2 was 40 mm Hg and half of the 
alveoli that were ventilated were not perfused, the ETCO2
would be 20 mm Hg. The phase II or upsloping portion 
of the capnogram, seen in Figs. 20.9 and 20.11B, can be 
slanted rightwards when the alveoli are emptying irregu-
larly. This can occur in patients with chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease or asthma, both of which are associ-
ated with obstruction to expired gas flow. In general, the 
increased slope of this phase of the capnogram is associ-
ated with greater airway resistance to expired gas flow.
Alveolar dead space may be increased in patients 
with chronic lung disease who have large emphysema-
tous areas of the lung that increase alveolar dead space 
Volume Control
Pressure Control
Volume Control Insp Pause
Pressure
Time
Flow
Time
Pressure
Volume
0
Tinsp
Texp
T
Tpause
Texp
Tinsp
Texp
Inspiration
Expiration
Note: constant pressure
Peak pressure
A
B
C
Peak
Plateau
Fig. 20.6 Ventilator Pressure Time Curves. Three commonly employed modes of ventilation generate 
characteristic curves. (A) Volume control. (B) Volume control with inspiratory pause. (C) Pressure control. 
Only four variables determine mechanical ventilation: (1) inspiratory time (Tinsp), (2) inspiratory pause time 
(Tinsppause), (3) expiratory time (Texp,), and (4) inspiratory flow rate. In ventilators that have control loops faulty 
monitoring can lead to inadequate or hazardous ventilation. The compliance of the lung can be measured 
by dividing the tidal volume by the pressure. Dynamic compliance reflects the compliance during airflow, 
so it includes the resistance of the endotracheal tube and the compliance of the lungs. In volume control 
ventilation (A) the pressure and volume smoothly increase until expiration (which is passive). With an 
inspiratory pause (B), both the dynamic compliance and the static compliance of the lungs and chest wall 
can be measured by using either the peak pressure or the plateau pressure, respectively. In pressure control 
ventilation (C) the pressure is constant as volume increases, until expiration. The pressure–volume loops 
are different for the various ventilation modes as well.
III
Chapter 20 Anesthetic Monitoring
359
Pressure
Time
Pressure
Time
alarm limit
alarm limit
Time
CO2
alarm limit
A
B
C
Fig. 20.7 Stacking Breaths. In both volume control (A) and pressure control (B) ventilation insufficient 
expiratory time leads to “stacking” of breaths and changes in the pressure waveform. In the case of volume 
control ventilation the pressure can increase, triggering an alarm. With pressure control ventilation, tidal 
volumes decrease and pressure remains constant. (This may trigger a high PEEP alarm.) The capnogram 
demonstrates decreased ventilation (increasing CO2) and may change shape as well (C).
Pressure
Volume
Volume Control, Bronchospasm
Pressure Control, Bronchospasm
Pressure
Volume
Fig. 20.8 Bronchospasm. With volume control ventilation (A), the set tidal volume is attempted to be 
delivered, with an increase in pressure. This results in the pressure volume loop being shifted to the right 
and flattened. In pressure control ventilation (B) the increased airway resistance of the lung results in a 
decreased tidal volume, without a change in the pressure (because that is the ventilator set point). Normal 
lungs, black tracing; bronchospasm, red tracing.
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
360
Fig. 20.9 Apparatus, Anatomic, and Alveolar Dead Space. To interpret the capnogram, one must first understand dead 
space and its components. This schematic shows the heart, lung, and ventilator circuit up to the Y-connector. Dead 
space volume (VDS) is defined as any portion of the tidal volume that does not participate in gas exchange. It is further 
divided into three components: apparatus dead space (VappsDS), anatomic dead space (VanaDS), and alveolar dead space 
(ValvDS). The apparatus dead space is the volume of gas between the Y-connector and the end of the endotracheal tube. 
The anatomic dead space is the dead space of the trachea and all conducting airways down to the alveoli. The alveolar 
dead space includes all nonperfused alveoli. In the figure the lung on the right has no blood flow, so all those alveoli are 
not perfused and therefore at the end of inspiration will have zero carbon dioxide. The lung on the left is well-perfused, 
and those alveoli can be assumed at the end of inspiration to equilibrate to the arterial carbon dioxide (PaCO2) value.
Fig. 20.10 Normal Capnogram. A capnogram is a continuous tracing of the carbon dioxide concentration sampled at 
the Y-connector on an intubated, ventilated patient and plotted versus time during the inspiratory and expiratory cycle. 
It can be divided into three phases. The first phase is the beginning of expiration when the apparatus and anatomic 
dead space are being sampled, both of which have zero carbon dioxide. Phase I starts when the mixed alveolar gases are 
detected and the capnogram rises up and reaches a plateau value, Phase III, which has only a slight rise as the mixed 
alveolar gases, are sampled during the end of the expiratory cycle. With the initiation of inspiration, the CO2 value drops 
to zero and stays at zero until the next expiration. Note the end peak value is the ETCO2.
III
Chapter 20 Anesthetic Monitoring
361
PaCO2
ETCO2
A
PaCO2
ETCO2
PaCO2
ETCO2
D
PaCO2
ETCO2
B
C
Fig. 20.11 Capnogram Abnormalities. (A) demonstrates a series of normal capnograms. The normal 
PaCO2 to ETCO2 gradient is 2 to 5 mm Hg. Note in (B) the slant of phase II of the capnogram is less 
steep. This rightward slant of the initiation of the alveolar gas detection can be observed in patients with 
asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. The greater the slant to the right (i.e., the lower the 
slope), the worse the expiratory airway resistance. The gradient of PaCO2 to ETCO2 has increased. The 
waveform in (C) shows a progressive rise in the baseline CO2 value (i.e., there is a progressive increase 
in inspiratory carbon dioxide), noting a CO2 rebreathing most commonly caused by an exhausted CO2
absorber. (D) signifies a progressive drop in the ETCO2 (i.e., a decrease in the height of the waveform). This 
is noted whenever there is an abrupt reduction in pulmonary blood flow (e.g., reduced cardiac output from 
pulmonary embolism or cardiac arrest).
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
362
and produce a large gradient between the ETCO2 and 
PaCO2. Acute changes in alveolar dead space occur in 
specific clinical situations. The classic case is pulmonary 
embolism, in which blood flow to some capillaries is 
completely obstructed by the emboli, causing an acute 
increase in alveolar dead space and an acute drop in 
the ETCO2 value (see Fig.20.11D). Increased dead space 
can also occur if there is a ventilation–perfusion mis-
match causing less perfusion to well-ventilated areas 
of the lung. For example, when a patient is placed in 
the lateral position, the dependent lung is well perfused 
and ventilated but the nondependent lung is less well 
perfused and therefore has increased alveolar dead space. 
This combination can result in a decrease in the ETCO2
value compared with the PaCO2. Finally, there may be 
a progressive increase in alveolar dead space because 
of a global lack of lung perfusion when the cardiac 
output (CO) decreases (see Fig.20.11D). For example, if 
a patient's CO is 5 L/min and for some reason acutely 
decreases to 2.5 L/min with unchanged alveolar ventila-
tion, there will be less blood flowing per unit time to 
perfuse the same number of ventilated alveoli. The result 
is an increase in alveolar dead space and a drop in ETCO2. 
For this reason, the ETCO2 capnogram is often referred 
to as the “poor man's measure of cardiac output.” Any 
significant decrease in CO will be associated with a drop 
in ETCO2 (see Fig.20.11D). In a patient with cardiac arrest 
the most important monitor of adequacy of chest com-
pressions during cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) 
is the capnogram. The presence of a capnogram tracing 
with every ventilated breath during CPR ensures there 
is both ventilation and perfusion of the lung. If there is 
no capnogram tracing during chest compressions (or if 
ETCO2 <10 mm Hg), then there is no effective CO perfus-
ing the patient's vital organs (also see Chapter 45). The 
other advantage of monitoring the capnogram during 
CPR is the lack of motion artifact, unlike other monitors 
used during CPR such as the electrocardiogram (ECG) and 
pulse oximeter. Because a normal continuous capnogram 
waveform reflects adequate ventilation and perfusion, 
one can argue that the capnogram is the most important 
monitor used during general anesthesia.
Although the sampling tube can be placed on nasal 
cannula or around the mouth in nonintubated patients, 
a reliable capnographic waveform is only achieved in an 
intubated patient or with a secure supraglottic airway. In 
nonclosed systems (where the sampling tube is placed by 
the airway under a mask or a nasal cannula) there may 
be aspiration of room air (which has no CO2), which will 
dilute the capnographic sample.
CIRCULATORY SYSTEM
Multiple characteristics of the circulation can be meas-
ured, including the heart rate, ECG, blood pressure, urine 
output, central venous pressures, pulmonary artery pres-
sures, CO, and systolic pressure variation (SPV) (Table 
20.1). Some of these are difficult to measure, and all 
require interpretation. Many important variables cannot 
be measured, such as venous capacitance, organ blood 
flow/perfusion, and circulating blood volume. Other val-
ues are derived from combinations of measured values 
(e.g., stroke volume, vascular resistance). No single char-
acteristic determines adequacy of perfusion, and a solid 
understanding of the underlying physiology is necessary 
to interpret even the simplest monitor.
Measurement of the Electrocardiogram
Continuous monitoring of the ECG, one of the American 
Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) Basic Monitoring Stand-
ards, yields information on heart rate and rhythm. Simply, 
the ECG is a record of the electrical activity of the heart, 
measured at the body surface. Technically, it is the net 
dipole moment of the heart displayed on the vertical axis 
in millivolts versus time on the horizontal axis (Fig.20.12). 
The operating room is an electrically noisy environment, 
and subtle ECG changes can be obscured by artifacts and 
by ECG filtering algorithms. ECG monitors used in the 
operating room have a filtering mode that reduces electri-
cal interference, but may produce artifacts that look like 
concerning ECG changes (e.g., T-wave changes suggestive 
of myocardial ischemia). These monitors also have a “diag-
nostic mode,” which removes all filtering and the artifacts 
it may induce. Therefore if the ECG on the monitor looks 
different from the preoperative ECG, it is best to switch the 
filters off, placing the monitor in the diagnostic mode to see 
if those changes are real. A three-lead system, which uses 
electrodes placed on both shoulders and the left abdomen 
below the ribcage, provides leads I, II, and III. The preferred 
method is a five-lead system, using a single precordial lead 
placed in the V5 position, as V5 is the most sensitive lead 
for detecting ischemia in patients receiving anesthesia12,13
(Table 20.2, Fig. 20.13). Most of the dysrhythmias and 
ischemia seen during anesthesia can be detected by a com-
bination of monitoring lead II and V5.13 ECG monitoring 
allows dysrhythmias, such as heart block, atrial fibrillation, 
ventricular fibrillation, bradycardia, asystole, and tachycar-
dia, to be diagnosed and managed appropriately.
Blood Pressure and Flow
The primary function of the circulatory system is to 
maintain a constant supply of blood flow to all organs 
to allow them to maintain aerobic metabolism and their 
function. This system is composed of a basic pump, the 
heart; conduits, the blood vessels; and resistance as blood 
flows through the microcirculation. This is an Ohm's law 
system, V = IR, in which V is the blood pressure (perfu-
sion pressure), I is the blood flow (cardiac output), and R 
is resistance (systemic vascular resistance). The pressure 
III
Chapter 20 Anesthetic Monitoring
363
Table 20.1
Normal Values
Measured Variable (Abbreviation)
Value (Units)
Systolic blood pressure (SBP)
90–140 mm Hg
Diastolic blood pressure (DBP)
60–90 mm Hg
Mean blood pressure (MAP)
70–105 mm Hg
Systolic pressure variation (SPV)a
3.9–6.0 mm Hg
Pulse pressure variation (PPV)a
5.0%–9.0%
Central venous pressure (CVP)
2–6 mm Hg
Right ventricular pressure
15–25/0–8 mm Hg
Pulmonary artery pressure (PAP)
15–25/8–15 mm Hg
Mean pulmonary artery pressure
10–20 mm Hg
Pulmonary capillary wedge pressure (PCWP)
6–12 mm Hg
Left atrial pressure (LAP)
6–12 mm Hg
Heart rate (HR)
60–90 beats/min
Arterial O2 saturation (SpO2)
95%–100%
Cardiac output (Q or CO)
4–8 L/m
Cardiac index (CI)
2.5–4.0 L/m/m2
Ejection fraction (EF)
55%–70%
End diastolic volume
65–240 mL
Calculated Values
Stroke volume (SV), stroke volume index (SVI)
60–100 mL/beat, 33–47 mL/m2/beat
Systemic vascular resistance (SVR)
800–1200 dynes*sec/cm5
Pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR)
<250 dynes*sec/cm5
Respiratory Parameters
Respiratory rate (RR)
12–20 breaths/min
Peak inspiratory pressure (PIP)
15–20 cm H2O
Tidal volume (Vt)
6–8 mL/kg ideal body weight
End-tidal CO2 (ETCO2)
35–40 mm Hg
Cerebral Parameters
Intracranial pressure (ICP)
5–15 mm Hg
Electroencephalogram (EEG)
Waveform varies by state of consciousness
Somatosensory evoked potential (SSEP)
Normal amplitude and latency
Bispectral index scale (BIS)
80–100 awake
Muscle Parameters
Train-of-four (TOF)
4 twitches present
TOF ratio
>0.9
Double burst stimulation (DBS)
No fade
Tetany
No fade
Electromyography (EMG)
Depends on stimulus
From Mathis MR, Schechtman SA, Engoren MC, et al. Arterial pressure variation in elective noncardiac surgery: Identifying reference distribution 
and modifying factors. Anesthesiology 2017;126:249–259.
aThese are the range of normal values for monitored and measured variables in clinical practice. Indices are commonly obtained by dividing the 
value by the body surface area (BSA).
difference across the circulation of any organ is defined 
as the perfusion pressure, that is, the pressure on the 
upstream side of that system minus the pressure on the 
downstream side. For the systemic circulation, it is the 
mean arterial pressure (MAP) minus the central venous 
pressure (CVP); and for the pulmonary circulation, it is the 
mean pulmonary artery pressure (MPAP) minus the left 
ventricular end diastolic pressure, usually estimated by a 
pulmonary artery catheter wedge pressure (PAWP). Mean 
pressure is approximated by the following equations:
Mean BP
Systolic BP
Diastolic BP



2
3
(Eq. 4)
 or
Mean BP = 
Diastolic BP
Systolic BP
Diastolic BP




1
3
(Eq. 5)
For the most vital of organs, the brain and heart, 
these perfusion pressures are slightly different. For the 
brain, it is the MAP minus the intracranial pressure (ICP) 
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
364
QRS Complex
P wave
T wave
Q wave
S wave
R wave
miliVollts 
Time 
Fig. 20.12 ECG Waves. Electrical activity of the heart measured at the body surface. The net dipole 
moment of the heart is displayed on the vertical axis in millivolts versus time on the horizontal axis. The p 
wave represents atrial depolarization, the QRS complex represents ventricular depolarization (Q wave first 
downward wave of the QRS complex, R wave initial positive deflection, and S wave the negative deflection 
following the R wave), and the T wave represents ventricular repolarization. Changes in rate, rhythm, and 
electrical conductivity of the heart affect the timing and morphology of the ECG waveform. Interpreting 
these changes in a timely and accurate fashion can allow for quick implementation of lifesaving therapy by 
the vigilant anesthesia provider.
Table 20.2
ECG Sensitivity for Detecting Ischemia
Landesberg et al.
London et al.
Single Leads
Single Leads
Infarcta
Ischemia
V5
75%
66%
V5
75%
V4
83%
79%
V4
61%
V3
75%
87%
V3
24%
Combination of Leads
Combination of Leads
V3 + V5
100%
97%
II + V2 + V3 + V4 + V5
100%
V4 + V5
100%
92%
V4 + V5
90%
V3 + V4
83%
92%
II + V5
80%
II + V4 + V5
96%
aPercentages represent sensitivity of leads in patients (n = 12) who were subsequently diagnosed with myocardial infarct.
Landesberg and colleagues12 and London and colleagues13 evaluated the sensitivity of various leads for detecting ischemia in patients under 
anesthesia. Landesberg and colleagues focused on ST changes in the 12-lead ECG during and for 48 to 72 hours after surgery in patients 
undergoing vascular surgery. Leads had varying sensitivities in detecting ischemia or myocardial infarction. London and colleagues evaluated 
the use of intraoperative 12-lead ECG in patients with known or suspected coronary artery disease. The sensitivity for various leads in detecting 
ischemia was then estimated.
III
Chapter 20 Anesthetic Monitoring
365
Fig. 20.14 Decision Tree Diagnosis of Acute Hypotension. Given 
that the cardiovascular system is a pressure = flows × resistance 
“circuit,” the diagnosis and acute management of hypotension 
should follow the principles outlined earlier. This schematic does 
not account for increasing venous capacitance. If the blood pressure 
decreases, it must be because of a drop in either resistance or 
cardiac output. If there is no obvious reason for the acute drop in 
resistance (e.g., a sympathectomy from spinal anesthesia), then 
the cardiac output drop must be caused by a decrease in either 
heart rate or stroke volume. If the heart rate has not decreased, 
then the decrease in stroke volume must be because of a decrease 
in either preload or contractility. If there is no reason for a drop in 
contractility and the preload is decreased, the most common cause 
is a lack of relative volume, frequently caused by the increase in 
venous capacitance with anesthetics. One should always keep in 
mind the three acute mechanical obstructions to blood flow: cardiac 
tamponade, pulmonary embolism (PE), and tension pneumothorax.
Midclavicular Line
Anterior Axillary Line
RL
LL
V lead
Fig. 20.13 ECG Lead Placement. The limb leads (RA, LA, RL, LL) are placed peripherally on the chest (or on the 
limbs if available). The V lead is placed in the fifth intercostal space in the anterior axillary line.
or CVP, whichever is higher, and for the left ventricle, it 
is the systemic diastolic pressure minus the right heart, 
or coronary sinus pressure. Because the left ventricle 
perfuses itself primarily during diastole, the diastolic 
pressure is used as the upstream pressure head. In all 
of these systems blood pressure correlates directly to 
blood flow, assuming the resistance is constant. Unfor-
tunately, this cannot be guaranteed. In some situations 
the pressure may be normal but the flow may be reduced 
because of elevated resistance. The reverse is certainly 
true. With decreases in blood pressure, there will come a 
point at which the blood flow to that organ, or the body 
in general, will be insufficient. Therefore a primary goal 
of continual repeated measurements of blood pressure is 
to ensure that hypotension is not occurring. Fig. 20.14
presents a decision tree for the diagnosis of hypotension.
Blood Pressure: Hypotension
Intraoperative measurement and documentation of pulse 
and blood pressure were first done by the neurosurgeon 
Harvey Cushing in 1901. Documentation of pulse and 
blood pressure at least every 5 minutes is one of the ASA 
Basic Monitoring Standards. Despite this long history of 
measuring blood pressure at frequent intervals, the impact 
of hypotension and its duration on clinical outcomes had 
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
366
not been determined until relatively recently. In 2009 
a large prospective observational study found that an 
intraoperative MAP <50 mm Hg or a 40% decrease in 
MAP from the preoperative blood pressure for more than 
10 minutes was associated with an increased incidence of 
postoperative adverse cardiac events.14 A 2013 large data-
base retrospective review noted that cumulative time with 
a MAP <55 mm Hg was associated with an increased inci-
dence of postoperative renal injury and cardiac injury15
(Fig. 20.15). Subsequently, a series of studies have con-
firmed these findings with respect to postoperative organ 
injury, including death16 (Fig. 20.16). Classic anesthesia 
teaching has suggested keeping a patient's blood pres-
sure within 20% of baseline values based on the theory 
that hypertensive patients require higher pressures to 
adequately perfuse organs habitually exposed to higher 
pressures. A 2017 retrospective cohort study evaluated 
both absolute blood pressure (i.e., MAP <65 mm Hg) and 
relative thresholds (20% below baseline) and found both 
were equally predictive of myocardial and kidney injury, 
with prolonged exposure associated with increased risk.17
Additionally, there were no clinically important interac-
tions with preoperative blood pressure, suggesting that 
anesthetic management can be based on intraoperative 
pressure regardless of preoperative pressure. A large 
2020 multicenter observational study of patients under-
going noncardiac surgery divided patients into four risk 
categories based on factors such as ASA Physical Status, 
surgery type, and presence of chronic kidney disease. In 
the patients with higher preoperative risk scores intraop-
erative hypotension (MAP <60 mm Hg) was associated 
with increased risk of kidney injury.18 Therefore intra-
operative hypotension for adults can be defined as MAP 
lower than 55 to 65 mm Hg depending on the patient's 
preoperative and procedural risk. Finally, patients require 
close blood pressure monitoring within the first 24 hours 
after surgery. A 2020 observational cohort study demon-
strated that postoperative hypotension is common and is 
associated with myocardial injury.19
Noninvasive Blood Pressure (NIBP)
The use of an automatic noninvasive cuff, which meas-
ures blood pressure by the oscillometric method, is rou-
tine in anesthetic care. The cuff inflates beyond systolic 
pressure and slowly deflates until it detects pulsations, 
continues deflating until it detects maximal pulsations 
(the MAP), and further deflates until pulsatility is no 
longer detected. Although an oscillometric blood pressure 
system presents systolic and diastolic blood pressures, its 
most accurate measurement is the MAP (Fig.20.17).20
The size of the blood pressure cuff will influence the 
resultant blood pressure measurement. If the cuff is 
properly sized, its width will be approximately 40% of 
the circumference of the arm. If the cuff is too small, the 
blood pressure measurement will be too high; if it is too 
large, the measurements will be too low. The oldest non-
invasive method of determining blood pressure is that 
of Riva-Rocci. In this approach a cuff with measuring 
capability (classically, a mercury sphygmomanometer) is 
used to occlude arterial flow distal to the cuff. The cuff is 
slowly deflated until arterial flow first returns, as deter-
mined by palpation. This pressure represents the systolic 
blood pressure. By using a Doppler probe, this method 
can be used to evaluate blood pressure in patients with 
severe hypotension or nonpulsatile flow (e.g., a patient 
with a left ventricular assist device [LVAD]).
Fig. 20.15 Relationship Between Intraoperative Mean Arterial Pressure and Clinical Outcome After 
Noncardiac Surgery. This figure, from Walsh and colleagues,15 demonstrates the adjusted odds ratio for 
acute kidney injury, cardiac complications, and myocardial injury by time spent with mean arterial pressure 
(MAP) <55 mm Hg. The cumulative time with a MAP <55 mm Hg was associated with a progressively 
increasing incidence of postoperative renal and cardiac injury.
III
Chapter 20 Anesthetic Monitoring
367
Fig. 20.16 Intraoperative Hypotension and the Risk of Postoperative Adverse Outcomes. This table 
from Wesselink and colleagues16 demonstrates the risk of end-organ injury associated with different 
durations of blood pressure below given thresholds. Patients were divided into risk categories (low, 
medium, and high) based on the depth and duration of hypotension. The risk category tends to 
increase as the depth (degree of hypotension) and duration increased.
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
368
Invasive Arterial Blood Pressure Monitoring
Continuous monitoring of arterial blood pressure can 
be useful for patients with significant cardiovascular 
disease or for procedures associated with blood pressure 
lability or large fluid shifts. Placement of an arterial line 
is a sterile procedure, with many technical variations 
on placement. Some institutions have created protocols 
to be followed for any line placement. The most basic 
functions of an arterial line include beat-to-beat blood 
pressure measurement and a means of convenient blood 
sampling for intraoperative laboratory tests. In addition, 
arterial line waveform analysis facilitates assessment of 
the patient's intravascular status volume by measuring 
SPV and other measures of volume responsiveness. The 
radial artery is most commonly used because it has the 
least associated risk and is most easily palpable. Other 
placement sites include the brachial, femoral, or dorsalis 
pedis arteries. The risks and benefits of different blood 
pressure measurement techniques and sites of placement 
are listed in Table 20.3. Although all catheters are placed 
in the arterial circulation, the waveforms differ signifi-
cantly, with systolic pressure rising as the monitoring site 
becomes more distal. Invasive blood pressures will not be 
identical to noninvasive oscillometric pressure because 
they assess pressures by completely different methods.
The arterial line is connected to a pressure transducer, 
which converts the mechanical energy of the arterial pulse 
into an electrical signal (Fig. 20.18). This fluid-filled tubing 
and transducer setup is an underdamped system, which 
can cause an amplification artifact of the systolic blood 
pressure. This artifact is worsened by increasing pulse rate 
and increasing amount of fluid (i.e., length of tubing) in 
the system; however, the MAP should remain accurate.1
Measures of Intravascular Volume 
Responsiveness
Systolic Pressure Variation
The gold standard for determining the adequacy of intra-
vascular volume and cardiac function is transesophageal 
echocardiography (TEE). Although TEE can serve as a 
useful diagnostic and monitoring tool during surgery, 
it is not necessary or practical for most anesthetics. 
For procedures with large intravascular volume shifts 
and uncertainty about cardiac performance, traditional 
monitors of perfusion (e.g., blood pressure, heart rate, 
urine output) may not be enough. Substantial informa-
tion can be derived from analyzing the variations of a 
continuous arterial pressure waveform in the setting of 
positive-pressure ventilation. For example, the transient 
extrapolated from increasing oscillations
extrapolated from decreasing oscillations
Fig. 20.17 Oscillometric Cuff and Korotkoff Sounds. Initial Korotkoff sounds correlate with the increasing cuff 
oscillations. The magnitude of the oscillations increases progressively to a peak and then decreases. The peak in 
oscillations is a measure of the mean arterial pressure, which is the most accurate measurement in an oscillometric 
cuff. The oscillometric systolic and diastolic pressures are inferred from the slope of the envelope around the oscillations. 
The decreasing oscillations correlate with the diastolic pressure and disappearance of Korotkoff sounds. (Adapted from 
Ehrenwerth J, Eisenkraft J, Berry J. Anesthesia Equipment: Principles and Applications. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders 
Elsevier; 2013.)
III
Chapter 20 Anesthetic Monitoring
369
decrease in systolic blood pressure associated with a 
positive-pressure breath can predict the responsiveness of 
a patient to a fluid challenge.21 If the decrease in systolic 
pressure is more than 10 mm Hg, the patient's CO is likely 
to increase with an intravenous (IV) fluid bolus. If this 
systolic pressure drop is less than 5 mm Hg, the patient's 
CO is not likely to improve with fluid bolus (Table 20.4). 
SPV may be manually calculated by freezing the arterial 
waveform on the physiologic monitor and measuring the 
systolic pressure differences, as shown in Fig. 20.19. In 
a patient with right ventricular overload the temporary 
decrease in venous return after a positive-pressure breath 
can actually improve right heart function by momentar-
ily reducing right heart filling (overstretch), allowing the 
right heart volume to decrease to a point on the Starling 
curve with improved CO and subsequently arterial blood 
pressure. The SPV also provides an indirect assessment of 
the venous capacitance, which, when abnormal, indicates 
a potential of the blood pressure to improve with fluid 
administration (see Fig. 20.1).
One of the major limitations of SPV is that the patient 
must have a regular heart rate. For example, patients with 
atrial fibrillation will have irregular variations in systolic 
pressure even with normal blood volume. SPV values 
may also be affected by decreased lung or chest wall 
compliance, prone positioning, high PEEP, and surgical 
procedures with an open thoracic cavity. An evaluation 
of clinical modifying factors for SPV and pulse pressure 
variation (PPV) demonstrated that nonsupine position 
and preoperative β-blockers are independently associ-
ated with increased SPV and PPV, whereas tidal volumes 
greater than 8 mL/kg and PIPs greater than 16 cmH2O 
are independently associated only with increased SPV.22
The newer generation of physiologic monitors automati-
cally calculate SPV and PPV.
Pulse Pressure Variation
Another method of analyzing arterial blood pressure 
during the positive pressure respiratory cycle is PPV. Cal-
culation of PPV involves subtraction of minimum pulse 
pressure from maximum pulse pressure, dividing by the 
average pulse pressure, per the following equation:
PPV%
max
min
max
min



PP
PP
PP
PP
2
100
(Eq. 6)
Because PPV is expressed as a percentage, the relative 
change in the pulse pressure may be more reliable over 
Table 20.3
Blood Pressure Measurement
Method
Advantage/Benefit/Indication
Disadvantage/Risk
Riva-Rocci
Place cuff on upper arm. Palpate 
pulse, Inflate cuff, slowly deflate 
until pulse returns
Can be used without a stethoscope 
by palpation of pulse or Doppler flow 
detection
Only gives a systolic pressure, can 
work with nonpulsatile flow
Korotkoff
Place cuff on upper arm 
Auscultate over antecubital 
fossa, inflate cuff, slowly deflate, 
noting first and last auscultation 
sounds
Gives diastolic and systolic
Needs stethoscope, quiet 
environment
NIBP
Choose and apply correct cuff 
size, push start button
Automated, easy, independent of user, 
routine monitoring, measures mean 
pressure, interpolates systolic and diastolic
Does not work with hypotension, 
motion artifact, LVAD
Invasive
Connect intraarterial catheter to 
transducer
Wide range of pressure, measures a mean 
pressure and systolic and diastolic used 
when there is hemodynamic instability, 
vasopressor administration, need for beat-
to-beat monitoring, additional benefit of 
access for blood draws
Invasive, potential for amplification 
artifact, dampening, hemorrhage, 
hematoma, infection, injury to 
artery or distal areas
Radial
Accessible, most commonly used site
Brachial
Sometimes available when radial not
No redundant blood supply, 
uncomfortable, cannot flex arm
Femoral
Large vessel, can give readings with 
profound vasoconstriction
Prone to infection, affected by 
prone positioning
Dorsalis pedis
Can be accessible when radial artery is not 
(e.g., with arms tucked during surgery)
Some amplification of waveform
LVAD, Left ventricular assist device; NIBP, noninvasive blood pressure.
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
370
a wider range of blood pressures than the absolute value 
of SPV, which is measured in mm Hg (see Table 20.4 and 
Fig. 20.19).
Stroke Volume Variation
Analysis of stroke volume variation (SVV) is yet another 
technique using the arterial waveform to assess volume 
responsiveness (see Fig.20.19). To determine SVV, a pulse 
contour algorithm is employed to estimate the stroke 
volume from the arterial pulse wave.23 These estimates of 
arterial pulse volume are compared during the respira-
tory cycle in an analogous fashion with SPV and PPV. 
The percent reduction in estimated stroke volume associ-
ated with positive-pressure ventilation is used to assess 
Normal Arterial Blood Pressure Waveform (nondistorted)
Overdampened Arterial Blood Pressure Waveform
Underdampened Arterial Blood Pressure Waveform
Fast-Flush Test
SAP overestimation
Deep dicrotic notch
Nonphysiologic occilations 
during diastolic phase
DAP underestimation
DAP overestimation
SAP underestimation
Fig. 20.18 Arterial Waveform Interpretation. The physical properties of arterial pressure transducers 
include natural frequency (how rapidly it oscillates in response to perturbation) and dampening coefficient 
(how rapidly it returns to the resting state). An overdampened system has a slurred upstroke, absent 
dicrotic notch, and loss of fine details (middle figure). If the natural frequency is too low, the pressure 
waveform will be an exaggerated or amplified version of intraarterial pressure. An underdampened system, 
by contrast, may show a systolic pressure overshoot and additional small, nonphysiologic pressure waves 
(bottom figure). The fast-flush test is a method for determining the system's dynamic response by analysis 
of the nature and duration of flush artifact. An adequate fast-flush test has a short oscillation cycle and 
amplitude that rapidly returns to rest (top figure). Despite differences in system characteristics, the MAP 
should remain accurate.
III
Chapter 20 Anesthetic Monitoring
371
whether the patient's CO will improve after an IV fluid 
bolus. These measures of volume responsiveness (SPV, 
PPV, and SVV) are only accurate in patients with regular 
heart rhythm receiving closed-chest positive-pressure 
ventilation without excessively high levels of PEEP (see 
Table 20.4).
Central Venous Monitoring: CVP, PAP, and CO
As discussed earlier, blood pressure alone is not a suf-
ficient variable to evaluate perfusion. Knowledge of CVP, 
pulmonary artery pressure (PAP), and CO may be helpful 
in guiding patient therapy. Additionally, central venous 
access may be necessary for administration of certain 
drugs and may act as secure access for large volumes of 
resuscitation fluids (Table 20.5).
Central Venous Pressure
Information obtained from a CVP line includes the CVP 
pressure and waveform. The CVP waveform has several 
components based upon the physiology of cardiac con-
traction, as described in Fig.20.20. Despite the physi-
ologic basis for the waveform, CVP monitoring is not a 
reliable measure to guide fluid therapy.24 CVP placement 
is often performed at the internal jugular or subclavian 
vein. Femoral venous access provides a route for drug 
administration but does not readily provide the same 
waveform, as it is not in the thoracic cavity and is very 
distant from the heart. In measuring CVP we are attempt-
ing to infer the filling pressures in the right side of the 
Time 
Time 
Arterial Pressure
Airway pressure
PPmax
SPV
PPmin
SVmax
SVmin
Fig. 20.19 Systolic Pressure Variation (SPV), Pulse Pressure Variation, and Stroke Volume Variation. A 
positive-pressure breath can result in a transient decrease in the systolic blood pressure, pulse pressure, 
and stroke volume. The mechanism is predominantly related to the positive intrathoracic pressure causing 
a decrease in venous return and subsequent decrease in right ventricular stroke volume, and ultimately left 
ventricular stroke volume, with resulting decrease in systolic pressure. Because of a delay in transit as blood 
moves between the right and left sides of the heart, the changes in stroke volume take several heartbeats 
to become evident on the arterial pressure waveform. The magnitude of the drop in systolic blood pressure 
and changes in pulse pressure (PPV) and stroke volume (SVV) can predict the responsiveness of a patient 
to an intravascular fluid challenge.
Table 20.4
Measures of Volume Responsiveness: SPV, 
PPV, and SVV
Fluid Responsive
Not Fluid Responsive
SPV
>10 mm Hg
<5 mm Hg
PPV
>15%
<7%
SVV
≥15%
<5%
These are three measures of volume responsiveness: systolic 
pressure variation (SPV), pulse pressure variation (PPV), stroke 
volume variation (SVV). There is a “gray zone” in which it is unclear 
if the patient would benefit from a fluid bolus.13 If the patient is 
unlikely to suffer harm from the additional fluid, one option is to 
treat and reevaluate or to pursue additional monitoring of volume 
status, such as central venous pressure or transesophageal echo.
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
372
heart. Because the compliance of the vascular space is 
determined by complex factors that can change rapidly, 
the relationship between venous pressures and volume 
status is also complex and unpredictable.
Although absolute CVP values are not predictive of 
intravascular volume status, they can be useful in the 
extremes. That is, a CVP <5 mm Hg suggests that an IV 
fluid bolus may improve cardiac filling, stroke volume, 
and CO, whereas a CVP >16 mm Hg suggests that a fluid 
bolus is unlikely to improve CO.
This approach to assessing the utility of a physiologic 
variable has been described as a “gray zone analysis.” That 
is, in the extremes the variable provides useful informa-
tion, but in the range between those extremes (which one 
may have called the normal range) is an area where the 
utility of the variable is less valuable in assessing clinical 
status. However, even CVP values in the extremes are less 
predictive of fluid responsiveness than SPV and PPV.24
CVP Placement
Before performing central venous access, the anesthesia 
provider should discuss the risks and benefits with the 
patient and obtain informed consent. The ASA has pub-
lished a practice guideline for central venous access.25
The most common placement site is the internal jugular 
vein for reasons of access and safety. Subclavian vein 
catheterization has an increased risk of pneumothorax 
but is more comfortable in an awake patient. Femoral 
vein cannulation is the least common choice for reasons 
of sterility and deep venous thrombosis risk. Catheter size 
is determined by the desired number of lumens and need 
for rapid fluid administration. A large bore (>7 French) 
introducer cannula is capable of infusing blood or fluid 
at rapid rates (>750 mL/min) and provides a means 
to insert a pulmonary artery catheter or an additional 
Table 20.5
Central Venous Access and Pressure Measurement
Route
Indications
Risk
Benefit
Any central venous 
catheter (CVC)
Unable to obtain peripheral 
access, route for potent 
vasoactive medications
Bleeding, infection
Stable intravenous (IV) access
Right internal 
jugular (RIJ)
Unable to obtain peripheral 
access, route for potent 
vasoactive medications
Carotid artery injury
Straight path to heart for pulmonary 
artery (PA) catheter
Left internal jugular 
(LIJ)
Unable to use RIJ
Carotid artery injury, thoracic duct 
injury, short distance to innominate 
vein
Can use if RIJ not available
Subclavian
Unable to use RIJ or LIJ
Pneumothorax risk, injury to brachial 
plexus, subclavian artery/vein
More comfortable for patient postop, 
can insert with cervical collar in place
Femoral
Disease of head and neck 
precluding use of neck access
Increased infection risk
Can apply pressure if bleeding
PA catheter
Unstable patient
In addition to central venous 
pressure (CVP) risks: PA rupture, 
dysrhythmias,
Can obtain cardiac output 
information, right and left heart 
pressures (CVP, PAPs, PCWP)
Practice guidelines for pulmonary artery (PA) catheterization have been published [Anesthesiology 2003;99:988–1014]. These guidelines 
highlight considerations for their use: (1) Patient disease (does the patient have serious cardiac disease where knowledge of the cardiac 
output and filling pressures may alter treatment?). (2) Surgery (is the surgery a major one in which there will be fluid shifts or changes that 
will be reflected in the monitor?). (3) Setting (do the practitioners have the expertise to perform the procedure with minimum potential risk 
and maximum potential benefit?). Because these guidelines have been developed, other monitoring modalities such as transthoracic or 
transesophageal echocardiography and advanced analysis of arterial pressure tracings have seen increased use.
Fig. 20.20 CVP Waveform. The mean CVP value can be used 
to assess right heart filling pressure. The waveform can also be 
instructive. The “a-wave” represents atrial contraction against the 
closed tricuspid valve, the “c-wave” reflects tricuspid bulging as 
the ventricle contracts, the “x-descent” reflects atrial relaxation, 
the “v-wave” reflects atrial filling, and the “y-descent” is produced 
after atrial emptying.
III
Chapter 20 Anesthetic Monitoring
373
multilumen catheter (PAC). However, catheter placement 
into an introducer sheath can significantly reduce fluid 
flow rate through the sheath.
Pulmonary Artery Pressure and Cardiac Output
A PAC is a 110-cm-long, balloon-tipped, right-heart-
access catheter advanced from the right atrium (RA) to 
the right ventricle (RV) into a wedge position (PCWP) 
in the pulmonary artery (PA) by following the pressure 
waveforms noted in Fig.20.21. Data from a PAC includes 
CO and pressures in the RA, RV, and PA. The PCWP 
serves as an estimate of left atrial pressure. This infor-
mation can be used to diagnose a variety of conditions. 
Hemodynamic status can be grossly assessed by measur-
ing wedge pressure and CO. Typical hemodynamic pro-
files associated with hypotension include hypovolemic 
shock (low PCWP, low CO), cardiogenic shock (high 
PCWP, low CO), and septic shock (low PCWP, high CO). 
Volume overload in a patient with normal cardiac func-
tion is associated with high PCWP and high CO. Under 
normal conditions, the pulmonary vascular system is 
a very low-resistance system, so the PCWP is only a 
few mm Hg lower than the PA diastolic pressure. In a 
patient with pulmonary embolism the resulting increase 
in pulmonary vascular resistance causes the PCWP to 
be significantly lower than the PA diastolic pressure. 
Table 20.6 describes a variety of acute causes of severe 
hypotension caused by mechanical disruption of the 
circulation and the typical PAC and airway pressures in 
each condition.
Methods of Measuring Cardiac Output
Thermodilution, the most common approach to measur-
ing CO with a PAC, uses the dye dilution method of flow 
determination. A measured amount of “cold” (usually 
10mL of crystalloid) is injected into the RA, and a 
thermistor measures the temperature distally. These tem-
perature readings are recorded as a curve of change in 
temperature over time. The area under the curve (AUC) 
is proportional to the CO, with a small AUC associated 
with higher CO than a large AUC. Thermodilution is an 
intermittent measurement technique, but modified com-
mercially available PA catheters can provide continuous 
CO data.
Despite all the hemodynamic data provided by the 
PAC, studies over the past 20 years have determined their 
benefits do not outweigh their risks in most patients.26
These risks are substantial, including line sepsis, thrombo-
sis, and PA rupture. Coincident with a decrease in PAC use 
has been an increase in TEE and transthoracic echocar-
diography for immediate diagnosis of cardiac pathology. 
If a PAC is used for the management of hemodynamic 
instability, it should be removed as soon as possible.
RV
PA
PCWP
0
Diastolic step-up
time or distance as catheter is advanced
Pressure
25 mm Hg
Fig. 20.21 The following is a trace of pressure versus distance as a pulmonary artery catheter is advanced 
from the right atrium through the right ventricle into the pulmonary artery and ultimately resting in a 
wedge position in the pulmonary artery. Note as the catheter is advanced from the right ventricle into the 
pulmonary artery the diastolic pressure is cut off and rises to the PA diastolic, which is only slightly higher 
than the pulmonary artery wedge pressure. If the pressure rises abruptly after the wedge is achieved and 
the balloon deflated, the catheter may be “overwedged” and should be immediately withdrawn a few 
centimeters until a pulmonary artery tracing is achieved.
Table 20.6
Differential Diagnosis for Hypotension Using 
Central Monitoring
Diagnosis
CVP
PAP
PCWP
Airway Pressure
Pneumothorax ↑
↑
↑
↑
Tamponade
↑
↑
↑
↔
PE
↑
↑
↓
↔
These are the changes in invasive hemodynamic and airway 
pressures associated with the three most common mechanical 
reasons for acute severe hypotension: pneumothorax, tamponade, 
and pulmonary embolism. To make these diagnoses, the patient 
must have a pulmonary artery catheter in place so that CVP, 
pulmonary artery pressure, and pulmonary artery capillary wedge 
pressure can be measured, along with airway pressure, in an 
intubated patient.
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
374
Alternative less invasive devices are increasingly 
available to estimate CO and assess patients' cardiovas-
cular function. The Doppler effect (shift in frequency of 
the reflected signal versus the original) can be used to 
measure the velocity of blood flow. Esophageal Dop-
pler, a CO measurement approach introduced in 1975, 
uses continuous-wave ultrasound directed through the 
esophagus and into the aorta to reflect off the blood 
moving back to the probe.27 Stroke volume can then be 
derived by using an algorithm based on the beat-to-beat 
maximum velocity–time integral (or stroke distance), the 
cross-sectional area of the descending aorta, and a cor-
rection factor that transforms descending aortic blood 
flow into global CO. This can provide a noninvasive 
estimate of CO and detect hemodynamic changes in 
mechanically ventilated patients.28
More recently, devices have become available that 
analyze the pulse contour of an arterial waveform to 
estimate stroke volume.29 Given the product of stroke 
volume and heart rate is CO, these devices provide a con-
tinuous estimate of CO without a PA catheter. This relies 
on transforming an arterial waveform pressure signal 
to CO and requires some assumptions be made on the 
dynamic characteristics of the arterial vasculature. Most 
systems use internal databases or nomograms based on 
demographics to accomplish this task. Some limitations 
include variable ability to detect changes in systemic 
vascular resistance (SVR) between systems, especially 
with large deviations from normal SVR (improved with 
newer systems); difficulty using in specific clinical sce-
narios, such as intraaortic balloon pump; and need for 
an accurate arterial waveform that is not overdamped or 
underdamped (see Fig. 20.18).
Other noninvasive monitoring systems, such as the 
ClearSight system (Edwards Lifesciences, Irvine, CA) are 
also gaining interest for monitoring. This system uses a 
finger cuff and two methods (volume clamp or vascular 
unloading) to provide continuous noninvasive blood 
pressure and other advanced hemodynamic information 
such as SVV and CO.30 The cuff inflates in systole and 
deflates in diastole to keep the finger's vascular volume 
constant, as measured by a transmitted light signal. The 
pressure required to linearize flow is equivalent to the 
blood pressure. This has been examined in multiple set-
tings and appears promising31; however, as with other 
technologies, it has limitations in certain settings (e.g., 
Raynaud disease, peripheral vascular disease, hypother-
mia, vasopressor use).
TEE Monitoring
One approach to rapid evaluation of the cardiac status 
is TEE. An ultrasound probe is inserted into the esopha-
gus, and various views of the heart are obtained in real 
time. TEE views can reveal information about heart 
valves; chamber size (correlated with preload); contractile 
activity (e.g., ejection fraction); diastolic function; wall 
motion abnormalities; and signs of specific disease pro-
cesses such as pulmonary embolism, cardiac tamponade, 
and aortic dissection. Limitations of TEE include the need 
for expertise in interpretation and access to the head of 
the patient. The most serious risks include esophageal 
trauma, bleeding, and perforation.
CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM
Processed Electroencephalograph Monitoring
Although the electrical activity of the brain can be 
monitored with the multichannel electroencephalograph 
(EEG), processed EEG monitors focused on the frontal 
area have been developed for the sake of convenience. 
These devices have been developed through an empiri-
cal comparison of the awake and anesthetized EEG and 
output an index generated through a multistep process. 
EEG features are extracted, artifact is minimized, and 
an algorithm converts the EEG features to a numerical 
index, typically ranging from 100 (awake) to 0 (isoelec-
tric EEG). These monitors are intended to assess anes-
thetic depth and reduce the incidence of awareness with 
postoperative recall (by avoiding subtherapeutic dosing) 
and minimize unnecessary anesthetic administration (by 
avoiding supratherapeutic dosing). The incidence of recall 
is between 1:500 and 1:1,000.32,33 The most definitive 
work on these devices, in particular, the bispectral index 
scale (BIS) monitor, has demonstrated a reduction in the 
incidence of postoperative recall of intraoperative events 
when compared with no monitoring of anesthetic depth; 
however, BIS monitoring was not superior to the use of 
alerts based on the expired anesthetic concentrations.32–34
Minimum Alveolar Concentration Alert 
Monitoring
The minimum alveolar concentration (MAC) was developed 
as a method to assess and compare the relative potency 
of inhalation anesthetics. It is the end-expired concentra-
tion of an anesthetic at equilibrium at which 50% of the 
subjects move in response to a noxious stimulus.
Large randomized trials of patients receiving inhala-
tion anesthetics have compared the use of alerts based on 
MAC with BIS monitoring on the incidence of awareness. 
Specifically, an alert based on age-adjusted MAC values of 
less than 0.7 was equivalent or superior to an alert based 
on BIS value in preventing awareness with postoperative 
recall.32,33 These studies also noted that patients monitored 
by either method had a lower incidence of recall than 
patients without any anesthetic depth monitoring. When 
pure total intravenous anesthesia (TIVA) is used without 
any inhaled agent, no calculated MAC alert can be pro-
duced. In these patients the use of a neurologic monitor 
is recommended, especially if a nondepolarizing muscle 
III
Chapter 20 Anesthetic Monitoring
375
relaxant is administered.34 Newer decision support displays 
incorporate the combined age-adjusted MAC calculations 
used in this study to alert providers that the anesthetic 
level may be associated with postoperative recall.35 36
Earlier clinical data suggested that a combination of 
low BIS, low blood pressure, and low MAC (so-called 
“triple low”) was associated with postoperative mortality, 
but a recent prospective trial of alerting for triple low did 
not demonstrate any difference in mortality.37
Intracranial Pressure Monitoring
Because the brain is enclosed in a fixed cranial vault, 
the perfusion pressure of the brain (cerebral perfusion 
pressure [CPP]) is defined as the MAP minus the ICP or 
CVP, whichever is higher. ICP is normally <20 mm Hg. 
When intracranial volume is increased (e.g., patients with 
intracranial tumor or hematoma), additional increases in 
volume (e.g., from cerebral edema, hemorrhage, increased 
cerebrospinal fluid from hydrocephalus) may dramati-
cally increase the ICP. In these settings continuous moni-
toring of ICP may be useful to ensure brain perfusion 
(also see Chapter 30).
Two methods are commonly employed to monitor ICP. 
The first, ventriculostomy, requires a catheter inserted in a 
ventricle of the brain, with pressure transduced with a tra-
ditional disposable transducer, as used in arterial or central 
venous pressure monitoring. The transducer must be zeroed 
at the tragus of the ear (ear canal). An advantage of moni-
toring with a ventriculostomy is that cerebrospinal fluid 
may be removed to treat severe intracranial hypertension. A 
second technique of measuring ICP employs a device with 
a pressure transducer on the tip of a catheter inserted into 
the subdural space. These devices do not require zeroing.
Cerebral Oximetry
The oxygenation of a portion of the cerebral cortex can be 
monitored with a reflectance oximeter. This device uses 
near-infrared light in a fashion similar to a pulse oxime-
ter. However, instead of using the pulsatile absorbance 
of light transmitted through tissue to estimate arterial 
saturation, the cerebral oximeter uses the reflected infra-
red light through the scalp and skull from a portion of 
the cerebral cortex beneath it. The measurement obtained 
is called regional cerebral oxygen saturation (rSO2). The 
light is reflected predominantly from the hemoglobin in 
the red blood cells within the vasculature of the cerebral 
cortex. The device presents a number between 1% and 
100% saturation, again similar to a pulse oximeter. The 
algorithms for determining this saturation are proprietary 
to the manufacturers. These devices have been used in 
cardiac and vascular surgical procedures where there is 
a concern for impaired brain perfusion. rSO2 values are 
usually around 70% (like mixed venous blood); rSO2 val-
ues <50% or a 20% decrease from baseline values may be 
associated with decreased cerebral oxygenation. A 2015 
study suggested that cerebral oximetry may also be use-
ful in the management of patients in the sitting position, 
such as shoulder surgery. In these patients rSO2 changes 
may lead to adjustment of FiO2 or minute ventilation.38
PERIPHERAL NERVOUS SYSTEM
Neuromuscular Monitoring
The use of neuromuscular blocking agents is an important 
part of many anesthetics. Monitoring the effects of drugs 
that block neuromuscular transmission at the synaptic 
junction is vital to prevent patient motion at inopportune 
times during the surgery and to prevent partial paraly-
sis with risks of awareness, pulmonary aspiration, and 
hypoventilation at the end of surgery (also see Chapter 11).
Basic Physiology/Pharmacology
Normal neuromuscular transmission starts with a motor 
nerve impulse arriving at the end plate. Quanta of ace-
tylcholine are released in response to the depolarization, 
diffuse across the neuromuscular synaptic cleft, bind to 
the postsynaptic nicotinic cholinergic receptor, trigger 
depolarization of the nerve, and open calcium channels 
with subsequent activation of actin–myosin chains and 
muscle contraction. Most of the acetylcholine is hydro-
lyzed enzymatically by acetylcholinesterase; the resulting 
choline is recycled into the nerve terminal. Nondepolar-
izing neuromuscular blocking drugs act by competitively 
inhibiting the binding of acetylcholine with the receptor. 
Because the blockade is competitive, it can be overcome 
with additional quanta of acetylcholine. The nondepolar-
izing blockers demonstrate fade with repeated stimulation, 
thought to be the result of presynaptic α3β2 acetylcholine 
receptor exhaustion.39–41 Succinylcholine acts differently 
by binding to the receptor, activating it, resulting in pro-
longed depolarization and blockade of transmission.
Neuromuscular Blockade Monitor
The most common method to follow the effects of a 
nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking agent is to use 
a twitch monitor and follow a train-of-four (TOF) count. 
The TOF monitor generates four supramaximal stimuli 
at 0.5-second intervals (2 Hz). As the degree of blockade 
deepens, the twitches first fade, then are progressively 
lost (Table 20.7). Assessment of very deep levels of 
blockade can be done by using a posttetanic count. The 
tetanic stimulus for 5 seconds primes the nerve terminal 
with more acetylcholine, allowing a posttetanic count 
to be done. Even low levels of neuromuscular blockade 
may be associated with adverse clinical outcomes. Succi-
nylcholine induces a noncompetitive blockade (so-called 
depolarizing block), which can be followed by a single 
twitch. Traditionally, assessment of twitches is done by 
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
376
Table 20.7
Assessment of Neuromuscular Blockade by Monitor Table
% Blockade
Stimulus
PTC
TOF
DBS
TOF Ratio
Tetany
Clinical
>100%
0
0/4
0
N/A
0
Flaccid
>100%
present
0
0
N/A
90%
PTC >10
1 of 4
N/A
N/A
80%
2 of 4 
N/A
May breathe, maintain 
ETCO2, but lack airway 
patency
75%
3 of 4 
N/A
0%–75%
N/A
4 of 4 
Significant fade
0.2
N/A
Fade detectable
0.4
Risk of aspiration still 
present
N/A
Some fade 
0.7 
Head lift >5 sec
N/A
0.9 
Fade at 50 Hz
60%
N/A
No fade at 50 Hz, 
fade at 100 Hz
30%
N/A
Fade at 200 Hz
0%
N/A
1.0
This table provides the responses of a neuromuscular blockade monitor as a function of block versus the stimulus posttetanic count (PTC), 
train-of-four (TOF), double-burst suppression (DBS), train-of-four ratio (TOF ratio), tetany, and the clinical response noted are given as a function 
of the percentage of neuromuscular blockade.
observation or palpation of the muscle stimulated by 
the twitch monitor. Newer monitors use more objective 
movement sensors (e.g., acceleromyography) to provide 
quantitative measurement of TOF ratio.40,41
Strict adherence to TOF criteria to determine “revers-
ibility” of aminosteroid nondepolarizers (rocuronium and 
vecuronium) may be less necessary with the introduc-
tion of sugammadex; however, the importance of TOF 
monitoring is not diminished. TOF monitoring remains 
essential to determine appropriate dosing of sugamma-
dex and adequacy of reversal after administration. Inat-
tention to TOF can result in excessive or underdosing of 
AL GRAWANY
III
Chapter 20 Anesthetic Monitoring
377
neuromuscular blockade, resulting in inadequate relaxa-
tion, inadequate reversal, potentially adverse events, and 
increased costs. A 2020 study found that reversal with 
sugammadex is associated with a substantial reduction of 
postoperative pulmonary complications compared with 
traditional reversal with neostigmine.42
Evoked Potential
Evoked potential (EP) monitoring is indicated for proce-
dures in which there may be neurologic injury caused by 
either mechanical trauma or ischemia (e.g., during spinal 
surgery, thoracic abdominal aneurysm surgery, or head 
and neck surgery). Monitoring of EPs requires constant 
attention of trained personnel. It is important for anes-
thesia providers to understand their use and limitations 
because these monitors affect the choice of anesthetic 
medications. The most commonly employed EPs are 
somatosensory evoked potentials (SSEPs) and motor 
evoked potentials (MEPs). Both involve a stimulating 
electrode and a sensing electrode continuously assessing 
the function of the sensory or motor nerve tract.
SSEPs involve delivering a small current to a sensory 
nerve and measuring the response on the sensory cortex 
with a scalp electrode. The response is viewed as voltage 
versus time plot. To reduce background noise, multiple 
responses are averaged to produce an SSEP waveform. 
Nerve injury or ischemia is associated with a decrease 
in amplitude and an increase in latency of the peaks in 
the waveform compared with the baseline waveform. 
Inhaled anesthetics (both halogenated agents and nitrous 
oxide) also produce marked decreases in amplitude and 
increases in latency at higher doses. Patients with pre-
existing compromise of brain or spinal cord integrity 
are especially susceptible to the effects of inhaled anes-
thetics on EP signals. Propofol is considered the drug of 
choice for maintenance of unconsciousness during EP 
monitoring. Dexmedetomidine has also been explored as 
an anesthetic adjunct because it causes minimal depres-
sion of EP signals in adults. A limitation of SSEPs for 
spine surgery is that they monitor sensory tracts (dorsal 
spinal cord), and not motor tracts (ventral spinal cord). 
A patient may undergo a procedure with intact SSEP 
signals when there is in fact damage to the motor tracts.
MEPs involve stimulating the motor cortex and 
detecting a response in muscle. MEPs therefore have the 
advantage of ensuring an intact ventral spinal cord and 
are more sensitive to both neural injury and anesthetic 
drugs. The disadvantage is that they require an intact 
neuromuscular junction, including avoidance of neuro-
muscular blocking drugs during MEP monitoring. MEPs 
are more profoundly affected by volatile anesthetics 
and nitrous oxide than SSEPs; therefore IV anesthetics 
are commonly employed. During EP monitoring, the 
anesthesia provider should communicate closely with 
the monitoring technician when adjusting the dose of 
anesthetic medications. Acute changes in MEP or SSEP 
signals require immediate discussion between the moni-
toring technician, surgeon, and anesthesia provider.
TEMPERATURE
General and neuraxial anesthetics interfere with normal 
thermoregulatory mechanisms and can result in periop-
erative hypothermia.43 In the first hour after induction of 
general anesthesia the drop in core temperature is caused 
by redistribution of heat from the core to the periphery, 
not by heat loss. Malignant hyperthermia, although rare, 
can cause rapid increases in temperature. Therefore, we 
monitor temperature in our patients to manage intra-
operative hypothermia (inadvertent or desired), prevent 
overheating when using perioperative warming tech-
niques, and confirm and detect malignant hyperther-
mia (although increasing ETCO2 is the earliest sign of 
this). Historically, core body temperature was measured 
orally or rectally with liquid thermometers. Although 
accurate, these devices were slow to respond, fragile, 
and cumbersome in an operating room environment. 
Infrared scanners directed at the tympanic membrane 
are used extensively preoperatively and postoperatively. 
The infrared response time is faster, but subject to errors 
because of cerumen and other obstructions to the optical 
path. Intraoperatively, the most common measurement 
device is a small thermistor located in a nasopharyngeal 
or esophageal probe. Changes in temperature cause a 
change in resistance in the thermistor, allowing rapid 
determination of temperature. The acceptable accuracy 
range is ±0.5°C.
True core temperature is measured by probe placement 
in the PA, distal esophagus, tympanic membrane, or naso-
pharyngeal zones. Other sites that can approximate core 
temperature include oral, axillary, and bladder. Bladder 
temperature is highly affected by urineoutput, approach-
ing true core temperature at high urine flows. Rectal and 
skin temperatures are highly variable relative to true core 
temperature (Table 20.8).
MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING AND 
ADVERSE CONDITIONS
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) uses radiofrequency 
pulses to change the rotation of nuclei in atoms aligned 
in a very strong magnetic field. As the pulse is removed, 
the energy is released and can be imaged in multiple 
dimensions. The return of nuclei to their resting align-
ment is called “relaxation.” Because different body 
tissues have different relaxation rates, better tissue dif-
ferentiation (e.g., white vs. gray matter in the central 
nervous system [CNS]) can be obtained.
The static magnetic field decreases in strength with 
the square of the distance from the coil. MRI suites have 
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
378
demarcation lines indicating the field strength at various 
distances. Better-designed suites have a series of rooms, 
so that direct access to the high magnetic environment is 
not possible without being screened. The hazards of pro-
viding anesthesia in this environment include equipment 
malfunction and physical danger to the patient and any-
one present if metal objects become projectiles if brought 
close enough to the MRI scanner (also see Chapter 38).
All monitors are affected by the MRI environment.44
Noise levels in an MRI suite can reach 95 dB, making 
auscultation of any sounds difficult (e.g., breath sounds, 
heart tones, Korotkoff sounds). The magnetic field will 
interfere with ECG monitoring as well. The rapidly 
changing magnetic field orientation can induce a current 
in any metal-containing loop (including standard pulse 
oximeters), causing heating and burns. Extended ventila-
tion and sampling tubing help keep sensitive equipment 
away from the magnet.
MULTIFUNCTION DISPLAYS AND DECISION 
SUPPORT
The past decade has seen the progressive implementa-
tion of the complete electronic medical record (EMR) 
incorporating patient diagnoses (ICD-10 codes), labora-
tory results, and live monitored data flow sheets. This 
information is incorporated into anesthesia information 
management systems (AIMSs). Initially, AIMSs were 
developed to automate recording of patient monitor 
and anesthesia machine information. However, the true 
potential of this broad array of patient data is real-time 
integrated display and decision support analogous to sys-
tems developed for commercial aviation in the 1980s.45
Clinical decision support (CDS) systems can be integrated 
into an AIMS or act as stand-alone systems.46 Commer-
cially available CDS systems include Talis Clinical and 
AlertWatch.
AlertWatch, like other CDS systems, allows for inte-
gration of clinical data in addition to live calculations 
to enhance the information.36 The anesthesia provider 
can be notified in real time with calculated alerts, such 
as the cumulative time the MAP has been <60 mm Hg 
(Fig.20.22). This type of live monitoring display attempts 
to reduce alarm fatigue by prioritizing them in the order 
they should be addressed.36 47 Decision support systems 
such as AlertWatch that involve calculations are con-
sidered software devices and therefore require Food and 
Drug Administration (FDA) clearance as medical device 
data systems (MDDS) devices, similar to physiologic 
monitors. Relevant patient information such as net fluid 
balance can be automatically calculated and presented 
relative to the patient's estimated blood volume (BV). The 
BV equation uses a formula that includes height, weight, 
and gender and involves an exponent calculation, which 
can be difficult to determine without a computer.48
Several studies have found that using AlertWatch can 
improve adherence to process measures such as glucose, 
ventilator, blood pressure, and fluid management.47 49
There was also an association with reduced hospital 
charges and length of stay when AlertWatch users were 
compared with historical controls but not when com-
pared with parallel controls.47 A multi–operating room 
census view can be employed as a “control tower” to 
survey the activity in multiple operating rooms simul-
taneously50 (Fig. 20.23). The future promise of systems 
such as AlertWatch is integration and processing of vast 
amounts of clinical data while promoting adherence to 
evidence-based guidelines and care management proto-
cols, hopefully leading to better patient outcomes.
Table 20.8
Temperature Monitoring Sites
Site
Advantages
Disadvantages
Pulmonary artery
Gives true blood temperature
Requires invasive procedure for placement
Tympanic
Gives “brain” temperature
May cause injury to tympanic membrane
Esophageal
Tends to reflect core temperature
Subject to cooling by respiratory gases
Nasopharyngeal
Gives “brain” temperature
Nosebleeds, ambient cooling/heating
Oral
Comfortable in awake patient
Not easily done in asleep patient
Bladder
Easily done if a urinary catheter is in place
Depends on urine output to reflect core temperature
Skin
Easy, noninvasive
Does not reflect core temperature, influenced by 
ambient temperature
Rectal
May not reflect true core temperature, uncomfortable 
placement in awake patient, nonsterile
All temperature readings are dependent on blood flow to the area. Alterations in blood flow will result in erroneous temperature readings. 
Surgical site can compromise monitoring (e.g., an open thorax can change esophageal temperature readings).
III
Chapter 20 Anesthetic Monitoring
379
Fig. 20.22 AlertWatch Patient View. The patient view of this multisystem display. It is color coded, 
with green, yellow, and red designating normal range, slightly abnormal range, and abnormal range, 
respectively. The color orange designates comorbidities associated with that item. The display has three 
sections: patient information on the left, icon-based organ system view in the center, and active alerts 
on the right. Each icon and color-coded portion of the display have more information about that organ 
system or item displayed when the item is selected. There are multiple calculations being conducted in 
the background (see Ref. 3). For example, this patient has a +822 mL positive I/O balance with a green 
background, meaning this positive I/O balance volume is within 20% of the patient's estimated blood 
volume (on the right in patient information section) and a calculated age-adjusted MAC of 0.781 (noted 
as a green level in the Brain, in the middle patient icon section) and additionally the mean arterial blood 
pressure has been below 60 mm Hg for a total of 13 minutes (noted as an alert in the upper right in the 
Alerts section of the screen). This patient has heart and kidney disease and is on medications that affect 
international normalized ratio (INR) and has diabetes (all highlighted in orange).
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
380
Fig. 20.23 Census View of AlertWatch. The census view of AlertWatch. Each rectangle represents a patient 
in an operating room (or critical care unit or labor and delivery). It shows the room number, the status of the 
case, (in operating room, induction end, etc.) and the anesthesia team in the room. If the bar in the middle 
is green, it means the case is on time; yellow means the case is longer than scheduled time; and red means 
the case is much longer than scheduled time. The colored circles with exclamation points come in three 
severities: black alerts (informational), red alert (more important information), and red flashing alerts (the 
issue needs immediate attention). A series of icons are defined at the bottom of the table. For example, a 
red elbow designates a history of difficult mask ventilation or difficult intubation.
III
Chapter 20 Anesthetic Monitoring
381
REFERENCES
1. Szocik J, Barker SJ, Tremper KK. Funda-
mental Principles of Monitoring Instru-
mentation in Miller’s Anesthesia. 8th ed. 
Vol. 1. Churchill Livingstone Elsevier; 
2013.
2. American Society of Anesthesiologists 
Standards for Basic Anesthetic Monitor-
ing, approved on October 21, 1986 and 
last amended on October 20, 2015 with 
an effective date of October 28, 2015. 
https://www.asahq.org/quality-and-prac-
tice-management/standards-and-guide-
lines. Accessed on September 29, 2020.
3. Tremper KK, Barker SJ. Pulse oximetry. 
Anesthesiology. 1989;70:98–108.
4. Barker SJ, Curry J, Redford D, Morgan 
S. Measurement of carboxyhemoglobin 
and methemoglobin by pulse oximetry. 
Anesthesiology. 2006;105:892–897.
5. Raphael DT. APSF Newsletter. 1998 
Winter; 13(4).
6. Amato MBP, Meade MO, Slutsky AS, 
etal. Driving pressure and survival in 
the acute respiratory distress syndrome. 
N Engl J Med. 2015;372:747–755.
7. Neto AS, Hemmes SNT, Barbas CSV, 
etal. Association between driving pres-
sure and development of postoperative 
pulmonary complications in patients 
undergoing mechanical ventilation for 
general anesthesia: A metal-analysis of 
individual patient data. Lancet Respir 
Med. 2016;4(4):272–280.
8. Park MH, Ahn HJ, Kim JA, etal. Driving 
pressure during thoracic surgery: A ran-
domized clinical trial. Anesthesiology. 
2019;130:385–393.
9. Ferrando C, Suarez-Sipmann F, Tusman 
G, etal. Open lung approach versus 
standard protective strategies: Effects 
on driving pressure and ventilatory 
efficiency during anesthesia—A pilot, 
randomized controlled trial. PLoS One. 
2017;12(5):e0177399. May 11.
10. Meier A, Sell RE, Malhotra A. Driving 
pressure for ventilation of patients with 
acute respiratory distress syndrome. 
Anesthesiology. 2020;132:1569–1576.
11. Futier E, Constantin JM, Paugam-Burtz 
C, etal. A trial of intraoperative low-tidal-
volume ventilation in abdominal sur-
gery. N Engl J Med. 2013;369:428–437.
12. Landesberg G, Mosseri M, Wolf Y, Ves-
selov Y, Weissman C. Perioperative 
myocardial ischemia and infarction: 
Identification by continuous 12-lead 
electrocardiogram with online ST-
segment monitoring. Anesthesiology. 
2002;96:264–270.
13. London MJ, Hollenberg M, Wong 
MG, etal., Intraoperative myocardial 
ischemia: Localization by continuous 
12-lead electrocardiography. Anesthesi-
ology. 1988;69:232–241.
14. Kheterpal S, O'Reilly M, Englesbe MJ, 
etal. Preoperative and intraoperative 
predictors of cardiac adverse events after 
general, vascular, and urological sur-
gery. Anesthesiology. 2009;110:58–66.
15. Walsh M, Devereaux PJ, Garg AX, 
etal. Relationship between intraop-
erative mean arterial pressure and clini-
cal outcomes after noncardiac surgery. 
Anesthesiology. 2013;119:507–515.
16. Wesselink EM, Kappen TH, Torn HM, 
Slooter JC. Intraoperative hypotension 
and the risk of postoperative adverse 
outcomes: A systematic review. British J 
of Anesthesia. 2018;121(4):706–721.
17. Salmasi V, Maheshwari K, Yang D, etal. 
Relationship between intraoperative 
hypotension defined by either reduction 
from baseline of absolute thresholds, 
and acute kidney and myocardial injury 
after noncardiac surgery. A retrospec-
tive cohort analysis. Anesthesiology. 
2017;126:47–65.
18. Mathis MR, Naik BI, Freundlich R, etal. 
Preoperative risk and the association 
between hypotension and postopera-
tive acute kidney injury. Anesthesiology. 
2020;132:461–475.
19. Liem VG, Hoeks SE, Mol KH, etal. 
Postoperative hypotension after non-
cardiac surgery and the association 
with myocardial injury. Anesthesiology. 
2020;133:519–522.
20. Ehrenwerth J, Eisenkraft JB, Berry J. 
Anesthesia Equipment: Principles and 
Applications. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: 
Saunders an imprint of Elsevier; 2013.
21. Perel A, Minkovich L, Preisman S, 
etal. Assessing fluid-responsiveness by 
a standardized ventilatory maneuver 
(the respiratory systolic variation test). 
Anesth Analg. 2005;100:942–945.
22. Mathis MR, Schechtman SA, Engoren 
MC, etal. Arterial Pressure Variation in 
Elective Noncardiac Surgery: Identifying 
Reference Distribution and Modifying 
Factors. Anesthesiology. 2017;126:249–
259.
23. Lahner D, Kabon B, Marscalek C, etal. 
Evaluation of stroke volume varia-
tion obtained by arterial pulse contour 
analysis to predict fluid responsive-
ness intraoperatively. Br J Anaesth. 
2009;103(3):346–351.
24. Marik PE, Cavallazzi R. Does the central 
venous pressure predict fluid respon-
siveness? An updated meta-analysis and 
a plea for some common sense. Crit Care 
Med. 2013;41:1774–1781.
25. American Society of Anesthesiologists 
Practice Guidelines for Central Venous 
Access: An updated report by the Ameri-
can Society of Anesthesiologists Task 
Force on Central Venous Access. Anes-
thesiology. 2020;132:8–43.
26. Sandham JD, Hull RD, Brant RF, etal. A 
randomized, controlled trial of the use 
of pulmonary-artery catheters in high 
risk surgical patients. N Engl J Med. 
2003;348:5–14.
27. Daigle RE, Miller CW, McLeod FD, 
Hokanson DE. Nontraumatic aortic 
blood flow sensing by use of an ultra-
sonic esophageal probe. J Appl Physiol-
ogy. 1975;38(6):1153–1160.
28. Valteir B, Cholley BP, Belot JP, ed la 
Coussaye JE, Mateo J, Payen DM. Non-
invasive monitoring of cardiac output in 
critically ill patients using transesopha-
geal Doppler. Am J Respir Crit Care 
Med. 1998;158(1):77–83.
29. Grensemann J. Cardiac output monitor-
ing by pulse contour analysis, the tech-
nical basics of less-invasive techniques. 
Front Med. 6;5:64
30. Chung E, Chen G, Alexander B, Can-
nesson M. Non-invasive blood pressure 
monitoring: A review of current applica-
tions. Front Med. 2003;7(1):91–101.
31. Chachula K, Lieb F, Hess Welter J, Graf N, 
Dullenkopf A. Non-invasive continuous 
blood pressure monitoring (ClearSightTM
system) during shoulder surgery in the 
beach chair position: A prospective self-
controlled study. 2020;20:217.
32. Avidan MS, Jacobsohn E, Glick D, etal. 
Prevention of intraoperative awareness 
in a high-risk surgical population. N 
Engl J Med. 2011;365:591–600.
33. Mashour GA, Shanks A, Tremper KT, 
etal. Prevention of intraoperative aware-
ness with explicit recall in an unselected 
surgical population. A randomized com-
parative effectiveness trial. Anesthesiol-
ogy. 2012;117:717–725.
34. Mashour GA, Orser BA, Avidan M. Intra-
operative awareness from neurobiol-
ogy to clinical practice. Anesthesiology. 
2011;114:1218.
35. Mashour G, Esaki R, Vandervest J, etal. 
A novel electronic algorithm for detect-
ing potentially insufficient anesthesia: 
Implications for the prevention of intra-
operative awareness. J Clin Monit Com-
put. 2009;23:273–277.
36. Tremper KK, Mace JM, Gombert JM, 
etal. Design of a novel multifunction 
decision support display for anesthesia 
care: AlertWatch OR. BMC Anesthesiol-
ogy. 2018. Feb 5.
37. Sessler D, et al. Triple-low alerts do not 
reduce mortality: A real-time randomized 
trial. Anesthesiology. 130:72–822019.
38. Picton P, Dering A, Alexander A, Neff 
M, Miller BS, Shanks A, Housey M, 
Mashour GA. Influence of ventilation 
strategies and anesthetic techniques on 
regional cerebral oximetry in the beach 
chair position: A prospective interven-
tional study with a randomized compar-
ison of two anesthetics. Anesthesiology. 
2015. [Epub ahead of print].
39. Fagerlund MJ, Eriksson LI. Current con-
cepts in neuromuscular transmission. 
BJA. 2009;103(1):108–114.
40. Murphy GS, Brull SJ. Residual neu-
romuscular block: Lessons unlearned. 
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
382
Part I: Definitions, incidence, and 
adverse physiologic effects of residual 
neuromuscular block. Anesth Analg. 
2010;111:120–128.
41. Brull SJ, Murphy GS. Residual neu-
romuscular block: Lessons unlearned. 
Part II: Methods to reduce the risk 
of residual weakness. Anesth Analg. 
2010;111:129–140.
42. Kheterpal S, Vaughn MT, Dubovoy TZ. 
etal. Sugammadex versus neostigmine 
for reversal of neuromuscular blockade 
and postoperative pulmonary compli-
cations (STRONGER): A multicenter 
matched cohort analysis. Anesthesiol-
ogy. 132,1371–1381.
43. Sessler D. Temperature monitoring and 
perioperative thermoregulation. Anes-
thesiology. 2008;109:318–338.
44. Patteson SK, Chesney JT. Anesthetic 
management for magnetic resonance 
imaging: Problems and solutions. 
Anesth Analg. 1992;74:121–128.
45. Tremper KK. Anesthesiology: From 
Patient Safety to Population Outcomes: 
The 49th Annual Rovenstine Lecture. 
Anesthesiology. 2011;114:755–770.
46. Nair BG, Gabel E, Hofer I, Schwid 
HA, Cannesson M. Intraoperative clini-
cal decision support for anesthesia: 
A narrative review of available sys-
tems. Anesth Analg. 2017;124(2):603–
617. PMID: 28099325. doi: 10.1213/
ANE.0000000000001636.
47. Kheterpal S, Shanks A, Tremper KK. 
Impact of a novel decision support sys-
tem on intraoperative process of care 
and postoperative outcomes. Anesthe-
siology. 2018;128:272–282.
48. Nadler SB, Hidalgo JU, Bloch T. Predic-
tion of blood volume in normal human 
adults. Surgery. 1962;51:224–232.
49. Sathishkumar S, Lai M, Picton P, etal. 
Behavioral modification of intraopera-
tive hyperglycemia management with 
a novel real-time audiovisual monitor. 
Anesthesiology. 2015;123:29–37.
50. Murray-Torres T, Casarella A, Bollini 
M, Wallace F, Avidan MS, Politi M. 
Anesthesiology Control Tower—Feasi-
bility Assessment to Support Transla-
tion (ACTFAST): Mixed-methods study 
of a novel telemedicine-based support 
system for the operating room. JMIR 
Hum Factors. 2019; 2:e12155. Apr-
Jun 6 Published online.
383
Chapter
Point-of-care ultrasound (POCUS) refers to the use of 
ultrasound at the patient’s bedside for procedural guid-
ance and/or aid in diagnosis. The use and application 
of POCUS has rapidly expanded over the past 20 years. 
POCUS is now routinely used by a number of different 
specialties within medicine. Increased use of ultrasound 
outside of the traditional radiology setting has been fueled 
by increasing portability, ease of use, ability to make 
rapid assessments, and ability to repeat examinations. 
In addition, there is mounting evidence demonstrating 
the value of ultrasound in various clinical settings. Mul-
tiple societies have published guidelines supporting the 
use of ultrasound by appropriately trained clinicians.1 2
Anesthesiologists have long used ultrasound for both 
procedural (vascular access, nerve blocks) and diagnostic 
(transesophageal echocardiogram [TEE]) purposes. As 
POCUS has become more ubiquitous across many medi-
cal specialties, the scope in the perioperative setting has 
also expanded. Based on current Accreditation Coun-
cil for Graduate Medical Education (ACGME) training 
requirements for anesthesiology residency, a new POCUS 
certificate program developed by the American Society 
of Anesthesiologists (ASA), and expert opinion regarding 
the use of perioperative POCUS,3 this chapter will focus 
on the following applications for diagnostic ultrasound: 
basic cardiac ultrasound, lung ultrasound, and abdominal 
ultrasound.
REVIEW OF ULTRASOUND PHYSICS
Sound waves are mechanical longitudinal pressure waves 
that are characterized by frequency, amplitude, and 
wavelength. Sound waves with frequencies above 20,000 
hertz (Hz) (or 20 kHz) are not audible by humans and are 
termed ultrasound. Medical ultrasound is usually in the 1 
to 20 megahertz (MHz) range.
Ultrasound technology uses a principle called the piezoe-
lectric effect (or pulse-echo principle) to generate and receive 
REVIEW OF ULTRASOUND PHYSICS
ULTRASOUND TRANSDUCERS
PREPARING FOR THE EXAMINATION
BASIC CARDIAC ULTRASOUND
Parasternal Long-Axis View
Parasternal Short-Axis View
Apical Four-Chamber View
Subcostal and Inferior Vena Cava Views
PULMONARY ULTRASOUND
Normal Lung Examination
Evaluation for Pneumothorax
Evaluation of Interstitial and Alveolar Patterns
Evaluation of the Pleural Space
ABDOMINAL ULTRASOUND
FAST Examination
Gastric Ultrasound
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
POINT-OF-CARE 
ULTRASOUND
Lindsey L. Huddleston, Kristine E.W. Breyer
21
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
384
ultrasound waves using nonionizing radiation. Ultrasound 
transducers contain many piezoelectric crystals, and ultra-
sonic waves are received and transmitted by the transducer 
via the piezoelectric crystals. Electricity applied to the ultra-
sound transducer induces vibration and results in transmis-
sion of ultrasound waves (reverse piezoelectric effect). Sound 
waves that are reflected back create electrical charges in 
the crystal array (piezoelectric effect), and those charges are 
interpreted by the ultrasound machine to create an image.
How much an ultrasound wave is reflected back to 
the transducer and how much is propagated depends on 
attenuation and acoustic impendence. As ultrasound waves 
are transmitted through substances, the ultrasound wave 
undergoes attenuation—that is, the amplitude of the wave 
diminishes as it propagates through the tissue. Attenuation 
is caused by the reflection of waves back to the transducer, 
refraction (deflection) of sound waves to a different direc-
tion, scattering, and absorption, which produces heat. Most 
attenuation is caused by absorption. Acoustic impedance 
is the resistance to sound wave propagation through a 
medium. Acoustic impedance depends on and is directly 
proportional to the speed of the sound wave and the density 
of the medium. In medical ultrasound when an ultrasound 
wave is transmitted, the angle of transmission changes once 
a new tissue or medium is encountered, based upon the 
acoustic impedance of the two opposing substances; this 
results in reflection and refraction of the ultrasound waves. 
The difference in acoustic impedance between the two sub-
stances changes the reflection angles. Fluids generally have 
a low acoustic impedance, and therefore most sound waves 
are transmitted through the fluid and not reflected back to 
the transducer, producing a black or anechoic image. More 
solid substances (e.g., bone) generally have a higher acoustic 
impedance, causing more waves to be reflected back and 
producing a very bright white or hyperechoic signal. If two 
different tissues have exactly the same impedance, then no 
change will be observed.
Two-dimensional (2D) ultrasound, also called B-mode
(for “brightness”), is the most commonly used ultrasound 
mode in POCUS. B-mode uses transducers with hundreds 
of piezoelectric crystals in a linear or phased array arrange-
ment. Each piezoelectric crystal sends out pulses (transmits 
waves) less than 1% of the time, allowing for ultrasound 
signals to be received back over 99% of the time. This is 
known as pulse wave ultrasonography. Ultrasound waves 
are interpreted based on the amplitude of the returned 
wave and the timing and direction of the reflected wave. 
The intensity of the amplitude creates the grayscale for the 
image. The higher the amplitude of the reflected wave, the 
brighter (whiter) the interpreted image. The longer return 
times are interpreted as deeper structures. The horizontal 
axis of the image is determined by the location along the 
footprint of the probe at which the ultrasound wave is 
returned. The quality of a 2D image is determined by spa-
tial resolution, temporal resolution, and field of view (FOV). 
The higher the frequency of the generated pulse waves, the 
better the resolution. However, higher-frequency waves 
also undergo more attenuation, resulting in poorer imag-
ing of deeper structures. When acquiring images, operators 
can change transducer types (e.g., switching to a higher-
frequency probe for better resolution of superficial struc-
tures) or make adjustments on the ultrasound machine (e.g., 
increasing the FOV size to capture more relevant structures) 
to create an optimal image.
M-mode (for “motion”) is another ultrasound mode 
commonly used in POCUS. In this mode a single piezo-
electric crystal along a single line within the transducer 
beam transmits waves, and the resulting image is dis-
played over time. M-mode has a very high sampling 
rate, which results in high resolution so that even rapid 
motion, such as the motion of the mitral valve, can be 
recorded. M-mode can also be useful to measure the 
changes in size and shape over time, such as the change 
in inferior vena cava (IVC) dimension with respiration.
ULTRASOUND TRANSDUCERS
Ultrasound transducers (commonly referred to as probes) 
used in medical ultrasound differ in their frequencies, 
arrangement of crystals, and mode of crystal excitation. 
Ultrasound transducers are generally classified as low 
frequency and high frequency. Low-frequency transduc-
ers produce longer wavelengths and have superior depth 
of penetration but decreased resolution. They are used 
to image deeper structures such as the heart or abdomi-
nal organs. High-frequency transducers produce shorter 
wavelengths and have greater resolution but achieve 
less depth of penetration. They are used to image more 
superficial structures, such as the internal jugular vein 
or radial artery. Three main transducers types are used 
in medical ultrasound: linear, curvilinear (convex), and 
phased array. Table 21.1 describes the properties and 
common clinical uses for each of these transducers.
PREPARING FOR THE EXAMINATION
As with any procedure performed in the perioperative 
setting, all necessary equipment must be gathered before 
starting the examination. This includes the ultrasound 
machine with proper probes attached, ultrasound gel, 
towels for removing the gel at the end of the examina-
tion, blankets for covering the patient to avoid unnec-
essary exposure, and potentially a second person to 
help with operating the machine controls during the 
examination. Proper patient positioning is also key to 
high-quality image acquisition. Other factors to consider 
include dimming lights and closing blinds to better see 
the ultrasound images and removing unnecessary equip-
ment in the area so there is enough room for the ultra-
sound machine, operator, and any potential assistants.
III
Chapter 21 Point-of-Care Ultrasound
385
The ultrasound machine must be set up properly 
before any examination. Once the appropriate transducer 
is selected, the user should then select the appropriate 
“examination type” or “examination mode.” The ultra-
sound machine will send out and interpret sound waves 
differently in different examination modes. For instance, 
imaging the heart using a low-frequency probe pro-
grammed for “abdominal examination” will yield a very 
difficult image to interpret. Appropriate depth should 
then be programmed so that the region of interest is cen-
tered and as large as possible. Because ultrasound waves 
do not travel well through air, ultrasound gel is critical 
to obtaining quality images for interpretation. The ultra-
sound gel acts as a conductive medium by preventing air 
space between the patient and the transducer. Ultrasound 
gel also facilitates probe movement during the examina-
tion. Lastly, it is important to know how to move the 
transducer to obtain an optimal image. Transducer move-
ments include sliding, rocking, tilting (or fanning), and 
rotating (Fig. 21.1) (also see Chapter 18).
BASIC CARDIAC ULTRASOUND
The perioperative cardiac POCUS examination includes 
four basic views plus examination of the IVC. For the 
Transducer Type
Frequency 
and Depth
Mode of Crystal Excitation
Clinical Applications
Linear
5–13 MHz
6 cm
Crystals activated in a sequential, linear fashion. 
Beams generated are parallel to each other and 
perpendicular to the probe’s surface.
Best for superficial structures
Vascular access
Nerve blocks
Pulmonary ultrasound (assessing for PTX)
Gastric ultrasound (thin adults or pediatric 
patients)
Phased array
1–5 MHz
35 cm
A small number of crystals are activated 
simultaneously to create a large number 
of beams that are multidirectional and 
overlapping. Timing of stimulation of each 
crystal can vary, resulting in ability to 
evaluate motion and flow.
Optimal for movement
Cardiac ultrasound (TTE/TEE)
Lung ultrasound (pleural and parenchymal 
examination)
Abdominal ultrasound (less commonly)
Curvilinear
2–5 MHz
30 cm
Crystals activated in a sequential, linear 
fashion. Beams generated diverge from 
each other because of the convex shape of 
the probe, creating a wider field of view.
Abdominal ultrasound
Cardiac ultrasound (when no phased array 
probe available)
Lung ultrasound (pleural examination)
Table 21.1
POCUS Transducers
PTX, Pneumothorax; TEE, transesophageal echocardiogram; TTE, transthoracic echocardiogram.
basic examination, the goal is to answer specific and 
mainly binary questions (e.g., “Is there a pericardial effu-
sion?”). There are more advanced applications of periop-
erative cardiac ultrasound that may be applied by more 
experienced providers (e.g., evaluation of valves, nonin-
vasive cardiac output measurements, evaluation of dias-
tolic function); however, these require additional training 
that is beyond the scope of this chapter. The phased array 
ultrasound probe is favored for cardiac ultrasound, but 
the curvilinear probe can also be used.
Parasternal Long-Axis View
Patient positioning: For optimal image acquisition, 
patients should be positioned with their left side down. 
If patients are unable to position themselves, this can 
be accomplished by using pillows or towels below the 
patient’s right side to help tilt them slightly left. If it is 
not possible to position the patient with their left side 
down, supine images can still be acquired; however, 
image quality may be poor, leading to limited or misin-
terpreted information.
Probe position and manipulation: Once the patient is 
positioned, the footprint of the ultrasound probe is placed 
between the third or fourth intercostal space, just to the 
left of the sternum. The indicator notch on the probe 
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
386
Fig. 21.1 Transducer movements. Four basic probe movements 
are used in POCUS image acquisition. These movements should be 
performed sequentially rather than simultaneously to optimize 
images with a systematic approach. (A) Sliding is relocation of 
the foot of the ultrasound probe to a new position on the skin 
surface. (B) Rotating is turning the ultrasound probe clockwise or 
counterclockwise along its central axis while maintaining contact 
with the skin surface. (C) Tilting (or fanning) is changing the angle 
of the probe interface along the short axis while maintaining a fixed 
position on the skin surface. (D) Rocking is motion along the long 
axis of the probe while maintaining a fixed position on the skin 
surface. (From Soni NJ, Arntfield R, Kory P. Point of Care Ultrasound. 
2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:27, Fig. 3.8.)
should be pointed toward the patient’s right shoulder 
(Fig. 21.2). The operator may need to slide laterally or 
medially along the rib space or interrogate adjacent rib 
spaces to optimize image quality. In addition, the probe 
can be rotated and/or fanned until all structures desired 
are displayed on the ultrasound screen.
Image appearance and structures visualized: The heart 
should appear horizontal across the screen. An ideal par-
asternal long-axis (PLAX) image should include the fol-
lowing structures: (1) left ventricle (LV; the apex of the LV 
should not be seen); (2) left atrium (LA); (3) mitral valve with 
both the anterior and posterior leaflets and the annulus; (4) 
left ventricular outflow tract (LVOT), (5) aortic valve (at least 
two of the three leaflets), (6) right ventricular outflow tract 
(RVOT); and (7) descending aorta (Fig. 21.3A).
Image interpretation: The PLAX view is an ideal view 
for interpreting left ventricular systolic function. For 
the purposes of perioperative POCUS, this will likely be 
a qualitative rather than quantitative assessment (e.g., 
reduced LV systolic function). Quantitative assessments 
require more expertise and extensive training in image 
acquisition and interpretation. Assessment of LV function 
should be done in a systematic way (similar to reading a 
chest radiograph or electrocardiogram) to avoid errors or 
misinterpretation. Box 21.1 describes the approach to LV 
function assessment in the PLAX view.
In addition to interpretation of LV function, a few other 
basic assessments can be made from the PLAX view. The 
first is evaluating for a pericardial effusion and distinguish-
ing pericardial from pleural fluid. Fluid will appear black, 
or hypoechoic, on the screen. If fluid is noted anterior to 
the descending aorta (or above on the ultrasound screen), 
it is pericardial fluid. If the fluid is traveling behind the 
descending aorta (or below on the ultrasound screen), the 
fluid is in the pleural space (Fig. 21.4). The other assess-
ment that can be made is chamber size relative to others. 
As a general rule, the RVOT, LVOT, and LA should have 
relatively the same anterior-to-posterior measurement. If 
one of them appears noticeably larger in the anterior-to-
posterior dimension, that may suggest pathology but could 
also be a result of improper image acquisition and will 
require follow-up with formal imaging. For example, in the 
case of the LVOT appearing larger than the LA and RVOT 
this could suggest possible aortic aneurysm and/or dissec-
tion and will need to be followed up with formal echocar-
diography and/or computed tomography (CT) angiography 
of the chest depending on the patient’s history and clinical 
presentation.
Parasternal Short-Axis View
Patient positioning: Patients should be positioned with 
their left side down.
Probe position and manipulation: Initial probe posi-
tion is based on where the operator obtains the PLAX 
view. The key to obtaining an optimal parasternal short-
axis (PSAX) view is to start from an optimal PLAX with 
the papillary muscles in the center of the screen. From 
this view, the probe is rotated approximately 90 degrees 
clockwise (the indicator notch points approximately to 
the patient’s left shoulder) (see Fig. 21.2).
Image appearance and structures visualized: The PSAX 
should be a transverse view of the myocardium of the LV 
at the level of the papillary muscles. The LV should appear 
round, and both papillary muscles should be in view at 
approximately three and seven o’clock (see Fig. 21.3B). 
Although the septum and the right ventricle (RV) will 
be seen, the entire RV is not visualized in the PSAX, so 
assessment of RV size is not appropriate in this view.
Image interpretation: LV function can be assessed in 
the PSAX view; however, because the mitral valve is not 
visualized, only two of the four questions to assess LV 
function can be addressed (Box 21.2).
The presence of pericardial fluid can be detected on 
the PSAX view and will appear as hypoechoic material 
surrounding the heart. If the interventricular septum 
appears flat through any portion of the cardiac cycle 
III
Chapter 21 Point-of-Care Ultrasound
387
(leading to a “D-shaped” LV), this may indicate RV pres-
sure or volume overload (Fig. 21.5). In this case the oper-
ator should attempt to obtain views of the RV in other 
views to confirm the finding or consider follow-up with 
a formal transthoracic echocardiogram or CT angiogram 
if there is concern for pulmonary embolus.
Apical Four-Chamber View
Patient positioning: The patient should be positioned with 
their left side down. The apical four-chamber (A4C) view 
is perhaps the most crucial view to ensure proper patient 
positioning because of the potential for foreshortening 
and misinterpretation of images acquired. Foreshortening 
occurs when the beam of the ultrasound does not pass 
through the true apex of the LV. This causes the apex of the 
LV to appear rounded and thick rather than thin and bullet 
shaped. Foreshortened images can lead to three important 
data misinterpretations: (1) any abnormalities of the LV 
apex will not be seen (e.g., LV thrombus); (2) LV function 
may appear better than it actually is; and (3) a normal, 
healthy RV may artifactually appear larger in size with 
reduced function.
Probe positioning and manipulation: To prevent 
foreshortening, the footprint of the ultrasound should 
be placed as close to the LV apex as possible. If pos-
sible, palpating the point of maximal impulse (PMI) can 
help the operator identify the LV apex. If the patient 
is positioned correctly with their left side down, initial 
probe placement will be just anterior to the midaxillary 
line, usually one to two rib spaces below the nipple 
line. The indicator notch should be pointed out to the 
patient’s left, and the ultrasound probe is often tilted 
so that the beam of the ultrasound is directed cephalad 
(see Fig. 21.2). The depth on the ultrasound machine will 
need to be increased when transitioning from the par-
asternal views to the A4C view.
Image appearance and structures visualized: All four 
chambers of the heart should be in view, and both the 
tricuspid and mitral valve should be clearly opening. In 
addition, the interventricular septum should be in the 
center of the ultrasound screen and be oriented vertically 
(see Fig. 21.3C). The LV apex should appear thin and not 
rounded (as discussed earlier).
Image interpretation: LV and RV function can be 
assessed in the A4C view (Box 21.3). However, the struc-
tures are farther away from the ultrasound probe, so wall 
thickening may be more difficult to determine because the 
endocardium is harder to visualize. Foreshortening can 
lead to inaccurate assessments of both LV and RV func-
tion. As with other views, pericardial fluid will be seen as 
hypoechoic fluid surrounding the heart in the A4C view. 
Because the right atrium (RA) and RV are clearly visual-
ized in this view, collapse of the RA and/or RV may be 
seen, suggesting a hemodynamically significant pericar-
dial effusion.
Fig. 21.2 Probe placement and patient position for basic cardiac views. For the PLAX, PSAX, and apical views, the patient is in the 
left lateral decubitus position (center image) for optimal imaging. The subcostal view is obtained with the patient in the supine position. 
(From Barnett CF, Sweeney DA, Huddleston LH. Ultrasonography: Advanced applications and procedures. In: Broaddus CV, et al. Textbook 
of Respiratory Medicine. Vol. 1, 7th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022: e-Fig. 24.1.)
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
388
Subcostal and Inferior Vena Cava Views
Patient positioning: The subcostal and IVC views are 
obtained with the patient supine rather than with their 
left side down. If the patient can cooperate, having them 
bend their knees will help relax the abdominal muscles 
and aid in image acquisition. The subcostal view is the 
easiest view to obtain during cardiopulmonary resusci-
tation because the operator and probe position do not 
interfere with chest compressions.
Probe positioning and manipulation: To obtain the 
subcostal view, the ultrasound probe is placed on the 
patient’s abdomen, 2 to 3 inches below the xyphoid 
Fig. 21.3 Cross-sectional anatomy and ultrasound images for the four basic cardiac ultrasound views. (A) Parasternal long axis 
(PLAX). Note that on an optimal PLAX view, the apex is not fully visualized on the ultrasound image. (B) Parasternal short axis (PSAX) 
taken at the level of the papillary muscles. (C) Apical four-chamber view. (D) Subcostal four-chamber view. AO, Aorta; AV, aortic valve; 
IVS, intraventricular septum; LA, left atrium; LV, left ventricle; MV, mitral valve; PM, papillary muscle; RA, right atrium; RV, right ventricle; 
RVOT, right ventricular outflow tract; TV, tricuspid valve. (Modified from Soni NJ, Arntfield R, Kory P. Point of Care Ultrasound. 2nd ed. 
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:115–122, Figs. 14.4, 14.5, 14.8, and 14.10.)
III
Chapter 21 Point-of-Care Ultrasound
389
process and just to the right of midline. The indicator 
notch is pointed toward the patient’s left. The probe will 
be relatively flat on the abdomen, so the operator should 
keep their hand above the probe (see Fig. 21.2). To obtain 
the IVC view, the probe is rotated approximately 90 
degrees counterclockwise from the subcostal view with 
the indicator notch now pointing toward the patient’s 
head. For both views, the operator will likely need to 
apply gentle downward pressure on the abdomen to 
acquire images.
Image appearance and structures visualized: As 
in the A4C view, all four chambers of the heart and 
Box 21.1
Left Ventricular (LV) Function Assessment in 
Parasternal Long-Axis (PLAX) View: Four Questions to Answer
1. Is the left ventricular chamber size (cavity) changing 
between systole and diastole?
•A normal LV cavity will decrease in size during systole.
2. Are the walls of the left ventricle getting thicker?
•Operators should look not for motion but actual
endocardial thickening of all of the visible wall 
segments.
•Wall segments that are dysfunctional may “move”
because of adjacent structures, but there will be no 
endocardial thickening (or appreciably less).
3. Is the anterior leaflet of the mitral valve hitting the 
septum?
•In a normally functioning LV the mitral valve should
open wide during diastole and the anterior leaflet 
should come close to the septum. This is a subjective 
measurement of end-point septal separation (EPSS).
4. Is the annulus of the mitral valve moving toward the 
septum?
•In a heart with normal systolic LV function the annulus
of the mitral valve will move vigorously from the base 
of the heart toward the apex.
the mitral and tricuspid valves should be visualized. 
The right side of the heart will appear on the top of 
the screen with the left side of the heart deeper and 
toward the bottom of the screen (see Fig. 21.3D). In 
the IVC view, the liver will be seen with hepatic veins 
emptying into the IVC. The IVC will be in the longi-
tudinal orientation and should be seen starting at the 
far left of the screen until it clearly empties into the 
RA (Fig. 21.6).
Image interpretation: LV function, RV size and function, 
and pericardial effusions can all be assessed in the subcostal 
view similarly to how they are assessed in the A4C view 
described earlier. The IVC view has been used to estimate 
right atrial pressure (RAP) and to aid with assessment of 
volume status. For both of these assessments, the absolute 
diameter and the change in diameter with respiration are 
measured. In a patient who is not undergoing positive-
pressure ventilation a small IVC (<21 mm) that collapses 
significantly with respiration suggests a low RAP (<3 mm 
Hg), whereas a large IVC (>21 mm) that does not collapse 
with respiration suggests a high RAP (>10 mm Hg). Pos-
itive-pressure ventilation changes intrathoracic pressure; 
thus interpretation of the IVC differs between spontaneous 
ventilation and mechanical ventilation. Because of con-
flicting data in the existing literature, there is uncertainty 
about the accuracy of the IVC examination to predict fluid 
responsiveness.4 5 In addition, pitfalls are associated with 
both acquiring images and interpreting the examination. 
For example, incorrectly identifying the aorta for the IVC 
can lead to the mistaken conclusion that there is an absence 
of respiratory variability. Finally, there are several clini-
cal conditions where IVC size and respiratory variability 
may not accurately predict preload or volume responsive-
ness. This is the case in cardiac tamponade where the IVC 
appears large and noncollapsible but the patient is preload 
dependent.
Fig. 21.4 Pericardial versus pleural fluid on PLAX view. (A) Pericardial fluid tracking anterior to the descending aorta compared with 
(B) pleural fluid tracking posterior to the descending aorta. DA, Descending aorta; LA, left atrium; LV, left ventricle; asterisk, pericardial 
fluid; double asterisk, pleural fluid.
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
390
Given these limitations, the IVC examination must be 
interpreted in the context of the entire clinical picture. 
The examination is most useful at extremes (e.g., very 
small, collapsing IVC) and when it can be repeated over 
time and after an intervention (such as fluid administra-
tion). Integrating the IVC examination with additional 
ultrasound findings from the cardiac, lung, and abdomi-
nal POCUS examinations is paramount. This practice will 
Box 21.2
Left Ventricular (LV) Function Assessment in 
Parasternal Short-Axis (PSAX) View: Two Questions to 
Answer
1. Is the left ventricular chamber size (cavity) changing 
between systole and diastole?
•In the PSAX view if papillary muscles touch each
other and/or the LV cavity seems to disappear during 
systole, this is suggestive of an underfilled LV cavity 
(similar to the transgastric view on transesophageal 
echocardiogram [TEE]).
2. Are the walls of the left ventricle getting thicker?
•If the LV is functioning normally, all of the walls of
the LV myocardium should be moving equally to the 
center of the LV cavity.
•Regional wall motion abnormalities may be detected
in this view; however, the PSAX is only one cross-
section of the full LV myocardium and does not show 
the right ventricular (RV) myocardium well at all.
•To truly rule out wall motion abnormalities, a formal
echocardiogram is needed to complete a thorough 
examination of all segments of the LV and RV 
myocardium.
Fig. 21.5 Two PSAX images comparing a normal interventricular septum (A) with a “D-shaped,” or flattened, interventricular septum in 
a patient with RV dysfunction (B). LV, Left ventricle; RV, right ventricle. (From Soni NJ, Arntfield R, Kory P. Point of Care Ultrasound. 2nd ed. 
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:141, Fig. 16.12.)
Box 21.3
Left Ventricular (LV) and Right Ventricular 
(RV) Function Assessment in Apical Four-Chamber 
(A4C) View
LV function: The four questions outlined in the PLAX section 
earlier can be used.
RV size: Gross chamber size (particularly RV size relative to 
LV size) can be evaluated with the A4C view.
•In a normal heart the RV should be approximately
one-third the size of the LV and should not be apex 
forming.
•If the RV appears large relative to the LV, ensure that the
images are not foreshortened and then evaluate the RV in 
the subcostal view to confirm.
RV function: Because of the shape of the RV, assessment 
of RV function is challenging with two-dimensional 
echocardiography, even with formal studies. For basic 
perioperative point-of-care ultrasound (POCUS), the main 
assessment is whether function is normal or abnormal—
more advanced interpretation should be deferred. In the 
A4C view the following aspects of RV function should be 
evaluated:
•Evaluation of the movement of the tricuspid annulus
toward the apex, also known as tricuspid annular plane 
systolic excursion (TAPSE) on formal echocardiography. In 
a normally functioning RV the tricuspid annulus will move 
vigorously toward the apex of the heart.
•Evaluation of the change in size of the RV cavity. A normal
RV will have some decrease in cavity size in systole when 
compared with diastole.
•Evaluation of the shape of the intraventricular septum. A
flattened intraventricular septum suggests an abnormality 
of the RV.
III
Chapter 21 Point-of-Care Ultrasound
391
help guide resuscitation and yield more accurate diagno-
ses in shock states.
PULMONARY ULTRASOUND
Ultrasound examination of the lungs can provide valu-
able information in the perioperative setting and pul-
monary ultrasound can be used as a diagnostic tool to 
identify a number of pathologies in the acutely decom-
pensating patient. Because ultrasound waves have poor 
penetration in air-filled structures, lung ultrasound relies 
on artifacts created by air/fluid or air/tissue interfaces. 
The lung examination can be divided into three separate 
components based on the different pathologies being 
evaluated: (1) evaluation for pneumothorax, (2) evalua-
tion of interstitial and alveolar patterns, and (3) evalua-
tion of the pleural space.
Normal Lung Examination
The appearance of a normal lung on ultrasound examina-
tion provides the basis for understanding the appearance of 
pulmonary pathology (Fig. 21.7). The first component of the 
normal lung examination is the presence of pleural sliding. 
The pleura appears as a bright, hyperechoic line. The visceral 
and parietal pleura slide against each other with respiration, 
creating the appearance of movement, sometimes referred 
to as “shimmering” or “ants crawling on a log.” When using 
M-mode, the movement of the pleura against each other 
creates the appearance of a “sandy beach” (Fig. 21.8A). 
The second component of the normal lung examination is 
the presence of A-lines. A-lines are reverberation artifacts 
that appear as horizontal hyperechoic lines at equidistant 
depths from the pleura. The last component of the normal 
lung examination is the presence of another ultrasound 
artifact called B-lines (also known as “comet tails”). B-lines 
originate from the pleural line and transverse to the bottom 
of the ultrasound screen. Although a few B-lines per inter-
costal space is normal, an abundance of B-lines indicates 
pathology.
Evaluation for Pneumothorax
Lung ultrasound is more sensitive than chest radiography 
for the detection of a pneumothorax.6 Additionally, the 
examination is easy to perform and interpret rapidly, 
making it a useful tool to assess an unstable patient.
Patient positioning: The examination is easiest to per-
form in the supine (or near-to-supine) position; however, 
it is possible to perform the examination with patients in 
other positions as well.
Probe positioning and manipulation: Any of the 
commonly used ultrasound probes (linear, curvilinear, 
or phased array) are suitable to conduct the examina-
tion. Initial probe placement should be on the anterior 
chest wall at approximately the second intercostal space 
with the indicator notch of the probe pointing cephalad. 
Because air travels to the least dependent area of the 
chest, most pneumothoraces in supine patients will be 
identified in the anterior region of the chest between the 
second and fourth intercostal spaces. However, the oper-
ator should still perform a comprehensive and systematic 
examination imaging both lungs at multiple points on 
the chest wall and in multiple different rib spaces.
Image appearance and structures visualized: In each area 
or zone imaged the operator should adjust the probe until 
the landmarks of two ribs with shadowing behind them and 
the bright pleural line between them are identified.
Image interpretation: A suggested systematic algo-
rithm for the interpretation of lung ultrasound for 
evaluation of pneumothorax is depicted in Fig. 21.10. 
The operator should assess for the sonographic signs of 
pneumothorax described in Box 21.4
Evaluation of Interstitial and Alveolar Patterns
The presence of more than three B-lines per intercostal space 
is indicative of interstitial pathology. Several processes can 
lead to a diffuse B-line pattern, including pulmonary edema 
(noncardiogenic or cardiogenic), interstitial pneumonia, 
pulmonary fibrosis, contusion, tumor, and pneumonitis. The 
pattern of B-lines (spacing between B-lines, focal vs. dif-
fuse) and the patient’s clinical context will aid in narrowing 
the differential diagnosis. Although any of the commonly 
used ultrasound transducers are acceptable for the examina-
tion, the curvilinear or phased array probe may be needed 
to evaluate the deeper posterior lung fields. The operator 
should use the same approach for patient positioning, probe 
positioning and manipulation, and systematic interrogation 
Fig. 21.6 Inferior vena cava ultrasound image showing the key 
sonographic characteristics of the hepatic vein emptying into the 
IVC and the junction of the IVC with the right atrium. IVC, Inferior 
vena cava; RA, right atrium.
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
392
of multiple zones of the chest wall, as described earlier in 
the pneumothorax examination.
Image interpretation: The presence of more than three 
B-lines in one intercostal space suggests the pathologic 
causes described earlier (Fig. 21.11). Focal patterns may 
be seen in areas of pneumonia, contusion, or tumor.
Evaluation of the Pleural Space
Pleural fluid is usually visible in the most dependent 
areas of the lung (typically, posterior-lateral). Lung 
ultrasound has a higher accuracy than chest radiography 
for detecting pleural fluid and can detect effusions as 
small as 20 mL.7 Low-frequency probes (curvilinear or 
phased array) are preferred when evaluating the pleural 
space because of the depth needed to visualize the key 
structures.
Patient positioning: Patients who are hemodynami-
cally stable and able to position themselves can be in a 
seated upright position, resting their elbows on a surface 
in front of them. If patients are unstable or unable to 
sit upright, the examination can be performed in the 
supine or semi recumbent position, with the ipsilateral 
arm raised above the patient’s head or positioned across 
the chest.
Probe positioning and manipulation: In a seated 
patient the operator should place the footprint of the 
ultrasound probe perpendicular to the skin on the lateral 
chest wall, just below the clavicle, with the indicator 
notch pointed toward the patient’s head. In a supine or 
Fig. 21.7 Ultrasound images of normal lung. The pleural line is visualized as a bright line between the two rib spaces. B-lines are 
laser-like, hyperechoic vertical lines that arise from the pleural line and extend to the bottom of the ultrasound screen. A-lines are 
reverberation artifacts that appear as hyperechoic horizontal lines that are equidistant from the pleura.
Fig. 21.8 (A) M-mode image of normal lung sliding with the normal aerated lung creating the appearance of a “sandy beach.” 
(B) M-mode image of absent lung sliding where the “sandy beach” is replaced with horizontal lines throughout the image, resulting 
in a “bar-code” pattern. (Modified from Soni NJ, Arntfield R, Kory P. Point of Care Ultrasound. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:58, 
Fig. 8.5.)
III
Chapter 21 Point-of-Care Ultrasound
393
semi recumbent patient the operator should place the 
probe in the midaxillary line with the indicator notch 
pointed toward the patient’s head. The operator may need 
to move the probe to a more posterior position (where it 
is wedged between the patient and the bed) to visualize 
smaller pleural effusions. In both positions the opera-
tor should then move the probe systematically both in 
a craniocaudal and then lateral-to-medial direction to 
examine the entire space, identify the boundaries of the 
pleural effusions, and identify adjacent structures.
Image appearance and structures visualized: The dia-
phragm and liver or spleen (depending on which side of 
the patient is being examined) should be identified. In 
images acquired posteriorly the kidney may also come 
into view. Fluid will appear as an anechoic space between 
the visceral and parietal pleura. The presence of a pleural 
fluid collection will enhance the transmission of ultra-
sound waves, resulting in visualization of the vertebral 
bodies in the thoracic cavity above the diaphragm, also 
known as the “spine sign” (Fig. 21.12). Consolidated lung 
will appear hyperechoic and nearly identical to the liver 
in terms of density.
Image interpretation: Pleural fluid will be positively 
identified as an anechoic space between the visceral or 
parietal pleura and/or by identification of the “spine 
sign.” Although quantification of pleural fluid volume 
Box 21.4
Four Sonographic Signs of Pneumothorax
1. Absence of pleural sliding:
•If air is separating the visceral and parietal pleura, normal
sliding is not seen and the bright pleural line will appear 
motionless. On M-mode, the “sandy beach” appearance 
will be replaced by straight lines throughout the entire 
image, often referred to as “bar code” (see Fig. 21.8B).
2. Absence of B-lines:
•Detection of a few B-lines is a characteristic of normal lung
ultrasound. B-lines originate from the visceral pleura and 
travel toward the edge of the ultrasound screen, erasing 
A-lines. Because the visceral pleura is not visualized in the 
presence of a pneumothorax, B-lines will be absent.
•A-lines will be detected in both normal lung ultrasound
and in the setting of a pneumothorax.
3. Absence of lung pulse:
•The pleural motion with each heartbeat is referred to as
“lung pulse” which is most easily recognizable in M-mode
•For a lung pulse to be detected, there has to be direct
contact between the visceral and parietal pleura.
•Thus if air is filling that potential space between the two
pleura (pneumothorax), a lung pulse will not be present.
4. Presence of lung point:
•The lung point is the interface where healthy lung starts
and a pneumothorax ends.
•Lung point is 100% specific for pneumothorax.
•One side of the image will show normal pleura sliding,
while the other side will show the absence of sliding. 
On M-mode, the “sandy beach” and “bar code” patterns 
appear to alternate over time (see Fig. 21.9).
using sonographic measurements has been extensively 
studied, these formulas are not commonly used in clini-
cal practice.8 A qualitative assessment of small, moder-
ate, or large volume is likely adequate for clinical deci-
sion making. Another useful descriptor is whether the 
effusion is simple or complex. Simple effusions appear 
anechoic and free flowing, whereas complex effusions 
can be characterized as homogenously or heterogene-
ously echogenic. Complex effusions may also have locu-
lations, septations, or fibrinous stranding. Simple pleural 
effusions are often transudative, whereas complex effu-
sions are more often exudative (e.g., from empyema, 
hemothorax, or malignancy).
An emerging body of literature has evaluated lung 
ultrasonography in the diagnosis of pneumonia in 
adults.9,10 Lung consolidation may occur from atelec-
tasis or pneumonia. Sonographic air bronchograms 
appear as hyperechoic lines and dots within the area 
of consolidated lung. These findings likely represent 
air-filled bronchi that are made visible by the surround-
ing consolidated lung. When they are immobile, they 
are called static air bronchograms, which can be seen 
in both atelectasis and pneumonia. However, when air 
bronchograms are mobile, they are called dynamic, and 
are highly specific for pneumonia as the cause of con-
solidation.
ABDOMINAL ULTRASOUND
FAST Examination
For patients who have sustained blunt or penetrating 
trauma, intraperitoneal bleeding can lead to hypov-
olemic shock and death. Historically, diagnostic perito-
neal lavage was performed in the emergency department 
to detect hemoperitoneum. The Focused Assessment 
with Sonography in Trauma (FAST) examination was 
developed to quickly identify hemoperitoneum (free 
peritoneal fluid) and hemopericardium (fluid in the 
pericardial sac) in the trauma patient population. The 
FAST examination has four basic views: the right upper 
quadrant, left upper quadrant, pelvic, and subcostal 
cardiac views. The E-FAST (Extended-FAST) examina-
tion additionally surveys the anterior and lateral pleural 
spaces to evaluate for pneumothorax or hemothorax. 
Although the FAST and E-FAST examinations were 
originally used to evaluate and expedite care in unsta-
ble trauma patients, the FAST examination is a useful 
way to assess for free fluid in hypotensive patients at 
risk for intraperitoneal hemorrhage. A low-frequency 
probe is used for the FAST examination, as evaluated 
contents lie relatively deep to the anatomic surface. The 
curvilinear probe is excellent for abdominal examina-
tions; however, the small footprint of the phased array 
can be advantageous as well.
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
394
Fig. 21.9 A lung point is the boundary between aerated lung and air in the pleural space and is the most specific finding for a 
pneumothorax. The left image is two-dimensional ultrasound at the point where the pneumothorax begins. M-mode imaging (right)
with arrowhead pointing to the transition point between normal aerated lung (“sandy beach”) and pneumothorax (“barcode”) pattern. 
(From Lichtenstein DA. Lung ultrasound in the critically ill. Ann Intensive Care. 2014;4:1, under Creative Commons license: https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0.)
Fig. 21.10 Diagnostic algorithm for pneumothorax. The algorithm begins with assessment for lung sliding.
Right Upper Quadrant View
The right upper quadrant view evaluates the hepatorenal 
recess (Morrison pouch) and the space above and below 
the right diaphragm.
Patient positioning: For this examination, patients can 
lie in the supine position. Ideally, the arms are positioned 
slightly abducted from the patient’s side.
Probe position and manipulation: Once the patient is 
positioned, the footprint of the ultrasound probe is placed 
around the right midaxillary line approximately at the 
level of the subxiphoid. The indicator notch on the probe 
should be pointed upward toward the patient’s head. The 
operator may need to slide the probe dorsally along the 
rib space or interrogate adjacent rib spaces to optimize 
image quality. In addition, the probe can be rotated and/
or fanned until all structures desired are displayed on the 
ultrasound screen.
Image appearance and structures visualized: An ideal 
right upper quadrant FAST image should include the 
following structures: (1) liver (coronal view), (2) right 
kidney, and (3) right diaphragm.
Image interpretation: A normal right upper quadrant 
FAST view will show the right diaphragm, liver, and right 
kidney adjacent to each other (Fig. 21.13A). An abnor-
mal, or “positive,” right upper quadrant FAST view will 
reveal a hypoechoic streak between these structures (see 
Fig. 21.13B). Hypoechoic streaks, which can be small or 
large, represent free fluid. It is critical to consider patient 
history and comorbidities when interpreting abdominal 
ultrasound imaging for free fluid. Patients with ascites, 
for instance, will have chronic free fluid.
Left Upper Quadrant View
The left upper quadrant view evaluates the splenorenal 
recess and the space above and below the left diaphragm.
Patient positioning: For this examination, patients can 
lie in the supine position. Ideally, the arms are positioned 
slightly abducted from the patient’s side.
III
Chapter 21 Point-of-Care Ultrasound
395
Fig. 21.11 Two examples of pathologic B-lines (indicated by asterisks) suggestive of interstitial edema. Arrows point to the pleural line. 
(Modified from Lee FC. Lung ultrasound: A primary survey of the acutely dyspneic patient. J Intensive Care, 2016;4[1]:57, under Creative 
Commons license: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0.)
Probe position and manipulation: Once the patient is 
positioned, the footprint of the ultrasound probe is placed 
posteriorly (past the midaxillary line) approximately at the 
level of the subxiphoid. This recess is posterior, and a com-
mon description is for the operator to have the hand holding 
the ultrasound probe touching the patient’s bed or knuckles 
to the gurney. The indicator notch on the probe should be 
pointed upward toward the patient’s head. The operator 
may need to slide dorsally along the rib space or interrogate 
adjacent rib spaces to optimize image quality. In addition, 
the probe can be rotated and/or fanned until all structures 
desired are displayed on the ultrasound screen.
Image appearance and structures visualized: An ideal 
left upper quadrant FAST image should include the fol-
lowing structures: (1) spleen (coronal view), (2) left kidney, 
and (3) left diaphragm.
Image interpretation: A normal left upper quadrant 
FAST view will show the left diaphragm, spleen, and 
left kidney adjacent to each other (Fig. 21.14A). An 
abnormal, or “positive,” left upper quadrant FAST view 
will reveal a hypoechoic streak between these structures, 
demonstrating free fluid (see Fig. 21.14B).
Pelvic View
The pelvic view evaluates for free fluid in the pelvis. In 
males the rectovesicular pouch is evaluated. In females 
the rectouterine (pouch of Douglas) and vesicouterine 
pouches are evaluated.
Positioning: For this examination, patients can lie in 
the supine position.
Probe position and manipulation: Once the patient is 
positioned, the footprint of the ultrasound probe is placed 
Fig. 21.12 Right-sided pleural effusion with anechoic pleural 
fluid (asterisk) and consolidated lung adjacent to the pleural 
fluid. Note that the spine shadow is seen both below and above 
the diaphragm (arrows). When the spine shadow is seen above 
the diaphragm, this is termed “spine sign” and is an indirect 
indicator of the presence of pleural fluid.
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
396
midline just above the pubic bone. The indicator notch on 
the probe should be pointed upward toward the patient’s 
head for the long-axis view and toward the patient’s 
right side for the short-axis view.
Image appearance and structures visualized: The 
bladder will be seen as a hypoechoic structure. In the 
short-axis view assess for hypoechoic streaks around the 
bladder and on the sides of the bladder. In the long-axis 
view assess for hypoechoic bands below and behind the 
bladder.
Image interpretation: A normal pelvic ultrasound will 
reveal a hypoechoic bladder without adjacent hypoechoic 
streaks or pockets (Fig. 21.15A and C). An abnormal pel-
vic ultrasound will reveal hypoechoic pockets either to 
the sides of the bladder or behind the bladder or uterus 
(see Fig. 21.15B and D). Once the bladder is decompressed 
(e.g., with a Foley catheter), the pelvic view can be dif-
ficult to interpret.
Gastric Ultrasound
Pulmonary aspiration causes significant morbidity in the 
perioperative setting and can lead to pneumonia, respira-
tory failure, acute lung injury, and potentially multiorgan 
failure and death. Point-of-care gastric ultrasound is an 
emerging tool that can aid in medical decision making 
when assessing aspiration risk. Although preoperative 
fasting guidelines are the mainstay for mitigation of 
aspiration risk before anesthesia, there are instances 
where adherence to these guidelines is unknown or where 
a patient’s underlying medical conditions cause delayed 
gastric emptying. In these cases gastric ultrasound can 
be used to qualitatively and quantitatively assess gas-
tric contents and enhance decision making with regard 
to delaying elective surgery.11 12 Precautionary meas-
ures to decrease the risk and/or severity of aspiration 
include administration of antacids, decompression of the 
Fig. 21.13 (A) Normal right upper quadrant ultrasound image. (B) Right upper quadrant view with free fluid visualized between the liver 
and the kidney. The potential space between the liver and the kidney, also known as Morrison’s pouch, is the most common place for 
free fluid to accumulate in the right upper quadrant view. (Modified from Soni NJ, Arntfield R, Kory P. Point of Care Ultrasound. 2nd ed. 
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:221, Fig. 24.4.)
Fig. 21.14 (A) Normal left upper quadrant ultrasound image. (B) Left upper quadrant image showing free fluid between the spleen and the 
diaphragm. The subdiaphragmatic (or perisplenic) space is the most common place for free fluid to accumulate in the left upper quadrant view. 
(Modified from Soni NJ, Arntfield R, Kory P. Point of Care Ultrasound. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:221, Fig. 24.6.)
III
Chapter 21 Point-of-Care Ultrasound
397
stomach before induction, rapid-sequence intubation, 
and endotracheal intubation.
Patient positioning: For a complete and interpretable 
gastric ultrasound, images should be acquired first in 
the supine, then right lateral decubitus (RLD) position. 
In patients who are unable to be positioned in the RLD 
position the semi recumbent position is an acceptable 
alternative. The RLD position is considered superior to 
the semi recumbent position because in the RLD posi-
tion, gastric contents are more likely to drain into the 
dependent antrum.
Probe positioning and manipulation: For most adults, 
the curvilinear probe should be used in the abdominal 
imaging setting. In pediatric patients a linear probe can 
also be used to provide greater resolution. The ultrasound 
transducer should be placed perpendicular to the skin in 
the epigastric region just below the subxiphoid margin. 
The probe should be in a sagittal plane with the indica-
tor notch pointing cephalad. The operator should then 
slide the probe from left to right or right to left until 
the antrum is visualized in short axis at the level of the 
abdominal aorta (Fig. 21.16). Rocking the ultrasound 
probe can help minimize obliquity of the antrum and 
optimize the final image.
Image appearance and structures visualized: The 
following structures should be identified and serve as 
anatomical landmarks to ensure an optimal image: liver, 
aorta (longitudinal), pancreas, and the superior mesen-
teric artery. The gastric antrum will be seen in short axis 
and can be differentiated from bowel by the thick, hypo-
echoic muscularis layer surrounding the hyperechoic 
serosa and mucosal layers.
Image interpretation: Assessment of gastric contents can 
be done both qualitatively and quantitatively. Qualitative 
assessment is broken down into three categories: empty, 
fluids present, or solids present. When empty, the antrum 
will either appear collapsed and flat or round to ovoid 
shape with thick walls, often described as a “bull’s eye.” 
Gastric secretions or clear liquids will appear anechoic or 
hypoechoic, and the antrum will distend and become thin 
walled when it contains fluid. Just after eating solid food, 
air ingested prevents visualization of the structures deep 
Fig. 21.15 Normal (A) and abnormal (B) male pelvis with free fluid collecting in the rectovesicular pouch. Normal (C) and abnormal (D) 
female pelvis with free fluid collecting in the rectouterine space (pouch of Douglas). In females the vesicouterine pouch should also be 
evaluated for the presence of free fluid. (Modified from Soni NJ, Arntfield R, Kory P. Point of Care Ultrasound. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 
2020:222, Fig. 24.8.)
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
398
Fig. 21.16 Ultrasound image of an empty gastric antrum with the classic bull’s-eye appearance. Key sonographic landmarks are 
identified in the right image. SMA, Superior mesenteric artery. (Modified from El-Boghdadly K, Wojcikiewicz T, Perlas A. Perioperative 
point-of-care gastric ultrasound. BJA Educ. 2019;19[7]:219–226.)
Fig. 21.17 Different stages of gastric filling by ultrasound imaging. (A) Gastric antrum beginning to dilate with small amount of 
anechoic fluid. (B) Dilated gastric antrum containing some air bubbles giving it a “starry night” appearance. Air bubbles can occur with 
ingestion of air from swallowing or with carbonated beverages. Both (A) and (B) are consistent with recent ingestion of clear fluids. Thick 
fluids (such as milk) will appear more echoic and homogenous within the antrum. (C) “Frosted glass” appearance of gastric antrum in the 
early stages after solid ingestion. Air ingested with chewing and swallowing prevents visualization of deeper structures. (D) Antrum filled 
with hyperechoic, heterogenous material representing ingestion of solid foods with varying consistencies. (Modified from El-Boghdadly 
K, Wojcikiewicz T, Perlas A. Perioperative point-of-care gastric ultrasound. BJA Educ. 2019;19[7]:219–226.)
III
Chapter 21 Point-of-Care Ultrasound
399
to the antrum, creating a “frosted glass” appearance. The 
antrum then distends and appears to be full of contents 
with heterogenous echogenicity (Fig. 21.17). For quan-
titative assessment of gastric contents, the antral cross-
sectional area (CSA) is measured in the RLD position. This 
can be done by measuring the craniocaudal and anterior-
posterior diameters of the antrum from serosa to serosa 
and then calculating the area using the formula for the 
area of an eclipse (CSA = (AP × CC × π)/4). Alternatively, 
some ultrasound machines allow the operator to trace the 
circumference of the antrum at the level of the serosa 
and then automatically calculate the CSA. The volume 
of gastric content can be estimated from the CSA using 
mathematical models that stratify by patient age. Studies 
have found that a volume of <1.5 mL kg−1 (approximately 
100 mL in an average-sized adult) is a normal finding in 
a fasted patient and carries a low risk of aspiration.13 14
Volumes ≥1.5 mL kg−1 may indicate delayed emptying or 
a nonfasted state and are associated with a higher-than-
baseline risk of aspiration.
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
Perioperative POCUS is a rapidly expanding field and 
has become one of the core competencies of training in 
anesthesiology. It is essential for anesthesia providers to 
undergo training in POCUS and to incorporate diagnostic 
perioperative POCUS into their clinical practice. As the 
field continues to grow, it is important to recognize the 
limitations of each type of examination and to clearly 
define the scope of practice. POCUS is meant to be per-
formed and interpreted by a clinician in real time. The 
examinations should be rapid, goal directed, easy to 
perform, and repeated over time as necessary. Clinicians 
must recognize when diagnostic accuracy is compro-
mised by poor imaging, artifacts, or incomplete data and 
when to obtain formal imaging or seek consultation with 
a more experienced provider or specialist. There are many 
other applications for perioperative POCUS beyond the 
scope of this chapter (e.g., airway/tracheal ultrasound, 
ultrasound for deep venous thrombosis, ocular ultra-
sound). As anesthesia providers become more proficient 
in perioperative POCUS, the scope of practice will expand 
and new applications for the use of ultrasound in the 
perioperative setting will emerge.
REFERENCES
1. Frankel HL, Kirkpatrick AW, Elbarbary M, etal. Guidelines for 
the appropriate use of bedside general and cardiac ultrasonog-
raphy in the evaluation of critically ill patients—Part I. Crit Care 
Med. 2015;43(11):2479–2502.
2. Ultrasound guidelines: Emergency, point-of-care and clinical 
ultrasound guidelines in medicine. Ann Emerg Med. 2017;69(5).
3. Bronshteyn YS, Anderson TA, Badakhsh O, etal. American Soci-
ety of Anesthesiologists Ad Hoc Committee on PoCUS. Diagnos-
tic point-of-care ultrasound: Recommendations from an expert 
panel. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth. S1053-0770(21)00342-6,
2021.
4. Millington SJ. Ultrasound assessment of the inferior vena cava 
for fluid responsiveness: Easy, fun, but unlikely to be helpful. 
Can J Anaesth. 2019;66(6):633–638.
5. Bentzer P, Griesdale DE, Boyd J. Will this hemodynami-
cally unstable patient respond to a bolus of intravenous fluids? 
JAMA. 2016;316(12):1298–1309.
6. Alrajhi K, Woo MY, Vaillancourt C. Test characteristics of ultra-
sonography for the detection of pneumothorax: A systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Chest. 2012;141(3):703–708.
7. Brogi E, Gargani L, Bignami E, etal. Thoracic ultrasound for 
pleural effusion in the intensive care unit: A narrative review 
from diagnosis to treatment. Crit Care. 2017;21(1):325.
8. Ibitoye BO, Idowu BM, Ogunrombi AB, Afolabi BI. Ultrasono-
graphic quantification of pleura effusion: Comparison of four 
formulae. Ultrasonograpy. 2018;37(3):254–260.
9. Orso D, Guglielmo N, Copetti R. Lung ultrasound in diagnosing 
pneumonia in the emergency department: A systematic review 
and meta-analysis. Eur J Emerg Med. 2018;25(5):312–321.
10. Llamas-Álvarez AM, Tenza-Lozana EM, Latour-Pérez J. Accu-
racy of lung ultrasonography in the diagnosis of pneumonia in 
adults. Chest. 2017;151(2):374–382.
11. El-Boghdadly K, Wojcikiewicz T, Perlas A. Perioperative point-
of-care gastric ultrasound. BJA Educ. 2019;19(7):219–226.
12. Gola W, Domagała M, Cugowski A. Ultrasound assessment of gastric 
emptying and the risk of aspiration of gastric contents in the perio-
perative period. Anaesthesiol Intensive Ther. 2018;50(4):297–302.
13. Lichtenstein DA. Lung ultrasound in the critically ill. Ann Inten-
sive Care. 2014;4(1).
14. Lee FC. Lung ultrasound-a primary survey of the acutely dysp-
neic patient. J Intensive Care. 2016;4(1):57.
Chapter
The concentrations of hydrogen and bicarbonate ions in 
plasma must be precisely regulated to optimize enzyme 
activity, oxygen transport, and rates of chemical reactions 
within cells. Each day approximately 15,000 mmol of 
carbon dioxide (which can generate carbonic acid as it 
combines with water) and 50 to 100 mEq of nonvolatile acid 
(mostly sulfuric acid) are produced and must be eliminated 
safely. The body is able to maintain this intricate acid–
base balance by utilizing buffers, pulmonary excretion of 
carbon dioxide, and renal elimination of acid. This chapter 
will define concepts important for understanding acids 
and bases, discuss clinical measurements of blood gases 
and their interpretation, and present a diagnostic approach 
to common acid–base disturbances.
DEFINITIONS
Acids and Bases
Bronsted and Lowry defined an acid as a molecule that 
can act as a proton (H+) donor and a base as a molecule 
that can act as a proton acceptor. In physiologic solutions 
a strong acid is a substance that readily and irreversibly 
gives up an H+, and a strong base avidly binds H+. In 
contrast, biologic molecules are either weak acids or bases, 
which reversibly donate H+ or reversibly bind H+
Acidemia and Acidosis
A blood pH less than 7.35 is called acidemia, and a pH 
greater than 7.45 is called alkalemia, regardless of the 
mechanism. The underlying process that lowers the pH is 
called an acidosis, and the process that raises the pH is 
known as an alkalosis. A patient can have a mixed dis-
order with both an acidosis and an alkalosis concurrently 
but can only be either acidemic or alkalemic. The last two 
terms are mutually exclusive.
DEFINITIONS
Acids and Bases
Acidemia and Acidosis
Base Excess
REGULATION OF THE HYDROGEN ION 
CONCENTRATION
Buffer Systems
Ventilatory Response
Renal Response
ANALYSIS OF ARTERIAL BLOOD GASES
Sampling
Temperature Correction
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS OF ACID–BASE 
DISTURBANCES
Adverse Responses to Acidemia and Alkalemia
Respiratory Acidosis
Respiratory Alkalosis
Metabolic Acidosis
Metabolic Alkalosis
Diagnosis
OTHER INFORMATION PROVIDED BY 
ANALYSIS OF ARTERIAL BLOOD GASES 
AND PH
Ventilation
Oxygenation
Cardiac Output Estimates
Lactate Measurements
ACID–BASE BALANCE 
AND BLOOD GAS 
ANALYSIS
Linda L. Liu
22
400
III
Chapter 22 Acid–Base Balance and Blood Gas Analysis
401
which an acid is 50% protonated and 50% deprotonated. 
Hydrochloric acid, a strong acid, has a pKa of −7, whereas 
carbonic acid, a weak acid, has a pKa of 6. The most impor-
tant buffer systems in blood, in order of importance, are 
the (1) bicarbonate buffer system (H2CO3/HCO3 ), (2) hemo-
globin buffer system (HbH/Hb ), (3) other protein buffer 
systems (PrH/Pr ), (4) phosphate buffer system (H2PO4 /
HPO4
2−), and (5) ammonia buffer system (NH3/NH4
+).
Bicarbonate Buffer System
Carbon dioxide, generated through aerobic metabolism, 
slowly combines with water to form carbonic acid, which 
spontaneously and rapidly deprotonates to form bicarbonate 
(Fig. 22.2). In this system the base molecule is bicarbonate 
and its weak conjugate acid is carbonic acid. Less than 1% 
of the dissolved carbon dioxide undergoes this reaction 
because it is so slow. However, the enzyme carbonic anhy-
drase, present in the endothelium, erythrocytes, and kidneys, 
catalyzes this reaction to accelerate the formation of car-
bonic acid and make this the most important buffering sys-
tem in the human body when combined with renal control 
of bicarbonate and pulmonary control of carbon dioxide.
Hemoglobin Buffer System
The hemoglobin protein serves as an effective buff-
ering system because it contains multiple histidine 
residues. Histidine is an effective buffer from pH 5.7 
to 7.7 (pKa 6.8) because of multiple protonatable sites 
on the imidazole side chains. Buffering by hemoglobin 
depends on the bicarbonate system to facilitate the 
movement of carbon dioxide intracellularly. (Fig. 22.3). 
At the lungs, the reverse process occurs. Chloride ions 
move out of the red blood cells as bicarbonate enters for 
conversion back to carbon dioxide. The carbon dioxide is 
released back into plasma and is eliminated by the lungs. 
This process allows a large fraction of extrapulmonary 
carbon dioxide to be transported back to the lungs as 
plasma bicarbonate.
Oxygenated and deoxygenated hemoglobin have dif-
ferent affinities for hydrogen ions and carbon dioxide. 
Deoxyhemoglobin takes up more hydrogen ions, which 
shifts the carbon dioxide/bicarbonate equilibrium to pro-
duce more bicarbonate and facilitates removal of carbon 
dioxide from peripheral tissues for release into the lungs. 
Oxyhemoglobin favors the release of hydrogen ions and 
shifts the equilibrium to more carbon dioxide formation. 
At physiologic pH, a small amount of carbon dioxide is 
Base Excess
Base excess (BE) is usually defined as the amount of strong 
acid (hydrochloric acid for BE greater than zero) or strong 
base (sodium hydroxide for BE less than zero) required to 
return 1 L of whole blood exposed invitro to a Pco2 of 
40 mm Hg to a pH of 7.4.1 Instead of an actual titration, 
the blood gas machine calculates the BE with algorithms 
utilizing plasma pH, blood Pco2, and hemoglobin concen-
tration. The number is supposed to refer to the nonrespira-
tory or metabolic component of an acid–base disturbance. 
A BE less than zero (also called a base deficit) suggests 
the presence of a metabolic acidosis, and a value greater 
than zero suggests the presence of a metabolic alkalosis. 
Invitro, the number has been accurate but in the living 
organism, because ions do cross beyond vascular and cel-
lular boundaries, a primary acute change in Paco2 some-
times can cause the BE to move in the opposite direction, 
despite an unchanged metabolic acid–base status.2 In 
clinical practice the BE is often used as a surrogate meas-
ure for lactic acidosis, which is one measurement to help 
determine adequacy of intravascular volume resuscitation.
REGULATION OF THE HYDROGEN ION 
CONCENTRATION
At 37°C, the normal hydrogen ion concentration in arterial 
blood and extracellular fluid is 35 to 45 nmol/L, which is 
equivalent to an arterial pH of 7.45 to 7.35, respectively. 
The normal plasma bicarbonate ion concentration is 24 ± 
2 mEq/L. Physiologic changes to acid–base disturbances 
are corrected by three systems: buffers, ventilation, and 
renal response. The buffer systems provide an immediate 
chemical response, and the ventilatory response occurs in 
minutes whenever possible. The renal response can take 
days but can provide nearly complete restoration of the pH.
Buffer Systems
A buffer is defined as a substance within a solution that can 
prevent extreme changes in pH. A buffer system is com-
posed of a base molecule and its weak conjugate acid. The 
base molecules of the buffer system bind excess hydrogen 
ions, and the weak acid protonates excess base molecules. 
The dissociation ionization constant (pKa) indicates the 
strength of an acid and is derived from the classic Hender-
son-Hasselbalch equation (Fig. 22.1). The pKa is the pH at 
pH = pKa + Iog10
[Base]
[Conjugate acid]
Fig. 22.1 Henderson-Hasselbalch equation. [Base], Concentration 
of base; [Conjugate acid], concentration of conjugate acid.
CO2 + H2O
Carbonic
anhydrase
H2CO3
H+ + HCO3
Fig. 22.2 Hydration of carbon dioxide results in carbonic acid, 
which dissociates into bicarbonate and hydrogen ions.
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
402
The stimulus from central and peripheral chemorecep-
tors to either increase or decrease alveolar ventilation 
diminishes as the pH approaches 7.4 such that complete 
correction or overcorrection is not possible. The pul-
monary response to metabolic alkalosis is usually less 
than the response to metabolic acidosis. The reason is 
because progressive hypoventilation results in hypox-
emia when breathing room air. Hypoxemia activates 
oxygen-sensitive chemoreceptors and limits the compen-
satory decrease in minute ventilation. Because of this, 
Paco2 usually does not rise above 55 mm Hg in response 
to metabolic alkalosis for patients not receiving oxygen 
supplementation.
Renal Response
Renal effects are slower in onset and may not be maximal 
for up to 5 days. The response occurs via three mecha-
nisms: (1) reabsorption of the filtered HCO3 , (2) excretion 
of titratable acids, and (3) ammonia (Fig. 22.4).3 Carbon 
dioxide combines with water in the renal tubular cell. 
With the help of carbonic anhydrase, the bicarbonate 
produced enters the bloodstream while the hydrogen ion 
is exchanged with sodium and is released into the renal 
tubule. There, H+ combines with filtered bicarbonate and 
dissociates into carbon dioxide and water with help from 
carbonic anhydrase located in the luminal brush bor-
der, and the carbon dioxide diffuses back into the renal 
tubular cell. The proximal tubule reabsorbs 80% to 90% 
of the bicarbonate this way, and the distal tubule takes 
care of the remaining 10% to 20%. Once the bicarbonate 
is reclaimed, further hydrogen ions can combine with 
HPO4
2− to form H2PO4 , which is eliminated in the urine. 
The last important urinary buffer is ammonia. Ammonia 
is formed from deamination of glutamine, an amino acid. 
The ammonia passively crosses the cell membrane to 
enter the tubular fluid. In the tubular fluid it combines 
with hydrogen ion to form NH4
+, which is trapped within 
the tubule and excreted in the urine. All of these steps 
allow for the generation and return of bicarbonate into 
the bloodstream. The large amount of bicarbonate filtered 
by the kidneys allows for rapid excretion, if necessary, for 
compensation during alkalosis. The kidneys are highly 
effective in protecting the body against alkalosis except 
in association with sodium deficiency or mineralocorti-
coid excess.
ANALYSIS OF ARTERIAL BLOOD GASES
The ability to measure arterial blood gas (ABG) and 
venous blood gas has revolutionized patient care during 
anesthesia and in the intensive care unit (ICU). Although 
pulse oximetry and capnography can be monitored con-
tinuously, analysis of ABGs has increased our diagnostic 
ability and the accuracy of our measurements.
also carried as carbaminohemoglobin. Deoxyhemoglobin 
has a greater affinity (3.5 times) for carbon dioxide, so 
venous blood carries more carbon dioxide than arterial 
blood (Haldane effect). These two mechanisms combine 
to account for the difference in carbon dioxide con-
tent of arterial versus venous plasma (25.6 mmol/L vs. 
27.7 mmol/L, respectively).
Ventilatory Response
Central chemoreceptors lie on the anterolateral surface of 
the medulla and respond to changes in cerebrospinal fluid 
(CSF) pH. Carbon dioxide diffuses across the blood–brain 
barrier to elevate CSF hydrogen ion concentration, which 
activates the chemoreceptors and increases alveolar ven-
tilation. The relationship between Paco2 and minute ven-
tilation is almost linear except at very high arterial Paco2, 
when carbon dioxide narcosis develops, and at very low 
arterial Paco2, when the apneic threshold is reached. There 
is a very wide variation in individual Paco2/ventilation 
response curves, but minute ventilation generally increases 
1 to 4 L/min for every 1 mm Hg increase in Paco2. Dur-
ing general anesthesia, spontaneous ventilation will cease 
when the Paco2 decreases to less than the apneic threshold, 
whereas in the awake patient, cortical influences prevent 
apnea, so the apneic threshold is not ordinarily observed.
Peripheral chemoreceptors are located at the bifurcation 
of the common carotid arteries and surrounding the aortic 
arch. The carotid bodies are the principal peripheral chem-
oreceptors and are sensitive to changes in Pao2, Paco2, pH, 
and arterial perfusion pressure. They communicate with 
the central respiratory centers via the glossopharyngeal 
nerves. Unlike the central chemoreceptors, which are more 
sensitive to hydrogen ions, the carotid bodies are most 
sensitive to Pao2. Bilateral carotid endarterectomies abolish 
the peripheral chemoreceptor response, and these patients 
have almost no hypoxic ventilatory drive.
Hb–
H++HCO3
HbH
CI
HCO3
H2CO3
CO2
Carbonic
anhydrase
CO2 + H2O

Fig. 22.3 Hemoglobin buffering system: Carbon dioxide freely 
diffuses into erythrocytes, where it combines with water to 
form carbonic acid, which rapidly deprotonates. The protons 
generated are bound up by hemoglobin. The bicarbonate anions 
are exchanged back into plasma with chloride.
III
Chapter 22 Acid–Base Balance and Blood Gas Analysis
403
dioxide in the blood with the corresponding partial pres-
sures in the air bubble could influence the measured 
results. A delay in analysis can lead to oxygen consump-
tion and carbon dioxide generation by the metabolically 
active white blood cells. Usually this error is small and 
can be reduced by placing the sample on ice. In some leu-
kemia patients with a markedly increased white blood cell 
count this error can be large and lead to a falsely low Po2
even though the patient's oxygenation is acceptable. This 
phenomenon is often referred to as leukocyte larceny 5
Temperature Correction
Decreases in temperature decrease the partial pressure of 
a gas in solution, even though the total gas content does 
not change. Both Pco2 and Po2 decrease during hypother-
mia, but serum bicarbonate is unchanged. This leads to 
an increase in pH if the blood could be measured at the 
patient's temperature. A blood gas with a pH of 7.4 and Pco2
of 43 mm Hg at 37°C will have a pH of 7.5 and a Pco2 of 
31 mm Hg at 30°C.6 Unfortunately, all blood gas samples are 
Sampling
Arterial blood is most often obtained percutaneously from 
the radial, brachial, or femoral artery. In certain clinically 
stable situations venous pH, bicarbonate, and BE have 
sufficient agreement to be clinically interchangeable for 
arterial values and save an arterial puncture.4 Venous pH is 
usually only 0.03 to 0.04 less than arterial values. Venous 
blood cannot be used for estimation of oxygenation for 
two reasons: venous Po2 (Pvo2) is significantly less than 
Pao2 and depending on the site of the venous blood draw, 
differences in tissue metabolic activity may alter Pvo2. 
Agreement between arterial and venous Pco2 is too unpre-
dictable to be clinically useful as a single test, but trends 
in Pco2 may be helpful. Periodic correlations of arterial 
and venous measurements should be performed, especially 
when venous measurements are used for serial monitoring 
in critically ill patients.
A heparinized, bubble-free, fresh blood sample is 
required for blood gas analysis. Air bubbles should be 
removed because equilibration of oxygen and carbon 
H2CO3
H2CO3
H+ + HCO3
Filtered
H2PO4
NH3
NH3
Amino
acid
CO2 + H2O
CO2 + H2O
HPO42–
H+
Na+
H+ + HCO3
HCO3
HCO3
HCO3
HCO3
Na+
H+
NH4+
H+
Carbonic
anhydrase
Renal tubule
Renal tubular cell
Bloodstream
+
Formation of titratable 
acid
Reabsorption of HCO3
+
Formation of ammonia
+
H+ + HCO3
Na+
Fig. 22.4 Three mechanisms of renal compensation during acidosis to sequester hydrogen ions and reabsorb 
bicarbonate: (1) reabsorption of the filtered HCO3
−, (2) excretion of titratable acids, and (3) production of 
ammonia.
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
404
Adverse Responses to Acidemia and Alkalemia
Adverse responses can be associated with severe aci-
demia or alkalemia. Consequences of severe acidosis can 
occur regardless of whether the acidosis is of respiratory, 
metabolic, or mixed origin. Acidemia usually leads to 
decreased myocardial contractility and release of cat-
echolamines. With mild acidosis, the release of catechola-
mines mitigates the myocardial depression. Patients with 
acute respiratory distress syndrome are typically man-
aged with a lung-protective ventilation strategy with per-
missive hypercapnia and mild respiratory acidosis (also 
see Chapter 41). No significant impact on systemic vas-
cular resistance, pulmonary vascular resistance, cardiac 
output, or systemic oxygen delivery has been seen.9 With 
severe acidemia (pH <7.2), myocardial responsiveness to 
catecholamines decreases, so myocardial depression and 
hypotension predominate (Fig. 22.5). Respiratory acido-
sis may produce more rapid and profound myocardial 
dysfunction than metabolic acidosis because of the rapid 
measured at 37°C, which raises the issue of how to best man-
age the ABG measurement in hypothermic patients. This has 
led to two management strategies: alpha-stat and pH-stat.
Alpha-Stat
Alpha-stat theory advocates measuring all blood gases at 
37°C. Alpha refers to the protonation state of the imida-
zole side chain of histidine. The pKa of histidine changes 
with temperature so that its protonation state is relatively 
constant regardless of temperature. The term alpha-stat
developed because as the patient's pH was allowed to 
drift with temperature, the protonation state of the his-
tidine residues remained static. During cardiopulmonary 
bypass, an anesthesia provider using alpha-stat would 
manage the patient based on an ABG measured at 37°C 
and strive to keep that pH at 7.4, but the patient's true pH 
would be higher. No extra adjustments would be made 
for the patient's hypothermia.
pH-Stat
pH-stat is different from alpha-stat in that it requires 
keeping a patient's pH static at 7.4 based on the core tem-
perature. During cardiopulmonary bypass, an anesthesia 
provider using pH-stat would manage the patient based on 
an ABG that is corrected for the patient's temperature. With 
hypothermia, this usually means adding carbon dioxide so 
that the patient's temperature-correct (hypothermic) blood 
gas has a pH of 7.4. In the ICU during targeted temperature 
management pH-stat management would mean lowering 
the patient's minute ventilation. The lower pH and higher 
Pco2 maintained during pH-stat may improve cerebrovas-
cular perfusion during hypothermia; however, there is still 
debate about which method provides better outcomes.7
Oxygenation
Decreases in temperature decrease the partial pressure 
of oxygen in solution. Because hypothermia causes the 
oxygen–hemoglobin dissociation curve to shift to the 
left, there is a higher affinity of hemoglobin to oxygen, 
making it easier for oxygen to attach to hemoglobin, but 
more difficult for it to diffuse to the tissues.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS OF ACID–BASE 
DISTURBANCES
Acid–base disturbances are categorized as respiratory or 
metabolic acidosis (pH less than 7.35) or alkalosis (pH more 
than 7.45). These disorders are further stratified into acute 
versus chronic based on their duration, which is gauged 
clinically by the patient's compensatory responses.8 Patients 
may also have a mixed acid–base disorder. The approach to 
managing acid–base disorders should first involve search-
ing for the causes rather than an immediate attempt to 
normalize the pH. Sometimes the treatment may be more 
detrimental than the original acid–base problem.
120
pHa 7.35
pHa 7.08
160
20
pHa 7.35
pHa 7.08
Heart rate change
(beats per minute)
Blood pressure change (mm Hg)
Norepinephrine (µg/kg)
Fig. 22.5 Diminished hemodynamic response to intravenously 
administered norepinephrine in a canine model of lactic 
acidosis. pHa, arterial pH. (From Ford GD, Cline WH, Fleming 
WW. Influence of lactic acidosis on cardiovascular response to 
sympathomimetic amines. Am J Physiol. 1968;215(5):1123–
1129, used with permission.)
III
Chapter 22 Acid–Base Balance and Blood Gas Analysis
405
indicates the need for increased ventilatory support. In 
patients with chronic respiratory acidosis the key approach 
is to avoid prolonged hyperventilation. The alkalosis from 
excessive ventilation and relative hypocapnia can result 
in central nervous system (CNS) irritability and cardiac 
ischemia. Also, the kidneys will now start to excrete bicar-
bonate. The increased serum bicarbonate has allowed the 
patient to maintain a normal pH with a relatively lower 
alveolar minute ventilation. After urinary excretion of 
bicarbonate, the patient's minute ventilation requirement 
will increase, which may affect weaning the patient from 
the ventilator.
Respiratory Alkalosis
Respiratory alkalosis occurs when alveolar minute venti-
lation is increased relative to carbon dioxide production. 
The increased alveolar minute ventilation can be related 
to a variety of causes (Box 22.2). Paco2 is diminished 
relative to bicarbonate levels, resulting in a pH more 
than 7.45. The decreased Paco2 and increased pH trigger 
the peripheral and central chemoreceptors to decrease the 
stimulus to breathe. During prolonged respiratory alkalo-
sis, active transport of bicarbonate ions out of CSF causes 
the central chemoreceptors to reset to a lower Paco2 level.
Compensatory Responses and Treatment
Respiratory alkalosis is compensated for by decreased 
reabsorption of bicarbonate ions from the renal tubules 
and increased urinary excretion of bicarbonate. Treat-
ment of respiratory alkalosis is directed at correcting 
the underlying disorder. Mild alkalemia usually does not 
require treatment. In rare cases severe acute respiratory 
alkalosis (pH >7.6) may require sedation. During general 
anesthesia, acute respiratory alkalosis is easily remedied 
by decreasing total minute ventilation.
Metabolic Acidosis
Metabolic acidosis is present when accumulation of any 
acid in the body other than carbon dioxide results in a 
entry of carbon dioxide into the cardiac cell. In the brain 
this rapid increase in carbon dioxide can lead to confu-
sion, loss of consciousness, and seizures.
Severe alkalemia (pH >7.6) can lead to decreased cerebral 
and coronary blood flow as a result of arteriolar vasocon-
striction. The consequences of severe alkalosis are also more 
prominent with respiratory than with metabolic causes 
because of the rapid movement of carbon dioxide across 
cell membranes.10 Acute hyperventilation can produce con-
fusion, myoclonus, depressed consciousness, and seizures.
Respiratory Acidosis
Respiratory acidosis occurs when alveolar minute venti-
lation is inadequate relative to carbon dioxide production 
(Box 22.1). It can occur with a normal or increased min-
ute ventilation if carbon dioxide production is increased 
or if there is decreased carbon dioxide elimination from 
lung disease. Decreased carbon dioxide elimination from 
a decreased minute ventilation can occur with volatile or 
intravenous anesthetics (see Chapter 8), neuromuscular 
blocking drugs (see Chapter 11), or neuromuscular dis-
ease. During anesthesia, increased rebreathing or absorp-
tion of carbon dioxide must also be considered.
Compensatory Responses and Treatment
Over the course of hours to days, the kidneys compensate 
for the respiratory acidosis by increasing hydrogen ion 
secretion and bicarbonate reabsorption. After a few days, 
the Pco2 will remain increased but the pH will be near 
normal, which is the hallmark of a chronic respiratory 
acidosis. Respiratory acidosis with a pH of less than 7.2 
Box 22.1
Causes of Respiratory Acidosis
Increased CO2 production
Malignant hyperthermia
Hyperthyroidism
Sepsis
Overfeeding
Decreased CO2 elimination
Intrinsic pulmonary disease (pneumonia, ARDS, fibrosis, 
edema)
Upper airway obstruction (laryngospasm, foreign body, OSA)
Lower airway obstruction (asthma, COPD)
Chest wall restriction (obesity, scoliosis, burns)
CNS depression (anesthetics, opioids, CNS lesions)
Decreased skeletal muscle strength (residual effects of 
neuromuscular blocking drugs, myopathy, neuropathy)
Increased CO2 rebreathing or absorption
Exhausted soda lime
Incompetent one-way valve in breathing circuit
Laparoscopic surgery 
ARDS, Acute respiratory distress syndrome; CNS, central nervous 
system; CO2, carbon dioxide; COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease; OSA, obstructive sleep apnea.
Box 22.2
Causes of Respiratory Alkalosis
Increased minute ventilation
Hypoxia (high altitude, low Fio2, severe anemia)
Iatrogenic (mechanical ventilation)
Anxiety and pain
CNS disease (tumor, infection, trauma)
Fever, sepsis
Drugs (salicylates, progesterone, doxapram)
Liver disease
Pregnancy
Restrictive lung disease
Pulmonary embolism
CNS, Central nervous system; Fio2, fractional concentration of inspired 
oxygen.
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
406
lactate among body tissues. The liver metabolizes approxi-
mately 60% of lactate produced, with the kidneys metabo-
lizing 30%. A small amount of lactate is converted back to 
glucose via gluconeogenesis. Causes of an elevated lactate 
can be divided into those related to tissue hypoxia or sys-
temic hypoperfusion, or etiologies not related to hypoperfu-
sion.12 (Box 22.4).
Nonanion Gap
Metabolic acidosis with a normal anion gap occurs when 
chloride replaces the lost bicarbonate, such as with a 
bicarbonate-wasting process in the kidneys (renal tubular 
acidosis) or gastrointestinal tract (diarrhea). Aggressive 
fluid resuscitation with normal saline (>30 mL/kg/h) will 
induce a nonanion gap metabolic acidosis secondary to 
excessive chloride administration, which impairs bicar-
bonate reabsorption in the kidneys.13
Strong Ion Difference
A second way to categorize metabolic acidoses is the 
strong ion difference (SID) approach, introduced by Peter 
Stewart in the 1980s.14 His major tenet is that although 
serum bicarbonate and BE can be used to determine the 
extent of a clinical acid–base disorder, they do not help 
determine the mechanism of the abnormality. Instead, he 
proposed that the independent variables responsible for 
changes in acid–base balance are the SID (the difference 
between the completely dissociated cations and anions 
in plasma) (Fig. 22.7), the plasma concentration of non-
volatile weak acids (ATOT), and the arterial carbon dioxide 
tension (Paco2). The strong ion approach distinguishes 
six primary acid–base disturbances (acidosis caused by 
decreased SID, alkalosis caused by increased SID, acidosis 
caused by increased ATOT, alkalosis caused by decreased 
ATOT, respiratory acidosis, or respiratory alkalosis) instead 
pH lower than 7.35 (Box 22.3). A compensatory increase 
in ventilatory elimination of carbon dioxide starts within 
minutes after the development of metabolic acidosis to 
provide a near-normal pH. Some patients, however, may 
not be able to sustain the increased minute ventilation 
and require mechanical ventilatory support.
Anion Gap
The best way to approach the differential diagnosis for 
a metabolic acidosis is to divide the causes into those 
that cause or do not cause an anion gap. The anion 
gap, defined as the difference between measured cations 
(sodium) and measured anions (chloride and bicarbo-
nate), represents the concentration of anions in serum 
that are unaccounted for in this equation (Fig. 22.6). A 
normal anion gap value is 8 to 12 mEq/L and is mostly 
composed of anionic serum albumin.11 A patient with a 
low serum albumin concentration will likely have a nar-
rower anion gap value (each 1.0 g/dL decrease or increase 
in serum albumin less or more than 4.4 g/dL decreases or 
increases the actual concentration of unmeasured anions 
by approximately 2.5 mEq/L). An increase in the anion 
gap occurs when the anion replacing bicarbonate is not 
one that is routinely measured.
The most common unmeasured anions are lactic acid 
and keto acids. Lactic acid elevation may be caused by 
increased production, decreased clearance, or a combination 
of both. Skeletal muscles produce the greatest amount of 
Anion gap = [Na+] – ([Cl ] + [HCO3 ])
Fig. 22.6 Calculation of the anion gap: The difference between 
the cations and the anions equals the concentration of 
unmeasured anions in serum.
Box 22.3
Causes of Metabolic Acidosis
Anion Gap Acidosis
Methanol, ethylene glycol
Uremia
Lactic acidosis (e.g., from CHF, sepsis, cyanide toxicity)
Ethanol
Paraldehyde
Aspirin, INH
Ketones (e.g., starvation, diabetic ketoacidosis)
Nongap Acidosis
Excessive chloride administration (e.g., 0.9% saline infusion)
GI losses—diarrhea, ileostomy, neobladder, pancreatic fistula
Renal losses—RTA
Drugs—acetazolamide
CHF, Congestive heart failure; GI, gastrointestinal; INH, isoniazid; RTA,
renal tubular acidosis.
Box 22.4
Causes of Elevated Lactate12 21
Type A—Perfusion Related
Distributive: sepsis, anaphylaxis
Cardiogenic/cardiac arrest
Hypovolemia: hemorrhagic
Obstructive: pulmonary embolism, cardiac tamponade
Tissue ischemia: mesenteric ischemia, burns, trauma, 
compartment syndrome, necrotizing soft tissue infections
Muscle activity: tonic-clonic seizures, increased work of 
breathing, disorders with acute muscle rigidity (e.g., 
serotonin syndrome, neuroleptic malignant syndrome, 
malignant hyperthermia)
Type B—Nonperfusion Related
Toxins: cyanide, carbon monoxide, cocaine, alcohol
Medications: metformin, linezolid, HIV reverse transcriptase 
inhibitors, epinephrine, inhaled β2-agonists, propofol 
infusion syndrome
Malignancy
Liver failure
III
Chapter 22 Acid–Base Balance and Blood Gas Analysis
407
unless eliminated by ventilation, can worsen any intracel-
lular and extracellular acidosis. A common approach is to 
administer a small dose of sodium bicarbonate and then 
repeat the pH measurement and monitor hemodynamics to 
determine the impact of treatment.
Metabolic Alkalosis
Metabolic alkalosis is present when the pH is higher than 
7.45 because of the gain of bicarbonate ions or loss of 
hydrogen ions. The loss of hydrogen ions is usually from 
the gastrointestinal tract or the kidney. The stimulus for 
bicarbonate reabsorption is usually from hypovolemia, 
hypokalemia, or hyperaldosteronism (Box 22.5). In hypo-
volemia associated with chloride loss (e.g., diuretics) 
bicarbonate is reabsorbed with sodium in the renal 
tubules. With the adoption of low tidal volumes and per-
missive hypercapnia for the ventilatory management of 
patients with acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), 
a compensatory metabolic alkalosis is often a common 
finding for the critically ill patient (also see Chapter 41).
Compensatory Responses and Treatment
Compensatory responses for metabolic alkalosis include 
increased reabsorption or decreased secretion of hydrogen 
ions by renal tubule cells and alveolar hypoventilation. 
The efficiency of the renal compensatory mechanism is 
dependent on the presence of cations (sodium, potassium) 
and chloride. Lack of these ions impairs the ability of 
the kidneys to excrete excess bicarbonate and results in 
incomplete renal compensation. In contrast to metabolic 
acidosis the respiratory compensation for pure metabolic 
of the four primary acid–base disturbances (respiratory 
acidosis or alkalosis, or metabolic acidosis or alkalosis), 
differentiated by the traditional Henderson-Hasselbalch 
equation. Under normal conditions, the SID is approxi-
mately 40 mEq/L. Processes that increase the SID increase 
blood pH, whereas processes that reduce it decrease pH. 
For instance, massive volume resuscitation with normal 
saline, which has a SID of 0, leads to an acidosis.
The major practical difference between the two theo-
ries (Stewart vs. Henderson-Hasselbalch) is the inclusion 
of the serum albumin concentration in the Stewart 
approach, which provides some increase in accuracy in 
certain clinical settings. If changes in serum albumin 
concentration are accounted for in measurement of the 
anion gap, the more complex Stewart approach does not 
appear to offer a clinically significant advantage over the 
traditional approach to acid–base disturbances.15
Compensatory Responses and Treatment
The compensatory responses for a metabolic acidosis 
include increased alveolar ventilation from carotid body 
stimulation and renal tubule secretion of hydrogen ions 
into urine. Chronic metabolic acidosis, as seen with 
chronic renal failure, is commonly associated with loss 
of bone mass because buffers present in bone are used to 
neutralize the nonvolatile acids.
Management of an anion gap metabolic acidosis is 
guided by diagnosis and treatment of the underlying 
cause in order to remove the nonvolatile acids from 
the circulation. Lactic acidosis related to hypoperfusion 
requires volume resuscitation, vasopressors, or inotropes, 
depending on the etiology of the shock, whereas other 
etiologies of elevated lactate require stopping offending 
drugs, removing the toxins, treating seizures, or improv-
ing the organ dysfunction. Diabetic ketoacidosis requires 
intravenous fluid and insulin therapy. Minute ventilation 
should be increased in a patient who is mechanically 
ventilated to compensate until more definitive treatment 
takes effect.
Bicarbonate therapy is more controversial and should be 
based on whether an anion gap is present or not. Adminis-
tration of sodium bicarbonate is often given for a nongap 
metabolic acidosis because the problem is bicarbonate loss. 
Bicarbonate may be considered as a temporizing measure 
in the setting of an extreme anion gap acidosis, particularly 
when a patient is hemodynamically unstable. Sodium bicar-
bonate administration generates carbon dioxide, which, 
SID   = [strong cations] – [strong anions]
         = [Na+] + [K+] + [Ca2+] + [Mg2+] – ([Cl ]  + [SO42–] + [organic acids ])
            [Na+] + [K+] – [Cl ]
~~
Fig. 22.7 Calculation of the strong ion difference (SID): The difference between the completely dissociated 
cations and anions in plasma.
Box 22.5
Causes of Metabolic Alkalosis
Chloride Responsive
Renal loss—diuretic therapy
GI loss—vomiting, NG suction
Alkali administration—citrate in blood products, acetate in 
TPN, bicarbonate
Chloride Resistant
Hyperaldosteronism
Refeeding syndrome
Profound hypokalemia
GI, Gastrointestinal; NG, nasogastric; TPN, total parenteral nutrition.
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
408
then step 4 assesses whether the abnormality is chronic 
or acute (Box 22.6). If a metabolic alkalosis is present, 
then the next step is to skip to step 7 and determine 
whether appropriate respiratory compensation is present 
(Box 22.7). If the measured Pco2 is greater than expected, 
a concurrent respiratory acidosis is present. If the 
measured Pco2 is less than expected, then a concurrent 
respiratory alkalosis is present. If a metabolic acidosis 
is present, then an anion gap should be calculated (step 
5). If there is a gap, then a Δgap should be determined. 
The Δgap is the excess anion gap (anion gap minus 12) 
added back to the serum bicarbonate level. If the num-
ber is less than 22 mEq/L, then a concurrent nongap 
metabolic acidosis is present. If the number is more 
alkalosis is never more than 75% complete. As a result, 
the pH remains increased in patients with primary meta-
bolic alkalosis. Treatment of metabolic alkalosis should 
be aimed at reducing the acid loss (e.g., by stopping 
gastric drainage) or fluid repletion with saline and potas-
sium chloride, which allows the kidneys to excrete excess 
bicarbonate ions. Occasionally, a trial of acetazolamide 
may be useful in causing a bicarbonaturia. Life-threaten-
ing metabolic alkalosis is rarely encountered.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis of an acid–base disorder should occur 
in a structured fashion. Fig. 22.8 shows a stepwise 
algorithm for blood gas interpretation. Step 1, which 
determines oxygenation, will be discussed later in this 
chapter. Step 2 involves determining whether the patient 
is acidemic (pH <7.35) or alkalemic (pH >7.45). Step 3 
looks at whether the cause is from a primary metabolic 
or respiratory process. Metabolic processes involve a 
change in bicarbonate concentration from 24 mEq/L, and 
respiratory processes involve a change in Pco2 from 40 
mm Hg. If the primary process is respiratory in origin, 
AG >12
AG <12
pH >7.45
Acidemic
Alkalemic
Acute or chronic
Nongap
Gap
pH <7.35
Determine
oxygenation
Determine
pH
Respiratory
or metabolic
[HCO3 ] <
24 mEq/L
Metabolic
acidosis
Respiratory
acidosis
Pco2 >
40 mm Hg
Anion gap
gap
Adequate
respiratory
compensation
Respiratory
alkalosis
Metabolic
alkalosis
Pco2 <
40 mm Hg
[HCO3 ] >
24 mEq/L
Respiratory
or metabolic
3
5
6
7
2
1
4
Fig. 22.8 Seven steps for acid–base diagnosis. Δgap, anion gap −12 + [HCO3 ]. If Δgap is less than 22 mEq/L, 
then concurrent nongap metabolic acidosis exists. If Δgap is greater than 26 mEq/L, then concurrent 
metabolic alkalosis exists. AG, Anion gap.
Box 22.6
Determining Whether Respiratory Process Is 
Acute or Chronic
Acute Process
pH Δ0.08 for every 10 mm Hg Δ in Pco2 from 40 mm Hg
Chronic Process
pH Δ 0.03 for every 10 mm Hg Δ in Pco2 from 40 mm Hg
III
Chapter 22 Acid–Base Balance and Blood Gas Analysis
409
Box 22.7
Determining Appropriate Respiratory 
Compensation in Acid–Base Disorders
Metabolic Alkalosis
Pco2 = (0.7 × HCO3) + 21
If measured Pco2 > calculated Pco2, then concurrent 
respiratory acidosis is present.
If measured Pco2 < calculated Pco2, then concurrent 
respiratory alkalosis is present.
Metabolic Acidosis
Winter formula:
Pco2 = (1.5 × HCO3) + 8
If measured Pco2 > calculated Pco2, then concurrent 
respiratory acidosis is present.
If measured Pco2 < calculated Pco2, then concurrent 
respiratory alkalosis is present.




Step 1





Step 2
Step 3

Step 4
Step 5




Step 6


Step 7






Fig. 22.9 Example for calculating acid–base abnormalities. ABG, Arterial blood gas.
Pco2 = (1.5 × HCO3
−) + 8, then a concurrent respiratory 
acidosis is present. If the measured Pco2 is less than cal-
culated, then a concurrent respiratory alkalosis is present. 
See sample calculations in Fig. 22.9.
OTHER INFORMATION PROVIDED 
BY ANALYSIS OF ARTERIAL BLOOD GASES 
AND pH
Aside from acid–base problems, additional measurements 
and information available from a blood gas analysis 
include the patient's ability to ventilate and oxygenate, 
cardiac output estimates, and lactate measurement (also 
see Chapter 5).
Ventilation
Paco2 reflects the adequacy of ventilation for removing 
carbon dioxide from blood. Increased dead space venti-
lation markedly decreases the efficiency of ventilation. 
The Vd/Vt ratio is the fraction of each tidal volume 
than 26 mEq/L, then a concurrent metabolic alkalosis 
is present. The last step, step 7, determines whether an 
appropriate respiratory compensation is present for the 
metabolic acidosis (see Box 22.7). If the measured Pco2 is 
greater than expected, as calculated by Winter's formula: 
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
410
the oxygen concentration. The alveolar gas equation esti-
mates this decrease in alveolar oxygen concentration by 
subtracting an amount equal to the carbon dioxide divided 
by the respiratory quotient.16
Alveolar-Arterial Gradient
Calculation of the alveolar-arterial (A-a) gradient pro-
vides an estimate of venous admixture as the cause of 
hypoxemia (see Fig. 22.10). Venous admixture refers to 
deoxygenated venous blood mixing with oxygenated 
arterial blood through shunting. The A-a gradient for-
mula calculates the difference in oxygen partial pres-
sure between alveolar (Pao2) and arterial (Pao2) blood. 
Normally, the A-a gradient is less than 15 mm Hg 
while breathing room air as a result of shunting via 
the Thebesian and bronchial veins. Age increases the 
A-a gradient because of progressive increase in clos-
ing capacity relative to functional residual capacity 
(FRC). Increased fractional concentration of inspired 
oxygen (Fio2) can lead to a larger gradient (up to 
60 mm Hg while breathing Fio2 1.0). Vasodilating 
drugs (nitroglycerin, nitroprusside, inhaled anesthet-
ics), which inhibit hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction 
and increase ventilation/perfusion (V/Q mismatch), can 
also increase the A-a gradient.
Larger A-a gradients suggest the presence of patho-
logic shunting, such as right-to-left intrapulmonary 
shunts (atelectasis, pneumonia, endobronchial intuba-
tion) or intracardiac shunts (congenital heart disease). 
The A-a gradient provides an assessment of the patient's 
that is involved in dead space ventilation. This value 
is usually around 0.25 to 0.3 because of anatomic dead 
space. When minute ventilation is held constant during 
anesthesia, the gradient between Paco2 and end-tidal CO2
(ETCO2) will increase if dead space is increased (e.g., pul-
monary embolus or reduced cardiac output).
Oxygenation
Oxygenation is assessed by measurement of Pao2. Arte-
rial hypoxemia may be caused by (1) a low Po2 in the 
inhaled gases (altitude, accidental occurrence during 
anesthesia), (2) hypoventilation, or (3) venous admixture 
with or without decreased mixed venous oxygen content. 
Acute hypoxemia causes activation of the sympathetic 
nervous system with endogenous catecholamine release, 
which augments blood pressure and cardiac output. The 
increased cardiac output will increase oxygen delivery 
from the lungs to peripheral tissues.
Alveolar Gas Equation
The alveolar gas equation estimates the partial pres-
sure of alveolar oxygen by accounting for barometric 
pressure, water vapor pressure, and the inspired oxygen 
concentration (Fig. 22.10). Atmospheric oxygen is a con-
stant 21% of barometric pressure; however, barometric 
pressure diminishes with altitude such that the decrease 
in inspired oxygen can become significant.
Hypoventilation leads to increased Pco2, which encroaches 
on the space available in the alveolus for oxygen and dilutes 
Alveolar gas equation: PAo2 = (PB – PH2O)Fio2 – PaCO2/RQ
PAo2 = alveolar partial pressure oxygen (mm Hg)
PB = barometric pressure (760 mm Hg at sea level)
PH2O = partial pressure of water vapor (47 mm Hg at 37C)
Fio2 = fraction inspired oxygen concentration
RQ = respiratory quotient (0.8 for normal diet)
A-a gradient  = PAo2 – Pao2
For patient with Pao2 of 363 mm Hg and PaCO2 of 40 mm Hg breathing Fio2
1.0
PAo2 = (760 − 47)(1.0) – 40/0.8
= (713) − 50
= 663 mm Hg
A-a gradient = 663 − 363
= 300 mm Hg
% shunt  = 1% for every 20 mm Hg of A-a gradient
= 300/20
= 15%
Fig. 22.10 The alveolar gas equation, calculation of alveolar-arterial (A-a) gradient, and estimation of 
percentage of shunt.
III
Chapter 22 Acid–Base Balance and Blood Gas Analysis
411
A-a gradient. When Pao2 is less than 150 mm Hg or when 
cardiac output is increased relative to metabolism, this 
guideline will underestimate the actual amount of venous 
admixture.
Pao2/Fio2 Ratio
The Pao2/Fio2 (P/F) ratio is a simple alternative to the A-a 
gradient to communicate the degree of hypoxemia. For 
patients with ARDS, the P/F ratio is used to categorize 
the severity of the disease (mild, moderate, severe); in 
shunt fraction and is more sensitive than pulse oxime-
try. A patient may have an Sao2 of 100% but have a Pao2
of only 90 mm Hg while breathing 100% oxygen. Sig-
nificant shunting secondary to a pulmonary or cardiac 
process can occur despite the reassuring pulse oximeter 
reading. In patients with large shunts (>50%), admin-
istration of 100% oxygen will be unable to raise Pao2
To estimate the amount of shunt present, when Pao2 is 
higher than 150 mm Hg, the shunt fraction is approximately 
1% of cardiac output for every 20 mm Hg difference in the 









Normal patient











CHF patient





Septic patient:









Fig. 22.11 Calculation of cardiac output via Fick equation; arterial and mixed venous oxygen content; and 
arteriovenous difference in normal, septic, and heart failure patients. Amount of dissolved oxygen calculated 
by 0.003 mLO2/dL/mm Hg *Po2 can be ignored because of its small influence on Cao2. CHF, Congestive heart 
failure.
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
412
cardiac output (sepsis) or lower extraction (cyanide poi-
soning) leads to a lower AV difference.
When the delivery of oxygen is first reduced, oxy-
gen consumption remains normal because of the body's 
ability to increase extraction. With further reductions in 
oxygen delivery, a critical point is reached when oxygen 
consumption becomes proportional to delivery. When 
oxygen consumption becomes supply dependent, cellular 
hypoxia occurs, which leads to progressive lactic acidosis 
and eventual death if uncorrected (Fig. 22.12).
Lactate Measurements
Arterial plasma lactate concentration is used as a marker 
of hypoperfusion and/or microcirculatory dysfunction 
and is a sensitive marker of disease severity. A value 
>2 mmol/L is considered significant, and its persistence 
predicts poor outcomes in critical illness.20 Changes 
in lactate can provide early and objective information 
regarding the patient's response to therapy. For example, 
lactate measurement is a core element of the Hour-1 
Surviving Sepsis 2016 Campaign bundle of care.21 Dur-
ing anesthesia, an increasing lactate is usually associated 
with reduced tissue perfusion, but other causes of an 
increased lactate, such as medications or toxins, should 
be considered as well.
the “severe” patient the P/F ratio is less than or equal to 
100 mm Hg (also see Chapter 41).17
Cardiac Output Estimates
Normal mixed PvO2 is 40 mm Hg and is a balance 
between oxygen delivery and tissue oxygen consump-
tion. A true PvO2 should reflect blood from the supe-
rior and inferior vena cava and the heart. It is usually 
obtained from the distal port of an unwedged pulmonary 
artery (PA) catheter. Because of the complexity and risks 
of placing a PA catheter, many clinicians simply fol-
low the trend from a central line placed in the superior 
vena cava.18 If tissue oxygen consumption is unchanged, 
changes in PvO2 reflect direct changes in cardiac output. 
The PvO2 will decrease when there is inadequate cardiac 
output because the peripheral tissues have to increase 
oxygen extraction for aerobic metabolism. The PvO2
will increase when there is high cardiac output (sepsis), 
peripheral shunting (arteriovenous fistulas), or impaired 
oxygen extraction (cyanide toxicity).
Fick Equation
If Pao2, PvO2, and hemoglobin are measured, the cardiac 
output can then be calculated by using the Fick equa-
tion (Fig. 22.11), which states that the delivery of oxy-
gen in the veins must equal the delivery of oxygen in 
the arteries minus what is consumed (Vo2). The delivery 
of oxygen is cardiac output multiplied by the amount 
of oxygen carried in the blood. The total amount of 
oxygen in the blood is the amount bound to hemoglobin 
and the amount dissolved in solution. Because the vast 
majority of the oxygen content in blood is bound to 
hemoglobin, the amount dissolved can often be left out 
of the equation in order to simplify calculations. The 
amount dissolved becomes important in situations such 
as severe anemia, when the amount carried by hemo-
globin is low.19
Arteriovenous Difference
The difference between the arterial and mixed venous 
oxygen content (AV difference) is a good estimate of the 
adequacy of oxygen delivery (see Fig. 22.11). The normal 
AV difference is 4 to 6 mL/dL of blood. When tissue oxy-
gen consumption is constant, a decreased cardiac output 
(congestive heart failure) leads to higher oxygen extrac-
tion, which increases the AV difference. An increased 
VO2
Cellular
hypoxia
Lactic
acidosis
Increased O2 extraction
VO2 independent of
O2 delivery
VO2
proportional
to delivery
Oxygen delivery (DO2)
Fig. 22.12 Relationship of oxygen consumption (Vo2) to oxygen 
delivery (Do2): When oxygen consumption becomes supply 
dependent, cellular hypoxia occurs, which leads to progressive 
lactic acidosis and eventually death.
III
Chapter 22 Acid–Base Balance and Blood Gas Analysis
413
1. Adrogue HJ, Gennari FJ, Galla JH, etal. 
Assessing acid-base disorders. Kidney 
Int. 2009;76:1239–1247.
2. Morgan TJ. The Stewart approach-one 
clinician's perspective. Clin Biochem 
Rev. 2009;30:41–54.
3. Koeppen. The kidney and acid-base reg-
ulation. Adv Physiol Educ. 2009;33:275–
281.
4. Byrne AL, Bennett M, Chatterji R, etal. 
Peripheral venous and arterial blood gas 
analysis in adults: are they comparable? 
A systematic review and meta-analysis. 
Respirology. 2014;19:168–175.
5. Pardesi O, Bittner EA. Leukocyte larceny: 
a cause of pseudohypoxemia. Can J 
Anaesth. 2016;63:1374–1375.
6. Bisson J, Younker J. Correcting arterial 
blood gases for temperature: (when) is 
it clinically significant?. Nurs Crit Care. 
2006;11:232–238.
7. Voicu S, Deye N, Malissin I, etal. 
Influence of α-stat and pH-stat blood 
gas management strategies on cere-
bral blood flow and oxygenation in 
patients treated with therapeutic hypo-
thermia after our-of-hospital cardiac 
arrest: a crossover study. Crit Care Med. 
2014;42:1849–1861.
8. Adrogue HJ, Madias NE. Secondary 
responses to altered acid-base status: the 
rules of engagement. J Am Soc Nephrol. 
2010;21:920–923.
9. Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome 
Network. Ventilation with lower tidal 
volumes as compared with traditional 
tidal volumes for acute lung injury and 
the acute respiratory distress syndrome. 
N Engl J Med. 2000;342:1301–1308.
10. Seifter JL, Chang HY. Disorders of acid-
base balance: new perspectives. Kidney 
Dis. 2016;2:170–186.
11. Fidkowski C, Helstrom J. Diagnosing 
metabolic acidosis in the critically ill: 
bridging the anion gap, Stewart, and 
base excess methods. Can J Anaesth. 
2009;56:247–256.
12. Anderson LW, Mackenhauer J, Rob-
erts JC, etal. Etiology and therapeutic 
approach to elevated lactate. Mayo Clin 
Proc. 2013;88:1127–1140.
13. Lira A, Pinsky MR. Choices in fluid type 
and volume during resuscitation: impact 
on patient outcomes. Ann Intensive 
Care. 2014;4:1–13.
14. Stewart PA. Modern quantitative acid-
base chemistry. Can J Physiol Pharma-
col. 1983;61:1444–1461.
15. Masevicious FD, Dubin A. Has Stewart 
approach improved our ability to diag-
nose acid-base disorders in critically 
ill patients?. World J Crit Care Med. 
2015;4:60–72.
16. Bigatello L, Pesenti A. Respiratory physi-
ology for the anesthesiologist. Anesthe-
siology. 2019;130:1064–1077.
17. ARDS Definition Task Force. Acute res-
piratory distress syndrome: the Berlin 
definition. JAMA. 2012;307:2526–2533.
18. Dueck MH, Klimek M, Appenrodt S, etal. 
Trends but not individual values of cen-
tral venous oxygen saturation agree with 
mixed venous oxygen saturation during 
varying hemodynamic conditions. Anes-
thesiology. 2005;103:249–257.
19. Wagner PD. The physiological basis of 
pulmonary gas exchange: implications 
for clinical interpretation of arterial 
blood gases. Eur Respir. 2015;45:227–
243.
20. Bakker J, Postelnicu R, Mukherjee V. 
Lactate: where are we now?. Crit Care 
Clin. 2020;36:115–124.
21. Pino R, Singh J. Appropriate Clinical 
Use of Lactate Measurements. Anesthe-
siology. 2021. https://doi.org/10.1097/
ALN.0000000000003655
REFERENCES
414
Chapter
INTRODUCTION
Hemostasis is an ordered process involving cellular and 
biochemical components that functions to limit blood 
loss secondary to vascular injury, maintain intravas-
cular blood flow, and promote revascularization after 
thrombosis. Normal physiologic hemostasis is a constant 
balance between procoagulant pathways responsible for 
generating localized hemostatic clot and counter-regu-
latory mechanisms that inhibit uncontrolled thrombus 
propagation or premature thrombus degradation. Vascular 
endothelium, platelets, plasma coagulation proteins, and 
fibrinolytic enzymes play equally important roles in this 
process. Derangements in this delicate system because 
of acquired or congenital disease states in addition to 
medications can lead to excessive bleeding or pathologic 
thrombus formation.
NORMAL HEMOSTASIS
Injury of the vascular endothelium results in platelet 
deposition at the injury site, a process often referred to 
as primary hemostasis. Although this initial platelet plug 
may prove adequate for a minor injury, control of more 
significant bleeding necessitates formation of a stable 
clot reinforced by crosslinked fibrin—a process mediated 
by activated plasma clotting factors and often referred 
to as secondary hemostasis (Fig. 23.1). Advances in our 
understanding of the cellular and molecular processes 
underlying hemostasis suggest a far more complex 
and nonlinear interplay between vascular endothelium, 
platelets, and clotting factors than is reflected in this 
model1; however, the terms primary and secondary 
hemostasis remain relevant for descriptive and diagnos-
tic purposes.
INTRODUCTION
NORMAL HEMOSTASIS
Vascular Endothelial Role in Hemostasis
Platelets and Hemostasis
Plasma-Mediated Hemostasis
Regulation of Coagulation
BLEEDING DISORDERS
Inherited Bleeding Disorders
Acquired Bleeding Disorders
Treatment of Bleeding Disorders
PROTHROMBOTIC STATES
Inherited Thrombotic Disorders
Acquired Thrombotic Disorders
Treatment of Thrombotic Disorders
LABORATORY EVALUATION OF HEMOSTASIS
Preoperative Evaluation
Laboratory-Based Measures of Coagulation
Tests of Platelet Function
Point-of-Care Measures of Coagulation
ANTITHROMBOTIC AND PROCOAGULANT 
DRUGS
Antiplatelet Agents
Anticoagulants
Thrombolytics
Procoagulant Drugs
PERIOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT OF 
ANTITHROMBOTIC THERAPY
Vitamin K Antagonists
Heparins
Antiplatelet Agents
Neuraxial Anesthesia and Anticoagulation
Emergent Reversal of Anticoagulants
CONCLUSION
HEMOSTASIS
Anil K. Panigrahi.
23
III
Chapter 23 Hemostasis
415
Vascular Endothelial Role in Hemostasis
The vascular endothelium serves an important role in 
reducing unprovoked thrombosis. Healthy endothelial 
cells possess antiplatelet and anticoagulant activity that 
functions to inhibit clot formation. The negatively charged 
vascular endothelium repels platelets, and endothelial 
cells produce potent platelet inhibitors such as prostacy-
clin (prostaglandin I2) and nitric oxide that prevent adhe-
sion of quiescent platelets. An adenosine diphosphatase 
(CD39) expressed on the surface of vascular endothelial 
cells also serves to block platelet activation through 
degradation of adenosine diphosphate (ADP), a potent 
platelet activator. The vascular endothelium also plays a 
pivotal anticoagulant role by expressing several inhibi-
tors of plasma-mediated hemostasis. Endothelial cells can 
increase activation of protein C, an anticoagulant, via 
surface expression of thrombomodulin (TM), which acts 
as a cofactor for thrombin-mediated activation of protein 
C, making its activation 1000 times faster. Endothelial 
cells also produce tissue factor pathway inhibitor (TFPI), 
which inhibits the procoagulant activity of factor Xa and 
the TF–VIIa complex. Finally, the vascular endothelium 
synthesizes tissue plasminogen activator (tPA), which is 
responsible for activating fibrinolysis, a primary counter-
regulatory mechanism limiting clot propagation.
Platelets and Hemostasis
Despite these natural defense mechanisms, upon injury 
the endothelium may shift the balance to promote 














































































Fig. 23.1 Normal Hemostasis. (A) Normal endothelium. Procoagulants (factors [F] VII, VIII, IX, X, XIII, 
prothrombin), fibrinogen, and platelets circulate in their inactive forms. Anticoagulants (tissue factor 
pathway inhibitor [TFPI], heparin, and tissue plasminogen activator [tPA]) actively prevent endothelial 
spontaneous thrombus formation. (B) Vascular injury, initial phase. Subendothelial tissue factor (TF) 
exposed to circulating FVII forms a TF:VII complex. TF:VII activates FIX and FX. FIXa binds to platelets. 
FXa activates FV (FVa) to form prothrombinase complex, which converts localized, small amounts of 
prothrombin to thrombin. (C) Vascular injury, role of thrombin. Thrombin (a) activates FX and FV to 
form prothrombinase complexes that generate the secondary thrombin burst, (b) activates platelets, 
(c) separates FVIII from von Willebrand factor (vWF) and activates FVIII, (d) converts fibrinogen to fibrin, 
(e) activates factor XI, and (f) activates FXIII, the stabilizer of crosslinked fibrin. A stable clot is formed. 
(D) Control of coagulation and fibrin clot dissolution. Antithrombin (AT) binds heparin and potently 
inhibits thrombin activity. TFPI binds to FXa to inhibit the TF:VIIa complex. Plasminogen is activated 
to plasmin by tPA and cleaves fibrin into soluble fibrin split products. (From Huddleston LL, Liu LL. 
Hemostasis. In Miller RD, Pardo MC, eds. Basics of Anesthesia. 7th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018. 
Figure 22.1.)
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
416
platelet adhesion, activation, and aggregation.2 Dam-
age to vascular endothelial cells exposes the underlying 
extracellular matrix (ECM), which contains collagen, von 
Willebrand factor (vWF), and other platelet-adhesive 
glycoproteins. Platelet receptors for vWF (glycoprotein 
Ib-IX-V complex) and collagen (integrin α2β1) facilitate 
platelet adhesion to the site of vessel injury. Absence 
of either vWF (von Willebrand disease) or glycoprotein 
Ib-IX-V complex receptors (Bernard–Soulier syndrome) 
results in a clinically significant bleeding disorder.
In addition to promoting their adhesion to the vessel 
wall, the platelet interaction with collagen serves as a 
potent stimulus for the subsequent phase of platelet acti-
vation. During the activation phase, platelets secrete ago-
nists such as thromboxane A2 (TxA2) and release granular 
contents, resulting in recruitment and activation of 
additional platelets and propagation of plasma-mediated 
coagulation. Platelets contain two specific types of stor-
age granules: α-granules and dense bodies. α-Granules 
contain numerous proteins essential to hemostasis and 
wound repair, including fibrinogen, coagulation factors 
V and VIII, vWF, platelet-derived growth factor, and 
others. Dense bodies contain the adenine nucleotides 
ADP and adenosine triphosphate (ATP), in addition to 
calcium, serotonin, histamine, and epinephrine. Redis-
tribution of platelet membrane phospholipids during 
activation exposes newly activated platelet surface recep-
tors and binding sites for calcium and coagulation factor 
activation complexes, which is critical to propagation of 
plasma-mediated hemostasis. During activation, platelets 
also undergo structural changes to develop pseudopod-
like membrane extensions and to release physiologi-
cally active microparticles, which serve to dramatically 
increase the platelet membrane surface area.
During the final phase, platelet aggregation, activators 
released during the activation phase recruit additional 
platelets to the site of injury. Newly active glycoprotein 
IIb/IIIa receptors on the platelet surface gain higher 
affinity for fibrinogen, thereby promoting crosslinking 
and aggregation with adjacent platelets. The importance 
of these receptors is reflected by the bleeding disorder 
associated with their hereditary deficiency, Glanzmann 
thrombasthenia.
Plasma-Mediated Hemostasis
Plasma-mediated hemostasis has been described as a 
cascade or waterfall sequence of steps involving the 
serial activation of proenzymes (zymogens) to enzymes 
and cofactors to accelerate and amplify fibrin generation 
by thrombin. Traditionally, the coagulation cascade has 
been depicted as extrinsic and intrinsic pathways, both of 
which culminate in a common pathway in which fibrin 
generation occurs (Fig. 23.2). This cascade model has 
proven to be an oversimplification, as it does not fully 
reflect in vivo hemostasis; however, it remains a useful 
Fig. 23.2 Classic Coagulation Cascade. The coagulation cascade has been depicted as extrinsic 
(initiated by vascular injury) and intrinsic (because of contact activation) pathways, both of which 
culminate in a common pathway of thrombin (factor II) activation, which then converts fibrinogen to 
fibrin. The extrinsic pathway begins with exposure of blood plasma to tissue factor (TF) after injury to the 
vascular wall. The TF/factor VIIa complex activates factor IX of the intrinsic pathway, binds to factor VIIIa, 
and forms intrinsic tenase, which activates factor X. The intrinsic pathway then subsequently amplifies 
and propagates the hemostatic response to increase overall thrombin generation. (From Slaughter TF. The 
coagulation system and cardiac surgery. In: Estafanous FG, Barasch PG, Reves JG, eds. Cardiac Anesthesia: 
Principles and Clinical Practice. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2001: 320.)
III
Chapter 23 Hemostasis
417
descriptive tool for organizing discussions of plasma-
mediated hemostasis and interpreting in vitro coagula-
tion tests.
The extrinsic pathway of coagulation is now under-
stood to represent the initiation phase of plasma-mediated 
hemostasis and begins with exposure of blood plasma to 
tissue factor (TF). TF is prevalent in subendothelial tis-
sues surrounding the vasculature; however, after vascular 
injury, small concentrations of factor VIIa circulating in 
plasma form phospholipid-bound activation complexes 
with TF, factor X, and calcium to promote conversion 
of factor X to Xa. Additionally, the TF/factor VIIa com-
plex activates factor IX of the intrinsic pathway, further 
demonstrating the key role of TF in initiating hemostasis. 
Recent cell-based models of coagulation suggest that 
thrombin generation by way of the extrinsic pathway is 
limited by a natural inhibitor, TFPI; however, the small 
quantities of thrombin generated do activate factor XI 
and the intrinsic pathway. The intrinsic pathway then 
subsequently amplifies and propagates the hemostatic 
response to increase overall thrombin generation.
The final pathway, common to both extrinsic and 
intrinsic coagulation cascades, depicts thrombin genera-
tion and subsequent fibrin formation. Signal amplifica-
tion results from activation of factor X by both intrinsic 
(FIXa, FVIIIa, Ca2+) and extrinsic (TF, FVIIa, Ca2+) tenase 
complexes. The tenase complexes in turn facilitate 
formation of the prothrombinase complex (FXa, FII 
[prothrombin], FVa [cofactor], and Ca2+), which medi-
ates a surge in thrombin generation from prothrombin. 
Thrombin proteolytically cleaves fibrinogen molecules to 
generate fibrin monomers, which polymerize into fibrin 
strands to form a clot. Finally, factor XIII is activated by 
thrombin and acts to covalently crosslink fibrin strands, 
producing an insoluble fibrin clot resistant to fibrinolytic 
degradation.
Regulation of Coagulation
Once activated, regulation of hemostasis proves essential 
to limit clot propagation beyond the injury site. Four 
major counterregulatory pathways have been identified 
that appear particularly important for downregulating 
hemostasis: fibrinolysis, TFPI, the protein C system, and 
serine protease inhibitors (SERPINs). The fibrinolytic 
system comprises a series of amplifying reactions that 
ultimately convert plasminogen to plasmin, a serine pro-
tease, which is responsible for the degradation of fibrin 
and fibrinogen (Fig. 23.3).3 In vivo, plasmin generation 
is most often accomplished by release of tPA or uroki-
nase from the vascular endothelium. Activity of tPA and 
urokinase is accelerated in the presence of fibrin, thereby 
limiting fibrinolysis to areas of clot formation. In addi-
tion to enzymatic degradation of fibrin and fibrinogen, 
plasmin inhibits coagulation by degrading essential 
cofactors V and VIII and reducing platelet glycoprotein 
surface receptors essential to adhesion and aggregation. 
As the fibrin clot is broken down, fibrinolytic activity is 
reduced by the rapid inhibition of free plasmin. Further-
more, excessive fibrinolysis is prevented by the function 
of two key SERPINs, namely plasmin-activator inhibi-
tor-1 (PAI-1) and α2‐antiplasmin. PAI-1 serves as the 
primary inhibitor of tPA and urokinase, thereby decreas-
ing plasmin generation, whereas α2‐antiplasmin directly 
inactivates circulating plasmin.
TFPI binds and inhibits factor Xa through the for-
mation of membrane-bound complexes. These factor 
Xa–TFPI complexes also act to inhibit TF/factor VIIa 
Fig. 23.3 The Fibrinolytic System. A series of amplifying reactions that ultimately convert plasminogen 
to plasmin, which degrades fibrin and fibrinogen.3 Tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) and urokinase are 
principal activators of plasmin in vivo, and their function is reduced plasmin-activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1), 
while α2-antiplasmin directly inactivates circulating plasmin. (From Slaughter TF. The coagulation 
system and cardiac surgery. In: Estafanous FG, Barasch PG, Reves JG, eds. Cardiac Anesthesia: Principles 
and Clinical Practice. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2001: 320.)
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
418
complexes, thereby downregulating the extrinsic coagu-
lation pathway. The protein C system proves particularly 
important in regulating coagulation through inhibition 
of thrombin and the essential cofactors Va and VIIIa. 
After binding to thrombomodulin on the surface of 
the endothelial cell, thrombin's procoagulant function 
decreases and instead its ability to activate protein C is 
augmented. Activated protein C (APC), complexed with 
the cofactor protein S, degrades both factors Va and 
VIIIa. Loss of these critical cofactors limits formation 
of tenase and prothrombinase complexes essential to 
formation of factor Xa and thrombin, respectively. One 
of the most significant SERPINs regulating hemostasis is 
antithrombin (AT, formerly antithrombin III). AT inhibits 
thrombin in addition to factors IXa, Xa, XIa, and XIIa. 
Heparin binds AT, causing a conformational change that 
accelerates AT-mediated inhibition of targeted enzymes 
by over 100-fold.
BLEEDING DISORDERS
Certain hereditary or acquired disorders, systemic dis-
eases, and environmental conditions can predispose a 
patient to excessive bleeding after tissue injury, including 
surgery. Given the complexity of the hemostatic system, 
bleeding can result from defects in or deficiency of 
coagulation factors, platelets, fibrinolysis, and vascular 
integrity. Patients with less than 20% to 30% of normal 
coagulation factor activity or platelet counts of less than 
50,000/μL are more likely than patients with normal val-
ues to have uncontrolled intraoperative bleeding. Bleed-
ing diatheses vary in clinical presentation depending on 
what component of the hemostatic system is affected.
Inherited Bleeding Disorders
Von Willebrand Disease
Inherited disorders of hemostasis include those involving 
platelet quantity and function, coagulation factor defi-
ciencies, or disorders of fibrinolytic pathways. Among 
these inherited bleeding disorders, von Willebrand dis-
ease (vWD) is the most common, affecting up to 1% of 
the population. vWD is categorized into three main types 
(type 1, 2, and 3), with most cases demonstrating an auto-
somal dominant inheritance pattern (Table 23.1). vWF is 
synthesized by megakaryocytes and endothelial cells and 
once released from these cells, it circulates as a series 
of multimers formed from a basic dimer subunit. Under 
normal conditions vWF plays a critical role in platelet 
adhesion to the ECM and prevents degradation of factor 
VIII by serving as a carrier molecule. vWD is character-
ized by quantitative or qualitative deficiencies of vWF 
resulting in defective platelet adhesion and aggregation. 
Classically, patients with vWD describe a history of easy 
bruising, recurrent epistaxis, and menorrhagia, which are 
characteristic of defects in platelet-mediated hemostasis. 
In more severe cases (i.e., type 3 vWD), concomitant 
reductions in factor VIII may lead to serious spontaneous 
hemorrhage, including hemarthroses.
Routine coagulation studies are generally not help-
ful in the diagnosis of vWD, as the platelet count and 
prothrombin time (PT) will be normal in most patients 
and the activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) may 
demonstrate mild-to-moderate prolongation depending 
on the level of factor VIII reduction. Initial screening tests 
for vWD involve measurement of vWF levels (vWF anti-
gen) and vWF platelet binding activity in the presence of 
the ristocetin cofactor, which leads to platelet agglutina-
tion. Mild cases of vWD often respond to desmopressin 
acetate (DDAVP), which results in the release of vWF 
from endothelial cells. Use of vWF:factor VIII concen-
trates (e.g., Humate-P) may be indicated in the periopera-
tive period if there is a significant bleeding history.4
Hemophilias
Hemophilia A (factor VIII deficiency) and hemophilia B 
(factor IX deficiency) are both X-linked inherited bleed-
ing disorders most frequently presenting in childhood as 
spontaneous hemorrhage involving joints and/or deep 
muscles. Hemophilia A is more common with an inci-
dence of 1:5000 males, whereas hemophilia B occurs in 
1:30,000 males. The severity of the disease is dependent 
on an individual's baseline factor activity level. Severe 
disease, defined by less than 1% of coagulation factor 
activity, occurs in approximately two-thirds of patients 
with hemophilia A and one half of patients with hemo-
philia B. Classically, laboratory testing in patients with 
hemophilia reveals prolongation of the aPTT, whereas the 
PT, bleeding time, and platelet count remain within nor-
mal limits. However, a normal aPTT may also be seen in 
mild forms of hemophilia, and it is important to exclude 
vWD as a cause of factor VIII deficiency.
An increasingly common complication of hemophilia 
is the development of alloantibodies to factors VIII or IX, 
which block exogenous factor activity. This can occur 
in up to 30% of patients with severe hemophilia A and 
3% to 5% of those with severe hemophilia B. Several 
approaches to reduce bleeding in these patients include 
substitution of porcine factor VIII, administration of acti-
vated factor VIII bypass activity (FEIBA) or nonactivated 
prothrombin complex concentrates (PCCs), or treatment 
with recombinant factor VIIa (rFVIIa).
Other Factor Deficiencies
Less common inherited factor deficiencies include defi-
ciencies of factors VII, XI, XII, and XIII. Factor VII 
deficiency (prevalence: 1 in 500,000) most commonly 
presents with excessive bleeding after invasive proce-
dures; heavy menstrual bleeding; or mucosal tract, joint, 
and muscle bleeding. Bleeding is uncommon with fac-
tor VII activity levels >10% and can be managed with 
III
Chapter 23 Hemostasis
419
rFVIIa. Factor XI deficiency, known as hemophilia C or 
Rosenthal syndrome (prevalence: 1 in 1,000,000), is char-
acterized by isolated prolongation in aPTT and variable 
bleeding severity. Factor XI activity levels, however, do 
not correlate well with bleeding risk.5 Most individuals 
do not experience spontaneous bleeding, hemarthrosis, or 
muscle hematomas, though bleeding episodes can occur 
under situations of hemostatic challenge such as trauma, 
surgery, or childbirth. Factor XII deficiency (prevalence: 
1 in 1,000,000) can cause marked prolongation of aPTT 
but is associated with clotting rather than bleeding. Fac-
tor XIII is involved in stabilizing the fibrin clot. Factor 
XIII deficiency (prevalence: 1 in 2,000,000) presents with 
delayed bleeding after hemostasis, impaired wound heal-
ing, and, occasionally, pregnancy loss. Laboratory evalu-
ation in these patients will demonstrate normal aPTT and 
PT, but the diagnosis can be confirmed by measurement 
of factor XIII activity levels.
Acquired Bleeding Disorders
Drug Induced
Medications represent the most significant cause of 
acquired coagulopathy in perioperative patients. In 
addition to anticoagulants such as heparin and warfa-
rin, the increasing number of direct oral anticoagulants 
(DOACs) and antiplatelet drugs has further complicated 
perioperative management. Additionally, several classes 
of medications may unintentionally increase bleeding 
risk because of side effects, primarily through inhibition 
of platelet aggregation. These drugs include β-lactam 
antibiotics, nitroprusside, nitroglycerin, nitric oxide, 
and selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), all 
of which can result in clinically significant bleeding in 
individuals with higher baseline risk. These medications 
should be considered in patients with an otherwise unex-
plained coagulopathy.
Vitamin K Deficiency
Vitamin K is an essential fat-soluble vitamin that is 
required for the carboxylation of factors II, VII, IX, and 
X and proteins C and S. Without carboxylation, these 
factors cannot bind to the phospholipid membrane of 
platelets and participate in hemostasis. Vitamin K is pre-
sent in dietary sources (leafy greens) and also synthesized 
by bacteria in the gastrointestinal tract. Patients who are 
fasting, have poor dietary intake, or are receiving total 
parenteral nutrition and those with fat malabsorption 
Type
Characteristic
Inheritance
Prevalence
Diagnosis
Treatment
1
Partial quantitative 
deficiency of VWF
AD
Up to 1%
↓ vWF:Ag
↓ vWF:RCo
DDAVP
FVIII/vWF concentrate
2
Qualitative defect of vWF 
(subtypes below)
2A
↓ binding of vWF to 
platelets
↓ large multimers
AD
Uncommon
↓ vWF:Ag
↓↓↓ vWF:RCo
↓ large multimers
DDAVP
FVIII/vWF concentrate
2B
↑ binding of vWF to 
platelets
↓ large multimers
AD
Uncommon
↑↑↑ LD-RIPA
FVIII/vWF concentrate
2M
↓ vWF function despite 
normal large multimers
AD
Uncommon
↓ vWF:Ag
↓↓ vWF:RCo
↓ RIPA
DDAVP
FVIII/vWF concentrate
2N
↓ binding of VWF to FVIII
AR
Uncommon
↓↓ FVIII
DDAVP
FVIII/vWF concentrate
3
Absent vWF
AR
Rare (1:250,000–1:1,000,000) Absent vWF:Ag
FVIII/vWF concentrate
Factor VIII concentrate
Platelet transfusion
Table 23.1
Classification of von Willebrand Disease
AD, Autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; DDAVP, desmopressin acetate; FVIII, coagulation factor VIII; LD-RIPA, low-dose ristocetin–
induced platelet aggregation; RIPA, ristocetin-induced platelet aggregation; vWF, von Willebrand factor; vWF:Ag, von Willebrand factor antigen; 
vWF:RCo, von Willebrand factor ristocetin cofactor activity; ↓, ↓↓, ↓↓↓, relative decrease; ↑, ↑↑, ↑↑↑ relative increase.
Adapted from Nichols WL et al. von Willebrand disease (VWD): Evidence-based diagnosis and management guidelines, the National Heart, Lung, 
and Blood Institute (NHLBI) Expert Panel report (USA). Haemophilia. 2008;14(2):171–232, Table 5 and Figure 5.
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
420
(obstructive jaundice, intestinal ileus or obstruction, or 
bowel resection) are prone to vitamin K deficiency. As 
gut microbiota are a source of vitamin K, newborns, who 
have not yet developed normal microbiota, and patients 
undergoing oral antibiotic therapy are also susceptible to 
vitamin K deficiency.
Liver Disease
The liver is the primary site for production of procoagu-
lant factors, including fibrinogen; prothrombin (factor 
II); factors V, VII, IX, X, XI, and XII; the anticoagulants 
protein C and S; and AT. Severe liver disease impairs syn-
thesis of coagulation factors, produces quantitative and 
qualitative platelet dysfunction, and impedes clearance 
of activated clotting and fibrinolytic proteins. Laboratory 
findings commonly associated with liver disease include 
a prolonged PT and possible prolongation of the aPTT, 
suggesting that these individuals are at increased risk of 
bleeding. However, these abnormal values only reflect 
decreases in procoagulant factors and do not account 
for parallel decreases in anticoagulant factors (protein 
C, protein S, and AT). As a result, patients with chronic 
liver disease are thought to have a rebalanced hemostasis 
and actually generate amounts of thrombin equivalent to 
healthy individuals.6
Similarly, thrombocytopenia from platelet sequestra-
tion in the spleen is often observed in patients with 
liver disease and portal hypertension. However, levels of 
the plasma metalloprotease ADAMTS13, responsible for 
cleaving vWF multimers, are also decreased in chronic 
liver disease and result in high circulating levels of large 
vWF multimers, which promote platelet aggregation. 
Consequently, this increase in vWF may partially correct 
for thrombocytopenia and platelet dysfunction but can 
also result in a prothrombotic state and increase clotting 
risk.
Fibrinolysis of a formed clot is also aberrant in 
patients with liver disease. Excessive fibrinolysis is 
prevented by thrombin-activatable fibrinolysis inhibitor 
(TAFI), which blocks activation of plasmin from plasmi-
nogen. TAFI is synthesized by the liver, and because lev-
els are decreased in patients with chronic liver disease, 
it was believed that such individuals are at increased 
bleeding risk because of hyperfibrinolysis. However, 
levels of PAI-1, an inhibitor of tPA and urokinase, are 
also increased in liver disease and may serve to normal-
ize fibrinolytic activity. Thus, in patients with chronic 
liver disease, hemostatic mechanisms are rebalanced, 
but decreases in procoagulant and anticoagulant factors 
create a tenuous equilibrium that is easily disrupted. As 
a result, these patients are at risk for both bleeding and 
inappropriate clotting.
Renal Disease
Platelet dysfunction commonly occurs in association 
with chronic renal failure and uremia and has primarily 
been attributed to decreased platelet aggregation and 
adhesion to injured vessel walls. Impaired adhesion is 
likely the result of defects of glycoprotein IIb/IIIa, which 
facilitates platelet binding of fibrinogen and vWF. 
Additionally, accumulation of guanidinosuccinic acid 
and the resulting increase in endothelial nitric oxide 
synthesis further decrease platelet responsiveness. Red 
blood cell (RBC) concentration has also been suggested 
to contribute to impaired platelet activity, as correction 
of anemia shortens bleeding times. This is thought to be 
the result of the increased RBC mass displacing platelets 
from the center of the vessel and bringing them into 
close proximity of the endothelium, thereby promoting 
adhesion.
Disseminated Intravascular Coagulation
Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) is a patho-
logic hemostatic response to TF/factor VIIa complex that 
leads to excessive activation of the extrinsic pathway, 
which overwhelms natural anticoagulant mechanisms 
and generates intravascular thrombin. Numerous under-
lying disorders may precipitate DIC, including sepsis, 
trauma, amniotic fluid embolus, malignancy, or incom-
patible blood transfusions (Table 23.2). Most often, DIC 
presents clinically as a diffuse bleeding disorder associ-
ated with consumption of coagulation factors and plate-
lets during widespread microvascular thrombotic activity 
resulting in multiorgan dysfunction. Laboratory find-
ings typical of DIC include reductions in platelet count; 
prolongation of the PT, aPTT, and thrombin time (TT); 
and elevated concentrations of soluble fibrin and fibrin 
degradation products (D-dimers). However, DIC is both 
a clinical and laboratory diagnosis, so laboratory data 
alone do not provide sufficient sensitivity or specificity 
to confirm a diagnosis.
Cardiopulmonary Bypass–Associated Coagulopathy
Institution of cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) by direct-
ing blood flow through an extracorporeal circuit causes 
significant perturbations to the hemostatic system.7
Initial priming of the bypass circuit results in hemodi-
lution and thrombocytopenia. Adhesion of platelets 
to the synthetic surfaces of the bypass circuit further 
decreases platelet counts and contributes to platelet 
dysfunction. During CPB, expression of platelet surface 
receptors important for adhesion and aggregation (GPIb, 
GPIIb/IIIa) are downregulated and the number of vWF-
containing α-granules are decreased, thereby impairing 
platelet function. Furthermore, induced hypothermia 
during CPB results in reduced platelet aggregation and 
plasma-mediated coagulation by decreasing clotting 
factor production and enzymatic activity. Increased 
plasmin generation may also occur during CPB, a pro-
cess that accelerates clot lysis. Thus, antifibrinolytic 
drugs are often administered to decrease intraoperative 
blood loss.
III
Chapter 23 Hemostasis
421
Trauma-Induced Coagulopathy (also see Chapter 43)
Uncontrolled hemorrhage is a frequent cause of trauma-
related deaths. Coagulopathy in this setting may be the 
result of acidosis, hypothermia, and hemodilution from 
resuscitation; however, an independent trauma-induced 
coagulopathy (TIC) is also experienced by these individu-
als.8 The anticoagulant effect of APC is thought to play 
a primary role in TIC by decreasing thrombin genera-
tion via inhibition of factor Va and VIIIa and promoting 
fibrinolysis through inhibition of PAI-1. Hypoperfusion 
subsequent to traumatic injury is thought to be the 
stimulus for APC activation. Additionally, tissue dam-
age results in shedding of the endothelial glycocalyx 
(EG), a gel-like matrix with anticoagulant properties that 
lines the vascular endothelium. The EG contains pro-
teoglycans such as syndecan-1, hyaluronic acid, heparan 
sulfate, and chondroitin sulfate, that when shed during 
endothelial injury, result in an “autoheparinization” 
phenomenon that contributes to TIC. Impaired platelet 
responsiveness also contributes to increased bleeding 
in TIC. Although platelet counts appear to be normal, 
response to various agonists, including ADP, arachidonic 
acid (AA), and collagen, is reduced and thought to be the 
result of “platelet exhaustion” resulting from activation 
caused by widespread release of ADP from injured tissues. 
This diffuse activation renders platelets unresponsive to 
subsequent stimulation. Platelet insensitivity to ADP is 
also associated with increased susceptibility of clots to 
tPA-mediated fibrinolysis. The importance of early treat-
ment to reduce hyperfibrinolysis in trauma is supported 
by the findings of the Clinical Randomisation of an 
Antifibrinolytic in Significant Haemorrhage 2 (CRASH-2) 
trial, which demonstrated a mortality benefit from early 
administration of the antifibrinolytic tranexamic acid.9
Treatment of Bleeding Disorders
von Willebrand Disease
Mild cases of vWD often respond to DDAVP, which 
causes the release of vWF from endothelial cells. One 
dose of DDAVP (0.3 μg/kg IV) will produce a complete 
or near-complete response in the majority of patients 
with type 1 vWD. DDAVP is contraindicated in type 2B 
vWD, as it may precipitate thrombocytopenia, which 
could worsen bleeding. In the setting of more significant 
surgical bleeding, use of plasma-derived vWF:factor VIII 
concentrate (Humate-P) or recombinant vWF (Vonvendi) 
is indicated. If vWF concentrates are not available, cryo-
precipitate, which contains high levels of vWF, can be 
used, but its use is considered second line, as most cryo-
precipitate has not undergone the pathogen inactivation 
processes used in preparing vWF concentrates.
Hemophilia
In most cases, perioperative management of patients with 
hemophilia A or B necessitates consultation with a hema-
tologist and administration of recombinant or purified fac-
tor VIII or factor IX concentrates, respectively. Mild cases 
of hemophilia A may be treated with desmopressin. An 
increasingly common complication of hemophilia, particu-
larly in the case of hemophilia A, has been the development 
of alloantibodies directed against the factor VIII protein. 
Administration of factor VIII concentrates will fail to con-
trol bleeding in patients with high-titer antibodies. Several 
approaches to reduce bleeding in these patients include sub-
stitution of porcine factor VIII, administration of activated 
FEIBA or nonactivated PCCs, or treatment with rFVIIa.
Disseminated Intravascular Coagulation
Management of DIC requires correction of the underlying 
condition precipitating hemostatic activation. Otherwise, 
treatment is mostly supportive and includes selective 
blood component transfusions to replete coagulation 
Category
Conditions
Infections
Bacterial (gram-negative bacilli, gram-
positive cocci)
Viral (CMV, EBV, HIV, VZV, hepatitis)
Fungal (histoplasma)
Parasites (malaria)
Malignancy
Hematologic (AML)
Solid tumors (prostate cancer, 
pancreatic cancer)
Malignant tumors (mucin-secreting 
adenocarcinoma)
Obstetric causes
Amniotic fluid embolism
Preeclampsia/eclampsia
Placental abruption
Acute fatty liver of pregnancy
Intrauterine fetal demise
Massive 
inflammation
Severe trauma
Burns
Traumatic brain injury
Crush injury
Severe pancreatitis
Toxic/
immunologic
Snake envenomation
Massive transfusion
ABO blood type incompatibility
Graft versus host disease
Other
Liver disease/fulminant hepatic failure
Vascular disease (aortic aneurysms, 
giant hemangiomas)
Ventricular assist devices
Table 23.2
Conditions Associated With Disseminated 
Intravascular Coagulation
AML, Acute myelogenous leukemia; CMV, cytomegalovirus; EBV,
Epstein–Barr virus; HIV, human immunodeficiency virus; VZV,
varicella zoster virus.
From Huddleston LL, Liu LL. Hemostasis. In Miller RD, Pardo MC, eds. 
Basics of Anesthesia. 7th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018. Table 22.2.
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
422
factors and platelets consumed in the process. The use 
of anticoagulants such as heparin remains controversial 
with recommendations that its use be limited to condi-
tions with the highest thrombotic risk. Antifibrinolytic 
therapy generally is contraindicated in DIC owing to the 
potential for catastrophic thrombotic complications.
Platelet Disorders
In the nonbleeding patient, treatment of thrombocyto-
penia in the form of platelet transfusion is usually with-
held until the platelet count is less than 10,000/μL. In 
the patient who is actively bleeding or requires surgical 
intervention, platelet transfusion is recommended to a 
goal of 50,000/μL, or in some cases, such as intracra-
nial hemorrhage or neurosurgery, 100,000/μL.10 Indi-
viduals who receive repeated platelet transfusions are at 
increased risk of forming antibodies to human leukocyte 
antigens (HLAs) or human platelet antigens. If such plate-
let alloimmunization develops, transfusion of standard 
platelet units may not increase platelet counts appro-
priately and use of HLA-matched units may be required.
Treatment of platelet dysfunction related to chronic renal 
disease includes administration of DDAVP (0.3 μg/kg IV), 
which stimulates release of vWF from endothelial cells. 
Additionally, conjugated estrogens (0.6 mg/kg/day intra-
venously for 5 days) have been demonstrated to shorten 
bleeding times, perhaps via decreased generation of nitric 
oxide. Transfusion of cryoprecipitate (rich in vWF and 
fibrinogen) may also be used to correct uremic platelet 
dysfunction; however, its use is often limited to patients 
with life-threatening bleeding because of the risks associ-
ated with transfusion of allogeneic blood products.
PROTHROMBOTIC STATES
Thrombophilia, a propensity for thrombotic events, 
commonly manifests clinically in the form of venous 
thrombosis (deep venous thrombosis [DVT] or pulmonary 
embolus [PE]). The pathogenesis of thrombosis is thought 
to be caused by the Virchow triad (blood stasis, endothe-
lial injury, and hypercoagulability).11 In the majority of 
cases, a risk factor or precipitating event is identified; 
however, a single factor generally does not result in clini-
cally significant thrombosis. Instead, multiple factors act 
synergistically to increase risk. For example, thrombotic 
complications often occur after surgery or during preg-
nancy in association with an inherited thrombophilia; 
underlying malignancy; or other clinical risk factors such 
as obesity, smoking, or oral contraceptive use.
Inherited Thrombotic Disorders
Factor V Leiden and Prothrombin Gene Mutation
Because of more specific testing, an inheritable throm-
botic predisposition is identified in as many as 50% of 
patients presenting with venous thromboembolism (VTE). 
The most common inherited prothrombotic conditions 
include single-point mutations in genes for factor V (fac-
tor V Leiden) or prothrombin (prothrombin G20210A). 
In the case of factor V Leiden, the mutation results in 
APC resistance whereby factor Va is no longer suscepti-
ble to APC-mediated degradation. This inability of APC 
to counterregulate the coagulation system results in a 
prothrombotic state that is found in approximately 5% 
of the Caucasian population. The prothrombin G20210A 
gene mutation causes increased plasma concentrations 
of prothrombin resulting in a hypercoagulable state. 
Individuals with factor V Leiden or the prothrombin 
gene mutation are at increased risk of developing DVTs, 
with homozygotes having the highest risk. Despite the 
increased relative risk, the absolute risk of blood clots in 
these patients remains low in the absence of other risk 
factors for hypercoagulability.
Protein C and Protein S Deficiency
Protein C deficiency is an autosomal dominant trait 
affecting approximately 1 in 500 individuals in the gen-
eral population. Deficiency can be the result of reduced 
concentrations or function of protein C and may result 
in VTE, warfarin-induced skin necrosis, neonatal purpura 
(in homozygous neonates), and fetal loss.
As discussed earlier, protein S functions as a cofactor 
of protein C and functions to accelerate APC's ability to 
inactivate factors Va and VIIIa. Individuals with protein S 
deficiency present similarly to those with other inherited 
thrombophilias and are at increased risk of VTE and PE.
Both protein C and protein S deficiencies can be 
acquired secondary to underlying disease. Acquired pro-
tein C deficiency can be seen in DIC, liver disease, severe 
infection (especially meningococcemia), uremia, and 
those on vitamin K antagonist (VKA) anticoagulation. 
Acquired protein S deficiency has been associated with 
pregnancy, oral contraceptive use, DIC, human immu-
nodeficiency virus (HIV) infection, nephrotic syndrome, 
and liver disease.
Acquired Thrombotic Disorders
Antiphospholipid Syndrome
Antiphospholipid syndrome (APS) describes an acquired 
autoimmune disorder characterized by venous and/
or arterial thromboses and recurrent pregnancy loss. 
This syndrome may occur in association with autoim-
mune disorders such as systemic lupus erythematosus or 
rheumatoid arthritis, or it may occur in isolation. APS 
results from development of autoantibodies directed 
against phospholipid-binding proteins, which affect the 
coagulation system, and is associated with up to 10% of 
cases of DVT and 6% of cases of pregnancy-associated 
morbidity. In rare instances, a severe form of APS, termed 
catastrophic APS, can occur resulting in coagulopathy, 
III
Chapter 23 Hemostasis
423
ischemic necrosis of the extremities, and multiorgan fail-
ure and is associated with a mortality rate of up to 30%.12
Characteristically, APS results in mild prolongation 
of the aPTT and positive testing for antiphospholipid 
antibodies (aPLs), such as lupus anticoagulant, anticardi-
olipin, or anti-β2-glycoprotein I antibodies. aPLs interfere 
with phospholipids common to many laboratory-based 
tests of coagulation. However, despite the prolonged 
aPTT, APS poses no increased bleeding risk. Instead, 
patients have greater risk for thrombosis. Isolated pro-
longation of an aPTT in a preoperative patient merits 
consideration of the diagnosis of APS. Patients with this 
syndrome who have experienced a thrombotic complica-
tion are at increased risk for recurrent thrombosis and 
most often are managed by lifelong anticoagulation.
Heparin-Induced Thrombocytopenia
Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT) describes an 
autoimmune-mediated drug reaction occurring in as 
many as 5% of patients receiving heparin therapy.13
Patients with HIT experience a mild to moderate throm-
bocytopenia. However, unlike other drug-induced throm-
bocytopenias, HIT results in platelet activation and 
increased risk of venous and arterial thromboses. Evi-
dence suggests that HIT is mediated by immunoglobulin 
G (IgG) antibodies, which bind to platelet factor 4 (PF4). 
Complexes composed of antibody, PF4, and heparin bind 
to platelet Fcγ receptors, thereby activating them. Risk 
factors for the development of HIT include patient popu-
lation, gender, and heparin formulation used. Women are 
at increased risk of HIT, as are patients undergoing major 
surgical procedures compared with medical patients. 
Additionally, use of unfractionated heparin (UFH) carries 
a greater risk of HIT development than low-molecular-
weight heparin (LMWH).
HIT manifests clinically as thrombocytopenia occur-
ring 5 to 14 days after initiating heparin therapy. With 
prior heparin exposure, thrombocytopenia or thrombosis 
may occur within 1 day. A diagnosis of HIT should be 
considered for any patient experiencing thrombosis or 
thrombocytopenia (absolute or relative ≥50% reduction 
in platelet count) during or after heparin administration. 
Although HIT remains a clinical diagnosis, HIT antibody 
testing should be undertaken to confirm the diagnosis. 
The enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) is sen-
sitive, but not as specific as the serotonin release assay 
(SRA), because the SRA indicates heparin-induced platelet 
activation. For many intensive care unit (ICU) patients, a 
positive ELISA test does not lead to a positive SRA, which 
means these patients are unlikely to have HIT.
Treatment of Thrombotic Disorders
Inherited Thrombophilias
Inherited thrombophilias are relatively rare in the gen-
eral population, and screening for the presence of these 
diseases in the absence of VTE is not recommended. In the 
absence of coexisting precipitating conditions, presence 
of a family history, or history of thrombosis, risks asso-
ciated with long-term preventive anticoagulation may 
outweigh potential benefits. Patients who present with 
VTE and test positive for an inherited thrombophilia are 
anticoagulated for their acute presentation. Continuation 
of anticoagulation after resolution of acute VTE is deter-
mined by severity of presentation, presence of more than 
one thrombophilia, and homozygosity or heterozygosity 
for thrombophilia.14 In the case of pregnant patients with 
known thrombophilia, anticoagulation is often recom-
mended in the antepartum and postpartum setting.
Antiphospholipid Syndrome
Patients with APS who have experienced a thrombotic 
complication are at increased risk for recurrent throm-
bosis and most often are managed by lifelong antico-
agulation. Standard treatments involve VKAs, such as 
warfarin, and aspirin may be added for patients who 
experience arterial thromboses. Individuals who are or 
may become pregnant are commonly treated with LMWH 
during the antepartum period.15
Heparin-Induced Thrombocytopenia
In cases where HIT is suspected, heparin must be dis-
continued immediately (including UFH, LMWH, heparin-
bonded catheters, and heparin flushes). Alternative 
nonheparin anticoagulation must be administered con-
currently, as patients who develop HIT are at risk of 
thrombosis and may also require anticoagulation for the 
condition for which heparin was originally administered. 
In most cases, a direct thrombin inhibitor (e.g., bivaliru-
din, lepirudin, or argatroban) is substituted for heparin 
until adequate prolongation of the international normal-
ized ratio (INR) can be achieved with warfarin. Initiation 
of warfarin alone is contraindicated for HIT treatment 
because the initial decreased synthesis of proteins C and 
S enhances the patient's prothrombotic state. Platelet 
transfusions should be held unless the patient is severely 
thrombocytopenic (<20 × 109/L) with signs of bleeding. 
Use of DOACs (e.g., rivaroxaban, apixaban, dabigatran, 
edoxaban) is being investigated.16 If possible, patients 
experiencing HIT should avoid future exposure to UFH; 
however, several reports describe subsequent limited 
perioperative re-exposure to UFH after laboratory testing 
ensures an absence of PF4/heparin immune complexes.
LABORATORY EVALUATION OF HEMOSTASIS
Preoperative Evaluation
The perioperative period presents significant challenges 
to the hemostatic system; therefore, identification and 
correction of hemostatic disorders can be of vital 
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
424
importance. Unfortunately, assessment of bleeding risk 
continues to be a challenge, and the optimal methods for 
preoperative evaluation remain controversial. Although 
routine preoperative coagulation testing of all surgical 
patients may seem prudent, such an approach is costly 
and lacks predictive value for the detection of hemostatic 
abnormalities. Standard coagulation tests such as PT and 
aPTT were designed as diagnostic tests to be used when 
a bleeding disorder is suspected based on clinical evalu-
ation (Table 23.3). As a result, when used as screening 
tests, these in vitro assays are limited in their ability to 
reflect the in vivo hemostatic response.17
Consequently, a carefully performed bleeding history 
remains the single most effective predictor of periop-
erative bleeding. In particular, patients should be asked 
whether they have experienced excessive bleeding after 
hemostatic challenges such as dental extractions, surgery, 
trauma, or childbirth and whether blood transfusions or 
reoperation were required to control the bleeding. Com-
mon presentations suggestive of a bleeding disorder may 
include frequent epistaxis necessitating nasal packing or 
surgical intervention. Oral surgery and dental extractions 
prove particularly good tests of hemostasis because of 
increased fibrinolytic activity on the mucous membranes 
of the oral cavity. Women with platelet disorders or vWD 
may experience menorrhagia, and postpartum hemor-
rhage commonly occurs in those with underlying disor-
ders of hemostasis. A careful medication history, includ-
ing direct questions relating to consumption of aspirin 
and nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), in 
addition to supplements such as ginkgo and vitamin E, 
should be included.18
For most patients, a thoughtfully conducted bleed-
ing history will eliminate the need for preoperative 
laboratory-based coagulation testing. Should the pre-
operative history or physical examination reveal signs 
or symptoms suggestive of a bleeding disorder, further 
laboratory testing is indicated. Preoperative coagulation 
screening tests may be indicated, despite a negative his-
tory, in cases in which the planned surgery is commonly 
associated with significant bleeding (e.g., CPB). Finally, 
preoperative testing may prove justified in settings in 
which the patient is unable to provide an adequate pre-
operative bleeding history. Should evidence of a bleeding 
disorder be detected, underlying etiologies should be 
clarified if possible before proceeding with surgery.
Laboratory-Based Measures of Coagulation
Prothrombin Time
PT assesses the integrity of the extrinsic and common 
pathways of plasma-mediated hemostasis. It measures 
time required in seconds for fibrin clot formation to 
occur after mixing a sample of patient plasma with TF 
(thromboplastin) and calcium. It is sensitive to deficien-
cies in fibrinogen and factors II, V, VII, or X. As three 
of these factors have vitamin K–dependent synthesis 
(factors II, VII, and X), the PT assay has been used to 
monitor anticoagulation with VKAs such as warfarin. 
Heparin, LMWH, and fondaparinux inhibit thrombin 
and therefore should prolong the PT. However, most PT 
reagents contain heparin-binding chemicals that block 
this effect; thus, the PT remains normal in the setting of 
these medications.
The thromboplastin reagent, derived from animal or 
recombinant sources, can vary in its ability to bind factor 
VII and initiate coagulation, which limits interlaboratory 
comparisons. Given the importance of monitoring PT 
results for patients on long-term warfarin therapy, the 
INR was introduced by the World Health Organization 
as a means of normalizing PT results among different 
laboratories.
Platelet Tests
Coagulation Tests
Fibrinolysis Tests
Count: 150–400 K/uL
Prothrombin time: 11.5–14.7 seca
Thrombin time: 14.7–18.0 sec
Bleeding time: <11 min
Activated partial thromboplastin time: 
23.8–35.7 seca
Fibrinogen-fibrin degradation products: 
<5 μg/dL
Aggregometry
(response to aggregating agents: 
collagen, adenosine diphosphate, 
epinephrine, and ristocetin)
Anti–factor Xa activity
(calibrated to specific anticoagulant medication)
Fibrin D-dimer assay: <250 μg/mL
Platelet function analysis
Fibrinoge: 234–395 mg/dL
Collagen/epinephrine: 94–193 sec
Activated clotting time: 70–140 sec
Collagen/adenosine diphosphate: 
71–118 sec
Table 23.3
Common Tests of Hemostasis and Normal Ranges
From Huddleston LL, Liu LL. Hemostasis. In Miller RD, Pardo MC, eds. Basics of Anesthesia. 7th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018. Table 22.3.
aThe normal range varies with reagent lots.
III
Chapter 23 Hemostasis
425
Any prolongation of the PT should be assessed fur-
ther with mixing studies to determine whether delayed 
clot formation is attributable to a coagulation factor 
deficiency or an inhibitor (i.e., APL, fibrin degradation 
products). The mixing study is performed by mixing the 
patient's plasma sample with “normal” donor plasma. In 
the case of a coagulation factor deficiency, time to clot 
formation will correct, whereas it will remain prolonged 
in the presence of an inhibitor.
Activated Partial Thromboplastin Time
aPTT assesses integrity of the intrinsic and common 
pathways of plasma-mediated hemostasis. It measures 
the time required in seconds for fibrin clot formation 
to occur after mixing a sample of patient plasma with 
phospholipid, calcium, and an activator of the intrinsic 
pathway of coagulation (e.g., celite, kaolin, silica, or 
ellagic acid). It can detect low levels of prekallikrein; 
high-molecular-weight kininogen; factors XII, XI, IX, 
and VIII (intrinsic pathway); and low levels of factors II, 
V, and X and fibrinogen (common pathway). The aPTT is 
more sensitive to deficiencies in factors VIII and IX than 
other factors in the intrinsic and common pathways. In 
most cases, coagulation factor levels below 30% to 40% 
of normal are detectable; however, aPTT reagents vary in 
their sensitivity and may not be prolonged until levels 
drop below 15% for some factors. Both hemophilias A 
and B and vWD (because of potentially low levels of fac-
tor VIII) will prolong aPTT. UFH therapy and anticoagu-
lation with parenteral direct thrombin inhibitors (DTIs) 
(e.g., argatroban) are monitored with aPTT levels. Unlike 
with the PT assay, there is no reference standard reagent 
for the aPTT, so individual institutions must set their own 
normal ranges, and aPTT values cannot be compared 
between laboratories.
Anti–Factor Xa Activity
The anti–factor Xa activity assay or factor Xa inhibition 
test is being used with increasing frequency to monitor 
heparin anticoagulation instead of, or in addition to, 
the aPTT assay. The assay involves combining patient 
plasma with reagent factor Xa and an artificial sub-
strate that releases a colorimetric signal after factor Xa 
cleavage, thereby providing a functional assessment of 
heparin anticoagulant effect. Although aPTT values can 
be affected by several patient factors such as coagulation 
factor deficiencies, factor inhibitors, or the presence of 
lupus anticoagulant, measurement of the heparin-bound 
AT inhibition of factor Xa activity is not influenced by 
these variables. Anti–factor Xa testing can also be used 
to measure the effect of other anticoagulants such as 
LMWH, fondaparinux, and factor Xa inhibitors. Data 
supporting the use of anti–factor Xa over aPTT is sparse; 
however, it may be helpful to use anti–factor Xa test-
ing in combination with the aPTT to monitor heparin 
effect.19
Thrombin Time
The TT measures the final step of the clotting pathway 
where fibrinogen is converted to fibrin. It measures the 
time required in seconds for fibrin clot formation to 
occur after mixing a sample of patient plasma with cal-
cium and thrombin. Conditions that prolong the throm-
bin time include therapy with anticoagulants (including 
heparin and DTIs), hypofibrinogenemia (<100 mg/dL), 
dysfibrinogenemia (presence of abnormal fibrinogen), 
DIC, liver disease, high concentrations of serum proteins 
(multiple myeloma, amyloidosis), and circulating bovine 
thrombin antibodies (formed after exposure to topical 
bovine thrombin used for hemostasis during surgery).
Fibrinogen Level
A number of methods are available for measuring 
fibrinogen. The most common method reports functional 
fibrinogen activity and incorporates the Clauss method, 
in which diluted plasma is exposed to a high concen-
tration of thrombin. The time to fibrin clot formation 
is compared with a standard calibration curve, and the 
fibrinogen concentration is extrapolated. Immunologic 
fibrinogen assays are used when clotting-based fibrino-
gen assays suggest hypofibrinogenemia in the absence of 
an obvious clinical explanation or when dysfibrinogen-
emia is suspected.
Tests of Platelet Function
Platelet Count
The platelet count continues to be used as a first-line test 
of platelet function. A platelet count is determined as part 
of a complete blood count and is performed by automated 
machines that use optical, impedance, or flow cytometric 
methods. Platelet clumping (which results from minimal 
platelet activation) and the presence of large platelets (as 
occurs in immune thrombocytopenic purpura) can lead 
to artificially decreased platelet counts. Conversely, if 
samples contain cellular debris (e.g., patients with thalas-
semias, leukemias, thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura 
[TTP]), the platelet count may be overestimated by some 
methods.
Bleeding Time
The bleeding time test was the first in vivo assay of plate-
let function. To perform the test, a blood pressure cuff is 
inflated on the upper part of the arm to 40 mm Hg and a 
standardized 9-mm long and 1-mm deep incision is made 
on the volar surface of the forearm. Blood is blotted away 
every 30 seconds with filter paper until bleeding stops. A 
prolonged bleeding time (>11 minutes) can signify either 
platelet dysfunction or thrombocytopenia (<100,000/μL). 
The bleeding time has benefits of assessing natural hemo-
stasis, does not require specialized equipment, and is not 
susceptible to artifacts from anticoagulant medications. 
However, the assay is invasive, time consuming, and 
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
426
poorly reproducible. Furthermore, a normal bleeding time 
does not predict adequate hemostasis during surgery, nor 
does an abnormal bleeding time predict abnormal surgi-
cal bleeding. As a result, the bleeding time may be used 
to help with diagnosis of inherited platelet disorders, but 
is not recommended as a preoperative screening test.20
Platelet Aggregometry
The technique for platelet aggregometry was developed in 
the 1960s and soon became the gold standard for assess-
ment of platelet function. The classic method involves 
centrifugation of patient blood to obtain platelet-rich 
plasma, which is then analyzed in a cuvette at 37°C 
placed between a light source and photocell. Addition 
of platelet agonists such as ADP, epinephrine, collagen, 
and ristocetin stimulate platelet aggregation, which in 
turn results in a decrease in turbidity of the solution and 
an increase in light transmission. Newer systems involve 
the use of platinum electrodes upon which aggregated 
platelets adhere, thereby increasing impedance that is 
measured over time. Patterns based upon the kinetics and 
amplitude of response to these various agonists are asso-
ciated with specific platelet disorders (e.g., Glanzmann 
thrombasthenia, Bernard–Soulier syndrome, vWD) and 
aid in their diagnosis. Platelet aggregometry can also be 
used for monitoring antiplatelet therapy.
Point-of-Care Measures of Coagulation
Although laboratory-based measures of coagulation 
remain the mainstay of preoperative coagulation testing, 
increasing availability of sensitive and specific point-
of-care coagulation monitoring may soon offer oppor-
tunities to direct blood component and hemostatic drug 
therapy more specifically without the delays inherent to 
standard laboratory testing.
Activated Clotting Time
ACT measures the time in seconds for formation of a clot 
after a contact activation initiator (e.g., celite, kaolin) is 
added to a sample of freshly drawn whole blood. Because 
the ACT measures fibrin clot formation by way of intrin-
sic and common pathways, heparin and other anticoagu-
lants prolong time to clot formation. Although the aPTT 
assay has replaced it in most clinical situations, the ACT's 
simplicity, low cost, and linear response at high heparin 
concentrations make it a popular perioperative coagula-
tion monitor during surgical cases requiring high doses 
of heparin (e.g., cardiac and vascular surgery).
Viscoelastic Measures of Coagulation
Viscoelastic monitors measure the entire spectrum of 
clot formation in whole blood from early fibrin strand 
generation through clot retraction and fibrinolysis. The 
early thromboelastograph (TEG) developed by Hartert 
in 1948 has evolved into two independent viscoelastic 
monitors available today: the modern TEG5000 and rota-
tional thromboelastometry (ROTEM). In the case of TEG, 
a small (0.35 mL) sample of whole blood is placed into 
a rotating cup. A sensor pin is lowered into the cup, and 
as the fibrin clot begins to form, the pin meets increased 
resistance and begins to rotate with the cup. This move-
ment is transferred via the pin to an attached torsion wire 
and electronic recorder (Fig. 23.4). A similar mechanism 
of movement and detection is employed in the ROTEM; 
however, in this system the cup remains stationary and 
the pin rotates. More recently, alternative viscoelastic 
measurement devices have been developed (Sonoclot 
Analyzer and TEG6s) in which a rapidly vibrating probe 
is immersed into a small sample of whole blood. As 
clot formation proceeds, impedance to probe movement 
increases, which in turn generates an electrical signal and 
characteristic clot signature.
Although variables derived from viscoelastic tracings 
do not coincide directly with laboratory-based tests of 
coagulation, various parameters describing clot forma-
tion and lysis are identified and measured (Fig. 23.5). 
Improvements in technique have led to easier use and 
the ability to perform point-of-care testing with rapid 
results. The addition of various trigger reagents provides 
further information on the extrinsic pathway, levels of 
fibrinogen, effects or presence of heparin, and resist-
ance to lysis. Although viscoelastic monitors may detect 
From start to
2-mm amplitude
(clot initiation)
From  2-mm to
20-mm amplitude
(clot kinetics)
Alpha angle
Maximum strength
(clot strength)
MA (maximum
amplitude)
MCF (maximum
clotting time)
LY 30, LY 60
CL 30, CL 60
Clot lysis
(at minutes)
Slope between
R and K
Angle of tangent at
2-mm amplitude
R (reaction time)
MA
MCF
CL
LY
R
CT
Time (min)
Alpha
angle
K (kinetics)
CT (clotting time)
CFT (clot
formation time)
Variable
TEG
TEG
ROTEM
ROTEM
Fig. 23.4 Measurements Derived From Viscoelastic Testing. 
Comparison of common variables for the global coagulation 
assays TEG (thromboelastography) and ROTEM (rotational 
thromboelastometry). CL, Clot lysis; LY, lysis. (From Huddleston 
LL, Liu LL. Hemostasis. In Miller RD, Pardo MC, eds. Basics of 
Anesthesia. 7th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018. Figure 22.2.)
AL GRAWANY
III
Chapter 23 Hemostasis
427
platelet dysfunction, the sensitivity and specificity are 
limited. Incorporation of a platelet mapping assay into 
TEG provides a method for viscoelastic measurement of 
drug-induced platelet inhibition with reasonable correla-
tion to optical aggregometry.
One of the more common applications for viscoelas-
tic monitoring has been real-time detection of excess 
fibrinolysis during trauma, liver transplantation, or cardiac 
surgery. Additionally, viscoelastic monitoring may prove 
beneficial in differentiating surgically related bleeding 
from that caused by a coagulopathy. Furthermore, when 
viscoelastic testing is incorporated in perioperative diag-
nostic algorithms to guide transfusion, they have been 
found to reduce overall blood product administration.21
Platelet Function Analysis
Several platelet function assays specifically designed as 
point-of-care instruments are becoming available. The 
platelet function analyzer (PFA-100) subjects citrated 
whole blood to high-shear stress within a capillary tube. 
The tube contains a membrane coated with collagen and 
platelet agonists, such as epinephrine or ADP. As plate-
lets begin to adhere to the membrane and form a plug, 
the capillary aperture is occluded, which is recorded as 
the closure time. Prolonged closure times indicate plate-
let dysfunction; however, the result is not specific to a 
particular disorder, and results may be inaccurate in the 
setting of thrombocytopenia or anemia. Nevertheless, 
because the test is simple, rapid, and does not require 
special training, it may be useful as a screening tool to 
assess for platelet dysfunction.
ANTITHROMBOTIC AND PROCOAGULANT 
DRUGS
Throughout the surgical period patients may be adminis-
tered medications to decrease or increase clot formation. 
An understanding of these medications, in addition to 
potential reversal strategies, is crucial for appropriate 
perioperative management. Antithrombotic drugs are 
usually used to reduce the formation of blood clots in 
the setting of coronary or cerebral atherosclerosis or after 
vascular thrombosis. They can be further subdivided into 
antiplatelet agents, anticoagulants, and thrombolytics 
(Table 23.4).
Antiplatelet Agents
Antiplatelet agents inhibit thrombus formation by inhib-
iting platelet adhesion to damaged endothelium and/or 
aggregation. Most common antiplatelet agents target the 
cyclooxygenase (COX) enzyme, P2Y12 receptor, or the 
platelet GPIIb/IIIa receptor.
Cyclooxygenase Inhibitors
There are two primary COX isozymes: COX-1 and COX-2. 
COX-1 maintains the integrity of the gastric lining and 
renal blood flow and initiates the formation of TxA2, 
which is important for platelet aggregation and secretion. 
COX-2 is responsible for synthesizing the prostaglandin 
mediators in pain and inflammation.
Small doses of aspirin irreversibly inhibit COX-1; 
however, COX-2 is 170 times less sensitive than COX-1 
to aspirin, so only at high doses can aspirin irrevers-
ibly inhibit both COX-1 and COX-2. Because platelets 
have no deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA), they are unable 
to synthesize new COX-1 once aspirin has irreversibly 
inhibited the enzyme. As a result, despite its short half-
life (15 to 20 minutes), aspirin's platelet-inhibitory effect 
persists for 7 to 10 days, which is the expected lifetime 
of anucleated platelets. The recovery of platelet function 
after aspirin requires generation of new platelets. Gener-
ally, megakaryocytes produce 10% to 12% of circulating 
platelets daily, so near-normal hemostasis is expected in 
2 to 3 days after the last dose of aspirin, assuming normal 
platelet turnover. Otherwise, immediate reversal can only 
be achieved with platelet transfusions.
Most NSAIDs are nonselective, reversible COX inhibi-
tors. Platelet function returns to normal 3 days after 
discontinuing the use of NSAIDs. Selective COX-2 
antagonists such as celecoxib were developed to provide 
pain relief without the gastrointestinal bleeding compli-
cations, but several clinical trials with selective COX-2 
antagonists reported increased risks for cardiovascular 
complications. Although COX-2 is not expressed by 
platelets, the increased thrombotic risk is thought to be 
caused, in part, by inhibition of prostacyclin (PGI2) with-
out inhibition of TxA2, thus tipping the balance toward 
Normal
Anticoagulants/Hemophilia
• R and K prolonged
• Alpha angle decreased
Platelet Blockers/Thrombocytopenia
• R normal, K prolonged
• MA decreased
Fibrinolysis
• R normal
• MA decreased over time
Hypercoagulability
• R and K decreased
• Alpha angle and MA increased
Fig. 23.5 Interpretation of Viscoelastic Tracings. Common 
thromboelastography examples with analysis. K, Kinetics; MA,
maximum amplitude; R, reaction time. (From Huddleston LL, Liu 
LL. Hemostasis. In Miller RD, Pardo MC, eds. Basics of Anesthesia. 
7th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018. Figure 22.3.)
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
428
thrombosis.22 Consequently, it is now recommended to 
use COX-2 inhibitors only when necessary and with the 
lowest effective dose possible after weighing the risks 
and benefits.
P2Y12 Receptor Antagonists
Thienopyridines (e.g., clopidogrel, ticlopidine, and prasu-
grel) and nucleoside analogs (e.g., ticagrelor and cangre-
lor) interfere with platelet function as antagonists of the 
P2Y12 receptor. Both classes prevent binding of ADP by 
the P2Y12 receptor, which impairs platelet adhesion and 
aggregation by preventing the expression of GP IIb/IIIa 
on the surface of activated platelets. Thienopyridines are 
prodrugs requiring hepatic metabolism to generate the 
active metabolite that then irreversibly inactivates the 
ADP-binding site of the P2Y12 receptor. Ticagrelor and 
cangrelor function as reversible inhibitors that change 
the conformation of the P2Y12 receptor. Platelet function 
normalizes 7 days after discontinuing clopidogrel and 14 
to 21 days after discontinuing ticlopidine.
Clopidogrel, the most commonly prescribed medi-
cation in this class, requires metabolism by CYP2C19 
for activation and as a result has wide interindividual 
variability in inhibiting ADP-induced platelet func-
tion. Although many factors may be involved in this 
variability, genetic polymorphism of CYP2C19 along with 
ABCB1, which affects the intestinal permeability and oral 
bioavailability of clopidogrel, are thought to play a sig-
nificant role. Patients treated with clopidogrel who have 
decreased CYP2C19 activity were shown to have signifi-
cantly increased risk of major cardiovascular events. The 
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) issued a black box 
warning on clopidogrel to make patients and health care 
providers aware that patients who are CYP2C19-poor 
metabolizers, who represent up to 14% of patients, are at 
high risk of treatment failure and that genotype testing 
may be helpful.
Ticagrelor has much lower interindividual variability 
because it binds to a separate site on the P2Y12 receptor, 
and both the parent drug and the active metabolite have 
antiplatelet effects. Because it is much shorter acting than 
clopidogrel, ticagrelor must be dosed twice daily, which 
may be of benefit before surgery. Cangrelor is the only 
P2Y12 inhibitor available for intravenous administration 
and exhibits rapid onset (seconds) and offset, with plate-
let function normalizing within 60 minutes of discontin-
uation. This rapid offset may allow for bridging therapy 
in patients with drug-eluting stents who require surgery.
GPIIb/IIIa Inhibitors
Glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors (GPIs) (e.g., abciximab, 
eptifibatide, and tirofiban) prevent platelet aggregation 
by decreasing the binding of fibrinogen and vWF to 
glycoprotein IIb/IIIa receptors on the surface of activated 
platelets. They are administered intravenously in order to 
limit ongoing arterial thrombosis or to prevent formation 
of occlusive thrombi and restenosis in diseased vessels. 
Abciximab is a noncompetitive, irreversible inhibitor of 
Category
Subcategory
Generic Drug Names
Antiplatelet agents
Cyclooxygenase inhibitors
Aspirin, NSAIDS
P2Y12 receptor antagonists
Ticlopidine, clopidogrel, prasugrel, cangrelor, and ticagrelor
Platelet GPIIb/IIIa antagonists
Abciximab, eptifibatide, and tirofiban
Anticoagulants
Vitamin K antagonists
Warfarin
Heparin
UFH, LMWH, fondaparinux
Direct thrombin inhibitors
Argatroban, bivalirudin (IV), desirudin (SQ), dabigatran (PO)
Factor Xa inhibitors
Rivaroxaban, apixaban, edoxaban
Thrombolytics
Fibrin-specific agents
Alteplase, reteplase, tenecteplase
Non–fibrin-specific agents
Streptokinase
Antifibrinolytics
Lysine analogs
Tranexamic acid, epsilon-aminocaproic acid
Factor replacements
Recombinant factor VIIa
Factor VIII:vWF
Prothrombin complex concentrates
Three-factor PCC; four-factor PCC, activated PCC, FEIBA
Fibrinogen concentrates
Table 23.4
Common Classes of Antithrombotic, Thrombolytic, and Procoagulant Medications
FEIBA, Factor VIII bypass activity; IV, intravenous; LMWH, low-molecular-weight heparin; NSAID, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug; PCC,
prothrombin complex concentrate; PO, per os, by mouth; SQ, subcutaneous; UFH, unfractionated heparin; vWF, von Willebrand factor.
From Panigrahi AK, Liu LL. Patient blood management: Coagulation. In Gropper MA, ed. Miller's Anesthesia. 9th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020. 
Table 50.1.
III
Chapter 23 Hemostasis
429
GPIIb/IIIa, whereas eptifibatide and tirofiban are com-
petitive, reversible GPIIb/IIIa antagonists. The inhibition 
provided by abciximab continues at various levels for 
several days after the infusion has been discontinued; 
however, platelet aggregation normalizes within 24 to 
48 hours. Platelet aggregation returns to normal 8 hours 
after discontinuing eptifibatide and tirofiban. All of these 
medications can cause thrombocytopenia, but the effect 
is strongest with abciximab (incidence of about 2.5%).
Anticoagulants
Vitamin K Antagonists
Warfarin, the most frequently used oral VKA, inhibits 
the synthesis of factors II, VII, IX, and X and proteins C 
and S. Without vitamin K, these proteins do not undergo 
γ-carboxylation and therefore are unable to bind to 
phospholipid membranes during hemostasis. Warfarin 
has a long half-life (∼36 hours), and the complete anti-
coagulant effect can take 3 to 4 days to emerge because 
of the long half-lives of the preexisting coagulation 
factors. Prothrombin (factor II) has the longest half-life 
(∼60 hours), whereas factor VII and protein C have the 
shortest half-lives (3 to 6 hours). During the initiation 
of warfarin therapy, early reductions in the anticoagu-
lant protein C relative to other coagulation factors can 
produce a hypercoagulable state, resulting in thrombosis 
or warfarin-induced skin necrosis. As a result, patients 
at high risk for thromboembolism must be bridged with 
another anticoagulant (usually heparin) until warfarin's 
full anticoagulant effect is achieved.
Warfarin is monitored using the INR, and the thera-
peutic range for warfarin anticoagulation is generally an 
INR of 2.0 to 3.0, except for patients with mechanical 
heart valves, where higher values are necessary (INR 2.5 
to 3.5). The INR is not calibrated to evaluate nonwarfarin 
factor deficiencies such as from liver disease and should 
not be used to evaluate therapeutic effects of other anti-
coagulants. Warfarin has a very narrow therapeutic win-
dow, which can be easily affected by other medications, 
foods, and alcohol. Warfarin's pharmacokinetics are 
also affected by genetic variations in cytochrome P450 
(CYP2C9 gene), which can result in altered metabolism. 
As a result, frequent laboratory monitoring is required 
when initiating warfarin therapy. If the target INR is 
not achieved in the usual time frame, pharmacogenetic 
testing for polymorphisms that affect the metabolism of 
warfarin may be considered.
Unfractionated Heparin
UFH is a mixture of different-length polysaccharides 
with a high molecular weight. UFH indirectly inhibits 
thrombin (factor IIa) and factor Xa by binding to AT. 
The benefits of heparin are its short half-life and ability 
to be fully reversed with protamine, a positively charged 
protein isolated from salmon. Patients may be resistant 
to UFH if they have hereditary insufficiency of AT or 
an acquired deficiency of AT from prolonged heparin 
administration. Treatment should be with recombinant or 
plasma-derived AT concentrates. If not available, plasma 
transfusions may be used, but this increases the risk of 
transfusion-associated circulatory overload (TACO) or 
other transfusion reactions (also see Chapter 25).
Heparin therapy is monitored with the aPTT or ACT. 
Full-dose heparin for cardiac surgery is administered as 
an intravenous bolus of 300 to 400 U/kg. An ACT greater 
than 400 seconds is usually considered safe for initiation 
of CPB. One mg protamine to 100 units of heparin is the 
reversal dose used at the conclusion of CPB.
Low-Molecular-Weight Heparin and Fondaparinux
LMWH is produced by cleaving UFH into shorter frag-
ments, which results in greater indirect (AT-mediated) 
inhibition of factor Xa compared with that of thrombin 
(factor IIa). Similarly, fondaparinux, a synthetic penta-
saccharide of the AT binding region of heparin, selec-
tively inhibits factor Xa via AT. LMWH and fondaparinux 
cannot be monitored using the aPTT assay, but routine 
laboratory monitoring is usually not needed. However, in 
patients with renal failure, which affects drug excretion, 
or in pregnant women, obese patients, and neonates for 
whom drug levels are less certain after subcutaneous 
injection, drug levels can be assessed using anti–factor 
Xa activity assays.
LMWH and fondaparinux have longer half-lives than 
heparin and can be administered subcutaneously either 
once or twice daily. Protamine is only partially effective 
in reversing LMWH and not effective for fondaparinux. 
LMWH is contraindicated in patients with HIT. Although 
fondaparinux does not interact with PF4 to form the 
antigen responsible for HIT, data supporting its use in 
HIT are limited.
Direct Thrombin Inhibitors
DTIs bind directly to thrombin and do not require a 
cofactor such as AT to exert their effect. As their name 
implies, DTIs (e.g., lepirudin, argatroban, bivalirudin) 
bind directly to thrombin and do not require a cofac-
tor such as AT to inhibit their activity. All DTIs inhibit 
thrombin in its free and fibrin-bound states, unlike hep-
arin, which only has an effect on free thrombin. Clini-
cal effects can be monitored with aPTT or ACT assays. 
Hirudin is a naturally occurring DTI found in leeches. 
Lepirudin is a recombinant hirudin analog, whereas 
argatroban and bivalirudin are synthetic agents. Arga-
troban, which has a half-life of 45 minutes, is the pre-
ferred DTI in patients with renal insufficiency because 
it is hepatically eliminated. Bivalirudin is a reversible 
DTI and is metabolized by plasma proteases and renally 
excreted. Bivalirudin is often chosen in patients with 
both renal and hepatic dysfunction because of its short 
half-life of 25 minutes, although dose adjustments are 
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
430
still necessary. There are no antidotes for any of the 
DTIs, so reversal depends on their clearance. All DTIs 
will interfere with the INR, but argatroban has the 
greatest effect, which can complicate the transition to 
long-term warfarin anticoagulation.
Direct Oral Anticoagulants
Several new DOACs have been introduced into the market 
over the past 10 years. DOACs are appealing alterna-
tives to traditional VKAs, as they have more predictable 
pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics and fewer 
drug–drug interactions, allowing them to be dosed with-
out daily laboratory monitoring. Until recently, a sig-
nificant limitation has been the lack of specific antidotes 
for DOAC reversal. Agents such as idarucizumab and 
andexanet alfa have been introduced; however, their use 
remains costly and availability limited.
Most DOACs are approved for prevention of VTE 
after hip or knee replacement surgery, treatment and 
secondary prevention of VTE, and prevention of stroke 
in nonvalvular atrial fibrillation. They are not approved 
for use in patients with mechanical heart valves and 
are contraindicated in pregnancy. In studies compar-
ing DOACs with warfarin for stroke prevention in atrial 
fibrillation, DOACs were found to have decreased rates 
of stroke, intracranial hemorrhage, and mortality, with 
similar rates of major bleeding events but increased 
gastrointestinal bleeding.23 DOACs were also found to 
be of similar efficacy to VKAs in the treatment of acute 
symptomatic VTE, but significantly decreased the risk of 
major bleeding.24
DOACs can be divided into two broad categories: (1) 
those that inhibit thrombin and (2) those that inhibit 
factor Xa. Dabigatran (Pradaxa), a DTI, was the first new 
oral antithrombotic agent approved for the prevention of 
ischemic stroke in patients with nonvalvular atrial fibril-
lation since warfarin. Dabigatran is predominantly elimi-
nated by the kidneys; therefore dosing should be reduced 
in patients with a CrCl <30 mL/min. Direct Xa inhibitors 
(rivaroxaban [Xarelto], apixaban [Eliquis], edoxaban 
[Savaysa], and betrixaban Bevyxxa]) are agents whose 
activity is directed against the active site of factor Xa. 
Most direct Xa inhibitors undergo some renal clearance, 
and half-lives may be prolonged in individuals with renal 
impairment and in older patients. Apixaban, however, 
has been approved for use in patients with end-stage 
renal disease requiring hemodialysis.25
Because of their predictable pharmacokinetics, routine 
monitoring of DOAC therapy is not required. However, 
testing may be necessary in the setting of suspected over-
dose, uncontrolled bleeding, or need for urgent/emergent 
surgery. Monitoring of dabigatran therapy is difficult, as 
the aPTT assay is nonlinear until dabigatran concentra-
tions are quite high (>200 ng/mL). The TT is very sensi-
tive to dabigatran, so although it is useful to detect any 
presence of the drug, it cannot be used to quantify the 
amount of drug present. Instead, if available, dilute TT or 
ecarin clotting time are both linear at clinically relevant 
dabigatran concentrations and are the tests of choice if 
monitoring is necessary.26 For direct Xa inhibitors, anti–
factor Xa activity assays are best suited for monitoring 
but must be specifically calibrated for each drug.
Thrombolytics
Thrombolytic therapy is used to break up or dissolve 
blood clots. These medications are most commonly used 
during acute myocardial infarctions, strokes, massive 
PE, arterial thromboembolism, and venous thrombosis. 
Thrombolytics may be given through an intravenous 
catheter systemically or directly to the site of blockage. 
Most thrombolytic agents are serine proteases that work 
by converting plasminogen to plasmin (plasminogen 
activators). Plasmin then degrades fibrinogen, fibrin, and 
crosslinked fibrin (found in the clot), thereby generating 
fibrin-degradation products.
Thrombolytic drugs are often divided into two catego-
ries: (1) non–fibrin-specific agents or (2) fibrin-specific 
agents. Streptokinase, produced by β-hemolytic strepto-
cocci, is a non–fibrin-specific thrombolytic and was the 
first clinically used thrombolytic agent. Because strep-
tokinase is a bacterial protein, it can elicit an immune 
response, including allergic or anaphylactic reactions. 
Fibrin-specific thrombolytic drugs include recombinant 
tPAs such as alteplase, reteplase, and tenecteplase. The 
ability of a thrombolytic agent to selectively recognize 
plasminogen bound to fibrin surfaces rather than plas-
minogen in the circulation dictates its fibrin specificity. 
Fibrin-specific thrombolytic agents may confer a lower 
risk of hemorrhagic complications by limiting lysis to 
the site of thrombosis; however, data regarding such a 
benefit are conflicting.27
In addition to lysing clots, tPAs function as antico-
agulants through the liberation of fibrin degradation 
products during fibrinolysis. These degradation products 
include fragment X (from fibrinogenolysis) and D-dimer 
(from crosslinked fibrin), which inhibit platelet aggrega-
tion.28 Surgery or puncture of noncompressible vessels is 
contraindicated within a 10-day period after the use of 
thrombolytic drugs.
Procoagulant Drugs
Perioperative bleeding can be the result of surgical 
bleeding but also because of hemostatic deficiency 
resulting in microvascular bleeding. Although transfu-
sion of blood products is the primary therapy used to 
correct hemostatic defects (see Chapter 25), anesthesia 
providers may use procoagulant drugs as adjuncts to 
reduce blood loss. These drugs can be divided into two 
different classes: antifibrinolytics and factor replace-
ments (see Table 23.4).
III
Chapter 23 Hemostasis
431
Antifibrinolytics
There are two types of antifibrinolytics: the lysine ana-
logs (epsilonaminocaproic acid [EACA] and tranexamic 
acid [TXA]) and a serine protease inhibitor, aprotinin. 
Aprotinin was removed from the U.S. market because of 
concerns of renal and cardiovascular toxicity and is now 
only available in Europe and Canada. The lysine analogs 
act to impair fibrinolysis by competitively inhibiting the 
binding site on plasminogen, leading to inhibition of 
plasminogen activation in addition to preventing plas-
minogen binding of fibrin. TXA and EACA likely have 
equivalent efficacy and decrease perioperative blood loss 
in cardiac surgery, liver transplantation, and orthopedic 
surgery.
The use of TXA in trauma patients was studied in the 
CRASH-2 trial and was associated with a reduction in 
all-cause mortality (14.5% vs. 16%, P = 0.0035), includ-
ing the risk of death because of bleeding (4.9% vs. 5.8%, 
P = 0.0077), without an increase in vascular occlusive 
events.9 Early administration of TXA was key in improv-
ing outcomes, however, as those who received the drug 
after 3 hours experienced increased risk of death from 
bleeding (relative risk [RR] of 1.44; 95% confidence inter-
val [CI] 1.12 to 1.84; P = 0.004).29 Similarly, the World 
Maternal Antifibrinolytic (WOMAN) Trial found that 
administration of TXA reduced death caused by bleed-
ing in women with postpartum hemorrhage, especially if 
given within 3 hours of birth and was not associated with 
an increase in adverse effects.30
Overall, TXA and EACA appear to be inexpensive and 
low-risk adjunctive agents that should be considered for 
use in major surgery or critical bleeding. Administra-
tion of lysine analogs perioperatively does not appear to 
increase the risk of thrombosis, but further studies are 
necessary before this can be definitively concluded. How-
ever, there are reports of high-dose TXA causing seizures 
in patients undergoing cardiac surgery.31 This is thought 
to be the result of TXA binding to GABAA receptors, 
which in turn reduces GABAA-mediated inhibition in the 
central nervous system (CNS). Because of this effect, it is 
recommended that doses for cardiac surgery be limited 
to a loading dose of 10 mg/kg followed by an infusion 
of 1 mg/kg/hr.32
Recombinant Factor VIIa
rFVIIa increases the generation of thrombin via the 
intrinsic and extrinsic pathways to enhance hemostasis. 
rFVIIa binds TF, which accelerates the activation of fac-
tor X; however, rFVIIa is also thought to activate fac-
tor X in a TF-independent manner.33 Both mechanisms 
result in a “burst” of thrombin and fibrin generation, 
which leads to clot formation. The halflife of rFVIIa is 
relatively short at only 2 to 2.5 hours, so it may require 
repeat dosing until the bleeding is controlled. 
rFVIIa was originally FDA approved for use in 
hemophilia patients with inhibitors, and its successful 
use generated a great deal of interest in its potential to 
promote hemostasis in hemorrhaging patients without 
a preexistent coagulation disorder. Consequently, there 
has been increased off-label use of rFVIIa in cardiac 
surgery, trauma, and liver transplantation and in patients 
with intracranial hemorrhage and traumatic brain injury. 
Overall, trials have demonstrated decreased rates of blood 
product transfusion when rFVIIa was used; however, 
there were no significant improvements in mortality 
rates.34 Furthermore, rates of venous and arterial throm-
boses (including coronary events) were increased. As a 
result, guidelines now recommend that rFVIIa no longer 
be used for the off-label indications of prevention and 
treatment of bleeding in patients without hemophilia.35
Thus, given the lack of formal assessment, the throm-
boembolic risk of rFVIIa should be carefully weighed 
against the potential benefit as a “last ditch” treatment 
of refractory bleeding.
Prothrombin Complex Concentrate
PCCs are purified formulations of varying amounts of 
vitamin K–dependent coagulation factors. Three-factor 
PCCs differ from four-factor PCCs in that they do not 
contain significant amounts of factor VII. Most of the 
factors are preserved in the inactive state, with the aim of 
decreasing thrombogenic risk; however, FEIBA is a four-
factor PCC that contains activated factor VII. Although 
PCCs are derived from human plasma, they are treated 
with at least one viral reduction process, which reduces 
the risk for infectious and noninfectious transfusion 
reactions. Because of their improved safety profile and 
small volume of administration compared with plasma, 
PCCs are the first-line treatment for emergent reversal 
of VKAs.
Fibrinogen Concentrate
Fibrinogen concentrate (FC) carries FDA approval for 
the correction of congenital fibrinogen deficiency but is 
increasingly used to correct acquired hypofibrinogen-
emia with the goals of reducing coagulopathy, bleed-
ing, and transfusion requirements. FC is produced from 
pooled human plasma and undergoes solvent/detergent 
and viral inactivation steps during the manufacturing 
process. As a result, FC offers benefits over plasma 
and cryoprecipitate in terms of standardized fibrino-
gen content, low infusion volume, decreased infec-
tious risk, and faster time to administration because 
of rapid reconstitution. Alternatively, cryoprecipitate 
and plasma are less costly and provide additional 
procoagulant factors (e.g., factors VIII and XIII and 
vWF) that could be beneficial during massive bleeding. 
Large-scale, randomized controlled trials comparing FC 
with cryoprecipitate are lacking; however, some hospi-
tals have incorporated FC into viscoelastic test-based 
transfusion algorithms with the goal of reducing blood 
product transfusion rates.
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
432
PERIOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT OF ANTI-
THROMBOTIC THERAPY
The perioperative management of patients who require 
chronic anticoagulation or antiplatelet therapy involves 
balancing the risk of surgical bleeding against the risk 
of developing postoperative thromboembolism. Preop-
erative evaluation should be performed by a multidisci-
plinary team with sufficient time before elective surgery 
in order to thoroughly review surgical risk factors and 
the medical indication for antithrombotic therapy and 
to develop a consensus plan for the discontinuation and 
reinstitution of anticoagulation or antiplatelet agents.
Vitamin K Antagonists
For patients taking VKAs, the current recommenda-
tion is to stop VKAs 5 days before surgery for those 
who are at low risk for perioperative thromboembolism 
(Table 23.5).36 VKAs should be restarted 12 to 24 hours 
postoperatively if there is adequate hemostasis. Patients 
at high risk of thromboembolism should be placed on 
bridging anticoagulation with UFH or LMWH after dis-
continuation of VKAs. For patients at intermediate throm-
boembolic risk, there is no definitive guidance regarding 
bridging therapy, so the approach chosen should be based 
on individual patient and surgical risk factors.37
Heparins
For those patients receiving bridging therapy with UFH, 
the infusion should be stopped 4 to 6 hours before 
surgery and resumed without a bolus dose no sooner 
than 12 hours postoperatively. In surgeries with high 
postoperative bleeding risk, resumption of UFH should 
be delayed 48 to 72 hours until adequate hemostasis has 
been achieved. In patients receiving bridging therapy 
with LMWH, the last dose of LMWH should be admin-
istered 24 hours before surgery and dosing should be 
resumed 24 hours postoperatively in low-bleeding-risk 
surgery and delayed until 48 to 72 hours postoperatively 
for surgeries with high bleeding risk.37
Antiplatelet Agents
For patients receiving nonreversible antiplatelet agents 
(e.g., aspirin, clopidogrel, ticlopidine, and prasugrel), 
decisions regarding changes in therapy are based on the 
following factors: (1) the patient's risk of a perioperative 
cardiovascular event; (2) whether the surgery is a minor 
procedure, major procedure, or cardiac procedure; and (3) 
the timing and type of stent placement for those patients 
who have undergone recent percutaneous coronary 
intervention. Low-dose acetylsalicylic acid (ASA) has 
been shown to reduce the risk of stroke and myocardial 
infarction by 25% to 30%,38 and continuation of perio-
perative ASA therapy may confer a significant reduction 
in myocardial infarction and other major cardiovascular 
events.39 However, concerns remain that continuation of 
ASA therapy increases the risk of major bleeding.40
Consequently, current recommendations are to con-
tinue ASA for patients who are at moderate to high risk 
for cardiovascular events requiring noncardiac surgery 
and only stop ASA 7 to 10 days before surgery for 
patients at low risk for cardiovascular events. Patients 
on dual antiplatelet therapy (DAPT)—most commonly, 
ASA and clopidogrel—should discontinue the clopidogrel 
5 days before cardiac or noncardiac surgery. Antiplatelet 
management of patients who have recently undergone 
percutaneous coronary procedures is unique because of 
the increased risk of stent thrombosis. If possible, surgery 
should be delayed for 30 days after bare-metal stent 
placement and ideally up to 6 months after drug-eluting 
stent placement.41 If surgery is required before this time 
has passed, DAPT should be continued unless the risk of 
bleeding is thought to outweigh the risk of thrombosis. If 
a DAPT after stent implantation has been held before a 
surgical procedure, therapy should be restarted as soon as 
possible, given the substantial thrombotic risks.
Neuraxial Anesthesia and Anticoagulation
Many patients who are receiving anticoagulant or 
antiplatelet therapy may require procedures that could 
benefit from neuraxial anesthetics. Given the wide 
variety of antithrombotic medications being used by 
perioperative patients, anesthesia providers must be 
aware of the risks of bleeding and neurologic injury 
Risk
Indication
High
Mechanical heart valve
Rheumatic valvular heart disease
CHADS score ≥5
VTE within 3 months or history of VTE when 
VKAs are discontinued
Moderate
CHADS score of 3 or 4
VTE between 3 and 12 months or history of 
recurrence
Active cancer
Low
CHADS score 0–2
VTE >12 months prior and no other risk factors
Table 23.5
Perioperative Risk Stratification
CHADS: Congestive heart failure, hypertension, age ≥75, diabetes 
mellitus, prior stroke; VKA, vitamin K antagonist; VTE, venous 
thromboembolism.
From Panigrahi AK, Liu LL. Patient blood management: Coagulation. 
In Gropper MA, ed. Miller's Anesthesia. 9th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 
2020. Table 50.3.)
III
Chapter 23 Hemostasis
433
associated with each therapy. Unfortunately, data from 
randomized controlled trials to guide the timing and 
management of antithrombotic therapy for neuraxial 
anesthesia in the perioperative setting are lacking. 
However, societies, including the American Society of 
Regional Anesthesia and Pain Medicine (ASRA) and 
the European Society of Anaesthesiology (ESA), have 
reviewed the available data and published guidelines 
to assist in management (Table 23.6).42 These recom-
mendations will continue to be updated as evidence on 
the bleeding risk of newer anticoagulants emerges and 
can be accessed at the point-of-care via smart device 
apps (e.g., ASRA Coags).
Emergent Reversal of Anticoagulants
Management of perioperative anticoagulation is becom-
ing increasingly more complex with the advent of the 
DOACs and the number of patients who are now receiv-
ing chronic anticoagulation (Table 23.7). For those 
patients on VKA who are experiencing life-threatening 
bleeding or require emergency surgery, four-factor PCC 
is now the drug of choice for emergent reversal of oral 
VKA in place of plasma. Concomitant administration of 
vitamin K is required to restore carboxylation of vitamin 
K–dependent factors by the liver and provide a more 
sustained correction after the factors in the PCC infusion 
have been metabolized.
Time Before Puncture/
Catheter Manipulation 
or Removal
Time After Puncture/
Catheter Manipulation 
or Removal
Laboratory Tests
UFHs (for prophylaxis, ≤15,000 
IU/day
4–6 hr
1 hr
Platelet count for treatment 
>5 days
UFHs (for treatment)
IV 4–6 hr
SQ 24 hr
1 hr
1 hr
aPTT, ACT, platelet count
LMWH (for prophylaxis)
12 hr
4 hr
Platelet count for treatment 
>5 days
LMWH (for treatment)
24 hr
4 hr
Platelet count for treatment 
>5 days
Fondaparinux (for prophylaxis, 
2.5 mg/day)
36–42 hr
6–12 hr
Anti–factor Xa, standardized 
for specific agent
Rivaroxaban
72 hr
6 hr
Anti–factor Xa, standardized 
for specific agent
Apixaban
72 hr
6 hr
Anti–factor Xa, standardized 
for specific agent
Dabigatran
5 days
6 hr
dTT
Warfarin
5 days and INR ≤1.4
After catheter removal
INR
Argatroban
Contraindicated
Acetylsalicylic acid
None
None
Clopidogrel
7 days
After catheter removal
Ticlopidine
10 days
After catheter removal
Prasugrel
7–10 days
After catheter removal
6 hr with loading dose
Ticagrelor
5–7 days
After catheter removal
6 hr with loading dose
NSAIDs
None
None
Table 23.6
Recommended Time Intervals Before and After Neuraxial Puncture or Catheter Removal
ACT, Activated clotting time; aPTT, activated partial thromboplastin time; dTT, dilute thrombin time; INR, international normalized ratio; IU,
international unit; IV, intravenous; LMWH, low-molecular-weight heparin; NSAID, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug; SQ, subcutaneous; UFH,
unfractionated heparin; vWF, von Willebrand factor.
Adapted from Gogarten W et al.; European Society of Anaesthesiology. Regional anaesthesia and antithrombotic agents: Recommendations of 
the European Society of Anaesthesiology. Eur J Anaesthesiol. 2010;27(12):999–1015, with permission. Table 2.
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
434
There are no direct reversal agents for intravenous 
DTIs; however, their half-lives are relatively short, so 
time and supportive medical care are often sufficient 
to manage their anticoagulant effect in acute clinical 
situations. For DOACs, several novel reversal agents are 
becoming available. Idarucizumab is a humanized anti-
body fragment that binds to dabigatran with an affinity 
350 times greater than thrombin. The drug received 
FDA approval in 2015 and can completely reverse the 
anticoagulant effect of dabigatran in minutes.43 For 
patients taking oral direct factor Xa inhibitors, andexa-
net alfa was approved in 2018 for the emergent rever-
sal of rivaroxaban or apixaban.44 Andexanet alfa is a 
recombinant derivative of factor Xa that acts as a decoy, 
binding away factor Xa inhibitors and thereby reversing 
their effect. However, to date, andexanet alfa has not 
been carefully studied in surgical patients, and there 
is a concern that the duration of its effect may be too 
limited or it may complicate procedures requiring CPB 
by contributing to heparin resistance.45 46 Alternatively, 
PCC has shown promise as a strategy for reversing 
factor Xa inhibitors in surgical patients.47 Ultimately, 
when assessing the need for medication reversal, not 
only should the agent to be reversed be considered but 
also its pharmacokinetics, the patient's renal function, 
and the specifics regarding whether surgery is truly 
emergent or can wait for further drug clearance and 
level assessment.
CONCLUSION
Ongoing research has continued to reveal the com-
plexity of the coagulation system, but an understand-
ing of the fundamental principles of hemostasis will 
assist the anesthesia provider in identifying patients 
at risk of bleeding preoperatively and safely manag-
ing blood loss and treating acquired coagulopathy 
Antithrombotic Agent
Drug Name
Stop Before 
Procedure
Monitoring
Reversal Agents
Antiplatelet agents
ASA
P2Y12 receptor 
antagonists
GPIIb/IIIa antagonists
7 days
7–14 days
24–72 hr
None
Platelet transfusion
Vitamin K antagonists
Warfarin
2–5 days
INR
PCC, FFP, vitamin K
Heparins
UFH
6 hr
aPTT, anti–factor Xa
Protamine
LMWH
12–24 h
None required, 
but anti–factor Xa 
activity can monitor 
levels
Partially reversed by 
protamine
Pentasaccharide
Fondaparinux
3 days (prophylactic 
dosing)
None required, 
but anti–factor Xa 
activity can monitor 
levels
None
Direct thrombin inhibitors
Argatroban
Bivalirudin
4–6 hr
3 h
aPTT or ACT
None
Dabigatran
2–4 days (longer if 
renal impairment)
None required, dTT 
can monitor levels
Idarucizumab
FXa inhibitors
Rivaroxaban
Apixaban
Edoxaban
2–3 days
2–3 days
2–3 days
None required, 
but anti–factor Xa 
activity can monitor 
levels
PCC
Andexanet alfa for 
rivaroxaban and 
apixaban
Table 23.7
Common Anticoagulants Along With the Required Laboratory Monitoring and Possible Reversal Agents for 
Emergencies
ACT, Activated clotting time; aPTT, activated partial thromboplastin time; ASA, acetylsalicylic acid; dTT, dilute thrombin time; FFP, fresh frozen 
plasma; INR, international normalized ratio; IV, intravenous; PCC, prothrombin complex concentrate; PT, prothrombin time.
From Panigrahi AK, Liu LL. Patient blood management: Coagulation. In Gropper MA, ed. Miller's Anesthesia. 9th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020. 
Table 50.5.
III
Chapter 23 Hemostasis
435
both intraoperatively and postoperatively. Care-
ful preoperative assessment of patients receiving 
antithrombotic therapy and a multidisciplinary team 
approach between the patient, primary care physi-
cian, hematologist, surgeon, and anesthesia provider 
are essential to ensure the perioperative safety of 
these patients.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The author, editors, and publisher would like to thank 
Drs. Lindsey L. Huddleston and Linda L. Liu for contrib-
uting to this chapter in the previous edition of this work. 
Excerpts of their chapter were incorporated and serve as 
the foundation for the current chapter.
REFERENCES
1. Furie B, Furie BC. Mechanisms of 
thrombus formation. N Engl J Med. 
2008;359:938–949.
2. Broos K, Feys HB, De Meyer SF, Van-
hoorelbeke K, Deckmyn H. Platelets at 
work in primary hemostasis. Blood Rev. 
2011;25:155–167.
3. Longstaff C, Kolev K. Basic mechanisms 
and regulation of fibrinolysis. J Thromb 
Haemost. 2015;13(Suppl 1):S98–105.
4. O'Donnell JS, Lavin M. Periopera-
tive management of patients with von 
Willebrand disease. Hematology Am 
Soc Hematol Educ Program. 2019;2019:
604–609.
5. Peyvandi F, etal. Coagulation factor 
activity and clinical bleeding sever-
ity in rare bleeding disorders: results 
from the European Network of Rare 
Bleeding Disorders. J Thromb Haemost. 
2012;10:615–621.
6. Tripodi A, Mannucci PM. The coagu-
lopathy of chronic liver disease. N Engl 
J Med. 2011;365:147–156.
7. Sniecinski RM, Chandler WL. Activa-
tion of the hemostatic system during 
cardiopulmonary bypass. Anesth Analg. 
2011;113:1319–1333.
8. Chang R, Cardenas JC, Wade CE, Hol-
comb JB. Advances in the understanding 
of trauma-induced coagulopathy. Blood. 
2016;128:1043–1049.
9. collaborators C-t, etal. Effects of 
tranexamic acid on death, vascular 
occlusive events, and blood transfu-
sion in trauma patients with significant 
haemorrhage (CRASH-2): a randomised, 
placebo-controlled 
trial. 
Lancet. 
2010;376:23–32.
10. American Society of Anesthesiologists 
Task Force on Perioperative Blood, M. 
Practice guidelines for perioperative 
blood management: an updated report 
by the American Society of Anesthe-
siologists Task Force on Perioperative 
Blood Management*. Anesthesiology. 
2015;122:241–275.
11. Wolberg AS, Aleman MM, Leiderman 
K, Machlus KR. Procoagulant activ-
ity in hemostasis and thrombosis: Vir-
chow's triad revisited. Anesth Analg. 
2012;114:275–285.
12. Lim W. Antiphospholipid syndrome. 
Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ Pro-
gram. 2013:675–680 2013.
13. Greinacher A. CLINICAL PRACTICE. 
Heparin-Induced Thrombocytopenia. N 
Engl J Med. 2015;373:252–261.
14. De Stefano V, Rossi E. Testing for inher-
ited thrombophilia and consequences for 
antithrombotic prophylaxis in patients 
with venous thromboembolism and their 
relatives. A review of the Guidelines from 
Scientific Societies and Working Groups. 
Thromb Haemost. 2013;110:697–705.
15. Bates SM, etal. VTE, thrombophilia, 
antithrombotic therapy, and pregnancy: 
Antithrombotic Therapy and Prevention 
of Thrombosis, 9th ed: American Col-
lege of Chest Physicians Evidence-Based 
Clinical Practice Guidelines. Chest. 
2012;141:e691S–e736S.
16. Warkentin TE, Pai M, Linkins LA. Direct 
oral anticoagulants for treatment of 
HIT: update of Hamilton experience 
and literature review. Blood. 2017;130:
1104–1113.
17. Levy JH, Szlam F, Wolberg AS, Winkler 
A. Clinical use of the activated partial 
thromboplastin time and prothrombin 
time for screening: a review of the lit-
erature and current guidelines for test-
ing. Clin Lab Med. 2014;34:453–477.
18. Wang CZ, Moss J, Yuan CS. Commonly 
Used Dietary Supplements on Coagula-
tion Function during Surgery. Medicines 
(Basel). 2015;2:157–185.
19. Zehnder J, Price E, Jin J. Controversies 
in heparin monitoring. Am J Hematol. 
2012;87(Suppl 1):S137–S140.
20. Peterson P, etal. The preoperative bleed-
ing time test lacks clinical benefit: 
College of American Pathologists' and 
American Society of Clinical Patholo-
gists' position article. Arch Surg. 
1998;133:134–139.
21. Karkouti K, etal. Point-of-Care Hemo-
static Testing in Cardiac Surgery: A 
Stepped-Wedge 
Clustered 
Rand-
omized Controlled Trial. Circulation. 
2016;134:1152–1162.
22. Funk CD, FitzGerald GA. COX-2 inhibi-
tors and cardiovascular risk. J Cardio-
vasc Pharmacol. 2007;50:470–479.
23. Ruff CT, etal. Comparison of the effi-
cacy and safety of new oral antico-
agulants with warfarin in patients with 
atrial fibrillation: a meta-analysis of 
randomised trials. Lancet. 2014;383:
955–962.
24. van Es N, Coppens M, Schulman S, 
Middeldorp S, Buller HR. Direct oral 
anticoagulants compared with vitamin K 
antagonists for acute venous thrombo-
embolism: evidence from phase 3 trials. 
Blood. 2014;124:1968–1975.
25. Wang X, etal. Pharmacokinetics, phar-
macodynamics, and safety of apixaban 
in subjects with end-stage renal dis-
ease on hemodialysis. J Clin Pharmacol. 
2016;56:628–636.
26. Douxfils J, etal. Laboratory testing in 
patients treated with direct oral antico-
agulants: a practical guide for clinicians. 
J Thromb Haemost. 2018;16:209–219.
27. Ouriel K. Comparison of safety and effica-
cy of the various thrombolytic agents. Rev 
Cardiovasc Med. 2002;3(Suppl 2):S17–S24.
28. Verni CC, Davila A, Sims CA, Diamond 
SL. D-Dimer and Fibrin Degradation 
Products Impair Platelet Signaling: Plas-
ma D-Dimer Is a Predictor and Mediator 
of Platelet Dysfunction During Trauma. 
J Appl Lab Med. 2020;5:1253–1264.
29. collaborators C-, etal. The importance 
of early treatment with tranexamic 
acid in bleeding trauma patients: an 
exploratory analysis of the CRASH-2 
randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 
2011;377:1096–1101 1101 e1091-1092.
30. Collaborators WT. Effect of early 
tranexamic acid administration on 
mortality, hysterectomy, and oth-
er morbidities in women with post-
partum haemorrhage (WOMAN): an 
international, 
randomised, 
double-
blind, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet. 
2017;389:2105–2116.
31. Murkin JM, etal. High-dose tranexamic 
Acid is associated with nonischem-
ic clinical seizures in cardiac surgi-
cal patients. Anesth Analg. 2010;110:
350–353.
32. Lecker I, Orser BA, Mazer CD. Seiz-
ing" the opportunity to understand 
antifibrinolytic drugs. Can J Anaesth. 
2012;59:1–5.
33. Shibeko AM, Woodle SA, Lee TK, 
Ovanesov MV. Unifying the mecha-
nism of recombinant FVIIa action: dose 
dependence is regulated differently by 
tissue factor and phospholipids. Blood. 
2012;120:891–899.
34. Simpson E, etal. Recombinant factor 
VIIa for the prevention and treatment 
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
436
of bleeding in patients without hae-
mophilia. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2012:CD005011.
35. Lin Y, Moltzan CJ, Anderson DR. Nation-
al Advisory Committee on, B. & Blood, P. 
The evidence for the use of recombinant 
factor VIIa in massive bleeding: revision 
of the transfusion policy framework. 
Transfus Med. 2012;22:383–394.
36. Douketis JD, etal. Perioperative man-
agement of antithrombotic therapy: 
Antithrombotic Therapy and Prevention 
of Thrombosis, 9th ed: American Col-
lege of Chest Physicians Evidence-Based 
Clinical Practice Guidelines. Chest. 
2012;141:e326S–e350S.
37. Hornor MA, etal. American College 
of Surgeons' Guidelines for the Perio-
perative Management of Antithrom-
botic Medication. J Am Coll Surg. 
2018;227:521–536 e521.
38. Antithrombotic Trialists C. Collaborative 
meta-analysis of randomised trials of 
antiplatelet therapy for prevention of 
death, myocardial infarction, and stroke 
in high risk patients. BMJ. 2002;324:
71–86.
39. Oscarsson A, etal. To continue or 
discontinue aspirin in the periopera-
tive period: a randomized, controlled 
clinical trial. Br J Anaesth. 2010;104:
305–312.
40. Devereaux PJ, etal. Aspirin in patients 
undergoing noncardiac surgery. N Engl J 
Med. 2014;370:1494–1503.
41. Levine GN, etal. 2016 ACC/AHA Guide-
line Focused Update on Duration of 
Dual Antiplatelet Therapy in Patients 
With Coronary Artery Disease: A Report 
of the American College of Cardiology/
American Heart Association Task Force 
on Clinical Practice Guidelines. J Am 
Coll Cardiol. 2016;68:1082–1115.
42. Horlocker TT, etal. Regional Anesthesia 
in the Patient Receiving Antithrombotic 
or Thrombolytic Therapy: American 
Society of Regional Anesthesia and Pain 
Medicine Evidence-Based Guidelines 
(Fourth Edition). Reg Anesth Pain Med. 
2018;43:263–309.
43. Pollack CV Jr, etal. Idarucizumab for 
Dabigatran Reversal - Full Cohort Anal-
ysis. N Engl J Med. 2017;377:431–441.
44. Connolly SJ, etal. Full Study Report of 
Andexanet Alfa for Bleeding Associated 
with Factor Xa Inhibitors. N Engl J Med. 
2019;380:1326–1335.
45. Levy JH, Connors JM. Andexanet Alfa 
Use in Cardiac Surgical Patients: A Xa 
Inhibitor and Heparin Reversal Agent. J 
Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth. 2021;35:265–
266.
46. Levy JH, Welsby I. Andexanet Alfa 
Use in Patients Requiring Cardiopul-
monary Bypass: Quo Vadis? A A Pract. 
2019;13:477.
47. Levy JH, Douketis J, Steiner T, Goldstein 
JN, Milling TJ. Prothrombin Complex 
Concentrates for Perioperative Vita-
min K Antagonist and Non-vitamin K 
Anticoagulant Reversal. Anesthesiology. 
2018;129:1171–1184.
AL GRAWANY
437
Chapter
INTRODUCTION
Perioperative fluid administration has two goals: to 
ensure adequate intravascular volume to maintain car-
diac output and tissue perfusion and to prevent elec-
trolyte and acid–base disturbances. Intravenous fluid 
therapy represents a core element of anesthesia practice, 
a companion to the classic triad of unconsciousness, pain 
relief, and muscle relaxation.1 The anesthesia provider 
must select appropriate intravenous fluids and decide the 
appropriate timing and volume to be administered. This 
chapter will review the physiology of fluid balance, types 
of fluids available, and strategies to achieve optimal fluid 
balance in the perioperative setting.
PHYSIOLOGY OF FLUID BALANCE
Approximately 60% of body weight is composed of total 
body water. This total body water can then be divided 
into intracellular (∼55%) and extracellular (∼45%) com-
ponents (Fig. 24.1). Intravascular fluid represents only 
7.5% of total body water.
Transcapillary fluid shifts are driven by competing Star-
ling forces across the endothelial membrane (Fig.24.2), in 
addition to endothelial permeability. Hydrostatic pressure 
is the strongest driver of fluid movement. As fluid trav-
erses a capillary bed, capillary hydrostatic pressure(Pc) 
decreases relative to interstitial hydrostatic pressure (Pi), 
whereas capillary oncotic pressure increases relative to 
interstitial oncotic pressure. A thin, gel-like layer known 
as the glycocalyx coats the endothelial membrane and 
is involved in the regulation of endothelial permeabil-
ity.2 Intravenous fluid resuscitation and other causes of 
increased intravascular hydrostatic pressure can degrade 
the glycocalyx layer, especially in patients with sepsis or 
other disease processes associated with microcirculatory 
dysfunction.3 4
INTRODUCTION
PHYSIOLOGY OF FLUID BALANCE
FLUID REPLACEMENT SOLUTIONS
Crystalloids
Normal Saline
Balanced Crystalloid Solutions
Other Crystalloid Solutions
Colloids
Albumin
Synthetic Colloids
HEMODYNAMIC MONITORING FOR FLUID 
RESPONSIVENESS
PERIOPERATIVE FLUID STRATEGIES FOR 
OPTIMAL VOLUME STATUS
CONCLUSIONS
FLUID MANAGEMENT
Catherine Chiu, Matthieu Legrand
24
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
438
FLUID REPLACEMENT SOLUTIONS
Although many crystalloid and colloid replacement fluids 
are available for administration, the ideal fluid remains 
a source of debate. An understanding of individual fluid 
compositions facilitates an informed choice of replace-
ment fluids (Table 24.2).
Crystalloids
Crystalloid solutions, a mixture of electrolytes and water, 
can be classified by composition (balanced vs. unbal-
anced) and tonicity (hypotonic, isotonic, and hypertonic). 
Balanced crystalloid solutions contain electrolytes in a 
ratio similar to plasma, unlike unbalanced solutions such 
as normal saline. Crystalloid solutions do not contrib-
ute to oncotic pressure because they diffuse out of the 
intravascular space shortly after administration.6 Tonic-
ity of a solution will affect osmolar equilibrium via the 
movement of water. To maintain equal intracellular and 
extracellular compartment osmolarity, hypotonic fluids 
will shift water toward the intracellular compartment, 
whereas hypertonic fluids will shift water toward the 
extracellular compartment.
Normal Saline
Normal saline (0.9% NaCl) is a slightly hypertonic solu-
tion with supraphysiologic concentrations of sodium and 
chloride. Stewart's approach to acid–base equilibrium 
(Fig. 24.3) allows a deeper understanding of normal 
saline's physiologic effects (also see Chapter 22). Accord-
ing to Stewart's approach, the plasma acid–base status 
is based on three parameters: the strong ion difference 
(SID), the arterial partial pressure of carbon dioxide 
(PaCO2), and the total anion charge of all weak plasma 
acids (Atot). In this approach bicarbonate does not define 
acid–base disturbances. SID is a simple calculation of 
the difference in charge between the strong cations (i.e., 
Na+, K+, Ca++, Mg++) and strong anions (i.e., Cl , lactate, 
ketoacids, sulfates). Whereas the SID of plasma is around 
40, the SID of normal saline is 0. Infusion of a solution 
with SID lower than plasma will lead to a decrease in 
plasma SID and metabolic acidosis because of the relative 
increase in [Cl ] concentration at the expense of [HCO3 ]. 
As such, resuscitation with low-SID solutions such as 
normal saline will inevitably lead to a hyperchloremic 
metabolic acidosis. Further consequences of normal 
saline–induced acidosis include the risk of increased 
plasma potassium because of cellular shifts. Potassium 
levels have been reported to be similar or higher than 
baseline using normal saline compared with balanced 
solutions, even if the balanced solutions contain a low 
concentration of potassium.7 8 The use of normal saline 
has also been associated with a higher incidence of major 
Because electrolytes can move freely across endothe-
lial membranes, they do not produce significant osmotic 
forces in transcapillary fluid equilibrium under most 
circumstances. However, electrolytes do play a criti-
cal role in fluid shifts between the intracellular and 
extracellular compartments. Knowledge of normal elec-
trolyte composition in the intravascular, intracellular, 
and extracellular compartments facilitates the choice 
of replacement fluids that help maintain the relative 
electrolyte balance and water distribution between com-
partments (Table 24.1).5
Fig. 24.1 Distribution of total body water. (From Edwards MR, 
Grocott MPW. Perioperative fluid and electrolyte therapy. In 
Gropper MA, et al, ed. Miller’s Anesthesia. 8th ed. Philadelphia: 
Elsevier; 2015)
0
Extracellular 45%
Sequestered
17.5%
Functional ECF
27.5%
Interstitial 20%
Sub-glycocalyceal layer 2%
Intra-
vascular
7.5%
Plasma 5.5%
Bone and dense
connective tissue 15%
Intracellular 55%
Transcellular 2.5%
100
50
40
30
20
10
80
90
70
60
% of total body water
III
Chapter 24 Fluid Management
439
plasma concentration. Most solutions contain an anion 
buffer, such as lactate, acetate, or gluconate, to main-
tain the electroneutrality of the solution. Metabolism of 
lactate and acetate results in plasma conversion to bicar-
bonate. Ringer's lactate and Plasma-Lyte have a higher 
SID (27 and 50, respectively) because of this alkalinizing 
effect.10 With large-volume infusions, accumulation of 
these anion buffers has been a concern. For example, 
rapid acetate accumulation has been associated in some 
studies with hypotension and decreased cardiac contrac-
tility.11 12 However, in a clinical trial of critically ill burn 
patients randomized to receive either lactated Ringer's or 
Plasma-Lyte there was no significant difference in mean 
arterial pressure, cardiac index, or acid–base disturbances 
between the two groups.10 Their findings revealed only a 
transient increase in plasma acetate in the Plasma-Lyte 
group. Notably, patients in the Plasma-Lyte group had 
significantly lower ionized calcium levels, likely caused 
by the chelating effects of acetate. Close monitoring 
of ionized calcium is required when large volumes of 
Plasma-Lyte are being infused.
Other Crystalloid Solutions
Hypertonic saline (i.e., 3% NaCl) should only be admin-
istered to patients with intracranial hypertensive emer-
gencies or acute symptomatic hyponatremia. Although 
the osmolarity of hypertonic saline is high, the resulting 
adverse kidney morbidity in acutely and critically ill 
patients, increased coagulopathy, increased inflamma-
tion, and higher postoperative morbidity.9 The increase 
in plasma chloride concentration after infusion of normal 
saline has been proposed as a mechanism for increased 
risk of acute kidney injury because of chloride-inducing 
vasoconstriction of the glomerular afferent arteriole and 
potentially decreased renal blood flow.
Balanced Crystalloid Solutions
Balanced solutions, such as Ringer's lactate and Plasma-
Lyte, contain differing amounts of electrolytes to mimic 
Fig. 24.2 Starling forces governing transcapillary fluid shifts. Capillary hydrostatic forces decrease 
as plasma oncotic pressure increases across a capillary. Red arrows indicate intravascular hydrostatic 
pressure, dotted line indicates oncotic pressure, and blue arrows indicate transcapillary fluid shifts. Panel A 
represents normal physiologic states, and Panel B represents a pathologic state with contributing factors 
(in box) leading to increased fluid shift from the intravascular to the interstitial compartment. A, Surface 
area for filtration; Jv net capillary flow rate; Lp filtration coefficient; Pc capillary hydrostatic pressure; P
interstitial hydrostatic pressure; Πp plasma protein oncotic pressure; Π interstitial oncotic pressure; σ
reflection coefficient.
Electrolyte Plasma Fluid 
(mEq/L)
Intracellular 
Fluid (mEq/L)
Extracellular 
Fluid (mEq/L)
Sodium
142
10
140
Potassium
4
150
4.5
Magnesium
2
40
2
Calcium
5
1
5
Chloride
103
103
117
Bicarbonate
25
7
28
Table 24.1 Normal Fluid Composition
Modified from Frost E. Fluid management. In Pardo M, Miller RD, eds. 
Basics of Anesthesia. 7th ed. Philadelphia; Elsevier; 2018, Table 23.1.
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
440
hypernatremia (i.e., intracellular dehydration) in patients 
unable to receive enteral water.
Colloids
Colloid solutions contain substances with large molecular 
weights, such as albumin or synthetic starches. Because 
of their greater plasma oncotic pressure, colloid solutions 
intravascular fluid shifts are temporary. The risks of 
hypertonic saline include hypernatremia and peripheral 
vein thrombophlebitis.
Five percent dextrose is often used as a parenteral 
alternative to enteral free water replacement. Intra-
venous dextrose is immediately metabolized. The risk 
of hyperglycemia and hyponatremia makes the use of 
this solution suitable only for correcting symptomatic 
Fig. 24.3 Stewart’s approach to plasma acid–base equilibrium. Left, Normal plasma. Plasma SID is 
normally around 40. Right, SID <40, which can result after resuscitation with a solution that has SID <40, 
such as normal saline. SID, Strong ion difference.
Normal 
Saline
Ringer’s 
Lactate
Ringer’s 
Acetate-
Gluconate 
(Plasma-Lyte)
Ringer’s 
Acetate-
Malate 
(Isofundine)
Hydroxyethyl 
Starch 6% 
130/0.4 
(Voluven)
Gelatin 
(Gelofusine)
Albumin 4% 
(Albumex 4)
Sodium (mmol/L)
154
130
140
140
154
154
148
Potassium (mmol/L)
0
4
5
4
Calcium (mmol/L)
0
3
0
2.5
Magnesium (mmol/L)
0
0
3
1
Chloride (mmol/L)
154
109
98
127
154
120
128
Bicarbonate (mmol/L)
0
0
0
0
Lactate (mmol/L)
0
28
0
28
Gluconate (mmol/L)
0
0
23
0
Acetate (mmol/L)
0
0
27
24
Osmolarity (mOsm/L)
308
275
294
304
308
274
250
SID
0
27
50
20
0
34
20
Table 24.2 Composition of Common Replacement Fluids
Adapted from Table 24.1 in Heming et al.6 and Noritomi et al.43
III
Chapter 24 Fluid Management
441
concentration(%), molecular weight, and molar substi-
tution (e.g., 6% HES 130/0.4). The choice of synthetic 
colloids for fluid replacement therapy remains contro-
versial for a number of reasons. In critically ill patients 
use of HES was associated with increased mortality and 
increased renal injury compared with the use of crystal-
loids.14 19 In a 2020 trial of patients undergoing major 
abdominal surgery deemed at high risk of developing 
postoperative acute kidney injury (AKI) there was no 
mortality benefit in patients receiving HES compared 
with normal saline, but patients receiving HES had a 
higher risk of developing AKI. The authors' findings do 
not support the use of HES as a replacement fluid in 
this surgical population.20 A systematic review of the 
safety and side effects of the different synthetic colloid 
solutions found increased incidence of anaphylactoid 
reactions and pruritis compared with albumin adminis-
tration.21 In cardiac surgery patients receiving HES there 
was a higher association with postoperative coagulopa-
thy and clinical bleeding, and HES administration has 
been implicated in the development of coagulopathy in 
healthy volunteers, critically ill patients, and postsurgical 
patients.21–24 This effect is likely caused by a reduction 
in circulating factor VIII and von Willebrand factors and 
impaired platelet function.
HEMODYNAMIC MONITORING FOR FLUID 
RESPONSIVENESS
An intravenous fluid bolus is typically administered 
with the goal of improving a patient's stroke volume 
and cardiac output. If the increase in stroke volume or 
cardiac output after the fluid bolus is greater than 10% 
to 15% of the prebolus values, the patient is considered 
“fluid responsive.” Many factors can affect fluid respon-
siveness, including cardiac rhythm, patient positioning, 
intrathoracic pressure, and respiratory effort.25 The 
impact of positive pressure ventilation on intrathoracic 
pressure and cardiac preload can be extremely useful 
in assessing fluid responsiveness. Specifically, when a 
patient receives a positive pressure mechanical venti-
lation breath, venous return will transiently decrease, 
causing the stroke volume to decrease a few seconds 
later. Commonly used surrogates of stroke volume 
include pulse pressure variation (PPV) and systolic pres-
sure variation (SPV), which are easily measured with an 
intraarterial catheter (also see Chapter 20). SPV values 
of greater than 10 mm Hg and PPV values of greater 
than 13% have been used to predict fluid responsiveness 
in mechanically ventilated, critically ill patients.26 SPV 
and PPV are most accurate in predicting fluid respon-
siveness in patients with a regular electrocardiogram 
(ECG) rhythm, mechanical ventilator tidal volume of 8to 
10mL/kg, supine positioning, and without conditions 
that alter intrathoracic pressure (e.g., laparoscopy).27
are expected to maintain intravascular volume longer 
than crystalloid solutions. Similarly, a smaller volume of 
colloid solution would be needed to maintain the same 
amount of intravascular volume compared with crystal-
loid solutions. However, in patients with critical illness 
and increased vascular permeability the intravascular 
half-life of colloids may be lower than expected.13 For 
example, in one large trial of critically ill patients ran-
domized to receive crystalloid or colloid fluid resuscita-
tion the total amount of fluid given in the colloid arm 
was statistically less, but only by 100 mL per day over 
4days.14 Another study of patients with severe sepsis 
or septic shock randomized to crystalloid versus colloid 
fluids found no difference in the total amount of fluids 
administered daily between the two groups.15 There is 
a risk–benefit decision to choosing not only between 
crystalloids and colloids but also among colloid solutions 
themselves, as described later.
Albumin
Albumin accounts for up to 50% of the total plasma 
protein content and up to 70% to 80% of plasma oncotic 
pressure.16 Commonly available preparations of albumin 
as a resuscitation fluid include 5% and 25% albumin. 
Although albumin is considered a physiologic plasma 
expander, the largest absolute amount of albumin resides 
in the interstitial fluid compartment. The interstitial 
albumin concentration ranges from 1.5 to 3 g/dL in most 
tissues, compared with 3.5 to 5 g/dL in plasma. Infused 
albumin will still be able to move into the interstitial 
compartment, and transfer is more rapid when the gly-
cocalyx layer is degraded and vascular permeability is 
increased.
Several studies of albumin replacement compared 
with crystalloids in critically ill patients did not find 
a mortality difference.15,17 Although a lower mortality 
rate was observed in a subgroup analysis of patients 
with septic shock, a randomized controlled trial is being 
performed for further evaluation. The potential benefit 
of albumin administration in the surgical population 
is largely unknown, and the acquisition cost is much 
higher than with crystalloids. Finally, because albumin 
is processed from human blood components, it may not 
be accepted as a resuscitation fluid by some Jehovah's 
Witness patients.
Synthetic Colloids
The high cost of albumin led to synthesis of large mol-
ecules with a base of starch, dextran, or gelatin that 
would remain intravascular for longer than crystalloid 
fluids. Many synthetic colloids are available for admin-
istration. They differ in molecular weight and molar 
substitutions to alter solubility.18 The hydroxyethyl starch 
(HES) products can be identified by three characteristics: 
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
442
Strategies for fluid management then shifted towards 
a target of “net-zero” weight balance after one seminal 
trial in patients undergoing elective colorectal surgery 
found increased postsurgical morbidity among patients 
who were randomized to a standard intraoperative and 
postoperative fluid regimen, compared with a restricted 
regimen with a goal of unchanged body weight.35 A 
2016 consensus statement from the Enhanced Recovery 
After Surgery (ERAS) Society provided moderate rec-
ommendations for keeping net-zero perioperative fluid 
balance.36 Successful ERAS protocols reported decreased 
hospital length of stay and readmission rates, particu-
larly for elective colorectal surgery, but the approach 
to intraoperative fluid management across institutions 
was nonuniform. For example, some institutions recom-
mended keeping total fluid intake to less than 2 L; others 
recommended using fluid boluses of 250-mL increments 
in addition to a basal infusion rate (<10 mL/kg/hr) to 
achieve urine output of >0.5 mL/kg/hr; and yet others 
recommended fluid boluses based on surrogate markers 
of cardiac output, such as the Kuper protocol.37–39 After 
some concern that intraoperative fluid restriction was 
associated with increased risk of AKI, a large interna-
tional trial was conducted among patients undergoing 
major abdominal surgery with an increased risk of com-
plications. In that study patients were randomized to a 
liberal intravenous fluid regimen (10 mL/kg fluid bolus 
on induction followed by 8 mL/kg/hr infusion intraop-
eratively, up to 100 kg) or a restrictive intravenous fluid 
regimen (fluid boluses of up to 5 mL/kg with 5 mL/
kg/hr infusion intraoperatively). Although the rate of 
disability-free survival at 1 year was the same in both 
groups, in a secondary outcome, AKI was more common 
in the restrictive group (8.6%) compared with the liberal 
group (5%).39 40
Similar to other realms of perioperative and critical 
care, optimal fluid management is likely dependent on 
individual hemodynamic status, and any overarching 
strategies will likely harm some patients and benefit 
others. Indeed, the ERAS Society provides a strong recom-
mendation for using advanced hemodynamic monitoring 
(i.e., arterial line monitoring and stroke volume moni-
toring) in high-risk patients undergoing major surgery 
with large intravascular fluid loss in order to practice 
a strategy of goal-directed fluid therapy (GDFT). In a 
GDFT-based strategy fluid therapy is titrated in response 
to advanced hemodynamic monitoring, which serves as 
a surrogate for optimizing stroke volume and cardiac 
output. Several studies, primarily of high-risk patients 
undergoing major abdominal surgery, have concluded 
that the use of GDFT algorithms has improved postopera-
tive morbidity and decreased intensive care unit length of 
stay.41 42 Importantly, many published strategies of GDFT 
have included the use of inotropic agents for persistently 
low cardiac output despite appropriate fluid challenges.
When SPV and PPV values remain in an intermediate 
range (e.g., PPV 9% to 13%), then a positive response to 
a fluid bolus is less clear. Other commonly encountered 
conditions affecting the accuracy of SPV and PPV in 
predicting fluid responsiveness include low tidal volume 
ventilation, which lowers SPV and PPV and can produce 
false-negative values, and right heart failure, which can 
produce false-positive values.
Advancements in technology have allowed the esti-
mation of stroke volume using noninvasive, proprietary 
pulse oximeter and arterial waveform devices (e.g., 
FloTrac, LidCO). These devices can estimate stroke vol-
ume and its changes after a fluid challenge to assess 
fluid responsiveness. The passive leg raise test can 
predict fluid responsiveness in critically ill patients; 
however, surgical conditions may preclude its use.28 A 
detailed review of surrogate markers of stroke volume 
illustrates the complexities and clinical use of these 
measurements.29,30
Central venous pressure (CVP) measurement remains 
a controversial method of assessing volume status and 
predicting fluid responsiveness. CVP is a static surrogate 
marker for cardiac preload but can be affected by overall 
cardiac function, mechanical ventilation, patient posi-
tioning, and venous compliance. Although elevated CVP 
is likely a sign of cardiac and venous congestion and 
has been associated with increased risk of kidney injury 
and poor outcomes in the critically ill, overall predictive 
value of fluid responsiveness with CVP has been consist-
ently poor.31–33
PERIOPERATIVE FLUID STRATEGIES FOR 
OPTIMAL VOLUME STATUS
Despite much research on strategies for periopera-
tive fluid management that optimize intravascular vol-
ume status and minimize postsurgical morbidity, there 
remains no consensus on the ideal approach. Beginning 
in the 1960s, one approach to evaluating fluid deficit 
was derived from the pediatric literature and used the 
“4-2-1” rule to determine maintenance fluid require-
ments. Using this rule, total maintenance fluids are 
calculated based on a patient's weight (in kg) with the 
following equation: 4mL/kg/hr for the first 10 kg + 
2mL/kg/hr for the second 10 kg + 1 mL/kg/hr for the 
remainder of the weight. For example, a 70-kg patient 
would require (4mL/kg/hr × 10kg) + (2 mL/kg/hr ×
10kg) + (1 mL/kg/hr × 50 kg) = 110 mL/hr. In addition 
to maintenance fluid requirements, the clinician would 
calculate the fluid deficit from a patient's NPO (nothing 
by mouth) status, in addition to intraoperative blood loss 
and other insensible fluid losses. Using this method, it 
was not uncommon to find patients receiving >5 L of 
fluid replacement intraoperatively.34
III
Chapter 24 Fluid Management
443
8. Young JB, Utter GH, Schermer CR, etal. Saline versus Plasma-
Lyte A in initial resuscitation of trauma patients: A rand-
omized trial. Ann Surg. Feb 2014;259(2):255–262. doi:10.1097/
SLA.0b013e318295feba.
9. Soussi S, Ferry A, Chaussard M, Legrand M. Chloride toxicity in 
critically ill patients: What's the evidence? Anaesth Crit Care Pain 
Med. 2017;36(2):125–130. doi:10.1016/j.accpm.2016.03.008.
10. Chaussard M, Dépret F, Saint-Aubin O, etal. Physiologi-
cal response to fluid resuscitation with Ringer lactate versus 
Plasmalyte in critically ill burn patients. J Appl Physiol. 
2020;128(3):709–714. 
doi:10.1152/japplphysiol.00859.2019 
(1985).
11. Mehta BR, Fischer D, Ahmad M, Dubose TD. Effects of acetate 
and bicarbonate hemodialysis on cardiac function in chronic 
dialysis patients. Kidney Int. 1983;24(6):782–787. doi:10.1038/
ki.1983.228.
12. Selby NM, Fluck RJ, Taal MW, McIntyre CW. Effects of acetate-
free double-chamber hemodiafiltration and standard dialysis 
on systemic hemodynamics and troponin T levels. ASAIO 
J. 2006;52(1):62–69. doi:10.1097/01.mat.0000189725.93808.58 
2006.
13. Bark BP, Persson J, Grände PO. Importance of the infusion 
rate for the plasma expanding effect of 5% albumin, 6% HES 
130/0.4, 4% gelatin, and 0.9% NaCl in the septic rat. Crit Care 
Med. 2013;41(3):857–866. doi:10.1097/CCM.0b013e318274157e.
14. Myburgh JA, Finfer S, Bellomo R, etal. Hydroxyethyl starch or 
saline for fluid resuscitation in intensive care. N Engl J Med. 
2012;367(20):1901–1911. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1209759.
15. Caironi P, Tognoni G, Masson S, etal. Albumin replacement 
in patients with severe sepsis or septic shock. N Engl J Med. 
2014;370(15):1412–1421. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1305727.
16. Caraceni P, Tufoni M, Bonavita ME. Clinical use of albumin. 
Blood Transfus. 2013;11(Suppl 4):s18–s25. doi:10.2450/2013.00
5s.
17. Finfer S, Bellomo R, Boyce N, etal. A comparison of albumin 
and saline for fluid resuscitation in the intensive care unit. 
N Engl J Med. 2004;350(22):2247–2256. doi:10.1056/NEJ-
Moa040232.
18. Westphal M, James MF, Kozek-Langenecker S, Stocker R, 
Guidet B, Van Aken H. Hydroxyethyl starches: Different prod-
ucts–different effects. Anesthesiology. 2009;111(1):187–202. 
doi:10.1097/ALN.0b013e3181a7ec82.
19. Perner A, Haase N, Guttormsen AB, etal. Hydroxyethyl starch 
130/0.42 versus Ringer's acetate in severe sepsis. N Engl J Med. 
2012;367(2):124–134. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1204242.
20. Futier E, Garot M, Godet T, etal. Effect of hydroxyethyl 
starch vs saline for volume replacement therapy on death or 
postoperative complications among high-risk patients under-
going major abdominal surgery: The FLASH Randomized 
Clinical Trial. JAMA. 2020;323(3):225–236. doi:10.1001/
jama.2019.20833.
21. Barron ME, Wilkes MM, Navickis RJ. A systematic review of 
the comparative safety of colloids. Arch Surg. 2004;139(5):552–
563. doi:10.1001/archsurg.139.5.552.
22. Kapiotis S, Quehenberger P, Eichler HG, etal. Effect of hydroxy-
ethyl starch on the activity of blood coagulation and fibrinoly-
sis in healthy volunteers: Comparison with albumin. Crit Care 
Med. 1994;22(4):606–612. doi:10.1097/00003246-199404000-
00016.
23. Falk JL, Rackow EC, Astiz ME, Weil MH. Effects of hetastarch 
and albumin on coagulation in patients with septic shock. J Clin 
Pharmacol. 1988;28(5):412–415. doi:10.1002/j.1552-4604.1988.
tb05751.x.
24. Trumble ER, Muizelaar JP, Myseros JS, Choi SC, Warren BB. 
Coagulopathy with the use of hetastarch in the treatment 
of vasospasm. J Neurosurg. 1995;82(1):44–47. doi:10.3171/
jns.1995.82.1.0044.
CONCLUSIONS
As technology improves to provide better monitoring of 
cardiac output and tissue perfusion, optimal strategies for 
fluid therapy will likely become more apparent. Box 24.1
lists general recommendations for perioperative fluid 
management.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The editors and publisher would like to thank Dr. Eliza-
beth A.M. Frost for contributing to this chapter in the 
previous edition of this work. It has served as the founda-
tion for the current chapter.
REFERENCES
1. Miller R, Eriksson L, Fleisher L, Wiener-Kronish J, Cohen N, 
Young W Perioperative fluid and electrolyte therapy. Miller’s 
Anesthesia. Saunders; 2014. 8th ed.
2. Weinbaum S, Tarbell JM, Damiano ER. The structure and func-
tion of the endothelial glycocalyx layer. Annu Rev Biomed Eng. 
2007;9:121–167. doi:10.1146/annurev.bioeng.9.060906.151959.
3. Uchimido R, Schmidt EP, Shapiro NI. The glycocalyx: A 
novel diagnostic and therapeutic target in sepsis. Crit Care. 
2019;23(1):16. doi:10.1186/s13054-018-2292-6.
4. Hippensteel JA, Uchimido R, Tyler PD, etal. Intravenous fluid 
resuscitation is associated with septic endothelial glycocalyx 
degradation. Crit Care. 2019;23(1):259. doi:10.1186/s13054-
019-2534-2.
5. Legrand M, Alexander B, Joosten A Perioperative maintenance 
fluid therapy in patients undergoing thoracic surgery: More 
risks than benefits? Intensive Care Med. 03. 2020;46(3):552–
553. doi:10.1007/s00134-020-05936-4
6. Heming N, Moine P, Coscas R, Annane D Perioperative 
fluid management for major elective surgery. Br J Surg. 01 
2020;107(2):e56-e62. doi:10.1002/bjs.11457
7. O'Malley CM, Frumento RJ, Hardy MA, etal. A 
randomized, double-blind comparison of lactated Ringer's 
solution and 0.9% NaCl during renal transplantation. 
Anesth Analg. 2005;100(5):1518–1524. doi:10.1213/01.
ANE.0000150939.28904.81. Maytable of contents.
Box 24.1
Perioperative Fluid Management 
Considerations
•Use balanced crystalloid solutions instead of normal
saline
•Avoid hydroxyethyl starch solutions because of potential
nephrotoxicity
•If considering albumin administration, recall that potential
benefit is unclear and cost is higher than crystalloids
•Avoid fluid overload, but consider that restrictive fluid
practices are associated with increased risk of acute 
kidney injury
•Consider use of advanced hemodynamic monitoring to
assess fluid responsiveness and guide fluid administration 
in high-risk patients undergoing major surgery
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
444
J Am Coll Surg. 2006;202(6):971–989. doi:10.1016/j.jamcoll-
surg.2006.01.003.
35. Brandstrup B, Tønnesen H, Beier-Holgersen R, etal. Effects of 
intravenous fluid restriction on postoperative complications: 
Comparison of two perioperative fluid regimens: A randomized 
assessor-blinded multicenter trial. Ann Surg. 2003;238(5):641–
648. doi:10.1097/01.sla.0000094387.50865.23.
36. Feldheiser A, Aziz O, Baldini G, etal. Enhanced Recovery after 
Surgery (ERAS) for gastrointestinal surgery, part 2: Consensus 
statement for anaesthesia practice. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand. 
2016;60(3):289–334. doi:10.1111/aas.12651.
37. Kuper M, Gold SJ, Callow C, etal. Intraoperative fluid man-
agement guided by oesophageal Doppler monitoring. BMJ. 
2011;342:d3016. doi:10.1136/bmj.d3016.
38. Koerner CP, Lopez-Aguiar AG, Zaidi M, etal. Caution: Increased 
acute kidney injury in Enhanced Recovery after Surgery (ERAS) 
protocols. Am Surg. 2019;85(2):156–161.
39. Marcotte JH, Patel K, Desai R, etal. Acute kidney injury fol-
lowing implementation of an Enhanced Recovery after Surgery 
(ERAS) protocol in colorectal surgery. Int J Colorectal Dis. 
2018;33(9):1259–1267. doi:10.1007/s00384-018-3084-9.
40. Myles PS, Bellomo R. Restrictive or liberal fluid therapy for 
major abdominal surgery. N Engl J Med. 2018;379(13):1283. 
doi:10.1056/NEJMc1810465.
41. Gan TJ, Soppitt A, Maroof M, etal. Goal-directed intra-
operative fluid administration reduces length of hospital 
stay after major surgery. Anesthesiology. 2002;97(4):820–826. 
doi:10.1097/00000542-200210000-00012.
42. Benes J, Giglio M, Brienza N, Michard F. The effects of 
goal-directed fluid therapy based on dynamic parameters on 
post-surgical outcome: A meta-analysis of randomized con-
trolled trials. Crit Care. 2014;18(5):584. doi:10.1186/s13054-
014-0584-z.
43. Noritomi DT, Pereira AJ, Bugano DD, Rehder PS, Silva 
E. Impact of Plasma-Lyte pH 7.4 on acid-base status and 
hemodynamics in a model of controlled hemorrhagic shock. 
Clinics (Sao Paulo). 2011;66(11):1969–1974. doi:10.1590/s1807-
59322011001100019.
25. Wheeler AP, Bernard GR, Thompson BT, etal. Pulmonary-artery 
versus central venous catheter to guide treatment of acute lung 
injury. N Engl J Med. 2006;354(21):2213–2224. doi:10.1056/
NEJMoa061895.
26. Marik PE, Cavallazzi R, Vasu T, Hirani A. Dynamic changes in 
arterial waveform derived variables and fluid responsiveness in 
mechanically ventilated patients: A systematic review of the 
literature. Crit Care Med. 2009;37(9):2642–2647. doi:10.1097/
CCM.0b013e3181a590da.
27. Mathis MR, Schechtman SA, Engoren MC, etal. Arterial pres-
sure variation in elective noncardiac surgery: Identifying 
reference distributions and modifying factors. Anesthesiology. 
2017;126(2):249–259. doi:10.1097/ALN.0000000000001460.
28. Bentzer P, Griesdale DE, Boyd J, MacLean K, Sirounis D, Ayas 
NT. Will this hemodynamically unstable patient respond to a 
bolus of intravenous fluids? JAMA. 2016;316(12):1298–1309. 
doi:10.1001/jama.2016.12310.
29. Chaves RCF, Corrêa TD, Neto AS, etal. Assessment of fluid 
responsiveness in spontaneously breathing patients: A sys-
tematic review of literature. Ann Intensive Care. 2018;8(1):21. 
doi:10.1186/s13613-018-0365-y.
30. Perel A, Pizov R, Cotev S. Respiratory variations in the arterial 
pressure during mechanical ventilation reflect volume status 
and fluid responsiveness. Intensive Care Med. 2014;40(6):798–
807. doi:10.1007/s00134-014-3285-9.
31. Eskesen TG, Wetterslev M, Perner A. Systematic review includ-
ing re-analyses of 1148 individual data sets of central venous 
pressure as a predictor of fluid responsiveness. Intensive Care 
Med. 2016;42(3):324–332. doi:10.1007/s00134-015-4168-4.
32. Marik PE, Cavallazzi R. Does the central venous pressure predict 
fluid responsiveness? An updated meta-analysis and a plea for 
some common sense. Crit Care Med. 2013;41(7):1774–1781. 
doi:10.1097/CCM.0b013e31828a25fd.
33. Legrand M, Dupuis C, Simon C, etal. Association between 
systemic hemodynamics and septic acute kidney injury in criti-
cally ill patients: A retrospective observational study. Crit Care. 
2013;17(6):R278. doi:10.1186/cc13133.
34. Holte K, Kehlet H. Fluid therapy and surgical outcomes in elec-
tive surgery: A need for reassessment in fast-track surgery. 
445
Chapter
The practice of transfusing blood has been around for 
centuries. The science of transfusion medicine started in 
the early twentieth century with the discoveries of human 
blood types and sodium citrate. Human blood typing is 
the pillar and foundation for safe blood transfusions, and 
citrate allowed for the storage of blood. The concept of 
collecting and storing blood (blood banking) was another 
major development, beginning in the 1930s. In the 1960s 
and 1970s transfusion practice focused on using whole 
blood in trauma (and war) for resuscitation and to stop 
bleeding. In the 1970s, 1980s, and 1990s transfusion 
was focused on the reduction in transmission of infec-
tions from a blood transfusion and moving toward blood 
component therapy instead of whole blood. In the 1990s 
and 2000s important topics in transfusion included when 
not to transfuse and what to transfuse. From the 2010s 
until now, the focus has been on patient blood manage-
ment, which includes strategies to mitigate the need for 
transfusion and refining the precision of the indications 
for blood transfusions.
Red blood cell (RBC) transfusions given for specific 
clinical situations can decrease mortality rates. Con-
versely, severe complications can occur when multiple 
transfusions are given to a patient. For example, the 
term lethal triad describes hypothermia, acidosis, and 
coagulopathy and is an important negative indicator for 
trauma patient outcome in transfusion medicine. Simi-
larly, the patient who requires high-volume transfusion 
(>10 units packed red blood cells [PRBCs] in 24 hours) 
experiences an increased mortality rate: a 10% increase 
for every 10 units of blood given. Thus if 50 units of 
blood are given, there is a 50% mortality rate.1
Despite the understanding that blood is a scarce 
resource and comes with possible complications, the 
practice of transfusing blood is quite commonplace. In 
2019 in the United States alone over 10,000,000 units 
of blood products were transfused.2 This underscores the 
importance of transfusion medicine and how the need for 
BLOOD BANKING ESSENTIALS
Whole-Blood Processing
Ensuring Donor–Recipient Compatibility
Massive Transfusion/Emergency Release 
Protocols
Blood Storage
BLOOD COMPONENTS
Packed Red Blood Cells
Fresh Frozen Plasma
Cryoprecipitate
Platelets
PATIENT BLOOD MANAGEMENT AND THE 
DECISION TO TRANSFUSE RED BLOOD 
CELLS
Patient Blood Management
Monitoring for Blood Loss
Monitoring for Inadequate Perfusion and 
Oxygenation of Vital Organs
Monitoring for Transfusion Indicators
COMPLICATIONS OF BLOOD THERAPY
Transmission of Infectious Diseases
Noninfectious Hazards of Transfusion
Metabolic Abnormalities
Hypothermia
Coagulopathy
Transfusion Reactions
AUTOLOGOUS BLOOD TRANSFUSIONS
Predeposited Autologous Donation
Intraoperative Blood Salvage
Normovolemic Hemodilution
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
BLOOD THERAPY
David Shimabukuro, Ronald D. Miller.
25
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
446
blood transfusions has helped this field evolve over the 
past 60 years.
The American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) Task 
Force on Perioperative Blood Management analyzed the 
literature and solicited opinions from experts and ASA 
members that were published as a practice guideline in 
2015.3 These guidelines will be periodically reviewed and 
updated in the future after review by the ASA Committee 
on Standards and Practice Parameters.
BLOOD BANKING ESSENTIALS
Whole-Blood Processing
Currently, the majority of the blood supply in the 
United States is in its component form (PRBCs, fresh 
frozen plasma [FFP], cryoprecipitate, platelets) because, 
in this way, it can be used in a more efficacious man-
ner (individualized component therapy). Whole blood, 
if available, is likely to be autologous in nature. Soon 
after collection, whole blood is separated into PRBCs 
and platelet-rich plasma. The platelets are then separated 
from the plasma, and the plasma is then frozen. Depend-
ing on how the plasma is frozen, it can either be thawed 
for patient use or further processed to cryoprecipitate 
and, eventually, albumin (Fig. 25.1). All components are 
stored appropriately until ready for use or discarded if 
not used within the designated time frame (see later). Of 
course, this is an oversimplification of the process that is 
highly regulated and prescribed by the AABB (formerly 
known as the American Association of Blood Banks).
Ensuring Donor–Recipient Compatibility
In addition to separating blood into its components for 
individualized therapy, the blood bank is responsible for 
determining donor–recipient compatibility. These proce-
dures will be discussed next.
Blood Type
Determining the blood type (A, B, O, Rh) of the recipient 
and donor is the first step in selecting blood for transfu-
sion therapy. Routine typing of blood is performed to 
identify the major surface antigen(s) (A, B, Rh), or their 
absence, on the membranes of erythrocytes (Table 25.1). 
Naturally occurring antibodies (anti-A, anti-B) are formed 
whenever erythrocyte membranes lack surface A or B 
antigens, or both. These antibodies are capable of caus-
ing rapid intravascular destruction of erythrocytes whose 
membranes express the corresponding antigen(s). There-
fore in blood type A erythrocytes express the A antigen 
and have anti-B antibodies; in blood type B erythrocytes 
express the B antigen and have anti-A antibodies. For 
blood type AB, both antigens are expressed, whereas in 
blood type O, no antigens are expressed. Rh factor can 
also be expressed on the erythrocyte cell surface. How-
ever, unlike the A and B naturally occurring antibodies, 
Rh antibodies are only produced after exposure and are 
not produced de novo
Fig. 25.1 Whole-blood processing by the blood center.
Blood Group
Antigen on 
Erythrocyte
Plasma Antibodies
A
A
Anti-B
B
B
Anti-A
AB
AB
None
O
None
Anti-A, Anti-B
Rh
Rh
Anti-Rh; acquired 
after exposure
Table 25.1
Blood Group Typing
III
Chapter 25 Blood Therapy
447
Antibody Screen
In addition to determining a patient's blood type, an 
antibody screen is performed using the recipient's serum 
to identify the presence of antibodies against common 
minor RBC surface antigens. It is a simple agglutination 
process in which the recipient's serum is placed in wells 
with known common RBC surface antigens; the presence 
of agglutination indicates the likely presence of an anti-
body. The “type and screen” is typically used when the 
surgical procedure is unlikely to require transfusion of 
blood (e.g., many laparoscopic procedures) but is one in 
which there is still a chance that blood could be needed. 
Blood typing and screening permit more cost-efficient 
use of stored blood because the blood is available to more 
than one patient. The chance of a significant hemolytic 
reaction related to the use of typed and screened blood is 
approximately 1 in 70,000 units transfused.
Crossmatch
A crossmatch occurs when the donor's erythrocytes are 
incubated with the recipient's plasma. A crossmatch 
is always done before the transfusion of blood. This 
entire process usually takes around 45 to 60 minutes. 
Rapid agglutination (within 5–10 minutes) occurs if 
the crossmatch is incompatible secondary to a major 
blood typing (A, B, O, Rh) mismatch or in the presence 
of recipient antibodies against MN, P, and/or Lewis. 
In addition to major incompatibility, the crossmatch 
checks for minor incompatibility by assessing for the 
presence of antibodies against minor surface antigens 
(e.g., Kell, Kidd, Fya, Fyb). This minor agglutination 
reaction can take as long as 45 to 60 minutes to occur. 
The term type-specific blood refers to the fact that 
only the ABO-Rh type has been determined. Presently, 
crossmatching can be done electronically when specific 
criteria are met and, mainly, several concordant blood 
types are in the electronic medical record along with a 
current negative antibody screen. With electronic cross-
matching, PRBC allocation of compatible units can be 
done in 5 to 10 minutes.
Massive Transfusion/Emergency Release 
Protocols
In certain clinical situations (e.g., aortic rupture) blood 
needs to be released from the blood bank on an emergent 
basis before a patient's blood type can be determined. 
Every hospital should be able to release blood rapidly via 
a massive transfusion and/or emergency release protocol. 
This usually involves a call to the blood bank stating 
the need to activate the massive transfusion/emergency 
release protocol that results in the immediate release of 
a prespecified number of units of uncrossmatched RBCs 
(type O-negative), prespecified number of units of FFP 
(type AB-negative), and prespecified number of platelet 
units.
In an emergency situation that requires transfusion 
before full compatibility testing is completed (Table 25.2) 
the most desirable approach is to transfuse type-specific, 
partially crossmatched PRBCs. The donor erythrocytes 
are mixed with recipient plasma and observed for mac-
roscopic agglutination. If the time required to complete 
this examination (typically <10 minutes) is not accept-
able, the second option is to administer type-specific, 
noncrossmatched PRBCs, if available, or O-negative 
PRBCs (universal red blood cell donor, as it has no major 
surface antigens). O-negative whole blood is not selected 
because it may contain high titers of anti-A and anti-B 
hemolytic antibodies in the plasma component. For adult 
patients, with the exception of women of childbearing 
age, emergency administration of O-positive PRBCs is 
considered acceptable practice until the patient's blood 
type is determined. If the patient's blood type becomes 
known and available after 2 units of type O-negative 
PRBCs have been transfused, classic teaching was that 
subsequent transfusions should probably continue with 
O-negative PRBCs. However, it is not clear if this practice 
is necessary, and the generally recommended approach is 
to switch to type-specific blood when it becomes avail-
able.
The general approach to the administration of FFP 
during an emergency is similar to that of PRBCs. If type-
specific plasma is not available, the plasma of AB-nega-
tive blood type donors can be given to all individuals, as 
it does not contain antibodies against the major surface 
antigens found on RBCs.
As platelets contain no RBCs and very little plasma, 
the blood type of the donor and recipient are irrelevant 
in the majority of emergency transfusions.
Of note, despite its relative unavailability, fresh whole 
blood is extremely effective in restoring normal coagula-
tion after severe injury. The effectiveness of fresh whole 
blood depends on how long it has been stored and its tem-
perature. In Vietnam in the late 1960s the military used 
type-specific blood that was maintained at room tempera-
ture and stored for no longer than 24 hours. They found 
it was extremely effective in preventing and treating 
trauma-induced coagulopathies.4 Not surprisingly, more 
Component
ABO/Rh
Screen
Crossmatch
WB/PRBCs
Yes
Yes
Yes
FFP
Yes
Yes
No
Cryo
No
No
No
Platelets
No/Yesa
No/Yesa
No/Yesa
Table 25.2
Blood Compatibility
Cryo, Cryoprecipitate; FFP, fresh frozen plasma; PRBCs, packed red 
blood cells; WB, whole blood.
aOn rare occasion, platelets can be typed and crossmatched 
to improve longevity after transfusion (e.g., for patients with 
thrombocytopenia who are refractory to random-donor platelets).
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
448
recently, the use of fresh whole blood by surgical teams 
in Afghanistan was associated with improved survival 
compared with component therapy without platelets.5
Blood Storage
PRBCs can be stored in a variety of solutions that 
contain phosphate, dextrose, and/or adenine at tem-
peratures of 1 to 6°C. Accepted storage time (hemolysis 
<1% with 75% viability of transfused erythrocytes 24 
hours after transfusion) is up to 42 days, depending 
on the donor and storage medium. Adenine increases 
erythrocyte survival by allowing the cells to resynthe-
size the adenosine triphosphate needed to fuel metabolic 
reactions. Changes that occur in RBCs during storage 
are affected by the length of storage and the type of 
preservative used. For many years, fresh PRBCs (<5 
days of storage) had been recommended for critically ill 
patients in an effort to improve the delivery of oxygen 
(2,3-diphosphoglycerate [2,3-DPG] concentrations are 
higher in fresh blood), though nowadays, it is more 
determined by what is available in the hospital blood 
bank. In the past, administration of younger PRBCs 
(<14 days of storage) was thought to be associated 
with better outcomes (i.e., decreased mortality rate and 
fewer postoperative complications), especially with 
major surgery. However, a 2016 study concluded that 
the death rate among a general hospital population was 
not related to the duration of blood storage.6 This was 
further validated by a large European study published 
a year later and by a Cochrane Database systematic 
review published in 2018.7 8
FFP and cryoprecipitate are stored at −20°C; plate-
lets are kept at room temperature (20°C) and are con-
tinuously gently agitated to prevent clumping. Because 
platelets are kept at room temperature, they have a 
short shelf life of 5 days. On the other hand, although 
FFP and cryoprecipitate can be kept frozen for a year, 
once thawed, they have to be used within 24 hours and 
4 hours, respectively.
Component
Dose
Volume per Unit
Shelf Life
Storage
Response
PRBCs
1 unit
200–250 mL
21–42 days
1–6°C
1 g/dL increase
FFP
10–15 mL/kg
200–300 mL
Frozen: 1 year
Thaw: 24 hours
Frozen: <−18°C
Thaw: 1–10°C
30% of normal 
coagulation factors
Cryo
1 unit/5 kg
15–20 mL
Frozen: 1 year
Thaw: 4 hours
Frozen: <−18°C
Thaw: 1–10°C
100 mg/dL increase 
in fibrinogen
Platelets
4–6 pooled WB 
derivative or 1 apheresis 
unit
200–250 mL
5 days
20–24°C with 
gentle agitation
30–60 × 109/L 
increase
Table 25.3
Blood Components
Cryo, Cryoprecipitate; FFP, fresh frozen plasma; PRBCs, packed red blood cells.
BLOOD COMPONENTS (TABLE 25.3)
Packed Red Blood Cells
In the perioperative period PRBCs (200–250 mL vol-
ume with a hematocrit of 70%–80%) are used for the 
treatment of anemia associated with anticipated and/or 
actual surgical blood loss. The major goal is to increase 
the oxygen-carrying capacity of blood with a resultant 
increase in oxygen delivery to tissues and vital organs. 
Although PRBCs can increase intravascular fluid volume, 
nonblood products, such as crystalloids and colloids, can 
also achieve that endpoint. A single unit of PRBCs will 
increase adult hemoglobin concentrations approximately 
1.0 to 1.5 g/dL. Theoretically, the use of hypotonic solu-
tions with PRBCs may cause hemolysis, and the calcium 
present in lactated Ringer's solution may lead to clotting 
in the blood filter and/or transfusion line.
The decision to administer PRBCs should be based on 
measured blood loss and inadequate oxygen-carrying 
capacity. Acute blood loss in the range of 1500 to 2000 
mL (approximately 30% of an adult patient's blood vol-
ume) may exceed the ability of crystalloids to replace 
blood volume without jeopardizing the oxygen-carrying 
capacity of the blood. Hypotension and tachycardia are 
likely, but these compensatory responses may be blunted 
by anesthesia or other drugs (e.g., β-adrenergic blocking 
drugs). Compensatory vasoconstriction may conceal the 
signs of acute blood loss until at least 10% of the blood 
volume is lost, and healthy patients may lose up to 20% 
of their blood volume before signs of hypovolemia occur. 
To ensure an adequate oxygen content in blood, PRBCs 
should be administered when blood loss is sufficiently 
large. Administration of whole blood, when available, 
decreases the incidence of hypofibrinogenemia and per-
haps coagulopathies associated with the administration 
of multiple units of PRBCs. In the Vietnam conflict fresh 
whole blood (typed and crossmatched, but not cooled) 
was quite effective, especially with massive transfusion-
associated coagulopathies. Forty years later in Iraq, 
III
Chapter 25 Blood Therapy
449
military physicians administered fresh whole blood from 
prescreened “walking donors,” which also can treat or 
prevent thrombocytopenia. In fact, warm fresh whole 
blood may be more efficacious than stored component 
therapy when treating critically ill patients requiring 
massive blood transfusions. Also, whole blood may be 
preferable to PRBCs when replacing blood losses that 
exceed 30% of the blood volume. Practically speaking, 
specific ratios of PRBC transfusions with FFP and plate-
lets have been used in place of whole blood. For example, 
a ratio of 1.5 units PRBC with 1 unit of FFP (i.e., for every 
1.5 units of PRBCs administered, 1 unit of FFP should 
be given). In addition, 1 unit of apheresis platelets (or 6 
pooled random donor units) for 6 units of RBCs has been 
recommended in patients with large blood losses and 
trauma. Interestingly, despite its wide acceptance in mas-
sive resuscitation in trauma patients, these ratios have 
not been conclusively proven to improve mortality.9 10
With acute blood loss, interstitial fluid and extravas-
cular protein are transferred to the intravascular space, 
which tends to maintain plasma volume. For this reason, 
when crystalloid solutions are used to replace blood loss, 
they should be given in amounts equal to about three 
times the amount of blood loss, not only to replenish 
intravascular fluid volume but also to replenish the fluid 
lost from interstitial spaces. Albumin is a solution that is 
useful for acute expansion of the intravascular fluid vol-
ume. In contrast to crystalloid solutions, albumin is more 
likely to remain in the intravascular space for a longer 
period (about 12 hours). These solutions avoid complica-
tions associated with blood-containing products but do 
not improve the oxygen-carrying capacity of the blood 
and in large volumes (>20 mL/kg) may cause coagulation 
defects from ongoing dilution (also see Chapter 24).
Fresh Frozen Plasma
FFP is the fluid portion obtained from a single unit of 
whole blood that is frozen within 6 hours of collection. 
All coagulation factors, except platelets, are present in 
FFP, which explains the use of this component for the 
treatment of hemorrhage from presumed coagulation 
factor deficiencies. FFP transfusions during surgery are 
probably not necessary unless the prothrombin time/
international normalized ratio (PT/INR) or activated par-
tial thromboplastin time (aPTT), or both, are at least 1.5 
times longer than normal. More recently, FFP has been 
given in specific ratios with PRBCs in trauma patients 
regardless of laboratory values. Other indications for FFP 
are an urgent reversal of warfarin and management of 
heparin resistance (i.e., FFP contains antithrombin III).
Cryoprecipitate
Cryoprecipitate is the fraction of plasma that precipitates 
when FFP is thawed from −70°C. It contains factor VIII, 
fibrinogen, fibronectin, von Willebrand factor, and factor 
XIII. This component is useful for treating hemophilia 
A (it contains high concentrations of factor VIII in a 
small volume) or von Willebrand factor deficiency that 
is unresponsive to desmopressin. Cryoprecipitate can also 
be used to treat hypofibrinogenemia because it contains 
more fibrinogen than FFP.
Platelets
Administration of platelets allows specific treatment of 
thrombocytopenia without the infusion of unnecessary 
blood components. Platelets are derived from volunteer 
donors and can be pooled from platelet concentrates 
derived from whole blood donation (random-donor 
platelets) or from a single donor (apheresis platelets). 
During surgery, platelet transfusions are probably not 
required unless the platelet count is less than 50,000 
to 100,000 cells/mm3 (usually dictated by the type and 
location of surgery) as determined by laboratory analysis 
or in predetermined ratios with PRBC and FFP in trauma 
patients, as described previously.
PATIENT BLOOD MANAGEMENT AND THE 
DECISION TO TRANSFUSE RED BLOOD CELLS
The decision to transfuse should be based on a combi-
nation of factors: (1) patient blood management (PBM) 
and preoperative anemia; (2) monitoring of blood loss; 
(3) assessment of how much additional blood loss may 
occur; (4) monitoring for inadequate perfusion and oxy-
genation of vital organs; (5) quantitation of intravenous 
fluids given overall; and (6) monitoring for transfusion 
indicators, typically based on laboratory data. Several of 
these concepts will be discussed in more detail next.
Patient Blood Management
PBM has been a major part of our transfusion terminol-
ogy for the past 10 to 15 years and is focused primarily 
on the perioperative period. The concept is based on three 
main pillars: (1) optimization of RBC mass, (2) reduction 
of blood loss and bleeding, and (3) optimization of the 
patient's physiologic tolerance toward anemia.11 Support-
ing the pillars are techniques and agents used during the 
intraoperative period to reduce blood loss, such as con-
trolled hypotension and antifibrinolytic agents. PBM also 
emphasizes the use of allogeneic blood components to be 
selective and optimal, keeping in mind that the ultimate 
goal is to transfuse only at the appropriate time and with 
the appropriate therapy.12,13
Although PBM includes intraoperative and postopera-
tive phases of care, one of the more prioritized components 
of PBM has been the identification and management of 
preoperative anemia.14 Studies have demonstrated that 
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
450
preoperative anemia is a risk factor for a poorer clini-
cal outcome and is, logically, a predisposing factor for 
intraoperative blood transfusions. PBM emphasizes that 
proper preoperative preparation can reduce the number 
of blood transfusions used intraoperatively and should 
ideally be addressed (e.g., with iron and, possibly, recom-
binant human erythropoietin) before coming for surgery. A 
higher presurgical hemoglobin level not only decreases the 
need for intraoperative blood transfusions but the overall 
morbidity and mortality rates as well (also see Chapter 42).
Monitoring for Blood Loss
Visual estimation is the simplest technique for quantify-
ing intraoperative blood loss. The estimate is based on a 
combination of visualization and gravimetric measure-
ments of blood on sponges and drapes and in suction 
devices. Specifically, differences in weight between dry 
and blood-soaked gauze pads can routinely be deter-
mined. However, these methods for measuring blood loss 
are only modestly accurate. Regardless, it is done every 
day and in nearly every surgical case performed in the 
operating room.
Monitoring for Inadequate Perfusion and 
Oxygenation of Vital Organs
Standard monitors, such as the electrocardiogram and 
those measuring arterial blood pressure, heart rate, and 
oxygen saturation, are commonly used. Analysis of 
arterial blood gases, mixed venous oxygen saturation, 
and echocardiography may be useful in select patients. 
Tachycardia is an insensitive and nonspecific indicator 
of hypovolemia, especially in patients receiving a volatile 
anesthetic. Maintenance of arterial blood pressure with 
normal systolic pressure variation/pulse pressure vari-
ation and urine output suggests adequate intravascular 
blood volume. Urinary output usually decreases during 
moderate to severe hypovolemia and the resulting tissue 
hypoperfusion. Hyperlactatemia secondary to increased 
anaerobic metabolism can arise from tissue hypoxia from 
inadequate oxygen delivery. Arterial pH may decrease 
only when tissue hypoperfusion becomes severe.
Monitoring for Transfusion Indicators
The decision to transfuse is primarily based on laboratory 
data, the risk of anemia to a patient, and the patient's 
ability to compensate for decreased oxygen-carrying 
capacity, in addition to the inherent risks associated 
with transfusion. Given the lack of clear evidence in the 
published literature, many of the variables used to guide 
transfusion therapy, especially PRBCs, are based on clini-
cal judgment and specialty society guidelines.
In the past 20 years terminology on blood transfu-
sion policy has increased. A clinician may be using a 
restrictive blood policy, meaning “give blood only when 
absolutely necessary.” This restrictive approach evolved 
many years ago when fear of transmitting hepatitis and 
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) was widespread. 
However, transmission of such diseases is now rare. 
Blood transfusions given in response to proper indica-
tions should ideally decrease patient mortality.
In parallel with this terminology, a general standard 
of care has evolved that patients with hemoglobin values 
more than 10 g/dL rarely require a PRBC transfusion, 
whereas those with hemoglobin values less than 6 g/
dL almost always require a PRBC transfusion, especially 
when anemia or surgical bleeding (or both) are acute 
and continuing. Determination of whether intermediate 
hemoglobin concentrations (6–10 g/dL) justify or require 
a transfusion should be based on the patient's risk for 
complications of inadequate oxygen delivery. Certain 
clinical situations may warrant transfusion of blood at a 
higher hemoglobin value than that in otherwise healthy 
patients. For example, a hemoglobin concentration of 
7 g/dL may be an appropriate threshold for transfusion 
in a surgical patient with no risk factors for ischemia, 
whereas a transfusion threshold of 9 g/dL may be justi-
fied in a patient who is considered to be at risk for car-
diac ischemia (e.g., history of coronary artery disease). 
Controlled studies to determine the hemoglobin concen-
tration at which PRBC transfusion improves outcome in a 
surgical patient with acute blood loss are few, yet center-
ing on hemoglobin values in a complex clinical situation 
must be done with caution.13
More recently, PBM has focused on the words restric-
tive and liberal for PRBC transfusions. PBM uses a 
hemoglobin value as an indicator for PRBC transfusion. 
A liberal policy would allow giving blood when hemo-
globin levels were more than 10 g/dL. A restrictive policy 
allowed giving blood only when the hemoglobin levels 
were preferably 7 g/dL or lower. Analysis of the over-
all literature clearly favors the restrictive approach.15,16
However, some groups have recommended a liberal 
approach to perioperative patients. According to a 2015 
metaanalysis, “according to randomized published evi-
dence, perioperative adult patients have an improved 
survival when receiving a liberal blood transfusion 
policy.”17 Of note, at the time of this publication, this is 
not a widely accepted practice.
Transfusion of PRBCs in patients with hemoglobin 
concentrations higher than 10 to 12 g/dL does not sub-
stantially increase oxygen delivery. Further decreases in 
the hemoglobin concentration can sometimes be offset by 
increases in cardiac output. The exact hemoglobin value 
at which cardiac output increases varies among individu-
als and is influenced by age, whether the anemia is acute 
or chronic, and sometimes by anesthesia. For example, 
the cardiovascular response to anemia in the elderly is 
decreased, as it is with general anesthesia. Yet the focus 
on hemoglobin as a transfusion indicator has existed 
III
Chapter 25 Blood Therapy
451
for many years and still continues.16 18 Furthermore, the 
availability of a noninvasive spectrophotometric monitor 
allows the continuous monitoring of hemoglobin levels. 
Whether this monitor can be used for transfusion deci-
sions without a laboratory cooximeter determination is 
not clear. More than likely, this monitor will provide 
more opportunity for defining the relationship between 
hemoglobin levels and transfusion requirements.19
In conclusion, the decision to give a PRBC transfusion 
requires a carefully thought-out process that is based on 
objective clinical indications and a knowledge of transfu-
sion medicine overall.11 20
COMPLICATIONS OF BLOOD THERAPY
Blood transfusions are extremely valuable in clinical 
medicine and have become increasingly safer, mainly 
because of more effective donor screening and pretrans-
fusion blood testing. Complications of blood therapy, 
like an adverse effect of any therapy, must be considered 
when evaluating the risk-to-benefit ratio for treatment of 
individual patients with blood products.
The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) analyzes 
and publishes mortality and morbidity data related to 
outcomes from blood transfusions on an annual basis. 
The most recent publication is for fiscal year 2019 
(Table 25.4). It lists the types of fatal reactions associated 
with blood transfusions from 2015 to 2019 on a cumula-
tive basis and in 2019 alone. According to these data, fatal 
reactions are rare and have been similar in occurrence for 
each of the previous 5 years. The leading causes of a fatal 
outcome from blood transfusions are transfusion-related 
acute lung injury (TRALI), transfusion-associated circula-
tory overload (TACO), and hemolytic transfusion reac-
tions.3 Regardless, from the general public's perspective, 
the transmission of infectious diseases (i.e., HIV, hepatitis 
B and C viruses, West Nile virus, Zika) and hemolytic 
transfusion reactions continue to be the most feared 
complications of transfusion therapy. Currently, the FDA 
continues to report that blood transfusions are safer now 
than at any time in history.
In addition to acquiring an infection from a blood 
transfusion, blood transfusions have been linked with 
other health care–associated infections.21 22 The concept 
is that transfusions may cause a patient to be more 
susceptible to infections via immunomodulation. This is 
discussed in more detail next.
Transmission of Infectious Diseases (Table 25.5)
The incidence of infection from blood transfusions has 
markedly decreased over the past 30 to 40 years. For 
example, in 1980 the incidence of hepatitis was as high 
as 10%. Improved donor blood testing and screening 
have dramatically decreased the risk of transmission of 
hepatitis C and HIV to less than 1 in 2 million transfu-
sions.23 Although many factors account for the marked 
decrease in the incidence of transmission of infectious 
agents by blood transfusion, the most important one 
is improved testing of donor blood. Currently, hepatitis 
C, HIV, and West Nile virus are tested by nucleic acid 
technology. In 2002 more than 30 cases of transfusion-
transmitted West Nile virus occurred. One year later, in 
2003, with a nearly universal screening of donor blood 
by nucleic acid technology, the incidence was reduced to 
that of HIV. Other less commonly transmitted infectious 
agents include Chagas disease, hepatitis B, human T-cell 
lymphotropic virus, cytomegalovirus, malaria, and pos-
sibly variant Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease.
Because platelets are stored at room temperature, 
they deserve special attention. One of the leading causes 
of transfusion-related fatalities in the United States is 
Infection
Risk
Hepatitis B
1 in 2 million
Hepatitis C
1 in 2 million
HIV
1 in 2 million
HTLV-I/II
1 in 3 million
West Nile virus
<1 in 3 million
Zika virus
<1 in 3 million
Trypanosoma cruzi
<1 in 3 million
Variant Creutzfeldt–Jakob
None
Bacteria (leading to sepsis 
event)
Platelets: 1 in 100,000
PRBC: <1 in 1 million
Table 25.5
Estimated Risk of Infection Transmitted by 
Blood Transfusion23
HIV, Human immunodeficiency virus; HTLV-I/II, human T-cell 
lymphotropic virus type I or type II; PRBC, packed red blood cell.
Cause
FY2015 Through FY2019 
(# and % of total)
FY2019 
(#)
TRALI
45
23%
13
TACO
65
34%
14
HTR (non-ABO)
26
14%
13
HTR (ABO)
13
7%
4
Microbial 
contamination
25
13%
2
Anaphylaxis
14
7%
2
Table 25.4
Comparison of Transfusion-Related Fatalities in 
the United States Between 2015 and 20192
HTR, Hemolytic transfusion reaction; TACO, transfusion-associated 
circulatory overload; TRALI, transfusion-related acute lung injury.
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
452
bacterial contamination, which is most likely to occur in 
platelet concentrates. Platelet-related sepsis can be fatal, 
with overall transfusion-related sepsis events occurring 
as frequently as 1 in 100,000 transfusions. However, it 
is probably underrecognized because of the many other 
confounding variables present in hospitalized patients, 
and some estimate it to be as high as 1 in 2000. When 
donor platelets are cultured before infusion (and not 
released until the culture is negative after a minimum 
of 24 hours' incubation), the incidence of sepsis may 
be significantly reduced, but sepsis is still possible. The 
fact that platelets are stored at 20 to 24°C instead of 4°C 
probably accounts for the greater risk of bacterial growth 
than with other blood products. As a result, any patient 
in whom a fever develops within 6 hours of receiving 
platelet concentrates should be considered to possibly be 
manifesting platelet-induced sepsis, and empiric antibi-
otic therapy should be strongly considered.
Noninfectious Hazards of Transfusion
The causes of noninfectious serious hazards of transfu-
sion are numerous and dominated by TRALI and transfu-
sion-related immunomodulation (TRIM).
Transfusion-Related Acute Lung Injury
TRALI is among the top two leading causes of trans-
fusion-related deaths. TRALI is acute lung injury that 
occurs within 6 hours after transfusion of a blood product, 
especially FFP. It can be further subdivided into type 1 or 
type 2 depending on the preexistence of acute respiratory 
distress syndrome (ARDS) in the preceding 12 hours.24
It is characterized by dyspnea and arterial hypoxemia 
secondary to noncardiogenic pulmonary edema; it is a 
diagnosis of exclusion. Immediate actions to take when 
TRALI is suspected include (1) stopping the transfusion; 
(2) supporting the patient's vital signs, especially oxy-
genation; (3) obtaining a complete blood count and chest 
radiograph; and (4) notifying the blood bank of possible 
TRALI so that other associated units can be quarantined.
Because the diagnosis is difficult to make, follow-up 
actions are especially important, including sending a 
patient's blood specimen along with the empty bags of 
blood administered back to the blood bank. All transfu-
sion forms and copies of anesthetic records (if not already 
present in the electronic medical record) will be required 
to be sent to the blood bank. Exclusion of multiparous 
female blood donors has decreased the incidence of 
TRALI.25 26
Transfusion-Related Immunomodulation
Blood transfusion, especially PRBCs, suppresses lym-
phocyte function likely via arginase, which, when com-
bined with other effects produced by surgical trauma, 
may place patients at risk for postoperative infection.27
Conversely, patients who receive blood transfusions may 
have more extensive disease and a poorer prognosis 
independent of the administration of blood. As such, the 
role of blood transfusions in postoperative infections is 
difficult to ascertain.
Metabolic Abnormalities
Metabolic abnormalities that accompany the storage of 
blood include accumulation of hydrogen ions and potas-
sium and decreased 2,3-DPG concentrations. The citrate 
present in the blood preservative as an anticoagulant 
may also affect the recipient.
Hydrogen Ions
The addition of most preservatives promptly increases the 
hydrogen ion content of stored blood. Continued metabolic 
function of erythrocytes results in additional production of 
hydrogen ions, with the pH of stored blood being as low as 
6.7. Despite these changes, metabolic acidosis in recipients 
caused by the transfusion of blood products, even with 
rapid infusion of large volumes of stored blood, does not 
occur. If there is an acidosis, in all likelihood, it arises from 
tissue hypoxia and not from the blood product itself.
Potassium
The potassium content of stored blood increases progres-
sively with the duration of storage, but even massive 
transfusions rarely increase plasma potassium concen-
trations. Failure of plasma potassium concentrations to 
increase most likely reflects the small amount of potas-
sium actually present in 1 unit of stored blood. It is 
estimated that 1 unit of PRBCs contains 5 to 6 mEq of 
potassium. Despite this relatively low amount, caution 
should be exercised when transfusing a large volume in 
patients with impaired renal function.
2,3-Diphosphoglycerate
Storage of blood is associated with a progressive decrease 
in concentrations of 2,3-DPG in erythrocytes, which 
results in increased affinity of hemoglobin for oxygen 
(decreased P50 values). Conceivably, this increased affin-
ity could make less oxygen available for tissues and jeop-
ardize tissue oxygen delivery. There had been speculation 
that young blood (with higher levels of 2,3-DPG) should 
be used for critically ill patients to better increase tissue 
oxygen delivery and thereby improve mortality. However, 
despite a few observational studies and sound theoretical 
advantages, the routine use of young blood and the clini-
cal significance of the 2,3-DPG oxygen affinity changes 
remain controversial.
Citrate
Citrate metabolism to bicarbonate may contribute to met-
abolic alkalosis, whereas binding of calcium by citrate 
could result in hypocalcemia. Indeed, metabolic alkalosis 
rather than metabolic acidosis can follow within hours 
III
Chapter 25 Blood Therapy
453
of massive blood transfusions. Severe hypocalcemia as 
a result of citrate binding of calcium is rare because of 
mobilization of calcium stores from bone and the abil-
ity of the liver to rapidly metabolize citrate to bicarbo-
nate. Therefore arbitrary administration of calcium in 
the absence of objective evidence of hypocalcemia (i.e., 
prolonged QT intervals on the electrocardiogram, meas-
ured decrease in plasma ionized calcium concentrations) 
is not indicated. Supplemental calcium may be needed 
when (1) the rate of blood infusion is more rapid than 
50 mL/min, (2) hypothermia or liver disease interferes 
with the metabolism of citrate, or (3) the patient is a 
neonate. Patients undergoing liver transplantation are 
the most likely to experience citrate intoxication, and 
these patients may require calcium administration during 
a massive transfusion of stored blood.
Hypothermia
Administration of blood stored at 6°C or less can result 
in a decrease in the patient's body temperature. Passage 
of blood through specially designed warmers greatly 
decreases the likelihood of transfusion-related hypother-
mia. Unrecognized malfunction of these warmers, causing 
them to overheat, may result in hemolysis of the blood 
being transfused. Hypothermia has been shown to worsen 
coagulopathy and is a part of the lethal triad in trauma 
patients. It has also been associated with an increase in 
surgical site infections and poor wound healing.
Coagulopathy
The conclusion that excessive microvascular bleeding is 
occurring should be the combined judgment of both the 
surgical and anesthesia teams. Laboratory tests are only 
a supplement to clinically determined excessive micro-
vascular bleeding. Blood loss should be determined by 
checking suction canisters, surgical sponges, and drains. 
A decision needs to be made regarding whether the 
blood loss is from inadequate surgical control of vascu-
lar bleeding or a coagulopathy. A platelet count, PT/INR, 
partial thromboplastin time (PTT), and fibrinogen level 
can confirm both the presence and type of coagulopathy. 
Platelet concentrates may be administered if the platelet 
count is less than 50,000 cells/mm3. A qualitative platelet 
defect from antiplatelet drugs or cardiopulmonary bypass 
may require platelet concentrates to be given, even with 
a normal platelet count. Administration of FFP should 
be considered when the PT is longer than 1.5 times nor-
mal or the INR is more than 1.5. When laboratory tests 
are unavailable, if more than one blood volume (about 
70 mL/kg) has been lost and excessive microvascular 
bleeding is present, FFP should be empirically trans-
fused. The dose of FFP (10–15 mL/kg) should achieve 
at least 30% of most plasma factor concentrations. As 
indicated previously, specific ratios of FFP and platelets 
with administration of RBCs seem to decrease coagula-
tion problems in patients with trauma and massive blood 
loss. The previous description of transfusion practice is 
based on laboratory-derived coagulation values (e.g., 
platelet count), which takes some time. Use of point-of-
care viscoelastic testing with rotational thromboelastog-
raphy (ROTEM) or thromboelastography (TEG) has been 
successfully used in several clinical situations. However, 
most of the published studies on transfusion medicine 
and bleeding are based on standard laboratory tests (also 
see Chapter 23).
Cryoprecipitate should be considered if fibrinogen 
levels are less than 100 mg/dL. Also, a highly purified, 
lyophilized virus-inactivated fibrinogen concentrate 
from human plasma can be used to treat hypofibrino-
genemia and is effective in some broader-based coagu-
lopathies. Low blood fibrinogen levels are increasingly 
associated with coagulopathies and massive blood 
transfusions. Accordingly, fibrinogen administration is 
increasingly recognized as being important in treat-
ing patients with significant blood loss. In addition, 
desmopressin or a topical hemostatic agent (fibrin glue) 
may be used for excessive bleeding. Recombinant acti-
vated factor VII or vitamin K four-factor prothrombin 
complex concentrate may be considered as a “rescue” 
drug when standard transfusion therapy has failed to 
successfully treat a coagulopathy. These “last-resort” 
agents have the risk of inducing thromboembolic com-
plications.
Transfusion Reactions
Although transfusion reactions are traditionally cat-
egorized as febrile, allergic, and hemolytic, anesthe-
sia—especially general anesthesia—may mask the signs 
and symptoms of all types of transfusion reactions. 
Regardless, when transfusing blood, it is important to 
periodically check for signs and symptoms of bacte-
rial contamination, TRALI, and hemolytic transfusion 
reactions, including urticaria, hypotension, tachycardia, 
increased peak airway pressure, hyperthermia, decreased 
urine output, hemoglobinuria, and microvascular bleed-
ing.28 Before instituting therapy for transfusion reactions, 
be sure to stop the blood transfusion first.
Febrile Reactions
Febrile reactions are the most common adverse non-
hemolytic response to the transfusion of blood, and 
they accompany 0.5% to 1% of transfusions. The most 
likely explanation for febrile reactions is an interaction 
between recipient antibodies and antigens present on the 
leukocytes or platelets of the donor. The patient's tem-
perature rarely increases to above 38°C, and the condi-
tion is treated by slowing the infusion and administering 
antipyretics. Severe febrile reactions accompanied by 
chills and shivering may require discontinuation of the 
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
454
blood transfusion. Today, most blood is leukoreduced at 
the time of separation into its components.
Allergic Reactions
Allergic reactions to properly typed and crossmatched 
blood are manifested as increases in body temperature, 
pruritus, and urticaria. Treatment often includes intra-
venous administration of antihistamines and, in severe 
cases, discontinuation of the blood transfusion. Examina-
tion of plasma and urine for free hemoglobin is useful to 
rule out hemolytic reactions.
Hemolytic Reactions
Hemolytic reactions occur when the wrong blood type is 
administered to a patient. The common factor in the pro-
duction of intravascular hemolysis and the development of 
spontaneous hemorrhage is activation of the complement 
system. With the exception of hypotension, the immediate 
signs (lumbar and substernal pain, fever, chills, dyspnea, 
skin flushing) of hemolytic reactions are masked by gen-
eral anesthesia. Even hypotension may be attributed to 
other causes in an anesthetized patient. The appearance 
of free hemoglobin in plasma or urine is presumptive evi-
dence of a hemolytic reaction. Acute renal failure reflects 
precipitation of stromal and lipid contents of hemolyzed 
erythrocytes in distal renal tubules. Disseminated intravas-
cular coagulation causing a coagulopathy is initiated by 
material released from hemolyzed erythrocytes.
The treatment of acute hemolytic reactions is immedi-
ate discontinuation of the incompatible blood transfusion, 
followed by maintenance of urine output by infusion of 
crystalloid solutions and administration of mannitol or 
furosemide. The use of sodium bicarbonate to alkalin-
ize the urine and improve the solubility of hemoglobin 
degradation products in the renal tubules is of unproven 
value, as is the administration of corticosteroids.
AUTOLOGOUS BLOOD TRANSFUSIONS
Although this chapter has focused primarily on alloge-
neic blood transfusions, a few words should be said about 
autologous blood transfusions. There are three types of 
autologous blood: (1) predeposited (preoperative) autolo-
gous donation (PAD), (2) intraoperative and postopera-
tive blood salvage, and (3) normovolemic hemodilution. 
The primary reason for the use of autologous blood is to 
decrease or eliminate infectious complications from allo-
geneic blood transfusions. In the 1980s both patient and 
physician fear escalated because of a legitimate concern 
regarding infectious diseases, especially hepatitis C and 
HIV. Today, given the recent advances in testing over the 
past 40 years, there has been a marked reduction in the 
rate of infectious disease transmission from allogeneic 
blood.
Predeposited Autologous Donation
Patients scheduled for elective surgery who may require 
transfusion of blood may choose to predeposit (predo-
nate) blood for possible transfusion in the perioperative 
period and avoid the use of allogeneic blood. Patient 
donors must have a hemoglobin concentration of at 
least 11 g/dL. Most patients can donate 10.5 mL/kg of 
blood approximately every 5–7 days (maximum, 2–3 
units), with the last unit collected 72 hours or more 
before surgery to permit restoration of plasma volume. 
Oral iron supplementation is highly recommended dur-
ing this process. Treatment with recombinant erythro-
poietin is very expensive, but it increases the amount 
of blood that patients can predeposit by as much as 
25%. PAD is not generally a cost-effective alternative 
to allogeneic blood.
Intraoperative Blood Salvage
Intraoperative blood salvage for reinfusion into the 
patient decreases the amount of allogeneic blood 
needed. Typically, semiautomated systems are used 
in which the RBCs are collected, washed, and then 
delivered to a reservoir for future administration either 
intraoperatively or postoperatively. The presence of 
infection or malignant disease at the operative site is 
considered a relative contraindication to blood sal-
vage. Complications of intraoperative salvage include 
dilutional coagulopathy, reinfusion of anticoagulant 
(heparin, though it is theoretically removed during the 
washing process), and hemolysis. A documented qual-
ity assurance program, as recommended by the AABB, 
is required for those who use intraoperative salvage 
techniques.
Normovolemic Hemodilution
Normovolemic hemodilution consists of withdrawing 
a portion of the patient's blood volume early in the 
intraoperative period and concurrent infusion of crys-
talloids or colloids to maintain intravascular volume. 
The endpoint is a patient hematocrit of 27% to 33%, 
depending on the patient's cardiovascular and res-
piratory status. By initially hemodiluting the patient, 
fewer blood cells will be lost per milliliter of blood 
loss during surgery. At the conclusion of surgery, the 
patient's blood, with its enhanced oxygen-carrying 
capacity by virtue of a higher hematocrit and its 
greater clotting ability by virtue of platelets and other 
coagulation factors, is reinfused. Whether the use of 
this technique actually decreases allogeneic blood 
administration is questionable. The survival of recov-
ered RBCs appears to be similar to that of transfused 
allogeneic cells.
III
Chapter 25 Blood Therapy
455
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
Transfusion of blood products has become increasingly 
safer as a result of the dramatically decreased incidence 
of infectious disease transmission. If given in accord-
ance with proper indications, patient mortality rate is 
not increased because of receiving blood transfusions 
per se. As indicated previously, increasing emphasis is 
being placed on defining ratios of blood products that 
should be given (e.g., 1:1 PRBCs with FFP or platelets 
during major trauma). Alternatively, perhaps in the 
future, whole blood will be given more often. This 
would also mitigate the impact of lengthy blood stor-
age times. Regardless, component therapy will always 
REFERENCES
1. Johnson DJ, Scott AV, Barodka VM, 
Park S, Wasey JO, Ness PM, Gniadek T, 
Frank SM. Morbidity and mortality after 
high-dose transfusion. Anesthesiol-
ogy. 2016;124(2):387–395. doi:10.1097/
ALN.0000000000000945 
FebPMID: 
26569167.
2. FDA's Center for Biologics Evaluation 
and Research. Fatalities reported to FDA 
following blood collection and transfu-
sion: Annual summary for fiscal year 
2019. Accessed April 17, 2021. https://
www.fda.gov/vaccines-blood-biologics/
report-problem-center-biologics-eval-
uation-research/transfusiondonation-
fatalities.
3. American Society of Anesthesiolo-
gists Task Force on Perioperative Blood 
Management. Practice guidelines for 
perioperative blood management: An 
updated report by the American Soci-
ety of Anesthesiologists Task Force 
on Perioperative Blood Management. 
Anesthesiology. 2015;122(2):241–275. 
doi:10.1097/ALN.0000000000000463.
4. Miller R. Massive blood transfusions: 
The impact of Vietnam military data on 
modern civilian transfusion medicine. 
Anesthesiology. 2009;110(6):1412–1416. 
doi:10.1097/ALN.0b013e3181a1fd54.
5. Gurney J, Staudt A, Cap A, etal. 
Improved survival in critically injured 
combat casualties treated with fresh 
whole blood by forward surgical 
teams in Afghanistan. Transfusion 
(Paris). 2020;60(Suppl 3):S180–S188. 
doi:10.1111/trf.15767.
6. Heddle N, Cook R, Arnold D, etal. Effect 
of short-term vs. long-term blood stor-
age on mortality after transfusion. N 
Engl J Med. 2016;375(20):1937–1945. 
doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1609014.
7. Halmin M, Rostgaard K, Lee B, etal. 
Length of storage of red blood cells and 
patient survival after blood transfusion: 
A Binational cohort study. Ann Intern 
Med. 2017;166(4):248–256. doi:10.7326/
M16-1415.
8. Shah A, Brunskill S, Desborough M, 
Doree C, Trivella M, Stanworth S. Trans-
fusion of red blood cells stored for 
shorter versus longer duration for all 
conditions. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2018;12(12). 
doi:10.1002/14651858.
CD010801.pub3.
9. McQuilten Z, Crighton G, Brunskill S, 
etal. Optimal dose, timing, and ratio 
of blood products in massive transfu-
sion: Results from a systematic review. 
Transfus Med Rev. 2018;32(1):6–15. 
doi:10.1016/j.tmrv.2017.06.003.
10. Meneses E, Boneva D, McKenney M, 
Elkbuli A. Massive transfusion proto-
col in adult trauma population. Am 
J Emerg Med. 2020;38(12):2661–2666. 
doi:10.1016/j.ajem.2020.07.041.
11. Desai N, Schofield N, Richards T. Peri-
operative patient blood management 
to improve outcomes. Anesth Analg. 
2018;127(5):1211–1220.
12. AABB. AABB Guide to Patient Blood 
Management and Blood Utilization. 
AABB. 2020.
13. Mueller M, van Remoortel H, Meybohm 
P, etal. Patient blood management: Rec-
ommendations from the 2018 Frankfurt 
Consensus Conference. J Am Med Assoc. 
2019;321(10):983–997. 
doi:10.1001/
jama.2019.0554.
14. Warner M, Shore-Lesserson L, Shander A, 
Patel S, Perelman S, Guinn N. Periopera-
tive anemia: Prevention, diagnosis, and 
management throughout the spectrum 
of perioperative care. Anesth Analg. 
2020;130(5):1364–1380. doi:10.1213/
ANE.0000000000004727.
15. Zhang W, Zheng Y, Yu K, Gu J. Lib-
eral 
transfusion 
versus 
restrictive 
transfusion and outcomes in critically 
ill adults: A meta-analysis. Transfus 
Med Hemotherapy. 2021;48(1):60–68. 
doi:10.1159/000506751.
16. Carson J, Stanworth S, Roubinian N, etal. 
Transfusion thresholds and other strate-
gies for guiding allogeneic red blood 
cell transfusion. Cochrane Database Syst 
Rev. 2016;10(10). doi:10.1002/14651858.
CD002042.pub4.
17. Fominskiy E, Putzu A, Monaco F, etal. 
Liberal transfusion strategy improves 
survival in perioperative but not criti-
cally ill patients. A meta-analysis of 
randomised trials. Br J Anaesthesiol. 
2015;115(4):511–519. doi:10.1093/bja/
aev317.
18. Vlaar A, Oczkowski S, de Bruin S, etal. 
Transfusion strategies in non-bleeding 
critically ill adults: A clinical practice 
guideline from the European Society of 
Intensive Care Medicine. Intensive Care 
Med. 2020;46(4):673–696. doi:10.1007/
s00134-019-05884-8.
19. Miller R, Ward T, Shiboski S, Cohen 
N. A comparison of three methods of 
hemoglobin monitoring in patients 
undergoing spine surgery. Anesth Analg. 
2011;112(4):858–863. 
doi:10.1213/
ANE.0b013e31820eecd1.
20. Hare G, Cazorla-Bak M, Ku SM, etal. 
When to transfuse your acute care 
patient? A narrative review of the risk 
of anemia and red blood cell transfu-
sion based on clinical trial outcomes. 
Can J Anesth. 2020;67(11):1576–1594. 
doi:10.1007/s12630-020-01763-9.
21. Rohde J, Dimcheff D, Blumberg N, 
etal. Healthcare-associated infection 
after red blood cell transfusion: A sys-
tematic review and meta-analysis. J Am 
Med Assoc. 2014;311(13):1317–1326. 
doi:10.1001/jama.2014.2726.
22. Lv Y, Xiang Q, Lin J, etal. There 
is 
no 
dose-response 
relationship 
between allogeneic blood transfusion 
and healthcare-associated infection: A 
retrospective cohort study. Antimicrob 
Resist Infect Control. 2021;10(1):1–10. 
doi:10.1186/s13756-021-00928-5.
be around, at least until alternatives are developed and 
the ultimate impact of storage time on overall transfu-
sion practice is refined. As for RBCs, other possibilities 
include hemoglobin-based oxygen carriers (HBOCs). 
For over 20 years, with all of their advantages (e.g., 
no typing and crossmatching), we hoped that one or 
more of these products would partially replace human 
blood transfusions. However, an FDA and National 
Institutes of Health (NIH) conference in 2008 indicated 
that HBOC products would not be available soon and, 
unfortunately, that prediction has been correct. Finally, 
consistent with the practice of medicine, well-designed 
protocols will increasingly be the foundation upon 
which transfusion practice is based.
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
456
23. Busch M, Bloch E, Kleinman S. Preven-
tion of transfusion-transmitted infec-
tions. Blood. 2019;133(17):1854–1864. 
doi:10.1182/blood-2018-11-833996.
24. Vlaar A, Toy P, Fung M, etal. A consen-
sus redefinition of transfusion-related 
acute lung injury. Transfusion (Paris). 
2019;59(7):2465–2476. 
doi:10.1111/
trf.15311
25. Middelburg R, van Stein D, Zupanska 
B, et al. Female donors and transfusion-
related acute lung injury: A case-referent 
study from the International TRALI Uni-
sex Research Group. Transfusion (Paris). 
2010;50(11):2447–2454. 
doi:10.1111/
j.1537-2995.2010.02715.x
26. Caram-Deelder C, Kreuger A, Evers 
D, etal. Association of blood trans-
fusion from female donors with and 
without a history of pregnancy with 
mortality among male and female trans-
fusion recipients. J Am Med Assoc. 
2017;318(15):1471–1478. doi:10.1001/
jama.2017.14825.
27. Remy K, Hall M, Cholette J, et al. Mech-
anisms of red blood cell transfusion-
related immunomodulation. Transfusion 
(Paris). 2018;58(3):804–815. doi:10.1111/
trf.14488
28. Strobel 
E. 
Hemolytic 
transfu-
sion reactions. Transfus Med Hemo-
therapy. 
2008;35(5):346–353. 
doi:
10.1159/000154811.
AL GRAWANY
Section
IV
SPECIAL ANESTHETIC 
CONSIDERATIONS
Chapter 26
CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE, 459
Chapter 27
CHRONIC PULMONARY DISEASE, 477
Chapter 29
RENAL, LIVER, AND BILIARY TRACT 
DISEASE, 498
Chapter 29
NUTRITIONAL, GASTROINTESTINAL, AND 
ENDOCRINE DISEASE, 515
Chapter 30
CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM DISEASE, 532
Chapter 31
OPHTHALMOLOGY AND 
OTOLARYNGOLOGY, 546
Chapter 32
ORTHOPEDIC SURGERY, 559
Chapter 33
OBSTETRICS, 577
Chapter 34
PEDIATRICS, 612
Chapter 35
GERIATRICS, 642
Chapter 36
ORGAN TRANSPLANTATION, 661
Chapter 37
OUTPATIENT ANESTHESIA, 671
Chapter 38
ANESTHESIA FOR PROCEDURES IN 
NONOPERATING ROOM LOCATIONS, 678
459
Chapter
Cardiovascular disease is the leading cause of global 
death, with an estimated 17 million deaths per year; it 
is also the leading cause of death in the United States.1,2
Many of the risk factors identified to predict periop-
erative mortality are cardiovascular in origin, includ-
ing coronary artery disease (CAD), peripheral vascular 
disease, recent myocardial infarction (MI) (in the past 6 
months), presence of congestive heart failure (CHF), and 
aortic stenosis.3,4 Management of anesthesia for patients 
with cardiovascular disease requires an understanding of 
the pathophysiology of the disease process; appropriate 
preoperative testing; application of perioperative risk 
reduction strategies; and careful selection of anesthetic, 
analgesic, neuromuscular, and autonomic blocking drugs.
CORONARY ARTERY DISEASE
CAD (ischemic heart disease) occurs in approximately 
40% of adult patients undergoing surgery annually in 
the United States.1 The presence of CAD in patients 
who undergo anesthesia for noncardiac surgery may 
be associated with increased morbidity and mortality 
rates. Important components of the routine preoperative 
cardiac evaluation include history, assessment of car-
diac risk factors, determination of the patient’s exercise 
tolerance, cardiac symptoms, physical examination with 
specific attention to cardiac and respiratory findings, and 
review of the electrocardiogram (ECG)5 (also see Chapter 
13). Risk factors for CAD include family history of CAD 
(especially at age 50 or younger), physical inactivity, 
overweight or obesity, unhealthy eating, and tobacco use.
The most common anginal symptom in men is short-
ness of breath with exertion (e.g., stair climbing), whereas 
in women the most common symptom is fatigue. It is 
important to ask whether patients have chest pain or 
shortness of breath when walking up stairs because the 
ability to walk slowly on level ground requires only 
minimal exertion (approximately 2 metabolic equivalents 
CORONARY ARTERY DISEASE
Prior Myocardial Infarction
Perioperative Risk Reduction Therapy/
Medications
Monitoring
Management of Anesthesia
VALVULAR HEART DISEASE
Mitral Stenosis
Mitral Regurgitation
Aortic Stenosis
Aortic Regurgitation
DISTURBANCES OF CARDIAC CONDUCTION 
AND RHYTHM
Heart Block
Cardiac Implantable Electronic Devices
HEART FAILURE
Management of Anesthesia
HYPERTROPHIC CARDIOMYOPATHY
Management of Anesthesia
PULMONARY HYPERTENSION
Management of Anesthesia
CARDIAC TAMPONADE
Management of Anesthesia
ANEURYSMS OF THE AORTA
Management of Anesthesia
CARDIOPULMONARY BYPASS
CARDIOVASCULAR 
DISEASE
Grace C. McCarthy, Annemarie Thompson.
26
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
460
[METs]); patients who are asymptomatic walking on flat 
ground will often report symptoms when walking up 
stairs (approximately 4 METs for one flight of stairs). Other 
potential signs of significant cardiac disease include (1) the 
inability to lie flat, (2) awakening from sleep with angina 
or shortness of breath, and (3) angina at rest or with mini-
mal exertion. Limited exercise tolerance in the absence of 
significant pulmonary disease is the most striking evidence 
of decreased cardiac reserve. The ability to achieve a mod-
erate level of activity (a metabolic equivalent of task score 
(METS) of 4 or more) without anginal symptoms predicts a 
low risk of perioperative complications.6
Assessment of functional capacity or cardiorespiratory 
fitness (METS) should help direct subsequent preoperative 
testing and treatment decisions. Ultimately, the history 
and physical examination with specific attention to signs 
and symptoms of new-onset angina, change in anginal 
pattern, worsening angina (Box 26.1), recent MI, heart 
failure, or aortic stenosis and the presence of appropriate 
medical therapy should determine whether patients are in 
the best medical condition possible before elective cardiac 
or noncardiac surgery5 (see Chapter 13). Fig. 26.1 pro-
vides a suggested protocol for preoperative evaluation.
An increased heart rate is more likely than hyperten-
sion to produce signs of myocardial ischemia. Tachycardia 
increases myocardial oxygen requirements while at the same 
time decreases the duration of diastole, thereby decreas-
ing left ventricular coronary blood flow (which occurs in 
diastole) and the delivery of oxygen to the left ventricle. 
Increased systolic and diastolic blood pressure, while 
increasing oxygen consumption, simultaneously increases 
coronary perfusion despite the presence of atherosclerotic 
coronary arteries. Avoidance of tachycardia is important 
in the perioperative care of patients with significant CAD.
Prior Myocardial Infarction
For patients with prior MI, the incidence of myocardial 
reinfarction in the perioperative period is related to the time 
elapsed since the previous MI.7–9 The incidence of periop-
erative myocardial reinfarction generally does not stabilize 
at 5% to 6% until 6 months after the MI. A common 
recommendation is to delay elective surgery, especially 
thoracic, upper abdominal, or other major procedures, for a 
period of 2 to 6 months after an MI. The exact duration of 
suggested delay is unclear. According to the 2014 Ameri-
can College of Cardiology/American Heart Association 
(ACC/AHA) guidelines for perioperative cardiac evaluation 
before noncardiac surgery, no fewer than 60 days should 
elapse between recent MI and noncardiac surgery. Though 
significant risk reduction occurs by 60 days post-MI, the 
risk of reinfarction remains elevated for up to 1 year after 
MI. After 6 months, the 5% to 6% incidence of myocardial 
reinfarction is about 50 times higher than the 0.13% inci-
dence of perioperative MI in patients undergoing similar 
operations but in the absence of a prior MI.10
Most perioperative myocardial reinfarctions occur 
in the first 48 to 72 hours postoperatively. However, 
if ischemia is initiated by the stress of surgery, there 
can be an increased risk of MI for several months after 
surgery.3
The risk of noncardiac surgery for patients with prior 
MI is reduced in the setting of coronary artery revascu-
larization by stenting (percutaneous coronary intervention 
[PCI]) or coronary artery bypass grafting.9 Although PCI 
can mitigate the risk associated with preoperative MI, the 
ACC/AHA recommend against routine PCI outside of cur-
rent clinical practice guidelines. Based on the need for dual 
antiplatelet therapy after PCI, elective noncardiac surgery 
should be delayed according to the following recommen-
dations: 14 days after balloon angioplasty, 30 days after 
bare-metal stent placement, and 6 months after drug-
eluting stent placement.11 Coronary angiography is also 
not routinely recommended for preoperative evaluation.
Perioperative Risk Reduction 
Therapy/Medications
Knowledge of the pharmacology of the drugs often 
taken by patients with CAD and potential adverse inter-
actions with anesthetics is an important preoperative 
consideration (also see Chapter 13). Continuation versus 
preoperative initiation of medications such as β-blockers 
and statins to reduce adverse outcomes remains contro-
versial. Current recommendations include continuation 
of existing statin and β-blocker therapies, which has 
been demonstrated to be of benefit, whereas preoperative 
Box 26.1 Grading of Angina*
Grade I
Ordinary physical activity does not cause angina, such as 
walking and climbing stairs. Angina with strenuous or rapid or 
prolonged exertion at work or recreation.
Grade II
Slight limitation of ordinary activity. Angina occurs when walking 
or climbing stairs rapidly; walking uphill; walking or stair climbing 
after meals; or in cold, or in wind, or under emotional stress; or 
only during the few hours after awakening. Walking more than 
two blocks on level ground and climbing more than one flight of 
ordinary stairs at a normal pace and in normal conditions.
Grade III
Marked limitation of ordinary physical activity. Angina occurs 
when walking one or two blocks on the level and climbing one 
flight of stairs in normal conditions and at normal pace.
Grade IV
Inability to carry on any physical activity without discomfort; 
anginal syndrome may be present at rest.
From Owlia M, Dodson JA, King JB, et al. Angina severity, mortality, 
and healthcare utilization among veterans with stable angina. J Am 
Heart Assoc. 2019;8(15):e012811.
*About 70% of ischemic episodes are not associated with angina 
pectoris, and as many as 15% of acute myocardial infarctions are silent.
IV
Chapter 26 Cardiovascular Disease
461
Patient scheduled for surgery with 
known or risk factors for CAD*
(Step 1)
Emergency
*See Sections 2.2, 2.4, and 2.5 in
the full-text CPG for
recommendations for patients
with symptomatic HF, VHD, or
arrhythmias.
†See UA/INSTEMI and STEMI
CPGs (Table 2).
Yes
Yes
Evaluate and treat
according to GDMT†
ACS†
(Step 2)
No
No
Estimated perioperative risk of MACE
based on combined clinical/surgical risk
(Step 3)
Low risk (<1%) 
(Step 4)
No further
testing
(Class III:NB)
Proceed to
srugery
Elevated risk 
(Step 5)
No further 
testing 
(Class Ila)
Moderate or greater 
(≥24 METs)
functional 
capacity
Excellent
(>10 METs)
Moderate/Good
(≥4–10 METs)
Pharmacologic 
stress testing 
(Class Ila)
No further
testing
(Class IIb)
Yes
No
If
normal
If
abnormal
Coronary
revascularization
according to
existing CPGs
(Class I)
Proceed to
surgery
Clinical risk stratification 
and proceed to surgery
No or
unknown
Poor OR unknown 
functional capacity 
(<4 METs): 
decision making OR
perioperative care? 
(Step 6)
Will further testing impact
Proceed to surgery 
according to GDMT OR
alternate strategies 
(noninvasive treatment.
palliation (Step 7)
Fig. 26.1 Stepwise approach to perioperative cardiac assessment for coronary artery disease 
(CAD). ACS, Acute coronary syndrome; CPG, clinical practice guideline; GDMT, guideline-directed 
medical therapy; HF, heart failure; MACE, major adverse cardiac event; MET, metabolic equivalent; 
NB, no benefit; STEMI, ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction; UA/NSTEMI, unstable angina/
non–ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction; VHD, valvular heart disease. (From Fleisher L, 
Fleischmann K, Auerbach AD, et al. 2014 ACC/AHA guideline on perioperative cardiovascular 
evaluation and management of patients undergoing noncardiac surgery. A report of the American 
College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2014;64[22]:e77–e137.)
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
462
introduction of these medical therapies should be decided 
based on risk estimation and clinical judgment.5
Despite the potential for adverse drug interactions, 
cardiac medications being taken preoperatively should, 
in general, be continued without interruption through 
the perioperative period. Holding angiotensin-converting 
enzyme (ACE) inhibitors and angiotensin receptor block-
ers (ARBs) perioperatively may be considered because 
continuation has been associated with an increased inci-
dence of intraoperative hypotension.12 In patients who 
do not require general anesthesia or who are undergoing 
low- to intermediate-risk procedures it is likely beneficial 
to continue all cardiac medications.
Patients with recently placed intracoronary stents 
receiving platelet inhibitors have a high risk of intrac-
oronary thrombosis and death when the platelet inhibi-
tors are discontinued for perioperative care. Guidelines 
provide recommendations for duration of antiplatelet 
therapy11; however, treatment should be individualized 
based on the patient’s risk of stent thrombosis versus 
surgical bleeding (see Chapter 13).
Monitoring (Also See Chapter 20)
The intensity of monitoring in the perioperative period is 
influenced by the complexity of the operative procedure 
and the severity of the cardiovascular disease. The five-
lead ECG serves as a noninvasive monitor of the balance 
between myocardial oxygen requirements and myocardial 
oxygen delivery in unconscious patients. When this bal-
ance is unfavorably altered, myocardial ischemia occurs, 
as evidenced on the ECG by at least a 1-mm downslop-
ing of the ST segment from the baseline (Table 26.1). 
A precordial V5 lead is a useful selection for detecting 
ST-segment changes characteristic of ischemia of the left 
ventricle during anesthesia, whereas lead II is the most 
sensitive for detection of arrhythmias. Intraarterial pres-
sure monitoring can speed the identification and treat-
ment of hemodynamic changes. Ventricular wall motion 
abnormalities observed by transesophageal echocardio-
gram (TEE) may be the most sensitive indicator of myo-
cardial ischemia, but this monitor is expensive, invasive, 
and requires additional training; however, it is routinely 
used for detecting myocardial ischemia. As part of goal-
directed therapy, continuous measurement of stroke vol-
ume variation (SVV) or pulse pressure variation (PPV) can 
predict fluid responsiveness and be used to optimize fluid 
administration, though there is controversy on whether 
there is any difference in outcomes13 (also see Chapter 24).
Intraoperative monitoring of pulmonary artery pressures 
or use of TEE should be reserved for selected high-risk 
patients (e.g., cardiac surgery, recent MI, current heart fail-
ure, unstable angina).1 Although few or no data support the 
use of pulmonary artery catheters,14 in selected patients, a 
pulmonary artery catheter in combination with a TEE probe 
may be helpful for monitoring responses to intravenous 
fluid replacement and the therapeutic effects of drugs on left 
ventricular function and cardiac output. When compared 
with TEE, monitoring with a pulmonary artery catheter is 
not a highly sensitive approach for detecting myocardial 
ischemia. TEE allows assessment of regional wall motion, 
global ventricular function, valvular function, intravascular 
fluid volume, and associated ventricular filling.
Management of Anesthesia
Management of anesthesia in patients with CAD is based on 
a preoperative evaluation of left ventricular function (Table 
26.2) and the maintenance of a favorable balance between 
myocardial oxygen requirements and myocardial oxygen 
delivery so as to prevent myocardial ischemia (Box 26.2). 
Any event associated with persistent tachycardia, systolic 
hypertension, diastolic hypotension, or arterial hypoxemia 
can adversely influence this delicate balance. Heart rate 
higher than 100 beats/min increases the risk of postopera-
tive death in patients with risk for CAD; heart rates higher 
than 120 beats/min significantly increase the risk.
Maintaining heart rate and systemic arterial blood pres-
sure within 20% of the awake values is commonly recom-
mended. Monitoring with an intraarterial catheter greatly 
improves the ability to maintain stable systemic arterial 
blood pressures. Nevertheless, an estimated one-half of all 
new perioperative ischemic episodes are not preceded by 
or associated with significant changes in heart rate or sys-
temic arterial blood pressure.15 A single 1-minute episode 
of myocardial ischemia detected by a 1-mm ST-segment 
Table 26.1
Area of Myocardial Ischemia as Reflected by the Electrocardiogram
Electrocardiogram Leads
Coronary Artery Responsible for 
Myocardial Ischemia
Area of Myocardium That May Be 
Involved
II, III, aVF
Right coronary artery
Right atrium
Sinus node
Atrioventricular node
Right ventricle
V3–V5
Left anterior descending coronary artery
Anterolateral aspect of the left ventricle
I, aVL
Circumflex coronary artery
Lateral aspect of the left ventricle
IV
Chapter 26 Cardiovascular Disease
463
elevation or depression increases the risk of cardiac events 
10-fold and the risk for death 2-fold.3 4 Tachycardia for 
5 minutes above 120 beats/min in the postoperative period 
can increase the risk of death 10-fold. Prevention or treat-
ment of tachycardia can reduce the risk of perioperative 
myocardial ischemia and associated death.
Preoperative anxiety can worsen myocardial ischemia 
because of increased catecholamine release and an 
increase in myocardial oxygen requirements secondary 
to an increase in heart rate and systemic blood pressure. 
Judicious preoperative use of a benzodiazepine or dex-
medetomidine can be considered.
Choice and dose of induction and maintenance agents 
need to reflect the patient’s underlying cardiac disease and 
function. In high-risk patients preinduction placement of 
an intraarterial catheter to monitor arterial blood pressure 
allows rapid pharmacologic manipulations and ability to 
achieve a more stable induction of anesthesia. Regardless 
of anesthetic choice, the main goals include avoidance of 
tachycardia and maintenance of hemodynamic stability.
Administration of opioids reduces the stimulation pro-
duced by tracheal intubation and attenuates the surgical 
stress response. β-Adrenergic blockers are effective in 
attenuating heart rate increases associated with tracheal 
intubation. Perioperative dexmedetomidine has been 
shown to reduce delirium after both cardiac surgery and 
noncardiac surgery.16 17
All volatile anesthetics induce ischemic precondition-
ing to varying degrees and may protect the myocar-
dium from subsequent ischemia.18 Regional myocardial 
ischemia associated with drug-induced vasodilation is 
known as coronary artery steal. The myth that isoflurane 
increases the risk of coronary steal has been debunked. 
There is no increased risk of coronary steal when hemo-
dynamic variables are tightly controlled.19 20 A large clin-
ical trial in patients undergoing cardiac surgery failed to 
demonstrate a difference between halothane, enflurane, 
isoflurane, and narcotic-based anesthetics.21
Decreases in body temperature that occur intraopera-
tively may predispose to shivering on awakening, leading 
to abrupt increases in myocardial oxygen requirements. 
After high-risk surgery, intensive and continuous post-
operative monitoring is useful for detecting myocardial 
ischemia, which is often asymptomatic. Most deaths after 
noncardiac surgery are linked to cardiovascular causes. MI 
after surgery independently raises the risk of 30-day mor-
tality and stroke.22 Perioperative monitoring of high-risk 
patients, including after surgery, is important to ensure the 
best recovery and patient outcomes.
VALVULAR HEART DISEASE
The most frequently encountered forms of valvular heart 
disease produce pressure overload (mitral stenosis, aortic 
stenosis) or volume overload (mitral regurgitation, aortic 
regurgitation).23 The net effect of valvular heart disease is 
interference with forward flow of blood from the heart into 
the systemic circulation. TEE has revolutionized the evalu-
ation and intraoperative management of valvular heart 
disease. Selection of anesthetic drugs for patients with 
valvular heart disease is often based on the likely effects of 
drug-induced changes in cardiac rhythm, heart rate, sys-
temic arterial blood pressure, systemic vascular resistance 
(SVR), and pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR) relative 
to the maintenance of cardiac output in these patients. 
Monitoring intraarterial pressure is helpful in patients with 
clinically significant valvular heart disease.
Mitral Stenosis
Mitral stenosis is characterized by mechanical obstruc-
tion of left ventricular diastolic filling secondary to a 
progressive decrease in the orifice of the mitral valve. The 
obstruction produces an increase in left atrial and pulmo-
nary venous pressure. Increased PVR is likely when the 
left atrial pressure is chronically higher than 25 mm Hg. 
Distention of the left atrium predisposes to atrial fibrilla-
tion, which can result in stasis of blood, the formation of 
thrombi, and systemic emboli. Chronic anticoagulation or 
antiplatelet therapy (or both) in patients with atrial fibrilla-
tion can reduce the risk of systemic embolic events. Mitral 
stenosis is commonly the result of the fusion of the mitral 
Box 26.2 Determinants of Myocardial Oxygen 
Requirements and Delivery
Myocardial Oxygen Requirements
•
Heart rate
•
Systolic blood pressure
•
Myocardial contractility
•
Ventricular volume
Myocardial Oxygen Delivery
•
Coronary blood flow
•
Oxygen content of arterial blood
Assessment Feature
Good Function
Impaired 
Function
Previous myocardial 
infarction
No
Yes
Evidence of congestive 
heart failure
No
Yes
Ejection fraction
>0.55
<0.4
Left ventricular end-
diastolic pressure
<12 mm Hg
>18 mm Hg
Cardiac index
>2.5 L/min/m2
<2 L/min/m2
Areas of ventricular 
dyskinesia
No
Yes
Table 26.2
Evaluation of Left Ventricular Function
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
464
valve leaflets during the healing process of acute rheu-
matic carditis. Symptoms of mitral stenosis do not usually 
develop until about 20 years after the initial episode of 
rheumatic fever. A sudden increase in the demand for car-
diac output as produced by pregnancy or sepsis, however, 
may unmask previously asymptomatic mitral stenosis.
Management of Anesthesia
Patients with mitral stenosis can be more susceptible than 
normal individuals to the ventilatory depressant effects 
of sedative drugs used for preoperative medication. If 
patients are given sedative drugs, supplemental oxygen 
may increase the margin of safety. Drugs used for induc-
tion and maintenance of anesthesia should cause minimal 
changes in heart rate and in SVR and PVR (Box 26.3). 
Furthermore, these drugs should not greatly decrease myo-
cardial contractility. No one anesthetic has been proven to 
be superior. Intraoperative intravenous fluid therapy must 
be carefully titrated because these patients are susceptible 
to intravascular volume overload and to the development 
of left ventricular failure and pulmonary edema. Likewise, 
the head-down position may not be well tolerated because 
the pulmonary blood volume is already increased.
Monitoring intraarterial pressure and SVV or PPV 
is helpful to guide the adequacy of intravascular fluid 
replacement (also see Chapters 20 and 24). If central pres-
sures are measured, an increase in right atrial pressure 
could also reflect pulmonary vasoconstriction, suggesting 
the need to check for causes, which may include nitrous 
oxide, desflurane, acidosis, hypoxia, increased mitral 
regurgitation, or light anesthesia.
Postoperatively, patients with mitral stenosis who undergo 
noncardiac surgery are at high risk for developing pulmo-
nary edema and right-sided heart failure. Mechanical venti-
lation may be necessary, particularly after major thoracic or 
abdominal surgery. The shift from positive-pressure ventila-
tion to spontaneous ventilation with weaning and extuba-
tion may lead to increased venous return and increased 
central venous pressures with worsening of heart failure.
Mitral Regurgitation
Mitral regurgitation is characterized by left atrial volume 
overload and decreased left ventricular forward stroke 
volume caused by the backflow of part of each stroke 
volume through the incompetent mitral valve back into 
the left atrium. This regurgitant flow is responsible for 
the characteristic V waves seen on the recording of the 
pulmonary artery occlusion pressure. Common causes 
of mitral regurgitation include mitral valve prolapse, 
ischemia leading to left ventricular dilation, and chronic 
hypertension. Mitral regurgitation secondary to rheu-
matic fever usually has a component of mitral stenosis. 
Isolated mitral regurgitation may be acute, reflecting 
papillary muscle dysfunction after an MI or rupture of 
chordae tendineae secondary to infective endocarditis.
Management of Anesthesia
Management of anesthesia in patients with mitral regur-
gitation should attempt to improve the forward left ven-
tricular stroke volume. Cardiac output can be improved 
by mild increases in heart rate and mild decreases in SVR 
(Box 26.4). Preinduction placement of intraarterial pres-
sure monitoring can speed the identification and treat-
ment of hemodynamic changes in patients with clinically 
significant valvular disease.
A general anesthetic is the usual choice for patients 
with significant mitral regurgitation. Although decreases 
in SVR are theoretically beneficial, the rapid onset and 
uncontrolled nature of this response with a spinal anes-
thetic may detract from the use of this technique. Local 
or regional anesthesia may be used safely for surgery on 
peripheral body sites. Surgical stimulation can lead to 
undesirable increases in systemic arterial blood pressure 
and SVR. Intravascular fluid volume must be maintained 
to ensure adequate venous return and ejection of an opti-
mal forward left ventricular stroke volume.
Aortic Stenosis
Aortic stenosis is characterized by increased left ventricu-
lar systolic pressure to maintain the forward stroke volume 
through a narrowed aortic valve. The magnitude of the 
pressure gradient across the valve serves as an estimate 
of the severity of valvular stenosis. Hemodynamically 
significant aortic stenosis is associated with mean systolic 
pressure gradients more than 40 mm Hg or valve areas less 
than 1.0 cm2. The combination of symptoms (angina, heart 
failure, or syncope), signs (serious left ventricular dysfunc-
tion and progressive cardiomegaly), and a reduced valve 
Box 26.3 Anesthetic Considerations in Patients With 
Mitral Stenosis
•Avoid tachycardia and maintain sinus rhythm
•Maintain systemic vascular resistance to maintain
diastolic coronary perfusion
•Arterial hypoxemia, hypoventilation, or hypercarbia may
exacerbate pulmonary hypertension and precipitate right 
ventricular failure
•Increased circulatory volume may lead to flash pulmonary
edema and hypoxemia
Box 26.4 Anesthetic Considerations in the Patient With 
Mitral or Aortic Regurgitation
•Maintain sinus rhythm with normal to slightly elevated
heart rate (HR 80–100 bpm)
•Maintain diastolic pressure; mild decrease in systemic
vascular resistance will improve forward flow
•Sudden increases in systemic vascular resistance may
worsen mitral or aortic regurgitation
IV
Chapter 26 Cardiovascular Disease
465
area also indicate the diagnosis of critical aortic stenosis 
requiring surgical replacement. Increased intraventricular 
pressures are accompanied by compensatory increases in 
the thickness of the left ventricular wall, which leads to 
diastolic and systolic dysfunction. Angina pectoris occurs 
often in these patients in the absence of CAD, reflect-
ing an increased myocardial oxygen demand associated 
with myocardial hypertrophy in combination with higher 
intraventricular pressures. There is a decrease in oxygen 
delivery secondary to the aortic valve pressure gradient 
in combination with an increase in oxygen requirements 
from the increase in left ventricular stroke work. Thus aor-
tic stenosis results in an increase in left ventricular stroke 
work and oxygen requirements (increased demand) while 
reducing coronary blood flow (reduced supply).
Isolated nonrheumatic aortic stenosis usually results 
from progressive calcification and stenosis of a congeni-
tally abnormal (usually bicuspid) valve. Aortic stenosis 
caused by rheumatic fever almost always occurs in associ-
ation with mitral valve disease. Likewise, aortic stenosis is 
usually accompanied by some degree of aortic regurgita-
tion. Regardless of the cause of aortic stenosis, the natural 
history of the disease includes a long latent period, often 
30 years or more, before symptoms occur. Because aortic 
stenosis may be asymptomatic, it is important to listen for 
this cardiac murmur (systolic murmur in the second right 
intercostal space that may radiate to the right carotid) in 
patients scheduled for surgery. The incidence of sudden 
death is increased in patients with aortic stenosis.
Management of Anesthesia
With the advent of transcatheter aortic valve replace-
ment (TAVR), the indications for aortic valve replace-
ment (AVR) have changed, and many patients previously 
thought too high risk for surgical AVR (SAVR) are now 
considered candidates for TAVR. Patients with critical 
aortic stenosis or aortic stenosis with reduced left ven-
tricular function or symptoms of angina or heart failure 
should be evaluated for AVR before elective surgery.
Goals during management of anesthesia in patients 
with aortic stenosis are avoidance of arterial hypoten-
sion; maintenance of normal sinus rhythm; and avoid-
ance of extreme and prolonged alterations in heart rate, 
SVR, and intravascular fluid volume (Box 26.5). The most 
important aspect of management for patients with aortic 
stenosis is careful avoidance of hypotension. Preservation 
of normal sinus rhythm is critical because the left ventri-
cle is dependent on properly timed atrial contractions to 
ensure optimal left ventricular filling and stroke volume. 
Marked increases in heart rate (more than 100 beats/min) 
decrease the time for left ventricular filling and ejection 
and decrease coronary blood flow while increasing myo-
cardial oxygen consumption. Coronary blood flow to the 
left ventricle occurs during diastole, and changes in heart 
rate primarily affect diastolic time. Bradycardia (fewer 
than 50 beats/min) can lead to acute overdistention of 
the left ventricle. In severe aortic stenosis intraarterial 
pressure monitoring before induction of anesthesia can 
speed the identification and treatment of hemodynamic 
changes. Prophylactic infusions of vasoconstrictors such 
as phenylephrine started before induction may reduce 
hemodynamic changes.
Intravascular fluid volume should be maintained in order 
to maintain end-diastolic volume. This may be challenging 
in the setting of underlying left ventricular hypertrophy 
(LVH), reduced left ventricular filling, and diastolic dysfunc-
tion. A cardiac defibrillator should be promptly available 
when anesthesia is administered to patients with severe 
aortic stenosis because external cardiac compressions are 
unlikely to generate an adequate stroke volume across a 
severely stenosed aortic valve. Cardiopulmonary resuscita-
tion (CPR) has a lower success rate in patients with aortic 
stenosis secondary to low coronary perfusion pressures as 
a result of the stenotic aortic valve (also see Chapter 45).
Aortic Regurgitation
Aortic regurgitation is characterized by decreased forward 
left ventricular stroke volume resulting from regurgita-
tion of part of the ejected stroke volume back into the left 
ventricle through an incompetent aortic valve. A gradual 
onset of aortic regurgitation results in marked LVH and 
eventual dilation. Increased myocardial oxygen require-
ments secondary to LVH, plus a characteristic decrease in 
aortic diastolic pressure that decreases coronary blood flow, 
can manifest as angina pectoris in the absence of CAD. 
Coronary blood flow to the left ventricle occurs during 
diastole. In severe or acute aortic regurgitation with low 
diastolic pressures and elevated end-diastolic ventricular 
pressures coronary blood flow can be severely compro-
mised. Acute aortic regurgitation is most often caused by 
infective endocarditis, trauma, or dissection of a thoracic 
aortic aneurysm. Chronic aortic regurgitation is usually the 
result of prior rheumatic fever. In contrast to aortic steno-
sis, the occurrence of sudden death in patients with aortic 
regurgitation is rare.
Management of Anesthesia
Management of anesthesia for noncardiac surgery 
in patients with aortic regurgitation is similar to the 
approach described for patients with mitral regurgitation 
Box 26.5 Anesthetic Considerations in Patients With 
Aortic Stenosis
•Maintain sinus rhythm with normal to slightly decreased
heart rate (HR 60–90 bpm)
•Avoid hypotension; maintain systemic vascular resistance
to maintain diastolic coronary perfusion
•Given underlying left ventricular hypertrophy, reduced
intracavitary volume, and associated diastolic dysfunction, 
fluid management may be challenging
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
466
(see Box 26.4). Preinduction intraarterial pressure monitor-
ing can speed the identification and treatment of hemo-
dynamic changes and should be used for patients with 
significant aortic regurgitation. Anesthetics with minimal 
effects on SVR or cardiac function should be selected.
DISTURBANCES OF CARDIAC CONDUCTION 
AND RHYTHM
The ECG is a valuable tool for diagnosing disturbances 
of cardiac conduction and rhythm (also see Chapter 20). 
Ambulatory ECG monitoring (Holter monitoring) is useful 
in documenting the occurrence of life-threatening car-
diac dysrhythmias and assessing the efficacy of antidys-
rhythmic drug therapy. The incidence of intraoperative 
cardiac dysrhythmias depends on the definition (benign 
vs. life threatening), patient characteristics, and the type 
of surgery (frequent incidence during cardiothoracic sur-
gery) (Table 26.3).
Heart Block
Disturbances of cardiac impulse conduction can be 
classified according to the site of the conduction block 
relative to the atrioventricular (AV) node. Heart block 
occurring above the AV node is usually benign and tran-
sient. Heart block occurring below the AV node tends to 
be progressive and permanent.
A theoretical concern in patients with bifascicular 
heart block is that perioperative events, such as altera-
tions in systemic arterial blood pressure, arterial oxygen-
ation, or electrolyte concentrations, might compromise 
conduction in the one remaining intact fascicle, leading 
to the acute onset intraoperatively of third-degree (com-
plete) AV heart block. However, surgery performed during 
general or regional anesthesia does not predispose to the 
development of third-degree heart block in patients with 
coexisting bifascicular block. Therefore placement of a 
prophylactic artificial cardiac pacemaker is not required 
before anesthesia and surgery, but transcutaneous pacing 
should be available.
Cardiac Implantable Electronic Devices
The number of patients presenting for surgery with car-
diac implantable electronic devices (CIEDs) is increasing. 
Permanent pacemakers are most commonly implanted 
for sinus node dysfunction and high-grade AV block. 
Biventricular pacemakers are specific types of pacing 
devices indicated for symptomatic patients with moder-
ate to severe cardiac failure with left ventricular ejection 
fraction (EF) of <35% and a widened QRS interval. Biven-
tricular pacing, often termed chronic resynchronization 
therapy (CRT), optimizes the timing of right and left ven-
tricular contraction, which is otherwise uncoordinated, 
with sole right ventricular pacing. Biventricular pace-
makers (CRT) may be combined with an implantable 
cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) (CRT-D).
Preoperative evaluation of the patient with a CIED 
includes determination of the type of device (pacemaker/
ICD/CRT-D), reason for implantation, dependency on 
device, brand, model, and magnet mode settings. History 
should include symptoms suggesting device malfunc-
tion, such as dizziness, syncope, or signs of deteriorat-
ing cardiac function. A device under the skin may not 
be a pacemaker or ICD. Implanted devices include loop 
recorders, deep brain stimulators, intravenous pumps 
or ports, spinal stimulators, bladder stimulators, gastric 
stimulators, and vagal stimulators.
Electromagnetic interference (EMI) from monopolar 
electrosurgery may adversely affect the normal function-
ing of CIEDs. EMI is particularly important to consider 
in a patient who is pacemaker-dependent because over-
sensing may result in inappropriate inhibition of pacing 
and lead to hemodynamic compromise. For surgeries 
above the umbilicus, EMI of pacing cannot be reliably 
eliminated. For patients with true pacing dependency 
at high risk of EMI exposure during surgery, manage-
ment requires either magnet placement (if the device is a 
pacemaker) or reprogramming (sole choice with an ICD, 
optional choice with a pacemaker). In the case of ICDs 
EMI may be falsely interpreted as a shockable rhythm 
with the risk of intraoperative shock delivery. Disabling 
the defibrillator function of an ICD before exposure to 
EMI is therefore advised.24 The device should be reac-
tivated after the surgical procedure and examined for 
proper function.
Selection of drugs or techniques for anesthesia is 
not influenced by the presence of CIEDs, as there is no 
evidence that the threshold and subsequent response 
of these devices is altered by drugs administered in the 
perioperative period. However, patients with CIEDs have 
a frequent incidence of coexisting cardiac disease and 
should be monitored carefully and anesthetized with 
care. Patients with ICDs frequently have poor ventricu-
lar function. Insertion of a pulmonary artery catheter 
will not disturb epicardial electrodes but might dislodge 
recently placed (less than 2 weeks) transvenous endocar-
dial electrodes.
A suggested algorithm for perioperative management 
of transvenous pacemakers/ICDs is shown in Fig. 26.2.
HEART FAILURE
Heart failure is a syndrome caused by cardiac dysfunction 
(systolic, diastolic, or both) characterized by pulmonary 
and/or systemic venous congestion and/or inadequate 
peripheral oxygen delivery. The definitions and clinical 
data standards for heart failure were updated in 2021 
(Table 26.4).35 The term guideline-directed management 
IV
Chapter 26 Cardiovascular Disease
467
Condition
Comments
Treatment
ECG Display
Third-degree 
(trifascicular, 
complete) AV 
block
Surgery and/
or anesthesia 
in patients with 
bifascicular block 
does not increase 
risk of developing 
third-degree heart 
block
Permanent 
pacemaker;
temporary tx:
emergency 
transvenous 
pacing or 
transesophageal 
pacing,
IV isoproterenol
Sick sinus 
syndrome
Malfunctioning sinus 
node resulting in 
sinus bradycardia, 
sinus arrest, brady-
tachy syndrome
Permanent 
pacemaker;
β-blockers for 
tachycardias
Ventricular 
premature 
beats or 
premature 
ventricular 
complexes 
(PVCs)
Causes include 
myocardial ischemia, 
hypoxia, hypercarbia, 
hypokalemia, 
mechanical irritation 
of the ventricles
Identify underlying 
cause and correct; 
β-Blockers, 
calcium channel 
blockers,
IV lidocaine (1– 
1.5 mg/kg)
Ventricular 
tachycardia 
at least three 
wide QRS 
complexes 
(>120 ms) at 
a heart rate 
>120 beats/
min
Causes include 
myocardial ischemia, 
hypoxia, electrolyte 
abnormalities, 
myocardial 
stimulation by 
surgeons
Stable:
IV amiodarone, 
procainamide, 
lidocaine
Unstable:
synchronized 
cardioversion
Wolff-
Parkinson-
White 
syndrome 
(preexcitation 
syndrome) 
PR <120 ms, 
wide QRS, 
delta wave
Often associated 
with paroxysmal 
atrial tachycardia. 
SVTs with 1:1 
conduction may lead 
to hemodynamic 
collapse. Avoid 
events/drugs 
that increase 
sympathetic activity 
and predispose to 
tachydysrhythmias
Catheter ablation 
of accessory 
pathways;
Stable:
IV adenosine, 
procainamide, 
β-blockers
Unstable:
synchronized 
cardioversion
Table 26.3
Cardiac Conduction and Rhythm Abnormalities
Continued
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
468
Patient with CIED
Comments: EMI is considered significant risk
when source is < 15 cm from generator. External
pacing/defibrillation must be available. Algorithm
assumes device magnet capabilities are enabled.
Consider consulting CIED team for CRT devices.
Algorithm by A. Thompson MD
EMI
above umbilicus?
No
No reprogramming or magnet 
application necessary. Have 
magnet available.
Yes
Yes
Yes
Magnet/reprogram to 
asynchronous mode.
No
No reprogramming or magnet 
application necessary. Have 
magnet available.
No
ICD
Pacemaker
Is the patient pacemaker- 
dependent?
Magnet/reprogram to 
deactivate ICD.
Is the patient pacemaker- 
dependent?
Reprogram to 
asynchronous mode.
No reprogramming 
necessary.
Fig. 26.2 Algorithm for perioperative management of CIEDs.
Condition
Comments
Treatment
ECG Display
Prolonged 
QT interval 
syndrome 
(>440 ms)
Associated 
with ventricular 
dysrhythmias, 
syncope, and sudden 
death. Avoid drugs 
that prolong the 
QT interval (i.e., 
droperidol)
β-blockers,
left stellate 
ganglion block
Table 26.3
Cardiac Conduction and Rhythm Abnormalities—cont’d
Figure A1 modified from Donald M, Kosowsky JM. Rosen’s Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice. Yealy; December 31, 2017: 
929–958.e2. © 2018. Fig. 69.15.
Figure A2 modified from Donald M, Kosowsky JM. Rosen’s Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice. Yealy; December 31, 2017: 
929–958.e2. © 2018. Fig. 69.11.
Figure A3 modified from Donald M, Kosowsky JM. Rosen’s Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice. Yealy; December 31, 2017: 
929–958.e2. © 2018. Fig. 69.16.
Figure A4 modified from Donald M, Kosowsky JM. Rosen’s Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice. Yealy; December 31, 2017: 
929–958.e2. © 2018. Fig. 69.36.
Figure A5 modified from Zimetbaum P. Goldman-Cecil Medicine. December 31, 2019: 331–343.e4. © 2020. Fig. 58.1.
Figure A6 modified from Perez M, Fonda H, Le V-V, Mitiku T, Ray J, Freeman JV, Ashley E, Froelicher VF. Current problems in cardiology. 2009. 
Nov 30; 34 (12): 586–662. © 2009. Fig. 3.
IV
Chapter 26 Cardiovascular Disease
469
Definition
HF is a clinical syndrome with current or prior symptoms 
and/or signs caused by structural and/or functional cardiac 
abnormalities and corroborated by at least one of the 
following:
•Elevated natriuretic peptide levels
•Objective evidence of cardiogenic pulmonary or
systemic congestion
Classification by Stage
At Risk (Stage A)
Patients at risk for HF, but without current or prior 
symptoms or signs of HF and without structural cardiac 
changes or elevated biomarkers or heart disease
Pre-HF (Stage B)
Patients without current or prior symptoms or signs of HF 
with evidence of one of the following:
•Structural heart disease
•Abnormal cardiac function
•Elevated natriuretic peptide or cardiac troponin levels
HF (Stage C)
Patients with current or prior symptoms and/or signs of HF 
caused by a structural and/or functional cardiac abnormality
Advanced HF (Stage D)
Severe symptoms and/or signs of HF at rest, recurrent 
hospitalizations despite GDMT, refractory or intolerant to 
GDMT, requiring advanced therapies such as transplantation, 
mechanical circulatory support, or palliative care
Classification by EF
HF with reduced EF (HFrEF) – HF with LVEF < 40%
HF with mildly reduced EF (HFmrEF) – HF with LVEF 
41-49%
HF with preserved EF (HFpEF) – HF with LVEF >50%
HF with improved EF (HFimpEF) – HF with baseline LVEF 
of <40%, a 10-point increase from baseline LVEF, and a 
second measurement of LVEF of >40%
From Bozkurt B, Coats AJS, Tsutsui H, et al. Universal definition and 
classification of heart failure: A report of the heart failure society 
of America, heart failure association of the European society of 
cardiology, Japanese heart failure society and writing committee of 
the universal definition of heart failure. J Card Fail. 2021;27:387–413
Table 26.4
Universal Definition and Classification of 
Heart Failure (HF)
and therapy (GDMT) is used to encompass clinical evalua-
tion, diagnostic testing, and pharmacologic and procedural 
treatments for heart failure. Pharmacologic treatment for 
stage C heart failure with reduced EF begins with an ACE 
inhibitor or ARB plus GDMT with a β-blocker (e.g., biso-
prolol or carvedilol), with diuretics as needed.2.26
Elective surgery should not be performed in patients 
with untreated heart failure. The preoperative pres-
ence of heart failure is often associated with significant 
postoperative morbidity or mortality rates. Cardiology 
consultation is frequently helpful in patients with heart 
failure symptoms, as consideration of surgical or inter-
ventional revascularization and optimization of medical 
therapy can improve cardiac function. Preoperative ini-
tiation of β-blockers and vasodilator therapy with ACE 
inhibitors can improve ventricular function and reduce 
operative risk. These drugs should be started by physi-
cians with expertise in treating heart failure, with drug 
doses increased slowly as tolerated over 3 to 6 months as 
the heart function recovers.
Management of Anesthesia
When surgery cannot be delayed, however, the drugs 
and techniques chosen to provide anesthesia must 
be selected with the goal of minimizing detrimental 
effects on cardiac output. Optimal cardiac output can 
be obtained when the impedance of the vasculature 
(preload and afterload) matches the impedance of the 
heart and can be achieved by careful preload and after-
load management.
Positive-pressure ventilation of the lungs may be ben-
eficial by decreasing pulmonary congestion, improving 
arterial oxygenation, and eliminating the work of breath-
ing. Care must be taken on extubation of patients with 
heart failure, as the resumption of negative intrathoracic 
pressures with spontaneous ventilation can lead to 
increased filling pressures and worsening heart failure. 
Maintenance of arterial blood pressure with vasocon-
strictors should precede increasing myocardial contrac-
tility with continuous intravenous infusions of inotropic 
drugs. The use of β-agonists in patients with heart failure 
may decrease the chance of survival and should be used 
only when necessary.
Regional anesthesia (also see Chapters 17 and 18) 
should be considered for patients with heart failure requir-
ing peripheral or minor surgery. Anesthetics with minimal 
hemodynamic effects are optimal. If general anesthesia is 
required, additional monitoring (e.g., intraarterial pressure, 
central venous pressure, pulmonary artery pressure, TEE) 
may be required depending on the invasiveness of the 
surgical procedure and patient physiology.
HYPERTROPHIC CARDIOMYOPATHY
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is characterized 
by left ventricular outflow tract obstruction (LVOTO) 
produced by asymmetric hypertrophy of the basal inter-
ventricular septum and systolic anterior motion (SAM) 
of the anterior mitral valve leaflet.27,28 Associated LHV, 
in an attempt to overcome the obstruction, may be so 
massive that the volume of the left ventricular chamber is 
decreased, leading to smaller left ventricular end-diastolic 
volume, which can reduce stroke volume despite a normal 
EF. This disease is often hereditary and is an important 
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
470
cause of sudden cardiac death, especially in young adults. 
Though patients can remain asymptomatic for decades, 
common presenting symptoms include angina, dyspnea, 
exercise intolerance, dizziness, syncope, or sudden death. 
Treatment for patients with HCM includes β-blockers for 
heart rate control and arrhythmia suppression, ICDs to 
manage malignant arrhythmias, and surgical myectomy 
and septal ablation to decrease LVOTO (Box 26.6).
Management of Anesthesia
The goal during management of anesthesia for patients 
with HCM is to decrease the pressure gradient across the 
left ventricular outflow tract (see Box 26.6). This can be 
accomplished by decreasing heart rate and/or myocardial 
contractility, increasing preload (ventricular volume), 
and increasing afterload. Maintenance of sinus rhythm is 
also important because of increased dependence on atrial 
contraction for maintaining cardiac output in the setting 
of LVH and decreased left ventricular compliance.
Patient anxiety, intubation, surgical incision, and post-
operative pain can lead to sympathetic stimulation. Anes-
thetic drugs and surgical blood loss can lead to changes in 
preload, afterload, and contractility. Increases in heart rate, 
rhythm disturbances, and decreases in afterload will exac-
erbate LVOTO and may cause hemodynamic deterioration. 
Increases in contractility and decreases in preload will also 
accentuate LVOTO, highlighting the dynamic component 
of HCM. Intraoperative hypotension is generally treated 
with intravenous fluids and vasoactive medications that 
do not increase heart rate or contractility such as phenyle-
phrine or vasopressin. The Trendelenburg position will 
assist in increasing preload. Drugs with β-agonist activity 
are not likely to be used to treat hypotension because any 
increase in cardiac contractility or heart rate could increase 
Box 26.6 Management and Treatment of Left Ventricular 
Outflow Tract Obstruction (LVOTO) in Hypertrophic 
Cardiomyopathy
Decrease Myocardial Contractility and Heart Rate
•β-Adrenergic blockade
Increase Preload
•Increase intravascular fluid volume (fluids and head-down
position)
•Increase diastolic filling time by decreasing heart rate
Increase Afterload
•α-Adrenergic stimulation (phenylephrine)
•Vasopressin
Arrhythmia Suppression/Treatment
•β-Adrenergic blockade
•Implantable cardiac defibrillator
Surgical Treatment of LVOTO
•Septal myectomy
•Septal ablation
LVOTO. Vasodilators should be used with caution because 
decreases in SVR can also increase LVOTO. In the case of 
sudden onset of atrial fibrillation that is hemodynamically 
unstable direct current cardioversion may be necessary.29
PULMONARY HYPERTENSION
Pulmonary hypertension is defined as a mean pulmonary 
arterial pressure (mPAP) greater than 20 mm Hg at rest, 
measured during right heart catheterization.30 Increased 
pulmonary pressure and resistance increase the afterload 
on the right heart, resulting in hypertrophy and dilation 
of the right ventricle. Initial adaptive remodeling of the 
right ventricle is followed by maladaptive hypertro-
phy and progressive right ventricular dysfunction and 
decreased cardiac output. Patients with pulmonary hyper-
tension have a significantly increased risk of perioperative 
morbidity and mortality and should be treated with care. 
Patients with known or suspected pulmonary hyperten-
sion undergoing elective surgery should have a proper 
evaluation and optimization before surgery.
Management of Anesthesia
Goals during management of anesthesia in patients with 
pulmonary hypertension are to avoid events or drugs that 
could increase PVR and lead to right heart failure. Sym-
pathetic stimulation caused by anxiety, stress, pain, and 
inflammation can increase PVR. Circumstances likely to 
exacerbate pulmonary hypertension include hypoxemia, 
hypercapnia, acidosis, hypothermia, hypervolemia, and 
insufficient anesthesia and analgesia. Using a regional 
anesthesia technique offers the advantage of maintain-
ing spontaneous ventilation, and a continuous regional 
technique can be used for postoperative analgesia. Epi-
dural anesthesia may be preferable over spinal because 
of the avoidance of an abrupt decrease in SVR leading 
to decreased coronary perfusion and worsening right 
heart failure. The main advantages of general anesthesia 
are control of oxygenation and ventilation and a secure 
airway during surgery. An intubated patient also allows 
for delivery of an inhaled pulmonary vasodilator (e.g., 
inhaled nitric oxide, inhaled milrinone, iloprost). All 
standard induction agents have no influence on PVR and 
therefore can be used. Volatile anesthetics are useful for 
relaxing vascular smooth muscle and attenuating airway 
responsiveness to stimuli produced by an endotracheal 
tube. All volatile anesthetics up to 1 MAC may be admin-
istered without causing an increase in PVR.31 Nitrous 
oxide may increase PVR and should be avoided.32
For patients with severe pulmonary hypertension, 
intraarterial pressure monitoring is very helpful for hemo-
dynamic management. Depending on the surgery, monitor-
ing of pulmonary arterial or right atrial pressure (or both) 
may be helpful to detect any adverse effect on pulmonary 
IV
Chapter 26 Cardiovascular Disease
471
vasculature. TEE monitoring can be very helpful in blood 
volume management and monitoring of right heart func-
tion. In patients with right heart dysfunction inotropic 
support with β-agonists can improve cardiac function. 
Therapy should be chosen based on the hemodynamic 
problem (volume, SVR, chronotropy, inotropy, and pul-
monary hypertension). β-Agonists must be used carefully 
to avoid myocardial ischemia. In severe right ventricular 
failure combinations of β-agonists and phosphodiesterase 
inhibitors (amrinone or milrinone) can provide synergistic 
improvements in ventricular function and vasodilation 
(amrinone or milrinone), thus improving cardiac output.
CARDIAC TAMPONADE
Cardiac tamponade is characterized by (1) decreases in 
diastolic filling of the ventricles, (2) decreases in stroke 
volume, and (3) decreases in systemic arterial blood pres-
sure caused by increased intrapericardial pressure from 
accumulation of fluid in the pericardial space (Box 26.7). 
Decreased stroke volume from inadequate ventricular 
filling results in activation of the sympathetic nervous 
system (tachycardia, vasoconstriction) as the cardiovas-
cular system attempts to maintain the cardiac output. 
Cardiac output and systemic arterial blood pressure are 
maintained only as long as the pressure in the central 
veins exceeds the right ventricular end-diastolic pressure.
Although continuous intravenous infusions of cat-
echolamines (epinephrine, norepinephrine, dopamine, 
dobutamine, or isoproterenol) and vasoconstrictors may 
be necessary to maintain cardiac output and arterial 
blood pressure, the primary therapy is pericardial drain-
age. A common sign of cardiac tamponade is hemody-
namic collapse and cardiogenic shock unresponsive to 
fluids and inotropes. Systolic ventricular function is not 
the cause; rather, diastolic dysfunction from increased 
pericardial pressure is the primary problem. Once the 
pericardium is drained, venous return can enter the 
heart and hemodynamics will rapidly normalize.
Box 26.7 Manifestations of Cardiac Tamponade
•Increased pericardial pressure leading to decreased
cardiac filling
•Hypotension
•Tachycardia
•Increased systemic vascular resistance
•Low cardiac output
•Equalization of left and right diastolic filling pressures
•Exaggeration of arterial blood pressure variation/pulsus
paradoxus with respiration
•Fixed and reduced stroke volume (cardiac output and
systemic arterial blood pressure dependent on heart rate)
•Failure to respond to volume and multiple inotropes with
cardiogenic shock
Management of Anesthesia
Before the induction of general anesthesia in patients 
with significant cardiac tamponade, the patient should 
be positioned on the operating room table. Intraarterial 
monitoring is helpful if time permits. The chest and abdo-
men should be prepped and draped for surgery. Before 
anesthetic induction, the surgeons should be scrubbed, 
gowned, gloved, and at the operating room table, ready for 
incision. It is optimal if anesthetic induction, intubation, 
incision, and drainage of the pericardial tamponade can 
occur in extremely rapid succession. Institution of general 
anesthesia and positive-pressure ventilation of the lungs in 
the presence of cardiac tamponade can lead to immediate 
and profound hypotension or death, reflecting anesthetic-
induced peripheral vasodilation, direct myocardial depres-
sion, and decreased venous return from positive-pressure 
ventilation. When percutaneous pericardiocentesis cannot 
be performed using local anesthesia, the induction and 
maintenance of general anesthesia are extremely danger-
ous but may be achieved while carefully maintaining 
spontaneous respiration. If possible, positive-pressure 
ventilation of the lungs should be avoided until drainage 
of the pericardial space is imminent.
ANEURYSMS OF THE AORTA
Aneurysms of the aorta most often involve the abdomi-
nal aorta but may involve any part of the thoracic or 
abdominal aorta. Most patients have hypertension, and 
many have associated atherosclerosis. A dissecting aneu-
rysm denotes a tear in the intima of the aorta that allows 
blood to enter and penetrate between the walls of the 
vessel, producing a false lumen. Ultimately, the dissection 
may reenter the lumen through another tear in the intima 
or rupture through the adventitia.
Elective repair of an abdominal aneurysm is often rec-
ommended when the estimated diameter of the aneurysm 
is more than 5 cm. The incidence of spontaneous rupture 
increases dramatically when the size of the aneurysm 
exceeds this diameter. Extension of the abdominal aneu-
rysm to include the renal arteries occurs in about 5% of 
patients.
Management of Anesthesia
All surgery patients with vascular disease should be 
considered for prophylactic β-blocker and statin therapy. 
Perioperative administration of β-blockers reduces the 
perioperative mortality rate 50% to 90%. β-blocking 
drugs should be started as soon as patients are identified 
as needing surgery.5 Perioperative statin use may also be 
beneficial in reducing mortality.33
Anesthetic technique must take into account the 
surgical approach. Endovascular aneurysm repair is 
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
472
less invasive and may require only regional anesthe-
sia, although in prolonged cases general anesthesia is 
preferred. Open procedures for aortic aneurysm surgery 
are major procedures and require general anesthesia. 
All patients undergoing anesthesia for resection of an 
abdominal aortic aneurysm should have monitoring 
of intraarterial pressures. Epidural catheter placement 
may be helpful for the management of postoperative 
pain. Continuous cardiac output monitoring with cal-
culation of SVV or PPV can be used for goal-directed 
fluid therapy to guide volume replacement (also see 
Chapter 20).
CARDIOPULMONARY BYPASS
The introduction of cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) 
ushered in the modern era of cardiac surgery, provid-
ing a bloodless and motionless field to allow detailed 
repair of the heart and great vessels while still supplying 
oxygenated blood to the organs. By providing extracor-
poreal replacement of lung function, oxygenation and 
ventilation, heart function, and perfusion of oxygenated 
blood to organs, CPB earns its ubiquitous nickname as 
the “heart–lung machine.”
A schematic of a basic CPB circuit is shown in 
Fig. 26.3. The four basic components of a CPB circuit are 
a venous reservoir, pump, heat exchanger, and oxygen-
ator. To access the circulatory system, there are typically 
two main cannulas: the venous cannula inserted in the 
right atrium or both the superior and inferior vena cavae, 
which drains blood from the right side of the heart to 
the CPB reservoir, and the arterial cannula inserted into 
the aorta, which returns oxygenated blood from the 
CPB circuit to the patient. There are many variations 
on this basic central cannulation strategy, but the main 
principles of venous blood drainage and oxygenated 
arterial blood return apply to all. There are additional 
components to a CPB circuit that aid in the manage-
ment of blood loss (cardiotomy suckers), avoidance of 
Fig. 26.3 Schematic Diagram of Cardiopulmonary Bypass Circuit. ALF, Arterial line filter; LV, left ventricle. 
(From https://www.uptodate.com/contents/management-of-cardiopulmonary-bypass#H3860522344
Graphic 93255, Version 5.0.)
IV
Chapter 26 Cardiovascular Disease
473
Fig. 26.4 Cardiopulmonary Bypass Cannulae Insertion Sites. * Left ventricular vent enters right upper pulmonary 
vein then passes into left ventricle through mitral valve. The arrows denote directional blood flow.
• Retrograde cardioplegia cannula enters right atrium and passes into coronary sinus.
Δ Aortic root vent allows suction to be applied to the aortic root, thereby indirectly emptying the left ventricle. (From 
https://www.uptodate.com/contents/management-of-cardiopulmonary-bypass#H3860522344 Graphic 97188, 
Version 6.0.)
left ventricular distension (cardiac vent cannula), and 
maintenance of motionless surgical field and deairing 
(coronary sinus cannula and cardioplegia/root vent can-
nula). Cannula insertion sites are illustrated in Fig. 26.4.
The steps for initiation of CPB are described in Table 
26.5. As CPB is initiated, venous blood enters the bypass 
circuit either by gravity, where drainage is determined by 
the height difference between the patient and the reser-
voir, or by vacuum-assisted drainage. Additional cannu-
lae can be added as needed for cardioplegia and venting.
Blood gases are monitored during CPB. Oxygen 
delivery to the circuit is supplied by an oxygenator, 
and carbon dioxide elimination is determined by the 
gas flow rate. There are two blood gas management 
strategies: alpha stat and pH stat.34 The best strat-
egy has not been definitively determined, with each 
method having advantages and potential drawbacks. 
Their differences in measurement, advantages, and 
potential disadvantages are detailed in Box 26.8 (also 
see Chapter 22).
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
474
Box 26.8 pH Stat Versus Alpha Stat Management 
During CPB
Alpha Stat
Description: arterial blood gas (ABG) is temperature uncorrected 
(i.e., ABG measured at 37°, regardless of body temperature)
Advantages: easier to implement; physiologic response to 
hypothermia is maintained; cerebral autoregulation is 
maintained
Disadvantages: can cause cerebral vasoconstriction because 
of alkalemia; leftward shift of oxyhemoglobin dissociation 
curve can reduce supply to vulnerable tissues
pH Stat
Description: ABG is temperature-corrected to the patient’s 
temperature. CO2 solubility is increased at lower 
temperatures, leading to a decline in Pco2. To maintain 
normal pH, carbon dioxide is added to the circuit. Cerebral 
autoregulation is uncoupled.
Advantages: cerebrovascular vasodilatation and improved 
cerebral blood flow, particularly during deep hypothermic 
circulatory arrest; improved global and regional cooling.
Disadvantages: potential for increased embolic burden to 
cerebrovascular system.
Heparinization
Blood in the CPB tubing and reservoir is prone to catastrophic clotting if the patient is not 
anticoagulated. The tubing and reservoir are non-endothelialized surfaces and represent a large 
surface area of foreign material that can activate native inflammatory responses as well as the 
coagulation cascade. An activated clotting time, or ACT, of 400-500 seconds is required for CPB to 
prevent clotting.
Arterial cannulation
Once the ACT is of sufficient duration, the aorta is cannulated.
Venous cannulation
This is typically performed after arterial cannulation when central venous cannulation (meaning 
the right atrium or vena cavae are cannulated). Manipulation of the right atrium can induce 
arrhythmias, cause mechanical obstruction of inflow to the right atrium, or tear the right 
atrium. With arterial cannulation having already been completed, volume can be administered if 
necessary through the arterial cannula to compensate for the hemodynamic effects of right atrial 
manipulation.
Table 26.5
Steps for Initiation of Cardiopulmonary Bypass (CPB)
Weaning from CPB refers to the gradual withdrawal 
of extracorporeal support. The heart and lungs will 
resume their native functions as CPB is discontinued. 
The actions involved with discontinuation of CPB are 
described in Table 26.6. Once separation of CPB is com-
plete and the patient is determined not to require any 
additional repair, protamine is administered to neutral-
ize the heparin given for CPB. Protamine should be 
given slowly over 10 to 15 minutes to avoid hypoten-
sion related to fast infusion, known as a type I reaction.
There is also a type II and type III reaction associated 
with protamine, which causes anaphylaxis and pulmo-
nary hypertensive crisis, respectively. Once protamine is 
given, an activated clotting time (ACT) is performed to 
confirm normalization of values.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors, editors and publisher would like to thank 
Dr. Arthur Wallace for contributing to this chapter in 
previous editions of this work. It has served as a foundation 
for the current chapter.
IV
Chapter 26 Cardiovascular Disease
475
1. Rewarming
Although cooling can be rapid upon initiation of CPB, the same is not true for rewarming as rapid 
rewarming and hyperthermia have been associated with cerebral injury.
2. De-airing
Intracardiac air should be vented through a deairing cannula prior to separation from CPB to avoid air 
embolization to the heart, brain, and other organs. The anterior position of the right coronary artery in 
the supine patient makes it a frequent site of air embolism that can manifest as inferior ST elevations, 
ventricular dysfunction (particularly right ventricular dysfunction, but left ventricular dysfunction can also 
occur), and arrhythmias.
3. In addition, the following parameters should be addressed when discontinuation of CPB is imminent:
a. Rate
Does the patient have a heart rate adequate to sustain cardiac output once CPB is discontinued? If the 
heart rate is too low, as in severe bradycardia or heart block, the patient will need an alternate method of 
pacing via epicardial wires.
b. Drips
CPB can induce an inflammatory response that results in significant vasoplegia. Additionally, myocardial 
dysfunction, either pre-existing or anticipated, can affect cardiac output after separation from CPB. 
Vasopressors and/or inotropes may be required to successfully separate from CPB.
c. Gas (anesthesia)
Are anesthetic gas flows restarted on the ventilator? Volatile agents are added to the CPB circuit during 
bypass, but a general anesthetic agent must be continued after CPB.
d. Oxygen
Ensure the oxygen flows are on. Initially an FiO2 =1 is often used until the post-CPB blood gas is collected.
e. Ventilation
Ensure the ventilator is on.
Table 26.6
Steps for Discontinuation of Cardiopulmonary Bypass
REFERENCES
1. Mangano DT, Goldman L. Preoperative 
assessment of patients with known or 
suspected coronary disease. N Engl J 
Med. 1995;333(26):1750–1756.
2. Virani SS, Alvaro A, Aparicio HJ, Ben-
jamin Emelia J, Bittencourt Marcio S, 
Callaway Clifton W, Carson April P, 
etal. Heart Disease and Stroke Statis-
tics-2021 update: A report from the 
American Heart Association. Circula-
tion. 2021;143(8):e254–e743.
3. Mangano DT. Long-term cardiac prog-
nosis following noncardiac surgery. 
JAMA. 1992. https://doi.org/10.1001/
jama.1992.03490020081035.
4. Mangano DT, Browner WS, Hollenberg 
M, London MJ, Tubau JF. Association 
of perioperative myocardial ischemia 
with cardiac morbidity and mortality 
in men undergoing noncardiac sur-
gery. Surv Anesthesiol.. 1991. https://
doi.org/10.1097/00132586-199110000-
00010.
5. Fleisher LA, Fleischmann KE, Auerbach 
AD, Barnason Susan A, Beckman Joshua 
A, Bozkurt Biykem, Davila-Roman Vic-
tor G, etal. 2014 ACC/AHA guideline on 
perioperative cardiovascular evaluation 
and management of patients undergo-
ing noncardiac surgery: A report of the 
American College of Cardiology/Ameri-
can Heart Association Task Force on 
Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2014;64(22):e77–137.
6. Jetté M, Sidney K, Blümchen G. Meta-
bolic equivalents (METS) in exercise 
testing, exercise prescription, and evalu-
ation of functional capacity. Clin Car-
diol. 1990;13(8):555–565.
7. Larsen K. Changing risk of perioperative 
myocardial infarction. Perm J. 2012. 
https://doi.org/10.7812/tpp/12-033.
8. Livhits M, Ko CY, Leonardi MJ, Zing-
mond DS, Gibbons MM, de Virgilio 
C. Risk of surgery following recent 
myocardial 
infarction. 
Ann 
Surg. 
2011;253(5):857–864.
9. Livhits M, Gibbons MM, de Virgilio 
C, O’Connell JB, Leonardi Michael 
J, Ko Clifford Y, Zingmond David S. 
Coronary revascularization after myo-
cardial infarction can reduce risks of 
noncardiac surgery. J Am Coll Surg. 
2011;212(6):1018–1026.
10. Landesberg G, Beattie WS, Mosseri 
M, Jaffe AS, Alpert JS. Perioperative 
myocardial 
infarction. 
Circulation. 
2009;119(22):2936–2944.
11. Levine GN, Bates ER, Bittl JA, Brindis 
Ralph G, Fihn Stephan D, Fleisher Lee 
A, Granger Christopher B, etal. 2016 
ACC/AHA guideline focused update on 
duration of dual antiplatelet therapy in 
patients with coronary artery disease: A 
report of the American College of Cardi-
ology/American Heart Association Task 
Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines: 
An update of the 2011 ACCF/AHA/SCAI 
guideline for percutaneous coronary 
intervention, 2011 ACCF/AHA guideline 
for coronary artery bypass graft surgery, 
2012 ACC/AHA/ACP/AATS/PCNA/SCAI/
STS guideline for the diagnosis and 
management of patients with stable 
ischemic heart disease, 2013 ACCF/AHA 
guideline for the management of ST-
elevation myocardial infarction, 2014 
AHA/ACC guideline for the manage-
ment of patients with non–ST-elevation 
acute coronary syndromes, and 2014 
ACC/AHA guideline on perioperative 
cardiovascular evaluation and manage-
ment of patients undergoing noncardiac 
surgery. Circulation. 2016. https://doi.
org/10.1161/cir.0000000000000404.
12. Hollmann C, Fernandes NL, Biccard BM. 
A systematic review of outcomes associ-
ated with withholding or continuing 
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibi-
tors and angiotensin receptor block-
ers before noncardiac surgery. Anesth 
Analg. 2018;127(3):678.
13. Meng L, Heerdt PM. Perioperative goal-
directed haemodynamic therapy based 
on flow parameters: A concept in evo-
lution. Br J Anaesth. 2016;117(suppl 
3):iii3–iii17.
14. Bootsma IT, Boerma EC, Scheeren T 
WL, de Lange F. The contemporary 
pulmonary artery catheter. Part 2: Meas-
urements, limitations, and clinical appli-
cations. JoJ Clin Monit Comput. 2021. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10877-021-
00673-5.
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
476
15. Slogoff S, Keats AS. Further observations 
on perioperative myocardial ischemia. 
Anesthesiology. 1986;65(5):539–542.
16. Wu M, Liang Y, Dai Z, Wang S. Perioper-
ative dexmedetomidine reduces delirium 
after cardiac surgery: A meta-analysis 
of randomized controlled trials. J Clin 
Anesth. 2018;50(November):33–42.
17. Pan H, Liu C, Ma X, Xu Y, Zhang M, 
Wang Y. Perioperative dexmedetomi-
dine reduces delirium in elderly patients 
after non-cardiac surgery: A system-
atic review and meta-analysis of rand-
omized-controlled trials. Can J Anesth. 
2019;66(12):1489–1500.
18. Lemoine S, Tritapepe L, Hanouz JL, 
Puddu PE. The mechanisms of cardio-
protective effects of desflurane and 
sevoflurane at the time of reperfusion: 
Anaesthetic post-conditioning poten-
tially translatable to humans? Br J 
Anaesth. 2016;116(4):456–475.
19. Leung JM, Goehner P, O’Kelly BF, Hol-
lenberg Milton, Pineda Nito, Cason 
Brian A, Mangano Dennis T, Group 
Spi Research. Isoflurane anesthesia 
and myocardial ischemia: Compara-
tive risk versus sufentanil anesthesia 
in patients undergoing coronary artery 
bypass graft surgery. Anesthesiology. 
1991;74(5):838–847.
20. Hartman JC, Kampine JP, Schmeling 
WT, Warltier DC. Steal-prone coronary 
circulation in chronically instrumented 
dogs: Isoflurane versus adenosine. Anes-
thesiology. 1991;74(4):744–756.
21. Slogoff S, Keats AS. Randomized trial of 
primary anesthetic agents on outcome 
of coronary artery bypass operations. 
Anesthesiology. 1989;70(2):179–188.
22. Abbott TEF, Pearse RM, Andrew Arch-
bold R, Ahmad Tahania, Niebrzegowska 
Edyta, Wragg Andrew, Rodseth Reitze N, 
Devereaux Philip J, Ackland Gareth L. 
A prospective international multicentre 
cohort study of intraoperative heart rate 
and systolic blood pressure and myo-
cardial injury after noncardiac surgery: 
Results of the VISION Study. Anesth 
Analg. 2018;126(6):1936–1945.
23. Carabello BA, Crawford FA. Valvular 
Heart Disease. NEJM. 1997. https://doi.
org/10.1056/nejm199707033370107.
24. Crossley GH, Poole JE, Rozner MA, 
Asirvatham Samuel J, Cheng Alan, 
Chung Mina K, Ferguson T Bruce, 
etal. The Heart Rhythm Society (HRS)/
American Society of Anesthesiologists 
(ASA) Expert Consensus Statement 
on the perioperative management of 
patients with implantable defibrillators, 
pacemakers and arrhythmia monitors: 
Facilities and patient management: This 
document was developed as a joint 
project with the American Society of 
Anesthesiologists (ASA), and in col-
laboration with the American Heart 
Association (AHA), and the Society of 
Thoracic Surgeons (STS). Heart Rhythm. 
2011;8(7):1114–1154.
25. Heart Failure Society of America. Sec-
tion 2: Conceptualization and work-
ing definition of heart failure. J Card 
Fail. 2010;16(6):e34–e37. ISSN 1071-
9164. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.card-
fail.2010.05.011.
26. Yancy CW, Jessup M, Bozkurt B, Butler 
J, Jr Casey DE, Colvin MM, Drazner MH, 
Filippatos GS, Fonarow GC, Givertz MM, 
Hollenberg SM, Lindenfeld J, Masoudi 
FA, McBride PE, Peterson PN, Steven-
son LW, 2017 Westlake C. ACC/AHA/
HFSA focused update of the 2013 ACCF/
AHA guideline for the management of 
heart failure: A report of the American 
College of Cardiology/American Heart 
Association Task Force on Clinical Prac-
tice Guidelines and the Heart Failure 
Society of America. Circulation. 2017 
Aug 8;136(6):e137–e161. doi:10.1161/
CIR.0000000000000509. Epub 2017 Apr 
28. PMID: 28455343.
27. Marian AJ, Braunwald E. Hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy: Genetics, pathogenesis, 
clinical manifestations, diagnosis, and 
therapy. Circ Res. 2017;121(7):749–770.
28. Hensley N, Dietrich J, Nyhan D, Mitter 
N, Yee M, Brady M. Hypertrophic car-
diomyopathy: A review. Anesth Analg. 
2015;120(3):554–569.
29. Poliac LC, Barron ME, Maron BJ. Peri-
anesthetic management of hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy. Anesthesiology. 2006. 
https://doi.org/10.1097/00000542-
200609000-00040.
30. Simonneau G, Montani D, Celermajer 
DS, Denton Christopher P, Gatzoulis 
Michael A, Krowka Michael, Williams 
Paul G, Souza Rogerio. Haemodynamic 
definitions and updated clinical clas-
sification of pulmonary hypertension. 
Eur Respir J.. 2019;53(1). https://doi.
org/10.1183/13993003.01913-2018.
31. Pritts CD, Pearl RG. Anesthesia for 
patients with pulmonary hypertension. 
Curr Opin Anaesthesiol. 2010. https://
doi.org/10.1097/aco.0b013e32833953fb.
32. Hilgenberg JC, McCammon RL, Stoelt-
ing RK. Pulmonary and systemic vas-
cular responses to nitrous oxide in 
patients with mitral stenosis and pul-
monary hypertension. Anesth Analg. 
1980;59(5):323–326.
33. London MJ, Schwartz GG, Hur K, Hen-
derson WG. Association of perioperative 
statin use with mortality and morbidity 
after major noncardiac surgery. JAMA 
Internal Medicine. 2017;177(2):231–242.
34. Pokela M, Sebastian D, Fausto B, Vilho 
Vainionpää, Salomäki Timo, Kiviluo-
ma Kai, Rönkä Erkka, etal. pH-stat 
versus alpha-stat perfusion strategy 
during experimental hypothermic circu-
latory arrest: A microdialysis study. Ann 
Thorac Surg. 2003;76(4):1215–1226.
35. Bozkurt B, Coats AJ, Tsutsui H, et al. 
Universal Definition and Classification 
of Heart Failure: A report of the Heart 
Failure Society of America, Heart Fail-
ure Association of the European Society 
of Cardiology, Japanese Heart Failure 
Society and Writing Committee of the 
Universal Definition of Heart Failure. J 
Card Fail. 2021;27:387–413.
477
Chapter
INTRODUCTION
Chronic respiratory problems include obstructive and 
restrictive lung diseases, obstructive sleep apnea (OSA), 
and pulmonary hypertension. Obstructive lung diseases 
are commonly divided into reactive airway disorders 
(asthma) and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD). However, many patients have more than one type 
of lung disease. Using regional or local rather than general 
anesthesia is preferable for patients with chronic respira-
tory diseases.
History
Common symptoms elicited in all patients include cough, 
wheezing, shortness of breath, chest tightness, sputum 
production, and reduced exercise tolerance. Important 
components of the history are recent exacerbations, 
current and previous therapies (including hospital admis-
sions), emergency room visits, and tobacco use.
INTRODUCTION
History
Physical Examination
Laboratory Examination
ASTHMA
Clinical Presentation
Management of Anesthesia
CHRONIC OBSTRUCTIVE PULMONARY 
DISEASE
Clinical Presentation
Perioperative Management
INTERSTITIAL LUNG DISEASE
CYSTIC FIBROSIS
OBSTRUCTIVE SLEEP APNEA
Clinical Presentation
Treatment of Obstructive Sleep Apnea
Preoperative Evaluation of Patients With 
Obstructive Sleep Apnea
Perioperative Management
Postoperative Management
Obesity Hypoventilation Syndrome
PULMONARY HYPERTENSION
Pathophysiology
Preoperative Evaluation
Management of Anesthesia
ANESTHESIA FOR LUNG RESECTION
Preoperative Assessment for Pulmonary 
Resection
Smoking Cessation
Assessment of the Patient With Lung Cancer
Indications for Lung Isolation
Options for Lung Isolation
Airway Anatomy
Sizing a Double-Lumen Endobronchial Tube
Methods of Insertion of a Left-Sided Double-
Lumen Tube
CHRONIC PULMONARY 
DISEASE
Andrew J. Deacon, Peter D. Slinger
27
Positioning a Left-Sided Double-Lumen Tube
Right-Sided Double-Lumen Tube Indications
Positioning a Bronchial Blocker
Physiologic Considerations of One-Lung 
Ventilation in the Lateral Position
Conduct of Anesthesia
Approach to Intravenous Fluid Management
Approach to One-Lung Ventilation
Prediction of Intraoperative Hypoxia
Management of Hypoxia During One-Lung 
Ventilation
Conclusion of Surgery
Pain Management
MEDIASTINOSCOPY
MEDIASTINAL MASSES
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
478
Physical Examination
Signs of chronic respiratory disease include tachypnea, 
cyanosis, use of accessory muscles of respiration, and 
clubbing of the fingers. Important examination findings 
are the presence of unequal breath sounds, wheezing, and 
rales during auscultation.
Laboratory Examination
Chest Imaging
A recent preoperative chest x-ray examination is not 
required for all patients but should be considered in any 
patient with a chronic respiratory disease or a patient 
with a recent change in respiratory symptoms or signs.
Spirometry
Simple spirometry (expired volume or flow vs. time), 
forced vital capacity (FVC), and forced expiratory volume 
in 1 second (FEV1) (Fig. 27.1) are not required in all sta-
ble patients but should be ordered if there is any doubt 
about the severity of disease, such as a recent change in 
symptoms, if the patient is unable to give a clear history, 
or if any patient with chronic lung disease is having lung 
surgery. Full pulmonary function tests (plethysmography) 
(Fig. 27.2), including measurement of residual volume 
(RV), functional residual capacity (FRC), and measurement 
of the lung diffusing capacity for carbon monoxide (Dlco) 
are only indicated if the diagnosis or severity of the lung 
disease is unclear from the simple spirometry procedure.
Gas Exchange
Oxygen saturation (pulse oximetry: Spo2%) should be 
documented preoperatively in every patient with a 
chronic respiratory disease. Arterial blood gases are 
required preoperatively in patients with moderate or 
severe chronic respiratory disease who are at risk of 
requiring postoperative mechanical ventilation (major 
abdominal, thoracic, cardiac, spine, or neurosurgery) or 
if symptoms have become more intense.
ASTHMA
Clinical Presentation
Asthma is a common form of episodic recurrent lower 
airway obstruction that affects 3% to 5% of the popula-
tion. Sixty-five percent of people with asthma become 
symptomatic before age 5 years.1 Patients with childhood 
asthma often become quiescent with time but can have 
recurrences. Inflammation of the airways is a hallmark 
of asthma. Steroids (inhaled, oral, or both) are the most 
effective medications in controlling this inflammation. 
The inflamed airway is hyperresponsive to irritant stimuli 
with subsequent bronchospasm, small airway edema, and 
mucous secretions. Bronchospastic stimuli can include 
allergens, dust, cold air, instrumentation of the airways, 
and medications (nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs or 
histamine-releasing drugs). Patients with asthma are at 
risk for life-threatening bronchospasm during anesthesia, 
particularly during or recently after a respiratory tract 
infection. Elective surgery should therefore be delayed at 
least 6 weeks after a respiratory infection in these patients.
The severity of asthma, defined by the amount of 
treatment required to control symptoms, includes inter-
mittent, mild persistent, moderate persistent, and severe 
persistent asthma2 3 (Box 27.1). Most patients will be 
in steps 1 or 2 of this treatment protocol. Caution is 
Time (seconds)
Volume (L)
Flow (L/second)
c
a
b
c
a
b
1
0
2
3
4
5
6
Volume (L)
1
0
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
0
2
3
4
5
6
1
0
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
A
B
Fig. 27.1 Simple spirometry patterns in obstructive lung disease (a), restrictive lung disease (b), and 
normal patients (c). (A) Volume–time curves. The exhaled volume during the first second of a maximal 
expiratory effort is the forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1). The maximal expired volume is the 
forced vital capacity (FVC). (B) Flow–volume curves. The maximal flow during a forced expiration is the 
peak expiratory flow (PEF). (From Patterson GA, Cooper JD, Deslauriers J, et al., eds. Pearson’s Thoracic and 
Esophageal Surgery. 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2008, used with permission.)
IV
Chapter 27 Chronic Pulmonary Disease
479
required when anesthetizing patients after step 3. A his-
tory of severe or life-threatening exacerbations, requiring 
endotracheal intubation or admission to intensive care, is 
indicative of patients at increased risk of major pulmo-
nary complications. Peak expiratory flow (PEF) rate is a 
simple and useful measurement of asthma severity. Many 
patients measure their own PEF to guide their therapy. 
PEF rates less than 50% of the predicted value (corrected 
for age, gender, and height) indicate severe asthma. A 
PEF increase of more than 15% after bronchodilator 
administration suggests inadequate treatment of asthma.
Suppression of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal 
(HPA) axis may occur with corticosteroid therapy. Adre-
nal crisis may be precipitated by the stress of surgery. 
Short courses of oral prednisone used to treat asthma 
exacerbations can affect HPA function for up to 10 
days, but dysfunction is unlikely to be prolonged. Large 
doses, prolonged therapy (>3 weeks), evening dosing, 
and continuous (as opposed to alternate day) dosing all 
increase suppression of the HPA axis and may take up 
to a year before returning to normal. Inhaled steroids 
are less likely to cause suppression of the HPA axis.
Management of Anesthesia
The adequacy of asthma control should be assessed 
during preoperative evaluation and symptoms unchar-
acteristic of asthma excluded (Table 27.1). Principles of 
perioperative management of patients with asthma are 
IC
FRC
SVC
IC
TV
ERV
ERV
RV
Lung volumes and capacities
RV
RV
IRV
TLC
Fig. 27.2 Complete pulmonary function testing will provide data on lung volumes and capacities to 
differentiate obstructive from restrictive diseases. ERV, Expiratory reserve volume; FRC, functional residual 
capacity; IC, inspiratory capacity; IRV, inspiratory reserve volume; RV, residual volume; SVC, slow vital capacity; 
TLC, total lung capacity; TV, tidal volume. (Reprinted from Patterson AG, Cooper JD, Deslauriers J, et al., eds. 
Pearson’s Thoracic and Esophageal Surgery. 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2008. p. 1168, with permission.)
Box 27.1
Stepwise Therapy for the Treatment of Asthma
Step 1: Inhaled short-acting β2-agonists (SABA) PRN (e.g., 
salbutamol [aka albuterol] 100–200 μg prn)
Step 2: Daily low-dose inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) and SABA 
PRN, or PRN concomitant with ICS and SABA (e.g., 
inhaled fluticasone 88 mcg twice daily)
Step 3: Daily and PRN combination low-dose ICS-formoterol*
Step 4: Daily and PRN combination medium-dose ICS-
formoterol
Step 5: Daily medium-high dose ICS-LABA plus long-acting 
muscarinic antagonist† (LAMA) and PRN SABA
Step 6: Daily high-dose ICS-LABA plus oral systemic 
corticosteroids plus PRN SABA
prn, As needed.
*Formoterol is a long-acting inhaled β2-agonist (LABA); there are 
several formulations of formoterol combined with an inhaled 
corticosteroid in a single inhaler.
†Long-acting muscarinic antagonists include tiotropium bromide and 
aclidinium bromide.
Stepwise approach for asthma management according to the 
National Asthma Education and Prevention Program Coordinating 
Committee. Step 1 is for patients with intermittent asthma only; the 
remaining steps are for patients with persistent asthma. Alternative 
management steps and additional treatment recommendations are 
available in Expert Panel Working Group of the National Heart, Lung, 
and Blood Institute (NHLBI) administered and coordinated National 
Asthma Education and Prevention Program Coordinating Committee 
(NAEPPCC), Cloutier MM, Baptist AP, Blake KV, et al. 2020 Focused 
updates to the asthma management guidelines: A report from the 
National Asthma Education and Prevention Program Coordinating 
Committee Expert Panel Working Group. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 
2020;146(6):1217–1270.
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
480
outlined in Box 27.2. Volatile anesthetics, particularly 
sevoflurane,4 reduce bronchomotor tone and produce a 
degree of bronchodilation (except desflurane) that may 
be helpful in patients with obstructive lung disease or 
bronchoconstriction.5
CHRONIC OBSTRUCTIVE PULMONARY 
DISEASE
Clinical Presentation
The pathologic hallmarks of COPD include inflammation 
of the small airways and destruction of lung parenchyma. 
The FEV1/FVC ratio will be less than 70%, and the RV 
will be increased. The severity of COPD is assessed by the 
percent of FEV1: stage I, more than 50% predicted (this 
category includes both mild and moderate COPD); stage 
II, 35% to 50%; and stage III, less than 35%.6 Stage I 
patients should not have significant dyspnea, hypoxemia, 
or hypercarbia. Specific complications of COPD to be 
considered preoperatively are described next.
Carbon Dioxide Retention (Baseline Paco2 >45 mm Hg)
Some patients with stage II or III COPD have an elevated 
Paco2 at rest. Patients with CO2 retention cannot be dif-
ferentiated from patients without retention on the basis 
of history, physical examination, or spirometry. When 
these patients are given supplemental oxygen, their 
Paco2 values increase because of an increase in alveolar 
dead space from a decrease in regional hypoxic pulmo-
nary vasoconstriction and the Haldane effect.7 However, 
supplemental oxygen must be administered to these 
patients to prevent the hypoxemia associated with the 
postoperative decrease in FRC. Increased CO2 concentra-
tions above baseline lead to respiratory acidosis, which 
causes cardiovascular changes (tachycardia, hyperten-
sion, and pulmonary vasoconstriction). Paco2 levels more 
than 80 mm Hg can cause a decreased level of conscious-
ness. The increase in Paco2 in these patients postopera-
tively should be anticipated and monitored. To identify 
these patients preoperatively, patients with stage II or 
III COPD should have an analysis of arterial blood gas 
performed.
Right Ventricular Dysfunction
Right ventricular dysfunction occurs in up to 50% of 
patients with severe COPD. Chronic recurrent hypoxemia 
is the cause of right ventricular dysfunction and sub-
sequent progression to cor pulmonale. Cor pulmonale 
occurs in 70% of adult COPD patients with an FEV1 less 
than 0.6 L. Mortality risk in these patients is primarily 
related to chronic hypoxemia. Administration of oxygen 
is the only therapy that improves long-term survival and 
decreases right-sided heart strain associated with COPD. 
Patients who have a resting Pao2 less than 55 mm Hg 
should receive supplemental oxygen to maintain Pao2 at 
60 to 65 mm Hg at home.
Bullae
Many patients with moderate or severe COPD develop 
cystic air spaces in the lung parenchyma known as 
bullae. These bullae will often be asymptomatic unless 
they occupy more than 50% of the hemithorax, in which 
case the patient will present with findings of restric-
tive respiratory disease in addition to their obstructive 
disease. A bulla is actually a localized loss of structural 
support tissue in the lung with elastic recoil of sur-
rounding parenchyma. The pressure in a bulla is the 
mean pressure in the surrounding alveoli averaged 
over the respiratory cycle. Whenever positive-pressure 
Box 27.2
Principles of Perioperative Management of 
Asthma
•Usual inhalers per normal on day of surgery. Inhaled
β2-agonists before anesthesia.
•Avoid lower airway manipulation (e.g., endotracheal
intubation) if possible. Use regional anesthesia or an 
LMA/mask for general anesthesia if possible.
•Avoid medications that release histamine (e.g., thiopental,
morphine, atracurium).
•Use anesthetic drugs that promote bronchodilation
(propofol, ketamine, sevoflurane).
•If instrumentation of the lower airway is necessary,
it should be performed after attaining a deep level of 
general anesthesia to decrease airway reflexes.
LMA, Laryngeal mask airway.
History Suggestive of Inadequate Asthma Control
Frequency of symptoms
Use of β2-agonist medications/relievers frequently
Hospital attendances (e.g., emergency department, 
physician office visit)
Hospital/intensive care unit (ICU) admissions
Use of oral steroids/high-dose inhaled steroids
Features Uncharacteristic 
of Asthma
Differential Diagnosis
Unremitting wheeze/stridor
Suggestive of fixed airway 
obstruction
Persisting wet cough/
productive cough
Suggestive of suppurative 
lung disease
Wheeze present from birth 
(rare with asthma)
Tracheomalacia/
bronchomalacia
A monophonic wheeze 
loudest over the glottis
Vocal cord dysfunction
Table 27.1
Preoperative Assessment for Asthma
IV
Chapter 27 Chronic Pulmonary Disease
481
ventilation is used, the pressure in a bulla will become 
positive in relation to the adjacent lung tissue and the 
bulla will expand, with the attendant risk of rupture, 
tension pneumothorax, and bronchopleural fistula. Pos-
itive-pressure ventilation can be used safely in patients 
with bullae, provided the airway pressures are low and 
adequate expertise and equipment are immediately 
available to insert a chest drain and obtain lung isola-
tion if necessary. Nitrous oxide will diffuse into a bulla 
more quickly than the less soluble nitrogen can diffuse 
out and may lead to rupture of the bulla. The presence 
of bullae should be ascertained by examination of the 
chest imaging of any patient with COPD preoperatively.
Flow Limitation
Severe COPD patients are often flow limited, even dur-
ing normal breathing. Flow limitation occurs when any 
increase in expiratory effort will not produce an increase 
in flow at that given lung volume. Flow limitation is pre-
sent in normal patients only during a forced expiratory 
maneuver and in patients with COPD as a result of the 
loss of lung elastic recoil. During positive-pressure ven-
tilation, this can lead to the development of an intrinsic 
positive end-expiratory pressure (auto-PEEP). Severely 
flow-limited patients are at risk of hemodynamic collapse 
during positive-pressure ventilation because of dynamic 
hyperinflation of the lungs leading to obstruction of pul-
monary blood flow.
Perioperative Management
Four treatable complications of COPD must be actively 
sought and managed at the time of preoperative assess-
ment: atelectasis, bronchospasm, respiratory tract infec-
tions, and congestive heart failure. Atelectasis impairs 
local lung lymphocyte and macrophage function, pre-
disposing to infection. Wheezing may be a symptom of 
both airway obstruction and congestive heart failure. 
Patients with COPD should receive bronchodilator ther-
apy as guided by their symptoms. If sympathomimetic 
and anticholinergic bronchodilators provide inadequate 
therapy, a trial of corticosteroid therapy should be 
instituted.
COPD patients have fewer postoperative pulmonary 
complications when intensive chest physiotherapy is 
initiated preoperatively. Even in patients with severe 
COPD, exercise tolerance can be improved with physi-
otherapy8 of at least 1 month or more. Among COPD 
patients, those with excessive sputum benefit the most 
from chest physiotherapy. A comprehensive program 
of pulmonary rehabilitation involving physiotherapy, 
exercise, nutrition, and education has been shown con-
sistently to improve functional capacity for patients with 
severe COPD. These programs typically have a duration 
of several months and are generally not an option in 
resections for malignancy.
INTERSTITIAL LUNG DISEASE
Interstitial lung disease (ILD) is a chronic restrictive 
pulmonary disease (i.e., FEV1 <70% predicted, FEV1/FVC 
ratio normal or increased, and RV decreased). Approxi-
mately 35% of ILD cases are attributable to an identifi-
able cause, such as exposure to inorganic dust, organic 
antigens, drugs, or radiation. The inciting agent in the 
remaining 65% of patients is unknown. In many of these 
patients, the lung is part of an autoimmune disorder.
Elastic recoil of the lungs increases as a consequence 
of inflammation and fibrosis of the alveolar walls, which 
results in decreased lung volumes. Early in the disease, 
patients adapt to smaller tidal volumes by increasing 
their respiratory rate. As the disease progresses, increased 
respiratory effort and energy are required to maintain 
sufficient tidal volumes to prevent alveolar hypoventila-
tion. Uneven disease distribution throughout the lung 
can cause significant ventilation/perfusion mismatch and 
is the primary cause of hypoxemia in patients with ILD.
Controlled ventilation via an endotracheal tube is 
often the most reliable and safest approach to optimizing 
oxygenation and ventilation in patients with ILD when 
a general anesthetic is required. The goal of mechanical 
ventilation in patients with ILD is to maintain adequate 
ventilation and oxygenation while minimizing the risks 
of barotrauma and acute lung injury. Potential strategies 
to minimize airway pressures include the use of long 
durations of inspiration compared with the duration 
of expiration ratios (e.g., ratios of 1:1 to 1:1.5), small 
tidal volumes, and rapid respiratory rates. In contrast to 
obstructive lung disease PEEP can be used safely in ILD.
CYSTIC FIBROSIS
Cystic fibrosis is an autosomal recessive disorder that 
results in impaired transport of sodium, chloride, and 
water across epithelial tissue. This leads to exocrine gland 
malfunction with abnormally viscous secretions, which 
can cause obstruction of the respiratory tracts, pancreas, 
biliary system, intestines, and sweat glands. It presents 
as a mixed obstructive and restrictive lung disease. 
Inability to clear the thick purulent secretions enhances 
bacterial growth and leads to bronchiectasis as the disease 
advances.9
The early mortality of cystic fibrosis is primarily the 
result of pulmonary complications, including air-trap-
ping, pneumothorax, massive hemoptysis, and respira-
tory failure. Effective sputum elimination is a key goal in 
the long-term management of cystic fibrosis. To optimize 
patients with cystic fibrosis for anesthesia, chest physio-
therapy should be performed immediately before surgery. 
Endotracheal intubation with a large endotracheal tube is 
preferred, as it facilitates endobronchial toileting with a 
suction catheter, bronchoscopy, or both.
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
482
OBSTRUCTIVE SLEEP APNEA (ALSO SEE 
CHAPTER 48)
Clinical Presentation
OSA affects approximately 4% of middle-aged men and 
2% of middle-aged women.10 Obesity is the most impor-
tant physical characteristic associated with OSA, though 
OSA may be present in patients with a normal body mass 
index (BMI) and absent in the obese.
Patients with risk factors (male gender, middle age, 
BMI >28 kg/m2, alcohol and sedative use) presenting for 
surgery should be screened for signs and symptoms of 
OSA (Box 27.3).
The pathophysiology of airflow obstruction is related 
primarily to upper airway pharyngeal collapse. Upper air-
way patency depends on the action of dilator muscles (i.e., 
tensor palatine, genioglossus muscle, and hyoid muscles). 
During sleep, laryngeal muscle tone is decreased, and 
apnea occurs when the upper airway collapses. Nonobese 
patients may develop OSA as a result of adenotonsillar 
hypertrophy or craniofacial abnormalities (retrognathia). 
Recurrent episodes of apnea or hypopnea lead to hypoxia, 
hypercapnia, increased sympathetic stimulation, and 
arousal from sleep. Patients may develop cardiopulmo-
nary dysfunction manifesting as systemic or pulmonary 
hypertension and cor pulmonale. Nonrestoration of sleep 
can lead to cognitive dysfunction manifesting as intel-
lectual impairment and hypersomnolence.
The diagnosis of OSA can be based on clinical impres-
sion or a formal sleep study. OSA should be suspected 
when a patient with predisposing clinical risk factors 
reports heavy snoring and excessive daytime sleepiness, 
which are the cardinal features of OSA. OSA is character-
ized by frequent episodes of apnea or hypopnea during 
sleep. Apnea is defined as complete cessation of breathing 
for 10seconds or more. Hypopnea is defined as more than 
50% decrease in ventilation or oxygen desaturation of more 
than 3% to 4% for 10 seconds or more. It is definitively 
diagnosed by polysomnography in a sleep laboratory. The 
severity of OSA is measured by using the apnea–hypopnea 
index (AHI), which is the number of apneic or hypopneic 
episodes occurring per hour of sleep (Table 27.2).
Treatment of Obstructive Sleep Apnea
Treatment should include correction of reversible exac-
erbating factors by means of weight reduction, avoid-
ance of alcohol and sedatives, and nasal decongestants, 
if needed. Patients with mild OSA can achieve clinical 
improvement through lifestyle modification. For severe 
OSA, the three main therapeutic options are continuous 
positive airway pressure (CPAP), dental appliances, and 
upper airway surgery.
Preoperative Evaluation of Patients With 
Obstructive Sleep Apnea
The goals of the preoperative assessment are to identify 
anticipated difficulties in airway management (difficult 
facemask ventilation, endotracheal intubation, or both) 
and coexisting cardiovascular disease. Associated medi-
cal conditions should be treated, to the extent possible, 
before elective surgery. Patients with OSA may have peri-
operative issues in multiple organ systems, as described 
in Box 27.4
Perioperative Management
Patients with OSA are sensitive to the respiratory depres-
sant and sedative effects of benzodiazepines and opioids, 
Box 27.3
Clinical Signs and Symptoms Suggestive of 
Obstructive Sleep Apnea
1. Predisposing clinical characteristics:
•Body mass index (BMI) ≥35 kg/m2 (or 95th percentile 
for age and gender)
•Neck circumference of ≥17 inches (men) or 
≥16 inches (women)
•Craniofacial abnormalities affecting the airway
•Anatomic nasal obstruction
•Tonsils touching or nearly touching in the midline
2. History of apparent airway obstruction during sleep (two 
or more of the following are present):
•Frequent snoring
•Observed pauses in breathing during sleep
•Awakens from sleep with choking sensation
•Frequent arousals from sleep
3. Somnolence:
•Frequent somnolence or fatigue despite adequate
“sleep”
•Falls asleep easily in a nonstimulating environment
despite “adequate sleep”
If a patient has signs or symptoms in two or more of the 
previous categories, there is a significant probability that he 
or she has obstructive sleep apnea (OSA). The severity of OSA 
can be determined using a sleep study. In the absence of a 
sleep study patients should be treated as though they have 
moderate sleep apnea unless one of the previous signs or 
symptoms is severely abnormal (i.e., markedly increased BMI), 
in which case they are classified as having severe sleep apnea.
Adult AHI Pediatric AHI
OSA Severity
OSA Severity 
Score
6–20
1–5
Mild
1
21–40
6–10
Moderate
2
>40
>10
Severe
3
Table 27.2
Determination of Severity of Obstructive Sleep 
Apnea on the Basis of a Sleep Study
AHI, Apnea–hypopnea index; OSA, obstructive sleep apnea.
IV
Chapter 27 Chronic Pulmonary Disease
483
which can cause upper airway obstruction or apnea. 
These medications should be withheld preoperatively or 
used with caution in a monitored environment.
Intraoperative anesthetic concerns in patients with 
OSA relate to (1) airway management; (2) choice of anes-
thetic technique; (3) patient positioning; (4) monitoring, 
inaccurate noninvasive blood pressure measurements 
and significant underlying cardiorespiratory disease 
may warrant insertion of an arterial line for analysis of 
arterial blood gas monitoring and beat-to-beat blood 
pressure measurements; and (5) vascular access, difficult 
intravenous (IV) access secondary to excess adipose tis-
sue may necessitate central line placement.
Upper airway abnormalities or increased airway adi-
posity in patients with OSA predisposes them as difficult 
to adequately ventilate with a bag and mask apparatus 
after induction of anesthesia. Oral and nasopharyngeal 
airways should be readily available. Excessive phar-
yngeal adipose tissue can make exposure of the glot-
tic opening difficult during direct laryngoscopy and 
endotracheal intubation.
The intraoperative use of short-acting drugs (e.g., 
sevoflurane, desflurane, propofol) and multimodal nono-
pioid analgesia decreases the risk of postoperative 
respiratory depression. Nitrous oxide is best avoided in 
patients with coexisting pulmonary hypertension. Short- 
to intermediate-acting neuromuscular blocking drugs can 
be used for muscle relaxation if required.
The anesthesia provider should consider tracheal extu-
bation with the patient in a semiupright position with an 
oral or nasopharyngeal airway in place to facilitate spon-
taneous ventilation. Supplemental oxygen and a small 
amount of PEEP may be provided via high-flow nasal 
cannula immediately after extubation. A two-person 
bag and mask ventilation may be required and possible 
reintubation of the trachea should acute airway obstruc-
tion develop. Administration of supplemental oxygen 
should be provided during transfer of the patient to the 
postanesthesia care unit (PACU). CPAP must be available 
for postoperative use in patients on CPAP or bilevel posi-
tive airway pressure (BiPAP) preoperatively.
Postoperative Management
Multimodal analgesia with nonsteroidal antiinflam-
matory drugs (NSAIDs), acetaminophen, and regional 
analgesia aims to minimize opiate analgesia and result-
ant respiratory depression. CPAP should be reinstituted 
postoperatively. Surveillance in a high-dependency unit 
such as the PACU, step-down unit, or intensive care unit 
(ICU) is prudent for patients with severe OSA.
Postoperative disposition of OSA is influenced by 
three factors:
1. Severity of the OSA (either by historical information 
or objective findings of a sleep study) (see Table 27.2)
2. Invasiveness of the surgical procedure and anesthesia 
(Table 27.3)
3. Predicted postoperative opioid use (Table 27.4)
A patient with increased perioperative risk of airway 
obstruction and resultant hypoxemia (perioperative OSA 
risk score greater than 4) should receive continuous oxygen 
saturation monitoring in either the ICU, a step-down unit, 
or telemetry unit (Box 27.5).
Box 27.4
Potential Organ System Involvement in 
Patients With OSA
1. Airway: Anticipated difficulties with airway management 
include difficult ventilation via a mask and difficult 
tracheal intubation.
2. Respiratory system: Patients with obesity will have 
evidence of restrictive lung disease on pulmonary function 
testing secondary to decreased chest wall compliance.
3. Cardiovascular system: Preoperative evaluation should be 
directed toward the detection of end-organ dysfunction 
resulting from chronic hypoxemia, hypercarbia, and 
polycythemia. Systemic hypertension, pulmonary 
hypertension, and signs of biventricular dysfunction (cor 
pulmonale and congestive heart failure) should be sought.
4. Endocrine and gastrointestinal systems: Fasting blood 
glucose levels should be sought to screen for type 2 
diabetes. Symptoms of esophageal reflux should lead to 
aspiration prophylaxis before induction of anesthesia. 
Liver function tests may indicate fatty liver infiltration 
causing hepatic dysfunction in severe cases.
Surgery
Anesthesia
Invasive Score
Superficial 
or 
peripheral
Local infiltration or 
peripheral nerve block with 
no sedation
0
Moderate sedation
Spinal or epidural
1
General anesthetic
2
Major or 
airway
General anesthetic
3
Table 27.3
Scoring Invasiveness of Surgery and 
Anesthesia
Opioid Requirement
Score
None
0
Low-dose oral
1
High-dose oral
2
Parenteral or spinal/epidural
3
Table 27.4
Scoring of Opioid Requirement
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
484
Obesity Hypoventilation Syndrome
Obesity hypoventilation syndrome (OHS) is defined by 
chronic daytime hypoxemia (Pao2 <65 mm Hg) and 
hypoventilation (Paco2 >45 mm Hg) in an obese patient 
without coexisting COPD. It results from an interaction of 
sleep-disordered breathing, decreased respiratory drive, 
and obesity-related respiratory impairment. Patients 
exhibit signs of central sleep apnea (apnea without res-
piratory efforts). This may culminate in the pickwickian 
syndrome characterized by obesity, daytime hypersom-
nolence, hypoxemia, and hypercarbia.
Preoperatively, obese patients should be screened for 
OHS with pulse oximetry. Patients with oxygen satura-
tion less than 96% warrant analysis of arterial blood 
gases to assess carbon dioxide retention.
Ultimately, the information obtained from preopera-
tive investigations allows the anesthesia provider to opti-
mize the patient's clinical status before elective surgery 
and plan perioperative care, including arrangements for 
appropriate postoperative monitoring (i.e., step-down bed, 
ICU). Interventions may include treatment of coexisting 
conditions (systemic hypertension, cardiac dysrhythmias, 
congestive heart failure) and initiation of CPAP. A 2-week 
period of CPAP therapy is usually effective in correcting 
the abnormal ventilatory drive of patients with OHS.
PULMONARY HYPERTENSION
Pathophysiology
Patients with pulmonary hypertension (mean pulmonary 
artery pressure >25 mm Hg by catheterization or systolic 
pulmonary artery pressure >50 mm Hg on echocardiog-
raphy)11 may present for a variety of noncardiac surgical 
procedures.12 Patients with pulmonary hypertension are 
at increased risk of respiratory complications and pro-
longed intubation after noncardiac surgery.13
Preoperative Evaluation
There are two commonly encountered types of pulmonary 
hypertension: pulmonary hypertension from left-sided heart 
disease and pulmonary hypertension from lung disease. 
Patients who present for noncardiac surgery are more likely 
to have pulmonary hypertension because of lung disease. 
Much of what has been learned about anesthesia for patients 
with pulmonary hypertension resulting from lung disease 
has come from clinical experience in pulmonary endarter-
ectomies14 and lung transplantation. Avoiding hypotension 
is the key to managing these patients (Box 27.6).
Management of Anesthesia
The increased right ventricular transmural and intracavi-
tary pressures associated with pulmonary hypertension 
may restrict perfusion of the right coronary artery during 
systole, especially as pulmonary artery pressures approach 
systemic levels. The impact of pulmonary hypertension 
on right ventricular dysfunction has several anesthetic 
implications. The hemodynamic goals are similar to other 
conditions in which cardiac output is relatively fixed. Care 
should be taken to avoid physiologic states that will worsen 
pulmonary hypertension, such as hypoxemia, hypercarbia, 
acidosis, and hypothermia. Conditions that impair right 
ventricular filling, such as tachycardia and arrhythmias, 
are not well tolerated. Ideally, during anesthesia, right 
ventricular contractility and systemic vascular resistance 
are maintained or increased while pulmonary vascular 
resistance is decreased. Ketamine is a useful anesthetic in 
pulmonary hypertension caused by lung disease.15 Ino-
tropes and inodilators, such as dobutamine and milrinone, 
may improve hemodynamics in patients with pulmonary 
hypertension caused by left-sided heart disease. However, 
inodilators decrease systemic vascular tone and can cause 
tachycardia, potentially leading to a deterioration in the 
hemodynamics of patients with pulmonary hypertension 
caused by lung disease. Vasopressors such as phenyle-
phrine, norepinephrine, and vasopressin are commonly 
used to maintain a systemic blood pressure greater than 
pulmonary pressures. Vasopressin can increase systemic 
blood pressure significantly without affecting pulmonary 
artery pressure in patients with pulmonary hypertension.16
In patients with severe pulmonary hypertension selective 
Box 27.6
Management Principles for Pulmonary 
Hypertension Secondary to Lung Disease
•Avoid hypotensive and vasodilating anesthetic drugs
whenever possible
•Ketamine does not exacerbate pulmonary hypertension
•Support mean blood pressure with vasopressors:
norepinephrine, phenylephrine, vasopressin
•Use inhaled pulmonary vasodilators (nitric oxide,
prostacyclin) in preference to intravenous vasodilators as 
needed
•Use thoracic epidural local anesthetics cautiously and
with inotropes as needed
•Monitor cardiac output if possible
Box 27.5
Determination of Perioperative Obstructive 
Sleep Apnea Risk Score
OSA Severity Score (1–3)
+
Invasiveness of anesthesia or surgery (1–3)
OR
Postoperative opioid requirement (1–3) (whichever is greater)
If risk score = 4 →increased perioperative risk
If risk score ≥5 →significantly increased perioperative risk
OSA, Obstructive sleep apnea.
IV
Chapter 27 Chronic Pulmonary Disease
485
inhaled pulmonary vasodilators, including nitric oxide (10 
to 40ppm)17 or nebulized prostaglandins (prostacyclin 
50ng/kg/min),18 should be considered.
Lumbar epidural analgesia and anesthesia have been 
used in obstetric patients with pulmonary hypertension,19
and occasionally thoracic epidural analgesia is used in 
patients with pulmonary hypertension. Patients with 
pulmonary hypertension caused by lung disease seem 
to be extremely dependent on tonic cardiac sympathetic 
innervation for normal hemodynamic stability.20 These 
patients will often require a low-dose infusion of ino-
tropes or vasopressors during management with thoracic 
epidural local analgesia.
ANESTHESIA FOR LUNG RESECTION
Thoracic surgery is a relatively young specialty that has 
been significantly aided by the development of positive-
pressure ventilation in the early 1950s, and advanced 
by the use of double-lumen endobronchial tubes (DLTs) 
and flexible bronchoscopes. These developments now 
enable a thoracic anesthesiologist to employ reliable 
lung isolation, allowing surgical access to the thorax and 
managing anesthesia during one-lung ventilation (OLV).
Preoperative Assessment for Pulmonary 
Resection
Preoperative assessment before pulmonary resection aims 
to identify patients at increased risk of perioperative 
morbidity and mortality in order to focus resources and 
improve their outcome. Postoperative preservation of res-
piratory function is proportional to the amount of lung 
parenchyma preserved. The major causes of perioperative 
morbidity and mortality after thoracic surgery are res-
piratory complications. Major respiratory complications, 
such as atelectasis, pneumonia, and respiratory failure, 
occur in 15% to 20% of patients and account for much 
of the 3% to 4% mortality rate.21 Objective measures 
of pulmonary function are required to guide anesthetic 
management and to transmit information easily between 
members of the health care team.
Objective Assessment of Pulmonary Function
Preoperative anesthetic assessment before lung resection 
continues to evolve as surgical techniques and periop-
erative care have expanded what is considered operable 
pathology. An “operable” patient is one who can tolerate 
the proposed resection with acceptable risk.
No single test of respiratory function is adequate 
for preoperative assessment. Before surgery, respiratory 
function should be assessed in three related but inde-
pendent areas: respiratory mechanics, gas exchange, 
and cardiorespiratory interaction (Fig. 27.3). This “three-
legged stool” approach can be used to plan intraoperative 
and postoperative management.
Respiratory Mechanics
Of all objective measures obtained via spirometry (e.g., 
FVC, FEV1, ratio of FEV1:FVC), the FEV1 is most helpful. 
Spirometry measurements should be expressed as a per-
centage of predicted volume corrected for age, sex, and 
height (e.g., an FEV1 of 74%). The predicted postoperative 
FEV1 (ppoFEV1%) is the most effective test for prediction 
of postthoracotomy respiratory complications.22 It is cal-
culated as follows (Eq. 1):
ppoFEV1% = preoperative FEV1%
× (100 −% of functional tissue removed/100)
Counting the number of lung segments to be removed 
allows estimation of the percentage of functional lung 
tissue removed (Fig. 27.4). Patients with a ppoFEV1 of 
more than 60% are at low risk of postoperative pulmo-
nary complications, whereas those with a ppoFEV1 of less 
than 30% are at high risk.23
Lung Parenchymal Function
Lung parenchymal function refers to the ability of the lung 
to exchange oxygen and carbon dioxide between the pul-
monary vascular bed and the alveoli. The most useful indi-
cator of lung parenchymal function is the Dlco obtained 
during lung function testing. The Dlco correlates with the 
total functioning surface area of the alveolar–capillary 
interface. The corrected Dlco can be used to calculate a 
predicted postresection (ppo) value using the same calcu-
lation as FEV1 (see Eq. 1). Like FEV1, a ppo Dlco greater 
than 60% correlates with a low risk of postoperative 
The “three-legged” stool of prethoracotomy
respiratory assessment
Respiratory
mechanics
MVV, RV/TLC,
FVC
FEV1*
(ppo >60%)
Lung parenchymal
function
Pao2 >60
Paco2 <45
DLco*
(ppo >60%)
Cardiopulmonary
reserve
Stair climb > two flights,
6 min walk,
Exercise Spo2 <4%
VO2max*
(>20 mL/kg/min)
Fig. 27.3 The three-legged stool of prethoracotomy respiratory 
assessment. ∗Most valid test (see text). Dlco, Lung diffusing 
capacity for carbon monoxide; FEV1, forced expiratory volume in 
1 second; FVC, forced vital capacity; MVV, maximum voluntary 
ventilation; Paco2, partial pressure of carbon dioxide in mm Hg; 
Pao2, partial pressure of oxygen (arterial) in mm Hg; ppo, predicted 
postoperative; RV, residual volume; Spo2, pulse oximeter saturation; 
TLC, total lung capacity; VO2max, maximal oxygen consumption. 
(Adapted from Slinger PD, ed. Pearson’s Thoracic and Esophageal 
Surgery. New York: Springer; 2011, used with permission.)
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
486
pulmonary complications. Traditionally, analysis of arte-
rial blood gas data, such as a partial pressure of oxygen 
(Pao2) less than 60 mm Hg or a partial pressure of carbon 
dioxide (Paco2) more than 45 mm Hg, has been used as an 
indicator of increased risk of respiratory failure.
Cardiopulmonary Interaction
The final step in assessment of respiratory function is the 
assessment of cardiopulmonary interaction. Formal labo-
ratory exercise testing is the gold standard,24 with the 
maximal oxygen consumption (VO2max) being the most 
useful predictor of postthoracotomy outcome, and should 
be used for patients with a ppoFEV1 or Dlco <60%. The 
risks of morbidity and mortality are low if the (VO2max) 
is greater than 20 mL/kg/min, with less than 10mL/kg/
min considered very high risk.23 Complete laboratory 
exercise testing is expensive and not available to all 
centers. Several alternatives, including the stair climb 
test (SCT), shuttle walk test (SWT), and the 6-minute walk 
test (6MWT), are valid surrogate tests for prethoracotomy 
assessment (outlined in Fig. 27.3).
Ventilation-Perfusion Scintigraphy
Prediction of postresection pulmonary function can 
be further refined by assessment of the preoperative 
contribution of the lung or lobe to be resected using 
ventilation-perfusion scintigraphy (V/Q scan). If the lung 
to be resected is minimally functional, this will modify 
the ppoFEV1
Preoperative Cardiac Assessment
Cardiac complications are the second most common cause 
of perioperative morbidity and death in the thoracic sur-
gical population. Intrathoracic surgery is considered a risk 
factor for major adverse cardiac events by the American 
College of Cardiology and American Heart Association.25
Further, dysrhythmia occurs in 12% to 44% of patients 
after thoracic or esophageal surgery, the majority of 
which is atrial fibrillation.26 The onset of atrial fibrillation 
occurs most commonly on postoperative days 2 and 3, 
with the risk reverting to the patient's baseline by week6. 
Risk factors for postoperative atrial fibrillation include 
male sex, older age, magnitude of lung or esophagus 
resected, history of congestive cardiac failure, concomi-
tant lung disease, and length of procedure. It may be 
reasonable to give high-risk patients (e.g., older patients 
undergoing pneumonectomy) prophylactic diltiazem or 
amiodarone to decrease the incidence of postoperative 
atrial fibrillation.27
Smoking Cessation
Pulmonary complications are reduced in patients under-
going lung resection who cease smoking perioperatively, 
with the benefits increasing proportionally to the length 
of cessation.28 Patients should be encouraged to stop 
smoking at the preoperative assessment, as they may 
be more receptive to the message at this time. Nicotine 
replacement and behavioral management increase the 
rate of smoking cessation.
Assessment of the Patient With Lung Cancer
Patients undergoing lung resection for malignancy 
should be assessed for the four Ms: mass effects, meta-
bolic abnormalities, metastases, and medications. These 
considerations are outlined in Box 27.7
Box 27.7
Anesthetic Considerations in Patients With 
Lung Cancer (the Four Ms)
Mass effects
Obstructive pneumonia, lung abscess, 
superior vena cava syndrome, 
tracheobronchial distortion, Pancoast 
syndrome, recurrent laryngeal nerve 
or phrenic nerve paresis, chest wall or 
mediastinal extension
Metabolic 
abnormalities
Lambert-Eaton syndrome, hypercalcemia, 
hyponatremia, Cushing syndrome
Metastases
Particularly to brain, bone, liver, adrenal 
gland
Medications
Chemotherapy drugs, pulmonary toxicity 
(bleomycin, mitomycin), cardiac toxicity 
(doxorubicin), renal toxicity (cisplatin)
6
4
12
10
Lung segments
Total subsegments = 42
Example: Right lower lobectomy
postoperative FEV1 decrease = 12/42 (29%)
10
Fig. 27.4 The number of subsegments of each lobe is used to 
calculate the predicted postoperative (ppo) pulmonary function. 
In this example after a right lower lobectomy, a patient with a 
preoperative FEV1 70% of normal would be expected to have a 
ppoFEV1 of 70% × (100 −29/100) = 50%. (From Slinger PD, ed. 
Pearson’s Thoracic and Esophageal Surgery. New York: Springer; 
2011, used with permission.)
IV
Chapter 27 Chronic Pulmonary Disease
487
Indications for Lung Isolation
Lung isolation techniques have several goals, as described 
in Box 27.8
Options for Lung Isolation
There are several options to facilitate selective ventilation 
of one lung. These include a DLT (Fig. 27.5), a bronchial 
blocker (BB) placed through a single-lumen endotra-
cheal tube (SLT) (see Fig. 27.12), and a single-lumen 
tube (standard endotracheal tube or endobronchial tube) 
placed directly into a bronchus. The advantages and dis-
advantages of each device are listed in Table 27.5
Airway Anatomy
To place a device for lung isolation, the anesthesia pro-
vider must appreciate the bronchial anatomy (Fig. 27.6). 
Without this knowledge, it is easy to place a device 
incorrectly and is difficult to recognize and troubleshoot 
malposition.29
Salient aspects of the bronchial anatomy are high-
lighted in Box 27.9. For a more detailed description of 
bronchial anatomy, please see the online bronchoscopy 
simulator.30
Sizing a Double-Lumen Endobronchial Tube
There is no consensus as to the optimal method to size 
a DLT. An ideally sized DLT should have a bronchial 
external diameter 1 to 2 mm smaller than the bronchial 
diameter in order to fit the deflated bronchial cuff. Chest 
x-ray images may be used to assist DLT selection.31 The 
authors’ preference is a simplified method based on 
patient sex and height (Table 27.6). A further important 
step before placement is to check a chest x-ray, or ide-
ally, a computed tomography (CT) chest coronal slice to 
exclude aberrant anatomy such as endoluminal obstruc-
tion, significant tracheal deviation, or aberrant right 
upper lobe take-off. DLTs have a larger external diameter 
than SLTs and should not be advanced against resistance 
(Fig. 27.7).
Box 27.8
Indications for One-Lung Ventilation
•Allow OLV and therefore surgical exposure to the thorax
and adjacent structures, such as for lung resection, 
mediastinal, cardiac, vascular, esophageal, and spinal 
surgery.
•Control ventilation, such as a patient with a
bronchopleural fistula.
•Prevent contralateral lung soiling, such as pulmonary
hemorrhage, bronchopleural fistula, and whole-lung 
lavage.
•Allow for differential patterns of ventilation in patients
with unilateral lung injury.
Fig. 27.5 Left-sided double-lumen endobronchial tube.
Tracheal
Tracheal cuff
Distal curve
Proximal
connecting
limbs
Proximal
curve
Bronchial
Bronchial cuff
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
488
Methods of Insertion of a Left-Sided Double-
Lumen Tube
Two techniques are commonly used when inserting a 
left-sided DLT. One is a blind technique: the endobron-
chial lumen of the DLT is passed through the glottis by 
laryngoscopy and the DLT is then turned 90 degrees 
counterclockwise and advanced until resistance is felt 
(Fig. 27.8). Blind insertion alone results in malposition 
in approximately 35% of cases, and therefore con-
firmation of position with a flexible bronchoscope is 
important.32 33
The alternative technique involves direct vision with 
the use of a flexible bronchoscope. The tip of the endo-
bronchial lumen is passed through the glottis, the DLT 
is rotated 90 degrees counterclockwise, and the DLT is 
advanced so the tracheal cuff is just past the glottis. A 
flexible bronchoscope is then inserted into the endo-
bronchial lumen to its opening, and the DLT and bron-
choscope advanced simultaneously into the correct bron-
chus. Alternatively, the bronchoscope may be advanced 
through the endobronchial lumen and into the left main 
bronchus, with the DLT advanced over it.
Positioning a Left-Sided Double-Lumen Tube
Correct positioning of a DLT is important to avoid ven-
tilation of the collapsed lung (i.e., if the DLT is too shal-
low), which may obscure the surgeon's field, and to avoid 
partial collapse of the ventilated lung (i.e., if the DLT is 
too deep), resulting in hypoxemia. Auscultation alone is 
unreliable for confirmation of DLT placement. It is still 
useful, as it will increase the anesthesia provider's index 
of suspicion regarding malposition before bronchoscopy, 
as troubleshooting an incorrectly placed DLT can be con-
fusing to the inexperienced provider.29 Both auscultation 
and bronchoscopy should be used when a DLT is initially 
placed and again after the patient is repositioned.
Bronchoscopy using a pediatric bronchoscope (approx-
imately 4.0 mm external diameter) is first performed 
through the tracheal lumen to ensure the endobronchial 
portion of the DLT is in the left bronchus and the blue 
endobronchial cuff is approximately 5 to 10 mm below 
the tracheal carina (Fig. 27.9). The right upper lobe take-
off should be identified at this time to confirm anatomic 
landmarks. The bronchoscope is removed and reinserted 
into the bronchial lumen, ensuring both the left upper 
Option
Advantages
Disadvantages
Double-lumen 
tube
•Easy to place successfully
•Repositioning rarely required
•Bronchoscopy to isolated lung
•Suction to isolated lung
•CPAP easily applied
•Can alternate one-lung ventilation to either lung
easily
•Placement possible if bronchoscopy not available
•Size selection more difficult
•Difficult to place in patients with difficult airways or
abnormal tracheas
•Not optimal for postoperative ventilation
•Potential laryngeal and bronchial trauma
Bronchial 
blockers
•Size selection rarely an issue
•Easily added to regular ETT
•Allows ventilation during placement
•Easier placement in patients with difficult airways
and in children
•Postoperative two-lung ventilation easy by
withdrawing blocker
•Selective lobar isolation possible
•CPAP to isolated lung possible
•More time required to position
•Repositioning required more often
•Bronchoscope essential for positioning
•Limited right-lung isolation because of RUL
anatomy
•Bronchoscopy to isolated lung impossible
•Minimal suction to isolated lung
•Difficult to alternate one-lung ventilation to either
lung
Endobronchial 
tube
•Easier placement in patients with difficult airways
•Short cuff designed for lung isolation
•Bronchoscopy necessary for placement
•Does not allow for bronchoscopy, suctioning, or
CPAP to isolated lung
•Difficult one-lung ventilation to right lung
Endotracheal 
tube advanced 
into bronchus
•Easier placement in patients with difficult airways
•Bronchoscopy necessary for placement
•Does not allow for bronchoscopy, suctioning, or
CPAP to isolated lung
•Cuff not designed for lung isolation
•Extremely difficult one-lung ventilation to right lung
Table 27.5
Options for Lung Isolation
CPAP, Continuous positive airway pressure; ETT, endotracheal tube; RUL, right upper lobe of lung.
IV
Chapter 27 Chronic Pulmonary Disease
489
and lower lobes can be seen. Both lobes must be identi-
fied to ensure that distal migration of the endobronchial 
lumen has not led to insertion into the left lower lobe and 
occlusion of the left upper lobe.
Right-Sided Double-Lumen Tube Indications
Although a left-sided DLT is used most frequently for 
thoracic procedures, there are specific clinical situa-
tions in which the use of a right-sided DLT is indicated 
(Box27.10). A right-sided DLT incorporates a modified 
cuff and slot in the endobronchial lumen that allows 
ventilation of the right upper lobe (Fig. 27.10). Tracheo-
bronchial anatomy must be checked before insertion of 
the right-sided DLT (CT scan or bronchoscopy) to confirm 
normal positioning of the right upper lobe orifice.
Positioning a Bronchial Blocker
The unifying principle of a BB is that it is inserted within 
an SLT and advanced into the left or right main bron-
chus or, less commonly, into a lobe. The cuff of the BB 
is inflated to obstruct the lumen (Fig. 27.11), allowing 
lung isolation, and a small channel within the blocker 
is used to allow gas to escape, allowing lung deflation; 
to apply suction to the lung; to intermittently insufflate 
oxygen; and to apply PEEP. An adaptor attaches to the 
SLT, allowing insertion of a BB or flexible bronchoscope 
and attachment to the anesthetic circuit. The method of 
insertion of a BB depends on the blocker's design. Four 
commercially available BBs are shown in Fig. 27.12. The 
advantages and disadvantages of BBs compared with 
other methods of lung isolation are listed in Table 27.5
Physiologic Considerations of One-Lung 
Ventilation in the Lateral Position
Initiation of OLV with an open chest in the lateral 
position exposes physiologic changes that improve 
Fig. 27.6 Tracheobronchial anatomy. Right main bronchus is 
typically 1.5 to 2 cm. Left main bronchus is typically 4.5 to 5 cm.
Trachea
Left mainstem
bronchus
Right mainstem
bronchus
Upper
lobe
Upper
lobe
Carina
Lingula
Middle
lobe
Lower
lobe
Lower
lobe
Box 27.9
Bronchial Anatomy Relevant to Lung Isolation
•Carina: bifurcation is “sharp” with no further divisions
seen in the left or right lumen
•Right main bronchus: typically 1.5–2 cm long
•Right upper lobe: the only trifurcation within the
tracheobronchial tree, with a distinct appearance on fiber-
optic bronchoscopy; aberrant take-off at or above carina 
in 1 in 250 patients
•Left main bronchus: typically 4.5–5 cm long
•Lower lobes: can be identified bilaterally as the
longitudinal fibers of the trachealis muscle descend into 
them
Sex
Height (cm)
Size of Double-
Lumen Tube (Fr)
Female
>160 (63 in)
<153–159
<152 (60 in)
37
35
consider 32
Male
>170 (67 in)
<160–169
<159 (63 in)
41
39
consider 37
Table 27.6
Selection of Double-Lumen Tube Size Based 
on Adult Patient’s Sex and Height
8.0
35 Fr
41 Fr
10.0
Fig. 27.7 Photograph of the cut cross sections of several single-
lumen tubes and double-lumen tubes illustrating comparative 
size. (Courtesy Professor Jerome Klafta, Department of Anesthesia 
and Critical Care, University of Chicago.)
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
490
ventilation and perfusion matching compared with two-
lung ventilation (TLV) with a closed chest. Perfusion to 
the nonventilated, nondependent lung is decreased from 
hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction and gravity, thereby 
favoring perfusion of the ventilated, dependent lung and 
decreasing shunt (Fig. 27.13). Changes in cardiac output 
can have varying effects, but typically shunt is lowest 
(and arterial Po2 is greatest) at a “normal” cardiac output 
during OLV.34 35
Ventilation of the nondependent lung is stopped by 
virtue of lung isolation. The compliance of the venti-
lated, dependent lung decreases because of the cephalad 
shift of the diaphragm after induction of anesthesia and 
muscle relaxation, mediastinal shift after opening of 
the chest, and surgical pushing and manipulation of the 
mediastinum. This decrease in compliance and FRC can 
be improved with the application of PEEP. PEEP (5 to 
A
B
C
Fig. 27.8 Blind method for placement of a left-sided double-lumen tube. (A) The double-lumen tube 
is passed with laryngoscopy beyond the vocal cords. (B) The double-lumen tube is rotated 90 degrees 
counterclockwise. (C) The double-lumen tube is advanced to an appropriate depth (generally 27 to 29 cm 
marking at the level of the teeth). (From Campos JH. How to achieve successful lung separation. SAJAA.
2008;14:22–26.)
(c)
(a)
A
(b)
B
C
Fig. 27.9 Bronchoscopic examination of an optimally placed 
Mallinckrodt left-sided double-lumen tube. (a) The bronchoscope is 
passed through the tracheal lumen, and the edge of the 
endobronchial cuff is seen 5 mm below the tracheal carina. A white 
line marker is seen above the tracheal carina. (b) The bronchoscopeis 
advanced through the endobronchial lumen, and a clear view of 
the left bronchial bifurcation (left upper and left lower bronchi) is 
seen. (c) A clear view of the right upper lobe bronchus and its three 
orifices confirms this is the right side. (From Campos JH. Update on 
tracheobronchial anatomy and flexible fiberoptic bronchoscopy in 
thoracic anesthesia. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol. 2009;22:4–10.)
Box 27.10
Indications for a Right-Sided Double-Lumen 
Tube
Distorted anatomy of the entrance of the left main bronchus
External or intraluminal tumor compression
Descending thoracic aortic aneurysm
Site of surgery involving the left main bronchus:
Left lung transplantation
Left-sided tracheobronchial disruption
Left-sided pneumonectomya
Left-sided sleeve resection
aIt is possible to manage a left pneumonectomy with a left-sided 
double-lumen tube (DLT) or bronchial blocker, but the DLT or blocker 
will have to be withdrawn before stapling the left main bronchus.
IV
Chapter 27 Chronic Pulmonary Disease
491
10cm H2O) to the ventilated, dependent lung also helps 
to reduce blood flow to the nonventilated, nondepend-
ent lung, as pulmonary vascular resistance is lowest at 
FRC (Fig. 27.14). Excessive PEEP may increase pulmo-
nary vascular resistance, thereby increasing blood flow 
to the nonventilated, nondependent lung and worsening 
shunt.
Conduct of Anesthesia
Any anesthetic technique that provides safe and stable 
general anesthesia can be used for thoracic surgery. 
Although volatile anesthetics impair hypoxic pulmonary 
vasoconstriction, they do so only at a minimum alveolar 
concentration (MAC) greater than routine use, and there 
is no clear advantage of a propofol total intravenous 
anesthetic compared with a volatile anesthetic in terms 
of shunt fraction or hypoxemia.36–38
The majority of thoracic surgical procedures are of 
moderate duration (2 to 4 hours) and performed in the lat-
eral position with an open hemithorax and OLV. Further, 
the surgeon is operating in close proximity to important 
structures, such as the heart and great vessels, and access 
to the patient is limited after lateral positioning. Thus the 
risk–benefit ratio for intraoperative monitoring and intra-
venous access favors being overly invasive at the outset.
Choice of monitoring should be guided by a knowledge 
of which complications are likely to occur (Table27.7). An 
intraarterial catheter allows hemodynamic monitoring and 
analysis of arterial blood gases. It is the authors’ practice 
to place an intraarterial catheter in all but the most simple 
Fig. 27.10 A Mallinckrodt right-sided double-lumen tube. Note 
the modified cuff allowing right-lung isolation and slot in the 
endobronchial lumen allowing ventilation of the right upper lobe. 
(Courtesy Dr. Andrew Deacon, Department of Anesthesia, The 
Canberra Hospital, Australia.)
B
A
Fig. 27.11 Placement of a bronchial blocker. Correct positioning of a blocker in the right (A) and left (B) 
main bronchi as seen through a bronchoscope in the trachea just above the carina. (From Campos JH. How 
to achieve successful lung separation. SAJAA. 2008;14:22–26.)
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
492
thoracic case (e.g., wedge resection) being performed on 
a patient without comorbid disease. A central venous 
catheter allows vasoactive agents to be infused, assist-
ing hemodynamic stability in a patient who is at risk of 
intraoperative hemorrhage or postoperative hypervolemia, 
such as for pneumonectomy, complex procedures, and 
redo-thoracotomy. The open hemithorax provides a large 
surface area for evaporative cooling; therefore devices to 
measure and maintain patient normothermia are required.
Another useful monitor during OLV is continuous 
spirometry. Available on most modern ventilators, this 
allows for continuous monitoring of inspiratory and 
expiratory volumes, pressures, and flows. Attention to 
the difference between the inspired and expired volumes 
during OLV may indicate an air leak and loss of lung iso-
lation (>30 mL/breath). During TLV after lung resection, 
this difference correlates to an air leak through the lung 
parenchyma. The development of gas trapping in patients 
with obstructive lung disease is indicated by persistent 
end-expiratory flow.
Approach to Intravenous Fluid Management
The administration of the “right” amount of intravenous 
fluid to patients undergoing lung resection remains chal-
lenging. Patients undergoing lung resection are at risk 
Surgery
Airway
pressure
Cardiac output
PVR
HPV
Fig. 27.13 Factors affecting the distribution of pulmonary blood flow 
during one-lung ventilation. Hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction 
(HPV) and the collapse of the nonventilated lung, which increases 
pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR), tend to redistribute blood flow 
toward the ventilated lung. The airway pressure gradient between 
the ventilated and nonventilated thoraces tends to encourage blood 
flow to the nonventilated lung. Surgery and cardiac output can have 
variable effects, either increasing or decreasing the proportional 
flow to the ventilated lung.
B
C
A
D
Fig. 
27.12 Three commercially available endobronchial 
blockers. (A) The Arndt endobronchial blocker (Cook Critical Care, 
Bloomington, IN). (B) The Cohen Flexitip blocker (Cook Critical 
Care, Bloomington, IN). (C) The Fuji Uniblocker (Fuji Systems 
Corporation, Tokyo, Japan). (D) The Rusch EZ-Blocker (Contract 
Medical International GmbH, Dresden, Germany). (D from Piccioni 
F, Vecchi I, Spinelli E, et al. Extraluminal EZ-blocker placement for 
one-lung ventilation in pediatric thoracic surgery. J Cardiothorac 
Vasc Anesth. 2015;29[6]:e71–e73.)
IV
Chapter 27 Chronic Pulmonary Disease
493
of developing interstitial and alveolar edema, with the 
risk proportional to the extent of lung resected. Con-
versely, the incidence of acute kidney injury is higher 
with restrictive fluid regimens.39 Very restrictive or liberal 
regimens should be avoided in favor of euvolemia,40
that is, replacement of intravascular volume deficits 
and maintenance only with a balanced salt solution. 
Box27.11 describes the authors’ approach to fluid man-
agement.
Approach to One-Lung Ventilation
A suggested approach to lung-protective ventilation 
before and during OLV is outlined in Table 27.8
Prediction of Intraoperative Hypoxia
There are many patient-, surgical-, and position-related 
factors that can be used to predict which patients are at 
risk of hypoxemia during OLV. These factors are outlined 
in Box 27.12
Management of Hypoxia During One-Lung 
Ventilation
Less than 5% of patients develop hypoxia during OLV.41
Although there is no consensus as to the lowest acceptable 
Spo2 or Po2 during OLV, an Spo2 less than 94% typically 
indicates a problem. A stepwise plan for management of 
this complication is shown in Table 27.9. The most common 
cause of desaturation during OLV is DLT malposition (i.e., 
the DLT has advanced and is occluding the upper lobe)41
and should therefore be investigated with a bronchoscope.
Conclusion of Surgery
A suggested plan for tracheal extubation at the conclu-
sion of lung resection is outlined in Fig. 27.15. A prereq-
uisite for extubation of the trachea is a patient who is 
alert, warm, and comfortable (AWaC).
Pain Management
Posterolateral thoracotomy is one of the most painful 
surgical incisions. Improvements in analgesic techniques 
over the last 30 years have contributed to a decrease 
Complication
Cause
Hypoxemia
Intrapulmonary shunt during one-lung 
ventilation
Sudden hypotension Surgical compression of the heart or 
great vessels
Sudden changes in 
ventilating pressure 
or volume
Movement of endobronchial tube/
blocker, air leak
Arrhythmia
Mechanical irritation of the heart
Bronchospasm
Direct airway stimulation, increased 
frequency of reactive airways disease
Hemorrhage
Surgical blood loss from great vessels 
or inflamed pleura
Hypothermia
Heat loss from open hemithorax
Table 27.7
Intraoperative Complications That Occur With 
Increased Frequency During Thoracotomy
Box 27.11
Fluid Management for Pulmonary Resection 
Surgery
•2–3 mL/kg/h until patient the patient can drink, then
discontinue IV fluids.
•Total positive fluid balance should not exceed 20 mL/kg
in the first 24-hour perioperative period.
•No fluid administration for third-space fluid losses during
pulmonary resection.
•Urine output greater than 0.5 mL/kg/hr is unnecessary.
•If increased tissue perfusion is required postoperatively,
it is advisable to use invasive monitoring and inotropes/
vasopressors rather than cause fluid overload.
Pulmonary vascular resistance
(PVR)
RV
FRC
Lung volume (L)
Large vessels
Small vessels
Total PVR
TLC
Fig. 27.14 The relationship between pulmonary vascular 
resistance (PVR) and lung volume. PVR is lowest at functional 
residual capacity (FRC) and increases as the lung volume decreases 
toward residual volume (RV), caused primarily by an increase in the 
resistance of large pulmonary vessels. PVR also increases as lung 
volume increases above FRC toward total lung capacity (TLC) as a 
result of an increase in the resistance of small interalveolar vessels.
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
494
in postoperative mortality rate for these procedures.42
No single analgesic technique can block the multi-
ple sensory afferents that transmit nociceptive stimuli 
after thoracotomy (thoracic and cervical spinal nerves, 
vagus and phrenic nerves); therefore analgesia should 
Parameter
Suggested 
Application
Explanation
Fio2
Induction and early 
maintenance Fio2
1.0
Decrease Fio2 during 
OLV if tolerated
Aids absorption 
atelectasis in 
nondependent 
lung, speeding lung 
collapse
Tidal volume
TLV 6–8 mL/kg
OLV 4–6 mL/kga
Peak airway 
pressure <35 cm 
H2O, Plateau airway 
pressure <25 cm 
H2O
Recruitment 
maneuver
Before lung isolation
During OLV as 
needed
Reverses atelectasis 
in ventilated lung, 
improving Po2
during OLVa
Positive end-
expiratory 
pressure
Routine PEEP 
5–10 cm
No PEEP in patients 
with obstructive 
disease
Respiratory 
rate
Respiratory rate 
12–16 breaths/min
May be higher if 
required
Pco2
Permissive 
hypercapnia during 
OLV
Aim to keep pH 
≥7.20
Mode
Volume or pressure 
controlled
Pressure control for 
patients at risk of 
lung injury, such as 
bullae, preexisting 
lung disease, 
pneumonectomy, 
lung transplantation
Table 27.8
A Suggested Approach to One-Lung 
Ventilation
OLV, One-lung ventilation; PEEP, positive end-expiratory pressure; 
TLV, two-lung ventilation.
aUnzueta C, Tusman G, Suarez-Sipmann F, et al. Alveolar recruitment 
improves ventilation during thoracic surgery: A randomized 
controlled trial. Br J Anaesth. 2012;108:517–524.
Box 27.12
Factors That Correlate With an Increased 
Risk of Hypoxemia During One-Lung Ventilation
•Higher percentage of ventilation or perfusion to the
operative lung on preoperative V/Q scan
•Poor Pao2 during two-lung ventilation, particularly in the 
lateral position intraoperatively
•Right-sided thoracotomy
•Normal preoperative spirometry (FEV1 or FVC) or 
restrictive lung disease
•Supine position during one-lung ventilation
FEV1, Forced expiratory volume in 1 second; FVC, functional residual 
capacity; Pao2, partial pressure of oxygen (arterial); V/Q, ventilation/
perfusion ratio.
Dependent/
Ventilated Lung
Nondependent/
Surgical Lung
Other Measures
Fio2 1.0
Passive, apneic 
O2 1–2 L/min via 
suction catheter 
down DLT, 
more effective 
after partial 
recruitment 
maneuver
Cardiac output 
optimal
Confirm position 
of DLT or blocker 
with flexible 
bronchoscope
Partial 
recruitment 
maneuver 
followed by CPAP 
1–2 cm H2O
Volatile anesthetic 
<1.0 MAC to 
optimize hypoxic 
pulmonary 
vasoconstriction 
and V/Q matching
Recruitment 
maneuver (this 
will transiently 
make hypoxemia 
worse)
Intermittent 
positive-pressure 
ventilation
Venovenous 
ECMO
Apply PEEP 
5–10 cm (except 
in patients with 
emphysematous 
pathology)
Flexible 
bronchoscopic 
lobar insufflation 
using O2
connected to 
working channel
Selective lobar 
collapse using a 
bronchial blocker
Small tidal volume 
ventilation
Mechanical 
restriction of 
blood flow to the 
nonventilated 
lung (clamping 
pulmonary artery)
Table 27.9
Management of Gradual Hypoxemia During 
One-Lung Ventilation
CPAP, Continuous positive airway pressure; DLT, double-lumen tube; 
ECMO, extracorporeal membrane oxygenation; MAC, minimum 
alveolar concentration; OLV, one-lung ventilation; PEEP, positive end-
expiratory pressure.
Note: Sudden and severe hypoxemia should be managed by 
informing the surgeon of the problem, reinflation of the isolated 
lung (provided it is safe to do so), and two-lung ventilation 
while attempting to identify and manage the cause. Methods of 
oxygenating the nondependent/surgical lung are listed from least 
intrusive to most intrusive to surgical access.
IV
Chapter 27 Chronic Pulmonary Disease
495
be multimodal. The optimal choice is based on patient 
factors (contraindications, preferences), surgical factors 
(type of incision), and system factors (available equip-
ment, monitoring, nursing support, institutional familiar-
ity with techniques). The ideal postthoracotomy analgesic 
technique includes opioid-sparing analgesics (e.g., aceta-
minophen, NSAIDs, opioids [systemic or neuraxial], and 
regional anesthesia).
MEDIASTINOSCOPY
Mediastinoscopy to stage lung cancer before resection 
has been largely superseded by endobronchial ultra-
sound-guided transbronchial needle aspiration (EBUS),43
which may aid in the diagnosis of anterior and superior 
mediastinal masses and mediastinal lymphadenopathy.
The most common surgical approach is via a small (2 to 
3 cm) midline, transverse incision superior to the supraster-
nal notch. Surgical access is limited, and there are many 
structures that may be compressed or transected, such as 
the trachea and bronchi, pleura, great vessels (particularly 
the innominate artery and vein), lymphatic vessels, phrenic 
and recurrent laryngeal nerves, and esophagus.
Any anesthetic technique can be used for mediastinos-
copy. Although local anesthesia can be used for cooperative 
and motivated patients with relatively superficial lesions, 
general anesthesia with an SLT is typical. It is important 
the patient be still, as movement or coughing may result in 
surgical complications. An arterial line is typically unnec-
essary unless there are unusual patient or surgical factors. 
It is useful to monitor the pulse in the right hand (pulse 
oximeter, manual palpation by anesthesia provider's fin-
ger, arterial line), as compression of the innominate artery 
supplying blood to the right carotid artery may occur by 
the mediastinoscope. A noninvasive blood pressure cuff 
placed on the left arm confirms innominate compression.
Massive mediastinal hemorrhage is perhaps the most 
feared complication of mediastinoscopy and requires a 
median sternotomy or thoracotomy to control. A sug-
gested approach to managing this complication is out-
lined in Box 27.13
MEDIASTINAL MASSES
Patients with mediastinal masses, particularly anterior and 
superior masses, present unique problems for anesthesia 
care. Mediastinal masses may cause obstruction of major 
airways distal to an endotracheal tube and/or major vas-
cular structures, such as the main pulmonary arteries, atria, 
and superior vena cava. Patients who are symptomatic 
or have significant compression of these vital structures 
visible on CT scans are likely to be at high risk of life-
threatening respiratory or cardiovascular collapse. Anes-
thetic deaths occur mainly in children because of the more 
Postthoracotomy anesthetic management:
Predicted postoperative FEV1 (ppoFEV1%)
Staged weaning from
mechanical ventilation.
Consider extubation
if >20% plus:
Thoracic epidural
analgesia
Consider extubation
based on:
Exercise tolerance
DLCO
V⁄Q scan
Associated
diseases
Extubate in operating 
room if:
Patient AWaC
(alert, warm, and
comfortable)
>60%
<30%
30% 60%
Fig. 27.15 Anesthetic management guided by preoperative assessment and the amount of functioning 
lung tissue removed during surgery. Dlco Lung diffusing capacity for carbon monoxide; FEV1 forced 
expiratory volume in 1 second; V/Q, ventilation/perfusion. (From Slinger PD, ed. Pearson’s Thoracic and 
Esophageal Surgery. New York: Springer; 2011, used with permission.)
Box 27.13
Anesthetic Management of Mediastinoscopy 
Hemorrhage
1. Stop surgery and pack the wound. There is a serious risk 
that the patient will approach the point of hemodynamic 
collapse if the surgery-anesthesia team does not realize 
soon enough that there is a problem.
2. Begin resuscitation and call for help, both anesthetic and 
surgical.
3. Obtain large-bore intravenous access in the lower limbs.
4. Place an arterial line (if not placed at induction).
5. Obtain crossmatched blood in the operating room.
6. Place a double-lumen tube or bronchial blocker if the 
surgeon thinks thoracotomy is a possibility.
7. Once the patient is stabilized and all preparations are 
made, the surgeon can reexplore the surgical incision.
8. Convert to sternotomy or thoracotomy if indicated.
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
496
compressible cartilaginous airway, difficulty in obtaining 
a history of positional symptoms, and the requirement for 
general anesthesia for imaging in young children.
General anesthesia is potentially dangerous for a 
patient with a mediastinal mass for several reasons. 
General anesthesia leads to a decrease in lung volume 
with cephalad shift of the diaphragm and relaxation of 
bronchial smooth muscle, resulting in more compressibil-
ity of the airway by the overlying mass. Further, muscle 
relaxant–induced paralysis leads to a loss of the normal 
transpleural pressure gradient and a subsequent decrease 
in airway caliber. If possible, spontaneous ventilation 
should be maintained and paralysis avoided.
A suggested approach to the management of potential 
complications is outlined in Table 27.10. Flow-volume 
loops for assessment of severity of intrathoracic airway 
obstruction are unreliable and not recommended for 
decision making.44 45
If a patient is considered high risk for cardiovascular 
collapse, femorofemoral cardiopulmonary bypass should 
be initiated before induction of anesthesia, as there is 
insufficient time for this to be started after cardiovascular 
collapse.
REFERENCES
1. Fanta CH. Asthma. N Engl J Med. 
2009;360:1002–1014.
2. McCracken JL, Veeranki SP, Ameredes 
BT, Calhoun WJ. Diagnosis and Manage-
ment of Asthma in Adults: A Review. 
JAMA. 2017;318(3):279–290. https://
doi.org/10.1001/jama.2017.8372.
3. Expert Panel Working Group of the 
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute 
(NHLBI) administered and coordinated 
National Asthma Education and Preven-
tion Program Coordinating Committee 
(NAEPPCC), Cloutier MM, Baptist AP, 
Blake KV, Brooks EG, Bryant-Stephens 
T, DiMango E, Dixon AE, Elward KS, 
Hartert T, Krishnan JA, Lemanske Jr RF, 
Ouellette DR, Pace WD, Schatz M, Skol-
nik NS, Stout JW, Teach SJ, Umscheid 
CA, Walsh CG. 2020 Focused Updates 
to the Asthma Management Guidelines: 
A Report from the National Asthma 
Education and Prevention Program 
Coordinating Committee Expert Panel 
Working Group. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 
Dec. 2020;146(6):1217–1270. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jaci.2020.10.003 .
4. Rooke GA, Choi JH, Bishop MJ. The 
effect of isoflurane, halothane, sevo-
flurane, and thiopental/nitrous oxide 
on respiratory system resistance after 
tracheal intubation. Anesthesiology. 
1997;86:1294–1299.
5. Goff MJ, Arain SR, Ficke DJ, etal. 
Absence of bronchodilation during des-
flurane anesthesia: a comparison to 
sevoflurane and thiopental. Anesthesiol-
ogy. 2000;93:404–408.
6. Rennard SI. Chronic obstructive pulmo-
nary disease: definition, clinical mani-
festations, diagnosis, and staging. In: 
Stoller JK, ed. UpToDate: Waltham: 
UpToDate; 2015. Accessed July 29, 
2015.
7. Wilson FA, Heunks L. Oxygen induced 
hypercapnia in COPD: myths and facts. 
Crit Care. 2012;16:323–328.
8. Morano M, Araujo A, Nascimento F, etal. 
Preoperative pulmonary rehabilitation 
versus chest physical therapy in patients 
undergoing lung cancer resection. Arch 
Phys Med Rehab. 2013;94:53–58.
9. Huffmayer J, Littlewood K, Nemergut 
E. Perioperative management of the 
adult with cystic fibrosis. Anesth Analg. 
2009;109:1949–1961.
10. Olsen E, Chung F, Seet E. Surgical risk 
and the preoperative evaluation and 
management of adults with obstructive 
sleep apnea. In: Jones S, Collop N, eds. 
UpToDate: Waltham: UpToDate; 2014. 
(accessed July 29, 2015).
11. Galie N, Hoeper MM, Humbert H, etal. 
Guidelines for the diagnosis and treat-
ment of pulmonary hypertension. Eur 
Heart J. 2009;30:2493–2537.
12. Pilkington SA, Taboada D, Martinez 
G. Pulmonary hypertension and its 
management in patients undergo-
ing non-cardiac surgery. Anaesthesia. 
2015;70:56–70.
13. Lai HC, Lai HC, Wang KY, etal. Severe 
pulmonary hypertension complicates 
postoperative outcome of non-cardiac 
surgery. Br J Anaesth. 2007;99(2):184–
190.
14. Banks DA, Pretorius GV, Kerr KM, 
Manecke GR. Pulmonary endarterec-
tomy: part II. Operation, anesthetic 
management, and postoperative care. 
Semin 
Cardiothorac 
Vasc 
Anesth. 
2014;18(4):331–340.
15. Maxwell BG, Jackson E. Role of keta-
mine in the management of pulmo-
nary hypertension and right ventricular 
failure. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth. 
2012;26:e24.
16. Currigan DA, Hughes RJA, Wright CE, 
etal. Vasoconstrictor responses to vaso-
pressor agents in human pulmonary 
and radial arteries. Anesthesiology. 
2014;121:930–936.
17. Wauthy P, Abdel Kafi S, Mooi WJ, etal. 
Inhaled nitric oxide versus prostacyclin 
in chronic shunt-induced pulmonary 
hypertension. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2003;126(5):1434–1441.
18. Jerath A, Srinivas C, Vegas A, etal. The 
successful management of severe pro-
tamine-induced pulmonary hyperten-
sion using inhaled prostacyclin. Anesth 
Analg. 2010;110:365–369.
19. Bonnin M, Mercier FJ, Sitbon O, etal. 
Severe pulmonary hypertension during 
pregnancy: mode of delivery and anes-
thetic management of 15 consecutive 
Complication
Options for Management
Airway 
obstruction
•Maintenance of spontaneous
ventilation, avoidance of muscle 
relaxants
•Awake fiber-optic intubation with
single-lumen endotracheal or 
endobronchial tube placed distal to the 
obstruction
•Patient repositioning: optimal position
determined preinduction based on 
patient’s symptoms
•Rigid bronchoscopy and ventilation
distal to the obstruction; experienced 
bronchoscopist and equipment in the 
room at induction
Cardiovascular 
collapse
•Lower limb intravenous (IV) access (large-
bore IV with or without central line)
•Patient repositioning
•Elective cardiopulmonary bypass
preinduction in extreme cases
Table 27.10
Management of Potentially Life-Threatening 
Complications of Mediastinal Masses
IV
Chapter 27 Chronic Pulmonary Disease
497
cases. Anesthesiology. 2006;102:1133–
1137.
20. Missant C, Claus P, Rex S, Wouters 
PF. Differential effects of lumbar and 
thoracic epidural anesthesia on the 
haemodynamic response to acute right 
ventricular pressure overload. Br J 
Anaesth. 2009;104:143.
21. Brunelli A, Salati M, Rocco G, etal. 
European risk models for morbidity 
(EuroLung1) and mortality (EuroLung2) 
to predict outcome following anatomic 
lung resections: an analysis from the 
European Society of Thoracic Surgeons 
database. European Journal of Cardio-
Thoracic Surgery. 2016;51:490–497.
22. Lim E, Baldwin D, Beckles M, etal. Brit-
ish Thoracic Society; Society for Car-
diothoracic Surgery in Great Britain and 
Ireland. Guidelines on the radical man-
agement of patients with lung cancer. 
Thorax. 2010;65(suppl 3):iii1–iii27.
23. Brunelli A, Kim AW, Berger KI, etal. 
Physiologic evaluation of the patient 
with lung cancer being considered 
for resectional surgery: Diagnosis and 
management of lung cancer, 3rd ed: 
American College of Chest Physicians 
evidence-based clinical practice guide-
lines. Chest. 2013;143:e166S–e190S.
24. Weisman IM. Cardiopulmonary exer-
cise testing in the preoperative assess-
ment for lung resection surgery. Semin 
Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2001;13:116–
125.
25. Fleisher LA, Fleishmann KE, Auerbach 
AD, etal. 2014 ACC/AHA guideline on 
perioperative cardiovascular evaluation 
and management of patients undergo-
ing noncardiac surgery. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 2014;64(22):e77–e137.
26. Fernando HC, Jaklitsch MT, Walsh GL, 
etal. The society of thoracic surgeons 
practice guideline on prophylaxis and 
management of atrial fibrillation asso-
ciated with general thoracic surgery: 
executive summary. Ann Thorac Surg. 
2011;92:1144–1152.
27. Frendl G, Sodickson AC, Chung MK, 
Waldo AL, Gersh BJ, Tisdale JE, Calkins 
H, Aranki S, Kaneko T, Cassivi S, Smith 
Jr SC, Darbar D, Wee JO, Waddell TK, 
Amar D, Adler D. American Association 
for Thoracic Surgery. 2014 AATS 
guidelines for the prevention and man-
agement of perioperative atrial fibril-
lation and flutter for thoracic surgical 
procedures. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
Sep. 2014;148(3):e153–e193. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jtcvs.2014.06.036 
Epub 2014 Jun 30. PMID: 25129609; 
PMCID: PMC4454633.
28. Pierre S, Rivera C, Le Maitre B, etal. 
Guidelines on smoking management 
during the perioperative period. Anaes-
thesia Critical Care & Pain Medicine. 
2017;36:195–200.
29. Campos JH, Hallam EA, Van Natta 
T, etal. Devices for lung isolation 
used by anesthesiologists with limited 
thoracic experience: comparison of 
double-lumen endotracheal tube, Uni-
vent torque control blocker, and Arndt 
wire-guided endobronchial blocker. 
Anesthesiology. 2006;104(2):261–266.
30. Toronto General Hospital Department 
of Anesthesia. Perioperative Interactive 
Education. http://pie.med.utoronto.ca/
VB/.
31. Brodsky JB, Macario A, Mark JB. Tra-
cheal diameter predicts double-lumen 
tube size: a method for selecting left 
double lumen tubes. Anesth Analg. 
1996;82:861–864.
32. Klein U, Karzai W, Bloos F, etal. Role of 
fiberoptic bronchoscopy in conjunction 
with the use of double-lumen tubes 
for thoracic anesthesia: a prospective 
study. Anesthesiology. 1998;88:346–
350.
33. de Bellis M, Accardo R, Di Maio M, etal. 
Is flexible bronchoscopy necessary to 
confirm the position of double-lumen 
tubes before thoracic surgery? Eur J 
Cardiothorac Surg. 2011;40:912–918.
34. Slinger P, Scott WA. Arterial oxy-
genation during one-lung ventilation. 
A comparison of enflurane and iso-
flurane. Anesthesiology. 1995;82:940–
946.
35. Russell WJ, James MF. The effects on 
arterial haemoglobin oxygenation satu-
ration and on shunt of increasing cardi-
ac output with dopamine or dobutamine 
during one-lung ventilation. Anaesth 
Intensive Care. 2004;32:644–648.
36. Beck DH, Doepfmer UR, Sinemus C, 
etal. Effects of sevoflurane and propo-
fol on pulmonary shunt fraction dur-
ing one lung ventilation for thoracic 
surgery. Br J Anaesth. 2001;86:38–43.
37. Pruszkowski O, Dalibon N, Moutafis 
M, etal. Effects of propofol vs sevo-
flurane on arterial oxygenation during 
one-lung ventilation. Br J Anaesth. 
2007;98:539–544.
38. Von Dossow V, Welte M, Zaune U, 
etal. Thoracic epidural anesthesia com-
bined with general anesthesia: the pre-
ferred anesthetic technique for thoracic 
surgery. Anesth Analg. 2001;92:848–
854.
39. Myles PS, Bellomo R, Corcoran T, etal. 
Restrictive versus Liberal Fluid Therapy 
for Major Abdominal Surgery. N Engl J 
Med. 2018;378:2263–2274.
40. Batchelor TJP, Rasburn NJ, Abduel-
nour-Bertold E, etal. Guidelines for 
enhanced recovery after lung surgery: 
recommendations of the Enhanced 
Recover After Surgery (ERAS) Society 
and the European Society of Thoracic 
Surgeons (ESTS). European Journal of 
Cardio-Thoracic Surgery. 2019;55:91–
115.
41. Brodsky JB, Lemmens JM. Left double-
lumen tubes: clinical experience with 
1,170 patients. J Cardiothorac Vasc 
Anesth. 2003;17:289–298.
42. Licker M, Widikker I, Robert J, etal. 
Operative mortality and respiratory 
complications after lung resection for 
cancer: impact of chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease and time trends. 
Ann Thorac Surg. 2006;81:1830–1837.
43. Czarnecka A, Yasufuku K. Endobron-
chial ultrasound-guided transbron-
chial needle aspiration for staging 
patients with lung cancer with clini-
cal N0 disease. Ann Am Thorac Soc. 
2015;12(3):297–299.
44. Vander Els NJ, Sorhage F, Bach AM, etal. 
Abnormal flow volume loops in patients 
with intrathoracic Hodgkin's disease. 
Chest. 2000;117(5):1256–1261.
45. Hnatiuk OW, Corcoran PC, Sierra 
P. Spirometry in surgery for ante-
rior 
mediastinal 
masses. 
Chest. 
2001;120:1152–1156.
498
Chapter
RENAL DISEASE
Normal renal function is important for the excretion of 
anesthetics and medications, maintaining fluid and acid–
base balance, and regulating hemoglobin levels in the 
perioperative period.
Renal disease is quite prevalent in patients presenting 
for surgery and is associated with an increased likeli-
hood of poor postoperative outcomes. Even mild renal 
dysfunction is associated with a more likely risk of post-
operative complications.1
Multiple preoperative risk factors have been identified 
that predict renal dysfunction in the postoperative period 
(Box 28.1).2 Several perioperative clinical conditions are 
also associated with renal dysfunction and should be 
considered carefully in patients with preoperative risk 
factors. These include planned major surgery, critical ill-
ness, septic shock, exposure to nephrotoxic drugs, and 
radiocontrast.3 4
Renal Blood Flow
Although the kidneys represent only 0.5% of total body 
weight, their blood flow is equivalent to about 20% of 
cardiac output. Approximately two-thirds of renal blood 
flow is distributed to the renal cortex. Renal blood flow 
and the glomerular filtration rate (GFR) remain relatively 
constant at renal arterial blood pressures in the range of 
80 to 180 mm Hg (Fig. 28.1). Being able to maintain renal 
blood flow at a constant rate independent of changes 
in perfusion pressure is known as autoregulation. It 
is achieved by adjustment of afferent arteriolar tone, 
which alters the resistance to blood flow. Autoregulation 
protects the glomerular capillaries from hypertension 
during acute hypertensive episodes and maintains GFR 
and renal tubule function during modest decreases in 
arterial blood pressure. When mean arterial blood pres-
sure is outside the autoregulatory range, renal blood flow 
becomes pressure dependent. Autoregulation is reset by 
RENAL DISEASE
Renal Blood Flow
Glomerular Filtration Rate
Humoral Mediators of Renal Function
Drug Clearance
Renal Function Tests
Pharmacology of Diuretics
Pathophysiology of End-Stage Renal Disease
Differential Diagnosis and Management of 
Perioperative Oliguria
Postoperative Acute Kidney Injury
Management of Anesthesia in Patients With 
End-Stage Renal Disease
LIVER DISEASE
Hepatic Blood Flow
Intrinsic Determinants of Hepatic Blood Flow
Extrinsic Determinants of Hepatic Blood Flow
Glucose Homeostasis
Coagulation
Drug Metabolism
Heme Metabolism
Cholesterol and Lipid Metabolism
Protein Metabolism
Pathophysiology of End-Stage Liver Disease
Effects of Anesthesia and Surgery on the Liver
Management of Anesthesia in Patients With 
End-Stage Liver Disease
Management of Coagulopathy
Postoperative Jaundice
DISEASES OF THE BILIARY TRACT
Bile Metabolism and Secretion
Pathophysiology of the Biliary Tract
Management of Anesthesia for Biliary Tract 
Surgery
RENAL, LIVER, AND 
BILIARY TRACT DISEASE
Anup Pamnani, Vinod Malhotra.
28
IV
Chapter 28 Renal, Liver, and Biliary Tract Disease
499
chronic hypertension and can be significantly altered in 
the diabetic kidney.
Renal blood flow is also strongly influenced by the 
activity of the sympathetic nervous system and by release 
of renin and other hormones. Sympathetic nervous sys-
tem stimulation can produce renal vasoconstriction and 
a marked decrease in renal blood flow even if systemic 
blood pressure is within the autoregulatory range.
Glomerular Filtration Rate
GFR reflects glomerular function and is a measure of the 
ability of the glomerular membrane to allow filtration. 
About 90% of the fluid filtered at the glomeruli is reab-
sorbed from renal tubules into peritubular capillaries and 
thus returned to the circulation (Fig. 28.2). Normal GFR 
is approximately 125 mL/min and is highly dependent 
on glomerular filtration pressure (GFP). GFP, in turn, is 
a function of renal artery pressure, afferent and efferent 
arteriolar tone, and glomerular oncotic pressure. Hydro-
static pressure within the glomerular capillaries is about 
50 mm Hg. This pressure forces water and other low-
molecular-weight substances such as electrolytes through 
the glomerular capillaries into the Bowman space. Plasma 
oncotic pressure is about 25 mm Hg at the afferent arte-
riole and with filtration increases to about 35 mm Hg at 
the efferent arteriole. Despite a relatively low net filtra-
tion pressure, the glomerular capillaries are able to filter 
plasma at a rate equivalent to about 125 mL/min. GFR 
is reduced by significantly decreased mean arterial pres-
sure or renal blood flow. Afferent arteriolar constriction 
decreases GFR by decreasing glomerular flow. Conversely, 
afferent arteriolar dilation and mild efferent vasoconstric-
tion increase GFP and GFR.
Humoral Mediators of Renal Function
Renin–Angiotensin–Aldosterone System
Renin is a proteolytic enzyme secreted by the juxta-
glomerular apparatus of the kidneys in response to 
(1) sympathetic nervous system stimulation, (2) decreased 
renal perfusion pressure, and (3) decreases in the deliv-
ery of sodium to the distal convoluted renal tubules. 
Renin acts on angiotensinogen (a circulating globulin 
in plasma) to form angiotensin I. Angiotensin I is con-
verted in the lungs by angiotensin-converting enzyme to 
angiotensin II. Angiotensin II, a potent vasoconstrictor, 
stimulates the release of aldosterone from the adrenal 
cortex. Angiotensin II selectively increases efferent renal 
arteriolar tone at low levels and causes afferent arteri-
olar constriction at higher levels. Aldosterone, in turn, 
stimulates reabsorption of sodium and water in the distal 
tubule and collecting ducts.
Prostaglandins
Prostaglandins are produced in the renal medulla via 
the enzymes phospholipase A2 and cyclooxygenase and 
released in response to sympathetic nervous system 
stimulation, hypotension, and increased levels of angio-
tensin II. During periods of hemodynamic instability, 
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
0
40
80
120
160
200
240
280
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
mL/min/100 g kidney
Renal arterial pressure (torr)
GFR
RBF
UFR
RBF
GFR
UFR
Fig. 28.1 Autoregulation of Renal Blood Flow (RBF) and the 
Glomerular Filtration Rate (GFR). The relationships between RBF, 
GFR, and urine flow rate (UFR) and mean renal arterial pressure 
in dogs are shown as renal arterial pressure is varied from 20 
to 280 mm Hg. Autoregulation of RBF and GFR is observed 
between about 80 mm Hg and 180 mm Hg. (Redrawn from 
Hemmings HC. Anesthetics, adjuvants and drugs and the kidney. 
In Malhotra V, ed. Anesthesia for Renal and Genitourinary Surgery. 
New York: McGraw-Hill; 1996:18.)
Box 28.1 Risk Factors for Postoperative Acute Kidney 
Injury (AKI)
•GFR <60 m:/min/1.73 m2
•Diabetes mellitus
•Age >50 years
•Male sex
•Heart failure
•Ascites
•Hypertension
•Emergency surgery
•Intraperitoneal surgery
•Increased number of chronic medications
•Use of ACE inhibitors or ARBs
•High ASA physical status score
•Albuminuria
From Prowle JR, Forni LG, Bell M, et al. Postoperative acute kidney 
injury in adult non-cardiac surgery: Joint consensus report of the 
Acute Disease Quality Initiative and PeriOperative Quality Initiative. 
Nat Rev Nephrol. 2021;17(9):605–618.
ACE, Angiotensin-converting enzyme; ARB, angiotensin receptor 
blocker; ASA, American Society of Anesthesiologists; GFR, glomerular 
filtration rate.
Patients with chronic kidney disease and/or diabetes are at 
particularly high risk of AKI.
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
500
prostaglandins act to modulate the effects of arginine 
vasopressin (AVP), the renin–angiotensin system, and 
norepinephrine by vasodilating juxtamedullary vessels 
and maintaining cortical blood flow.
Arginine Vasopressin
Previously known as antidiuretic hormone, AVP regulates 
osmolality and diuresis. Although secreted in the supraop-
tic and paraventricular nuclei in the hypothalamus, it 
exerts significant effects on the renal collecting system. 
AVP actions are concentrated on collecting duct V2
receptors to increase membrane permeability and facili-
tate water reabsorption. The overall effect of AVP is to 
decrease serum osmolality and increase urine osmolality.
Atrial Natriuretic Peptide
Atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP) is secreted when stretch 
receptors in the atria of the heart and other organs are 
stimulated by increased intravascular volume. ANP acts 
by relaxing vascular smooth muscle to cause vasodilation, 
inhibiting the renin–angiotensin system, and stimulating 
diuresis and natriuresis. The net effect of ANP is to decrease 
systemic blood pressure and intravascular volume.
Drug Clearance
Excretion of drugs or their metabolites into urine 
depends on three mechanisms: (1) glomerular filtration, 
(2) active secretion by the renal tubules, and (3) passive 
Juxtaglomerular
apparatus
Afferent
arteriole
Efferent
arteriole
Distal
convoluted
tubule
Loop of Henle
Peritubular
capillaries
Glomerulus
Bowman
capsule
Proximal convoluted tubule
Collecting
tubule
Fig. 28.2 Anatomy of a Nephron. The glomerulus is formed by the invaginated and blind end of the 
nephron known as the Bowman capsule. Hydrostatic pressure in these capillaries causes water and 
low-molecular-weight substances to filter through the glomerulus. Glomerular filtrate travels along the 
renal tubule (proximal convoluted tubule, loop of Henle, distal convoluted tubule), during which most of 
its water and various amounts of solutes are reabsorbed from the renal tubular lumen into peritubular 
capillaries. The remaining glomerular filtrate becomes urine.
IV
Chapter 28 Renal, Liver, and Biliary Tract Disease
501
reabsorption by the tubules. The glomerular filtration 
of small molecules characteristic of anesthetic drugs 
depends on the GFR and the fractional plasma protein 
binding. Drugs that are highly protein bound will be 
inefficiently filtered at the glomerulus. Nonionized 
acidic and basic compounds undergo passive reabsorp-
tion by back-diffusion in the proximal and distal renal 
tubules. However, the ionized forms of these weak acids 
and bases are trapped within renal tubules, accounting 
for increased renal elimination by either alkaliniza-
tion or acidification of urine. Conjugation of drugs 
in the liver to water-soluble metabolites is another 
mechanism by which renal excretion of substances is 
achieved.
Renal Function Tests
Renal function can be evaluated preoperatively by 
using several laboratory tests (Table 28.1). These tests 
are not particularly sensitive measurements, and signif-
icant renal disease (more than a 50% decrease in renal 
function) can exist while laboratory values remain 
normal. Furthermore, the normal values established in 
healthy individuals may not be adjusted for age or be 
applicable during anesthesia. Trends are more useful 
for evaluating renal function than a single laboratory 
measurement.
Serum Creatinine
Serum creatinine concentration, which reflects the bal-
ance between creatinine production by muscle and its 
renal excretion, is often used as a marker of GFR. In 
contrast to blood urea nitrogen (BUN) concentration, 
the serum creatinine level is not influenced by pro-
tein metabolism or the rate of fluid flow through renal 
tubules. It is, however, influenced by skeletal muscle 
mass. Furthermore, increases in serum creatinine are not 
typically noted until GFR has declined by at least 50%. 
Thus an increased creatinine level may serve as a late 
marker of renal injury. For example, elderly patients with 
known decreases in GFR frequently display normal serum 
creatinine concentrations because of decreased creatinine 
production as a consequence of the decrease in skeletal 
muscle mass. Indeed, mild increases in the serum creati-
nine concentration in elderly patients may suggest sig-
nificant renal disease. Likewise, in patients with chronic 
renal failure serum creatinine concentrations may not 
accurately reflect the GFR because of (1) decreased cre-
atinine production, (2) the presence of decreased skel-
etal muscle mass, or (3) nonrenal (gastrointestinal tract) 
excretion of creatinine. GFR can be estimated from serum 
creatinine by a variety of methods, including the follow-
ing formula:
GFR
age
weight in kg / serum creatinine
=
−
(
) ×
(
)
×
(
)
140
72
Blood Urea Nitrogen
BUN concentrations, which are normally 10 to 20 mg/
dL, vary with changes in GFR. The relationship between 
serum creatinine and BUN levels is particularly use-
ful in diagnosing the cause of renal failure. Like serum 
creatinine, increases in BUN level are frequently a late 
sign of renal injury and are affected by dietary intake, 
coexisting illnesses, and intravascular fluid volume. For 
example, high-protein diets or gastrointestinal bleeding 
can increase the production of urea and thereby result in 
increased BUN concentrations (azotemia) despite a nor-
mal GFR. Other causes of increased BUN concentrations 
in the presence of normal GFR are increased catabolism 
during febrile illnesses and dehydration. Conversely, BUN 
concentrations can remain normal in the presence of 
low-protein diets despite decreases in GFR.
Increased BUN concentrations relative to serum cre-
atinine in the presence of dehydration likely reflect 
increased urea absorption caused by decreased urinary 
flow through the renal tubules, which results in a BUN–
creatinine ratio greater than 20. Although BUN concen-
tration is susceptible to multiple extraneous influences, 
values more than 50 mg/dL inevitably reflect a decreased 
GFR.
Creatinine Clearance
Creatinine clearance (normal, 110–150 mL/min) is a 
measurement of the ability of the glomeruli to excrete 
creatinine into urine for a given serum creatinine concen-
tration. Because clearance does not depend on corrections 
for age or the presence of a steady state, measurement of 
GFR is more reliable than the serum BUN or creatinine 
Test
Normal Value
Factors That Influence 
Interpretation
Test of Glomerular Filtration
Blood urea 
nitrogen
8–20 mg/dL
Dehydration
Variable protein intake
Gastrointestinal bleeding
Catabolism
Serum 
creatinine
0.5–1.2 mg/dL
Age
Skeletal muscle mass
Catabolism
Creatinine 
clearance
120 mL/min
Accurate urine volume 
measurement
Tests of Tubular Function
Urine specific 
gravity
Urine 
osmolality
Urine sodium
1.003–1.030
350–500 mOsm
20–40 mEq
All are affected by dehy-
dration, solutes, filtrates, 
proteins, diuretics, 
dehydration, drugs, and 
extremes of age
Table 28.1
Tests Used for Evaluation of Renal Function
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
502
values. The principal disadvantage of this test, however, is 
the need for timed urine collections. Typically, a 24-hour 
collection yields the most accurate results; however, a 
2-hour collection may be acceptable. Creatinine clear-
ance (CrCl) and, by proxy, GFR can be calculated from 
the formula
GFR
CrCl
Ucr
V/Pcr
=
=
×
where Ucr is urine creatinine, Pcr is plasma creatinine 
drawn at the midpoint of the timed collection, and V is 
urinary flow rate.
Proteinuria
Small amounts of protein are normally filtered through 
glomerular capillaries and then reabsorbed in the proxi-
mal convoluted tubules. Proteinuria (excretion of more 
than 150 mg of protein per day) is more likely the result 
of abnormally high filtration rather than impaired reab-
sorption by the renal tubules. Intermittent proteinuria 
occasionally occurs in healthy individuals when standing 
and disappears when supine. Other nonrenal causes of 
proteinuria include exercise, fever, and congestive heart 
failure.
Urine Indices
Measurement of urine osmolality and urinary sodium and 
calculation of the fractional excretion of sodium can help 
differentiate between prerenal and renal tubular causes 
of azotemia.
Newer Tests of Renal Function
Several additional markers of renal function have 
recently been identified. Serum cystatin C, a ubiquitous 
protein that is exclusively excreted by glomerular filtra-
tion, is less influenced by variations in muscle mass and 
nutrition than creatinine. It may better predict risk of 
death and end-stage renal disease (ESRD) across diverse 
populations.5
Other biomarkers such as N-acetyl-β-D-glucosaminidase, 
kidney injury molecule-1, and interleukin-18 are promis-
ing in the early detection of kidney injury. These biomark-
ers may have a role in reducing morbidity and mortality 
rates associated with kidney injury in the perioperative 
setting.6
Pharmacology of Diuretics
Thiazide Diuretics
Thiazide diuretics (hydrochlorothiazide, chlorthalidone) 
are generally administered for the treatment of essential 
hypertension and for mobilization of the edema fluid 
that is associated with renal, hepatic, or cardiac dys-
function. Diuresis occurs as a result of the inhibition of 
reabsorption of sodium and chloride ions from the early 
distal renal tubules. Side effects associated with diuretic-
induced hypokalemia may include (1) skeletal muscle 
weakness, (2) increased risk for digitalis toxicity, and (3) 
enhancement of nondepolarizing neuromuscular block-
ing drugs (Table 28.2).
Loop Diuretics
Loop diuretics (ethacrynic acid, furosemide, bumetanide) 
inhibit the reabsorption of sodium and chloride and aug-
ment the secretion of potassium, primarily in the loop 
of Henle. Intravenous administration of these drugs pro-
duces a diuretic response within minutes. Chronic admin-
istration of loop diuretics may result in hypochloremic, 
hypokalemic metabolic alkalosis, and, in rare instances, 
deafness.7
Osmotic Diuretics
The most frequently administered osmotic diuretic is the 
six-carbon sugar mannitol. Mannitol produces diuresis 
because it is filtered by the glomeruli and not reabsorbed 
within the renal tubules. This leads to increased osmolar-
ity of the renal tubule fluid and associated excretion of 
water.
Mannitol increases fluid movement from intracellular 
spaces into extracellular spaces such that intravascular 
fluid volume expands acutely. This redistribution of fluid 
from intracellular to extracellular compartments decreases 
brain size and intracranial pressure (also see Chapter 30). 
Mannitol may further diminish intracranial pressure by 
decreasing the rate of cerebrospinal fluid formation.
Aldosterone Antagonists
Spironolactone blocks the renal tubular effects of aldos-
terone and offsets the loss of potassium from administra-
tion of thiazide diuretics. Ascites and peripheral edema 
secondary to cirrhosis of the liver is often treated with 
spironolactone. The most serious toxic effect of spirono-
lactone is hyperkalemia. Serum potassium concentration 
should be monitored closely in patients taking spirono-
lactone.
Dopamine and Fenoldopam
Dopamine dilates renal arterioles via its agonist action at 
the DA1 receptor, leading to increased renal blood flow 
Diuretic Class
Hypokalemic, 
Hypochloremic 
Metabolic 
Alkalosis
Hyper-
kalemia
Hyper-
glycemia
Thiazide diuretics
Yes
No
Yes
Loop diuretics
Yes
No
Minimal
Osmotic diuretics No
No
No
Aldosterone 
antagonists
No
Yes
No
Table 28.2
Side Effects of Diuretics
IV
Chapter 28 Renal, Liver, and Biliary Tract Disease
503
and GFR. Treatment with low-dose dopamine (0.5–3 μg/
kg/min) may increase urine output but yet not alter the 
course of renal failure. In addition, dose-dependent side 
effects of dopamine include tachydysrhythmias, pulmo-
nary shunting, and tissue ischemia (gastrointestinal tract, 
digits).8 9
Fenoldopam, a dopamine analog, also possesses DA1 
agonist activity but lacks the adrenergic activity of dopa-
mine. It also increases renal blood flow and GFR, which 
may help the treatment of acute kidney injury (AKI). 
Several meta analyses (one in critically ill patients, the 
other two in cardiovascular surgery patients) had sug-
gested that fenoldopam was associated with a significant 
reduction in postoperative AKI. However, a 2015 meta 
analysis of patients undergoing major surgery did not 
demonstrate an impact on renal replacement therapy use 
or improvement in hospital mortality.10
Pathophysiology of End-Stage Renal Disease
ESRD causes profound physiologic changes that affect 
several organs (Box 28.2 and Table 28.3).
Cardiovascular Disease
Cardiovascular disease is the predominant cause of death 
in patients with ESRD. Acute myocardial infarction, car-
diac arrest of unknown cause, cardiac dysrhythmias, and 
cardiomyopathy account for more than 50% of deaths 
in patients receiving dialysis. Hypertension commonly 
exists in patients with ESRD. This systemic hyperten-
sion can be severe and refractory to antihypertensive 
therapy. Hypervolemia and excess activation of the 
renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system are the most com-
mon causes.
Additionally, the accumulation of uremic toxins and 
metabolic acids may contribute to poor myocardial per-
formance. Yet the presence of ESRD with significantly 
depressed cardiac function does not necessarily contrain-
dicate renal transplantation because cardiac ventricular 
function often improves after transplantation.
Uremia causes changes in lipid metabolism that lead 
to increased concentrations of serum triglycerides and 
reduced levels of protective high-density lipoproteins. 
Thus ESRD accelerates the progression of atherosclerosis. 
Pericardial disease and cardiac dysrhythmias can also be 
encountered in patients with ESRD. Pericardial effusions 
typically resolve when patients are adequately dialyzed.
Metabolic Disease
Many patients with ESRD also have diabetes mellitus. 
Kidney failure as a result of diabetes develops in nearly 
30% to 40% of patients with ESRD and accounts for 30% 
of those on the waiting list for kidney transplantation. 
In fact, nephropathy develops in nearly 60% of insulin-
dependent diabetic patients. Patients with ESRD and dia-
betes are more likely to develop cardiovascular disorders 
than patients with renal failure alone.11
Once patients are unable to excrete their dietary fluid 
and electrolyte loads, abnormalities in plasma electrolyte 
concentrations (sodium, potassium, calcium, magnesium, 
and phosphate) can develop. The most life-threatening 
electrolyte abnormality is hyperkalemia. The risk of 
hyperkalemia remains significant even in patients with 
ESRD undergoing maintenance hemodialysis; the inci-
dence of hyperkalemia is lower in patients treated with 
continuous peritoneal dialysis.
Anemia and Abnormal Coagulation
Patients with renal failure generally display a normo-
chromic, normocytic anemia because of decreased eryth-
ropoiesis and retained toxins that are secondary to renal 
failure. Treatment with recombinant erythropoietin can 
frequently increase hemoglobin concentrations. Symp-
toms of fatigue are reduced, and both cerebral function 
and cardiac function are improved. Occasionally, recom-
binant erythropoietin therapy may exacerbate preexisting 
essential hypertension. Patients with renal failure may 
also display uremia-induced defects in platelet function.
Differential Diagnosis and Management of 
Perioperative Oliguria
Prerenal Oliguria
Prerenal oliguria is characterized by the excretion of 
concentrated urine that contains minimal amounts of 
sodium (Table 28.4). Excretion of highly concentrated 
and sodium-poor urine confirms that renal tubular func-
tion is intact and reflects an attempt by the kidneys to 
Box 28.2 Changes Characteristic of Chronic Renal Disease
•Anemia
•Decreased ejection fraction
•Decreased platelet adhesiveness
•Hyperkalemia
•Unpredictable intravascular fluid volume
•Metabolic acidosis
•Systemic hypertension
•Pericardial effusion
•Decreased sympathetic nervous system activity
Stage
Glomerular Filtration Rate 
(mL/min/1.73 m2)
1
>90
2
60–89
3
30–59
4
15–29
5
<15
Table 28.3
Stages of Chronic Renal Failure
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
504
conserve sodium and restore intravascular fluid volume 
in response to decreased renal blood flow. The decreased 
renal blood flow most likely reflects an acute decrease in 
intravascular fluid volume or decreased cardiac output. 
Other causes of decreased renal blood flow are sepsis, 
liver failure, and congestive heart failure.12
The initial management of patients with perioperative 
oliguria is influenced by their risk for the development 
of acute renal failure. A brisk diuresis in response to 
an intravascular fluid challenge suggests that an acute 
decrease in intravascular fluid volume is the cause of the 
prerenal oliguria. When intravascular fluid replacement 
does not result in increased urine output, intrinsic renal 
disease or hemodynamic causes should be considered. 
Prompt recognition and treatment of prerenal oliguria is 
critical, as prolonged severe ischemia can lead to necro-
sis of renal tubules and convert reversible injury to true 
structural injury.
Administration of diuretics to maintain or stimulate 
urine flow in the perioperative period is controversial. One 
theory is that prevention of renal tubule urine stasis with 
diuretics can prevent prerenal oliguria from progressing 
to acute tubular necrosis. Nevertheless, urine output that 
is enhanced by the administration of a diuretic does not 
necessarily predict postoperative renal function. There 
is no evidence that drug-induced diuresis (dopamine, 
furosemide, mannitol) in the presence of reduced cardiac 
output or hypovolemia, or both, protects renal function. 
In fact, a 2013 meta analysis of clinical trials did not 
find reliable evidence that any interventions (e.g., diuret-
ics, dopamine and its analogs, calcium channel blockers, 
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, specific hydra-
tion fluids, N-acetylcysteine, ANP, or erythropoietin) can 
reduce the risk of perioperative renal failure.12
Intrinsic Renal Disease
Acute tubular necrosis, glomerulonephritis, and acute 
interstitial nephritis are intrinsic renal causes of oliguria. 
In contrast to oliguria secondary to hypovolemia, the 
urine of patients with acute tubular necrosis is poorly 
concentrated and contains excessive amounts of sodium. 
Intrinsic renal disease is the most severe of the different 
forms of oliguria and is typically the hardest to reverse.
Postrenal Oliguria
An obstruction that is distal to the renal collecting system 
usually involves a mechanical problem such as a blood 
clot in the ureter, bladder, or urethra. Surgical ligation, 
renal calculi, and edema are other postrenal causes of 
low urine output. Another common postrenal cause is 
bladder catheter obstruction. Postrenal oliguria is fre-
quently reversible once the source of the obstruction is 
removed.13
Postoperative Acute Kidney Injury
Postoperative AKI is a clinical syndrome that is usu-
ally multifactorial in cause. Risk factors are listed 
in Box 28.1. A 2021 consensus group recommended 
defining postoperative AKI as occurring when the 
Kidney Disease Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) 
criteria for AKI are met within 7 days of an operative 
intervention2 (Box 28.3). The oliguria criteria are more 
commonly seen in the intraoperative and postoperative 
period than the serum creatinine criteria. Treatment 
of AKI should be targeted to underlying causes, as 
described earlier.
Management of Anesthesia in Patients With 
End-Stage Renal Disease
General anesthesia with tracheal intubation provides 
acceptable hemodynamics, excellent skeletal muscle 
relaxation, and a predictable depth of anesthesia in 
patients with ESRD who are undergoing major operations. 
Patients with advanced stages of comorbid conditions 
may require more extensive monitoring, such as continu-
ous monitoring of systemic blood pressure and perhaps 
central venous pressure. Large variations in arterial blood 
pressure may occur, with hypotension being more likely 
than hypertension during maintenance of anesthesia. 
This is especially the case if the patient has recently been 
hemodialyzed in preparation for the surgical procedure. 
Those with the most severe comorbid conditions, such as 
symptomatic coronary artery disease or a history of con-
gestive heart failure, may benefit from monitoring with a 
pulmonary artery catheter or transesophageal echocardi-
ography (TEE).
The status of hemodialysis shunts or fistulas should be 
monitored and documented (e.g., presence of a palpable 
thrill) during positioning and intraoperatively to confirm 
Diagnostic 
Feature
Prerenal Oliguria
Acute Tubular 
Necrosis
Fractional 
excretion of 
sodium
<1%
>3%
Urine specific 
gravity
>1.015
1.01–1.015
Urine sodium 
(mEq/L)
<40
>40
Urine osmolality 
(mOsm/L)
>400
<400
Causes
Decreased renal blood 
flow (hypotension, 
hypovolemia, 
decreased cardiac 
output)
Renal ischemia, 
nephrotoxins, 
free hemoglobin 
or myoglobin
Table 28.4
Prerenal Oliguria Versus Acute Tubular 
Necrosis: Preoperative Differential Diagnosis
IV
Chapter 28 Renal, Liver, and Biliary Tract Disease
505
continued patency. Peripheral lines and arterial blood 
pressure monitoring cuffs should not be placed in prox-
imity to such implanted vascular access devices.
Normal saline (NS) is often given instead of lactated 
Ringer’s solution for intravascular fluid resuscitation in 
patients with ESRD. The rationale is the hypothesized 
risk of hyperkalemia from potassium contained in lac-
tated Ringer's solution. Yet this conclusion has not been 
proved to be likely. For example, two prospective ran-
domized double-blind clinical trials comparing the two 
intraoperative fluid therapies in ESRD patients undergo-
ing renal transplantation have shown more hyperkalemia 
and a greater degree of acidosis with NS than lactated 
Ringer's solution.14 15
Patients with uremia and other comorbid conditions 
(e.g., diabetes mellitus) are at an increased risk for aspi-
ration of gastric contents during induction of anesthesia. 
The use of a rapid-sequence induction of anesthesia 
technique may be indicated in such patients. Succinyl-
choline is not contraindicated in patients with ESRD. The 
increase in serum potassium concentration after a large 
dose of succinylcholine is approximately 0.6 mEq/L for 
patients both with and without ESRD. This increase can 
be tolerated without imposing a significant cardiac risk, 
even if initial (i.e., preanesthetic) serum potassium con-
centration is more than 5 mEq/L.
Several strategies have achieved adequate heart rate 
and arterial blood pressure control during induction of 
anesthesia. Moderate to large doses of opioids, such as 
fentanyl, can blunt the response to laryngoscopy. How-
ever, systemic blood pressure is frequently more difficult 
to maintain after induction of anesthesia, and hypoten-
sion may require treatment with vasoconstrictors. The 
short-acting β-adrenergic blocker esmolol can blunt the 
hemodynamic response to tracheal intubation and is ide-
ally suited for patients with an adequate ejection fraction.
Drugs or their metabolites that depend on renal elimi-
nation (pancuronium, vecuronium, morphine, meperi-
dine) should be used cautiously or avoided. Cisatra-
curium is a good choice, as most of it is metabolized 
by spontaneous Hoffman degradation, which makes its 
duration of action independent of liver or kidney func-
tion. The elimination half-life of rocuronium is increased 
because of increased volume of distribution with no 
change in clearance. Mivacurium is metabolized by 
plasma cholinesterase, but its action may be prolonged 
by 10 to 15 minutes as a result of reduced cholinest-
erase activity in these patients (also see Chapter 11). 
Because morphine has long-acting renally excreted 
metabolites such as morphine-6-glucuronide, alternative 
opioid choices are preferred (e.g., fentanyl, sufentanil, 
alfentanil, remifentanil).
Appropriate choices of inhaled anesthetics include 
desflurane, isoflurane, and sevoflurane. The metabolism 
of sevoflurane to inorganic fluoride has been implicated 
in experimental studies of renal toxicity, although no 
controlled human studies are available to indicate either 
safety concerns or danger when using sevoflurane in the 
setting of ESRD.
LIVER DISEASE
The liver is responsible for the production of essential 
plasma proteins, the metabolism and detoxification of 
drugs and deleterious xenobiotics, the absorption of 
critical nutrients, and carbohydrate metabolism. Impaired 
liver function affects nearly every organ system in the 
body. Fig. 28.3 summarizes the end-organ implications 
of cirrhosis.
Hepatic Blood Flow
The liver is unique in that it receives a dual afferent 
blood supply that is equal to about 25% of cardiac 
output (Fig. 28.4). Approximately, 70% of hepatic blood 
flow is supplied by the portal vein, with the remainder 
supplied by the hepatic artery. Under normal conditions, 
each blood vessel contributes roughly 50% to the liver's 
oxygen supply. Portal vein flow is not regulated and is 
susceptible to systemic hypotension and decreases in 
cardiac output.
Intrinsic Determinants of Hepatic Blood Flow
Reduction in portal flow (up to a 50% reduction) is 
compensated for by modulating hepatic artery tone to 
maintain perfusion to the liver. This is primarily medi-
ated via the hepatic arterial buffer response, which 
reciprocally varies hepatic arterial blood flow to changes 
in portal flow mediated by adenosine. The response is 
stimulated by low pH and O2 content and increased Pco2. 
Volatile anesthetics and cirrhosis of the liver attenuate 
this reciprocal relationship and render the liver vulner-
able to ischemia.
Extrinsic Determinants of Hepatic Blood Flow
Hepatic perfusion pressure (mean arterial or portal vein 
pressure minus hepatic vein pressure) and splanchnic 
Box 28.3 Kidney Disease Improving Global Outcomes 
(KDIGO) Criteria for AKI
AKI is defined as any of the following (not graded):
Increase in SCr by ≥0.3 mg/dL (≥26.5 μmol/L) within 48 hours
Increase in SCr to ≥1.5 times baseline, which is known or 
presumed to have occurred within the prior 7 days
Urine volume <0.5 mL/kg/hr for 6 hours
From llum JA, Lameire N; KDIGO AKI Guideline Work Group. 
Diagnosis, evaluation, and management of acute kidney injury: A 
KDIGO summary (Part 1). Crit Care. 2013;17(1):204.
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
506
vascular resistance determine hepatic blood flow. The 
splanchnic vessels receive vasomotor innervation from 
the sympathetic nervous system. Splanchnic nerve stimu-
lation (pain, arterial hypoxemia, surgical stress) increases 
splanchnic vascular resistance and decreases hepatic 
blood flow.
Surgical stimulation and the proximity of the opera-
tive site to the liver are important determinants of the 
magnitude of the decrease in hepatic blood flow seen 
during general anesthesia. β-Adrenergic receptor block-
ers such as propranolol are associated with decreases 
in hepatic blood flow. Positive-pressure ventilation of 
the lungs, congestive heart failure, and administration 
of excessive intravascular fluid cause increased central 
venous pressure, resulting in increased hepatic venous 
pressure, which effectively decreases hepatic perfusion 
pressure and blood flow.
Glucose Homeostasis
The liver is the main organ for the storage and release of glu-
cose. Hepatocytes extract glucose via an insulin-mediated 
mechanism, where it can be stored as glycogen. Gluca-
gon-mediated catabolism of glycogen (glycogenolysis) 
releases glucose back into the systemic circulation for 
maintenance of euglycemia. Surgical stress, starvation, 
and sympathetic nervous system activation stimulate gly-
cogen depolymerization to glucose. When glycogen stores 
are depleted, hepatic gluconeogenesis from substrates such 
as lactate, glycerol, and certain amino acids restores blood 
glucose levels.
Coagulation
Hepatocytes are responsible for the synthesis of the major-
ity of procoagulant proteins in addition to regulators such 
as proteins C and S and antithrombin III. An important 
exception to this is factor VIII, which is partially produced 
in endothelial cells. Vitamin K, which is absorbed by bile 
secretion into the gastrointestinal tract, plays an impor-
tant role in catalysis of some of the procoagulant proteins 
to produce factors II, VII, IX, and X. Laboratory studies 
such as prothrombin time (international normalized ratio 
[INR]), partial thromboplastin time (PTT), and fibrinogen 
Fig. 28.3 Metabolic, Anatomic, and Physiologic Changes of Cirrhosis and Potential Consequences in 
the Surgical Patient. AKI, Acute kidney injury; ARDS, acute respiratory distress syndrome; ATN, acute 
tubular necrosis; PT, prothrombin time. (From Newman KL, Johnson KM, Cornia PB, et al. Perioperative 
evaluation and management of patients with cirrhosis: Risk assessment, surgical outcomes, and future 
directions. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2020;18[11]:2398–2414.e3, Fig. 1.)
IV
Chapter 28 Renal, Liver, and Biliary Tract Disease
507
levels can be used to evaluate impaired coagulation and 
hepatic function. Impaired laboratory studies reflect sig-
nificant hepatic dysfunction because most coagulation 
factors maintain function at up to 20% to 30% of their 
normal levels. In the intraoperative period point-of-care 
coagulation testing, such as rotational thromboelastom-
etry (ROTEM), can be used to evaluate coagulation and 
guide therapy (also see Chapter 23).
Drug Metabolism
Hepatic drug metabolism is characterized by the conver-
sion of lipid-soluble drugs to more water-soluble forms 
to facilitate renal excretion, transformation to pharma-
cologically less active substances, and excretion in bile.
Three major pathways are used to accomplish these 
goals. Phase 1 metabolism involves an increase in 
polarity of drugs via cytochrome P and mixed-function 
oxidases. Phase 2 metabolism involves conjugation of 
metabolites to water-soluble substrates. Phase 3 elimi-
nation relies on energy-dependent excretion of drugs 
into bile. Chronic liver disease may interfere with the 
metabolism of drugs because of the decreased number of 
enzyme-containing hepatocytes or the decreased hepatic 
blood flow that typically accompanies cirrhosis of the 
liver. Prolonged elimination half-times for morphine, 
alfentanil, diazepam, lidocaine, pancuronium, and vecu-
ronium occur in patients with cirrhosis of the liver. Like-
wise, chronic drug therapy can inhibit hepatic enzymes 
and inhibit metabolism of anesthetic drugs, leading 
to higher circulating blood levels. Conversely, enzyme 
induction, particularly of cytochrome P isoforms, can 
also occur as a response to chronic therapy with drugs 
such as phenytoin, isoniazid, and rifampin or as a result 
of alcohol use disorder. Induction of hepatic enzymes 
can increase metabolism of administered anesthetic and 
therapeutic drugs, thereby reducing plasma levels.
Heme Metabolism
Although fetal erythrocyte production occurs exclusively 
in the liver, hepatic hematopoiesis accounts for only 20% 
of adult heme synthesis, with the remainder produced 
in the bone marrow. Heme synthesis occurs from gly-
cine and succinyl coenzyme A (CoA) through a reaction 
catalyzed by aminolevulinic acid (ALA) synthase. ALA 
synthase is the rate-limiting step in the heme synthesis 
pathway and is regulated by feedback inhibition by its 
end product heme. Porphyrias are rare genetic diseases 
characterized by interruption of feedback inhibition of 
ALA synthase.
Heme degradation, primarily by the reticuloendothelial 
system, results in the formation of bilirubin as an end 
product. Formed bilirubin is then bound to plasma albu-
min for transport to the liver, where it is extracted and 
conjugated for secretion into canalicular bile. The majority 
of bilirubin excretion occurs in the gut, although a small 
portion is recirculated to the liver via the enterohepatic 
circulation. This accounts for the small amount of bilirubin 
conjugates present in blood. Conjugated bilirubin is water 
soluble, and about 10% is excreted in the urine.
Cholesterol and Lipid Metabolism
The liver stores dietary fat as triglycerides, cholesterol, 
and phospholipids and releases free fatty acids via tri-
glyceride hydrolysis. In addition, the liver synthesizes free 
fatty acids from glucose, lipids, and protein. The liver also 
plays an important role in the regulation of cholesterol 
uptake, metabolism, and transport. Bile salts, the end 
product of cholesterol synthesis, serve as regulators of 
lipid metabolism. Elimination of cholesterol is achieved 
by biliary secretion and by excretion of bile acids.
Protein Metabolism
The liver plays a vital role in protein metabolism. 
Numerous biologically active proteins, including albu-
min, cytokines, hormones, and coagulation factors, are 
synthesized in the liver. In addition, nonessential amino 
acid synthesis can occur in hepatocytes when necessary. 
Protein degradation is another important function of 
the liver. The urea (Krebs) cycle is used by hepatocytes 
to convert the end products of amino acid degradation, 
such as ammonia and other nitrogenous waste products, 
Inferior vena cava
Hepatic vein
Hepatic artery
Splenic
vein
Superior
mesenteric vein
Portal vein
Aorta
Inferior
mesenteric vein
Fig. 28.4 Schematic Depiction of the Dual Afferent Blood Supply 
to the Liver Provided by the Portal Vein and Hepatic Artery. About 
70% of hepatic blood flow is via the portal vein, with the 
remainder via the hepatic artery. Total hepatic blood flow is 
directly proportional to perfusion pressure across the liver and 
inversely related to splanchnic vascular resistance. Cirrhosis of 
the liver increases resistance to blood flow through the portal 
vein and decreases hepatic blood flow.
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
508
to urea, which is readily excreted by the kidney. Severe 
hepatic dysfunction, such as that which occurs in end-
stage liver disease (ESLD), leads to accumulation of 
ammonia in the serum resulting in hepatic encephalopa-
thy (HE).
Pathophysiology of End-Stage Liver Disease
Cardiovascular Complications
Severe parenchymal disease that has advanced to the 
point of cirrhosis usually results in a hyperdynamic cir-
culation. Hemodynamic measurements generally reveal 
normal to low systemic blood pressure, increased car-
diac output, and decreased systemic vascular resistance. 
Decreased systemic vascular resistance occurs from vaso-
dilation and abnormal anatomic and physiologic shunt-
ing. Physiologic shunting is the passage of blood from 
the arterial to the venous side of the circulation without 
effectively traversing a capillary bed. Abnormal blood 
vessels, such as those seen in the skin as spider angiomas, 
represent an anatomic shunt.16,17
Portal Hypertension
High resistance to blood flow through the liver, a hall-
mark of ESLD, causes an accumulation of blood in the 
vascular beds that are immediately upstream of the liver. 
Vessels draining the esophagus, stomach, spleen, and 
intestines dilate and hypertrophy, which leads to the 
development of splenomegaly and esophageal, gastric, 
and intraabdominal varices. Symptoms of portal hyper-
tension include anorexia, nausea, ascites, esophageal 
varices, spider nevi, and HE. It is central to the patho-
genesis of a variety of complications associated with 
ESLD, including massive variceal hemorrhage, increased 
susceptibility to infection, renal failure, and mental status 
changes.
Pulmonary Complications
ESLD is associated with hepatopulmonary syndrome 
and portopulmonary hypertension. Hepatopulmonary 
syndrome develops as a result of intrapulmonary arterio-
venous communications that are not ventilated, impair-
ment of hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction, atelectasis, 
and restrictive pulmonary disease secondary to ascites 
and pleural effusion. Arterial hypoxemia, secondary to 
the hepatopulmonary syndrome, may improve somewhat 
with supplemental oxygen in the early stages of the 
disease, but oxygen may not be effective with disease 
progression.
Portopulmonary hypertension is an increase in pulmo-
nary arterial pressure in patients with portal hyperten-
sion. The cause is not well established. This syndrome 
occurs in less than 5% of patients, including the liver 
transplant population. Nevertheless, these patients are 
at increased risk for acute right-sided heart failure if 
physiologic conditions that increase pulmonary vascular 
resistance (acidosis, arterial hypoxemia, hypercapnia) 
occur during anesthesia. Hepatic hydrothorax, defined 
as pleural effusions occurring in the absence of car-
diopulmonary disease, can also occur in up to 10% of 
cirrhotic patients. In some patients the pleural effusions 
from hepatic hydrothorax are large enough to impair 
oxygenation.
Hepatic Encephalopathy
Altered mental state is a frequent complication of both 
acute and chronic liver failure, with a clinically vari-
able presentation ranging from minor changes in brain 
function to deep coma. The pathophysiology of HE is 
complex and not fully understood. When hepatic failure 
occurs, ammonia that is normally released by gut flora 
into the portal circulation accumulates and is shunted 
to the systemic circulation. The high level of systemic 
ammonia can lead to neuronal dysfunction and some 
of the clinical manifestations of HE. Other mechanisms 
are also implicated in the pathogenesis of this complex 
phenomenon, including alterations in the blood–brain 
barrier, γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) receptor agonism, 
manganese toxicity, lactate, and dopamine metabolites.18
Therapy is primarily aimed at reducing ammonia 
levels. Lactulose reduces intestinal ammonia absorption 
via its laxative effect and a variety of mechanisms that 
alter the gut microbiome. Antibiotics like rifaximin and 
neomycin, which also alter gut microbial flora, are often 
used as ancillary therapies. L-Ornithine L-aspartate, pro-
biotics, and branched-chain amino acids also have use in 
the management of this condition.
Impaired Drug Binding
When liver disease is so severe that albumin production 
is decreased, fewer sites are available for drug bind-
ing. This limited availability can increase levels of the 
unbound, pharmacologically active fraction of drugs, 
such as thiopental and alfentanil. Increased drug sen-
sitivity as a result of decreased protein binding is most 
likely to be manifested when plasma albumin concentra-
tions are lower than 2.5 g/dL.
Ascites
Ascites is a common complication of cirrhosis, affect-
ing up to 50% of cirrhotic patients. The development 
of ascites is associated with significant morbidity and 
heralds the end stages of cirrhosis. Complications associ-
ated with ascites include marked abdominal distention 
(leading to atelectasis and restrictive pulmonary physiol-
ogy), spontaneous bacterial peritonitis, and circulatory 
instability caused by compression of the inferior vena 
cava and right atrium. Although the exact mechanism of 
ascites is unclear, excess sodium retention by the kidney, 
decreased oncotic pressure because of hypoalbuminemia, 
and portal hypertension appear to play a central role. Ini-
tial therapy includes restriction of fluid administration, 
IV
Chapter 28 Renal, Liver, and Biliary Tract Disease
509
reduction of sodium intake, and administration of diuret-
ics. In severe cases abdominal paracentesis can be effec-
tive at transiently reducing abdominal distention and 
restoring hemodynamic stability.19 20 Some patients with 
refractory ascites are candidates for transjugular intra-
hepatic portosystemic shunt (TIPS), an interventional 
radiologic procedure to place a stent between a branch 
of the hepatic vein and portal vein (also see Chapter 38).
Renal Dysfunction and Hepatorenal Syndrome
Renal dysfunction can develop in a significant portion 
of patients with cirrhosis. A variety of etiologic factors, 
including diuretic therapy, reduced intravascular volume 
secondary to ascites or gastrointestinal hemorrhage, 
nephrotoxic drugs, and sepsis, can provoke acute renal 
failure and ultimately acute tubular necrosis in cirrhotic 
patients.
In the absence of obvious factors precipitating renal 
failure hepatorenal syndrome (HRS) can be diagnosed. 
HRS is a type of AKI, now called HRS-AKI, that is char-
acterized by intense renal vasoconstriction.21 Before the 
development of new criteria for AKI, patients with HRS 
were divided into two types. Type 1 HRS (now called 
HRS-AKI) typically presented as rapidly progressing pre-
renal failure and poor prognosis in the absence of thera-
peutic intervention. Conversely, type 2 HRS, with a more 
gradual increase in serum creatinine, now falls within the 
current definition of chronic kidney disease. The treat-
ment of HRS-AKI includes 20% to 25% albumin admin-
istration, withdrawal of diuretics, vasoconstrictors (e.g., 
terlipressin, norepinephrine, or combined midodrine/
octreotide), and reversal of precipitating factors.21
Effects of Anesthesia and Surgery on the Liver
Impact of Anesthetics on Hepatic Blood Flow
Inhaled anesthetics and regional anesthesia both typi-
cally decrease hepatic blood flow 20% to 30% in the 
absence of surgical stimulation. These changes reflect 
drug- or technique-induced effects on hepatic perfusion 
pressure or splanchnic vascular resistance, or both. For 
example, reduced hepatic blood flow from volatile anes-
thetics, in addition to regional anesthesia (T5 sensory 
level), is likely the result of decreased hepatic perfusion 
pressure. Autoregulation (increased hepatic artery blood 
flow offsetting decreases in portal vein blood flow) of 
hepatic blood flow may be best maintained with isoflu-
rane. However, hepatic blood flow during the adminis-
tration of desflurane and sevoflurane is maintained by a 
similar mechanism.
Volatile Anesthetic–Induced Hepatic Dysfunction
A rare but life-threatening form of hepatic dysfunction 
may reflect an immune-mediated hepatotoxicity caused 
by halothane. Two patterns of hepatic injury have 
occurred with use of halothane. A mild form occurs in up 
to 20% of patients and is associated with minimal seque-
lae. A rare fulminant form is associated with a fatality 
rate of 50% to 70%. Risk factors for development of this 
condition include prior exposure to halothane, age older 
than 40 years, obesity, and female sex. Isoflurane and 
desflurane are also capable of causing hepatic dysfunc-
tion, but the incidence of hepatitis after exposure to these 
volatile anesthetics is extremely rare, mainly because of 
the decreased magnitude of metabolism in comparison 
with halothane. Given its rare incidence and the dis-
appearance of halothane in modern clinical practice, 
volatile anesthetic–induced hepatic dysfunction remains 
a diagnosis of exclusion in the patient presenting with 
hepatitis in the perioperative period.22
Management of Anesthesia in Patients With 
End-Stage Liver Disease
Preoperative Evaluation of Liver Disease
Preoperative liver function tests (Table 28.5) can be used 
to detect the presence of liver disease. Often, these tests 
are not very specific. Furthermore, the large reserve of the 
liver means that considerable hepatic damage can be pre-
sent before liver function test results are altered. Indeed, 
cirrhosis of the liver may cause little alteration in liver 
function tests. Additional stressors, such as anesthesia and 
surgery, sometimes reveal underlying liver disease.
Historically, the Child-Turcotte-Pugh (CTP) score was 
used to classify liver dysfunction in patients with cirrho-
sis and portal hypertension (Table 28.6). In general, the 
risk of surgical mortality increases with increasing CTP 
class. Patients with CTP class C cirrhosis are not con-
sidered candidates for elective surgery. However, more 
contemporary studies have not demonstrated as strong 
of a correlation with mortality risk, most likely because 
Test
Normal Valuesa
Albumin
3.5–5.5 g/dL
Bilirubin
0.3–1.1 mg/dL
Unconjugated bilirubin (indirect 
reacting)
0.2–0.7 mg/dL
Conjugated bilirubin (direct reacting)
0.1–0.4 mg/dL
Aspartate aminotransferase (i.e., SGOT)
10–40 U/mL
Alanine aminotransferase (i.e., SGPT)
5–35 U/mL
Alkaline phosphatase
10–30 U/mL
Prothrombin time
12–14 s
Table 28.5
Hepatic and Biliary Function Tests With 
Normal Values
aNormal values for each individual laboratory should be considered 
in interpreting liver function test results.
SGOT, Serum glutamic-oxaloacetic (acid) transaminase; SGPT, serum 
glutamate-pyruvate transaminase.
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
510
surgery is avoided in patients with decompensated class 
C cirrhosis.23
The Model of End-Stage Liver Disease (MELD) score 
was initially developed in 2000 to predict 90-day mor-
tality in patients who required TIPS procedures. The 
formula is complex but requires three laboratory tests: 
serum bilirubin, INR, and serum creatinine (Box 28.4). 
One advantage of the MELD score is its relative objectiv-
ity compared with the CTP score, which relied on physi-
cal examination for two of its components (ascites and 
encephalopathy). Preoperative MELD score correlates 
with postoperative mortality.23 The Mayo Clinic created a 
risk calculator that incorporates MELD, age, and Ameri-
can Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) physical status 
to provide a risk estimate for patients with cirrhosis 
undergoing major surgery.24 25 Incorporation of serum 
sodium into the MELD score calculation (MELD-Na score) 
improves its accuracy in predicting mortality in patients 
listed for liver transplantation26 (see Box 28.4). However, 
the MELD-Na score has not been evaluated as a postop-
erative surgical risk predictor. Postoperative mortality in 
patients with cirrhosis depends on factors related to the 
patient, surgical procedure, and anesthesia management 
(Fig. 28.5).
Intraoperative Management
Most major operations in patients with significant liver 
disease involve the use of general anesthesia. Regional 
techniques can be considered in selected patients who 
have normal coagulation values.
The magnitude of the operation determines the 
extent of invasive monitoring that is required. Major 
operations during which significant blood loss is likely 
require continuous monitoring of arterial blood pressure 
(arterial line) and filling pressure (central venous line). 
Patients with significant comorbid conditions (includ-
ing cardiac diseases) undergoing procedures involving 
large anticipated blood loss may require placement of 
a pulmonary artery catheter or perioperative echocar-
diography.
Correction of severe coagulopathy before vascular line 
placement should be considered. Ultrasound guidance 
can reduce the risk of complications related to vascular 
access. Communication with the blood bank (also see 
Chapter 25) before surgery is crucial to ensure adequate 
availability of red blood cells, platelets, and clotting fac-
tors, including fresh frozen plasma and cryoprecipitate. 
For patients with esophageal varices, the risk of bleeding 
from insertion of a TEE probe may be increased.
Most patients have well-preserved cardiac function 
and no significant systemic or pulmonary hypertension. 
Induction of anesthesia can be achieved with an intra-
venous anesthetic such as propofol or etomidate, along 
with opioids and neuromuscular blocking drugs. Intrave-
nous anesthetics have minimal impact on hepatic blood 
flow as long as arterial blood pressure is adequately 
maintained. Adequate anesthetic depth is necessary 
because sympathetic stimulation has an adverse effect on 
hepatic blood flow. A rapid-sequence or modified rapid-
sequence induction of anesthesia is warranted if patients 
have significant ascites or delayed gastric emptying. 
Hypotension after induction of anesthesia occurs com-
monly because of the low systemic vascular resistance 
and relative hypovolemia. This can usually be treated 
with small doses of vasoconstrictors such as phenyle-
phrine. Except for halothane, all volatile anesthetics are 
Category
Description
Points
Encephalopathy
None
1
Stage 1–2
2
Stage 3–4
3
Ascites level
Absent
1
Slight
2
Moderate or severe
3
Serum albumin (g/dL)
>3.5
1
2.8–3.5
2
<2.8
3
Total bilirubin (mg/dL)
<2
1
2–3
2
>3
3
International 
normalized ratio (INR)
<1.7
1
1.7–2.3
2
>2.3
3
Table 28.6
Child-Turcotte-Pugh (CTP) Score
The CTP score is based on three laboratory tests and two physical 
findings in a patient with cirrhosis. The total number of points is 
used to assign the class.
CTP class A: 5–6 points
CTP class B: 7–9 points
CTP class C: 10–15 points
From Pugh RN, Murray-Lyon IM, Dawson JL, et al. Transection of the 
oesophagus for bleeding oesophageal varices. Br J Surg. 1973;
60(8):646–649.
Box 28.4 MELD Score and MELD-Na Formulas 
for Liver Disease
MELD score = (0.957 × loge [serum creatinine (mg/dL)] +
0.378 × loge [total serum bilirubin (mg/dL)] + 1.120 × loge
[INR]) × 10
–Minimum for all values is 1.
–Maximum value for creatinine is 4.
MELD-Na Score Formula
MELD-Na = MELD + 1.32 × (137 −Na) −[0.033 × MELD ×
(137 −Na)]
–Sodium values less than 125 mmol/L are set to 125, and 
values greater than 137 mmol/L are set to 137.
MELD, Model for End-Stage Liver Disease.
IV
Chapter 28 Renal, Liver, and Biliary Tract Disease
511
suitable for patients with severe liver disease. No optimal 
anesthetic technique has been established for the main-
tenance of anesthesia.
Management of Coagulopathy
Traditionally, surgical blood loss and coagulopathy have 
been managed by administering blood products either by 
clinical judgment alone (if bleeding is rapid) or guided 
by conventional laboratory tests (e.g., PTT, INR, platelet 
count) (if bleeding is controlled) (also see Chapter 23). 
Standard laboratory testing, however, can be slow to 
yield results and does not provide information about the 
qualitative aspects of clot formation.
Advances in point-of-care coagulation technology, 
such as ROTEM and platelet function analysis, however, 
allow the clinician to rapidly diagnose and manage 
coagulopathy associated with ESLD in the perioperative 
setting. Additional information, unavailable through 
conventional laboratory tests, such as clot strength, 
platelet function, and hyperfibrinolysis, can be assessed 
rapidly at the bedside with these newer techniques.27
The use of factor concentrate therapies, such as pro-
thrombin complex concentrate and fibrinogen concen-
trate may also play a significant role in blood product 
management in patients with ESLD. Hemostatic algo-
rithms that use point-of-care coagulation testing and 
factor concentrate–based therapy are showing consider-
able promise in the management of patients with coagu-
lopathy related to liver disease.28
Postoperative Jaundice
Halothane or other volatile anesthetics are often impli-
cated as the cause of postoperative jaundice, but there are 
many other and probably more likely causes (Table 28.7). 
Fig. 28.5 Postoperative mortality in patients with cirrhosis depends on cirrhosis-related, surgery-
related, and comorbidity-related factors. Currently, there are no comprehensive models to incorporate 
all of these factors. ASA, American Society of Anesthesiologists; BMI, body mass index; CHF, congestive 
heart failure; CTP, Child-Turcotte-Pugh; MELD, Model for End-Stage Liver Disease. (From Newman KL, 
Johnson KM, Cornia PB, et al. Perioperative evaluation and management of patients with cirrhosis: Risk 
assessment, surgical outcomes, and future directions. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2020;18[11]:2398–
2414.e3, Fig. 2.)
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
512
A surgical cause of postoperative jaundice is likely if the 
operation involved the liver or biliary tract. Similarly, 
multiple blood transfusions and resorption of surgical 
hematoma can lead to jaundice in the perioperative period. 
Drugs, including antibiotics, and other metabolic or infec-
tious causes, such as sepsis, must also be considered in the 
differential diagnosis of postoperative jaundice.
DISEASES OF THE BILIARY TRACT
The biliary tract refers to a system of organs and ducts 
that produce bile. The main functions of this system 
are to drain waste products from the liver and to aid in 
digestion.
Bile Metabolism and Secretion
Bile is an aqueous secretion that originates from hepato-
cytes and is modified distally by absorptive and secretory 
transport systems in the bile duct epithelium. It func-
tions to excrete exogenous and endogenous substances, 
emulsify dietary fats to facilitate intestinal absorption, 
eliminate cholesterol, assist with immunoprotection in 
the intestine, and excrete hormones and pheromones.29
Excess bile is stored in the gallbladder, a pouched organ, 
connected to the common bile duct via the cystic duct. In 
addition to acting as a reservoir, the gallbladder actively 
adjusts the ratio of biliary components during storage. 
A variety of pathologic and physiologic conditions can 
alter bile composition, secretion, and storage leading to 
gallstone formation.30
Pathophysiology of the Biliary Tract
The prevalence of gallstones is between 10% and 15% 
of the adult population. There is a higher prevalence 
in women (particularly during pregnancy), the obese, 
and those greater than 40 years of age. Dyslipidemia, 
diabetes, rapid weight loss, and dietary factors can also 
predispose to gallstone formation.31 Gallstones typically 
present with steady right upper quadrant pain and intol-
erance to fatty foods. Presence of fever is usually indica-
tive of acute cholecystitis or cholangitis.
Biliary tract cancer is relatively rare in developed 
countries but is more common in some developing 
countries. The gallbladder is the most common organ 
involved. Gallbladder cancer is characterized by delayed 
presentation of symptoms and difficulty with treatment. 
Chronic infection, environmental exposure to chemicals, 
and dietary and genetic factors have all been linked to 
the development of gallbladder cancer.32 Treatment typi-
cally involves surgery and adjuvant therapies. Survival, 
particularly in advanced stages, can be low.
Gilbert syndrome, a benign disorder causing elevation 
in unconjugated bilirubin, is one of the most common 
causes of jaundice and may occasionally be mistaken 
for postoperative hepatobiliary dysfunction. Conversely, 
Dubin-Johnson and Rotor syndromes are congenital dis-
orders leading to elevated conjugated bilirubin levels that 
can be exacerbated by surgery.
Management of Anesthesia for 
Biliary Tract Surgery
Anesthesia for cholecystectomy or exploration of the 
common bile duct, or both, should account for the effect 
of anesthetic drugs on intraluminal pressure in the bil-
iary tract. Specifically, opioids can produce spasm of the 
choledochoduodenal sphincter, which increases common 
bile duct pressure. Such spasm may impair the passage 
of contrast medium into the duodenum and erroneously 
suggest the need for sphincteroplasty or the presence of 
common bile duct stones. However, opioids have been 
Diagnostic Feature
Prehepatic
Intrahepatic
Posthepatic
Bilirubin
Increased (unconjugated 
fraction)
Increased (conjugated 
fraction)
Increased (conjugated 
fraction)
Aminotransferase enzymes
No change
Markedly increased
Normal to slightly increased
Alkaline phosphatase
No change
No change to slightly increased
Markedly increased
Prothrombin time
No change
Prolonged
No change to prolonged
Albumin
No change
Decreased
No change to decreased
Causes
Hemolysis
Hematoma reabsorption
Bilirubin overload from 
whole blood
Viruses
Drugs
Sepsis
Arterial hypoxemia 
Congestive heart failure
Cirrhosis
Stones
Cancer
Sepsis
Table 28.7
Classification and Causes of Postoperative Liver Dysfunction
IV
Chapter 28 Renal, Liver, and Biliary Tract Disease
513
used in many instances without adverse effect, which 
emphasizes the fact that not all patients respond to opi-
oids with choledochoduodenal sphincter spasm. Treat-
ment of biliary spasm includes naloxone, glucagon, and 
nitroglycerin.
Laparoscopic Cholecystectomy
Anesthetic considerations for laparoscopic cholecys-
tectomy are similar to those for other laparoscopic 
procedures. For example, insufflation of the abdominal 
cavity (pneumoperitoneum) with carbon dioxide intro-
duced through a needle placed via a supraumbilical 
incision results in increased intraabdominal pressure 
that may interfere with ventilation of the lungs and 
venous return. During laparoscopic cholecystectomy, 
placement of the patient in the reverse Trendelenburg 
position favors movement of the abdominal con-
tents away from the operative site and may facilitate 
mechanical ventilation of the lungs. This position, 
however, may further interfere with venous return. 
Generous intravascular fluid replacement during lapa-
roscopic cholecystectomy may facilitate recovery from 
this type of surgery.33
Monitoring end-tidal carbon dioxide concentrations 
during laparoscopic abdominal surgical procedures is 
useful because of the unpredictability of systemic absorp-
tion of the carbon dioxide used to create the pneumop-
eritoneum. Intraoperative decompression of the stomach 
with a nasogastric or orogastric tube may decrease the 
risk for visceral puncture at the time of needle insertion 
and may subsequently improve laparoscopic visualiza-
tion. Administration of nitrous oxide during laparoscopic 
cholecystectomy has typically not been recommended 
because of the possibility that it could expand bowel 
gas volume, causing interference with surgical working 
conditions and the theoretical possibility that diffusion 
into the abdominal cavity could support combustion.34
Loss of hemostasis or injury to the hepatic artery or liver 
may require prompt intervention via a conventional 
laparotomy incision.
REFERENCES
1. Mooney JF, Chow CK, Hillis GS. Peri-
operative renal function and surgi-
cal outcome. Curr Opin Anesthesiol. 
2014;27:195–200.
2. Prowle JR, Forni LG, Bell M, etal. Postop-
erative acute kidney injury in adult non-
cardiac surgery: Joint consensus report 
of the Acute Disease Quality Initiative 
and PeriOperative Quality Initiative. Nat 
Rev Nephrol. 2021 Sep;17(9):605–618. 
doi:10.1038/s41581-021-00418-2 Epub 
2021 May 11. PMID: 33976395; PMCID: 
PMC8367817.
3. Joannidis M, Druml W, Forni LG, etal. 
Prevention of acute kidney injury and 
protection of renal function in the inten-
sive care unit: Update 2017. Intensive 
Care Med. 2017;43:730–749.
4. Hoste E, Clermont G, Kersten A, etal. 
RIFLE criteria for acute kidney injury 
are associated with hospital mortality in 
critically ill patients: A cohort analysis. 
Crit Care. 2006;10:R73.
5. Shlipak MG, Coresh J, Gansevoort RT. 
Cystatin C versus creatinine for kidney 
function-based risk. N Engl J Med. 
2013;369:2457–2459.
6. Mårtensson J, Martling CR, Bell M. 
Novel biomarkers of acute kidney injury 
and failure: Clinical applicability. Br J 
Anaesth. 2012;109(6):843–850.
7. Sica DA. Diuretic use in renal disease. 
Nat Rev Nephrol. 2011;8:100–109.
8. ANZICS Clinical Trials Group. Low-dose 
dopamine in patients with early renal 
dysfunction: A placebo-controlled rand-
omized trial. Lancet. 2000;356:2139–2143.
9. Friedrich JO, Adhikari N, Herridge MS, 
etal. Meta-analysis: Low dose dopamine 
increases urine output but does not 
prevent renal dysfunction or death. Ann 
Intern Med. 2005;142:510–524.
10. Gillies MA, Kakar V, Parker RJ, etal. 
Fenoldopam to prevent acute kidney 
injury after major surgery—A system-
atic review and meta-analysis. Crit Care. 
2015;19:449.
11. Jones DR, Lee HT. Perioperative renal 
protection. Best Pract Res Clin Anaes-
thesiol. 2008;22:193–208.
12. Zacharias M, Mugawar M, Herbison 
GP, etal. Interventions for protect-
ing renal function in the perioperative 
period. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2013;9:CD003590.
13. Sear JW. Kidney dysfunction in the 
postoperative period. Br J Anaesth. 
2005;95:20–32.
14. O'Malley CM, Frumento RJ, Hardy 
MA, etal. A randomized, double-
blind comparison of lactated Ring-
er's solution and 0.9% NaCl during 
renal transplantation. Anesth Analg. 
2005;100:1518–1524.
15. Weinberg L, Harris L, Bellomo R, etal. 
Effects of intraoperative and early 
postoperative normal saline or Plas-
ma-Lyte 148® on hyperkalaemia in 
deceased donor renal transplantation: 
A double-blind randomized trial. Br 
J Anaesth. 2017 Oct 1;119(4):606–
615. doi:10.1093/bja/aex163 PMID: 
29121282.
16. Kiamanesh D, Rumley J, Moitra VK. 
Monitoring and managing hepatic 
disease in anaesthesia. Br J Anaesth. 
2013;111(suppl 1):i50–i61.
17. Moller S, Henriksen JH. Cardiovas-
cular complications of cirrhosis. Gut. 
2008;57:268–278.
18. Encephalopathy Wijdicks EFHepatic. N 
Engl J Med. 2016;375:1660–1670.
19. Gines P, Cardenas A, Arroyo V, etal. 
Management of cirrhosis and ascites. N 
Engl J Med. 2004;350:1646–1654.
20. Schuppan D, Afdhal NH. Liver cirrhosis. 
Lancet. 2008;371:838–851.
21. Simonetto DA, Gines P, Kamath PS. 
Hepatorenal syndrome: Pathophysiol-
ogy, diagnosis, and management. BMJ. 
2020 Sep 14;370:m2687. doi:10.1136/
bmj.m2687 PMID: 32928750.
22. Hoetzel A, Ryan H, Schmidt R. Anes-
thetic considerations for the patient with 
liver disease. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol. 
2012;25:340–347.
23. Northup PG, Friedman LS, Kamath PS. AGA 
clinical practice update on surgical risk 
assessment and perioperative management 
in cirrhosis: Expert review. Clin Gastro-
enterol Hepatol. 2019 Mar;17(4):595–606. 
doi:10.1016/j.cgh.2018.09.043 Epub 2018 
Sep 28. PMID: 30273751.
24. Teh SH, Nagorney DM, Stevens SR, etal. 
Risk factors for mortality after surgery 
in patients with cirrhosis. Gastroen-
terology. 2007 Apr;132(4):1261–1269. 
doi:10.1053/j.gastro.2007.01.040 Epub 
2007 Jan 25. PMID: 17408652.
25. Mayo Clinic. Postoperative mortality risk 
in patients with cirrhosis. https://www.
mayoclinic.org/medical-professionals/
transplant-medicine/calculators/post-
operative-mortality-risk-in-patients-
with-cirrhosis/itt-20434721. Accessed 
November 25, 2021.
26. Biggins SW, Kim RW, Terrault NA, etal. 
Evidence-based incorporation of serum 
sodium concentration Into MELD. Gas-
troenterology. 2006;130(6):1652–1660.
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
514
27. Mallett SV. Clinical utility of viscoelas-
tic tests of coagulation (TEG/ROTEM) in 
patients with liver disease and during 
liver transplantation. Semin Thromb 
Hemost. 2015;41(5):527–537.
28. Theusinger OM, Stein P, Levy JH. Point 
of care and factor concentrate-based 
coagulation algorithms. Transfus Med 
Hemother. 2015;42(2):115–121.
29. Boyer JL. Bile formation and secre-
tion. Compr Physiol. 2013;3(3):1035–
1078.
30. Dosch RA, Imagawa DK, Jutric Z. 
Bile metabolism and lithogenesis: 
An update. Surg Clin North Am. 
2019;99(2):215–229 2019.
31. Stinton LM, Shaffer EA. Epidemiology 
of gallbladder disease: Cholelithiasis and 
cancer. Gut Liver. 2012;6(2):172–187.
32. Sharma A, Sharma KL, Gupta A, etal. 
Gallbladder 
cancer 
epidemiology, 
pathogenesis and molecular genetics: 
Recent Update. World J Gastroenterol. 
2017;23(22):3978–3998.
33. Gerges FJ, Kanazi GE, Jabbour-Khoury 
SI. Anesthesia for laparoscopy: A 
review. J Clin Anesth. 2006;18:67–78.
34. Diemunsch PA, Torp KD, Van Dorsse-
laer T, Mutter D. Nitrous oxide fraction 
in the carbon dioxide pneumoperito-
neum during laparoscopy under gen-
eral inhaled anesthesia in pigs. Anesth 
Analg. 2000;90:k951–k953.
515
Chapter
NUTRITIONAL DISORDERS
Obesity
Obesity is a condition characterized by excessive accu-
mulation and storage of adipose tissue. Obesity is most 
commonly quantified by body mass index (BMI), the ratio 
of a person's weight (in kilograms) to the square of their 
height (in meters). The Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention and the World Health Organization provide 
definitions of obesity (Table 29.1).1 2 Measuring the degree 
of obesity is of clinical relevance, because with increas-
ing severity, there are adverse metabolic, biomechanical, 
and psychosocial health consequences. Although BMI is a 
simple and reproducible measure of obesity and its related 
metabolic risk, it does not account for sex- or ethnic-
related differences, muscle mass, adipose tissue distribu-
tion, or frame size. Additional methods to quantitatively 
assess obesity include abdominal circumference, body fat 
percentage, and waist-to-hip ratio.
Obesity is a complex disease with its morbidity affect-
ing every organ system in the body (Table 29.2). Associ-
ated conditions that are most likely to impact anesthesia 
care include pulmonary (obstructive sleep apnea, obesity 
hypoventilation syndrome, restrictive pulmonary physi-
ology with impaired ventilation-perfusion matching, and 
reduced functional residual capacity with related rapid 
desaturation during apnea); cardiovascular (hyperten-
sion with related structural heart disease, pulmonary 
hypertension with cor pulmonale); and endocrine (insulin 
resistance and diabetes mellitus) disorders.3
Obesity is independently associated with various 
adverse outcomes in the perioperative setting, includ-
ing greater hospital length of stay, greater estimated 
blood loss, longer operative times, increased surgical site 
infections, increased risk of renal failure, and prolonged 
assisted ventilation.4 As a BMI calculation alone may 
not accurately predict metabolic health and comorbid 
NUTRITIONAL DISORDERS
Obesity
Malnutrition
GASTROINTESTINAL DISORDERS
Inflammatory Bowel Disease
Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease
ENDOCRINE DISORDERS
Diabetes Mellitus
Thyroid Disease
Hypothyroidism
Hyperthyroidism and Thyroid Storm
Parathyroid Disease
Adrenal Cortex Dysfunction
Pheochromocytoma and Paraganglioma
Pituitary Gland Dysfunction
Neuroendocrine Tumors
NUTRITIONAL, 
GASTROINTESTINAL, AND 
ENDOCRINE DISEASE
Sophia P. Poorsattar, Solmaz Poorsattar Manuel
29
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
516
high risk or symptomatic.7 Careful consideration should 
be made regarding the use of sedative premedication to 
achieve anxiolysis, as patients with obesity may be more 
sensitive to the respiratory depressant effects. If used, 
these should be given in incremental doses and carefully 
titrated to effect.
Depending on the habitus of the patient, several 
logistical challenges may be encountered related to 
monitoring, procedures, and positioning. The amount and 
conditions because of its previously mentioned limita-
tions, a complete systems-based assessment is essential 
for determining a patient's perioperative risk (also see 
Chapter 13).
The combination of the metabolic risk factors associ-
ated with obesity is called metabolic syndrome. Metabolic 
syndrome is an important risk factor for the subsequent 
development of type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) and/or 
cardiovascular disease, and its diagnosis is associated with 
a higher risk of morbidity after surgery.5 There are six 
components to metabolic syndrome: abdominal obesity, 
atherogenic dyslipidemia, hypertension, insulin resistance, 
proinflammatory state, and prothrombotic state. Because 
the metabolic traits cooccur, a diagnosis of metabolic 
syndrome can be made in the presence of just three of 
the following five criteria: abdominal obesity, increased 
serum triglycerides, decreased high-density lipoproteins, 
hypertension, and increased fasting blood glucose levels.4
The development and maintenance of obesity are mul-
tifactorial and involve genetic, neuroendocrine, environ-
mental, and psychosocial factors. The major therapeutic 
goals in these patients are to focus on weight reduction 
and increased physical activity and to pharmacologically 
treat the previously mentioned metabolic disturbances if 
they persist despite lifestyle modification.
Perioperative Considerations
Changes in anatomy and physiology related to obesity 
affect anesthetic planning and management. Preoperative 
assessment should focus on determining the presence and 
status of comorbid conditions. This assessment will allow 
for measures to be taken to minimize the risk of perio-
perative complications, including determining if certain 
additional testing is required, if the patient is scheduled 
at an appropriate surgical venue, and if adequate postop-
erative resources are available if needed.6
Standard preoperative fasting guidelines should be 
observed and the decision to use aspiration prophylaxis 
made on an individual basis for those patients who are 
Organ System
Associated Conditions
Central nervous 
system
Cognitive decline, dementia
Depression
Respiratory 
system
Obstructive sleep apnea
Obesity hypoventilation syndrome
Restrictive lung disease
Cardiovascular 
system
Arrhythmias
Systemic hypertension
Coronary arterial disease
Congestive heart failure
Pulmonary hypertension
Cor pulmonale
Cerebrovascular disease
Peripheral vascular disease
Venous thromboembolism
Hypercholesterolemia
Hypertriglyceridemia
Sudden cardiac death
Endocrine 
system
Metabolic syndrome
Diabetes mellitus
Cushing syndrome
Hypothyroidism
Infertility
Gastrointestinal 
system
Hiatal hernia
Gastroesophageal reflux disease
Nonalcoholic steatohepatitis
Fatty infiltration of the liver
Cholelithiasis
Musculoskeletal 
system
Degenerative joint disease
Osteoarthritis
Joint pain
Inguinal hernia
Malignancy
Breast
Gastric
Pancreatic
Liver, gallbladder
Kidney
Prostate
Cervical, uterine, endometrial
Colorectal
Other
Kidney failure
Hypercoagulable syndromes
Shorter life expectancy
BMI
Preferred BMI
18.5–24.9 kg/m²
Overweight
25.0–29.9 kg/m²
Class I obesity
30.0–34.9 kg/m²
Class II obesity
35.0–39.9 kg/m²
Class III obesity
≥40.0 kg/m²
Table 29.1
CDC/WHO Obesity Definitions in Adults Over 
20 Years Old
Data from Refs. 1 and 2
BMI, Body mass index; CDC, Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention; WHO, World Health Organization.
Table 29.2
Medical Conditions Associated With Obesity3,4
IV
Chapter 29 Nutritional, Gastrointestinal, and Endocrine Disease
517
noninvasive ventilatory support in the recovery room 
may be required to ensure adequate ventilation and gas 
exchange.11
Bariatric Surgery
Adult bariatric surgery is a therapeutic option in patients 
with severe obesity who have failed conservative treat-
ments, such as lifestyle modifications and medical man-
agement. Bariatric surgery results in significant sustained 
weight loss and a reduction in obesity-related comorbidi-
ties and cardiovascular events. The strategic approaches 
for surgically assisted weight loss fall into three catego-
ries: gastric restriction, intestinal malabsorption, or a 
combination of both.
Malabsorptive procedures include jejunoileal bypass 
or biliopancreatic diversion. These operations have the 
advantage of promoting significant weight loss by exten-
sively bypassing the small intestine. Although these were 
the most commonly performed approaches when bariatric 
surgery was first created, they are now infrequently per-
formed because of their related nutritional and metabolic 
complications.12
Restrictive procedures include gastric banding and 
sleeve gastrectomy. By creating a small gastric pouch 
and outlet, these procedures promote weight loss through 
several mechanisms, including appetite suppression and 
early satiety, reduced secretion of gastric hormones (i.e., 
ghrelin), and possibly vagal nerve compression. Whereas 
sleeve gastrectomies involve resection of the greater cur-
vature of the stomach, banding procedures use adjustable 
or fixed bands to wrap the top portion of the stomach 
to the desired size. Gastric banding has fewer complica-
tions and lower morbidity and mortality, as it requires no 
cutting into gastrointestinal structures. Restrictive-based 
procedures take a longer time to achieve weight loss. 
However, the normal absorptive physiology of the small 
intestine is left intact, and nutritional deficiencies rarely 
occur.12
The most common combined bariatric procedure is the 
Roux-en-Y gastric bypass. This procedure involves creat-
ing a small gastric pouch, which is then connected to the 
jejunum. It is the most complex of the approaches and 
requires the longest operative time and hospital length of 
stay. Because of its combined gastric restriction and mal-
absorption approaches, it promotes the greatest weight 
loss and improvement in obesity-related comorbidi-
ties; however, these patients require lifelong nutritional 
surveillance and supplementation. As such, it is often 
reserved for patients with clinically severe obesity.
Bariatric surgeries are often performed laparoscopi-
cally because of the benefits of decreased pain, decreased 
complication rates, shorter recovery times, and outcome 
efficacy comparable to that of their open counterparts. 
In addition to the weight loss and high-resolution rate 
of comorbid conditions such as hypertension and diabe-
tes, patients report improvement in their quality of life. 
distribution of subcutaneous fat in the extremities may 
make obtaining peripheral intravenous access difficult 
and necessitate central venous access depending on the 
procedure. Similarly, the increased width or conical shape 
of the upper arms may make the use of a noninvasive 
blood pressure cuff inaccurate or unreliable and neces-
sitate alternative cuff location (forearm or lower leg) or 
invasive arterial line access for blood pressure monitor-
ing.8 As operative room tables are often narrow, position-
ing may be a challenge (also see Chapter 19). Additional 
reinforcement or pressure point padding may be required 
to ensure adequate security and support, especially in 
the event that extreme angles of tilt are required for the 
procedure.
Before induction of anesthesia, an airway assess-
ment should be made to determine risk factors for dif-
ficult mask ventilation or laryngeal intubation (also see 
Chapter 16). Securing an airway in patients with obesity 
may be challenging because of the redundancy of oro-
pharyngeal tissue, increased neck circumference, reduced 
mobility of the cervical spine, or increased anterior-pos-
terior chest dimension. Induction of anesthesia may also 
be complicated by rapid desaturation with apnea. A rapid 
decrease in blood oxygen saturation is multifactorial 
with causes including increased metabolic requirements 
(increased oxygen consumption and carbon dioxide 
production) and reduced functional residual capacity.4,9
Ensuring adequate preoxygenation or providing apneic 
oxygenation allows for increased time to desaturation. 
Optimizing positioning by placing the patient in reverse 
Trendelenburg (back up or ramped position) will increase 
functional residual capacity by reducing atelectasis in 
dependent areas of the lung, improve ventilation-perfu-
sion matching, and caudally displace chest tissue to allow 
for easier mask ventilation and view on laryngoscopy.10
No anesthetic type has proven superior in patients with 
obesity. However, in patients with elevated risk for res-
piratory or airway-related problems regional anesthesia 
should be considered if feasible. When general anesthesia 
is used, ventilatory management may be challenging 
and require additional pressure support or positive end-
expiratory pressure to ensure adequate ventilation and 
avoid alveolar collapse. Choice of medications depends 
on patient-specific factors and comorbidities with con-
sideration of altered drug metabolism and elimination 
with increased adipose tissue. As mentioned previously, 
anesthetic medications should be administered in incre-
mental doses and titrated to effect to avoid oversedation 
or hypoventilation on emergence or postextubation. 
Ensuring adequate extubation criteria is important, as 
sedation or interim airway swelling and edema from the 
surgery or positioning may further complicate an already 
challenging intubation. As patients with obesity are at 
increased risk for postoperative pulmonary complica-
tions, including hypoxemia or hypercarbia from atelec-
tasis, hypoventilation, or airway obstruction, additional 
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
518
Perioperative Considerations
Malnutrition is associated with several complications 
in the perioperative period, including increased rates of 
infection, poor wound healing and anastomotic integ-
rity, bacterial overgrowth in the gastrointestinal tract, 
increased time spent in the intensive care unit and hos-
pital length of stay, and increased need for mechanical 
ventilation. It is also associated with increased mortality 
after organ transplant, major intraabdominal, or car-
diothoracic surgeries. As such, it is important to iden-
tify patients who are malnourished and, when possible, 
intervene to improve their nutritional state in an effort to 
reduce complications and improve outcomes.
Overall, perioperative mortality from bariatric surgeries 
ranges from 0.1% to 2.0%, with gastric banding hav-
ing the lowest mortality and Roux-en-Y gastric bypass 
having the highest. Risk factors for mortality include 
male sex, older age, BMI ≥50.0 kg/m², diabetes mellitus, 
obstructive sleep apnea, and performance at a low-
volume bariatric surgical center.13
Malnutrition
Malnourishment is an imbalance between energy expend-
iture and energy intake. This term may refer to excessive 
intake, such as occurs in individuals with obesity, or 
deficient intake, such as occurs in individuals with under-
nutrition.14 For the purpose of this section, malnutrition 
will be used synonymously with undernutrition. In under-
nutrition, the supply of nutrients and energy to the body 
does not meet the demand necessary for cellular growth, 
maintenance, and function. Undernutrition can be divided 
into four subforms: wasting (low weight for height), 
shunting (low height for age), underweight (low weight 
for age), and micronutrient deficient. Malnourishment 
may occur as a result of a variety of pathologic and envi-
ronmental causes and presents in a variety of forms. To 
account for this variation, the Global Leadership Initiative 
on Malnutrition developed a consensus on the diagnostic 
criteria for malnutrition that requires the combination of 
at least one phenotype and one etiologic criteria: non-
volitional weight loss, low BMI, or reduced muscle mass 
(phenotype criteria) or reduced food intake or absorption, 
or underlying inflammation resulting from acute disease/
injury or chronic disease (etiologic criteria).15
Malnutrition is a complex metabolic disorder, involv-
ing inflammatory and neurohumoral mediators, which, 
when severe, affect every organ system in the body 
(Table29.3).
Treatment is aimed at balancing nutritional intake 
with energy needs, taking into consideration the level 
of activity or stress of the patient. When it is evident 
that patients will not be able to meet their nutritional 
needs, nutritional supplementation may be indicated, 
either through enteral (oral or tube) feeding or parenteral 
(intravenous) feeding. When possible, enteral support 
is preferred over parenteral support because of its rela-
tive simplicity, safety, lower cost, and decreased rates of 
complications. Total parenteral nutrition (TPN) is required 
when the gastrointestinal tract is not functional. When 
used for brief periods, peripheral parenteral nutrition may 
be provided; however, when long-term or high caloric 
support is indicated, central venous access is required to 
allow for the infusion of hypertonic solutions at a lower 
volume. Numerous complications are associated with 
TPN, including metabolic and electrolyte derangements, 
renal dysfunction, liver dysfunction, altered coagulation, 
bacterial translocation from the gastrointestinal tract, 
and infection or sepsis.
Organ System
Features
Central nervous 
system
Psychological disturbance, depression
Depressed cognitive function
Fatigue and generalized weakness
Cardiovascular 
system
Reduction in cardiac output
Increased vagal tone
Conduction abnormalities, arrhythmias
Peripheral vasoconstriction
Respiratory 
system
Reduced respiratory muscle strength and 
function
Decreased respiratory compliance
Spontaneous pneumothorax
Gastrointestinal 
system
Gut atrophy, bacterial translocation, and 
impaired immune function
Delayed gastric emptying, gastric 
dilatation
Musculoskeletal 
system
Reduced muscle mass and strength, 
myopathy
Reduced bone mass, secondary fractures
Impaired wound healing
Impaired thermoregulation
Renal system
Reduced glomerular filtration rate
Total body water proportionally higher
Proteinuria, uremia
Electrolyte and 
metabolic
Hypokalemia
Hypocalcemia
Hypoglycemia
Metabolic acidosis
Increased cortisol
Pharmacologic
Delayed or reduced absorption of drugs
Decreased protein binding from 
hypoalbuminemia
Prolonged treatment with 
nondepolarizing muscle relaxants
Lower dosing thresholds for toxicity
Table 29.3
Body Systems Affected by Malnutrition
Modified from Edwards S. Anaesthetising the malnourished patient. 
Update Anaesth. 2016;31:31–37.
IV
Chapter 29 Nutritional, Gastrointestinal, and Endocrine Disease
519
GASTROINTESTINAL DISORDERS
Inflammatory Bowel Disease
Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is a group of inflam-
matory disorders of the small intestine and colon. The 
two principal types are ulcerative colitis (UC) and Crohn 
disease (CD). UC primarily affects the colon and rec-
tum and results in relapsing and remitting episodes of 
mucosal inflammation. CD may involve any portion of 
the gastrointestinal tract from the mouth to the perianal 
area and results in transmural inflammation, which may 
be complicated by fibrosis, stricture, fistula, or abscess 
formation. Although the two disorders have some dis-
tinct pathologic and clinical characteristics, there is 
substantial overlap, and differentiation of the two may 
be difficult.
The pathophysiology of IBD is complex and arises 
from interaction of both genetic and environmental fac-
tors, ultimately triggering an immunologic response and 
inflammation in the intestine. Known environmental 
risk factors include smoking, sedentary lifestyle, sleep 
deprivation, stress, appendectomy, antibiotics, oral con-
traceptives, and nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs 
(NSAIDs).17 Diagnosis is often made based on the location 
and nature of the intestinal and extraintestinal manifes-
tations coupled with findings on imaging and endoscopy. 
Fecal calprotectin may also suggest the diagnosis, but it 
is not specific for IBD.
Medical therapy for both types is aimed at alleviat-
ing the severity of symptoms and is not curative. In 
addition to medical therapy, up to 70% of patients may 
require surgical intervention. Although surgery cannot 
definitively cure CD, most cases of UC can be cured by 
proctocolectomy, although the patient's extraintestinal 
symptoms may persist.18 In patients with advanced IBD 
of either type surgery may be indicated for various rea-
sons, including disease complications (fistula, stricture, 
abscess, toxic megacolon, perforation), surgical compli-
cations (adhesions, bowel obstruction), intractable symp-
toms, or cancer prevention.
Perioperative Considerations
As the proportion of older patients with IBD is increas-
ing, there is an increase in the complexity of comorbid 
conditions that require care in the perioperative set-
ting. Increased perioperative morbidity of patients with 
IBD is seen in those who are malnourished, aged 60 
to 80years, on long-term immunosuppressive therapy, 
requiring emergent operation, and treated in low-volume 
centers. Type of surgical intervention is also related to 
perioperative morbidity, with increased risk in patients 
undergoing a total proctocolectomy with J pouch rather 
than ileostomy, a repair for fistulizing disease rather than 
strictureplasty or stoma revision, and an open rather than 
laparoscopic approach.19
Assessing nutritional status preoperatively is complex; 
however, the combined use of a comprehensive history 
and physical examination and nutritional risk screening 
tool is a helpful approach. Certain laboratory testing may 
also help to identify malnourishment, including reduced 
serum protein markers, such as albumin, prealbumin, 
or transferrin. Of these, prealbumin may allow for the 
earliest detection of changes in nutritional status, given 
that its half-life is only 2 days; however, it should be 
measured in conjunction with C-reactive protein levels, 
as inflammation can raise the level of prealbumin and 
affect result interpretation. Reduced serum levels of cho-
lesterol, zinc, iron, vitamin B12, or folic acid may also 
indicate malnourishment. In the postoperative setting the 
adequacy of nutritional support may be assessed by the 
patient's overall clinical course and wound healing. Daily 
clinical assessment, trend in lean body mass, calorimetry, 
and laboratory results may also inform the patient's 
nutritional status.
Refeeding syndrome describes the metabolic distur-
bance that occurs after rapid nutritional repletion in a 
severely malnourished patient. Hypophosphatemia is the 
hallmark disturbance of the syndrome and occurs for 
several reasons. Initial glucose load from feeding leads 
to increased insulin levels, which in turn result in a 
rapid movement of extracellular phosphate, potassium, 
and magnesium into the intracellular compartment. 
Insulin also leads to the production of molecules that 
require phosphate, such as adenosine triphosphate and 
2,3-diphosphoglycerate, which leads to further phosphate 
depletion. Hypophosphatemia in turn leads to tissue 
hypoxia, myocardial dysfunction, respiratory failure, 
hemolysis, rhabdomyolysis, and seizures. Refeeding syn-
drome can be avoided by having a cautious and carefully 
titrated approach to nutritional repletion.16
For severely malnourished patients, TPN or enteral 
feeding should be administered for 7 to 10 days before an 
electric surgery to improve outcomes. Nutritional replace-
ment should be continued as long as possible before 
a surgical procedure. With TPN, consideration should 
be made regarding the presence of insulin in the infu-
sion, as regular monitoring of the patient's glucose and 
electrolytes may be required. With enteral replacement, 
consideration should be made regarding thepatient's 
risk of aspiration of gastric contents with the benefit of 
continued nutritional replacement to keep the patient at 
goal level.16
Intraoperative goals for anesthetic management rely 
on considering the various metabolic, physiologic, 
and pharmacologic changes in malnourished patients. 
General principles for management include preventing 
hypoglycemia, preventing hypothermia, treating and 
preventing dehydration, correcting electrolytes, identi-
fying and treating infections, correcting micronutrient 
deficiencies, careful positioning and padding, and emo-
tional support.
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
520
heartburn (burning retrosternal sensation) and regurgita-
tion (perception of flow of refluxed gastric contents into 
the hypopharynx or mouth). The prevalence of heartburn 
and/or regurgitation symptoms is between 10% and 30% 
worldwide.20 Other nonspecific manifestations of GERD 
include dysphagia, globus sensation, chest pain, laryn-
gitis, hoarseness, cough, dental erosions, adult-onset 
asthma, and aspiration.
Several mechanisms contribute to the development 
of GERD, including the imbalance of symptom-eliciting 
factors and defensive factors. Symptom-eliciting factors 
include reflux events, acidity of refluxed contents, and 
esophageal hypersensitivity. Defensive factors include 
esophageal acid clearance and mucosal integrity.21 Symp-
tom severity is reflective of this imbalance in combina-
tion with impaired esophageal mobility, LES function, 
and/or gastric motility. Normally, the LES acts as an 
antireflux barrier at the level of the gastroesophageal 
junction (GEJ). The LES contributes to reflux prevention 
by maintaining a pressure higher than intraabdominal 
(or intragastric) pressure. Reflux occurs if the LES barrier 
becomes incompetent, such as with transient LES relaxa-
tions (i.e., belching), a hypotensive LES (reduced LES 
muscle tone and LES pressure), or an anatomic disruption 
of the LES. In patients with normal LES anatomy and 
function reflux can still occur if intraabdominal pressure 
exceeds LES pressure.
Several conditions are associated with the devel-
opment of GERD, including hiatal hernia, obesity, 
pregnancy, obstructive sleep apnea, gastric hypersecre-
tion, gastric outlet obstruction, gastric neuropathy, and 
increased intraabdominal pressure (Table 29.4).
Diagnosis is made based on a combination of symp-
tom presentation, objective testing (endoscopy, ambu-
latory reflux monitoring), and response to empiric 
antisecretory therapy.22 Conservative management with 
lifestyle modification and medications are the mainstay 
of treatment for GERD. Lifestyle interventions include 
Before elective surgery, medical optimization should 
be performed to address possible nutritional deficiencies 
and associated coagulopathy, hypovolemia, and electro-
lyte or acid–base disturbance in order to reduce the asso-
ciated morbidity. Because of the elevated risk for venous 
thromboembolic events in patients with IBD, periopera-
tive pharmacologic prophylaxis is recommended. Periop-
erative medical management in patients with IBD varies 
depending on the type of IBD, the clinical circumstance 
of the patient, and the urgency of the surgery. The 
classes of medications used for patients with IBD include 
antidiarrheals, antiinflammatories, immunosuppressants, 
antibiotics, and other investigational drugs. Special 
consideration should be taken requiring the discontinua-
tion and resumption of each type of immunosuppressive 
medication, as failure to hold or continue them may 
increase the risk of perioperative complications. Gluco-
corticoids should continue throughout the perioperative 
period with consideration for supplemental stress dosing 
before surgery.19
Although no specific type of anesthetic is preferred for 
patients with IBD, consideration should be taken regard-
ing the interaction of common IBD drugs with anesthetic 
medications. Cyclosporine increases minimum alveolar 
concentration of volatile anesthetics. Azathioprine may 
partially antagonize the effect of nondepolarizing neuro-
muscular blocking agents, and cyclosporine and inflixi-
mab may enhance their potency.19
Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease
Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is a condition 
defined by the symptoms and complications associ-
ated with the reflux of gastric contents through the 
lower esophageal sphincter (LES) into the esophagus. 
Some degree of reflux is physiologic, but for patients 
with GERD, reflux is pathologic and leads to symptoms 
or mucosal injury. The classic symptoms of GERD are 
Condition
Mechanism
Comments
Hiatal hernia
Esophageal dysmotility, impaired emptying, 
cephalad displacement of LES into thoracic cavity, 
supradiaphragmatic postprandial acid pocket
Multifactorial
Obesity and weight gain
Increased intraabdominal pressure, LES dysfunction
Also increased incidence of hiatal hernia
Pregnancy
Hormonal factors (estrogen and progesterone-mediated 
reduction in LES tone), mechanical factors (gravid uterus 
causing increased intraabdominal pressure, delayed 
gastric emptying and decreased bowel transit)
Also see Chapter 33
Food and medications
LES dysfunction
Large meals, fatty foods, spicy foods, 
alcohol; medications may include aspirin/
NSAIDs, anticholinergics, antidepressants
Table 29.4
Conditions Associated With GERD
LES, Lower esophageal sphincter; NSAID, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug.
IV
Chapter 29 Nutritional, Gastrointestinal, and Endocrine Disease
521
is during this interval that the complete loss of airway 
reflexes occur and pulmonary aspiration risk is the high-
est. If a difficult intubation is anticipated on preoperative 
airway evaluation, an awake intubation may be indicated 
over an RSII. With RSII, achieving adequate depth of 
anesthesia (with or without neuromuscular blockade) is 
essential to avoid coughing, straining, or active vomiting 
with airway manipulation. Positive-pressure ventilation 
is avoided between induction and intubation to decrease 
the risk of gastric insufflation. Thorough preoxygenation 
and apneic oxygenation are necessary to increase the 
time until hypoxemia develops with apnea. Positioning 
with the head of the bed elevated places the larynx above 
the LES and aids in reducing the risk of passive regurgi-
tation and aspiration. Although the application of cricoid 
pressure during RSII is often used to reduce the incidence 
of aspiration of gastric contents, its use is controversial. 
Multiple studies of cricoid pressure during RSII provide 
inconclusive results regarding technique and efficacy, 
and some studies suggest potential harm with cricoid 
pressure.23–25 Patients at risk for aspiration on induc-
tion and intubation are also at risk on emergence and 
extubation. Precautions to minimize aspiration during 
emergence include decompressing the stomach with an 
orogastric tube, elevating the head of the bed, and ensur-
ing intact airway reflexes before extubation.
Surgical management of GERD is reserved for patients 
unable to tolerate medical therapy, for those with per-
sistent symptoms necessitating long-term therapy, or 
for those who develop complications despite optimal 
medical therapy. Of the various endoscopic and surgical 
weight loss, head of bed elevation, and smoking cessa-
tion. Further, avoidance of late-night meals or foods that 
can potentially aggravate symptoms by lowering LES 
tone is recommended.
Drug therapies are aimed at relieving symptoms 
through several mechanisms (Table 29.5).22
Perioperative Considerations
Patients with GERD are at greater risk for aspiration. 
As such, anesthetic planning and management aim to 
minimize the chance for pulmonary aspiration of gastric 
contents and its associated morbidity. Depending on the 
volume, acidity, and composition of the gastric contents, 
aspiration may lead to airway obstruction, chemical 
injury and inflammation, pneumonia, acute respiratory 
distress syndrome, and/or respiratory failure. Risk factors 
for aspiration pneumonitis include gastric fluid pH less 
than 2.5, volume of aspirate more than 0.4 mL/kg, aspi-
rate containing particulate matter, and pregnancy greater 
than 18 weeks' gestation. Premedication with antacids 
or histamine2-receptor antagonists may help to reduce 
the extent of injury if aspiration occurs, and prokinetic 
agents may help to reduce the aspirate volume. Proton 
pump inhibitors (PPIs) should be continued leading up 
to surgery.
Rapid-sequence induction and intubation (RSII) is 
often the induction technique of choice in patients at 
risk of aspiration pneumonitis. The goal of RSII is to 
complete the sequence of events from awake with intact 
airway reflexes to endotracheal intubation with the cuff 
inflated within the shortest time interval allowable. It 
Medication
Mechanism
Comments
Antacids
Neutralize gastric fluid acidity by providing 
base to react with hydrogen ions
Antacids can be particulate (e.g., TUMS) or 
nonparticulate (e.g., Bicitra).
Mucoprotective drugs (e.g., 
sucralfate)
Provide a mucosal barrier from stomach 
acids
Prokinetic agents (e.g., 
metoclopramide)
Promote esophageal and gastric motility 
through the combined effect of increased 
muscarinic activity and dopamine and 
serotonin receptor antagonism
Metoclopramide may cause extrapyramidal side 
effects, such as tardive dyskinesia.
Histamine2-receptor 
antagonists (e.g., 
famotidine)
Reduce the secretion of gastric acid
Histamine2-receptor antagonists may cause 
adverse central nervous system effects, such as 
confusion, agitation, and psychosis, especially in 
the elderly.
Proton pump inhibitors 
(PPIs; e.g., pantoprazole)
Reduce the secretion of gastric acid
PPIs provide faster and more complete symptom 
relief and wound healing. Certain PPIs have 
drug–drug interactions, including inhibiting the 
metabolism and elimination of warfarin, digoxin, 
phenytoin, and benzodiazepines.
Table 29.5
Drug Therapies for GERD
From Katz PO, Gerson LB, Vela MF. Guidelines for the diagnosis and management of gastroesophageal reflux disease. Am J Gastroenterol. 
2013;108(3):308–329.
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
522
Several different techniques may confirm a diagnosis 
of diabetes (Box 29.1). Classic symptoms of hyperglyce-
mia include polyuria, polydipsia, weight loss, and blurred 
vision. As a surrogate for end-organ complications, 
each diagnostic criterion reflects the glycemic threshold 
observed for the risk of developing retinopathy.
Monitoring of blood glucose control is best performed 
by measuring HbA1C levels. During hyperglycemia, glu-
cose can permanently combine with hemoglobin in red 
blood cells and form HbA1C. Because red blood cells 
have a 120-day life span, HbA1C levels reflect the aver-
age blood glucose levels over a 2- to 3-month period 
and provide an indication of how well diabetes has been 
controlled during this time. Although HbA1C level is a 
reliable marker of chronic glycemia, random or fasting 
serum blood glucose levels provide information regard-
ing acute control.
The primary goal of treatment for all forms of diabetes 
is glucose control, with a reasonable target for an HbA1C
<7%. Although treatment starts with education regarding 
dietary and lifestyle interventions, most patients require 
pharmacologic therapy. Various classes of medications 
aim to address hyperglycemia via increasing insulin 
availability (endogenously or exogenously), improving 
sensitivity to insulin, delaying the delivery and absorp-
tion of carbohydrates from the gastrointestinal tract, 
increasing urinary glucose excretion, or a combination 
of these approaches.
Because of its efficacy and favorable risk profile, 
metformin is the preferred initial noninsulin glucose-
lowering agent for T2DM. Metformin is a biguanide 
that decreases hepatic glucose output and enhances 
tissue sensitivity to insulin. If this fails to adequately 
control glucose, additional therapeutics may be indi-
cated. A newer class of oral medications for T2DM are 
the sodium-glucose cotransporter-2 (SGLT2) inhibitors, 
also called “gliflozins,” which promote urinary glucose 
excretion as the means to reduce blood glucose levels.28
In 2015 the US. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) 
issued a safety warning that these drugs may lead to 
diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) with glucose levels lower 
interventions available, the most common antireflux 
operation is the Nissen fundoplication. The operation is 
most often performed laparoscopically and consists of 
reducing the herniated stomach, repairing the diaphrag-
matic defect, and performing a gastric wrap around the 
stomach and LES to prevent the regurgitation of gastric 
contents. Although the Nissen fundoplication is the most 
effective and durable antireflux procedure, it also has the 
greatest potential for postoperative dysphagia, difficulty 
with vomiting, and gas bloating.
ENDOCRINE DISORDERS
Diabetes Mellitus
In the United States diabetes mellitus is the seventh lead-
ing cause of death among adults and has a prevalence of 
approximately 13%.26 Diabetes is a disorder of impaired 
glucose, fat, and protein metabolism that results from 
an inadequate supply of insulin, an inadequate tis-
sue response to insulin, or a combination of both. The 
hallmark of the disease is increased circulating levels of 
serum glucose that, when left untreated, lead to diffuse 
microvascular and macrovascular lesions progressing to 
end-organ dysfunction. Notably, diabetes is the leading 
cause of renal failure requiring dialysis in young and 
middle-aged adults and the leading cause of blindness 
among adults aged 20 to 74 years. Patients with diabe-
tes have a twofold increase in risk of cardiac death or 
ischemic stroke compared with patients without diabetes. 
Diabetes is classified into four broad categories: type 
1 diabetes mellitus (T1DM), type 2 diabetes mellitus, 
gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM), and diabetes result-
ing from other causes.27 T1DM is characterized by the 
absence of insulin production caused by autoimmune 
destruction of pancreatic β-cells, whereas T2DM involves 
a progressive loss of insulin secretion in combination 
with insulin resistance. GDM is glucose intolerance with 
onset first recognized during pregnancy. Diabetes result-
ing from other causes includes various disease states 
that either damage the pancreas or lead to imbalances in 
hormones affecting the action of insulin.
The most prevalent forms of diabetes are T1DM and 
T2DM, with the former accounting for 5% to 10% of 
cases and the latter for the remaining 90% to 95% of 
cases.27 Historical paradigms characterized T1DM as rap-
idly progressive with juvenile onset and dependent on 
insulin. In contrast, T2DM was characterized by a more 
insidious presentation with adult onset and noninsulin 
dependent. In reality, both T1DM and T2DM are heter-
ogenous diseases with considerable variability in clinical 
presentation and disease progression. Many individuals 
with diabetes do not easily fit into a single class; there-
fore the label is less important than understanding the 
underlying pathogenesis of the hyperglycemia in order 
to effectively guide treatment.
Box 29.1
Diagnostic Criteria for Diabetes Mellitus
1. Glycated hemoglobin (HbA1C) ≥6.5%,
2. Fasting plasma glucose ≥126 mg/dL (7.0 mmol/L) after 
8 hours of no caloric intake
3. Two-hour plasma glucose ≥200 mg/dL (11.1 mmol/L) 
during an oral glucose tolerance test
4. A random plasma glucose ≥200 mg/dL (11.1 mmol/L) 
in a patient with classic symptoms of hyperglycemia or 
hyperglycemic crisis
Data from American Diabetes Association. 2. Classification and 
diagnosis of diabetes: Standards of medical care in diabetes—2020. 
Diabetes Care. 2020; 43(Suppl 1):S14–S31.
IV
Chapter 29 Nutritional, Gastrointestinal, and Endocrine Disease
523
severe, can result in permanent brain damage. Hypergly-
cemia can result in decreased immune function, increased 
oxidative stress, endothelial dysfunction, increased 
inflammatory factors, procoagulant state, fluid shifts, and 
electrolyte fluxes.29 This may subsequently result in poor 
wound healing, increased infections, delayed recovery, 
and further end-organ damage. Accordingly, an elevated 
HbA1C or blood glucose preoperatively predicts worse 
perioperative outcome and may warrant postponement 
of a nonemergent surgery depending on the degree of 
elevation and associated conditions.30
The general goals of perioperative glucose control 
include the avoidance of hypoglycemia, the avoidance 
of hyperglycemia, and the prevention of acute, life-
threatening consequences of both extremes, including 
ketoacidosis or nonketotic hyperosmolar syndrome. Pre-
operative diabetic medications should be adjusted to 
achieve these goals. Although most medication strategies 
than expected for DKA. This condition has been called 
“euglycemic DKA.”
In patients with absolute or relative deficiencies in 
insulin, such as all patients with T1DM and many with 
advanced T2DM, insulin therapy is indicated. Insulin 
is categorized as rapid, intermediate, or long-acting 
(Fig.29.1). With the goal of achieving a steady near-
normoglycemic state, in the outpatient setting, insulin 
therapy is administered via continuous or intermittent 
subcutaneous injection with a combination of rapid and/
or long-acting formulations tailored based on the antici-
pated glucose fluctuations of the individual patient.
Maintaining long-term near-normoglycemia is impor-
tant for preventing and slowing the progression of the 
microvascular and macrovascular multiorgan diseases 
related to chronic systemic glucotoxicity (Table 29.6). 
Only a small fraction of patients with diabetes have no 
comorbidities. The most common comorbid diseases are 
retinopathy, nephropathy, autonomic neuropathy, car-
diovascular disease, cerebrovascular disease, and obesity.
Perioperative Considerations
In the perioperative period the presence of many of the 
earlier-mentioned risk factors increases the incidence of 
adverse events. As such, before surgery, the evaluation 
and treatment of these diseases are essential in order to 
ensure optimization and subsequently avoid prevent-
able morbidity and mortality. In addition to preexisting 
end-organ disease, extremes of glucose in the immediate 
perioperative period lead to injury. Hypoglycemia, when 
Fig. 29.1 Comparison of the onset and duration of different 
insulin preparations after subcutaneous administration. (From 
Chouhan R, Goswami S, Bajpai A. Recent advancements in oral 
delivery of insulin: From challenges to solutions. In Andronescu 
E, Grumezescu A, eds. Nanostructures for Oral Medicine. Elsevier; 
2017:Figure 15.6.)
22
20
18
16
14
Hours
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
24
Rapid-acting
analog
(insulin aspart,
insulin lispro)
Short-acting
(regular/soluble)
Intermediate-acting
(isophane)
Long-acting
(lente)
Prolonged action
analog
(insulin glargine)
22
20
18
16
14
Hours
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
24
22
20
18
16
14
Hours
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
24
22
20
18
16
14
Hours
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
24
22
20
18
16
14
Hours
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
24
Table 29.6
Medical Conditions Associated With Diabetes
Organ System
Associated Conditions
Central nervous 
system
Retinopathy, vision loss
Peripheral neuropathies
Autonomic neuropathies
Cerebrovascular disease, stroke
Depression
Cognitive impairment
Disordered sleep
Respiratory system
Inadequate ventilatory response to 
hypoxemia and hypercarbia
Cardiovascular 
system
Hypertension
Hyperlipidemia
Orthostatic hypotension
Cardiovascular instability
Arrhythmias
Accelerated atherosclerosis
Congestive heart failure
Coronary arterial disease, myocardial 
infarction
Peripheral vascular disease, tissue 
ulceration
Genitourinary 
system
Impotence
Neurogenic bladder
Renal failure
Gastrointestinal 
system
Gastroparesis
Musculoskeletal 
system
Decreased joint mobility
Bone fractures
Other
Delayed wound healing
Increased susceptibility to infection
Chronic pain
Obesity
Cancer
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
524
respiratory rate, and oxygen consumption. Thyroid hor-
mones are also essential for normal growth and brain 
development.
Thyroid disorders include hypothyroidism, hyperthy-
roidism, thyroid inflammation (thyroiditis), and thyroid 
enlargement (goiter), all of which may have implications 
for anesthetic management.32
Hypothyroidism
Hypothyroidism is characterized by deficient secretion of 
thyroid hormones. The most common causes are iodine 
deficiency and autoimmune (Hashimoto thyroiditis). 
Symptoms include unexpected weight gain, fatigue, 
constipation, heavy menstrual bleeding, hair loss, cold 
intolerance, bradycardia, and depression. Severe hypo-
thyroidism can present with decreased mental status, 
hypoventilation, hypothermia, hypotension, congestive 
heart failure, hyponatremia, and hypoglycemia. Labo-
ratory testing shows elevated TSH levels or reduced T4
levels. Treatment of hypothyroidism includes thyroid 
hormone replacement. In severe presentations a stress 
dose steroid is often also given to mitigate complications 
from coexisting adrenal insufficiency.32
Perioperative Considerations
Patients should be clinically stable and medically euthy-
roid before elective surgeries. Prescribed medical therapy 
should be continued on the day of surgery. Coexisting 
conditions to screen for include adrenal insufficiency, 
hypoglycemia, anemia, and hyponatremia. If a goiter 
is present, preoperative evaluation and imaging should 
be done to assess risk factors for difficult intubation or 
hemodynamic collapse on induction, including dyspnea, 
dysphagia, voice change, assessment of airway or great 
blood vessel compression, tracheal deviation, tracheoma-
lacia, or retrosternal extension.
If a symptomatic hypothyroid patient must undergo 
urgent or emergent surgery, extra caution is required. 
Hypothyroid patients may be hypersensitive to the res-
piratory depressant effects of premedications. In addition, 
because of reduced cardiac output and diminished baro-
receptor reflexes, induction agents that preserve hemo-
dynamic stability such as etomidate or ketamine should 
be considered. Mask ventilation and intubation may be 
more difficult in patients with a large goiter or enlarged 
tongue. Hypothyroid patients are also more susceptible to 
intraoperative hypothermia, slow drug metabolism, and 
delayed emergence from anesthesia.
Hyperthyroidism and Thyroid Storm
Hyperthyroidism is characterized by excess circulating 
thyroid hormone (T3 or T4). The most common causes are 
autoimmune (Graves disease), toxic multinodular goiter, 
and thyroiditis. Symptoms include weight loss, muscle 
are determined on a case-by-case basis, it is generally 
recommended to hold oral and/or noninsulin injectable 
hypoglycemic drugs the morning of surgery. Similarly, it 
is recommended to reduce the nighttime and/or morning 
dose of insulin by 20% to 50% in order to prevent hypo-
glycemia associated with preoperative fasting.31 Intra-
operatively, there is no consensus on a target glycemic 
range beyond avoidance of extremes in blood glucose. 
Adapted from studies mostly performed in the intensive 
care setting, such as the NICE-SUGAR trial, most society 
guidelines suggest maintaining glucose levels between 
140 and 180 mg/dL (7.8 and 10 mmol/L) throughout sur-
gery, as levels outside this range showed an increase in 
adverse events, including death.30
For patients with diabetes, blood glucose levels 
should be measured before and after surgery. The fre-
quency of monitoring during the perioperative period 
depends on several factors, including if the patient has 
labile glycemic control, if they have received insulin 
of any type, and if they are critically ill. Additional 
perioperative factors that may contribute to glucose fluc-
tuations include stress-induced neuroendocrine changes, 
decreased activity levels, altered nutritional intake, and 
glucocorticoid therapy. Because anesthesia may mask the 
signs and symptoms of hypoglycemia, glucose monitor-
ing via point-of-care fingerstick or laboratory method 
may be necessary every hour. Medications to treat 
hypoglycemia, such as glucagon or dextrose, should 
be readily available. Laboratory monitoring to ensure 
physiologic electrolyte, acid–base, and fluid balance may 
be required as well.30
Additional perioperative planning depends on the 
end-organ complications of each patient. Preparation 
for anticipated difficult mask ventilation or intubation 
may be required in a patient with obesity or limited joint 
mobility. Aspiration precautions must be considered if 
there is concern for gastroparesis. Advanced cardiovascu-
lar monitoring may be indicated in patients with cardiac 
or cerebrovascular disease. The presence of renal insuf-
ficiency may alter drug and fluid management. Patients 
with existing neuropathies and arthropathies require 
careful positioning and pressure point padding (also see 
Chapter 19).
Thyroid Disease
The thyroid gland is situated in the anterior neck, wrap-
ping around the front of the larynx and trachea. The 
secretion of thyroid hormones, triiodothyronine (T3) and 
thyroxine (T4), is regulated by thyroid-stimulating hor-
mone (TSH), which is secreted from the anterior pituitary 
gland.
Thyroid hormones have many essential roles in the 
body, including regulation of metabolic rate, body temper-
ature, gut motility and absorption, breakdown of glucose, 
breakdown of fats, cardiac inotropy and chronotropy, 
IV
Chapter 29 Nutritional, Gastrointestinal, and Endocrine Disease
525
surgical incision for hematoma management and urgent 
airway management. Risk of hematoma formation can 
be reduced by mitigating hypertension and coughing 
during emergence and extubation. Based on risk factors 
and comfort, consider deep extubation or administra-
tion of remifentanil, dexmedetomidine, or lidocaine at 
emergence. If there is stridor after extubation, immediate 
reintubation may be necessary.
Acute hypocalcemia resulting from unintentional 
removal of the parathyroid glands can present within 
12 to 72 hours after surgery. Postoperative measurement 
of serum calcium with or without parathyroid hormone 
(PTH) aids in diagnosis. Preemptive calcium and vitamin 
D supplementation may be administered. Alternatively, 
PTH levels can be measured intraoperatively.33
Parathyroid Disease
Four parathyroid glands are typically located on the 
posterior side of the lateral lobes of the thyroid gland. 
The major function of the parathyroid glands is to pro-
duce and secrete PTH, which regulates the body's serum 
calcium and phosphate levels. In response to PTH, serum 
calcium levels are increased through increased bone 
resorption, reduced renal excretion, and increased gastro-
intestinal absorption. Parathyroid disorders include those 
that cause hyperparathyroidism and those that cause 
hypoparathyroidism.
Primary hyperparathyroidism results in excess levels 
of circulating PTH and serum calcium. Though the most 
common presentation is asymptomatic hypercalcemia, 
symptoms related to hypercalcemia may include bone 
pain (because of increased bone resorption), dehydration, 
and altered mental status. Primary hyperparathyroidism 
is most often managed by surgical removal of the abnor-
mal parathyroid gland.34,35
Secondary hyperparathyroidism is most commonly 
the result of chronic kidney disease (CKD) or vitamin 
D deficiency. Patients with CKD have reduced urinary 
phosphate excretion. Phosphate retention induces hypoc-
alcemia, which results in parathyroid hyperplasia with 
elevated PTH and low serum calcium or vitamin D. PTH-
related peptide secreted by various types of malignant 
tumors is the most common cause of hypercalcemia in 
hospitalized patients.
Hypoparathyroidism is most commonly the result of 
postsurgical or autoimmune destruction of the parathy-
roid glands. Pseudohypoparathyroidism occurs when 
parathyroid glands appropriately produce PTH but target 
organs do not respond appropriately to the hormone. 
Symptoms of the hypocalcemia associated with these 
conditions include tetany (Chvostek sign or Trousseau 
sign), laryngospasm, stridor, altered mental status, pares-
thesias, seizures, and congestive heart failure. Hypopar-
athyroidism and pseudohypoparathyroidism are managed 
with calcium supplementation.
weakness, insomnia, heat intolerance, diarrhea, tremor, 
tachyarrhythmias (e.g., new-onset atrial fibrillation), and 
anxiety. Goiters may be present in severe cases.
Laboratory testing shows elevated serum T4 and T3
with a reduced TSH level. Rapid management of symp-
toms can be achieved with β-blockers. Long-term man-
agement aimed at thyroid suppression may be achieved 
with medications (propylthiouracil, carbimazole, and 
methimazole), radioactive iodine destruction, or surgical 
removal.
Perioperative Considerations
Patients should be clinically stable, asymptomatic, and 
medically euthyroid (normal serum T4 and T3) before 
elective surgeries. Medical therapy, including β-blockers 
and thyroid suppression medications, should be contin-
ued on the day of surgery. Patients with goiters should 
be evaluated for potential airway compromise or medi-
astinal extension.
If a patient with uncontrolled hyperthyroidism must 
undergo urgent or emergent surgery, adrenergic over-
activity and tachycardia can be controlled with short-
acting β-blockers. Avoid sympathomimetic drugs such as 
ketamine and ephedrine. Relative hypovolemia in active 
hyperthyroidism has the potential to exacerbate hemo-
dynamic changes. Exophthalmos is associated with an 
increased risk of corneal abrasion.
In addition, laryngoscopy, surgical stimulation, or 
tissue manipulation may precipitate a thyroid storm,
which can present any time in the perioperative period. 
The presentation may include tachycardia, hemodynamic 
lability, fever, and diaphoresis. It can be distinguished 
from malignant hyperthermia by lack of rigidity or 
respiratory acidosis. Management includes supportive 
care, hydration, β-blockade, antithyroid medication, and 
removal of the precipitating cause.33
Thyroidectomy Postoperative Complications
Anesthesia providers should be aware of potential imme-
diate postoperative complications after thyroid surgery. 
Recurrent laryngeal nerve (RLN) damage presents as 
hoarseness (unilateral) or stridor (bilateral). Transient 
hoarseness is also common and may result from glottic 
edema. Intraoperative real-time monitoring of RLN func-
tion assists in identification and protection and results 
in decreased incidence of injury. Some surgeons request 
placement of a neural integrity monitor (NIM) endotra-
cheal tube, which incorporates electromyography (EMG) 
as part of the RLN identification process. Specifically, 
the surgeon uses a sterile probe that administers a small 
electrical current. If the RLN is stimulated, the vocal cords 
move, producing an EMG signal that is converted to an 
audible signal. Neuromuscular blockade must be avoided 
during this portion of the procedure.
Postoperative neck hematoma may also cause air-
way compromise and require bedside reopening of the 
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
526
of an aldosterone antagonist (e.g., spironolactone) or 
restricting sodium intake. Hypokalemia is associated with 
increased myocardial excitability and an increased risk 
of arrhythmias.36 Careful potassium repletion may be 
required to restore intracellular and extracellular potas-
sium balance.
Glucocorticoid Excess
Glucocorticoid excess may be related to hyperfunction 
of the adrenal cortex (primary disease), hypersecretion 
of adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) by a pituitary 
adenoma (Cushing disease), production of ACTH-like 
substance by a nonpituitary tumor, or exogenous gluco-
corticoid administration. In each scenario cortisol excess 
produces Cushing syndrome, which is characterized 
by hypertension and fluid retention, impaired glucose 
metabolism, central obesity, hyperlipidemia, hypercoagu-
lability, osteoporosis, altered mental status and emotional 
lability, and muscular weakness.
Perioperative planning must take the various systemic 
effects of Cushing syndrome into consideration. An 
assessment of cardiac risk factors should guide additional 
workup as necessary. Before surgery, hyperlipidemia and 
hypertension should be optimized. Similar to hyperal-
dosteronism, diuresis with spironolactone may help to 
mobilize excess intravascular fluid and restore electro-
lyte balance. Serum glucose should be monitored and 
corrected as necessary. Patients with bone density loss 
are at increased risk for fracture, and careful pressure 
point padding and positioning may be required. Patients 
receiving exogenous steroids may require supplemental 
steroid administration, as their adrenal glands may be 
unable to respond appropriately to the stress of surgery. 
Similarly, patients undergoing unilateral or bilateral 
adrenal resection will require glucocorticoid replacement 
therapy. In patients with significant skeletal muscle wast-
ing consideration should be taken regarding the use of 
muscle relaxants.
Adrenal Insufficiency
Undersecretion of adrenal steroid hormones may result 
from either an inability of the adrenal glands to pro-
duce adequate amounts of hormones (primary adrenal 
insufficiency or Addison disease) or a deficiency in the 
production of ACTH (secondary adrenal insufficiency). 
Primary adrenal insufficiency is commonly caused by 
atrophy or destruction of the adrenal glands, whereas 
secondary adrenal insufficiency is often caused by 
pituitary dysfunction, traumatic brain injury, or long-
term exogenous glucocorticoid use. Whereas primary 
adrenal insufficiency results in a combined deficiency 
of both mineralocorticoids and glucocorticoids, second-
ary adrenal insufficiency results primarily in an isolated 
deficiency of glucocorticoids with preserved mineralo-
corticoid production. It is uncommon for any type of 
adrenal insufficiency to result in an isolated deficiency 
Perioperative Considerations
Patients should have normalized serum calcium levels 
and be asymptomatic without electrocardiogram changes 
before elective surgery. In addition, their preoperative 
evaluation should rule out concurrent thyroid disease. 
During parathyroidectomy, intraoperative PTH testing 
can help determine when an overactive parathyroid 
gland has been removed. Blood samples can be drawn 
from a peripheral vein, arterial catheter, or by the sur-
geon from the internal jugular vein in the operative 
field. Postoperatively patients should be monitored for 
hematoma, vocal cord dysfunction, and symptomatic 
hypocalcemia.35
Adrenal Cortex Dysfunction
The adrenal glands, situated in the retroperitoneum 
above the kidneys within the renal fascia, are composed 
of an outer cortex and inner medulla. The adrenal cortex 
produces three main types of steroid hormones: miner-
alocorticoids, glucocorticoids, and androgens. The adre-
nal medulla contains chromaffin cells that produce the 
catecholamines epinephrine and norepinephrine.
Mineralocorticoids, such as aldosterone, help regulate 
blood pressure and electrolyte homeostasis. Glucocorti-
coids, such as cortisol, regulate metabolism and immune 
function. Both of these are essential hormones with 
major physiologic significance, and dysfunction in either 
of the systems has anesthetic implications.
Mineralocorticoid Excess
Hyperaldosteronism occurs when there are increased lev-
els of aldosterone. In primary hyperaldosteronism there 
is hypersecretion of aldosterone by the adrenal cortex 
in the setting of a unilateral adenoma (Conn syndrome), 
bilateral hyperplasia, or adrenal gland carcinoma. Sec-
ondary hyperaldosteronism occurs in the setting of 
a disease state that stimulates aldosterone secretion 
through activation of the renin–angiotensin–aldosterone 
system, such as congestive heart failure, hepatic cirrhosis, 
nephrotic syndrome, and certain types of hypertension. 
Clinical manifestations of hyperaldosteronism are a result 
of increased tubular exchange of sodium for potassium 
and hydrogen ion, and include hypokalemic alkalosis, 
hypertension and fluid retention, skeletal muscle weak-
ness, and fatigue.
Patients with primary aldosteronism have higher rates 
of stroke, myocardial infarction, and atrial fibrillation 
compared with patients with non–aldosterone‐mediated 
hypertension.36 Preoperative assessment may require 
cardiac imaging, including chest x-ray and echocar-
diography, to determine the extent and status of car-
diovascular disease. Perioperative management in these 
patients focuses primarily on correcting intravascular 
volume and electrolyte status. Elevated blood pressure 
and hypokalemia may be addressed by administration 
IV
Chapter 29 Nutritional, Gastrointestinal, and Endocrine Disease
527
tumors, when hormonally active, can produce and release 
large amounts of catecholamines and metanephrines.
The signs and symptoms of hormonally active pheo-
chromocytomas and paragangliomas are caused by 
sympathetic nervous system hyperactivity. The classic 
triad includes paroxysmal headaches (hypertension), 
tachycardia, and diaphoresis. Other common symptoms 
include heat intolerance, weight loss, chest discomfort, 
nausea and vomiting, orthostatic hypotension, constipa-
tion, anxiety, hyperglycemia, and hyperresponsiveness to 
noxious stimuli. Symptoms may be constant or paroxys-
mal Severe catecholamine surges can cause hypertensive 
emergencies with end-organ damage.38
Pheochromocytoma multisystem crisis is a rare and 
extreme presentation with hemodynamic instability, 
hyperthermia (>40°C), neurologic manifestations, and 
multiorgan failure. This severe presentation may not 
respond to α-antagonism, and emergent surgery may be 
required. Another rare presentation is severe hemody-
namic instability during induction of anesthesia, intuba-
tion, or surgical manipulation.38 39
The gold standard for diagnosing pheochromocy-
tomas is elevated plasma fractionated metanephrines 
(metanephrine and normetanephrine) along with ana-
tomic evidence of the tumor. Twenty-four-hour urinary 
metanephrines are used when plasma testing is unavaila-
ble. Anatomic imaging with contrast-enhanced computed 
tomography (CT) or T2-weighted magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI) is used to localize the tumor and also gain 
information about size and relation to adjacent anatomic 
structures.39 40
Pheochromocytomas and paragangliomas are treated 
with surgical resection. Depending on size, location, 
and adjacent structure involvement, a minimally inva-
sive (laparoscopic or robotic) or open technique may be 
chosen.39
Perioperative Considerations
Multidisciplinary teams should be involved in the pre-
operative evaluation and optimization of patients with 
pheochromocytomas and paragangliomas. The primary 
goals are to minimize catecholamine surges and evaluate 
for end-organ damage.
End-organ effects that may have implications for anes-
thetic management include the following: hypovolemia, 
aortic dissection, myocardial ischemia, toxic myocarditis, 
catecholamine-induced cardiomyopathy, hypertrophic or 
dilated cardiomyopathy, congestive heart failure, tach-
yarrhythmias, and acute stroke. Preoperative electrocar-
diogram and echocardiogram are indicated to evaluate 
cardiovascular function.36 38 In addition, preoperative 
laboratory tests should include electrolytes, blood glu-
cose, blood urea nitrogen, creatinine, and complete blood 
count.36 38
Perioperative catecholamine surges may be trig-
gered by a variety of medications, noxious stimuli 
of mineralocorticoids. Symptoms depend on the extent 
of adrenal function loss, whether mineralocorticoid func-
tion is preserved, and the degree of physiologic stress. 
Common features of any type of adrenal insufficiency 
include fatigue, weight loss, nonspecific abdominal com-
plaints, myalgias, and arthralgias. Patients with primary 
adrenal insufficiency may also present with skin hyper-
pigmentation, salt craving, and postural hypotension.
Preoperative laboratory tests should include an elec-
trolyte panel. Hyponatremia, hyperkalemia, or hypo-
glycemia should be appropriately addressed. Even 
asymptomatic adrenally insufficient patients may expe-
rience acute adrenal insufficiency, or adrenal crisis,
during the perioperative period. During stress caused by 
illness or surgery, the secretion of cortisol by the adre-
nal cortex can transiently increase from a basal rate of 
approximately 10 mg/day up to 150 mg/day, depending 
on the stressor or magnitude of surgery. This relative 
lack of cortisol can lead to vasodilation and hypoten-
sion. Although the predominant manifestation is shock 
or hypotension unresponsive to typical vasopressors and 
fluid support, patients often have nonspecific symptoms 
such as acute abdominal pain, weakness, electrolyte dis-
turbance, unexplained fever, confusion, or coma. Patients 
with primary adrenal insufficiency are at significantly 
higher risk for developing perioperative symptoms than 
those with a secondary deficiency. Maintenance steroid 
supplementation should not be missed, including on 
the day of surgery. An additional “stress dose” steroid 
should be administered to patients with primary adrenal 
insufficiency before any physiologically stressful proce-
dure. For patients with secondary adrenal insufficiency 
from exogenous steroid administration, the administra-
tion of additional steroids beyond the baseline dose is 
an area of controversy.37 One approach is to continue 
the preoperative steroid dose and administer a “rescue” 
steroid dose (e.g., hydrocortisone 50 to 100 mg) only 
if refractory hypotension develops. Another approach 
is to administer additional steroid based on the risk of 
hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal axis (HPAA) suppression 
and the stress of surgery. For example, a patient with 
high risk of HPAA suppression (e.g., on prednisone at 
least 20 mg/day for >3weeks) undergoing major surgery 
(e.g., cardiac surgery, esophagectomy, acute trauma) will 
receive hydrocortisone 100 mg IV before incision and 50 
mg every 8 hours for 24 hours. A patient with low risk 
of HPAA suppression (e.g., on steroids <3 weeks or on 
prednisone less than 5 mg/day) would not receive stress-
dose steroids unless refractory hypotension developed.37
Pheochromocytoma and Paraganglioma
Pheochromocytoma is a rare chromaffin cell tumor that 
occurs inside of the adrenal gland (adrenal medulla), and 
a paraganglioma is a chromaffin cell tumor that occurs 
outside of the adrenal gland. These neuroendocrine 
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
528
surgical procedures, epidural analgesia can help manage 
perioperative pain. When placing an epidural in patients 
with pheochromocytomas and paragangliomas, consider 
giving premedication to reduce anxiety, avoiding epi-
nephrine in the test dose, and running low-concentration 
local anesthetic intraoperatively to avoid significant 
vasodilation and sympathectomy-induced hemodynamic 
lability.
Multiple common perioperative medications have the 
potential to trigger catecholamine surges. Anesthesia 
providers should attempt to avoid sympathomi-
metic medications (ketamine, ephedrine, meperidine), 
dopamine-blocking medications (metoclopramide, chlor-
promazine, prochlorperazine, droperidol, haloperidol), 
proarrhythmics (halothane), and histamine-stimulating 
medications (morphine, atracurium).38
The most common postoperative concern is postre-
section hypotension caused by residual α-adrenoceptor 
antagonism after the removal of the catecholamine-
secreting tumor. This is a particular issue with the use of 
phenoxybenzamine, which is an irreversible, long-acting 
α-adrenergic blocking agent. Postoperative hyperten-
sion is also common for 1 to 3 days after surgery. If the 
hypertension persists, this may be caused by incomplete 
resection, pain, or coexisting essential hypertension. 
Blood glucose fluctuations should be monitored, as hypo-
glycemia could develop after catecholamine suppression 
of insulin activity subsides. β-blockade and residual 
anesthesia may mask symptoms of hypoglycemia.36 Other 
less common complications include adrenal insufficiency 
with bilateral adrenalectomies, acute kidney injury, vol-
ume overload, pulmonary complications, and thrombo-
embolic events.43
Pituitary Gland Dysfunction
The pituitary gland, or hypophysis, is an endocrine 
gland that sits in the sella turcica of the sphenoid bone 
at the base of the brain. The anterior pituitary secretes 
hormones that regulate several physiologic processes, 
including human growth hormone (hGH), ACTH, TSH, 
gonadotropic hormones (luteinizing hormone [LH] and 
follicle-stimulating hormone [FSH]), and prolactin. The 
posterior pituitary secretes hormones produced in the 
hypothalamus, including vasopressin (antidiuretic hor-
mone [ADH]) and oxytocin.
The pituitary gland disorders most impactful to 
anesthetic management include acromegaly, Cushing 
syndrome (described earlier), prolactinoma, panhypopitu-
itarism, syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone 
secretion (SIADH), and diabetes insipidus (DI).
Acromegaly
Acromegaly is characterized by excess growth hormone 
in adults (after growth plates have closed). Presenting 
signs and symptoms include enlarged hands and feet, 
(including intubation), or intraoperative tumor manipula-
tion. Therefore adequate preoperative adrenergic block-
ade is essential. The US Endocrine Society in conjunction 
with the European Society of Endocrinology recommends 
preoperative α-adrenoceptor blockade for 7 to 14 days 
before surgery to allow adequate time to normalize 
hemodynamic parameters.40 Moderate symptoms can be 
managed with a selective, short-acting α1 adrenoceptor 
antagonist (doxazosin, prazosin, terazosin). More sig-
nificant clinical presentations are preferentially treated 
with a nonselective α1 and α2 adrenoceptor antagonist 
(phenoxybenzamine). Calcium channel blockers can also 
be used either in conjunction with α-blockade or when 
side effects are not tolerated.36,38
β-Adrenoceptor antagonists are also used to control 
heart rate after α-blockade has adequately normalized 
blood pressure.41,42 Selective β1 adrenoceptor antago-
nists (atenolol, metoprolol) are preferred. However, it is 
advised that β-antagonists should never be used alone or 
started before α-antagonists because blockade of vaso-
dilatory peripheral β-adrenergic receptors with unop-
posed α-adrenergic stimulation can lead to uncontrolled 
hypertension.38,40
Relative hypovolemia caused by catecholamine excess 
activity makes individuals susceptible to intraoperative 
hypotension. Society guidelines recommend a high-
sodium diet and adequate fluid intake before surgery.40 In 
addition, preoperative intravascular volume resuscitation 
may be considered.36
Intraoperative management should begin with pre-
medication as necessary to minimize anxiety. It is rec-
ommended to achieve an adequate depth of anesthesia 
before intubation and incision. Communication between 
anesthesia provider and surgeon, along with familiarity 
with the steps of the resection, help to anticipate and 
mitigate intraoperative hemodynamic variability. The 
first phase of the surgery, during which the tumor and its 
vascular supply are manipulated and isolated, is often the 
most turbulent. Hypertension can be treated with intra-
venous phentolamine, nitroprusside, nicardipine, clevidi-
pine, labetalol, or esmolol. Magnesium has also emerged 
as an antihypertensive and antiarrhythmic medication 
with a favorable side effect profile. Tachyarrhythmias 
can be treated with esmolol, lidocaine, or amiodarone. 
After the tumor's efferent blood supply is clamped, hypo-
tension necessitating vasopressor support is a common 
occurrence. Hypotension can be treated with volume 
resuscitation, phenylephrine, norepinephrine, vasopres-
sin, and/or dopamine.38
General anesthesia with endotracheal intubation is the 
most common anesthetic approach. Continuous intraarte-
rial blood pressure monitoring is appropriate for patients 
with hormonally active tumors, often placed before 
induction and intubation. Large-bore intravenous access 
for volume resuscitation in addition to a reliable line for 
vasoactive medications are recommended.38 For open 
IV
Chapter 29 Nutritional, Gastrointestinal, and Endocrine Disease
529
(confusion, seizures, coma), 3% hypertonic saline should 
be used cautiously. A risk of over-rapid correction of 
serum sodium levels is osmotic demyelination syndrome.
Central Diabetes Insipidus
Central DI is characterized by decreased ADH production 
resulting in polyuria, hypernatremia, hypokalemia, and 
dehydration. Perioperatively, it is important to moni-
tor urine output and serum electrolytes and attempt to 
maintain euvolemia. Administration of preoperative vas-
opressin analogue (desmopressin) or intraoperative vaso-
pressin helps prevent significant intraoperative fluid loss.
Neuroendocrine Tumors
Neuroendocrine tumors are neoplasms that arise from 
cells of the neuroendocrine system. The majority of these 
tumors are nonfunctional; however, some functional 
tumors are capable of hormone overproduction. Surgical 
resection is the treatment of choice for localized pancre-
atic neuroendocrine tumors, and surgical debulking may 
be of benefit in metastatic disease.44
Functional neuroendocrine tumors with implications 
for anesthetic management include insulinomas, gas-
trinomas, VIPomas, and carcinoid tumors. Insulinomas 
secrete excess insulin, causing hypoglycemia that can 
worsen with preoperative fasting. Hyperglycemia may 
occur after insulinoma resection. Close blood glucose 
monitoring and treatment are required perioperatively. 
Gastrinomas secrete excess gastrin causing peptic ulcer 
disease, diarrhea, and esophageal reflux. Perioperative 
care includes treatment with H2 antagonists and PPIs, 
rapid-sequence intubation, and rehydration. VIPomas 
secrete excess vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP) caus-
ing watery diarrhea, flushing, hypotension, dehydration, 
hypokalemia, achlorhydria, and metabolic acidosis. Fluid 
deficits should be corrected preoperatively and a soma-
tostatin analogue (octreotide) started.45
Carcinoid Tumor
Carcinoid tumors are neuroendocrine tumors that secrete 
excess vasoactive hormones, notably serotonin, brady-
kinins, prostaglandins, tachykinins, substance P, and/or 
histamine. Carcinoid tumors primarily occur in the gas-
trointestinal tract, most commonly in the midgut (ileum 
and appendix). Vasoactive substances released by tumors 
isolated to the gastrointestinal tract are largely metabo-
lized by the liver, preventing significant systemic effects. 
However, when vasoactive substances do not go through 
hepatic degradation in the setting of metastatic spread, 
the symptoms of carcinoid syndrome are seen.
Carcinoid syndrome presents as flushing, tachycardia, 
hypotension, lacrimation, peripheral edema, abdominal 
pain, diarrhea, dehydration, electrolyte abnormalities, 
bronchoconstriction, and right-sided valvular heart dis-
ease. In the short term, somatostatin analogs (octreotide) 
enlarged facial features, deepening of the voice, head-
aches, obstructive sleep apnea, hypertension, and glucose 
intolerance. These patients also have increased inci-
dence of left ventricular hypertrophy, heart failure, and 
arrhythmias. Acromegaly is most commonly caused by a 
pituitary adenoma; transsphenoidal surgical resection is 
the preferred treatment.
Preoperative evaluation of patients with acromegaly 
should include a careful cardiac evaluation with electrocar-
diogram. Blood sugar should be monitored perioperatively 
and treated as appropriate. An airway management plan 
should take into account potentially increased difficulty in 
mask ventilation and/or endotracheal intubation caused by 
upper airway changes common in acromegaly: macroglos-
sia, enlarged epiglottis, enlarged mandible, subglottic nar-
rowing, and enlarged nasal turbinates. For patients with 
obstructive sleep apnea, it should be noted that postopera-
tive noninvasive positive-pressure ventilation is relatively 
contraindicated after transsphenoidal surgery.
Prolactinoma
A prolactinoma is a hyper-prolactin-secreting tumor of 
the pituitary gland. Prolactinomas are the most common 
type of functional pituitary tumor and are classified as 
either microprolactinoma (<10 mm) or macroprolacti-
noma (>10 mm). Hyperprolactinemia causes galactor-
rhea, amenorrhea, hypogonadism, and gynecomastia. 
Tumors with mass effect cause headaches, visual field 
changes, and cranial nerve palsies. Medical management 
with dopamine agonists (bromocriptine, cabergoline) 
help reduce tumor size and normalize prolactin levels. 
Unfortunately, they both have significant side effects. 
Transsphenoidal surgical resection is suggested if medical 
therapy is not tolerated or fails.
Hypopituitarism
Hypopituitarism describes decreased secretion of one or 
more of the hormones secreted by the pituitary gland. 
With any pituitary dysfunction, all other pituitary hor-
mone levels should be checked and replaced with exog-
enous hormone supplements as appropriate.
Syndrome of Inappropriate Antidiuretic 
Hormone Secretion
SIADH is characterized by excessive secretion of ADH, 
which results in water retention, volume overload, serum 
hyponatremia and hypoosmolarity, and urine hyperna-
tremia (urine sodium > 30 mEq/L) and hyperosmolarity 
(urine osmolality > 100 mOsm/kg H2O). Perioperative man-
agement of SIADH depends on severity and acuity of the 
hyponatremia and whether symptoms are present. Plasma 
sodium levels should be closely followed. Asymptomatic 
and mild hyponatremia can be treated with salt intake and 
fluid restriction. Symptomatic and moderate hyponatremia 
can be treated with furosemide and normal saline infu-
sion. For patients with severe symptoms of hyponatremia 
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
530
postoperatively. Other common premedications include 
benzodiazepines (anxiolysis), antihistamines, and ondan-
setron (antiserotonin).
Intraoperative management aims to minimize anxiety, 
noxious stimuli, hypercapnia, and hypothermia, all of 
which may stimulate vasoactive substance release. Hypo-
tension can be treated with fluid bolus, octreotide, phe-
nylephrine, and/or vasopressin. Sympathomimetic agents 
(e.g., epinephrine) and histamine-stimulating medications 
can theoretically stimulate the release of vasoactive sub-
stances from the tumor and exacerbate hemodynamic 
instability. Intraoperative hypertension can be treated 
with octreotide or β-adrenergic blockade.46
can ameliorate symptoms of carcinoid syndrome by 
blocking the production and release of vasoactive media-
tors; however, with time, patients often become refrac-
tory to somatostatin analogs. Surgical resection is the 
most effective treatment.
Preoperative evaluation of patients with carcinoid 
tumor should determine the severity and impact of 
symptoms. Cardiac evaluation should include electro-
cardiogram and echocardiography. Fluid and electrolyte 
abnormalities should be corrected.
The primary goal of intraoperative management of 
patients with carcinoid tumor is to minimize vasoactive 
substance release. Octreotide should be started preop-
eratively, continued intraoperatively, and tapered off 
1. Centers for Disease Control and Preven-
tion (CDC). Prevalence of overweight, 
obesity, and extreme obesity among 
adults: United States, 2017–2018. Feb-
ruary 2020. https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/
products/databriefs/db360.htm. Accessed 
October 13, 2020.
2. World Health Organization (WHO). Obe-
sity and overweight fact sheet. 2020. 
https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-
sheets/detail/obesity-and-overweight. 
Accessed October 13, 2020.
3. Adams JP, Murphy PG. Obesity in anaes-
thesia and intensive care. Br J Anaesth. 
2000;85:91–108.
4. Lang LH, Parekh K, Tsui BYK, Maze 
M. Perioperative management of the 
obese surgical patient. Br Med Bull. 
2017;124(1):135–155.
5. Glance LG, Wissler R, Mukamel DB, etal. 
Perioperative outcomes among patients 
with the modified metabolic syndrome 
who are undergoing noncardiac surgery. 
Anesthesiology. 2010;113:859.
6. Joshi GP, Ahmad S, Riad W, etal. Selec-
tion of obese patients undergoing ambu-
latory surgery: A systematic review of the 
literature. Anesth Analg. 2013;117:1082.
7. American Society of Anesthesiologists 
Committee. Practice guidelines for pre-
operative fasting and the use of phar-
macologic agents to reduce the risk of 
pulmonary aspiration: Application to 
healthy patients undergoing elective 
procedures: An updated report by the 
American Society of Anesthesiologists 
Committee on Standards and Practice 
Parameters. Anesthesiology. 2011;114:495.
8. Eley VA, Christensen R, Guy L, Dodd B. 
Perioperative blood pressure monitoring 
in patients with obesity. Anesth Analg. 
2019;128:484.
9. Jensen MD, Ryan DH, Apovian CM, etal. 
2013 AHA/ACC/TOS guideline for the 
management of overweight and obesity 
in adults: A report of the American Col-
lege of Cardiology/American Heart Asso-
ciation Task Force on Practice Guidelines 
and the Obesity Society. Circulation. 
2014;129(25 suppl 2):S102–S138.
10. De Jong A, Molinari N, Pouzeratte 
Y, etal. Difficult intubation in obese 
patients: incidence, risk factors, and 
complications in the operating thea-
tre and in intensive care units. Br J 
Anaesth. 2015;114:297–306.
11. Hodgson LE, Murphy PB, Hart N. Res-
piratory management of the obese 
patient undergoing surgery. J Thorac 
Dis. 2015;7:943–952.
12. Baker MT. The history and evolution of 
bariatric surgical procedures. Surg Clin 
North Am. 2011;91:1181–1201.
13. Wolfe BM, Kvach E, Eckel RH. Treatment 
of obesity: Weight loss and bariatric sur-
gery. Circ Res. 2016;118(11):1844–1855.
14. World Health Organization. What is 
malnutrition? 2016. www.who.int/fea-
tures/qa/malnutrition/en (Accessed on 
October 22, 2020).
15. Jensen GL, Cederholm T, Correia MITD, 
etal. GLIM criteria for the diagnosis 
of malnutrition: A consensus report 
from the Global Clinical Nutrition Com-
munity. JPEN J Parenter Enteral Nutr. 
2019;43:32.
16. Edwards S. Anaesthetising the mal-
nourished patient. Update Anaesth. 
2016;31:31–37.
17. Ananthakrishnan AN. Epidemiology and 
risk factors for IBD. Nat Rev Gastroen-
terol Hepatol. 2015;12(4):205–217.
18. Nickerson, etal. Perioperative consid-
erations in Crohn disease and ulcera-
tive colitis. Clin Colon Rectal Surg. 
2016;29:80–84.
19. Kumar A, Auron M, Aneja A, Mohr F, 
Jain A, Shen B. Inflammatory bowel 
disease: Perioperative pharmacologi-
cal considerations. Mayo Clin Proc. 
2011;86(8):748–757.
20. El-Serag HB, Sweet S, Winchester CC, 
Dent J. Update on the epidemiology of 
gastro-oesophageal reflux disease: A 
systematic review. Gut. 2014;63(6):871–
880.
21. Boeckxstaens G, El-Serag HB, Smout AJ, 
Kahrilas PJ. Symptomatic reflux disease: 
The present, the past and the future. Gut. 
2014;63:1185.
22. Katz PO, Gerson LB, Vela MF. Guidelines 
for the diagnosis and management of 
gastroesophageal reflux disease. Am J 
Gastroenterol. 2013;108(3):308–329.
23. Zdravkovic M, Rice MJ, Brull SJ. The 
clinical use of cricoid pressure: First, do 
no harm. Anesth Analg. 2019.
24. Algie CM, Mahar RK, Tan HB, etal. 
Effectiveness and risks of cricoid pres-
sure during rapid sequence induction 
for endotracheal intubation. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev. 2015: CD011656.
25. Birenbaum A, Hajage D, Roche S, etal. 
Effect of cricoid pressure compared with 
a sham procedure in the rapid sequence 
induction of anesthesia: The IRIS ran-
domized clinical trial. JAMA Surg. 
2019;154:9.
26. Center for Disease Control. National Dia-
betes Statistics Report, 2020. Estimates 
of diabetes and its burden in the United 
States. www.cdc.gov/diabetes/pdfs/data/
statistics/national-diabetes-statistics-
report.pdf Accessed on December 10, 
2020.
27. American Diabetes Association 2. Clas-
sification and diagnosis of diabetes: 
Standards of Medical Care in Diabetes
2020. Jan;43(Supplement 1):S14–S31.
28. Peacock SC, Lovshin JA, Cherney DZI. 
Perioperative considerations for the 
use of sodium-glucose cotransporter-2 
REFERENCES
IV
Chapter 29 Nutritional, Gastrointestinal, and Endocrine Disease
531
inhibitors in patients with type 2 diabetes. 
Anesth Analg. 2018 Feb;126(2):699–704. 
doi:10.1213/ANE.0000000000002377. 
PMID: 28786838.
29. Akhtar S, Barash PG, Inzucchi SE. Scien-
tific principles and clinical implications 
of perioperative glucose regulation and 
control. Anesth Analg. 2010;110(2):478–
497.
30. Sudhakaran S, Surani SR. Guidelines 
for 
perioperative 
management 
of 
the diabetic patient. Surg Res Pract. 
2015;2015:284063.
31. Alexanian SM, McDonnell ME, Akhtar 
S. Creating a perioperative glycemic 
control program. Anesthesiol Res Pract. 
2011;2011:465974.
32. Bacuzzi A, Dionigi G, Del Bosco A, 
Cantone G, Sansone T, Di Losa E, Cuf-
fari S. Anaesthesia for thyroid surgery: 
Perioperative management. Int J Surg. 
2008;6(Suppl 1):S82–S85.
33. Patel KN, Yip L, Lubitz CC, Grubbs EG, 
Miller BS, Shen W, Angelos P, Chen H, 
Doherty GM, Fahey TJ 3rd, Kebebew E, 
Livolsi VA, Perrier ND, Sipos JA, Sosa 
JA, Steward D, Tufano RP, McHenry CR, 
Carty SE. The American Association of 
Endocrine Surgeons guidelines for the 
definitive surgical management of thy-
roid disease in adults. Ann Surg. 2020 
Mar;271(3):e21–e93 .
34. Bilezikian JP, Bandeira L, Khan A, Cus-
ano NE. Hyperparathyroidism. Lancet. 
2018 Jan 13; 391(10116):168–178.
35. Wilhelm SM, Wang TS, Ruan DT, etal. 
The American Association of Endo-
crine Surgeons guidelines for definitive 
management of primary hyperparathy-
roidism. JAMA Surg. 2016;151(10):959–
968.
36. Phitayakorn R, McHenry CR. Periop-
erative 
considerations 
in 
patients 
with adrenal tumors. J Surg Oncol. 
2012;106(5):604–610.
37. Liu MM, Reidy AB, Saatee S, Col-
lard CD. Perioperative steroid man-
agement: 
Approaches 
based 
on 
current 
evidence. 
Anesthesiology. 
2017 Jul;127(1):166–172. doi:10.1097/
ALN.0000000000001659 
PMID: 
28452806.
38. Naranjo J, Dodd S, Martin YN. Periop-
erative management of pheochromocy-
toma. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth. 2017 
Aug;31(4):1427–1439.
39. Newell KA, Prinz RA, Pickleman J, 
etal. Pheochromocytoma multisystem 
crisis: A surgical emergency. Arch Surg. 
1988;123(8):956–959.
40. Lenders JW, Duh QY, Eisenhofer G, 
etal. Pheochromocytoma and paragan-
glioma: An Endocrine Society clinical 
practice guideline. J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab. 2014;99:1915–1942.
41. Weingarten TN, Welch TL, Moore TL, 
etal. Preoperative levels of catecho-
lamines and metanephrines and intra-
operative hemodynamics of patients 
undergoing pheochromocytoma and 
paraganglioma 
resection. 
Urology. 
2017;100:131–138.
42. Neumann HPH, Young WF Jr, Eng C. 
Pheochromocytoma and paraganglio-
ma. N Engl J Med. 2019;381(6):552–
565.
43. Tischler AS, de Krijger RR, Gill AJ, 
etal. Phaechromocytoma: In: WHO 
Classification of Tumours of Endocrine 
Organs. 4th ed. Lyon, France: Interna-
tional Agency for Research on Cancer; 
2017:183–190.
44. Scott AT, Howe JR. Evaluation and man-
agement of neuroendocrine tumors of 
the pancreas. Surg Clin North Am. 2019 
Aug;99(4):793–814 .
45. Singh S, Dey C, Kennecke H, Kocha 
W, Maroun J, Metrakos P, Mukhtar T, 
Pasieka J, Rayson D, Rowsell C, Sideris 
L, Wong R, Law C. Consensus recom-
mendations for the diagnosis and man-
agement of pancreatic neuroendocrine 
tumors: Guidelines from a Canadian 
national expert group. Ann Surg Oncol. 
2015 Aug;22(8):2685–2699 .
46. Kunz PL, Reidy-Lagunes D, Anthony 
LB, Bertino EM, Brendtro K, Chan JA, 
Chen H, Jensen RT, Kim MK, Klim-
stra DS, Kulke MH, Liu EH, Metz DC, 
Phan AT, Sippel RS, Strosberg JR, Yao 
JC; North American Neuroendocrine 
Tumor Society. Consensus guidelines 
for the management and treatment of 
neuroendocrine tumors. Pancreas. 2013 
May;42(4):557–577 .
532
Chapter
The central nervous system (CNS) deserves special con-
sideration in the perioperative setting for several reasons. 
First, anesthesia care is often required for patients under-
going treatment for CNS diseases, such as intracranial 
tumors or aneurysms, carotid disease, or diseases of the 
spine. Second, anesthesia providers commonly encounter 
patients with concurrent CNS diseases (e.g., Parkinson 
disease or prior stroke) who present for nonneurologic 
procedures. Third, neurocognitive dysfunction or other 
neurologic complications, such as stroke and delirium, 
can occur after surgery. Finally, the CNS is highly vulner-
able to ischemia, as it is metabolically active with little 
oxygen reserve and is therefore sensitive to hypoxia even 
for very brief periods. The latter is especially important 
in vulnerable patients with altered cerebrovascular 
pathophysiology leading to poor regulatory reserve of 
cerebral blood flow (CBF). This chapter discusses the 
relevant knowledge base and clinical care needed when 
taking care of patients with CNS diseases or who are at 
risk for neurocognitive complications in the periopera-
tive setting.
NEUROANATOMY
Supratentorial and Infratentorial Compartments
Conceptually, the cranium is divided into supratento-
rial and infratentorial compartments. The supratentorial 
compartment contains the cerebral hemispheres and 
diencephalon (thalamus and hypothalamus), and the 
brainstem (midbrain, pons, and medulla) and cerebellum 
make up the infratentorial compartment. For intracranial 
surgery, the location of the lesion has important implica-
tions for operative position and anesthetic management. 
For example, antiepileptic medications are commonly 
NEUROANATOMY
Supratentorial and Infratentorial Compartments
Cerebral Vasculature
Cranial Nerves
Blood–Brain Barrier
NEUROPHYSIOLOGY
Regulation of Cerebral Blood Flow
Cerebral Metabolic Rate and Neurovascular 
Coupling
Cerebral Perfusion Pressure and Cerebral 
Autoregulation
Cerebrovascular Paco2 and Pao2 Reactivity
Effects of Anesthetic Agents on CBF
INTRACRANIAL PRESSURE AND BRAIN 
RELAXATION
Determinants of ICP and the Compensation for 
an Elevated ICP
Effect of Anesthetic Agents on ICP
NEUROPROTECTION
NEUROPHYSIOLOGIC MONITORING
ANESTHESIA FOR NEUROSURGERY
Preoperative Assessment
Monitoring
Induction of Anesthesia
Positioning
Maintenance of Anesthesia
ICP Reduction and Brain Relaxation
Ventilation Adjustment
Fluid Management
Blood Product Administration and 
Anticoagulant Management
Emergence From Anesthesia and Postoperative 
Care
Venous Air Embolism
COMMON CLINICAL CASES
Intracranial Mass Lesions
CENTRAL NERVOUS 
SYSTEM DISEASE
Lingzhong Meng, and Alana Flexman
30
Intracranial Aneurysms
Arteriovenous Malformations
Carotid Disease
IV
Chapter 30 Central Nervous System Disease
533
considered during supratentorial, rather than infraten-
torial, brain tumor resection. In addition, intracranial 
lesions may be classified as either intraaxial or extraax-
ial, defined as within or outside the brain parenchyma, 
respectively. The location of intraaxial mass lesions is 
particularly relevant, as some lesions may compromise 
eloquent areas such as the language centers and motor 
cortex of the brain. In this case functional preservation 
during surgery becomes a critical focus.
Cerebral Vasculature
The arterial blood supply to the brain is through the left 
and right internal carotid arteries (anterior circulation) 
and the vertebrobasilar system (posterior circulation). 
Anastomoses between these vessels form the circle of 
Willis (Fig. 30.1) and create a collateral blood supply 
to protect against focal ischemia. However, this ring 
should not be assumed to be complete in all patients; 
approximately 50% or more of the population has an 
abnormal circulation, implying that collateralization 
may not be complete. The clinical significance of an 
abnormal circle of Willis may depend on the pattern of 
the abnormality and coexisting cerebrovascular diseases. 
Anesthesia providers should carefully maintain adequate 
cerebral perfusion pressure (CPP) in anesthetized surgical 
patients with hemodynamically significant obstructive 
cerebrovascular lesions (e.g., carotid stenosis) or abnor-
mal collateral circulation. Unfortunately, this information 
is not available in most patients; therefore consistently 
avoiding relative hypotension in the perioperative period 
is a reasonable approach.
Cranial Nerves
There are 12 pairs of intracranial nerves, each with a 
unique distribution and sensorimotor and autonomic 
function. Some neurosurgical procedures can potentially 
jeopardize specific intracranial nerves during surgery. 
For example, resection of acoustic neuroma can injure or 
sacrifice the vestibulocochlear nerve. Intracranial nerves 
can be monitored intraoperatively to facilitate timely 
detection of reversible injury and theoretically prevent 
permanent deficit. If intraoperative neuromonitoring is 
used, the anesthesiology and neurophysiologic monitor-
ing teams need to be in close communication to ensure 
that appropriate equipment is available and a compatible 
anesthesia technique is chosen to facilitate monitor-
ing, with the goal of maintaining a stable anesthetic 
depth that avoids overly suppressing neurophysiologic 
function. Anesthetic technique should be tailored to 
the intraoperative neuromonitoring used. For example, 
volatile anesthetic agents are typically minimized dur-
ing somatosensory and motor evoked potential moni-
toring, and neuromuscular blocking agents should be 
avoided when motor evoked potentials are used. Glos-
sopharyngeal nerve and hypoglossal nerve monitoring 
require placement of monitoring needles inside of the 
mouth, and caution should be taken until all needles are 
removed. Vagus nerve monitoring requires the placement 
of a special endotracheal tube with electrodes. If motor 
evoked potentials are used, a bite block must be placed 
to avoid trauma to the tongue and oropharynx, because 
masseter and temporalis muscle contraction commonly 
occur during stimulation.
Blood–Brain Barrier
The anatomic and functional integrity of the blood–
brain barrier has important clinical implications. The 
blood–brain barrier is composed of capillary endothelial 
cells with tight junctions that prevent free passage of 
electrolytes, macromolecules, or proteins. In contrast, 
lipid-soluble substances (carbon dioxide, oxygen, anes-
thetic agents) cross the blood–brain barrier easily. The 
Anterior
communicating
artery
Posterior
communicating
artery
Pontine
arteries
Anterior
cerebral
artery
Middle
cerebral
artery
Posterior
cerebral
artery
Superior
cerebellar
artery
Basilar
artery
Vertebral
artery
Anterior
inferior
cerebellar
artery
Posterior
inferior
cerebellar
artery
Anterior
spinal
artery
Anterior
choroidal
artery
Internal
carotid
artery
Ophthalmic
artery
Fig. 30.1 Anatomy of the circle of Willis.
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
534
blood–brain barrier may be disrupted in the event of 
hypertensive crisis, trauma, infection, arterial hypoxemia, 
severe hypercapnia, tumors, and sustained seizure activ-
ity. Osmotic therapy (e.g., mannitol) for brain edema, 
intracranial hypertension, or intraprocedural brain relax-
ation relies on an intact blood–brain barrier in order to 
move the free water from the brain parenchyma to the 
intravascular space.
NEUROPHYSIOLOGY
Regulation of Cerebral Blood Flow
Normal CBF is approximately 50 mL/100 g/min and rep-
resents 12% to 15% of total cardiac output. The brain, 
representing 2% of the body weight, receives a dispropor-
tionately large share of cardiac output because of its high 
metabolic rate and inability to store energy. As preserva-
tion of oxygen delivery is critical, the brain is equipped 
with robust regulatory mechanisms to regulate blood 
flow. Physiologic measures that regulate CBF include the 
following: (1) cerebral metabolic rate via neurovascular 
coupling, (2) CPP via cerebral autoregulation, (3) arterial 
blood carbon dioxide and oxygen partial pressure (Paco2
and Pao2, respectively) via cerebrovascular reactivity, (4) 
sympathetic nervous activity, (5) cardiac output, and (6) 
anesthetic agents directly. Different regulatory mecha-
nisms may exert distinctive and sometimes opposing 
effects on CBF; however, these effects are integrated at 
the level of cerebral resistance arteries/arterioles to deter-
mine the CBF.1 2
Cerebral Metabolic Rate and Neurovascular 
Coupling
Cerebral metabolic rate of oxygen (CMRO2) is often used 
as an index of the cerebral metabolic activity. CMRO2
and CBF are closely related—an increase or decrease in 
CMRO2 results in a proportional increase or decrease in 
CBF, respectively. This mechanism is known as neuro-
vascular coupling or cerebral metabolism-flow coupling.
In the perioperative setting CMRO2 can be reduced by 
hypothermia and most intravenous anesthetic drugs, 
which produces a coupled reduction in CBF in healthy 
brains (CBF decreases 7% for every 1°C decrease in 
body temperature below 37°C).3 In contrast, CMRO2 and 
therefore CBF may be dramatically increased by seizure 
activity.
Cerebral Perfusion Pressure and Cerebral 
Autoregulation
CPP is the difference between mean arterial pressure 
(MAP) and intracranial pressure (ICP) or central venous 
pressure, whichever is greater. How CPP affects CBF is 
determined by cerebral autoregulation, which is a mecha-
nism that maintains a relatively stable CBF in the face of 
a fluctuating CPP as a result of cerebral vasoconstriction 
or vasodilation in response to an increase or decrease in 
CPP, respectively.1 That is, the simultaneous and propor-
tionate changes in CPP and cerebrovascular resistance 
caused by cerebrovascular pressure reactivity lead to a 
stable CBF. However, as static cerebral autoregulation 
takes minutes to take effect, a rapid increase or decrease 
in MAP may be associated with a brief period of cerebral 
hyperperfusion or hypoperfusion, respectively.4
The cerebral autoregulation curve has three portions 
that are the plateau and the lower and upper limits of 
autoregulation (Fig. 30.2). The lower limit is the CPP level 
below which the CBF decreases along with a decreasing 
CPP. In contrast, the upper limit is the CPP level above 
which the CBF increases along with an increasing CPP. 
The plateau is the CPP range between the lower and 
upper limits where CBF remains stable (approximately 50 
mL/100 g/min in awake adults and lower in anesthetized 
adults). The frequently quoted limits of autoregulation 
are a lower limit of 60 mm Hg and an upper limit of 
150 mm Hg. However, it is important to recognize that 
although these numbers may apply to young and healthy 
humans, there is significant variation, and they may 
not apply in patients with various medical and surgical 
comorbidities.5 For example, chronic uncontrolled hyper-
tension or sympathetic stimulation shifts the autoregula-
tory curve to the right, and these patients require a higher 
minimum CPP to maintain adequate CBF. Autoregulatory 
curves are an individualized phenomenon; perioperative 
blood pressure or CPP management should incorporate 
individual variation and factors to avoid jeopardizing 
cerebral perfusion.
Cerebral autoregulation may be impaired in various 
circumstances. It can be abolished after traumatic brain 
injury and intracranial surgery. As a result, CBF becomes 
pressure passive, implying that it no longer remains 
stable across the autoregulatory CPP range and instead 
changes along with changes in CPP. Severe hypercapnia, 
often as a result of hypoventilation, can also impair 
cerebral autoregulation. Inhaled anesthetic agents are 
potent cerebral vasodilators and impair autoregulation to 
varying degrees depending on the dose used. In contrast, 
intravenous anesthetic agents do not typically disrupt 
this regulatory mechanism. In circumstances where cer-
ebral autoregulation is impaired it is important to care-
fully control CPP because changes in CPP lead directly to 
changes in CBF, leading to either inadequate or overzeal-
ous perfusion of the brain.
Cerebrovascular Paco2 and Pao2 Reactivity
Both Paco2 and Pao2 are powerful modulators of CBF, 
reflecting a robust cerebrovascular Paco2 and Pao2 reac-
tivity. Changes in Paco2 produce corresponding and 
IV
Chapter 30 Central Nervous System Disease
535
same directional changes in CBF between a Paco2 of 20 
and 80 mm Hg (Fig. 30.3). CBF increases or decreases 
approximately 1 mL/100 g/min, or 2%, for every 1 mm 
Hg increase or decrease in Paco2 from 40 mm Hg. Such 
changes in CBF reflect the effect of carbon dioxide–
mediated alterations in perivascular pH that lead to cer-
ebral arteriole dilation or constriction. The Paco2-related 
change in CBF only lasts for about 6 to 8 hours because 
of the compensatory change in bicarbonate (HCO3 ) con-
centration. Both extreme hyperventilation and hypoven-
tilation should be avoided, as they lead to cerebral 
hypoperfusion and hyperperfusion, respectively. There 
is evidence to suggest that prolonged and aggressive 
hyperventilation after traumatic brain injury is associated 
with poorer neurologic outcome.6 In contrast, decreases 
in Pao2 below a threshold value of about 50 mm Hg result 
in an exponential increase in CBF (see Fig. 30.3), likely 
a compensatory mechanism to maintain cerebral oxygen 
delivery. Cerebral oxygen delivery equals arterial blood 
oxygen content times CBF. Therefore if arterial blood 
oxygen content decreases because of acute anemia or 
hemoglobin desaturation, CBF can increase to maintain 
cerebral oxygen delivery.
Effects of Anesthetic Agents on CBF (Also See 
Chapters 7 and 8)
Intravenously administered anesthetic agents such as 
propofol and thiopental cause simultaneous reduction of 
CMRO2 and CBF. The effect of intravenous anesthetics on 
CBF is attributed to neurovascular coupling; that is, the 
decrease in CMRO2 leads to a corresponding decrease in 
CBF. The reported effects of ketamine on cerebrovascular 
physiology and ICP have varied, which likely reflects 
different research study conditions.7 When ketamine is 
given on its own without control of ventilation, Paco2, 
CBF, and ICP all increase, whereas when given in the 
presence of another sedative/anesthetic drug in patients 
CPP (mm Hg)
100
50
0
0
50 60
SD
SD
SD
B
UL
Maximal Constriction
...Reactive... ...Reactive...
C
Plateau
LL
A
Maximal
Dilation
100
200
150
CBF (mL/100 g/min)
Fig. 30.2 Cerebral autoregulation describes the relationship between cerebral blood flow (CBF) and 
cerebral perfusion pressure (CPP). The three key elements of an autoregulation curve are the lower limit 
(LL), the upper limit (UL), and the plateau. CBF remains stable in the CPP range between the lower and 
upper limits and is pressure passive beyond this range. The frequently quoted numbers are the lower 
limit = 60 mm Hg, the upper limit = 150 mm Hg, and the plateau = 50 mL/100 g/min. However, these 
numbers may not be representative of all patients, and these parameters may vary, as indicated by the 
standard deviation (SD) in this illustration, especially in the context of poorly controlled hypertension. 
The cerebrovascular reactivity is also illustrated. (Figure 1 of Reference 1)1
Fig. 30.3 Schematic depiction of the impact of intracranial 
pressure (dashed black line), Pao2 (solid red line), Paco2 (solid 
black line), and cerebral perfusion pressure (mean arterial 
pressure minus intracranial pressure or central venous pressure, 
whichever is greater) (dashed red line) on cerebral blood flow.
50
0
100
150
Pressure (mm Hg)
200
500
0
50
100
75
25
Cerebral blood flow (mL/100 g/min)
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
536
whose ventilation is controlled, these effects were not 
observed. Because of this controversy, however, ketamine 
is often avoided in patients with known intracranial dis-
ease or increased ICP.
Benzodiazepines and opioids decrease CMRO2 and 
CBF, analogous to propofol and thiopental, although to 
a lesser extent. However, if these medications result in 
respiratory depression and elevation of Paco2, the oppo-
site effect may occur. Opioids should be used with cau-
tion in patients with intracranial disease because of their 
depressant effects on consciousness and ventilation with 
associated increases in Paco2, and therefore ICP.
Alpha-2 agonists (e.g., clonidine and dexmedeto-
midine) are unique sedatives in that they do not cause 
significant respiratory depression. They reduce arterial 
blood pressure, CPP, and CBF with minimal effects on 
ICP. Alpha-2 agonists can be used intraoperatively to 
reduce the dose of other anesthetic agents and blunt 
hemodynamic responses, or postoperatively as sedatives 
and to attenuate postoperative hypertension and tachy-
cardia.
In contrast to intravenous anesthetics, volatile anes-
thetic agents are potent cerebral vasodilators. At low 
doses, this vasodilation is balanced by a reduction in 
CBF induced via flow metabolism coupling and a reduc-
tion in CMRO2. However, when administered during 
normocapnia at concentrations higher than 0.5 minimum 
alveolar concentration (MAC), desflurane, sevoflurane, 
and isoflurane induce dose-dependent vasodilation and 
increases in CBF even though CMRO2 is decreased. There-
fore volatile anesthetic agents produce divergent changes 
in CMRO2 and CBF that are distinct from intravenous 
anesthetic agents, particularly at high doses. When used 
in isolation, nitrous oxide increases CBF and possibly 
CMRO2; however, these effects appear to be attenuated by 
the coadministration of other anesthetic agents.
INTRACRANIAL PRESSURE AND BRAIN 
RELAXATION
ICP and brain relaxation are related but distinct. ICP is 
the pressure measured inside of the cranium with the 
cranium closed/intact. Brain relaxation is the volumetric 
relationship between the brain and intracranial space 
and the tactile feeling of the firmness of the brain by the 
surgeon with the cranium opened.8 When the cranium 
is opened, the ICP equals the atmospheric pressure (i.e., 
zero); however, the brain may or may not be regarded as 
relaxed. Nonetheless, the management strategies for ICP 
and brain relaxation are similar.
Determinants of ICP and the Compensation for 
an Elevated ICP
The intracranial compartment normally contains three 
components: (1) brain matter, (2) cerebrospinal fluid 
(CSF), and (3) blood. Increases in any of these components 
Volume of the expanding
intracranial content (one component)
Intracranial pressure
Threshold
Compensation
exhausted
1
2
3
4
Compensation
Fig. 30.4 Illustration of the effect of an expanding intracranial component on intracranial pressure 
(ICP). As the volume of an intracranial component increases from point 1 to point 2 on the curve, 
ICP remains relatively stable because of the compensatory mechanisms, including the translocation 
of cerebrospinal fluid from the intracranial space into the spinal subarachnoid space. Between points 
1 and 2, the volumetric sum of all intracranial components remains relatively constant. Patients 
with intracranial tumors who are between point 1 and point 2 on the curve are unlikely to manifest 
clinical symptoms of increased ICP. The compensation ability is exhausted on the rising portion of the 
curve (point 3) when a small volumetric increase of the expanding intracranial component leads to a 
noticeable increase of ICP. Clinical signs and symptoms attributable to increased ICP are likely at this 
stage. Additional increases in intracranial volume at this point, as produced by increased CBF secondary 
to hypercapnia or inhaled anesthesia, can precipitate abrupt further increases in ICP (point 4).
IV
Chapter 30 Central Nervous System Disease
537
or the addition of a pathologic lesion (e.g., tumor) can 
result in an elevated ICP, normally defined as a sustained 
increase of ICP greater than 15 mm Hg. Marked increases 
in ICP can decrease CPP, and therefore CBF, to the point 
of causing cerebral ischemia. However, several compen-
satory physiologic mechanisms can help to reduce ICP, 
including compensatory reduction of other intracranial 
components such as translocation of CSF from the 
intracranial space to the extracranial space. When these 
compensatory mechanisms are exhausted, ICP starts to 
rise and cerebral blood vessels are eventually compressed 
(Fig. 30.4). It is important to differentiate CBF from cere-
bral blood volume (CBV) because the former is a dynamic 
concept representing flow, whereas the latter is a static 
concept representing the intracranial blood volume. 
These two terms are related but not interchangeable. The 
treatment of intracranial hypertension is primarily via 
the reduction of various intracranial components, includ-
ing CBV (Box 30.1). Theoretically, the reduction of CBV 
should not compromise CBF; otherwise, the brain will 
experience hypoperfusion or ischemia.
Effect of Anesthetic Agents on ICP
Most intravenous anesthetic drugs reduce CBF because 
of the reduction of CMRO2 (neurovascular coupling), and 
this reduction is associated with a decrease in ICP caused 
by the simultaneous decrease in CBV. However, in this 
case the decrease in CBF is appropriate and induced by a 
simultaneous decrease in CMRO2. These drugs should be 
considered in patients whose ICP is abnormally elevated. 
In patients refractory to initial treatment of intracranial 
hypertension a deep level of anesthesia such as propofol-
induced burst suppression or barbiturate coma can be 
considered as alternative options. However, this must be 
done carefully, as large doses of propofol or thiopental 
may adversely affect blood pressure and cardiac output 
and compromise cerebral perfusion.
An increased frequency of excitatory peaks on the 
electroencephalogram (EEG) of patients receiving etomi-
date, as compared with thiopental, suggests etomidate 
should be administered with caution to patients with a 
history of epilepsy, because seizures increase CMRO2, 
CBF, and ICP as a consequence.9 Opioids and benzodiaz-
epines reduce ICP through reductions in CMRO2 and CBF, 
although this benefit will be offset if respiratory depres-
sion and increases in Paco2 occur. The effect of ketamine 
is controversial, as discussed earlier.
Volatile anesthetic agents are cerebral vasodilators 
and produce dose-dependent increases in ICP that paral-
lel the increases in CBF and CBV, although the clinical 
importance of this increase is unclear. Hyperventilation 
to decrease Paco2 to <35 mm Hg attenuates the tendency 
for volatile anesthetic agents to increase ICP. In patients 
undergoing craniotomy for supratentorial tumors with 
evidence of a midline shift, neither isoflurane nor 
desflurane significantly affected lumbar CSF pressure 
when moderate hypocapnia (Paco2 of 30 mm Hg) was 
maintained.10 Although there are no data on the impact 
of anesthesia type on meaningful clinical outcomes, 
intravenous agents can be considered in patients with 
exhausted ICP-compensating mechanisms, as evidenced 
by elevated ICP, abnormal mental status, or imaging 
studies.
Neuromuscular blocking drugs do not directly affect 
ICP unless they induce release of histamine or hypo-
tension. Histamine can cause cerebral vasodilation, 
leading to an increase in ICP. Succinylcholine may 
increase ICP through increases in CBF, although this 
phenomenon is inconsistently reported in the literature 
because of differences in study design and patient neu-
rologic status.11
NEUROPROTECTION
Many anesthetic agents have been proposed as neu-
roprotectants given their potential to reduce cerebral 
metabolic rate and excitotoxicity during periods of 
oxygen deprivation. Animal studies support the ability 
of many anesthetic agents, including volatile anesthetic 
agents, barbiturates, propofol, and xenon, to provide 
neuroprotection, although convincing human data are 
Box 30.1
Methods to Decrease Intracranial Pressure
Cerebral Blood Volume Reduction
Decrease Cerebral Blood Flow
Intravenous anesthetic drugs are preferred
Decrease CMRO2 (propofol, barbiturates)
Employ hyperventilation
Avoid cerebral vasodilators
Avoid extreme hypertension
Increase Venous Outflow
Elevate head
Avoid constriction at the neck
Avoid PEEP and excessive airway pressure
Cerebrospinal Fluid Reduction
External ventricular drain
Lumbar drain
Head elevation (translocation of intracranial cerebrospinal 
fluid)
Acetazolamide (Diamox)
Cerebral Edema Reduction
Osmotic therapy (mannitol, hypertonic saline)
Furosemide (Lasix)
Prevention of ischemia and secondary edema
Dexamethasone to reduce peritumoral vasogenic edema
Resection of Space-Occupying Lesions
Decompressive Craniectomy
CMRO2, Cerebral metabolic rate of oxygen; PEEP, positive end-
expiratory pressure.
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
538
lacking.12 Hypothermia has been investigated extensively 
as a method of cerebral protection during acute injury. 
Although numerous animal studies have supported tem-
perature reduction to reduce ischemic injury, several 
large prospective, randomized trials of hypothermia in 
aneurysm surgery and traumatic brain injury have failed 
to reproduce a consistent clinical benefit to date.3 Cooling 
of patients with return of spontaneous circulation after 
cardiac arrest has been shown to improve neurologic 
outcome in a randomized controlled trial,13 although a 
more recent trial contradicted these findings.14 In con-
trast, hyperthermia worsens ischemic injury and should 
be avoided in patients vulnerable to cerebral ischemia.
NEUROPHYSIOLOGIC MONITORING
Neurophysiologic monitoring is employed during various 
neurologic surgeries with increasing frequency because 
of minimal risk to patients and the potential to reduce 
intraprocedural neurologic injuries. An understanding 
of the effects of anesthetic agents on various monitor-
ing modalities, including the EEG, somatosensory and 
motor evoked potentials, and intracranial nerve moni-
toring, is critical in neuroanesthesia. The monitoring 
techniques can use a transcranial, direct cortical or 
subcortical approach. Different monitoring modalities 
often require different anesthetic regimens to preserve 
the quality of monitoring. Generally speaking, narcotics 
have a minimal impact, whereas intravenous and vola-
tile anesthetics cause a dose-dependent suppression of 
monitoring signals. Anesthesia providers should facilitate 
neurophysiologic monitoring, avoiding major fluctua-
tions in anesthetic level during monitoring. The impact 
of anesthetics on evoked potentials is discussed further 
in Chapter 20. Of note, electrocorticography (ECoG) is 
sometimes used during neurologic surgery to identify 
epileptic foci or activity. ECoG is sensitive to anesthetic 
agents that change the seizure threshold (e.g., benzodi-
azepines, propofol, and volatile anesthetic agents) and 
requires close communication and collaboration with the 
neurophysiologic monitoring team.
ANESTHESIA FOR NEUROSURGERY
Preoperative Assessment
Patients presenting for neurosurgical procedures can 
have a wide range of symptoms. Patients with intracra-
nial mass lesions may present with seizures, altered level 
of consciousness, headaches, cranial nerve abnormalities, 
and motor or sensory deficits. Aneurysms and arterio-
venous malformations (AVMs) can present with a severe 
(“thunderclap”) headache, if ruptured, and focal deficits 
or visual impairment from compression of the optic 
chiasm when unruptured. Some neurosurgical patients 
are asymptomatic, having discovered their intracranial 
pathology incidentally through imaging.
Evidence of increased ICP should be elicited during 
the preoperative visit. Clinical signs may be consist-
ent with, but do not reliably indicate, the level of ICP 
(Box30.2). Imaging may reveal midline shift, encroach-
ment of expanding brain on cerebral ventricles, cerebral 
edema, hydrocephalus, or any combination of these 
signs. In symptomatic patients preoperative medications 
that cause sedation or depression of ventilation are usu-
ally avoided. Drug-induced depression of ventilation can 
lead to increased Paco2 and subsequent increases in CBF 
and ICP. In alert patients small doses of benzodiazepines 
may provide a useful degree of anxiolysis but should be 
used judiciously, if at all.
Patient medications related to CNS disease include 
antiepileptic drugs (e.g., levetiracetam), drugs used to 
reduce peritumor edema (e.g., dexamethasone), and drugs 
used to reduce brain free water (e.g., mannitol, hypertonic 
saline). Other medications may include antihypertensive 
drugs, drugs used for blood glucose control, drugs for 
chronic pain, and anticoagulants. Abnormal laboratory 
results should be investigated and corrected if clinically 
indicated. Coagulation profile, including platelet count 
and international normalized ratio (INR), and studies 
such as echocardiography and brain magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI)/computed tomography (CT)/angiogram 
should be reviewed. The side of the brain lesion, left ver-
sus right, should be specifically noted.
Monitoring
In addition to standard monitors, continuous monitoring 
of arterial blood pressure via an intraarterial catheter is 
recommended for intracranial procedures. The advan-
tages of invasive blood pressure monitoring include the 
ability to continuously assess CPP and intravascular 
volume using systolic pressure variation and pulse pres-
sure variation (also see Chapter 20). In addition, these 
catheters allow for arterial blood gas sampling and accu-
rate determination of Paco2. Central venous catheters are 
not routinely used, although they can be considered in 
patients with difficult peripheral venous access or where 
there is a potential for massive transfusion. Measure-
ment of the exhaled carbon dioxide concentration 
Box 30.2
Preoperative Evidence of Increased 
Intracranial Pressure
Positional headache
Nausea and vomiting
Hypertension and bradycardia
Altered level of consciousness
Altered patterns of breathing
Papilledema
IV
Chapter 30 Central Nervous System Disease
539
(capnography) is used to adjust mechanical ventilation 
or assess spontaneous breathing if the patient is awake 
or sedated. The electrocardiogram (ECG) allows prompt 
detection of cardiac dysrhythmias caused by surgical 
stimulation or traction on the brainstem, intracranial 
nerves, or dura. Neuromuscular blockade is monitored 
with a peripheral nerve stimulator. Because of the length 
of these surgical procedures and the use of diuretics, a 
bladder catheter is often necessary and helps to guide 
fluid therapy. A continuous monitor of ICP is helpful but 
rarely used after the bone flap is removed and the dura 
is opened. Two types of ICP monitors are inserted by 
neurosurgeons. The intraventricular catheter or external 
ventricular device (EVD) permits direct measurement of 
ICP and drainage of CSF. The subarachnoid or subdural 
bolt is placed through a burr hole and can be inserted 
quickly in an emergency setting, but it does not allow 
for CSF drainage.
Induction of Anesthesia
The goal of induction of anesthesia is to achieve a suffi-
cient level of anesthesia to blunt the stimulation of direct 
laryngoscopy and tracheal intubation without compro-
mising systemic hemodynamics and cerebral perfusion. 
Propofol produces reliable and prompt onset of uncon-
sciousness and is unlikely to adversely increase ICP. Eto-
midate is rarely used in neurosurgical patients. However, 
the dose of a drug being chosen in a particular patient 
is a clinical decision that depends on the patient's age, 
physical condition, and comorbidities. Hemodynamic 
support with sympathomimetic drugs, such as phenyle-
phrine and ephedrine, may be necessary, and such drugs 
should be readily available, particularly in cases where 
CPP is already compromised. A nondepolarizing neu-
romuscular blocking drug or succinylcholine is used to 
facilitate tracheal intubation, mechanical ventilation of 
the lungs, and patient positioning on the operating table. 
Increases in ICP may occur after the administration of 
succinylcholine, but the extent of the increase is usually 
short-lived and clinically inconsequential.11 The patient's 
trachea is intubated after the confirmation of skeletal 
muscle paralysis so that coughing and acute increases in 
ICP are avoided. Injection of additional intravenous anes-
thetics before initiating direct laryngoscopy may attenu-
ate the increase in systemic blood pressure andICP.
Positioning (Also See Chapter 19)
During intracranial procedures, the head of the operat-
ing table is frequently turned 90 to 180 degrees away 
from the anesthesia workstation. Anesthesia providers 
typically have limited access to the patient's head, and 
the endotracheal tube should be safely secured before 
draping. The eyelids are closed and covered by transpar-
ent and waterproof film dressing to avoid abrasion and 
chemical injury to the eyes from prep solutions. A soft 
bite block should be placed and secured to prevent injury 
from biting secondary to motor monitoring or seizures.
Resection of supratentorial tumors and intracranial 
vascular lesions is typically accomplished with the 
patient in supine, semilateral, or lateral position. Resec-
tion of posterior fossa/infratentorial tumors frequently 
requires placement of the patient in a prone or sitting 
position. The sitting position facilitates surgical exposure 
of posterior fossa tumors, but because of the high risk of 
venous air embolism (>25% incidence), the prone posi-
tion is frequently used instead. Other risks associated 
with the sitting position include upper airway edema as 
a result of venous obstruction from excessive cervical 
flexion and quadriplegia from spinal cord compression 
and ischemia, especially in the presence of preexisting 
cervical stenosis. An alternative approach is the “park 
bench position,” in which the patient is placed in a lateral 
position but rolled slightly forward with the head further 
rotated to “look” at the floor. This position allows the 
surgeon full access to the posterior fossa and minimizes 
the risk for venous air embolism.
Extreme rotation, flexion and extension of the head 
and neck should be avoided, especially in patients with 
cervical spine diseases or elderly patients with arthritis 
or osteoporosis. Twisting, stretching, and compression 
of the neck vascular structures should also be avoided. 
A chest roll is frequently used in patients positioned 
lateral or in the park bench position, but not semilateral 
position. Pressure points should be adequately padded 
to avoid compression injury. The body weight should be 
borne by multiple points, not a single point, in a fashion 
of even distribution. Slight flexion of elbows and knees is 
recommended. Mechanisms to prevent patients from slip-
ping should be instituted if the operating table is tilted 
during surgery. The patient's tolerance and ease of air-
way instrumentation, when needed, should also be taken 
into consideration during positioning for any procedure 
that is to be done under monitored anesthesia care such 
as deep brain stimulator placement or awake craniotomy.
A special consideration during neurologic surgery 
is the application of a head frame using pins. Caution 
must be exercised to avoid bucking or movement during 
the placement and removal of the head frame and while 
the patient is fixed in the frame to avoid injury to the 
patient. Additional doses of propofol and/or opioids are 
frequently administered immediately before head frame 
placement to blunt the hemodynamic fluctuation. A 
bolus of remifentanil (1 to 2 mcg/kg) is a commonly used 
and effective medication for this purpose.
Maintenance of Anesthesia
The goal of anesthetic care during neurosurgical proce-
dures is to provide appropriate levels of unconscious-
ness and analgesia; facilitate brain relaxation while 
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
540
maintaining optimal cerebral perfusion; facilitate neu-
rophysiologic monitoring; and enable a smooth and 
prompt emergence without confusion, agitation, nausea, 
and shivering.15 Deep levels of anesthesia may adversely 
affect the quality of neurophysiologic monitoring and 
prolong emergence. Targeting a lighter plane of anesthe-
sia facilitates neurophysiologic monitoring and enables 
a quicker emergence, although it may risk patient move-
ment if used without muscle paralysis.
Anesthesia is often maintained using a combination 
of propofol and remifentanil infusion, with or without a 
low-dose volatile anesthetic agent (MAC 0.3–0.4). Some 
practitioners add dexmedetomidine infusion. The use 
of nitrous oxide and ketamine infusion during neuro-
surgical procedures is controversial. Volatile anesthetic 
agents must be used carefully because of their ability 
to increase ICP. The choice of anesthetic agents should 
also take into account the neurophysiologic monitoring 
being used because certain agents (e.g., volatile anes-
thetic agents and nitrous oxide) may adversely affect the 
quality of monitoring. High doses of propofol may affect 
EEG monitoring. Collaboration with the neuromonitor-
ing team is essential to facilitate appropriate monitor-
ing and communication if any issues arise during the 
procedure.
Direct-acting vasodilating drugs (hydralazine, nitro-
prusside, nitroglycerin, calcium channel blockers) may 
increase CBF and ICP despite causing simultaneous 
decreases in systemic blood pressure; therefore use of 
these drugs, particularly before the dura is open, is not 
encouraged. On the contrary, sympathomimetic drugs 
such as phenylephrine or norepinephrine are often infused 
to maintain arterial blood pressure and an ideal CPP.
Inadequate depth of anesthesia can result in patient 
movement, coughing, or reacting to the presence of 
the tracheal tube during intracranial procedures. These 
responses can lead to complications such as increases 
in ICP, surgical bleeding, and brain swelling. Because 
deep levels of anesthesia may impede neurophysiologic 
monitoring, the depth of anesthesia should be carefully 
titrated. Muscle paralysis provides insurance against 
movement or coughing but is not possible in cases with 
motor monitoring. In these cases anesthesia providers 
can consider the use of an opioid infusion (e.g., remifen-
tanil or fentanyl) with a propofol infusion, with the pos-
sible addition of a low-dose volatile agent.
ICP Reduction and Brain Relaxation
As discussed earlier, ICP reduction and brain relaxa-
tion are related but distinct concepts. Osmotic agents 
such as mannitol (0.25–1 g/kg IV) or 3% hypertonic 
saline are frequently administered to reduce cerebral 
water content and decrease ICP before craniectomy and 
improve brain relaxation after craniectomy.16 The onset 
of action is 5 to 10 minutes, maximum effects are seen 
in 20 to 30 minutes, and the effects last for about 2 to 
4hours. However, if administered rapidly, mannitol can 
also cause peripheral vasodilation (hypotension) and 
short-term intravascular volume expansion, which could 
result in increased ICP and volume overload. Mannitol 
is a relatively well-tolerated drug.16 Furosemide (0.3–
0.5mg/kg IV) is sometimes used in combination with 
mannitol to decrease brain water and ICP and is thought 
to be synergistic with mannitol in decreasing ICP. How-
ever, hypovolemia secondary to diuresis may adversely 
affect cardiac output and tissue perfusion. Intravascular 
volume replacement should take into account losses 
resulting from diuresis. Hyperventilation is an effective 
strategy to reduce ICP and improve brain relaxation, with 
immediate onset. Intravenous agents may be preferred 
over volatile agents when ICP reduction and brain relax-
ation are critical, although there are no clinical outcome 
data to support one anesthetic technique over another. 
The patient's position is also important, as placing the 
patient in a head-up position will decrease ICP. Finally, 
any constriction around the neck should be avoided, as 
it may impair venous drainage.
Ventilation Adjustment
After tracheal intubation, ventilation of the lungs is con-
trolled at a rate and tidal volume sufficient to maintain 
Paco2 between 30 and 35 mm Hg. There is no evidence 
of additional therapeutic benefit when Paco2 is decreased 
below this range. It remains unclear whether a smaller tidal 
volume is lung protective during neurologic procedures. 
Use of high levels of positive end-expiratory pressure 
(PEEP) is not encouraged because of impairment of cer-
ebral venous drainage and potential for increased ICP, but 
this can usually be counteracted by raising the head 10 to 
15 cm above the level of the chest. Recruitment maneuvers 
or large increases in intrathoracic pressure can increase 
ICP and reduce blood pressure and should be avoided. 
Hypoventilation is detrimental, as hypercapnia causes 
cerebral vasodilation, increased CBF and ICP, and impaired 
cerebral autoregulation.1 Overall, the current consensus is 
to maintain eucapnia during intracranial surgery and use 
relative hyperventilation only as a temporizing measure.
Fluid Management
Maintaining euvolemia is recommended. Dextrose solu-
tions are not recommended because they are rapidly 
distributed throughout body water, and if blood glucose 
concentrations decrease more rapidly than brain glucose 
concentrations, water crosses the blood–brain barrier 
and cerebral edema results. Furthermore, hyperglycemia 
augments ischemic neuronal cell damage by promot-
ing neuronal lactate production, which worsens cellular 
injury. Therefore crystalloid solutions such as normal 
saline, PlasmaLyte, and lactated Ringer solution are 
IV
Chapter 30 Central Nervous System Disease
541
recommended. Colloids such as 5% albumin are also an 
acceptable replacement fluid but have not been shown to 
improve outcomes compared with crystalloids and may 
be detrimental in patients with traumatic brain injury.17
Goal-directed fluid therapy shows promise but requires 
further study in brain-injured patients.
Blood Product Administration and 
Anticoagulant Management
The transfusion trigger for red blood cells remains con-
troversial in patients undergoing neurosurgical proce-
dures. The decision to transfuse is based on the patient's 
age, baseline hemoglobin, ongoing blood loss during sur-
gery, comorbidities, and signs of organ dysfunction. Cur-
rently available evidence suggests that a hemoglobin of 
less than 9 to 10 g/dL is associated with worse outcomes 
in neurologically impaired patients, although the role 
of transfusion remains to be determined. Ultimately, the 
decision to transfuse should be individualized. Coagulop-
athy and thrombocytopenia are associated with a higher 
risk of perioperative bleeding and should be corrected, 
particularly given the risk of intracranial hematoma. 
Anticoagulants, including aspirin, are typically stopped 
before surgery; however, specific practice varies, as there 
is no consensus for patients undergoing neurosurgery.
Emergence From Anesthesia and Postoperative 
Care
On awakening from anesthesia, coughing or straining by 
the patient should be avoided, given the risk of inducing 
an intracranial hemorrhage or cerebral edema. Remifen-
tanil can be used to facilitate a smooth emergence, 
particularly if a low-dose infusion is continued through 
emergence. A prior intravenous bolus of lidocaine, opi-
oid, or both may help decrease the likelihood of coughing 
during tracheal extubation. After extubation, early and 
frequent neurologic assessments are important to identify 
neurologic injury or ischemia or intracranial hematoma. 
Delayed return of consciousness or neurologic deteriora-
tion in the postoperative period should be immediately 
assessed with consideration for further urgent imaging 
(e.g., CT or MRI). Intracranial hemorrhage, stroke, and 
tension pneumocephalus should be ruled out as early as 
possible. The postoperative sympathetic stress response 
(hypertension, tachycardia) should be attenuated using 
labetalol, nicardipine, or opioids to avoid precipitating 
intracranial hematoma. Drugs that reduce MAP without 
cerebral vasodilation are preferred.
Venous Air Embolism
Neurosurgical procedures are considered at higher risk 
of venous air embolism for several reasons. These pro-
cedures often require significant elevation of the head, 
which elevates the operative site above the level of the 
heart and increases the risk for venous air embolism.18 In 
addition, the venous sinuses in the cut edge of bone or 
dura may not collapse when transected, which can allow 
air to enter the venous system. Once air is entrained, it 
enters the pulmonary circulation and becomes trapped 
in small vessels and acutely increases dead space. Mas-
sive air embolism may cause air to be trapped in the 
right ventricle and subsequently cause acute right ven-
tricular failure. Microvascular bubbles may also cause 
reflex bronchoconstriction and activate the release of 
endothelial mediators causing pulmonary edema. Death 
is usually the result of cardiovascular collapse and arte-
rial hypoxemia. Air may reach the coronary and cerebral 
circulations (paradoxical air embolism) by crossing a 
patent foramen ovale, which is present in 20% to 30% 
of adults, and result in myocardial infarction or stroke. 
Furthermore, transpulmonary passage of venous air is 
possible even in the absence of a patent foramen ovale.
Transesophageal echocardiography is the most sensi-
tive method to detect air embolism, but it is invasive and 
may be impractical during intracranial surgery. A precor-
dial Doppler ultrasound transducer placed over the right 
heart (over the second or third intercostal space to the 
right or left of the sternum to maximize audible signals 
from the right atrium) is the next most sensitive, detect-
ing amounts of air as small as 0.25mL.19 This monitor 
represents a practical noninvasive indicator of the pres-
ence of intracardiac air. A sudden decrease in end-tidal 
concentrations of carbon dioxide reflects increased dead 
space secondary to continued ventilation of nonperfused 
alveoli. An increased end-tidal nitrogen concentration 
may reflect nitrogen from venous air embolism if the 
inspired oxygen fraction is 100%, but end-tidal nitrogen 
is rarely monitored. Aspiration of air through a correctly 
positioned central venous catheter can also be used to 
diagnose air embolism. A right atrial catheter with the tip 
positioned at the junction of the superior vena cava and 
the right atrium may allow rapid aspiration of air. Dur-
ing controlled ventilation of the lungs, sudden attempts 
(gasps) by patients to initiate spontaneous breaths may 
be an early indication of venous air embolism. Hypoten-
sion, tachycardia, cardiac dysrhythmias, hypoxemia, and 
a “mill wheel” murmur are late signs of air embolism. A 
pulmonary artery catheter may show an abrupt increase 
in pulmonary artery pressure. In awake patients addi-
tional signs of venous air embolism include chest pain, 
coughing, and anxiety.
Once recognized, the management includes avoiding 
further entrainment of air and supportive care. The sur-
geon should be notified immediately whenever venous 
air embolism is suspected in order to minimize further 
air entry into the circulation. Venous air embolism is 
treated by (1) irrigation of the operative site with fluid, in 
addition to the application of occlusive material to bone 
edges (e.g., bone wax) to occlude potential sites of air 
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
542
entry; (2) placement of the patient in a head-down posi-
tion; (3) gentle compression of the internal jugular veins 
and intravenous fluids to increase venous pressure; (4) 
ensuring 100% inspired oxygen fraction; and (5)hemo-
dynamic support. If nitrous oxide is being administered, 
it should be promptly discontinued to avoid the risk of 
increasing the size of air bubbles. Despite the logic of 
applying PEEP to decrease entrainment of air, the effi-
cacy of this maneuver has not been confirmed. Further-
more, PEEP could reverse the pressure gradient between 
the left and right atria and predispose to passage of air 
across a patent foramen ovale.
COMMON CLINICAL CASES
Intracranial Mass Lesions (Box 30.3)
The pathology of an intracranial mass lesion may be a 
primary brain tumor or a metastatic tumor. The signs 
and symptoms are diverse and often nonspecific. The 
clinical manifestations may or may not reflect increases 
in ICP. The initial diagnosis is usually made by MRI. 
Abrupt increases in ICP should be avoided when car-
ing for patients with a large intracranial mass lesion. 
The patient's position during surgery is determined by 
the location of the tumor and surgical approach. Dexa-
methasone is commonly used to reduce peritumor edema, 
particularly after tumor resection. Patients with supraten-
torial tumors will sometimes receive an intraoperative 
dose of antiepileptics. Strategies to increase brain relaxa-
tion are frequently required with large tumors, particu-
larly if there is significant preoperative peritumor edema 
or midline shift. Awake craniotomy with intraoperative 
mapping may be indicated for lesions residing in close 
proximity to eloquent areas of the brain.20
Sitting-position craniotomy for posterior fossa tumor 
resection has several additional considerations, although 
this approach is rarely used. A patent foramen ovale can 
be excluded using preoperative echocardiography. As the 
neck is flexed, there is a risk of tongue edema and air-
way compromise. CPP should be accurately measured by 
ensuring the transducer of the arterial line is positioned 
no lower than the external ear canal level, and hypoten-
sion should be minimized. Given the high risk of venous 
air embolism, a properly positioned central venous cath-
eter and precordial Doppler are recommended. Adequate 
hydration is warranted to compensate for the blood 
pooling in the lower body. Posterior fossa operations 
have the potential of stimulating or injuring vital brain-
stem respiratory and circulatory centers and can result 
in intraoperative arrhythmias, hemodynamic instability, 
and postoperative respiratory insufficiency. The cranial 
nerves can also be stimulated or affected, which can lead 
to intraoperative dysrhythmias and postoperative impair-
ment of protective airway reflexes. Postoperatively, the 
decision to extubate is based on the patient's ability to 
protect their airway and the risk of ventilatory failure.
Intracranial Aneurysms (Box 30.4)
Intracranial aneurysms occur in 2% to 4% of the popula-
tion. The risk of rupture (subarachnoid hemorrhage) in 
these individuals is 1% to 2% per year. Although many 
aneurysms are found incidentally, many present for the 
first time after rupture. Subarachnoid hemorrhage leads 
to a sudden onset of severe headache, nausea, vomit-
ing, focal neurologic signs, and/or altered conscious-
ness. Subarachnoid hemorrhage can result in major 
complications, including death, rebleeding, vasospasm, 
acute hydrocephalus, and delayed cerebral ischemia. 
Aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage is a common 
Box 30.3
Management of Anesthesia for Patients With 
Intracranial Masses
Preoperative
•Avoid sedatives and opioids if ICP is elevated.
•Standard anxiolytics can be given if ICP is not elevated.
Monitors
Supratentorial Masses
•Standard ASA monitors, arterial line, temperature, and
Foley catheter are used.
Infratentorial Masses—Depending on Positioning
•Prone or park bench position: Standard ASA monitors,
arterial line, temperature, and Foley catheter are 
adequate.
•Sitting position (associated with increased frequency of
VAE): Standard monitors plus central venous catheter, 
precordial Doppler, or TEE are required.
Induction
•Adequate anesthesia and skeletal muscle paralysis are
obtained before direct laryngoscopy/tracheal intubation 
to avoid increasing ICP while maintaining CPP.
Maintenance
•Maintain adequate CPP.
•Assure adequate brain relaxation.
•Opioid (e.g., remifentanil infusion) plus propofol infusion
and/or low MAC volatile anesthetic.
•Avoid intraoperative muscle relaxant if motor function is
tested/mapped.
•Mannitol (0.25–1 g/kg IV) for brain relaxation.
•Maintain euvolemia.
•Eucapnia if normal ICP; temporary hyperventilation for a
tight brain only.
Postoperative
•Avoid coughing, straining, and systemic hypertension
during tracheal extubation.
•Rapid awakening allows early neurologic assessment.
ASA, American Society of Anesthesiologists; CPP, cerebral perfusion 
pressure; ICP, intracranial pressure; MAC, mean alveolar concentration; 
TEE, transesophageal echocardiography; VAE, venous air embolism.
IV
Chapter 30 Central Nervous System Disease
543
cause of intracranial hemorrhage that requires treat-
ment in interventional radiology suites or operating 
rooms. Short- to medium-term outcomes are similar in 
patients treated surgically versus endovascular insertion 
of platinum coils, although the long-term benefits of one 
technique over the other continue to be debated.21 Some 
patients are unsuitable candidates for endovascular coil-
ing because of the anatomy and location of their aneu-
rysms; in these cases surgical clipping is required.
Early treatment is advocated to reduce the rebleeding 
risk, but surgery may be associated with greater technical 
difficulty because of a swollen inflamed brain. Cerebral 
vasospasm is generally manifested clinically 3 to 5 days 
after subarachnoid hemorrhage and is the foremost cause 
of morbidity and mortality. Transcranial Doppler and cer-
ebral angiography can detect cerebral vasospasm before 
clinical symptoms (worsening headache, neurologic dete-
rioration, loss of consciousness) occur. So-called “triple 
H” therapy (hypervolemia, hypertension, hemodilution) 
was used in the past to treat vasospasm, but its use has 
been questioned because of the lack of convincing evi-
dence of benefit.22 Nimodipine decreases the morbidity 
and mortality from vasospasm and is one of the few 
medical treatments for vasospasm with proven beneficial 
effects.23 Other treatment modalities include selective 
intraarterial injection of vasodilators and balloon dila-
tion (angioplasty) of the affected arterial segments in the 
interventional neuroradiology suite (also see Chapter 38).
Other complications of subarachnoid hemorrhage 
include seizures (10%), acute and chronic hydrocepha-
lus, and intracerebral hematoma. Changes on the ECG 
(T-wave inversions, U waves, ST depressions, prolonged 
QT, and rarely Q waves) and mild elevation of cardiac 
enzymes are frequent but do not usually correlate with 
significant myocardial dysfunction or poor outcome. 
Hyponatremia is commonly seen after subarachnoid 
hemorrhage. Significant electrolyte, acid–base abnormal-
ities, or hemodynamic derangements should be corrected 
if present, and a cardiac workup should ensue if Q waves 
are seen on ECG.
The anesthetic care for intracranial aneurysm clipping 
is designed to (1) prevent sudden increases in systemic 
arterial blood pressure, which would increase the aneu-
rysm's transmural pressure and could result in rupture or 
rebleeding, and (2) facilitate surgical exposure and access 
to the aneurysm. Induction and maintenance of anes-
thesia must be designed to minimize the hypertensive 
responses evoked by noxious stimulation, such as direct 
laryngoscopy and placing the patient's head in immo-
bilizing pins. Conversely, CPP must be maintained to 
prevent ischemia during surgical retraction or temporary 
vessel occlusion or as a result of vasospasm.
Hemodynamic control is important during dissection 
of the aneurysm to prevent intraoperative rupture. Tem-
porary occlusive clips applied to the major feeding artery 
of the aneurysm can create regional arterial hypotension 
and cerebral ischemia. It is judicious to maintain a nor-
mal or even increased systemic arterial blood pressure 
to facilitate perfusion through collateral circulations. In 
addition to maintaining collateral cerebral circulations 
via systemic relative hypertension, drugs such as propo-
fol or thiopental may be administered, via either boluses 
or high-rate infusion to the point of burst suppression 
on electroencephalography monitoring, in the hope that 
they can provide some protection from cerebral ischemia. 
Occasionally, hypothermic circulatory arrest may be 
used for very large complex aneurysms. Unfortunately, 
convincing evidence supporting the benefits of these 
maneuvers is lacking.
The patient's trachea is generally extubated at the 
completion of surgery unless there is significant neuro-
logic impairment or other intraoperative complications. 
Measures to prevent vasospasm and seizures while main-
taining adequate CPP should be continued during care of 
these patients postoperatively.
Arteriovenous Malformations
The incidence of AVMs in the general population and 
annual rate of rupture are similar to aneurysms, at 2% 
Box 30.4
Anesthetic Management of Patients 
With Intracranial Aneurysms
Preoperative
•Neurologic evaluation is performed to look for evidence of
increased intracranial pressure and vasospasm.
•Electrocardiogram changes are often present.
•HHH therapy when vasospasm present is becoming
controversial.
•Nimodipine therapy is considered standard care.
Induction
•Avoid increases in systemic blood pressure.
•Maintain cerebral perfusion pressure to avoid ischemia.
Maintenance
•Opioid (e.g., remifentanil infusion) plus propofol infusion
and/or low MAC volatile anesthetic
•Mannitol (0.25–1 g/kg IV) for brain relaxation
•Maintain normal to increased systemic blood pressure to
avoid ischemia during surgical retraction and temporary 
clipping.
•Maintain euvolemia.
•Maintain eucapnia; avoid unnecessary hyperventilation.
•EEG burst suppression can be considered.
•Avoid hyperthermia.
Postoperative
•Maintain normal to increased systemic blood pressure
•Early awakening is recommended to facilitate neurologic
assessment
•HHH therapy should be used with caution in patients
with vasospasm
HHH, Hypervolemia, hypertension, hemodilution.
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
544
to 4% and 2%, respectively. Up to 10% of patients diag-
nosed with an AVM have an associated aneurysm.24 Risk 
of hemorrhage is related to the anatomic features of 
AVM, including size and characteristics of the feeding 
arteries. These patients may be treated in several ways: 
expectantly, open resection, endovascular embolization, 
or with stereotactic radiosurgery (gamma knife). Preop-
erative embolization is frequently employed to reduce 
blood loss and facilitate surgical resection.
Anesthesia for resection or embolization of AVMs is 
similar to that of aneurysms with a few distinct con-
siderations. Because of their flow characteristics (low-
pressure, high-flow shunts), AVMs are unlikely to rupture 
during acute systemic hypertension, such as during 
laryngoscopy. Despite this, hypertension should still be 
avoided during induction, given the high rate of associ-
ated aneurysms. Finally, anesthesia for intracranial AVM 
resection must include preparation for massive, persistent 
blood loss and postoperative cerebral swelling.
Carotid Disease (Box 30.5)
In the United States stroke is the fifth leading cause of 
death and a significant cause of disability. A significant 
proportion of strokes is the result of atherosclerotic ste-
nosis of the carotid artery. Despite the technical advance-
ment and increasing adoption of carotid artery stenting 
(CAS), carotid endarterectomy (CEA) remains the “gold 
standard” in treating symptomatic carotid disease.25
Although the perioperative risk of stroke and death 
(approximately 4%–7%) must be taken into account, CEA 
may be beneficial in asymptomatic patients as well.26
Data suggest that early CEA (<30 days after symptom 
onset) is optimal given the presence of unstable athero-
sclerotic plaque.27
Preoperative assessment of patients undergoing CEA 
should focus on assessment of perioperative risk of car-
diac ischemia, as these patients typically have atheroscle-
rotic cardiovascular disease. Either general or regional 
anesthesia (deep and superficial cervical plexus block) 
may be used for this procedure. Although an awake 
patient may provide a more accurate intraoperative 
assessment of the patient's neurologic status and more 
stable hemodynamic profile, it requires a cooperative 
and motionless patient. Current evidence suggests that 
outcomes are similar whether CEA is performed with 
regional or general anesthesia.28
Goals of anesthesia for CEA include (1) prevention 
of cerebral ischemia through maintenance of adequate 
CPP and (2) prevention of myocardial ischemia through 
avoidance of acute peaks in blood pressure and heart 
rate. Invasive hemodynamic monitoring with a peripheral 
arterial catheter is indicated to ensure adequate CPP. This 
is especially important during intraoperative clamping of 
the carotid artery. The anesthesia provider should ensure 
that the MAP is maintained above the patient's baseline 
pressure (within 20%) to ensure adequate collateral 
flow through the circle of Willis. Hypocarbia should be 
avoided, given the risk of cerebral vasoconstriction and 
ischemia. Many methods have been employed to detect 
intraoperative cerebral ischemia and need for shunting 
during clamping, including EEG, evoked potentials, tran-
scranial Doppler, cerebral oximetry, and stump pressure, 
although none have been shown to definitively improve 
outcome.
Postoperative complications include cardiovascular 
ischemia and neurologic deficits secondary to intraop-
erative emboli. Hypertension should be avoided because 
it may lead to two complications: neck hematoma with 
airway compromise and/or hyperperfusion syndrome. 
Cerebral hyperperfusion syndrome, although rare, can 
cause symptoms ranging from severe headache and eye 
and facial pain to focal neurologic deficits, seizures, and 
loss of consciousness.29 The mechanism most commonly 
cited is impairment of cerebral autoregulation. Manage-
ment includes maintaining postprocedure blood pressure 
lower than 140/90, or possibly lower based on patient 
and procedure characteristics.
Box 30.5
Management of Anesthesia for Patients 
With Carotid Stenosis
Preoperative
•Neurologic examination is indicated to look for
preoperative deficits.
•Screen for associated CAD.
•Anxiolytics may be useful.
Monitors
•Standard ASA monitors, arterial line, and Foley catheter
are used.
•Cerebral ischemia monitoring depends on institutional
and individual practitioner's preference.
Induction
•Avoid increases in mean arterial pressure or heart rate if
CAD is suspected.
•Maintain adequate CPP.
Maintenance
•Maintain adequate CPP (baseline to 20 % above) during
carotid clamping.
•Opioid (e.g., remifentanil infusion) plus propofol infusion
and/or low MAC volatile anesthetic
•Close intraoperative monitoring for cerebral ischemia
during carotid clamping by keeping the patient awake or 
based on various monitoring modalities
Postoperative
•Avoid coughing, straining, and systemic hypertension
during tracheal extubation.
•Rapid awakening allows early neurologic assessment.
•Monitor for hyperperfusion syndrome and airway
compromise.
ASA, American Society of Anesthesiologists; CAD, coronary artery 
disease; CPP, cerebral perfusion pressure.
IV
Chapter 30 Central Nervous System Disease
545
1. Meng L, Gelb AW. Regulation of cer-
ebral autoregulation by carbon dioxide. 
Anesthesiology. 2015;122(1):196–205.
2. Meng L, Hou W, Chui J, Han R, Gelb 
AW. Cardiac output and cerebral blood 
flow: The integrated regulation of brain 
perfusion in adult humans. Anesthesi-
ology. 2015;123(5):1198–1208.
3. Polderman KH. Mechanisms of action, 
physiological effects, and complica-
tions of hypothermia. Crit Care Med. 
2009;37(7 Suppl):S186–S202.
4. Dagal A, Lam AM. Cerebral autoregula-
tion and anesthesia. Curr Opin Anaes-
thesiol. 2009;22(5):547–552.
5. Meng L, Wang Y, Zhang L, McDonagh 
DL. Heterogeneity and variability in 
pressure autoregulation of organ blood 
flow: Lessons learned over 100+ years. 
Crit Care Med. 2019;47(3):436–448.
6. Guidelines for the management of 
severe traumatic brain injury. J Neuro-
trauma. 2007;24(Suppl 1):S1–S106.
7. Albanèse J, Arnaud S, Rey M, Thoma-
chot L, Alliez B, Martin C. Ketamine 
decreases intracranial pressure and 
electroencephalographic activity in 
traumatic brain injury patients dur-
ing propofol sedation. Anesthesiology. 
1997;87(6):1328–1334.
8. Li J, Gelb AW, Flexman AM, Ji F, 
Meng L. Definition, evaluation, and 
management of brain relaxation 
during craniotomy. Br J Anaesth. 
2016;116(6):759–769.
9. Reddy RV, Moorthy SS, Dierdorf SF, 
Deitch RD, Link L. Excitatory effects 
and electroencephalographic correlation 
of etomidate, thiopental, methohexi-
tal, and propofol. Anesth Analg. 
1993;77(5):1008–1011.
10. Muzzi DA, Losasso TJ, Dietz NM, Faust 
RJ, Cucchiara RF, Milde LN. The effect 
of desflurane and isoflurane on cer-
ebrospinal fluid pressure in humans 
with supratentorial mass lesions. Anes-
thesiology. 1992;76(5):720–724.
11. Kovarik WD, Mayberg TS, Lam AM, 
Mathisen TL, Winn HR. Succinylcholine 
does not change intracranial pressure, 
cerebral blood flow velocity, or the 
electroencephalogram in patients with 
neurologic injury. Anesthesia & Anal-
gesia. 1994;78(3):469–473.
12. Meng L. General anesthetic agents 
are not neuroprotective and may be 
neurotoxic. J Neurosurg Anesthesiol. 
2019;31(4):362–364.
13. Bernard SA, Gray TW, Buist MD, etal. 
Treatment of comatose survivors of 
out-of-hospital cardiac arrest with 
induced hypothermia. N Engl J Med. 
2002;346(8):557–563.
14. Nielsen N, Wetterslev J, Cronberg T, 
etal. Targeted temperature management 
at 33°C versus 36°C after cardiac arrest. 
N Engl J Med. 2013;369(23):2197–2206.
15. Flexman AM, Wang T, Meng L. Neu-
roanesthesia and outcomes: Evidence, 
opinions, and speculations on clinically 
relevant topics. Curr Opin Anesthesiol. 
2019;32(5):539–545.
16. Zhang W, Neal J, Lin L, etal. Mannitol 
in critical care and surgery over 50+ 
years: A systematic review of rand-
omized controlled trials and complica-
tions with meta-analysis. J Neurosurg 
Anesthesiol. 2019;31(3):273–284.
17. Myburgh J, Cooper DJ, Finfer S, etal. 
Saline or albumin for fluid resuscita-
tion in patients with traumatic brain 
injury. N Engl J Med. 2007;357(9):874–
884.
18. Muth CM, Shank ES. Gas embolism. N 
Engl J Med. 2000;342(7):476–482.
19. Schubert A, Deogaonkar A, Drummond 
JC. Precordial Doppler probe placement 
for optimal detection of venous air 
embolism during craniotomy. Anesth 
Analg. 2006;102(5):1543–1547.
20. Meng L, McDonagh DL, Berger MS, 
Gelb AW. Anesthesia for awake crani-
otomy: A how-to guide for the occa-
sional practitioner. Can J Anaesth. 
2017;64(5):517–529.
21. Thomas AJ, Ogilvy CS. ISAT: Equipoise 
in treatment of ruptured cerebral aneu-
rysms? Lancet. 2015;385(9969):666–668.
22. Dankbaar JW, Slooter AJ, Rinkel GJ, 
Schaaf IC. Effect of different compo-
nents of triple-H therapy on cerebral 
perfusion in patients with aneurysmal 
subarachnoid haemorrhage: A system-
atic review. Crit Care. 2010;14(1):R23.
23. Wang J, McDonagh DL, Meng L. Calci-
um channel blockers in acute care: The 
links and missing links between hemo-
dynamic effects and outcome evidence. 
Am J Cardiovasc Drugs. 2021;21(1):35–
49.
24. Ogilvy CS, Stieg PE, Awad I, etal. 
Recommendations for the management 
of intracranial arteriovenous malfor-
mations: A statement for healthcare 
professionals from a special writing 
group of the Stroke Council, Ameri-
can Stroke Association. Circulation. 
2001;103(21):2644–2657.
25. Kolkert JL, Meerwaldt R, Geelkerken RH, 
Zeebregts CJ. Endarterectomy or carotid 
artery stenting: The quest continues 
part two. Am J Surg. 2015;209(2):403–
412.
26. Raman G, Moorthy D, Hadar N, etal. 
Management strategies for asympto-
matic carotid stenosis: A systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Ann Intern 
Med. 2013;158(9):676–685.
27. Rerkasem K, Rothwell PM. Systematic 
review of the operative risks of carotid 
endarterectomy for recently sympto-
matic stenosis in relation to the timing 
of surgery. Stroke. 2009;40(10):e564–
e572.
28. Lewis SC, Warlow CP, Bodenham AR, 
etal. General anaesthesia versus local 
anaesthesia for carotid surgery (GALA): 
A multicentre, randomised controlled 
trial. Lancet. 2008;372(9656):2132–
2142.
29. Lin YH, Liu HM. Update on cerebral 
hyperperfusion syndrome. J Neuro-
interv 
Surg. 
2020;12(8):788–793. 
doi:10.1136/neurintsurg-2019-015621 
AugEpub 2020 May 15. PMID: 
32414892; PMCID: PMC7402457.
REFERENCES
546
Chapter
Surgical procedures of the head and neck present unique 
anesthetic challenges. Operative field isolation places the 
anesthesia provider at a distance from the airway and 
hampers access to the patient. The region's extensive 
parasympathetic innervations predispose patients to 
intraoperative bradycardia and asystole. Ophthalmic and 
otolaryngologic procedures require smooth induction 
and emergence from anesthesia. Coughing and bucking 
increase venous and intraocular pressure (IOP), which 
may negatively affect surgical outcome.
OPHTHALMOLOGY
More than 2 million cataract operations are completed 
nationally each year. Most eye procedures are consid-
ered low risk for perioperative complications; however, 
ophthalmic patients are often at greater risk during sur-
gery because typically they include the elderly (also see 
Chapter 35), who frequently have multiple concomitant 
medical issues, or pediatric patients (also see Chapter 34), 
who may be premature or have associated syndromes.1
Additionally, most operations are conducted on an ambu-
latory basis (also see Chapter 37), emphasizing the impor-
tance of preoperative evaluation (also see Chapter 13).
Most ophthalmologic procedures are performed via 
monitored anesthesia care (MAC) and some form of regional 
or topical eye anesthetic.2 Aside from intraoperative analge-
sia and akinesia, advantages of ophthalmic regional blocks 
include suppression of the oculocardiac reflex (OCR) and 
provision of postoperative pain management. An under-
standing of regional block techniques and management 
of their complications is requisite. General anesthesia is 
reserved for operations of prolonged duration; more inva-
sive orbital procedures; and patients unable to remain rela-
tively still such as neonates, infants, and children.
Anesthetic drugs and maneuvers may affect ocular 
dynamics and surgical outcomes, and ophthalmic medi-
cations can cause adverse anesthesia reactions or may 
OPHTHALMOLOGY
Intraocular Pressure
Ophthalmic Medications
Oculocardiac Reflex
Preoperative Assessment
Anesthetic Options
Anesthesia Management of Specific Ophthalmic 
Procedures
Postoperative Eye Issues
OTOLARYNGOLOGY
Special Considerations for Head and Neck 
Surgery
Anesthesia Management of Specific 
Otolaryngology Procedures
OPHTHALMOLOGY AND 
OTOLARYNGOLOGY
Steven Gayer, Howard D. Palte
31
IV
Chapter 31 Ophthalmology and Otolaryngology
547
significantly affect systemic physiology. Appreciation of 
factors affecting IOP and vigilance vis-à-vis the OCR are 
critical.
Intraocular Pressure
Adequate pressure within the eye serves to maintain 
refracting surfaces, corneal contour, and functionally 
correct vision. IOP is primarily derived from a bal-
ance between aqueous humor production and drainage. 
Aqueous humor is actively secreted from the posterior 
chamber's ciliary body and flows through the pupil into 
the anterior chamber, where it is admixed with aque-
ous humor passively produced by blood vessels on the 
iris's forward surface. After washing over the avascular 
lens and corneal endothelium, aqueous humor filters 
through the spongy trabecular meshwork into the canal 
of Schlemm tubules at the base of the cornea. From there, 
it exits the eye into episcleral veins and ultimately to 
the superior vena cava and right atrium. Therefore any 
obstruction of venous return from the eye to the right 
side of the heart can increase IOP. Lesser factors that 
influence IOP include force transmitted to the globe by 
contraction of the orbicularis oculi or extraocular mus-
cles in addition to hardening of the lens, vitreous, and 
sclera that can occur with aging.
IOP ranges between 10 and 22 mm Hg in the intact 
normal eye. Typically, there is a 2 to 5 mm Hg diurnal 
variation. Small transient changes occur with each car-
diac contraction and with eyelid closure, mydriasis, and 
postural changes. These changes are normal and have no 
bearing on the intact eye. A sustained increase in IOP 
during anesthesia, however, has the potential to produce 
acute glaucoma, retinal ischemia, hemorrhage, and per-
manent visual loss.
Factors That Influence Intraocular Pressure
Venous congestion resulting from obstruction at any 
point from the episcleral veins to the right atrium may 
cause a substantive increase of IOP. Before induction 
of anesthesia, Trendelenburg positioning or presence 
of a tight cervical collar can increase intraocular blood 
volume, dilate orbital vessels, and inhibit aqueous drain-
age. Straining, retching, or coughing during induction 
of anesthesia will markedly increase venous pressure 
and can readily precipitate an increase in IOP of 40 mm 
Hg or more. Should this occur while the globe is open 
during surgery, such as during corneal transplant, loss 
of vitreous, hemorrhage, and expulsion of eye contents 
may lead to permanent damage to the eye or even blind-
ness. Arterial hypertension can transiently increase IOP 
but has much less impact than perturbations of venous 
drainage. External compression on the globe by a tightly 
applied facemask, laryngoscopy, and tracheal intubation 
also elevate IOP, but placement of a supraglottic airway 
has minimal impact. Hypoxemia and hypoventilation can 
increase IOP. Hyperventilation and hypothermia have the 
opposite effect.
Anesthetic Drugs and Intraocular Pressure
Inhaled and most intravenous anesthetics produce dose-
related reductions in IOP. Although the exact mechanisms 
are not known, IOP is probably reduced by a combination 
of central nervous system depression, diminished aque-
ous humor production, enhanced aqueous outflow, and 
relaxation of extraocular muscles. There is controversy 
surrounding the effect of ketamine on IOP. Although 
ketamine may not increase IOP, it does cause rotatory 
nystagmus and blepharospasm, making it a less-than-
ideal anesthetic for eye surgery.
In the absence of alveolar hypoventilation, nondepo-
larizing neuromuscular blocking drugs decrease IOP via 
relaxation of the extraocular muscles. In contrast, suc-
cinylcholine produces an increase of about 9 mm Hg in 
1 to 4 minutes after intravenous administration, with a 
subsequent diminution to baseline within 7 minutes. The 
increase in IOP is probably the result of several mecha-
nisms, including tonic contraction of extraocular muscles, 
relaxation of orbital smooth muscle, choroidal vascu-
lar dilation, and aqueous outflow-impeding cycloplegia. 
Many clinicians avoid using succinylcholine with eye sur-
gery patients; however, pretreatment with a small dose of a 
nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking drug, lidocaine, 
β-blocker, or acetazolamide may attenuate the increase in 
IOP associated with induction of anesthesia with succinyl-
choline, direct laryngoscopy, and endotracheal intubation.
Ophthalmic Medications
Systemic absorption of topical ophthalmic drugs from 
either the conjunctiva or via drainage through the 
nasolacrimal duct onto the nasal mucosa can produce 
untoward side effects. These drops include acetylcholine, 
anticholinesterases, cyclopentolate, epinephrine, phe-
nylephrine, and timolol (Table 31.1). Phospholine iodide 
(echothiophate) is a miosis-inducing anticholinesterase 
that profoundly interferes with metabolism of succinyl-
choline. Prolonged paralysis after a single dose of succi-
nylcholine may ensue. Phenylephrine drops are available 
in concentrations of 2.5% and 10%. Systemic absorption 
via the nasolacrimal duct of 10% phenylephrine drops 
can induce transient malignant hypertension. Parenteral 
administration of a long-acting antihypertensive drug 
may result in untoward hypotension after resolution of 
the short-acting phenylephrine. Some systemic ophthal-
mic drugs, such as glycerol, mannitol, and acetazolamide, 
may also produce untoward side effects.
Oculocardiac Reflex
The OCR is a sudden profound decrease in heart rate 
in response to traction on the extraocular muscles or 
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
548
external pressure on the globe. There is a wide range 
of reported incidence, varying from approximately 15% 
to 80%. This reflex occurs more commonly in young 
patients. The reflex arc has a trigeminal nerve affer-
ent limb that generates an efferent vagal response that 
may precipitate a variety of dysrhythmias, including 
junctional or sinus bradycardia, atrioventricular block, 
ventricular bigeminy, multifocal premature ventricular 
contractions, ventricular tachycardia, and asystole.
The OCR is most often encountered during strabismus 
surgery but can occur during any type of ophthalmic 
surgery. OCR may also occur while performing an oph-
thalmic regional anesthetic nerve block. Hypercarbia, 
hypoxemia, and light planes of anesthetic depth augment 
the incidence and severity of OCR.
Prompt removal of the instigating surgical stimulus 
frequently results in rapid recovery. Unrelenting ten-
sion may induce cardiac arrest, so heart rate must be 
continuously monitored during eye regional block and 
surgery. At the first sign of dysrhythmia, surgery must 
stop and all pressure on the eye or traction on eye mus-
cles discontinued. The ventilatory status and depth of 
anesthesia should be reassessed. The reflex may extin-
guish itself after a few minutes; it also can be abated by 
administration of a parasympatholytic drug such as atro-
pine or glycopyrrolate. The OCR can also be eradicated 
by an anesthetic eye block, thereby abolishing its afferent 
arc. Paradoxically, initial placement of a regional block 
can induce the OCR.
The prophylactic use of intramuscular anticholin-
ergics for adult ophthalmic surgery patients is not 
recommended, as the tachycardia after atropine or 
glycopyrrolate may have significant consequences for 
geriatric patients with coexisting cardiac disease (also 
see Chapter 26). In children (also see Chapter 34) who 
are more dependent on heart rate to maintain cardiac 
output, prophylactic intravenous administration of 
atropine (0.01 to 0.02 mg/kg) or glycopyrrolate may be 
prudent just before commencing eye surgery.
Preoperative Assessment
Patients having eye surgery are often at the extremes of 
age, —ranging from premature babies with retinopathy 
to the elderly. Hence, special age-related considerations 
such as altered pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics 
apply (also see Chapter 35). The elderly, pediatric patients 
with various syndromes, and premature infants frequently 
Ophthalmic 
Indication
Drug
Mechanism of Action
Systemic Effect
Miosis
Acetylcholine
Cholinergic agonist
Bronchospasm, bradycardia, hypotension
Glaucoma 
(increased 
intraocular 
pressure)
Acetazolamide
Carbonic anhydrase 
inhibitor
Diuresis, hypokalemic metabolic acidosis
Echothiophate
Irreversible 
cholinesterase inhibitor
Prolongation of succinylcholine's effects
Reduction in plasma cholinesterase activity up to 3–7 weeks after 
discontinuation
Bradycardia, bronchospasm
Timolol
β-Adrenergic antagonist
Atropine-resistant bradycardia, bronchospasm, exacerbation of 
congestive heart failure; possible exacerbation of myasthenia gravis
Mydriasis, 
ophthalmic 
capillary 
decongestion
Atropine
Anticholinergic
Central anticholinergic syndrome (mad as a hatter, delirium, agitation; 
hot as a hare, fever; red as a beet, flushing; dry as a bone, xerostomia, 
anhidrosis)
Blurred vision (cycloplegia, photophobia)
Cyclopentolate
Anticholinergic
Disorientation, psychosis, convulsions, dysarthria
Epinephrine
α-, β-Adrenergic agonist
Hypertension, tachycardia, cardiac dysrhythmias; epinephrine 
paradoxically leads to decreased intraocular pressure and can also be 
used for glaucoma
Phenylephrine
α-Adrenergic agonist, 
direct-acting vasopressor
Hypertension (1 drop, or 0.05 mL, of a 10% solution contains 5 mg 
of phenylephrine)
Scopolamine
Anticholinergic
Central anticholinergic syndrome (see atropine earlier)
Table 31.1
Drugs Administered to Ophthalmic Surgery Patients
IV
Chapter 31 Ophthalmology and Otolaryngology
549
have multiple comorbid conditions. Preoperative evalua-
tion is vital, but routine laboratory testing is not appro-
priate. For cataract surgery, in particular, routine testing 
is associated with a significant increase in health care 
spending.3 Physician assessment and judgment determine 
the need for indicated laboratory testing.4 Cessation of 
antiplatelet/anticoagulant drugs before eye surgery is 
controversial.5 The risk of intraocular bleeding versus 
the risk of perioperative stroke, myocardial ischemia, and 
deep venous thrombosis must be assessed.6
One of the most important preoperative assessments 
is the likelihood of patient movement during surgery. 
Inability to remain supine and relatively still during 
intraocular surgery with MAC may result in eye injury 
and have devastating long-term visual consequences.7
Anesthetic Options
Anesthetic options for most ophthalmic procedures 
include general anesthesia, retrobulbar (intraconal) block, 
peribulbar (extraconal) anesthesia, sub-Tenon block, and 
topical analgesia (Box 31.1). Often, there is minimal 
exposure to regional anesthetic eye block techniques dur-
ing anesthesia training, creating a reluctance to perform 
such blocks. Professional societies dedicated to teaching 
safe ophthalmic regional anesthesia can provide valuable 
instruction.8 Site of surgery errors is more common for 
eye procedures than all other surgeries (except dental 
and digital). Of prime importance is confirmation of the 
correct side of surgery (i.e., right eye versus left eye) 
immediately before anesthesia and surgery.
Needle-Based Ophthalmic Regional Anesthesia
The anatomic foundation of needle-based eye blocks 
rests upon the concept of the orbital cone. This structure 
consists of the four ocular rectus muscles extending from 
their origin at the apex of the orbit to the globe ante-
riorly. These muscles and their surrounding connective 
tissue form a compartment behind the globe akin to the 
brachial plexus sheath in the axilla.
A retrobulbar block is performed by inserting a steeply 
angled needle from the inferotemporal orbital rim into 
this muscle cone such that the tip of the needle is behind 
(retro) the globe (bulbar).9 A more descriptive term is 


Fig. 
31.1 Needle-Based 
Regional 
Anesthesia 
for 
Ophthalmic Surgery. (A) An intraconal (retrobulbar) block is 
placed deeper and is more steeply angled. (B) An extraconal 
(peribulbar) block is shallower and minimally angled. Asterisk 
indicates needle entry point. A portion of the lateral orbital rim is 
removed. (Model courtesy of Dr. Roy Hamilton.)
Box 31.1
Goals for Anesthesia Management of 
Ophthalmic Surgery
Safety
Analgesia
Akinesia (when indicated)
Control of intraocular pressure
Avoidance of the oculocardiac reflex
Awareness of possible drug interactions
Awakening without coughing, nausea, or vomiting
intraconal block (Fig. 31.1).10 Injection of a small volume 
of local anesthetic into this compartment will produce 
rapid onset of akinesia and analgesia.
The boundary separating the intraconal from extra-
conal space is porous, and thus local anesthetics injected 
outside the muscle cone diffuse inward. A peribulbar 
block can be achieved by directing a minimally angled 
needle to a shallow depth such that the tip remains 
outside the cone (see Fig. 31.1). This extraconal block 
is theoretically safer because the needle is not directed 
toward the apex of the orbit; hence, the needle tip is ulti-
mately situated farther from key intraorbital structures. 
This distance minimizes the potential for optic nerve 
trauma, optic nerve sheath injection, orbital epidural, and 
brainstem anesthesia. Complications of needle-based eye 
blocks are listed in Box 31.2. Because extraconal block 
local anesthetics are injected at a farther distance from 
the nerves, larger volumes and more time for diffusion 
of the local anesthetic are needed. Thus intraconal versus 
extraconal anesthesia is somewhat analogous to suba-
rachnoid versus epidural anesthesia in terms of volume, 
onset, and density of block.
Altered physiologic status after an ophthalmic anes-
thetic block has important implications. Differential diag-
nosis includes oversedation, brainstem anesthesia, and 
intravascular injection of local anesthetic (Table 31.2). 
Abrupt onset of seizure activity is characteristic of intra-
vascular injection. Convulsions are typically of brief and 
limited duration. A small dose of induction agent (e.g., 
propofol) or benzodiazepine may be beneficial. Brainstem 
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
550
anesthesia may have a gradual latency of onset and per-
sist for 10 to 40 minutes or longer. Patients must be con-
tinuously monitored after anesthetic eye blocks for signs 
of oversedation, brainstem anesthesia, and intravascular 
absorption of local anesthetics.
Branches of the facial nerve that innervate the eyelid's 
orbicularis oculi muscle are blocked by the larger volume 
of local anesthetic used with extraconal injection. This 
prevents eyelid squeezing and is a distinct advantage dur-
ing corneal transplantation. An intraconal block requires 
a separate facial nerve injection to limit blepharospasm.
Cannula-Based Ophthalmic Regional Anesthesia
Ophthalmic anesthesia can also be achieved by instilling 
local anesthetics through a cannula into the space between 
the globe's rigid sclera and sub-Tenon capsule (Fig. 31.2).11
The capsule consists of fascia that envelops the eye, pro-
viding a smooth friction-free interface in which to rotate. 
Box 31.2
Complications of Regional Anesthesia for 
Ophthalmic Surgery
Superficial or retrobulbar hemorrhage
Elicitation of the oculocardiac reflex
Puncture of the globe
Intraocular injection
Optic nerve trauma
Seizures (intravenous injection of local anesthetic solution)
Brainstem anesthesia (spread of local anesthetic to the 
brainstem causing delayed-onset loss of consciousness, 
respiratory depression, paralysis of the contralateral 
extraocular muscles)
Central retinal artery occlusion
Blindness
Alteration
Oversedation
Brainstem 
Anesthesia
Intravascular 
Injection
Loss of 
consciousness
±
+
+
Apnea
±
+
±
Cardiac 
instability
±
+
±
Seizure 
activity
Ø
Ø
+
Contralateral 
mydriasis
Ø
±
Ø
Contralateral 
eye block
Ø
±
Ø
Table 31.2
Differential Diagnosis of Altered Physiologic 
Status After Regional Anesthesia for 
Ophthalmic Surgery
+, Likely; ±, may or may not be present; Ø, not present.
Anteriorly, it originates near the limbal margin, where it 
is fused to the conjunctiva. As the capsule extends pos-
teriorly, it surrounds the eye, with portions reflected onto 
the extraocular muscles. Local anesthetics injected into 
the sub-Tenon space block ciliary nerves that penetrate 
the capsule and the optic nerve posteriorly.
A cannula is introduced into the episcleral (or sub-
Tenon) space through a dissection accomplished with 
blunt scissors. Alternatively, the dissection can be created 
with a blunt conjunctival probe or by using a blunt-
tipped, side-ported rigid cannula.12
Topical Ophthalmic Regional Anesthesia
Topical anesthesia is typically achieved using local anes-
thetic lidocaine gel. The gel acts as a barrier to antiseptic, 
so 5% betadine drops are instilled before application of 
gel. Local anesthetic drops are placed to minimize the 
astringency of the betadine. Intraoperatively, the surgeon 
can inject preservative-free local anesthetic into the ante-
rior chamber to supplement anesthesia.
Anesthesia Management of Specific 
Ophthalmic Procedures
Retina Surgery
The globe's posterior inner wall is lined by the retina, 
sensory tissue that converts incoming light into neural 
output and, ultimately, vision. The densely packed mac-
ula near its center provides fine detailed vision. Perfusion 
comes from the choroid layer situated between the sclera 
and the retina. The retina may break or detach from the 
choroid, leading to ischemia and compromised vision. 
Patients with diabetic retinopathy or extreme myopia 
are at particular risk. Surgical options include combina-
tions of scleral buckle, vitrectomy, laser, cryotherapy, and 
injection of intravitreal gas.
Preoperative evaluation of patients with diabetes and 
coexisting comorbid conditions (also see Chapter 13) is 
important, and appropriate changes should be made to 
ensure that these patients are in optimal medical condi-
tion for surgery. Sudden death during retina surgery can 
occur because of venous air embolism introduced into the 
choroid blood flow during the air/fluid exchange portion 
of vitrectomy.13 Retina surgery is often prolonged and 
associated with more extensive manipulation of the eye, 
therefore requiring general anesthesia or dense regional 
anesthetic block with MAC. Perfluorocarbons such as 
sulfur hexafluoride (SF6) and C3F8 are inert, relatively 
insoluble gases that are injected to internally tamponade 
the retina onto the choroid. Resorption can take 10 to 
28 days depending on which drug is selected. As nitrous 
oxide is over 100-fold more diffusible than SF6, it can 
expand the size of the gas bubble, increase IOP, and 
potentially cause retinal ischemia and permanent loss of 
vision.14 Nitrous oxide should be discontinued 20 min-
utes before gas injection or omitted altogether.
IV
Chapter 31 Ophthalmology and Otolaryngology
551
Glaucoma
Glaucoma is commonly characterized as a sustained 
increase in IOP that leads to diminished perfusion of the 
optic nerve and eventual loss of vision. Various forms of 
glaucoma exist, each presenting with differing degrees 
of IOP variation. Terminology can be confusing, result-
ing in several classifications: acquired versus congenital, 
high IOP versus normal pressure, acute versus chronic, 
and open versus narrow or closed angle. Angle-closure 
(acute) glaucoma occurs when the angle between the iris 
and cornea narrows and obstructs outflow. Open-angle 
(chronic) glaucoma results from sclerosis of the trabecu-
lar meshwork and impaired aqueous drainage. Outflow is 
improved with constriction of the pupil by miotic drugs. 
Administration of atropine drops into the eye produce 
mydriasis and are contraindicated. Intravenous atropine, 
on the other hand, is minimally absorbed by the eye and 
should be used when indicated during anesthesia. Infan-
tile glaucoma may readily progress to blindness, making 
early surgery more urgent. Congenital glaucoma is often 
a component of many syndromes, several of which have 
important anesthesia implications.
Many adult glaucoma procedures can be managed with 
regional anesthesia and MAC. General anesthesia is requi-
site for pediatric glaucoma cases. Anesthesia implications 
include (1) avoiding mydriasis by continuing all miotic 
drops; (2) understanding the interactions of antiglaucoma 
medications and anesthetics (see Table 31.1); and (3) 
preventing increases in IOP associated with induction, 
maintenance, and emergence from anesthesia.
Strabismus Surgery
Strabismus surgery is performed to correct misalign-
ment of extraocular muscles and realign the visual axis. 
Most patients are pediatric (also see Chapter 34). Special 
Capsule of Tenon
Optic Nerve
Retina
Sclera
Capsule of Tenon
Local
Anesthetic
Fig. 31.2 Sub-Tenon Block. Local anesthetic is infused via a cannula into the potential space between 
the capsule of Tenon and the sclera, ultimately arriving at the optic nerve.
considerations include (1) frequent incidence of intraop-
erative OCR, (2) potential increased risk for malignant 
hyperthermia, and (3) marked prevalence of postoperative 
nausea and vomiting (PONV).
Nausea and Vomiting
The incidence of PONV after strabismus surgery varies 
widely but has been quoted as high as 85%. PONV is the 
most common reason for pediatric inpatient admission 
after outpatient surgery and is probably a vagal-mediated 
response to surgical manipulation of extraocular muscles. 
Multimodal antiemetics with differing mechanisms of 
action may be more effective than individual medications 
for those patients at most risk of PONV after eye surgery.
Malignant Hyperthermia
Strabismus is a neuromuscular disorder that can be 
associated with other myopathies. The frequency of 
masseter muscle spasm after succinylcholine is fourfold 
greater than baseline. Suspect malignant hyperthermia if 
hypertension, tachycardia, hypercarbia, and increasing 
temperature occur (also see Chapter 7).
Traumatic Eye Injuries
Eye injury occurs from penetrating or blunt trauma. The 
anesthesia plan must balance specific risks. Increased IOP 
resulting from a tightly applied facemask, laryngoscopy, 
and endotracheal intubation, or because of coughing 
or bucking, can cause extrusion of globe contents and 
jeopardize vision. Additionally, in emergency situations, 
the patient may be nonfasting and at risk of aspiration of 
gastric contents upon induction of general anesthesia. Con-
trol of the airway can be achieved with a rapid-sequence 
induction of anesthesia, including succinylcholine; how-
ever, succinylcholine can also cause a transient increase in 
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
552
IOP.15 Awake endotracheal intubation may be appropriate 
for patients with difficult airways; however, the resultant 
increases in IOP can be disastrous. The risks of succinylcho-
line or awake intubation on IOP must be weighed against 
the dangers imposed by a full stomach or difficult airway.
The anesthesia provider should ask the ophthalmolo-
gist if the operative repair can be delayed until the risk 
of aspiration is lower. If not, then proceed after careful 
evaluation to rule out other issues. Administer appropri-
ate drugs to decrease gastric acidity and volume. Place 
the patient in slight reverse Trendelenburg position and 
avoid any maneuvers that may increase IOP. If no airway 
problems are anticipated, consider a modified rapid-
sequence induction of anesthesia with a large dose of 
a nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking drug (e.g., 
rocuronium 1.2 mg/kg). If succinylcholine is selected, 
the IOP and systemic hypertension after laryngoscopy/
intubation can be moderated by intravenous lidocaine, 
opioids, or a small pretreatment dose of nondepolarizing 
neuromuscular blocker before induction of anesthesia. 
Regional anesthesia may be an option for select injuries 
and patients at greater risk from general anesthesia.16
Postoperative Eye Issues
Corneal Abrasion
The most common cause of postoperative eye pain after 
general anesthesia is corneal abrasion. It manifests with 
conjunctivitis, tearing, and foreign body sensation. Dam-
age may be mechanically incurred by dangling ID tags, 
the anesthesia mask, drapes, and other objects. During 
general anesthesia, abrasion may also occur because of 
the loss of the blink reflex, the drying effects of exposure 
to air, and diminished tear production. Preventive meas-
ures include gently taping the eyelids shut during mask 
ventilation, endotracheal intubation, and thereafter. Oint-
ments may cause allergic reaction or blurred postemer-
gence vision. Protective goggles may be best. Antibiotic 
ointment and patching the eye usually result in healing 
of corneal abrasions within a day or two.
Acute Glaucoma
Acute glaucoma can be very painful. Presence of a 
mydriatic pupil may be diagnostic. This is an urgent 
matter calling for consult with an ophthalmologist. Intra-
venous mannitol or acetazolamide can decrease IOP and 
relieve pain.
Postoperative Visual Loss
Painless loss of vision after surgery may be the result of 
ischemic optic neuropathy (ION) or brain injury (also see 
Chapter 19). Both are rare events. Risk is more frequent 
with spine surgery in the prone position and cardiac 
surgery.17 Consultation with an ophthalmologist is man-
datory, as early funduscopic examination may aid in 
diagnosis.
OTOLARYNGOLOGY
Ear, nose, and throat (ENT) surgery can make the airway 
fairly inaccessible and is commonly referred to as field 
avoidance. Preoperative planning with the surgeon and 
nursing staff is essential.18 There is a distinct possibility 
of encountering a difficult airway because of anatomic 
factors, surgical issues, or underlying disease. Attention 
should be directed to the establishment and firm anchor-
ing of an endotracheal airway. The endotracheal tube 
(ETT) should be manually supported during patient repo-
sitioning, such as turning of the head, because movement 
can result in endobronchial intubation, tube occlusion, 
cuff leaks, disconnections, or even frank dislodgement 
of the ETT and inadvertent extubation. Before surgical 
preparation or placement of drapes, the neck position 
should be reassessed and susceptible pressure points pad-
ded. During surgery, the airway may be compromised by 
often undetected bleeding, edema, or surgical manipula-
tion. The use of posterior pharyngeal packs can minimize 
the risk of aspiration of gastric contents. Operating room 
personnel should be alerted to their placement, and there 
must be confirmation of the complete removal of all 
packs before extubation of the trachea.
Special Considerations for Head and Neck 
Surgery
The Difficult Airway (Also See Chapter 16)
Preoperative assessment of patients undergoing head 
and neck surgery may generate airway concerns; man-
agement should be discussed with the surgeon before 
entering the operating room. In anticipation, supplemen-
tary equipment should be readied and expert assistance 
immediately available. Modified techniques for securing 
the airway include video laryngoscopy, fiber-optic bron-
choscopy, or even performance of a tracheostomy under 
local anesthesia. Importantly, tracheal retention sutures 
should be performed during tracheostomy in order to 
facilitate airway recapture when patency is compromised. 
Intratracheal procedures may result in significant edema 
and acute obstruction. In the acute postoperative phase 
some patients may remain intubated, whereas others may 
require treatment with humidified oxygen or nebulized 
bronchodilators.
Laryngospasm
The laryngeal reflex producing laryngospasm is mediated 
by vagal stimulation of the superior laryngeal nerve. 
Abrupt intense, prolonged closure of the larynx compro-
mising gas exchange may occur secondary to instrumen-
tation of the endolarynx, presence of blood or foreign 
body, and inadequate depth of anesthesia. In complete 
airway obstruction the anesthesia provider may be unable 
to ventilate despite an adequate mask fit. The resultant 
hypercarbia, hypoxia, and acidosis elicit an autonomic 
IV
Chapter 31 Ophthalmology and Otolaryngology
553
sympathetic response manifesting as hypertension and 
tachycardia. However, temporal reduction in brainstem 
firing to the superior laryngeal nerve eventually causes 
relaxation of the vocal cords. In small children even brief 
laryngospasm is perilous because hypoxemia develops 
rapidly as a result of their reduced functional residual 
capacity and high cardiac output (also see Chapter 34). 
Prompt recognition and intervention are essential. Treat-
ment modalities include the administration of 100% oxy-
gen via positive-pressure facemask ventilation, placement 
of an oral or nasal airway, and deepening of anesthesia 
with intravenously administered anesthetics. Small doses 
of succinylcholine (0.25 to 0.5 mg/kg) and tracheal intu-
bation may be necessary in refractory cases. The likeli-
hood of encountering laryngospasm may be reduced with 
the use of intravenous or topical lidocaine spray before 
laryngoscopy and endotracheal intubation.
Upper Respiratory Infections
Patients, especially children, scheduled for elective ENT 
surgery may present with an unresolved upper respira-
tory infection (URI) predisposing to airway hyperreactiv-
ity. These children are at enhanced risk of intraoperative 
breath-holding, hypoxemia, and postoperative croup.19
Postponing surgery for uncomplicated pediatric URI is 
controversial and may not be required for brief non-
airway ENT procedures such as myringotomy and tube 
placement (also see Chapter 34).
Epistaxis
Patients with massive epistaxis are often anxious, 
hypovolemic, and hypertensive. Rehydration and reas-
surance are essential. These patients are considered at 
high risk for regurgitation and aspiration of gastric 
contents because large amounts of blood are swallowed. 
A large-bore peripheral intravenous cannula with gen-
erous rehydration is vital because blood loss is occult, 
and hypotension or further hemorrhage may occur after 
induction of anesthesia.
Obstructive Sleep Apnea (Also See Chapter 48)
Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is characterized by upper 
airway obstruction and disordered breathing patterns dur-
ing sleep. Symptoms include snoring, headache, sleep dis-
turbance, daytime somnolence, and personality changes. 
Polysomnography (sleep study) establishes the diagnosis 
and severity of the disorder but is not routinely per-
formed. Pediatric patients may have behavior and growth 
disturbances in addition to poor school performance. 
Patients with OSA are often obese with short, thick necks 
and large tongues. These factors contribute to difficult 
airway management during mask ventilation, direct 
laryngoscopy, tracheal intubation, and extubation.20
In addition, patients with OSA are exquisitely sensitive 
to the side effects of hypnotics (sedation) and narcotics 
(respiratory depression) resulting in prolonged recovery 
times. High-flow (70 L/min) nasal oxygen has been used 
during induction of anesthesia to decrease the risk of 
hypoxemia during laryngoscopy.21
Airway Fires
Airway fires are a direct patient hazard and source of 
medical litigation. Three elements are needed to produce 
a fire in the operating room: (1) heat or a source of igni-
tion (laser or electrosurgical unit); (2) fuel (paper drapes, 
ETT, or gauze swabs); and (3) oxidizer (O2, air, or N2O).
The danger of an airway fire is not limited to general 
anesthesia. It may also occur during face and neck pro-
cedures conducted under MAC because electrocautery is 
used in close proximity to an open source of oxygen, 
such as nasal cannula.22
Anesthesia Management of Specific 
Otolaryngology Procedures
Ear Surgery
There are several points to consider for anesthesia and 
ear surgery, discussed in the following sections.
Nitrous Oxide
Nitrous oxide is more soluble than nitrogen in blood and 
diffuses into air-filled cavities faster than nitrogen. The 
resultant increase in middle ear pressure may be prob-
lematic because of potential for dislodgement of eardrum 
grafts. Furthermore, acute discontinuation of high con-
centrations of nitrous oxide markedly decreases pressure 
in the middle-ear cavity, producing serous otitis. Nitrous 
oxide should be avoided or used in moderate concentra-
tion (<50%) and discontinued at least 15 minutes before 
application of an eardrum graft.
Facial Nerve Monitoring
The surgeon may elect to use a facial nerve monitor to 
avoid inadvertent injury to the facial nerve branches 
during surgery. The administration of long-acting neuro-
muscular blocking agents will hinder detection of facial 
nerve activity by the monitor. Therefore use of nondepo-
larizing neuromuscular blocking drugs should be limited 
to induction; succinylcholine is a viable alternative. 
Also, a neuromuscular monitor can be used to confirm 
a response to train-of-four stimulation of a peripheral 
nerve and absence of full paralysis before surgical dissec-
tion in the middle ear (also see Chapter 11).
Epinephrine
Epinephrine is frequently injected during ear microsur-
gery to decrease bleeding and improve surgical field 
visualization. Systemic uptake may precipitate tachydys-
rhythmias. Hence, epinephrine concentration should be 
limited to a 1:200,000 solution.23 Other means to control 
bleeding include moderate reverse Trendelenburg (head-
up) positioning to decrease venous congestion and the use 
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
554
of volatile anesthetics to decrease systolic arterial blood 
pressures within an acceptable range. The use of vasoac-
tive drugs and controlled hypotension is controversial.
Emergence
Head and neck manipulation during the application of 
bandages at the conclusion of surgery produces move-
ment of the ETT and airway irritation. Coughing and 
bucking increase venous pressure, which can lead to 
graft disruption or acute bleeding. In the patient with an 
uncomplicated airway extubation of the trachea at a deep 
plane of anesthesia may be beneficial.
Postoperative Nausea and Vomiting (Also See Chapter 39)
As a result of manipulation of the vestibular appara-
tus, PONV is common after middle ear surgery. Factors 
exacerbating PONV include anesthetic technique (use of 
nitrous oxide and narcotics), inadequate rehydration, and 
postoperative movement. The number and dosing of pro-
phylactic agents to prevent PONV are guided by a graded 
risk analysis.24 Prophylactic interventions may include 
use of one or more antiemetics, including corticosteroid, 
5-HT3-receptor antagonist, neurokinin-1 receptor antag-
onist, scopolamine patch, low-dose propofol, and gastric 
decompression. Scopolamine may cause confusion and 
probably should not be used in elderly patients.
Myringotomy and Tube Insertion
Myringotomy and tube insertion are performed for chil-
dren with disorders of the middle ear who have a history 
of repeated ear infections with unsatisfactory response 
to antibiotic therapy. There may be residual middle ear 
inflammation and upper airway irritability. An inhalation 
induction and maintenance via spontaneous respiration 
with a facemask is preferred for this brief procedure. 
Also, premedication may not be necessary because resid-
ual sedation may delay a rapid recovery.
Tonsillectomy and Adenoidectomy
Most patients undergoing this procedure are young and 
healthy. Common surgical perioperative issues include 
airway obstruction, bleeding, cardiac arrhythmias, and 
croup (postextubation airway edema). Patients frequently 
have upper airway obstruction that only becomes appar-
ent during sleep (OSA). In general, a comprehensive 
history and physical examination are sufficient, but 
symptoms of sleep-disordered breathing, obesity, or a 
bleeding diathesis warrants further investigation. Seda-
tive premedication is best avoided in children with OSA, 
obesity, intermittent airway obstruction, or significant 
tonsillar hypertrophy.
In young children inhalational induction of anesthe-
sia is preferred because preoperative establishment of an 
intravenous line may be difficult or traumatic. Intrave-
nous access is secured once the child is anesthetized. Loss 
of pharyngeal muscle tone upon induction of anesthesia 
Fig. 31.3 Armored and cuffed preformed curved oral 
endotracheal tubes.
may cause airway obstruction and require assistance 
with positive airway pressure. Placement of a cuffed 
preformed curved oral ETT optimizes field visualization 
and decreases the likelihood of accidental extubation of 
the trachea (Fig. 31.3). An air leak at 20 cm H2O peak 
airway pressure reduces the probability of tissue edema, 
a critical factor for pediatric patients who have narrower 
airway diameters than adults. A precordial stethoscope is 
useful to monitor breath sounds because ETT dislodge-
ment can occur with movement of the head or mouth 
gag. The supraglottic area is occasionally packed with 
gauze to protect against aspiration. Before extubation 
of the trachea, the pack must be removed and the stom-
ach should be decompressed. Tracheal extubation can 
be safely performed when the child is fully awake and 
responsive. However, some anesthesia providers opt for 
tracheal extubation under deep anesthesia in order to 
minimize cough and laryngospasm.
Intravenous dexamethasone may decrease edema and 
postoperative pain in addition to PONV. Postoperative 
airway obstruction may occur for a variety of reasons, 
including secretions or blood on the vocal cords or a 
retained pharyngeal pack. Notably, airway obstruction 
and respiratory efforts against a closed glottis may result 
in marked negative intrathoracic pressure and pulmonary 
edema. This pressure is transmitted to interstitial tissue 
and promotes the flow of fluid from the pulmonary cir-
culation into the alveoli. Young children (younger than 
4 years old) are susceptible to airway obstruction as late 
as 24 hours postoperatively and may benefit from pro-
longed postoperative monitoring.
Tonsillar Bleeding After Tonsillectomy and Adenoidectomy
The family expectation is that children undergoing 
tonsillectomy will have an uneventful and uncompli-
cated procedure and anesthesia. However, serious com-
plications can occur. Hemorrhage after tonsillectomy 
IV
Chapter 31 Ophthalmology and Otolaryngology
555
normally occurs within a few hours of surgery and pre-
sents with expectoration of red blood, repeated swallow-
ing, tachycardia, and PONV.25 In fact, occult (swallowed) 
blood loss is underestimated. Intravenous rehydration 
is critical before surgery. A rapid-sequence induction is 
mandated because these patients are considered to have a 
stomach full of blood. The rapid-sequence induction pre-
requisites include preoxygenation, application of cricoid 
pressure (Sellick maneuver), administration of hypnotic 
and neuromuscular blocking drugs in rapid succession, 
and availability of a working suction catheter.
Epiglottitis
Acute epiglottitis is an infectious disease caused by Hae-
mophilus influenzae type B, most often affecting children 
between 2 and 7 years of age with a history of sudden 
onset of fever and dysphagia.26 Symptomatic progression 
from pharyngitis to airway obstruction and respiratory 
failure can be rapid (within hours). The child appears agi-
tated, drools, and leans forward keeping the head in an 
extended position. Progression to exhaustion may result 
from labored breathing against a compromised airway.
Direct visualization of the glottis should not be 
attempted because stimulation of the patient and strug-
gling may result in complete airway obstruction. Anes-
thesia commences only when all emergency airway 
equipment is immediately available and a surgeon 
adept at rigid bronchoscopy and tracheostomy is at the 
bedside. An inhaled induction of anesthesia maintain-
ing spontaneous ventilation is preferred. Atropine may 
be given to avoid bradycardia and to dry secretions. 
The edematous airway necessitates use of a small ETT. 
Because the degree of airway narrowing is unpredic-
table, a range of ETT sizes should be available. In the 
event of any difficulty the surgeon should intervene and 
secure the airway with a rigid bronchoscope or establish 
a surgical airway.
Foreign Body in Airway
Tracheal aspiration of a foreign body is an emergency, 
especially in the pediatric population (also see Chapter 34). 
Clinical manifestations include sudden dyspnea, dry cough, 
hoarseness, and wheezing. Mutual cooperation between the 
anesthesia provider and surgeon is vital to avoid inadvert-
ent distal displacement of the foreign body and complete 
airway obstruction.
Removal of the foreign body is achieved either via 
direct laryngoscopy or rigid bronchoscopy, without 
application of positive airway pressure.27 The surgeon 
should be present and ready to perform emergency cri-
cothyrotomy or tracheostomy in the event of complete 
airway occlusion. Total intravenous anesthesia maintain-
ing spontaneous respiration avoids exposing operating 
room personnel to volatile anesthetics. Postoperatively, 
the patient should breathe humidified oxygen and remain 
under close observation for airway edema.
Nasal and Sinus Surgery
Nasal surgery is performed for either cosmetic or func-
tional purposes. Common surgical operations include 
polypectomy, septoplasty, functional endoscopic sinus 
surgery, and rhinoplasty. Patients undergoing nasal sur-
gery often have significant nasal passage obstruction 
that may hinder ventilation via facemask. Furthermore, 
nasal polyps are associated with allergy and asthma. The 
rich vascular supply can result in substantial intraopera-
tive blood loss that may go undetected as blood trickles 
backward into the pharynx. Many nasal procedures can 
be performed with regional anesthesia and sedation.
The anterior ethmoidal and sphenopalatine branches 
of the trigeminal nerve provide sensory innervation to 
the nasal septum and lateral walls. Topical anesthesia 
is achieved by packing the nose with local anesthetic-
soaked pledgets. Previously, the advantages of using 
cocaine included production of topical anesthesia, vaso-
constriction of vascular tissue, and shrinking of the 
mucosa. Because of cocaine's disadvantages, including 
altered sensorium and deleterious cardiovascular effects, 
it has been largely replaced by a “pseudococaine” mix-
ture of local anesthetic and vasoconstrictor.28
Anesthesia can be supplemented with submucosal 
local anesthetic infiltration. When general anesthesia is 
chosen, the airway should be secured with a cuffed ETT. 
A posterior pharyngeal pack can prevent aspiration of 
gastric contents and decrease PONV caused by swallowed 
blood. Extubation of the trachea should be performed 
only on return of protective airway reflexes.
Cochlear Implant Surgery
Cochlear implant is the treatment of choice for bilateral 
sensorineural hearing loss. The majority of these pro-
cedures are performed under general anesthesia with 
endotracheal intubation. In select cases the procedure 
may be conducted with MAC.29
Endoscopic Surgery
Endoscopy includes esophagoscopy, bronchoscopy, 
laryngoscopy, and microlaryngoscopy (with or without 
laser surgery). Airway evaluation is performed for a vari-
ety of pathologic conditions, ranging from foreign body, 
gastroesophageal reflux, and papillomatosis to tumors or 
tracheal stenosis. The compromised airway requires care-
ful preoperative assessment. Airway issues should be dis-
cussed with the surgeon, and preoperative investigations 
such as analysis of arterial blood gases, flow-volume 
loops, radiographic studies, or magnetic resonance imag-
ing may be warranted.
A proactive airway management plan is necessary. 
Consideration must be given to an awake fiber-optic 
endotracheal intubation if doubts exist about the effi-
cacy of successful mask ventilation and direct laryn-
goscopy. Sedative premedication should be cautiously 
considered in the presence of upper airway obstruction. 
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
556
Administration of an anticholinergic drug will diminish 
secretions and facilitate airway visualization. Stridor 
and inspiratory retractions are definitive signs of airway 
obstruction.
Several techniques can be employed to provide oxy-
genation and ventilation during endoscopy. The trachea 
can be intubated with a small-diameter pediatric ETT, 
but these tubes are frequently too short for use in adults 
and offer high resistance to flow. Because an ETT impairs 
visualization of the posterior commissure, a technique 
using high-flow oxygen insufflations through a small-
gauge catheter placed in the trachea is useful (Fig. 31.4).30
Another alternative is a manual jet ventilator, which 
attaches to a side port of the laryngoscope or broncho-
scope. The oxygen source is connected to “wall” pressure 
(30 to 50 psi), but can be regulated to the lowest pressure 
that produces chest rise (typically 15 to 20 psi). Oxygen 
flow is delivered during inspiration and concomitantly 
entrains air into the trachea via the Venturi effect. This 
technique carries a risk of pneumothorax and pneumo-
mediastinum from rupture of alveolar blebs.
An adequate degree of masseter relaxation is required 
for introduction of a suspension laryngoscope by the 
endoscopist. A succinylcholine infusion can be admin-
istered but may produce a phase II neuromuscular block 
(also see Chapter 11).
Laser Surgery
Laser (light amplification by stimulated emission of 
radiation) surgery affords precision in targeting lesions, 
provides hemostasis, causes minimal tissue edema, and 
promotes rapid healing. Its physical properties depend 
on the medium used to create the beam. Laser is used in 
the treatment of vocal cord papillomas, laryngeal webs, 
and resection of subglottic occlusive tissue. The use of a 
small-diameter ETT is necessary for maximum exposure.31
Laser energy can cause retinal damage and can produce 
a laser plume of toxic fumes with potential to transmit 
disease. An efficient smoke evacuator and special masks 
are necessary because small particles are readily inhaled. 
The patient's eyes should be taped, and operating room 
personnel must wear protective eyeglasses.
The greatest danger during laser surgery is ETT fire, so 
suitable precautions should be taken (Box 31.3). Flexible 
Fig. 31.4 Sanders injector apparatus uses high-flow oxygen 
insufflations through a small-gauge catheter placed in the trachea.
stainless steel laser-resistant tubes are available for the 
specific type of laser employed (Fig. 31.5). To dissipate 
heat and detect cuff rupture, the tube cuff should be filled 
with saline and an indicator dye. Although polyvinyl-
chloride tubes are flammable, they may be modified with 
a metallic tape wrap. Nonetheless, they retain risk for 
ignition and can reflect the laser beam onto nontargeted 
tissue. The tissue adjacent to the surgical field should be 
protected with moist packing. Postoperatively, patients 
should be monitored for laryngeal edema.
Neck Dissection Surgery
Neck dissection may be complete, modified, or functional. 
Anatomically, the structures principally involved are (1) 
the sternocleidomastoid muscle, (2) cranial nerve XI, and 
(3) internal and external jugular veins and carotid artery. 
Frequently, neck dissection is performed for removal of a 
tumor and may also involve partial or total glossectomy. 
Patients with such tumors may have a history of tobacco 
and alcohol use disorder. Pulmonary disease is likely and 
is an indication for a preoperative pulmonary evaluation.
Fig. 31.5 Laser endotracheal tube—stainless steel.
Box 31.3
Operating Room Precautions for Laser Surgery
Preoperative Period
1. Arrange surgical drapes to avoid accumulation of 
combustible gases (O2, N2O).
2. Allow time for flammable skin preparations to dry.
3. Moisten gauze and sponges in vicinity of laser beam.
Intraoperative Period
1. Alert surgeon and OR personnel about ignition risk.
2. Assign specific roles to each OR member in case of fire.
3. Use appropriate laser-resistant ETT.
4. Reduce inspired O2 to minimal values (monitor Spo2).
5. Replace N2O with air.
6. Wait a few minutes after steps 3 to 5 before activating 
laser.
ETT, Endotracheal tube; OR, operating room; Spo2, oxygen saturation 
measured by pulse oximetry.
IV
Chapter 31 Ophthalmology and Otolaryngology
557
LeFort I
LeFort II
LeFort III
Fig. 31.6 Facial Injuries and the LeFort Fracture Classification. A LeFort I fracture extends across 
the lower portion of the maxilla but does not continue up into the medial canthal region. A LeFort II 
fracture also extends across the maxilla, but at a more cephalad level, and it continues upward to the 
medial canthal region. A LeFort III fracture is a high-level transverse fracture above the malar bone 
and through the orbits. It is characterized by complete separation of the maxilla from the craniofacial 
skeleton. (From Myer CM. Trauma of the larynx and craniofacial structures: Airway implications. Paediatr 
Anaesth. 2004;14:103–106, used with permission.)
In many cases the neck dissection may be bilateral, 
and a tracheostomy may be performed to maintain a pat-
ent airway. Upper airway management may be difficult in 
these patients, especially if there is a history of radiation 
treatment of the larynx and pharynx or if a mass is pre-
sent in the oral cavity. Neuromuscular blocking drugs are 
ideally avoided. Traction or pressure on the carotid sinus 
can provoke prolongation of the QT interval, bradydys-
rhythmias, and even asystole. Treatment consists of early 
detection, cessation of surgical stimulus, and administra-
tion of atropine. The carotid sinus reflex can be blocked 
with local anesthetic infiltration. During dissection, open 
veins carry a risk of venous air embolism.
Postoperative Complications
In the postoperative period the anesthesia provider should 
be aware of potential nerve injuries. Damage to the recur-
rent laryngeal nerve can cause vocal cord dysfunction 
and, when bilateral, results in airway obstruction. The 
phrenic nerve also traverses through the operative field, 
and injury to it can result in paralysis of the ipsilateral 
hemidiaphragm. Pneumothorax can also occur in the 
postoperative period. Excessive coughing or agitation 
may cause bleeding and airway compromise. The patient 
should be closely monitored in the postoperative phase 
when a tracheostomy is not performed.
Thyroid and Parathyroid Surgery
Thyroid storm may be encountered in a patient who has 
inadequately controlled hyperthyroidism. It manifests 
with signs of massive catecholamine release, including 
tachycardia, hypertension, and diaphoresis. Intraop-
erative anesthesia considerations again focus on airway 
management. Surgical manipulation of the head and neck 
can occlude a standard ETT, so an armored ETT may be 
beneficial (see Fig. 31.3). Airway obstruction after thyroid 
or parathyroid surgery can be caused by bleeding from 
the operative site compressing the trachea. Emergency 
measures include prompt incision and opening of the 
wound to release the accumulated hematoma. Surgical 
trauma to one or both recurrent laryngeal nerves can 
manifest as postextubation hoarseness or stridor. Some 
surgeons use electromyography (EMG) to monitor recur-
rent laryngeal nerve integrity, using a special ETT and 
EMG monitor. Parathyroid injury or removal may cause 
hypocalcemia with clinical signs of tetany, cardiac dys-
rhythmias, and laryngospasm (also see Chapter 29).
Parotid Surgery
The parotid gland may be excised in toto, or surgery may 
be limited to the superficial portion of the gland. Because 
the parotid is traversed by the facial nerve, nerve func-
tion can be monitored with a facial nerve monitor in 
order to circumvent surgical trauma.32 The facial nerve 
may need to be sacrificed during radical parotidectomy 
and then reconstructed with a graft from the contralat-
eral greater auricular nerve (branch of the superficial 
cervical plexus). Nasotracheal intubation is appropriate if 
a mandibular resection is planned.
Facial Trauma
Facial fractures are characterized by the LeFort classifica-
tion of maxilla fractures (Fig. 31.6).33 Orotracheal intuba-
tion is necessary when intranasal damage is a possibility. 
In orthognathic surgery LeFort fractures are created for 
cosmetic repair.
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
558
1. Gayer S, Zuleta J. Perioperative man-
agement of the elderly undergo-
ing eye surgery. Clin Geriatr Med. 
2008;24(4):687–700.
2. Vann MA, Ogunnaike BO, Joshi GP. 
Sedation and anesthesia care for oph-
thalmologic surgery during local/
regional anesthesia. Anesthesiology. 
2007;107(3):502–508.
3. Chen CL, Lin GA, Bardach NS, etal. 
Preoperative medical testing in Medicare 
patients undergoing cataract surgery. N 
Engl J Med. 2015;372(16):1530–1538.
4. Schein OD, Katz J, Bass EB, etal. The 
value of routine preoperative medical 
testing before cataract surgery. Study of 
Medical Testing for Cataract Surgery. N 
Engl J Med. 2000;342:168–175.
5. Katz J, Feldman MA, Bass EB, etal. 
Risks and benefits of anticoagu-
lant and antiplatelet medication use 
before cataract surgery. Ophthalmology. 
2003;110(9):1784–1788.
6. McClellan AJ, Flynn Jr HW, Gayer S. 
The use of perioperative antithrom-
botic agents in posterior segment 
ocular surgery. Am J Ophthalmol. 
2014;158(5):858–859.
7. Bhananker SM, Posner FW, Cheney 
KL, etal. Injury and liability associ-
ated with monitored anesthesia care. A 
closed claims analysis. Anesthesiology. 
2006;104(2):228–234.
8. Ophthalmic Anesthesia Society. www.
eyeanesthesia.org
9. Fanning GL. Orbital regional anes-
thesia. Ophthalmol Clin North Am. 
2006;19(2):221–232.
10. Gayer 
S. 
Ophthalmic 
anesthe-
sia: More than meets the eye. ASA 
Refresher Courses in Anesthesiology. 
2006;34(5):55–63.
11. Kumar CM, Dodds C. Sub-Tenon's anes-
thesia. Ophthalmol Clin North Am. 
2006;19(2):209–219.
12. Gayer S, Palte H. “A novel technique 
for minimally invasive sub-Tenon’s 
anesthesia”. Reg Anesth Pain Med. 
2019;44(1):131–132. 
13. Gayer S, Palte HD, Albini TA, Flynn HW 
Jr, Martinez-Ruiz R, Salas N, McClellan 
AJ, Relhan N, Parel JM. In-vivo porcine 
model of venous air embolism during 
pars plana vitrectomy. Am J Ophthal-
mol. 2016;171(11):139–144.
14. Wolf GL, Capuano C, Hartung J. Nitrous 
oxide increases intraocular pressure after 
intravitreal sulfur hexafluoride injec-
tion. Anesthesiology. 1983;59:547–548.
15. Vachon CA, Warner DO, Bacon DR. 
Succinylcholine and the open globe. 
Tracing the teaching. Anesthesiology. 
2003;99:220–223.
16. Gayer S. Rethinking anesthesia strategies 
for patients with traumatic eye injuries: 
Alternatives to general anesthesia. Curr 
Anaesth Crit Care. 2006;17:191–196.
17. Shen Y, Drum M, Roth S. The preva-
lence of perioperative visual loss in the 
United States: A 10 year study from 
1996 to 2005 of spinal, orthopedic, car-
diac, and general surgery. Anesth Analg. 
2009;109(5):1534–1545.
18. Satloff RT, Brown AC. Special equipment 
in the operating room for otolaryngol-
ogy—Head and neck surgery. Otolaryngol 
Clin North Am. 1981;14:669–686.
19. Tait AR, Malviya S, Voepel-Lewis T, 
etal. Risk factors for perioperative 
adverse respiratory events in children 
with upper respiratory tract infections. 
Anesthesiology. 2001;95:299–306.
20. Gross JB, Bachenberg KL, Benumof JL, 
etal. Practice guidelines for the perio-
perative management of patients with 
obstructive sleep apnea: A report by 
the American Society of Anesthesi-
ologists (ASA) Task Force on Periop-
erative Management of patients with 
obstructive sleep apnea. Anesthesiology. 
2006;104(5):1081–1093.
21. Renda T, Corrado A, Iskandar G, 
et al. High-flow nasal oxygen therapy 
in intensive care and anaesthesia. BJA. 
2018;120(1):18–27.
22. Caplan RA, Barker SJ, Connis RT, etal. 
American Society of Anesthesiologists 
Task Force on Operating Room Fires 
Practice advisory for the prevention 
and management of operating room 
fires. Anesthesiology. 2008;108(5):786–
801.
23. Dunlevy TM, O'Malley TP, Postma GN. 
Optimal concentration of epinephrine 
for vasoconstriction in neck surgery. 
Laryngoscope. 1996;106:1412–1414.
24. Apfel CC, Laara E, Koivuranta M, etal. 
A simplified risk score for predict-
ing postoperative nausea and vomit-
ing: Conclusions from cross-validations 
between two centers. Anesthesiology. 
1999;91:693–700.
25. Randall DA, Hoffer ME. Complica-
tions of tonsillectomy and adenoid-
ectomy. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 
1998;118:61–68.
26. Tanner K, Fitzsimmons G, Carrol ED, 
etal. Haemophilus influenzae type b 
epiglottitis as a cause of acute upper 
airways obstruction in children. BMJ. 
2002;325:1099–1100.
27. Lam HC, Woo JK, van Hasselt CA. Man-
agement of ingested foreign bodies: 
A retrospective review of 5240 patients. 
J Laryngol Otol. 2001;115:954–957.
28. Lange RA, Cigarroa RG, Yancy Jr 
CW, etal. Cocaine-induced coronary-
artery vasoconstriction. N Engl J Med. 
1989;321:1557–1562.
29. Hamerschmidt R, Morero A, Wiemes 
G, etal. Cochlear implant surgery with 
local anesthesia and sedation: com-
parison with General Anesthesia. Otol 
Neurol. 2012;34:75–78.
30. Rajagopalan R, Smith F, Ramachandran 
PR. Anaesthesia for microlaryngoscopy 
and definitive surgery. Can Anaesth Soc J. 
1972;19:83–86.
31. Rampil 
IJ. 
Anesthetic 
considera-
tions for laser surgery. Anesth Analg. 
1992;74:424–435.
32. Terrell JE, Kileny PR, Yian C, etal. Clini-
cal outcome of continuous facial nerve 
monitoring during primary parotidec-
tomy. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 
1997;123:1081–1087.
33. Myer CM. Trauma of the larynx and 
craniofacial structures, airway impli-
cations. Paediatr Anaesth. 2004;14:
103–106.
REFERENCES
559
Chapter
RHEUMATOLOGIC DISORDERS
Patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and other rheu-
matologic disorders, such as ankylosing spondylitis, pre-
sent for orthopedic surgery related to their disease state. 
Knowledge of these diseases and their underlying medical 
issues is essential for optimal anesthetic and periopera-
tive management.
Rheumatoid Arthritis
RA is a chronic inflammatory disease that initially 
destroys joints and adjacent connective tissue and 
then progresses to a systemic disease affecting major 
organ systems (Fig. 32.1). Implicated predisposing causes 
include genetic (over 100 gene loci have been identified), 
environmental, bacterial, viral, and hormonal factors.1 5
The role of T cells, autoimmunity, and inflammatory 
mediators are important in the progression of RA and 
may serve as sites for potential new treatments.2 5
Systemic manifestations of RA are widespread. They 
may include pulmonary involvement with interstitial 
fibrosis and cysts with honeycombing, gastritis and 
ulcers from aspirin and other analgesics, neuropathy, 
muscle wasting, vasculitis, and anemia. Ultimately, the 
anatomy of the airway is damaged and altered in patients 
with RA.2 5
Airway and Cervical Spine Changes
The patient must be carefully evaluated for both complex-
ity and risks of endotracheal intubation. For example, the 
airway may be difficult to visualize when attempting 
intubation. Furthermore, the performance of maneuvers 
to intubate the trachea may result in an increased risk 
of cervical spine injury. Many airway abnormalities may 
occur in patients with RA. Normal mouth opening may 
be decreased as a result of temporomandibular arthritis. 
This difficulty may be compounded by the presence of a 
hypoplastic mandible, which may fuse early in patients 
RHEUMATOLOGIC DISORDERS
Rheumatoid Arthritis
Ankylosing Spondylitis
SPINE SURGERY
Anesthetic Technique
Awareness
Blood Conservation During Spine Surgery
Positioning
Intraoperative Spinal Cord Monitoring
Vision Loss
SURGERY IN THE SITTING POSITION
FRACTURED HIP
Anesthetic Technique
TOTAL JOINT REPLACEMENT
Tranexamic Acid in Orthopedics
Total Hip Replacement
Total Knee Replacements and Tourniquets
Deep Venous Thrombosis and 
Thromboembolism Prophylaxis
ORTHOPEDIC SURGERY
David Furgiuele, Mitchell H. Marshall, 
Andrew D. Rosenberg
32
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
560
with juvenile RA. This results in the noticeable overbite 
in some patients with RA.2 5
As with other joints, the cricoarytenoid joint may be 
affected. Cricoarytenoid arthritis may result in short-
ness of breath and snoring. Patients with RA have been 
misdiagnosed as having sleep apnea as a result of this 
condition.6 Patients with cricoarytenoid arthritis may 
present with stridor during inspiration, which may occur 
in the postanesthesia care unit (PACU) after surgery while 
recovering from anesthesia. Acute subluxation of the 
cricoarytenoid joint as a result of tracheal intubation can 
cause stridor as well and is not responsive to administra-
tion of racemic epinephrine.3
The cervical spine is abnormal in as many as 80% of 
patients with RA. Subluxation and unrestricted motion of 
the cervical spine can lead to impingement of the spinal 
cord and its injury.7 Three anatomic areas of the cervi-
cal spine may become involved, resulting in atlantoaxial 
subluxation, subaxial subluxation, or superior migration 
of the odontoid (Fig. 32.2).
Heart
  • valves - incompetence
  • arrhythmia
Pericardium
  • effusion
Lungs - pleura
  • chronic diffuse
interstitial fibrosis
  • cysts with honeycombing
  • pleural effusion
  • active tuberculosis
Bone marrow
  • anemia
Joint involvement
  • inflammation and
destruction
Mandible
  • receding
Cervical spine
  • subluxation
Stomach
  • ulcers
Vascular system
  • diffuse arteritis
Skin
  • atrophy
Muscle
  • wasting
Kidneys
  • amyloidosis
  • decreased renal
function
Nervous system
  • neuropathy
Larynx
  • cricoarytenoid arthritis
Eyes
  • scleromalacia
perforans
Temporomandibular
joint
  • ankylosis
Fig. 32.1 Systemic manifestations of rheumatoid arthritis.
Superior migration
of odontoid
Odontoid
Atlas
Axis
Atlantoaxial
subluxation
Subaxial
subluxation
Fig. 32.2 Sites of potential involvement of rheumatoid arthritis 
in the cervical spine.
IV
Chapter 32 Orthopedic Surgery
561
Atlantoaxial Subluxation
Atlantoaxial subluxation is the abnormal movement 
of the C1 cervical vertebra (the atlas) on C2 (the axis). 
Normally, the transverse axial ligament (TAL) holds the 
odontoid process, also referred to as the dens, which is 
the superior projection of the vertebra of C2, in place 
directly behind the anterior arch of C1 (Fig. 32.3A). 
With an intact TAL, as the cervical spine is flexed and 
extended, the odontoid moves with the cervical arch of 
C1 and the movement between the two is minimal. With 
destruction of the TAL by RA, movement of the dens is 
no longer restricted. As the neck is flexed and extended, 
the C1 vertebra can sublux on the C2 vertebra as the dens 
and C1 cervical spine no longer move together (see Fig. 
32.3B). This can result in impingement of the spinal cord, 
placing it at risk for damage. Subluxation of C1 on C2, 
referred to as atlantoaxial subluxation, can be quantified 
by a measurement made between the back of the anterior 
arch of C1 and the front of the dens or odontoid. This 
distance is referred to as the atlas-dens interval (ADI). 
Flexion and extension radiographs of the cervical spine 
are obtained in order to determine the distance between 
the atlas and dens and the degree of subluxation (Fig. 
32.4). If the ADI is 4 mm or more, atlantoaxial instabil-
ity is present, the amount of subluxation is considered 
significant, and the patient is considered to be at risk for 
spinal cord injury. Because the ring of the cervical arch 
is an enclosed space, as the ADI increases, the safe area 
for the cord (SAC), that area left within the arch of C1, 
decreases and motion can lead to impingement of the 
cord. In a situation in which the TAL is disrupted, exten-
sion of the head minimizes the ADI and increases the 
SAC, whereas flexion increases the ADI (Fig. 32.5) and 
decreases the SAC, making flexion a position of greater 
risk. However, as RA affects more than just the TAL, all 
neck movements in patients with RA have to be evalu-
ated carefully because extension of the neck can also 
lead to problems. Although uncommon, asymptomatic 
patients can have ADI measurements as high as 8 mm to 
10 mm. These asymptomatic patients are able to compen-
sate for their cervical spine instability with use of local 
musculature while awake, but this is not possible when 
anesthetized. Therefore neck motion should be minimized 
after administration of sedation or general anesthesia in 
patients with atlantoaxial subluxation.2 5 7 10
Subaxial Subluxation
Subluxation of 15% or more of one cervical vertebra on 
another below the level of the axis (C2) is referred to as 
subaxial subluxation. This can result in significant spinal 
cord impingement and neurologic symptoms. The C5–C6 
level is the most common area for subaxial subluxa-
tion.9 10 As a result, neck motion can increase impinge-
ment and result in spinal cord injury. Therefore minimal 
motion of the cervical spine is recommended in patients 
with this condition.
Superior Migration of the Odontoid
Inflammation and bone destruction can result in cervical 
spine collapse in patients with RA. Not all areas of the 
cervical spine are equally affected in any given patient. 
For example, if the odontoid is spared, cervical spine col-
lapse may actually result in an intact odontoid process 
projecting up through the foramen magnum and into 
the skull. The odontoid can impinge on the brainstem, 
and patients may suffer neurologic symptoms, includ-
ing quadriparesis or paralysis (Fig. 32.6). This pathologic 
anatomic condition is referred to as superior migration 
of the odontoid. The odontoid needs to be removed in 
order to decompress the spinal cord and brainstem. A 
complicated operative procedure, a transoral odontoid-
ectomy, may accomplish this and involves an incision in 
the posterior pharyngeal wall, followed by removal of the 
arch of C1 and then removal of the odontoid, or pannus, 
or both, which is causing the neurologic symptoms. With 
completion of the transoral portion of the procedure, the 
cervical spine is very unstable, necessitating a posterior 
spinal fusion.
The Trachea in Rheumatoid Arthritis
Although the cervical spine is affected by RA and may 
collapse from bone destruction, the trachea is usually 
spared. This results in the trachea twisting in a character-
istic manner as the cervical spine collapses, only serving 
Odontoid (dens)
Transverse
axial ligament
Anterior
arch of C1
Spinal cord
A
B
Fig. 32.3 (A) Cross-sectional view demonstrating intact 
transverse axial ligament (TAL) holding the odontoid in place 
against the anterior arch of C1 vertebra. (B) Rupture of TAL may 
result in spinal cord impingement.
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
562
Fig. 32.4 Radiographs of cervical spine in flexion and extension. Note significant atlantoaxial instability 
with flexion in the left panel where the odontoid and arch of C1 are outlined. Note contrast in the right 
panel where in extension the odontoid and arch of C1 are in close proximity.
SA
ADI
Extension
SAC
ADI
Flexion
Fig. 32.5 Flexion and extension views demonstrating how flexion increases the atlas-dens interval 
(ADI) and decreases the safe area for the spinal cord (SAC). In extension the ADI is decreased and the 
SAC is increased.
IV
Chapter 32 Orthopedic Surgery
563
to increase the difficulty of intubating these patients.9
Tracheal intubation aids such as a fiber-optic bron-
choscope, Glidescope, Airtraq, or intubating laryngeal 
mask airway (LMA) should be available for assistance in 
intubating these patients should it be needed (also see 
Chapter 16).
Ankylosing Spondylitis
Ankylosing spondylitis is an inflammatory rheumatologic 
disorder in which repetitive minute bone fractures fol-
lowed by healing result in the characteristic bamboo spine, 
disease of the sacroiliac joint, fusion of the posterior ele-
ments of the spinal column, and fixed neck flexion that 
are characteristic in this patient population. There is an 
association between ankylosing spondylitis and HLA-B27, 
although most HLA-B27–positive patients are not affected 
with the disease. Patients also develop thoracic and costo-
chondral involvement, which may result in a rapid shallow 
breathing pattern.3 11 The cervical spine becomes rigid, and 
direct laryngoscopy and airway manipulation should be 
performed only after careful assessment. A tracheal intu-
bation assist device can help secure the airway. Return of 
the neck to the neutral position via cervical spine surgery 
involves removal of all the bony elements of the posterior 
portion of the spine followed by extension of the head 
back into a neutral position. This is a very complicated 
and dangerous procedure, especially at the time when the 
neck is extended back to the neutral position, which relies 
on spinal cord monitoring to assess neurologic function as 
the spine is manipulated.
SPINE SURGERY
Posterior spinal fusion, scoliosis correction, and com-
bined anteroposterior spine procedures may be long, 
complex operations associated with significant blood 
loss, marked fluid shifts, and major hemodynamic altera-
tions. These factors necessitate adequate patient prepa-
ration for the perioperative period, including a detailed 
preoperative evaluation (also see Chapter 13), anticipa-
tion regarding perioperative intravenous fluid admin-
istration, and appropriate monitoring requirements. 
Some patients have underlying neuromuscular disorders 
that could influence the timing of tracheal extubation. 
Preoperative pulmonary function testing will facilitate 
clinical decisions in this patient population. Appropriate 
size and number of intravenous catheters, in addition to 
hemodynamic and neurologic monitoring needs, should 
be determined. In addition, the blood bank needs to be 
advised that significant blood loss can occur, requiring 
rapid administration of blood and blood products (also 
see Chapter 25).
Anterior spine surgery may be performed via abdomi-
nal or thoracic approaches. Thoracic surgery may involve 
open thoracotomy or thoracoscopic techniques. Preoper-
ative discussion with the surgeon is crucial to determine 
the surgical approach, as there may be a need to provide 
lung isolation and one-lung ventilation. High thoracic 
and thoracoscopic procedures frequently require one-
lung ventilation to ensure adequate visualization (also 
see Chapter 27). This can be accomplished with the use of 
a double-lumen or a bronchial blocker tube.
Fig. 32.6 Magnetic resonance image (MRI) and reconstruction demonstrating superior migration of the 
odontoid through the foramen magnum and impingement on medulla and pons. Also note subaxial 
subluxation. (MRI courtesy of Malcolm Dobrow, MD.)
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
564
If the procedure is a combined anteroposterior pro-
cedure, a double-lumen endotracheal tube (ETT) can 
be used for the anterior component, with the tube 
exchanged for a single-lumen ETT for the posterior por-
tion of the surgery. Although double-lumen ETTs provide 
value in facilitating surgical exposure, they can also 
create risks, such as difficult intraoperative exchange 
of the double-lumen ETT to a single-lumen ETT. Rein-
tubation of the trachea can become difficult, owing to 
airway edema, and may be traumatic. Alternatively, a 
bronchial blocker can be used with a single-lumen ETT 
(Fig. 32.7).4 12
Advantages of the bronchial blocker include avoid-
ing the need to change the tube between different stages 
of the procedure or at the end of the surgery. Deflating 
the cuff and withdrawing the catheter back into its cas-
ing and recapping the proximal end return the ETT to 
its single-lumen tube characteristics. If extubation of 
the trachea at the end of the surgical procedure is not 
indicated, the ETT does not have to be changed at the 
end of the operation, thereby avoiding the possibility of 
changing an ETT in the presence of potentially signifi-
cant airway edema or difficult endotracheal intubation. 
The PACU or intensive care unit staff needs to be prop-
erly educated as to the various ports of the bronchial 
blocker.3 4 12
Some surgeons are using CO2 insufflation as the sole 
means of moving the lung away from the surgical field, 
even in high thoracic spine surgical procedures. This 
allows for the use of a single-lumen ETT for the entire 
procedure, bypassing the need for either a double-lumen 
tube or a bronchial blocker.
Anesthetic Technique
The anesthetic technique is geared to provide anes-
thesia and analgesia for the procedure while avoiding 
drugs that may interfere with acquisition of the wave-
forms required for perioperative neurologic evaluation 
of the spine. Nitrous oxide/oxygen or air/oxygen are 
used in combination with opioids and an infusion of 
propofol and/or dexmedetomidine. If somatosensory 
evoked potentials (SSEPs) alone are being monitored, 
an inhaled anesthetic, equivalent to a small percentage 
(typically <50%) of 1 minimum alveolar concentration 
(MAC), can be administered. Volatile anesthetics may 
interfere with signal acquisition in patients monitored 
with transcranial motor evoked potentials (TCMEPs) and 
may have to be discontinued, if used at all, if adequate 
signals cannot be obtained. Although neuromuscular 
blockade may be used to facilitate tracheal intubation, 
paralysis should not be maintained if TCMEPs are being 
continuously monitored. If the patient is having pedicle 
screws placed, then the neuromuscular blockade needs 
to be terminated before the electromyograms (EMGs) 
are obtained so that testing can be properly performed. 
A small dose of ketamine, either as a bolus or continu-
ous infusion, can be given in the perioperative period 
as an additional pain relief modality to provide anal-
gesia for major surgery, including spine surgery (also 
see Chapter 8).13 14
Awareness
Intraoperative awareness is a concern for patients and 
physicians alike. Patients undergoing spine surgery may 
be at increased risk for intraoperative awareness as a 
result of the requirement that the anesthetic techniques 
administered to them be modified to allow for adequate 
intraoperative neurophysiologic monitoring waveforms 
to assess spinal cord function. Therefore the use of brain 
function monitoring in these patients may help avoid 
intraoperative awareness. However, this is not a standard, 
and as noted in the Practice Advisory for Intraoperative 
Awareness and Brain Function Monitoring,15 a decision 
should be made on a case-by-case basis by the individual 
practitioner for selected patients (e.g., if light anesthesia 
is being administered). There was a consensus in the advi-
sory that brain function monitoring is not routinely indi-
cated for patients undergoing general anesthesia as the 
“general applicability of these monitors in the prevention 
of intraoperative awareness had not been established.” 
In fact, a large randomized trial of processed EEG versus 
end-tidal anesthetic monitoring demonstrated that aware-
ness is not decreased with use of brain function monitor-
ing.16 The need for brain monitoring is still not clear.
Bronchial
blocker
Fig. 32.7 Depiction of how a bronchial blocker is placed to 
isolate the lung for one-lung ventilation.
IV
Chapter 32 Orthopedic Surgery
565
Blood Conservation During Spine Surgery
Methods to decrease blood loss in spine surgery patients 
include predonation, hemodilution, wound infiltration 
with a dilute epinephrine solution, hypotensive anes-
thetic techniques, use of cell salvage devices, positioning 
to diminish venous pressure, careful surgical hemo-
stasis, and administration of antifibrinolytics (also see 
Chapter 23). Medications that have been employed to 
decrease blood loss during spine surgery include the 
antifibrinolytics aprotinin, tranexamic acid (TXA), and 
ε-aminocaproic acid. Aprotinin, a serine protease inhibi-
tor, effectively decreases blood loss in cardiac patients 
and has also been demonstrated to be efficacious in 
patients undergoing spine surgery.17 19 The synthetic 
lysine analogs TXA and ε-aminocaproic acid have also 
been employed in patients undergoing orthopedic joint 
replacement surgery.19 TXA can be administered by an 
initial bolus injection of 50 mg/kg over 30 minutes fol-
lowed by a continuous infusion of 10 mg/kg/hr, although 
other regimens may be used. TXA may alternatively be 
given topically or intraarticularly in appropriate patients.
A metaanalysis of the use of antifibrinolytics in 
orthopedic patients demonstrated that although both 
aprotinin and TXA are effective in decreasing blood loss, 
the data were not sufficient to demonstrate efficacy with 
ε-aminocaproic acid.18 However, the negative side effects 
of aprotinin in cardiac patients include (1) increased 
risk of myocardial infarction (MI) or heart failure by 
approximately 55%, nearly double the risk of stroke; (2) 
increased long-term risk of mortality; and (3) a more 
frequent death rate in patients receiving aprotinin as 
demonstrated in a study over a 5-year period compar-
ing aprotinin with lysine analogs in high-risk cardiac 
surgery. The study was terminated early and resulted in 
relabeling and ultimately withdrawing aprotinin from the 
market.20 22
Positioning
Spine surgery is often performed with the patient in the 
prone position (also see Chapter 19). Careful positioning 
is crucial to avoid patient injury. Movement to the prone 
position should be performed in a carefully coordinated 
manner with the surgical team. The neck should not be 
hyperextended or hyperflexed but placed in the neutral 
position and the ETT positioned so that it is not kinked. 
Contact areas are padded, and the face and eyes are pro-
tected. Prolonged prone positioning has resulted in pres-
sure ulcers on the face, especially the chin and forehead, 
and other areas. When possible, periodic repositioning 
of the head during prolonged procedures may minimize 
the risk of such injuries. Direct pressure on the eye can 
result in visual loss. Pressure and stretch on nerves are 
avoided by proper padding and avoiding any extension 
over 90 degrees. The abdomen needs to be hanging free 
to avoid increased venous pressure and thereby increased 
venous bleeding. The prone position alters pulmonary 
dynamics, so pulmonary function must be reassessed in 
this position.
Intraoperative Spinal Cord Monitoring
Monitoring spinal cord function is an important compo-
nent of major surgical procedures involving distraction 
and rotation of the spine, such as with major anter-
oposterior spinal fusions and scoliosis surgery (also see 
Chapter 20). Spinal cord monitoring is employed in order 
to detect and hopefully reverse in a timely manner any 
adverse effects noted during the operative period. Spinal 
cord monitoring may include use of SSEPs, motor evoked 
potentials (MEPs) including TCMEPs, EMGs, or a wake-up 
test. The anesthetic technique must be adjusted appro-
priately when spinal cord monitoring is employed. Some 
anesthetics interfere with acquisition of the waveforms 
that are obtained intraoperatively and used to analyze 
spinal cord integrity.
SSEPs are sensory evoked potential waves generated 
in the cerebral cortex that result from sensory stimuli 
caused by repetitive peripheral nerve stimulation in the 
extremities that propagate up through the dorsum or sen-
sory portion of the spinal cord and into the brain. These 
waveforms are then detected via electrodes placed over 
the scalp. Specific areas on the scalp coincide with the 
brain's sensory areas for the upper and lower extremities, 
and proper signal acquisition obtained over these sites 
indicates an intact sensory or dorsal portion of the spinal 
cord. The SSEP waveform generated from multiple repeti-
tive stimulations is analyzed for its latency and amplitude 
(Fig. 32.8). An increase in latency of more than 10% or a 
decrease in amplitude of 60% or more, in addition to an 
inability to obtain a proper waveform or signal, may be 
indicative of spinal cord dysfunction or disruption. Many 
factors can alter waveforms unrelated to surgery. They 
should be properly detected and eliminated. Surgically 
unrelated causes may include hypotension, hypothermia, 
high concentrations of volatile anesthetics, benzodiaz-
epines, hypercarbia or hypocarbia, and anemia. Only a 
small concentration of volatile anesthetic (typically 1% 
to 2% desflurane) should be employed when SSEP moni-
toring is used. Midazolam and other benzodiazepines 
are avoided because they may interfere with obtaining a 
waveform. Some anesthesia providers avoid nitrous oxide 
and use a combination of air in oxygen.3–5,13,14
Surgically related conditions resulting in loss of SSEPs 
include direct injury or trauma to the cord or impairment 
of blood supply. Distraction, rotation, excessive bleed-
ing, and severing or clamping of arterial blood supply 
can result in ischemia to the cord and neurologic injury. 
Unlike direct injury, which is demonstrated immediately 
by changes in SSEPs, ischemia may take time, up to 
half an hour or longer, to manifest itself. Some areas of 
the spinal cord are more vulnerable and therefore more 
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
566
prone to ischemia, as their blood supply is dependent on 
watershed blood flow. Surgical intervention as a result of 
either direct contact or stretching may impair blood sup-
ply and thus render the cord ischemic.23 Once a signifi-
cant change in SSEPs or other monitor is noted, specific 
maneuvers should be used such as releasing the rotation 
and distraction of the spine if it has occurred. In addition, 
as a result of distraction, there may be insufficient blood 
supply to the spine, and therefore, the mean arterial 
blood pressure should be increased in an effort to restore 
adequate blood flow. All variables such as hemoglobin, 
temperature, CO2, and arterial blood pressure should be 
considered. Once these are all evaluated, a wake-up test 
(see following discussion) may be necessary if the wave-
forms do not improve.
Transcranial Motor Evoked Potentials
As SSEP monitoring only helps determine adequate 
status of the dorsal or sensory portion of the spinal 
cord, a method to monitor the motor or ventral aspect 
of the spinal cord became necessary.24 Initially this was 
provided via neurogenic MEPs, but these waveforms 
could be obtained only while the surgical incision was 
open and the spinous processes available for insertion 
of electrodes. Thus some vulnerable operative periods 
remained unmonitored. TCMEPs allow for monitoring 
the patient's motor pathways throughout the entire pro-
cedure. Stimulation over the motor cortex of the brain 
generates a waveform, which is propagated down the 
motor pathways and detected distally in the arm or leg. 
This stimulation results in a characteristic waveform 
(Fig. 32.9). Loss of the wave may be indicative of neuro-
logic injury (see Fig. 32.9). As with SSEP waveforms, loss 
of the tracings requires the following steps: an evaluation 
to determine the cause, attention to physiologic variables, 
intervention to increase arterial blood pressure, and pos-
sibly a wake-up test as well.25
To generate TCMEPs, the patient cannot have a 
residual neuromuscular blockade (also see Chapter 11). 
Importantly, it should be understood that the electric 
current causing the stimulus over the motor cortex also 
stimulates muscles directly in the area of the electrodes 
placed in the scalp—the masseter muscle and muscles 
of mastication. This muscle contraction may result in 
a strong bite, which can potentially injure the tongue, 
lip, and ETT. Instances of significant tongue lacera-
tions and damage to ETTs can occur and potentially 
develop into emergency situations, especially with the 
patient in the prone position.26 The tongue should not 
protrude through the teeth. Placing a bite block made 
of tongue depressors and gauze in the back of the 
mouth along the teeth line bilaterally will help prevent 
injury. In the prone (face-down) position, any motion 
may allow for the tongue to slip and fall between 
the teeth, rendering it vulnerable to laceration. Each 
stimulus is associated with a masseter muscle contrac-
tion, so the patient is at risk as long as waveforms are 
being generated.25 26
100/0+
100/0+
100/0+
100/0+
Cz-Fz
100 ms
5 µV
C4´-C3´
100 ms
5 µV
C5-Fz
100 ms
5 µV
Cz-C3´
100 ms
5 µV
Fig. 32.8 Somatosensory evoked potentials (SSEPs) of tibial nerve demonstrating loss of SSEP 
waveform. Note how the newly acquired waveforms (purple) are flattened when compared with baseline 
tracings (red) as amplitudes of tracings are decreased and latency increased. Tracings returned to 
normal after retraction of the cauda equina was released. (Courtesy of Department of Neurophysiology, 
NYU Hospital for Joint Diseases.)
IV
Chapter 32 Orthopedic Surgery
567
Electromyograms
After pedicle screw placement, the surgeon may request 
EMGs to determine if the screw is in close proximity to 
a nerve root, as this can result in neurologic deficits. An 
electric current is sent through the screw, and EMGs are 
measured distally. If a low milliampere (mA) current can 
stimulate the nerve root, then the screw is too close to the 
nerve root. Therefore in general, a current greater than 7 
mA is sent to generate a response to know that screws are 
not too close to nerve roots. For accurate muscle EMGs, 
residual neuromuscular blockade must be terminated or 
reversed.
Wake-Up Test
The wake-up test was traditionally used to assess spinal 
cord integrity in many scoliosis cases. Development of 
sophisticated spinal cord monitoring is now standard 
in many hospitals, and the wake-up test is generally 
reserved for those situations in which monitoring is 
unobtainable or a significant intraoperative change in 
spinal cord monitoring waveforms is noted. During the 
wake-up test, the anesthetic is discontinued and the 
patient is asked to move the extremities. Potential com-
plications of this approach include increased bleeding, 
venous air embolism, and even inadvertent extubation 
of the trachea in the prone position with the wound 
exposed. The wake-up test is performed as follows: Turn 
off all inhaled anesthetics; reverse any neuromuscular 
blocking drug-induced paralysis; and stop infusions 
such as dexmedetomidine, propofol, or ketamine. If 
spontaneous respirations do not begin, inject naloxone 
0.04 mg at a time to reverse any residual narcotic effect. 
The patient's head should be held to reduce the risk of 
self-extubation of the trachea. Before assessing lower 
extremity function, confirm upper extremity function. 
This can be accomplished by having the patient squeeze 
an observer's hand. Patient compliance denotes adequate 
recovery from general anesthesia. Then, while someone 
is observing the feet, ask the patient to wiggle his or her 
toes. A rapid-acting anesthetic such as propofol should 
be ready to be administered as soon as the assessment is 
complete, so the patient can rapidly be reanesthetized. 
If the wake-up test is not successful in demonstrating 
adequate motor movement, further surgical intervention 
may be warranted and the patient may require transport 
to the radiology suite for additional imaging studies.3 5 27
Conclusion of the Case
At the conclusion of the operation, the patient is placed 
in the supine position. All lines and tubes are secured so 
that intravenous line, arterial line, and airway access are 
not lost at this crucial time. Carefully reassess the patient 
for hemodynamic status, intravascular volume status, 
hematocrit, blood loss, degree of fluid and blood replace-
ment, temperature, and the potential for airway edema. 
Premature extubation of the trachea must be avoided. 
Also facial edema, respiratory effort, the amount of 
pain medication, and the presence of splinting and pain 
should be evaluated before extubating the trachea. After 
the decision is made to extubate the trachea or not, the 
patient may be properly transported to the PACU. Supple-
mental oxygen should be used in the PACU. Electrolytes, 
hemoglobin, and clotting studies should be ordered as 
indicated.
Postoperative pain management (also see Chapter 
40) may prove complicated after spine surgery, as some 
patients may be taking significant amounts of pain medi-
cations, particularly opioids, before surgery. For these 
patients and for narcotic-naïve patients, a perioperative 
pain management plan can be developed and incorporated 
in the patient's care plan. In fact, the pain management 
pathway should consider using preoperative oral pain 
LAPB
100 ms
1 mV
RAPB
100 ms
1 mV
LTA
100 ms
200 µV
RTA
100 ms
200 µV
LAPB
100 ms
1 mV
RAPB
100 ms
1 mV
LTA
100 ms
200 µV
RTA
100 ms
200 µV
Fig. 32.9 Normal transcranial motor evoked potentials (left) and loss of waveform (right lower two 
panels) indicating possible neurologic issue with motor component of the spinal cord. (Courtesy of 
Department of Neurophysiology, NYU Hospital for Joint Diseases.)
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
568
medications, intraoperative infusion of pain medications, 
and postoperative medications to supply a multimodal 
pain regimen with the goal of maximizing pain relief 
while considering methods to decrease narcotic-related 
respiratory depression. Applying individual consideration 
to a standard pain pathway, preoperative pain medica-
tions may include acetaminophen, gabapentin, or other 
antiinflammatory pain medications. Patient-controlled 
analgesia (PCA) may be effective postoperatively, with 
the dose tailored to the patient's needs. Some centers use 
ketamine as an analgesic adjunct, either intraoperatively 
or postoperatively. The use of nonsteroidal antiinflam-
matory drugs (NSAIDs), such as ketorolac, needs careful 
consideration, as they will interfere with bone formation 
and therefore should be avoided in patients who have 
just undergone spinal fusion.28 NSAIDs can be considered 
on an individual basis when bone healing is not a factor, 
with cautionary consideration of cardiac-related issues 
resulting from their administration. Other oral medica-
tions are helpful in the perioperative period and may be 
considered for administration preoperatively and postop-
eratively. These drugs may include acetaminophen, anti-
convulsants (e.g., gabapentin and pregabalin), antispas-
modics that work at the spinal cord level (e.g., baclofen, 
tizanidine), antiinflammatory medications, and opioids. 
Intravenous acetaminophen is an excellent addition to 
the pain management regimen in patients who are nil per 
os, or nothing by mouth (NPO).
Vision Loss
Postoperative visual loss (POVL) is a rare but potentially 
devastating complication occurring in patients under-
going spine surgery (also see Chapters 19 and 31).29 36
Although its cause is unclear, patients having prolonged 
spine surgery (>6 hours) in the prone position who 
have large blood loss (>1 L) are particularly at risk.29
Yet patients with small blood loss and short procedures 
also have had visual loss. Perioperative factors such as 
anemia, hypotension, prolonged surgery, blood loss, 
increased venous pressure from positioning in the prone 
position, edema, a compartment syndrome within the 
orbit, and resistance to blood flow such as direct pressure 
on the eye, in addition to systemic diseases such as dia-
betes, hypertension, and vascular disease have all been 
considered possible etiologic factors.29 36
Ischemic optic neuropathy (ION) is a major cause of 
POVL. Variations in blood supply to the optic nerve may 
play a role in the development of ION, including reli-
ance on a watershed blood supply to critical areas of the 
optic nerve. The head-down position allows edema to 
develop in the orbit, and this increase in venous pres-
sure may affect arterial blood flow. Ocular perfusion 
pressure (OPP), or the blood pressure supplying blood 
flow to the optic nerve, is a function of the mean arterial 
pressure (MAP) and intraocular pressure (IOP) such that 
OPP = MAP −IOP. Increases in IOP or decreases in MAP 
can have a negative impact on OPP.12 Increases in IOP 
can decrease OPP and lead to ischemia, and the prone 
position is associated with increases in IOP.31
A visual loss registry has been established by the 
American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) to facili-
tate establishing the cause of POVL.30 An ASA Practice 
Advisory points to ION as the most likely cause of POVL 
(Box 32.1).29 36 In a published report of 93 cases reported 
in the POVL registry, 83 resulted from ION, with the 
remainder attributed to central retinal artery occlusion 
(CRAO). CRAO may be embolic in nature or the result of 
direct pressure on the eyeball and tends to be unilateral. 
Most patients in the registry were healthy and placed 
in the prone position for spine surgery. Blood loss more 
than 1 L and procedures of 6 hours or longer were pre-
sent in 96% of cases. Fifty-five of the POVL cases were 
bilateral, with 47 having total visual loss. The registry 
publication reveals that blood loss in patients with POVL 
varied widely with a mean of 2 L but ranged from 0.1 
to 25 L.30 34 35 The advisory and registry publications 
promote a preoperative discussion with the patient, and 
some suggest staged spine procedures for prolonged sur-
geries.30 34 35
A study comparing 80 patients who suffered ION 
reported in the registry publication with matched con-
trol subjects revealed more insight concerning risk. An 
Box 32.1
Summary of the ASA Practice Advisory
•There is a subset of patients who undergo spine
procedures in the prone position and are at increased 
risk for perioperative visual loss. Patients who may be 
at increased risk are those having long procedures or 
substantial blood loss or both.
•Consider informing high-risk patients that there is a
small, unpredictable risk of perioperative visual loss.
•The use of deliberate hypotensive techniques during spine
surgery is not associated with perioperative visual loss.
•In patients who have substantial blood loss, colloids
should be administered in addition to crystalloids to 
maintain intravascular volume.
•There is no apparent transfusion “trigger” that would
eliminate the risk of perioperative visual loss related to 
anemia.
•When positioning high-risk patients, the head should
be level with or higher than the heart when possible. In 
addition, when possible, the head should be maintained 
in a neutral forward position (e.g., without significant 
neck flexion, extension, lateral flexion, or rotation).
•Staged spine procedures should be considered in high-
risk patients.
From American Society of Anesthesiologists Task Force on 
Perioperative Visual Loss. Practice advisory for perioperative visual 
loss associated with spine surgery: An updated report by the 
American Society of Anesthesiologists Task Force on Perioperative 
Visual Loss. Anesthesiology. 2012;116(2):274–285.ASA, American 
Society of Anesthesiologists.
IV
Chapter 32 Orthopedic Surgery
569
increased incidence of ION was noted in patients with the 
following risk factors: males, obese patients, patients who 
underwent surgery on a Wilson frame, longer anesthesia 
time, cases with larger blood loss, and those who received 
a smaller percentage of colloid.37
SURGERY IN THE SITTING POSITION
Shoulder surgery is frequently performed with patients in 
the sitting, or “beach chair,” position, with the head and 
upper torso elevated 30 to 90 degrees from the supine 
position (also see Chapter 19). Anesthesia in this position 
is associated with rare but significant and devastating 
neurologic complications, including stroke, ischemic 
brain injury, and vegetative states.38 39 The cause is a 
decrease in cerebral perfusion pressure resulting in insuf-
ficient blood supply to the brain. This is caused by the 
arterial blood pressure gradient that develops between 
the heart and brain in this position. For each centimeter 
of head elevation above the level of the heart, there is 
a decrease in arterial blood pressure of 0.77 mm Hg. 
Therefore arterial blood pressure measured at the level 
of the heart is not the blood and perfusion pressure at 
the brain. Measurements obtained at the level of the 
heart must be recalculated. A 20-cm height differential is 
not uncommon, which calculates to approximately a 15 
to 16 mm Hg gradient. A convenient point for measur-
ing height difference between the heart and brain is the 
external auditory meatus, which is at the same level as 
the circle of Willis (COW). Even so, there is still a signifi-
cant amount of brain tissue above this level. If arterial 
blood pressure decreases, or the surgeon's request for 
significant hypotensive anesthesia is followed, cerebral 
hypotension, and therefore a significantly diminished 
cerebral perfusion pressure, may occur at the level of 
the COW and the brain. Therefore significant hypoten-
sion should be avoided in these patients, especially those 
elderly, hypertensive patients whose autoregulatory curve 
is undoubtedly compromised.
FRACTURED HIP
Hip fractures occur frequently in elderly patients, who 
often also suffer from multiple preexisting medical con-
ditions or comorbid conditions. Factors predisposing to 
fracture include medical comorbid conditions, osteoporo-
sis, lower limb dysfunction, visual impairment, increasing 
age, Parkinson disease, previous fracture, stroke, female 
gender, dementia, institutionalized patients, excess alco-
hol or caffeine consumption, cold climate, and use of 
psychotropic medications.40 Mortality rates can range up 
to 14% to 36% in the first year after fracture.40 Medical 
status affects morbidity and mortality risks. One example 
is the number of preexisting comorbid conditions from 
which the patient suffers. A prospective cohort study of 
over 2000 patients over the age of 60 years with an acute 
hip fracture reported that the presence of three or more 
comorbid conditions was the strongest preoperative risk 
factor.41 The most common postoperative complications 
were chest infection and heart failure; each was associ-
ated with greater risk of death.
Generally, when significant comorbid conditions that 
need correction exist, patients benefit from delay in 
surgery while their medical status is improved. Mortality 
rate in high-risk patients was decreased from 29% to 3% 
in one study when time was taken to correct physiologic 
abnormalities.42 In a 2005 prospective study of 2660 
patients who underwent surgical treatment for hip frac-
ture the overall mortality rate was 9% at 30 days, 19% 
at 90 days, and 30% at 12 months. Healthy patients did 
well as long as surgery was performed within 4 days.43
Patients with comorbid conditions had a nearly 2.5 times 
increased mortality rate at 30 days as compared with 
healthy patients. Also, patients admitted to the hospital 
immediately after fracture did better than those admitted 
more than a day later.43 A metaanalysis of over 200,000 
elderly patients with hip fracture noted that operative 
delay beyond 48 hours after admission was associated 
with increased mortality rate and suggested that undue 
delay may be harmful to patients, especially young or 
low-risk patients.44
Preoperative evaluation (also see Chapter 13) is espe-
cially important. The diagnosis of a recent MI illustrates 
how these evaluations have changed. Previously, surgery 
was delayed up to 6 months after an MI, but now, the 
tendency is to risk-stratify patients based on the severity 
of their MI to determine wait time until surgery.45 The 
recent MI needs to be evaluated on a risk–benefit ratio 
comparing the risk of surgery after a recent MI with the 
negative side effects of keeping a patient bed bound with 
its attendant risks of pneumonia, pulmonary embolism, 
pain, loss of ability to walk, and decubitus ulcers. Fac-
tors to consider are the extent of the MI, additional 
myocardium that may be at risk, presence of postinfarc-
tion angina, and presence of congestive heart failure 
(CHF). Although ongoing angina or the presence of CHF 
may preclude early surgery, a small subendocardial MI 
with minimal increase in cardiac enzymes and normal 
echocardiogram and stress test would allow considera-
tion for an earlier intervention. A fractured hip usually 
prevents the patient from undergoing a normal exercise 
stress test. Therefore if indicated, a pharmacologic stress 
test may be needed.
Anesthetic Technique
A long-standing issue is whether one anesthetic tech-
nique, general or regional, is associated with better 
outcomes in patients undergoing hip fracture repair. 
In general, the data accumulated over many years 
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
570
and many different studies have not documented a 
clear advantage of one technique over another.3 5 46 47
Therefore choice of spinal or general anesthesia should 
be made on a case-by-case basis taking the patient's 
specific medical issues into consideration. The pros and 
cons of both spinal and general anesthesia must be con-
sidered when choosing the technique for a given patient 
(also see Chapter 14). General anesthesia, although 
easy to administer, does not provide any thromboem-
bolic protection for the patient that may be provided 
by a regional technique.3 5 In what may prove to be 
a clearer elucidation of whether anesthetic technique 
(neuraxial or general anesthesia) affects outcome in hip 
fracture patients, a 2012 retrospective study involving 
over 18,000 hip fracture patients revealed that use of 
regional anesthesia resulted in lower mortality rates 
and fewer pulmonary complications in patients with 
intertrochanteric hip fractures but not in those patients 
suffering femoral neck fractures.48 In 2021, a multi-
center, pragmatic, randomized study compared spinal 
anesthesia with general anesthesia in 1,600 older (age 
50 and above) hip fracture patients (Regional vs General 
Anesthesia for Promoting Independence After Hip Frac-
ture, or REGAIN). Spinal anesthesia was not found to be 
superior to general anesthesia with respect to survival 
and recovery of ambulation at 60 days. Furthermore, 
there was no significant difference in the incidence of 
postoperative delirium between groups.49
The anesthesia provider should consider the type of 
fracture when preparing for surgery. Intertrochanteric 
fractures are associated with larger blood losses and 
longer operations, because a plate and screw are inserted, 
than intracapsular fractures that may be repaired with 
cannulated screws or a hemiarthroplasty depending on 
the viability of the femoral head.
Advantages of regional anesthesia, such as provided 
by a spinal anesthetic, include the following: (1) it 
avoids endotracheal intubation and airway manipula-
tion and the medications that need to be administered 
to accomplish this, (2) it decreases the total amount of 
systemic medication the patient receives throughout the 
procedure, and (3) it may play a role in decreasing the 
risk of thromboembolism. The vasodilatory effect of the 
spinal anesthetic may help the patient with CHF. How-
ever, intravascular fluid still should be given cautiously 
because CHF may worsen as the intravascular vasodila-
tory effect of the spinal recedes.3 5
Preoperatively, intravascular volume status is a con-
cern, as fractures can result in significant blood loss, 
and a spinal anesthetic in the presence of hypovolemia 
can result in profound hypotension. An additional con-
cern is the amount of time the patient must lie on the 
fracture table, especially in the elderly, as even small 
amounts of sedation can result in significant respiratory 
depression.
Peripheral nerve blocks, including lumbar plexus, 
femoral, and lateral femoral cutaneous nerve (LFCN) 
blocks, may also be used in selected situations. Lumbar 
plexus block can be performed with the nerve stimulator 
technique or the use of ultrasound guidance.50 Fracture 
repair requiring only cannulated pins may be performed 
with combined femoral and LFCN blocks. The femoral 
nerve block provides analgesia in the region of the hip, 
and the LFCN block will anesthetize the region of can-
nulated pin insertion located on the lateral aspect of the 
thigh. An LFCN block is performed by administering a 
fan of local anesthetic in a cephalad direction from a 
point 1 cm medial and inferior to the anterior superior 
iliac spine. The LFCN is a sensory nerve and therefore 
not amenable to location with a nerve stimulator. Alter-
natively, the nerve can be blocked using ultrasound 
guidance.
Intraoperative considerations for patients undergoing 
fractured hip repair include proper positioning and pad-
ding on the fracture table, maintaining adequate intra-
vascular volume status as blood is lost, and adequately 
maintaining body temperature. Observation for hemody-
namic alterations and other unanticipated responses in 
the elderly patient is especially important as the proce-
dure progresses.
At the conclusion of the surgery, reassess hemody-
namic status, ensuring that the patient has received 
adequate blood and fluid replacement. Determine if 
the dose of narcotic the patient received is going to 
have a prolonged effect, thereby resulting in respira-
tory depression once the patient is extubated. Check 
for hypothermia and anemia, and evaluate the patient's 
end-tidal CO2, as the elderly can be slow to awaken 
and can easily hypoventilate as a result of the opioids 
they received. Once the trachea is extubated, adminis-
ter supplemental oxygen. The dose and frequency of 
pain medication should be determined cautiously, as 
increased circulation time and the cumulative effect 
of administered opioids may become evident when not 
expected.
TOTAL JOINT REPLACEMENT
Total hip, knee, and shoulder replacements are fre-
quently performed in patients suffering from osteoar-
thritis, rheumatologic disorders, and trauma. Operations 
may include replacement of an entire joint, partial joint 
replacement, replacement of individual components, 
or resurfacing procedures. Major concerns include the 
patient's age, concurrent medical conditions, blood 
loss, proper positioning and padding, hemodynamic 
variations during the procedure, the response to meth-
ylmethacrylate cement (MMC), and the risk of fat and 
pulmonary emboli.
IV
Chapter 32 Orthopedic Surgery
571
Tranexamic Acid in Orthopedics
TXA use in total joint arthroplasty, as in spine surgery, 
has gained wide acceptance, as a number of studies 
have shown its efficacy in decreasing blood loss in 
these procedures. TXA is an antifibrinolytic that pre-
vents clot breakdown by binding to plasminogen and 
inhibiting fibrinolysis. In 2018 the American Society of 
Regional Anesthesia and Pain Medicine, along with the 
American Association of Hip and Knee Surgeons and the 
American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons, published 
a consensus statement on the use of TXA in total joint 
arthroplasty. The intent was to establish evidence-based 
guidelines for TXA administration in total hip and knee 
arthroplasty to improve treatment and reduce practice 
variation. Major guideline recommendations include the 
following: (1) that either IV, topical, or oral administra-
tion of TXA is effective at reducing perioperative blood 
loss; (2) multiple doses of TXA do not have any signifi-
cant benefit over a single dose in reducing blood loss and 
need for transfusion; (3) TXA administration before inci-
sion is more effective than if given after incision; and (4) 
TXA administration does not increase the risk of venous 
thromboembolism in patients without a history of venous 
thromboembolic events.51 A 2021 systematic review of 
216 studies suggested that intravenous TXA, irrespective 
of dosing, does not increase the risk of venous thrombo-
embolic events.52
Fig. 32.10 Comparison of bupivacaine and tranexamic acid vials, illustrating similarities between them.
As the use of TXA has increased, there have been 
multiple case reports of inadvertent intrathecal admin-
istration of TXA, resulting in significant morbidity and 
mortality. A 2019 review article identified 21 reports 
of intrathecal TXA administration. In 20 cases there 
were significant neurologic and cardiac complications 
requiring prolonged intensive care treatment, leading 
to 10 deaths.53 A 2021 case report was published of 
a patient undergoing a total knee arthroplasty who 
received intrathecal TXA instead of local anesthetic, 
which resulted in myoclonic seizures and hyperten-
sion.54 Treatments employed in these reports included 
administration of anticonvulsants, general anesthesia, 
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) lavage, and intensive hemo-
dynamic and neurologic monitoring.
In September 2020 the National Alert Network pub-
lished an advisory that highlighted the dangers of the use 
of TXA in orthopedics. There were three cases in which 
a medication error occurred and TXA was injected into 
the intrathecal space. This was felt to be the result of the 
vials having a similar appearance to commonly used local 
anesthetics (Fig. 32.10). When TXA is administered via the 
spinal route, it acts as a neurotoxin with a mortality rate 
as high as 50%.55 The U.S. Food and Drug Administra-
tion (FDA) issued its own alert to health care providers in 
December 2020. It noted that injection of TXA into the spi-
nal space could cause disastrous effects, including seizures, 
arrhythmias, permanent neurologic injury, and death.56
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
572
Institutions should rapidly establish protocols with 
safety measures to prevent these avoidable occur-
rences. Risk-reduction measures include having the 
pharmacy provide nonvial preparations of TXA, two-
person verification of medications to be injected into 
the intrathecal space, and having TXA made available 
for intravenous injection only after spinal anesthesia 
has been completed.
Total Hip Replacement
Total hip replacements (THRs) are performed with 
patients traditionally in either the supine or lateral decu-
bitus position. A relatively new approach, the anterior 
approach to the hip, is frequently performed with the 
patient in the supine position on a special operating 
room table. Using this technique, selected patients are 
candidates for same-day hip replacement. In the supine 
position, the arm that is on the same side as the hip 
needs to be flexed away from the side. In the lateral 
position, an axillary roll is placed just caudal to the 
axilla to protect the axillary artery and brachial plexus 
from compression (also see Chapter 19). Patients hav-
ing procedures in the lateral position also have a lateral 
positioner placed to stabilize their pelvis. The positioner 
can push abdominal contents cephalad and interfere 
with respiratory function.
A THR may have MMC used to secure the prosthesis. 
Younger patients tend to receive noncemented joint 
replacements. The use of MMC is associated with car-
diopulmonary side effects such as hypoxia, bronchoc-
onstriction, hypotension, cardiovascular collapse, and 
even death. The cause for the systemic reaction to MMC 
may result from the liquid MMC monomer itself, which 
is used in producing the cement for cementing the pros-
thesis, or may be the result of air, fat, or bone marrow 
elements being forced into circulation. The higher the 
liquid content of the liquid monomer in the mix with 
the polymer MMC at the time of insertion, which occurs 
from not adequately mixing or not waiting long enough 
for mixing to occur, the more frequently side effects 
are noted.3 4 57 High-risk patients include those who are 
hypovolemic at the time of cementing, those who are 
hypertensive, and those with significant preexisting 
cardiac disease.3 42
Transesophageal echocardiographic evaluation of car-
diac structure and function during reaming and cement-
ing does indicate that MMC and fat emboli flow centrally 
to the heart from the surgical site.57 If a patient has a pat-
ent foramen ovale, these emboli can theoretically cross 
the patent foramen into the left ventricle and then move 
into the arterial circulation. If the patient has a probe-
patent foramen ovale, an increase in pulmonary pres-
sures as a result of bronchoconstriction may occur. MMC, 
for example, can increase right atrial pressure and shunt 
blood flow directly across the probe-patent foramen 
ovale. Many patients may have a decreased Pao2 during 
the reaming and cementing process intraoperatively. An 
increase in the Fio2 of 1.0 may be necessary.
At the conclusion of surgery, the patient is trans-
ferred to the PACU. Supplemental oxygen is adminis-
tered, and a hemoglobin count should be considered. 
Further testing is based upon the patient's underlying 
medical condition. A postoperative pain management 
plan should be considered preoperatively (also see 
Chapter 40). Pain pathways are used at some medical 
centers that include preoperative oral medications. More 
comprehensive protocols to optimize management for 
same-day procedures are also being used. They may 
include recommendations for intravascular fluid man-
agement, dosing of spinal anesthetics, and medications 
to promote bladder contractility. For inpatients, postop-
erative pain management may include epidural infusion 
with epidural PCA, intravenous PCA, oral medications, 
or peripheral nerve block including lumbar plexus 
block. The postoperative pain management the patient 
receives may be influenced by the thromboembolism 
prophylaxis administered.
Total Knee Replacements and Tourniquets
Total knee replacements (TKRs) are frequently performed 
with a tourniquet in place to provide a bloodless surgical 
field. The tourniquet should be carefully placed on the 
upper thigh over appropriate padding. The leg may be 
wrapped with an Esmarch elastic bandage to help exsan-
guinate the limb before tourniquet inflation. In the lower 
extremity, the tourniquet is inflated to approximately 
100 mm Hg above the systolic blood pressure, as this will 
prevent arterial blood from entering the exsanguinated 
limb.3,4,58
As tourniquets render the limb ischemic, there is a 
limit to inflation time before the ischemia can result in 
permanent limb damage. The safe upper limit of ischemia 
time is about 2 hours. The surgeon should be informed of 
tourniquet inflation time at 1 hour and then as the tour-
niquet approaches the 2-hour limit so it can be deflated 
in a timely manner. If the total tourniquet time exceeds 
the 2-hour limit, the tourniquet should be deflated at 2 
hours for a period of at least 15 to 20 minutes before 
it is reinflated. This will allow for the “wash-out” of 
acidic metabolites from the ischemic limb as the limb is 
reperfused with oxygenated blood. Recirculation of the 
ischemic limb with release of the tourniquet is noted by 
a decrease in arterial blood pressure and an increase in 
end-tidal CO2 as the acid products recirculate.3 The hypo-
tension usually responds to intravascular fluid adminis-
tration and vasopressors if necessary.3,58
Pain is noted as the duration of tourniquet inflation 
time increases, manifesting itself as an increase in arterial 
blood pressure and heart rate. Overaggressively treating 
the increase in arterial blood pressure with opioids and 
IV
Chapter 32 Orthopedic Surgery
573
other medications can result in hypotension after the 
tourniquet is released. Animal models have determined 
the pain to occur as a result of C-fiber firing. A regional 
block proximal to the tourniquet can prevent C-fibers 
from firing.3 58 59
Complications noted with tourniquet use include 
nerve damage, vessel damage (especially in patients 
with atherosclerosis), pulmonary embolism, and skin 
damage. Skin injury may be the result of the antiseptic 
prep solution if it is allowed to seep under the tourniquet 
and tourniquet padding at the time of skin prep, caus-
ing a chemical burn. Additional concerns at the time 
of tourniquet deflation are pulmonary embolism and a 
decrease in core temperature as the isolated extremity is 
reperfused.3 45 46
After deflating the tourniquet, the surgical field 
should be observed for evidence of bleeding. Occasion-
ally the tourniquet is deflated at the tourniquet control 
box but there is no bleeding because the tubing to the 
tourniquet is kinked. This is a significant complication, 
as the tourniquet is effectively still inflated and the 
patient is then at risk for prolonged tourniquet inflation 
time, limb ischemia, and complications. One method to 
help ensure tourniquet deflation is to disconnect the 
tubing from the tourniquet box and observe the inci-
sion for bleeding, which is an indicator of tourniquet 
deflation.
TKRs are frequently performed under regional anes-
thesia with intravenous sedation. As a tourniquet is used 
during the operation, in the operating room blood loss 
is usually not significant. However, if much blood loss 
occurs into drains in the PACU, hypotension may result. 
Some surgeons do not deflate the tourniquet until the 
wound is closed and the dressing is on the patient. In this 
situation blood loss is usually less but there is a risk of 
postoperative bleeding.60
Debate exists as to whether bilateral TKRs should be 
performed in one setting. Many patients have undergone 
bilateral TKRs in one day or during one hospital admis-
sion.60 64 If bilateral TKRs are scheduled, they should be 
performed after careful patient selection. Many institu-
tions have guidelines delineating those patients felt to 
be acceptable candidates for bilateral procedures based 
on comorbid conditions and ASA physical status. Intra-
operatively, the anesthesia provider should be aware that 
drainage from the first total joint will be occurring into 
the wound drainage system, which may be hidden from 
view. If bleeding is significant, hypotension can occur for 
what might be unrecognized reasons.
TKR patients have more postoperative pain than 
patients receiving THR. A postoperative pain manage-
ment plan should be delineated to address anticipated 
pain. This plan may include oral and intravenous 
pain medications and nerve blocks. Preoperative oral 
pain medications such as acetaminophen, gabapentin, 
or NSAIDs (with cardiovascular risk considered) are 
employed by some as part of a total knee pain pathway. 
With early ambulation becoming popular, even as early 
as in the PACU, there is a need to provide adequate pain 
relief for mobilization. Peripheral nerve blocks, such as 
a femoral or an adductor canal block, can supply such 
pain relief.65 The adductor canal block potentially spares 
motor components of the femoral nerve, preserving 
motor strength in the femoral nerve distribution. It is not 
clear that use of femoral or adductor canal blocks results 
in a more frequent incidence of falls.66 Postoperative 
pain relief may also include PCA, continuous infusions 
through catheters, individual nerve blocks of the lower 
extremities, and intravenous or oral medications. The use 
of intravenous dexamethasone administered at the time 
of a peripheral nerve block prolongs the block's duration, 
which may be useful in this setting.67 In lieu of peripheral 
nerve blocks, some surgeons are using “off-label” periar-
ticular infiltrations of liposomal bupivacaine at the end 
of surgery to achieve extended postoperative analgesia. 
One randomized trial comparing intraarticular liposomal 
bupivacaine to single-shot femoral nerve blockade after 
TKR reported similar inpatient pain control.68
Deep Venous Thrombosis and 
Thromboembolism Prophylaxis
The need for, and technique of, perioperative deep 
venous thrombosis (DVT) prophylaxis varies by surgeon 
and institution. Thromboembolism management should 
be coordinated with the anesthesia providers. Options 
for DVT prophylaxis include warfarin, low-molecular-
weight heparin (LMWH), sequential compression boots, 
and aspirin. Although guidelines do exist as to which 
medications to use, the choice of DVT thromboprophy-
laxis is still variable. The surgeon's choice and timing of 
DVT prophylaxis will influence the choice of technique: 
general, spinal, combined spinal and epidural, epidural, 
peripheral block, or nerve block and catheter. At issue 
is concern that catheter manipulation while a patient is 
anticoagulated will result in bleeding, and if the catheter 
is in the epidural space, its removal can potentially result 
in epidural bleeding, epidural hematoma formation, and 
paralysis. Once an epidural hematoma develops, the 
catheter must be removed expeditiously before irrevers-
ible paralysis occurs. Although epidural hematomas clas-
sically present with severe pain and onset of numbness 
and weakness, in patients receiving epidural infusions of 
local anesthetics, these classic symptoms may be masked.
LMWH was used for postoperative anticoagulation 
in Europe without significant problems. However, after 
introduction of the LMWH enoxaparin in the United 
States, the incidence of epidural hematomas increased. 
Several factors may have contributed, including twice-
daily LMWH (compared with once daily in Europe), per-
formance of neuraxial anesthesia or removal of epidural 
catheters while the anticoagulation effect of LMWH was 
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
574
still present, use of multiple medications with anticoagu-
lation properties simultaneously, or the lack of attention 
to dosing schedule. This prompted a 1998 warning from 
the FDA noting “reports of epidural or spinal hematomas 
with concurrent use of low molecular weight heparin and 
spinal/epidural anesthesia or spinal puncture.” Consensus 
statements from the American Society of Regional Anes-
thesia and Pain Medicine (ASRA) addressed the issue in an 
evidence-based guideline, currently in its fourth edition, 
published in 2018.69 The FDA issued an updated drug 
safety communication in 2013 that recommended waiting 
at least 12 hours before neuraxial needle placement in a 
patient who received a prophylactic dose of enoxaparin 
and waiting 4 hours (increased from the previous 2-hour 
waiting period) before dosing enoxaparin after an epidural 
catheter is removed.70 Patients receiving warfarin should 
have their catheter removed only when the international 
normalized ratio (INR) is less than 1.5. Other anticoagu-
lants and antiplatelet medications should be avoided when 
LMWH is being used and an epidural catheter is in place.69
When given alone, aspirin and NSAIDs do not appear to 
increase the risk of spinal hematoma in patients undergoing 
neuraxial anesthesia. However, several potent antiplatelet 
Box 32.2
Discontinuation of Antiplatelet Agents Before 
Neuraxial Blockade
Medication Time Interval*
Ticlopidine 10 days
Clopidogrel 5–7 days
Prasugrel 7–10 days
Ticagrelor 5–7 days
From Horlocker T, Vandermeuelen, E, Kopp S, et al. Regional 
anesthesia in the patient receiving antithrombotic or thrombolytic 
therapy: American Society of Regional Anesthesia and Pain Medicine 
Evidence-Based Guidelines (Fourth Edition). Reg Anesth Pain Med. 
2018;43(3):286.
*Time interval between medication discontinuation and neuraxial 
blockade.
1. Okada Y, Wu D, Trynka G, etal. Genet-
ics of rheumatoid arthritis contributes 
to biology and drug discovery. Nature. 
2014;506(7488):376–381.
2. Klippel JH, Crofford LJ, Stone JH, Wey-
land CM, eds. Rheumatoid arthritis. 
Epidemiology, pathology and pathogen-
esis. Primer on the Rheumatic Diseases. 
12th ed. Atlanta: Arthritis Foundation; 
2001:209–232.
3. Bernstein RL, Rosenberg AD. Manual of 
Orthopedic Anesthesia and Related Pain 
Syndromes. New York: Churchill Living-
stone; 1993.
4. Rosenberg AD. Current issues in the 
anesthetic treatment of the patient for 
orthopedic surgery. ASA Refresher Cours-
es in Anesthesiology. 2004;32:169–178.
5. Rosenberg AD. Anesthesia for major 
orthopedic surgery. ASA Refresher Cours-
es in Anesthesiology. 1997;25:131–144.
6. Bienenstock H, Ehrlich GE, Freyberg RH. 
Rheumatoid arthritis of the cricoarety-
noid joint: A clinicopathological study. 
Arthritis Rheum. 1963;6:48–63.
7. Skues MA, Welchew EA. Anaesthesia 
and rheumatoid arthritis. Anaesthesia. 
1993;48:989–997.
8. Steel HH. Anatomical and mechani-
cal considerations of the atlantoaxial 
articulations. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 
1968;50:1481–1490.
9. Keenan MA, Stiles CM, Kaufman RL. 
Acquired laryngeal deviation associated 
with cervical spine disease in erosive 
polyarticular arthritis. Use of the fiber-
optic bronchoscope in rheumatic dis-
ease. Anesthesiology. 1983;58:441–449.
10. Macarthur A, Kleiman S. Rheuma-
toid cervical joint disease—a challenge 
to the anesthetist. Can J Anaesth. 
1993;40(2):154–159.
11. Klippel JH, Crofford LJ, Stone JH, Wey-
land CM, eds. Seronegative spondy-
loarthropathies, ankylosing spondylitis. 
Primer on the Rheumatic Diseases. 12th 
ed. Atlanta, GA: Arthritis Foundation; 
2001:250–254.
12. Rosenberg AD. Annual Meeting 58th 
Refresher Course Lectures and Basic Sci-
ence Review RCL American Society of 
Anesthesiology. Anesthesiology. 2007:119.
13. Zakine J, Samarcq D, Lorne E, etal. 
Postoperative ketamine administration 
decreases morphine consumption in major 
abdominal surgery: A prospective, ran-
domized, double-blind, controlled study. 
Anesth Analg. 2008;106(6):1856–1861.
14. Subramaniam K, Subramaniam B, Stein-
brook RA. Ketamine as adjuvant anal-
gesic to opioids: A quantitative and 
qualitative systematic review. Anesth 
Analg. 2004;99:482–495.
15. American Society of Anesthesiologists Task 
Force on Intraoperative Awareness. Prac-
tice advisory for intraoperative awareness 
and brain function monitoring: A report by 
the American Society of Anesthesiologists 
Task Force on Intraoperative Awareness. 
Anesthesiology. 2006;104:847–864.
16. Avidan MS, Zhang L, Burnside BA, etal. 
Anesthesia awareness and the bispectral 
index. N Engl J Med. 2008;358:1097–1108.
17. Urban MK, Jules-Elysee K, Urquhart B, 
etal. The efficacy of antifibrinolytics in 
the reduction of blood loss during complex 
adult reconstructive spine surgery. Spine 
(Phila Pa 1976). 2001;26:1152–1156.
18. Zufferey P, Merquiol F, Laporte S, etal. 
Do antifibrinolytics reduce allogeneic 
blood in orthopedic surgery? Anesthesi-
ology. 2006;105(5):1034–1046.
19. Neilipovitz DT, Murto K, Hall L, etal. A 
randomized trial of tranexamic acid to 
reduce blood transfusion for scoliosis 
surgery. Anesth Analg. 2001;93:82–87.
20. Mangano DT, Tudor IC, Dietzel C, 
etal. The risk associated with apro-
tinin in cardiac surgery. N Engl J Med. 
2006;354:353–365.
21. Mangano DT, Miao Y, Vuylsteke A, 
etal. Mortality associated with apro-
tinin during 5 years following coronary 
bypass graft surgery. JAMA. 2007;297:
471–479.
22. Fergusson DA, Hebert PC, Mazer CD, 
etal. A comparison of aprotinin and 
lysine analogues in high-risk cardiac sur-
gery. N Engl J Med. 2008;358:2319–2331.
23. Pasternak BM, Boyd DP, Ellis FH. Spinal 
cord injury after procedures on the aorta. 
Surg Gynecol Obstet. 1972;135:29–34.
REFERENCES
drugs place a patient at an increased risk for a neuraxial 
hematoma if a spinal or epidural anesthetic is performed 
while their effects are present. The medications listed in Box 
32.2 should be withheld for the recommended period, or 
a nonneuraxial technique should be used instead.69 These 
guidelines will likely undergo revision as new medications 
are added and as additional experience is considered (also 
see Chapter 23).
IV
Chapter 32 Orthopedic Surgery
575
24. Owen JH, Laschinger J, Bridwell K, etal. 
Sensitivity and specificity of soma-
tosensory and neurogenic motor evoked 
potentials in animals and humans. Spine 
(Phila Pa 1976). 1988;13(10):1111–1118.
25. Hilibrand AS, Schwartz DM, Sethura-
man V, etal. Comparison of transcra-
nial electric motor and somatosensory 
evoked potential monitoring during cer-
vical spine surgery. J Bone Joint Surg 
Am. 2004;86:1248–1253.
26. MacDonald D. Intraoperative motor 
evoked potential monitoring: over-
view and update. J Clin Monit Comput. 
2006;20(5):347–377.
27. Vauzelle C, Stagnara P, Jouvinroux P. 
Functional monitoring of spinal cord 
activity during spinal surgery. Clin 
Orthop Relat Res. 1973;93:173–178.
28. Glassman SD, Rose SM, Dimar JR, etal. 
The effect of postoperative nonsteroidal 
antiinflammatory drug administration 
on spinal fusion. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 
1998;23:834–838.
29. Williams EL. Postoperative blindness. 
Anesthiol Clin North Am. 2002;20:
605–622.
30. Lee L, Roth S, Posner K, etal. The 
American Society of Anesthesiologists 
Postoperative Visual Loss Registry: 
Analysis of 93 spine surgery cases with 
postoperative visual loss. Anesthesiol-
ogy. 2006;105(4):652–659.
31. Cheng MA, Todorov A, Tempelhoff R, etal. 
The effect of prone positioning on intraoc-
ular pressure in anesthetized patients. 
Anesthesiology. 2001;95:1351–1355.
32. Lee L, Lam A. Unilateral blindness after 
position lumbar spine surgery. Anesthe-
siology. 2001;95:793–795.
33. Roth S, Barach P. Postoperative visual 
loss: Still no answers—yet. Anesthesiol-
ogy. 2001;95:575–577.
34. Warner MA. Postoperative visual loss: 
Experts, data and practice. Anesthesiol-
ogy. 2006;105:641–642.
35. American Society of Anesthesiologists 
Task Force on Perioperative Visual Loss. 
Practice advisory for perioperative vis-
ual loss associated with spine surgery: 
An updated report by the American 
Society of Anesthesiologists Task Force 
on Perioperative Visual Loss. Anesthesi-
ology. 2012;116(2):274–285.
36. Roth S. Perioperative visual loss: What 
do we know, what can we do? Br J 
Anaesth. 2009;103(suppl):i31–i40.
37. The Postoperative Visual Loss Study 
Group. Risk factors associated with 
ischemic optic neuropathy after spine sur-
gery. Anesthesiology. 2012;116(1):15–24.
38. Pohl A, Cullen DJ. Cerebral ischemia 
during shoulder surgery in the upright 
position: A case series. J Clin Anesth. 
2005;17:463–469.
39. Cullen DJ, Kirby RB. Beach chair posi-
tion may decrease cerebral perfusion 
pressure. Catastrophic outcomes have 
occurred. APSF Newsl. 2007;22(2):25.
40. Zuckerman J. Hip fracture. N Engl J 
Med. 1996;334:1519–1525.
41. Roche JJ, Wenn RT, Sahota O, etal. 
Effect of comorbidities and postopera-
tive complications on mortality after 
hip fracture in elderly people: Prospec-
tive observational cohort study. BMJ. 
2005;331(7529):1374.
42. Schultz RJ, Whitfield GF, LaMura JJ, 
etal. The role of physiologic monitoring 
in patients with fractures of the hip. J 
Trauma. 1985;25:309–316.
43. Moran CG, Wenn RT, Sikand M, etal. 
Early mortality after hip fracture: Is 
delay before surgery important? J Bone 
Joint Surg Am. 2005;87:483–489.
44. Shiga T, Wajimaa Z, Ohe Y. Is operative 
delay associated with increased mortal-
ity of hip fracture patients? Systematic 
review, meta-analysis, and meta-regres-
sion. Can J Anaesth. 2008;55:146–154.
45. Shah KB, Kleinman BS, Sami H, etal. 
Reevaluation of perioperative myocar-
dial infarction in patients with pri-
or myocardial infarction undergoing 
noncardiac operations. Anesth Analg. 
1990;71:231–235.
46. Valentin N, Lomholt B, Jensen JS, etal. 
Spinal or general anaesthesia for sur-
gery of the fractured hip? A prospective 
study of mortality in 578 patients. Br J 
Anaesth. 1986;58:284–291.
47. Davis FM, Woolner DF, Frampton C, etal. 
Prospective multi-centre trial of mortality 
following general or spinal anesthesia for 
hip fracture surgery in the elderly. Br J 
Anaesth. 1987;59:1080–1088.
48. Neuman MD, Silber JH, Elkassabany 
NM, etal. Comparative effectiveness of 
regional versus general anesthesia for 
hip fracture surgery in adults. Anesthe-
siology. 2012;117:72–92.
49. Neuman Mark D, Feng Rui, Carson 
Jeffrey L, et al., REGAIN Investigators. 
Spinal Anesthesia or General Anesthe-
sia for Hip Surgery in Older Adults. N 
Engl J Med. 2021;385(22):2025–2035. 
doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2113514. 34623788.
50. Touray ST, de Leeuw MA, Zuurmond 
WW, Perez RS. Psoas compartment 
block for lower extremity surgery: A 
meta-analysis. Br J Anaesth. 2008 
Dec;101(6):750–760. 
doi:10.1093/
bja/aen298 Epub 2008 Oct 22. PMID: 
18945717.
51. Fillingham YA, Ramkumar DB, Jevsevar 
DS, etal. Tranexamic acid in total joint 
arthroplasty: The endorsed clinical prac-
tice guides of the American Association 
of Hip and Knee Surgeons, Ameri-
can Society of Regional Anesthesia and 
Pain Medicine, American Academy of 
Orthopaedic Surgeons, Hip Society, and 
Knee Society. Reg Anesth Pain Med. 
2019;44(1):7–11.
52. Taeuber I, Weibel S, Herrmann E, etal. 
Association of intravenous tranexamic 
acid with thromboembolic events and 
mortality: A systematic review, meta-
analysis, and meta-regression. JAMA 
Surg. 2021:e210884.
53. Patel S, Robertson B, McConachie I. 
Catastrophic drug errors involving 
tranexamic acid administered dur-
ing spinal anaesthesia. Anaesthesia. 
2019;74(7):904–914.
54. Al-Taei MH, AlAzzawi M, Albustani S, 
Alsaoudi G, Costanzo E. Incorrect route 
for injection: Inadvertent tranexam-
ic acid intrathecal injection. Cureus. 
2021;13(2):e13055.
55. Dangerous Wrong-Route Errors with 
Tranexamic Acid. Institute for Safe Medi-
cation Practices. Sept. 9, 2020. www.ismp.
org/alerts/dangerous-wrong-route-errors-
tranexamic-acid. Accessed April 8, 2021.
56. FDA Alerts Healthcare Professionals 
About the Risk of Medication Errors with 
Tranexamic Acid Injection Resulting in 
Inadvertent Intrathecal (Spinal) Injection. 
Food and Drug Administration. Dec. 3, 
2020. www.fda.gov/drugs/drug-safety-
and-availability/fda-alerts-healthcare-
professionals-about-risk-medication-er-
rors-tranexamic-acid-injection-resulting. 
Accessed April 8, 2021.
57. Donaldson AJ, Thompson HE, Harper NJ, 
Kenny NW. Bone cement implantation syn-
drome. Br J Anaesth. 2009;102(1):12–22.
58. Odinsson A, Finsen V. Tourniquet use 
and its complications in Norway. J Bone 
Joint Surg. 2006;88:1090–1092.
59. Chabel C, Russell LC, Lee R. Tourniquet-
induced limb ischemia: A neurophysi-
ologic animal model. Anesthesiology. 
1990;72:1038–1044.
60. Rama KR, Apsingi S, Poovali S, etal. 
Timing of tourniquet release in knee 
arthroplasty. Meta-analysis of rand-
omized, controlled trials. J Bone Joint 
Surg Am. 2007;89:699–705.
61. Memtsoudis SG, Ma Y, Gonzalez Del-
la Valle A, etal. Perioperative out-
comes after unilateral and bilateral 
total knee arthroplasty. Anesthesiology. 
2009;111:1206–1216.
62. Chan WC, Musonda P, Cooper AS, etal. 
One-stage versus two-stage bilateral 
unicompartmental knee replacement: A 
comparison of immediate post-opera-
tive complications. J Bone Joint Surg. 
2009;91:1305–1309.
63. Ritter MA, Harty LD, Davis KE, etal. 
Simultaneous bilateral, staged bilateral, 
and unilateral total knee arthroplasty: A 
survival analysis. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 
2003;85:1532–1537.
64. Restrepo C, Parvizi J, Dietrich T, etal. 
Safety of simulataneous bilateral total 
knee arthroplasty. A meta-analysis. 
J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2007;89:
1220–1226.
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
576
65. Kim DH, Lin Y, Goytizolo EA, etal. 
Adductor canal block versus femoral 
nerve block for total knee arthroplasy. 
Anesthesiology. 2014;120:540–555.
66. Memtsoudis AG, Danninger T, Rasul 
R, etal. Inpatient falls after total knee 
arthroplasty. The role of anesthesia type 
and peripheral nerve blocks. Anesthesi-
ology. 2014;120:551–563.
67. Abdallah FW, Johnson J, Chan V, etal. 
Intravenous dexamethasone and peri-
neural dexamethasone similarly prolong 
the duration of analgesia after supracla-
vicular block: A randomized, triple arm, 
double blind, placebo-controlled trial. 
Reg Anesth Pain Med. 2015;40(2):125–
132.
68. Surdam JW, Licini DJ, Baynes NT, Arce 
BR. The use of exparel (liposomal bupi-
vacaine) to manage postoperative pain 
in unilateral total knee replacement. J 
Arthroplasty. 2015;30(2):325–329.
69. Horlocker TT, Vandermeuelen E, Kopp 
SL, Gogarten W, Leffert LR, Benzon 
HT. Regional Anesthesia in the Patient 
Receiving Antithrombotic or Throm-
bolytic Therapy: American Society of 
Regional Anesthesia and Pain Medicine 
Evidence-Based 
Guidelines 
(Fourth 
Edition). Reg Anesth Pain Med. 2018 
Apr;43(3):263–309. Erratum in: Reg 
Anesth Pain Med. 2018 Jul;43(5):566. 
Vandermeuelen, Erik [corrected to Van-
dermeulen, Erik]. PMID: 29561531. 
doi:10.1097/AAP.0000000000000763.
70. Food and Drug Administration. FDA 
Drug Safety Communication: Updated 
recommendations to decrease risk of 
spinal column bleeding and paralysis in 
patients on low molecular weight hep-
arins. Nov. 6:2013 http://www.fda.gov/
Drugs/DrugSafety/ucm373595.htm.
AL GRAWANY
577
Chapter
Combined Spinal Epidural Anesthesia
General Anesthesia
ABNORMAL PRESENTATIONS AND MULTIPLE 
BIRTHS
Multiple Gestations
Abnormal Presentations
HYPERTENSIVE DISORDERS OF PREGNANCY
Preeclampsia
HEMORRHAGE IN PREGNANT WOMEN
Placenta Previa
Abruptio Placentae
Uterine Rupture
Retained Placenta
Uterine Atony
Placenta Accreta Spectrum
AMNIOTIC FLUID EMBOLISM
ANESTHESIA FOR NONOBSTETRIC SURGERY 
DURING PREGNANCY
Avoidance of Teratogenic Drugs
Avoidance of Intrauterine Fetal Hypoxia and 
Acidosis
Prevention of Preterm Labor
Management of Anesthesia
DIAGNOSIS AND MANAGEMENT OF FETAL 
DISTRESS
Overview
Key Evaluation Components
EVALUATION OF THE NEONATE AND 
NEONATAL RESUSCITATION
PHYSIOLOGIC CHANGES IN PREGNANT 
WOMEN
Cardiovascular System Changes
Pulmonary System Changes
Gastrointestinal Changes
Nervous System Changes
Renal Changes
Hepatic Changes
PHYSIOLOGY OF THE UTEROPLACENTAL 
CIRCULATION
Uterine Blood Flow
Placental Exchange
STAGES OF LABOR
ANATOMY OF LABOR PAIN
METHODS OF LABOR ANALGESIA
Nonpharmacologic Techniques
Systemic Medications
Neuraxial (Regional) Analgesia
NEURAXIAL TECHNIQUES
Preoperative Assessment
Timing and Placement of Epidural
Epidural Technique
Combined Spinal Epidural and Dural Puncture 
Epidural Techniques
Neuraxial Dosing and Delivery Techniques
Spinal Labor Analgesia
CONTRAINDICATIONS OF NEURAXIAL 
ANESTHESIA
COMPLICATIONS OF NEURAXIAL 
ANESTHESIA
Systemic Toxicity and Excessive Blockade
Hypotension
Increased Core Temperature
ANESTHESIA FOR CESAREAN DELIVERY
Spinal Anesthesia
Epidural Anesthesia
OBSTETRICS
Christine M. Warrick, Mark D. Rollins
33
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
578
System Parameter
Value at Term Compared 
With Nonpregnant Value
Cardiovascular System
Intravascular fluid volume
Increased 35%–45%
Plasma volume
Increased 45%–55%
Erythrocyte volume
Increased 20%–30%
Cardiac output
Increased 40%–50%
Stroke volume
Increased 25%–30%
Heart rate
Increased 15%–25%
Peripheral circulation
Systemic vascular 
resistance
Decreased 20%
Pulmonary vascular 
resistance
Decreased 35%
Central venous pressure
No change
Pulmonary capillary wedge 
pressure
No change
Femoral venous pressure
Increased 15%–50%
Pulmonary System
Minute ventilation
Increased 45%–50%
Tidal volume
Increased 40%–45%
Breathing frequency
Increased 0%–15%
Lung volumes
Expiratory reserve volume
Decreased 20%–25%
Residual volume
Decreased 15%–20%
Functional residual 
capacity
Decreased 20%
Vital capacity
No change
Total lung capacity
Decreased 0%–5%
Arterial blood gases and pH
Pao2
Normal or slightly increased
Paco2
Decreased 10 mm Hg
pH
No change or minimal 
alkalosis
Oxygen consumption
Increased 20%
Providing peripartum analgesia and anesthesia requires 
an understanding of the physiologic changes that occur 
during pregnancy and labor and the effects of anesthetic 
care on the mother, fetus, and neonate. It also demands 
an understanding of the course of labor and delivery; 
knowledge of high-risk maternal conditions; ability to 
provide a variety of analgesic and anesthetic techniques; 
and preparation for potential obstetric emergencies and 
complications requiring immediate intervention, such as 
fetal distress and maternal hemorrhage.
PHYSIOLOGIC CHANGES IN PREGNANT 
WOMEN
During pregnancy, labor, and delivery, women undergo 
significant changes in anatomy and physiology as a 
result of (1) altered hormonal activity; (2) biochemical 
changes associated with increasing metabolic demands of 
a growing fetus, placenta, and uterus; and (3) mechanical 
displacement by an enlarging uterus.1 2
Cardiovascular System Changes
Changes in the cardiovascular system during pregnancy 
can be summarized as (1) an increase in intravascular 
fluid volume, (2) an increase in cardiac output, (3) a 
decrease in systemic vascular resistance, and (4) the pres-
ence of supine aortocaval compression (Table 33.1).
Intravascular Fluid and Hematology
Maternal intravascular fluid volume begins to increase 
in the first trimester. At term, the plasma volume has 
increased about 50% above the nonpregnant state, 
whereas the erythrocyte volume has increased only about 
25%. This disproportionate increase in plasma volume 
accounts for the relative anemia of pregnancy. The 
hemoglobin decreases but normally remains at 11 g/dL 
or greater. This expanded intravascular fluid volume of 
1000 to 1500 mL at term offsets the 300 to 500 mL blood 
loss that accompanies vaginal delivery and the average 
800 to 1000 mL blood loss from cesarean delivery. After 
delivery, the contracted uterus auto-transfuses about 500 
mL of blood.
The total plasma protein concentration is decreased 
as a result of the dilutional effect of the increased intra-
vascular fluid volume, and colloid osmotic pressure is 
reduced from about 27 mm Hg down to 22 mm Hg by 
term. Pregnancy is a hypercoagulable state with increases 
in factors I, VII, VIII, IX, X, and XII and von Willebrand 
factor and decreases in factors XI and XIII, antithrombin 
III, and protein S. This results in an approximately 20% 
decrease in prothrombin time (PT) and partial thrombo-
plastin time (PTT). Platelet count may remain normal or 
decrease 10% by term, and leukocytosis is common.
Cardiac Output
Cardiac output increases by about 35% by the end of the 
first trimester and increases 40% to 50% above baseline 
by the third trimester. This augmentation of cardiac out-
put is the result of increases in both stroke volume (25% 
to 30%) and heart rate (15% to 25%). The onset of labor 
is associated with further increases in cardiac output, 
with increases above prelabor values by 10% to 25% 
during the first stage and 40% in the second stage. The 
largest increase occurs immediately after delivery, when 
cardiac output is increased by as much as 80% above 
prelabor values. This presents a unique postpartum risk 
Table 33.1
Changes in the Cardiovascular and Pulmonary 
Systems During Pregnancy
Data from Refs. 1 and 2.
IV
Chapter 33 Obstetrics
579
for patients with cardiac disease, such as fixed valvular 
stenosis or cardiomyopathy. Cardiac output decreases 
within the first hours after delivery and reaches prelabor 
values about 48 hours postpartum. By 2 weeks postpar-
tum, it has decreased substantially toward pre-pregnant 
values.
Systemic Vascular Resistance
Although cardiac output and plasma volume increase, 
systemic blood pressure decreases in an uncomplicated 
pregnancy secondary to a 20% reduction in systemic 
vascular resistance. Systolic, mean, and diastolic blood 
pressure may all decrease 5% to 20% by 20 weeks’ 
gestation and increase slightly towards pre-pregnant 
values as the pregnancy progresses. There is no change 
in central venous pressure during pregnancy despite the 
increased plasma volume because venous capacitance 
increases.
Aortocaval Compression
When supine, the gravid uterus can compress the aorta 
and vena cava. Compression of the vena cava can 
decrease preload, cardiac output, and systemic blood 
pressure (Fig. 33.1). In the supine position, some vena 
caval compression can occur near the beginning of the 
second trimester. By term, full occlusion when supine 
is typical, with venous return of blood from the lower 
extremities through the epidural, azygos, and vertebral 
veins. In addition, significant aortoiliac artery compres-
sion occurs in 15% to 20% of pregnant women. Nearly 
15% of pregnant women at term experience significant 
hypotension in the supine position. Diaphoresis, nausea, 
vomiting, and changes in cerebration often accompany 
the hypotension. This constellation of symptoms is 
termed supine hypotension syndrome. Vena cava com-
pression decreases cardiac output 10% to 20% and may 
also contribute to lower extremity venous stasis and 
thereby result in ankle edema, varices, and increased risk 
of venous thrombosis.
Echocardiography Changes
There are significant changes in echocardiography dur-
ing pregnancy.3 The heart is displaced anteriorly and 
leftward. Right-sided chambers increase in size by 20% 
and left-sided chambers increase in size by 10% with an 
associated left ventricular (LV) eccentric hypertrophy. The 
right ventricular systolic pressure remains unchanged 
despite increases in intravascular volume. Mitral, tri-
cuspid, and pulmonic valve annuli diameters increase. 
Tricuspid and pulmonic valve regurgitation is common, 
and about one in four women have mitral regurgitation. 
In addition, small insignificant pericardial effusions may 
be present.
Aorta
IVC
L
R
Fig. 33.1 Schematic diagram showing compression of the 
inferior vena cava (IVC) and abdominal aorta by the gravid uterus 
in the supine position.
Compensatory Responses and Anesthetic Implications
Many pregnant women do not experience significant 
arterial hypotension when supine because they com-
pensate for the reduction in preload with increases 
in systemic vascular resistance. This compensation is 
impaired by regional anesthetic techniques. Conse-
quently, supine positioning is avoided during neuraxial 
anesthetic administration in the second and third tri-
mesters. Significant lateral tilt (30 degrees) is frequently 
required to reduce hypotension and preserve fetal circu-
lation by effectively displacing the gravid uterus off the 
inferior vena cava (Fig. 33.2).4 Left uterine displacement 
can be accomplished by placing the patient in a left 
lateral position or by elevation of the right hip with a 
wedge or table tilt.
The gravid uterus can also compress the lower abdom-
inal aorta. Such compression leads to arterial hypoten-
sion in the lower extremities, but decreases in systemic 
blood pressure measured in the arms may not reflect this 
decrease. The significance of aortocaval compression is 
the associated decrease in uterine and placental blood 
flow. Even with a healthy uteroplacental unit, prolonged 
maternal hypotension (more than a 25% decrease for an 
average patient) for longer than 10 to 15 minutes can 
significantly decrease uterine blood flow (UBF) and lead 
to progressive fetal acidosis.
The increased venous pressure distal to the level of 
vena caval compression diverts blood return from the 
lower half of the body via the paravertebral venous 
plexuses to the azygos vein. Flow from the azygos vein 
enters the superior vena cava and returns to the heart. 
Dilation of the epidural veins with pregnancy may 
increase the rate of unintentional intravascular place-
ment of an epidural catheter and accidental intravascular 
injection of the local anesthetic solution. A “test dose” is 
therefore employed before dosing an epidural catheter in 
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
580
order to decrease the likelihood of an unintended intra-
vascular placement before initiating neuraxial blockade. 
This technique is described in the section “Neuraxial 
Dosing and Delivery Techniques."
Pulmonary System Changes
The most significant changes in the pulmonary system 
during pregnancy include alterations in (1) the upper 
airway, (2) minute ventilation, (3) arterial oxygenation, 
and (4) lung volumes (see Table 33.1).
Upper Airway
During pregnancy there is significant capillary engorge-
ment of the mucosal lining of the upper respiratory tract 
and increased tissue edema and friability. Additional 
care is needed during suctioning and placement of 
airways (e.g., avoid nasal instrumentation if possible) 
to prevent tissue bleeding with instrumentation. Mask 
ventilation, laryngoscopy, and intubation are all more 
challenging. A smaller cuffed tracheal tube (6.0 to 6.5 
mm internal diameter) is typically selected because the 
vocal cords and arytenoids are often edematous. The 
presence of preeclampsia, upper respiratory tract infec-
tions, and active pushing with associated increased 
venous pressure further exacerbate airway tissue edema, 
making both ventilation and intubation more problem-
atic. In addition, the weight gain associated with preg-
nancy, particularly in women of short stature or with 
coexisting obesity, can result in difficulty placing the 
laryngoscope because of a shorter neck and increased 
breast tissue.
L
Aorta
Wedge
IVC
R
Fig. 33.2 Schematic diagram depicting left uterine displacement 
by elevation of the right hip with a wedge. This position deflects 
the gravid uterus off of the inferior vena cava (IVC) and aorta.
Minute Ventilation and Oxygenation
Minute ventilation increases about 50% above pre-preg-
nant levels during the first trimester and is maintained 
for the remainder of the pregnancy. This increased min-
ute ventilation is achieved primarily by a greater tidal 
volume, with small increases in the respiratory rate (see 
Table 33.1). Elevated circulating levels of progesterone 
and increased CO2 production are presumed to be the 
stimulus for the increased minute ventilation. Resting 
maternal Paco2 decreases from 40 mm Hg to approxi-
mately 30 mm Hg during the first trimester as a reflection 
of the increased minute ventilation. Arterial pH, however, 
remains only mildly alkalotic (7.42 to 7.44) because of 
increased renal excretion of bicarbonate ions (HCO3
− is 
approximately 20 to 21 mEq/L).
Early in gestation, maternal Pao2 while breathing room 
air is normally above 100 mm Hg because of the presence 
of hyperventilation and the associated decrease in alveo-
lar CO2. Later, Pao2 will decrease towards pre-pregnancy 
values, likely reflecting airway closure and intrapulmo-
nary shunt. Maternal hemoglobin (Hgb) is right-shifted, 
with the oxygen partial pressure associated with 50% 
Hgb saturation (P50) increasing from 27 mm Hg up to 
approximately 30 mm Hg. This right-shift combined with 
the left-shifted fetal Hgb (a P50 of approximately 18 mm 
Hg) facilitates oxygen delivery across the placenta.
At term, maternal oxygen consumption is increased 
by 20%. The added work of labor results in further 
increases in both minute ventilation and oxygen con-
sumption. During labor, oxygen consumption increases 
above prelabor rates by 40% during the first stage and 
75% during the second stage.
Lung Volumes
The expiratory reserve volume (ERV) and residual lung 
volume (RV) do not begin to change until about the third 
month of pregnancy (see Table 33.1). With enlargement 
of the uterus, the diaphragm is forced cephalad, which is 
primarily responsible for the 20% decrease in functional 
residual capacity (FRC) present by term. This change is 
created by approximately equal decreases in the ERV and 
RV. As a result, FRC can be less than closing capacity 
for many small airways and may give rise to atelectasis 
in the supine position. Vital capacity is not significantly 
changed with pregnancy. The combination of increased 
minute ventilation and decreased FRC results in a greater 
rate at which changes in the alveolar concentration of 
inhaled anesthetics can be achieved. Respiratory meas-
ures of forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1), 
FEV1/FVC (forced vital capacity), and closing capacity do 
not change significantly with pregnancy.
Anesthetic Implications
During induction of general anesthesia in a pregnant 
patient, Pao2 decreases much more rapidly than in 
IV
Chapter 33 Obstetrics
581
a nonpregnant patient because of decreased oxygen 
reserve (decreased FRC) and increased oxygen uptake 
(increased metabolic rate). For these reasons, the admin-
istration of supplemental oxygen, or “preoxygenation,” 
before general anesthesia is critical for patient safety. 
The pregnant patient should breathe oxygen for 3 min-
utes before any anticipated period of apnea (such as 
induction) or take four maximal breaths over the 30 
seconds just before induction if emergent general anes-
thesia is needed. In addition, the increased airway edema 
makes both ventilation and intubation more difficult 
and further increases the potential for complications and 
morbidity. Optimal positioning should be obtained and 
backup airway equipment readily available before induc-
tion of general anesthesia. See “Anesthesia for Cesarean 
Delivery.”
Gastrointestinal Changes
Gastrointestinal changes during pregnancy make 
women beyond 20 weeks’ gestation vulnerable to 
aspiration of gastric contents and the development of 
pneumonitis. Displacement of the stomach and pylorus 
cephalad by the enlarged uterus repositions the intraab-
dominal portion of the esophagus into the thorax and 
decreases the competence of the lower esophageal 
sphincter. Higher progesterone and estrogen levels of 
pregnancy further reduce esophageal sphincter tone. 
During vaginal delivery, gastric pressure is increased 
by both the gravid uterus and the lithotomy position. 
Gastrin, which is secreted by the placenta, stimulates 
gastric hydrogen ion secretion such that the pH of 
gastric fluid is predictably low in pregnant women. For 
these reasons, gastric fluid reflux into the esophagus 
with subsequent esophagitis (heartburn) is common and 
increases with the pregnancy gestational age. In addi-
tion, gastric emptying is delayed with the onset of labor 
or administration of opioids, further increasing the risk 
of aspiration.
Anesthetic Implications
Regardless of the time interval since the ingestion of 
food, women in labor are treated as having a full stom-
ach and an increased risk for pulmonary aspiration. 
This includes the routine use of nonparticulate antacids, 
rapid-sequence induction, cricoid pressure, and cuffed 
intubation as part of the general anesthesia induction 
sequence in a pregnant woman after approximately 20 
weeks gestational age. Pain, anxiety, and opioids admin-
istered during labor can further slow gastric emptying 
beyond an already prolonged transit time. Epidural anal-
gesia using local anesthetics with low-dose fentanyl does 
not delay gastric emptying, but administering epidural 
boluses of fentanyl does.5 The low pH of aspirated gastric 
fluid is important in the production and severity of acid 
pneumonitis and is the basis for the administration of 
antacids to pregnant women before induction of anes-
thesia. Current American Society of Anesthesiologists 
(ASA) guidelines6 recommend the “timely administration 
of oral nonparticulate antacids, IV H2-receptor antago-
nists, and/or metoclopramide for aspiration prophylaxis” 
before the induction of anesthesia in pregnant women. 
Nonparticulate antacids such as sodium citrate (30 mL) 
work rapidly. Metoclopramide can significantly decrease 
gastric volume in as little as 15 minutes, although gastric 
hypomotility associated with prior opioid administration 
reduces the effectiveness of metoclopramide.7 H2-recep-
tor antagonists increase gastric fluid pH in pregnant 
women approximately 1 hour after administration with-
out producing adverse effects. There is some evidence 
that antacids plus H2 antagonists are better than antac-
ids alone in decreasing gastric acidity.8 The physiologic 
effects of pregnancy on gastric function return to normal 
approximately 24 hours after delivery.1
Nervous System Changes
Volatile anesthetic requirements (minimum alveolar con-
centration [MAC]) decrease up to 40% during pregnancy 
in animal studies9 and 28% in humans10 within the first 
trimester of pregnancy. However, an electroencephalo-
graphic study suggests that anesthetic effects of sevoflu-
rane are similar in pregnant and nonpregnant women.11
Consequently, the degree of anesthetic reduction and 
mechanism remains uncertain, but progesterone activity 
may be partially responsible. A clinical implication of 
this decreased MAC is that alveolar anesthetic concen-
trations that would not routinely produce unconscious-
ness may approximate anesthetizing concentrations in 
pregnant women. Judicious administration of agents that 
depress the central nervous system (CNS) is required to 
prevent unintended impairment of upper airway reflexes 
and increased risk of pulmonary aspiration that is already 
elevated secondary to gastrointestinal changes detailed 
previously. Notably, rates of intraoperative awareness 
under general anesthesia are increased for cesarean 
delivery, and reducing standard anesthetic levels in stable 
pregnant patients is not advised.
Pregnant patients are more sensitive to the local 
anesthetics used during neuraxial blockade. There is a 
decrease in local anesthetic dose needed for epidural or 
spinal anesthesia in pregnant women at term. The obser-
vation of decreased neuraxial local anesthetic doses as 
early as the first trimester suggests a role for biochemical 
changes causing increased nerve sensitivity. Although 
this increased sensitivity is likely based on hormonal 
changes, there may be some role for mechanical changes 
as well. Engorgement of epidural veins as intraabdomi-
nal pressure increases with progressive enlargement of 
the uterus results in a decrease in both the size of the 
epidural space and volume of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) 
in the subarachnoid space. The decreased volume of 
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
582
these spaces facilitates the spread of local anesthetics. 
However, CSF pressure itself does not increase with 
pregnancy.
Renal Changes
Renal blood flow and the glomerular filtration rate are 
increased about 50% to 60% by the third month of preg-
nancy and do not return to pre-pregnant levels until 3 
months postpartum. Therefore, the normal upper limits of 
blood urea nitrogen and serum creatinine concentrations 
in pregnant women are only 50% of those in nonpreg-
nant women. There is decreased tubular resorption of 
both protein and glucose, and excretion of these in the 
urine is common. A 24-hour urine collection of less than 
300 mg protein or 10 grams glucose is considered the 
upper limit of normal in pregnancy.
Hepatic Changes
Liver blood flow does not change significantly with 
pregnancy. Plasma protein concentrations are reduced 
during pregnancy, and decreased serum albumin levels 
can result in elevated free blood levels of highly protein-
bound drugs. Slightly elevated liver function tests are 
common in the third trimester. Plasma cholinesterase 
(pseudocholinesterase) activity is decreased about 25% 
to 30% from the tenth week of gestation up to 6 weeks 
postpartum. This decreased activity is unlikely to be 
associated with significant prolongation of the neu-
romuscular blockade of succinylcholine, but return of 
muscle strength should always be verified. In addition, 
incomplete gallbladder emptying and changes in bile 
composition increase the risk of gallbladder disease 
during pregnancy. Even without underlying pathology, 
alkaline phosphate levels double during pregnancy from 
placental production.
PHYSIOLOGY OF THE UTEROPLACENTAL 
CIRCULATION
The placenta is the interface of maternal and fetal tis-
sue for the purpose of physiologic exchange. Maternal 
blood is delivered to the uterus and placenta by two 
uterine arteries. On the fetal side, nutrient-rich and 
waste-free blood is returned from the placenta to the 
fetus through a single umbilical vein, and fetal blood 
returns to interface with the maternal circulation via 
two umbilical arteries.
Uterine Blood Flow
UBF increases throughout gestation from about 100 mL/
min before pregnancy to 700 mL/min (about 10% of 
cardiac output) at term gestation. About 80% of UBF 
perfuses the intervillous space (placenta) and 20% sup-
ports the myometrium. The uterine vasculature has limited 
autoregulation and remains essentially maximally dilated 
under normal pregnancy conditions. UBF can decrease 
from any cause of reduced uterine perfusion pressure 
such as systemic hypotension secondary to hypovolemia, 
aortocaval compression, or decreased systemic resistance 
from either general or neuraxial anesthesia. UBF can also 
decrease with increased uterine venous pressure. This can 
result from vena caval compression (supine position), 
prolonged or frequent uterine contractions, significant 
abdominal musculature contraction (Valsalva maneuver 
during pushing), or extreme hypocapnia (Paco2 <20 mm 
Hg) associated with hyperventilation secondary to labor 
pain.
Epidural or spinal anesthesia does not significantly 
alter UBF as long as maternal hypotension is avoided. 
Although certain types and higher doses of vasopressors 
can increase uterine artery resistance and decrease UBF, 
phenylephrine, ephedrine, and norepinephrine can all 
be used safely to treat hypotension in standard clinical 
doses, See “Hypotension” section below.
Placental Exchange
Transfer of oxygen from the mother to the fetus is 
dependent on a variety of factors, including the ratio of 
maternal UBF to fetal umbilical blood flow, the oxygen 
partial pressure gradient, the respective hemoglobin con-
centrations and affinities, the placental diffusing capac-
ity, and the acid–base status of the fetal and maternal 
blood (Bohr effect). The fetal oxyhemoglobin dissociation 
curve is left-shifted (greater oxygen affinity), whereas 
the maternal hemoglobin binding curve is right-shifted 
(decreased oxygen affinity), resulting in facilitated oxy-
gen transfer to the fetus. The fetal Pao2 is normally 20 to 
40 mm Hg,12 but can reach 60 mm Hg if the mother is 
breathing 100% oxygen.13 This is because the placental 
exchange to the fetus from the mother represents more 
of a venous rather than arterial blood. CO2 readily crosses 
the placenta and is not limited by diffusion, but rather 
flow.
Placental exchange of most drugs and other sub-
stances less than 1000 Daltons occurs principally by dif-
fusion from the maternal circulation to the fetus and vice 
versa. Diffusion of a substance across the placenta to the 
fetus depends on maternal-to-fetal concentration gradi-
ents, maternal protein binding, molecular weight, lipid 
solubility, and the degree of ionization of that substance. 
Minimizing the maternal blood concentration of a drug 
is the most important method of limiting the amount that 
ultimately reaches the fetus.
The high molecular weight and poor lipid solubility 
of nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking drugs result 
in limited ability of these drugs to cross the placenta. 
Succinylcholine has a low molecular weight but is highly 
IV
Chapter 33 Obstetrics
583
ionized and therefore does not readily cross the placenta. 
Thus, during administration of a typical general anes-
thetic for cesarean delivery, the fetus/neonate is not para-
lyzed. Additionally, heparin, insulin, and glycopyrrolate 
have significantly limited placental transfer. Placental 
transfer of benzodiazepines, volatile anesthetics, local 
anesthetics, and opioids is facilitated by the relatively 
low molecular weights of these substances. In general, 
drugs that readily cross the blood–brain barrier also cross 
the placenta.
Fetal Uptake
Fetal uptake of a substance that crosses the placenta is 
affected by the lower pH (0.1 unit) of fetal blood com-
pared with maternal. The lower fetal pH means that 
weakly basic drugs (e.g., local anesthetics) that cross the 
placenta in the nonionized form will become ionized in 
the fetal circulation. Because an ionized drug cannot 
readily cross the placenta and return to the maternal 
circulation, this drug will accumulate in the fetal blood 
against a concentration gradient. Therefore, in an acidotic 
fetus, higher concentrations of local anesthetic can accu-
mulate (ion trapping), especially during periods of fetal 
distress. Increased concentrations of local anesthetics in 
the fetus can result in decreased neonatal neuromuscular 
tone. If direct maternal intravascular local anesthetic 
injection occurs, significant fetal toxicity can result in 
bradycardia, ventricular arrhythmia, acidosis, and severe 
cardiac depression. Placental transfer and fetal uptake of 
specific analgesic and anesthetic agents are detailed in 
the upcoming sections on “Methods of Labor Analgesia” 
and “Anesthesia for Cesarean Delivery.”
Characteristics of the Fetal Circulation
The fetal circulation helps protect vital fetal organs 
from exposure to high concentrations of drugs initially 
present in umbilical venous blood. For example, about 
75% of umbilical venous blood initially passes through 
the fetal liver such that significant portions of drugs are 
metabolized before reaching the fetal arterial circulation 
for delivery to the heart and brain. Despite decreased 
liver enzyme activity in comparison with adults, fetal/
neonatal enzyme systems are adequately developed to 
metabolize most drugs. Moreover, drugs in the portion of 
umbilical venous blood that enter the inferior vena cava 
via the ductus venosus will be diluted by drug-free blood 
returning from the lower extremities and pelvic viscera 
of the fetus. These circulatory characteristics decrease the 
fetal plasma drug concentrations compared with mater-
nal after an intravenous drug bolus.14
STAGES OF LABOR
The anesthesia provider may be consulted at any time to 
aid in a safe delivery. The labor course, mode of delivery, 
and maternal comorbidities should all be considered in 
determining which analgesic or anesthetic technique is 
most appropriate. Understanding the stages of labor and 
common labor patterns is important to appreciate when 
labor is not progressing and obstetric intervention may 
be required. Progression of labor is reliably unpredict-
able. Retrospective reviews of the maternal labor course 
have led to a change of definitions for what constitutes 
normal labor progress.15 Ideally, this change will decrease 
cesarean deliveries in the first stage of labor (active-stage 
arrest).
The course of labor is divided into three stages. The 
first stage begins with maternal perception of uterine 
contractions (latent phase) and continues with signifi-
cant acceleration of cervical dilation (active phase), until 
the cervix is fully dilated. The latent phase can persist 
for hours to days. The active phase begins when the 
rate of cervical dilation increases (usually after 5 to 
6 cm dilation). The second stage of labor begins with 
full cervical dilation and ends with neonatal birth. This 
stage is referred to as the “pushing and expulsion” stage. 
Once the neonate is born, the third stage begins and is 
completed when the placenta is delivered. Concern for 
abnormal labor and obstetric interventions may be indi-
cated if progression through the stages of labor is halted 
or delayed.
If dilation slows or stops in the active phase of labor 
despite pharmacologic interventions, this is considered 
active-phase arrest and cesarean delivery will likely be 
considered by the obstetrician. Arrest of descent occurs 
during the second stage of labor, when the neonate 
cannot be born vaginally. The mode of delivery in this 
case depends on the location of the neonatal head when 
arrest of descent occurs. If the neonate is low enough in 
the pelvis, the obstetrician can perform an instrumented 
vaginal delivery (also known as an operative vaginal 
delivery) via vacuum or forceps. If the neonate remains 
too high in the pelvis, then the woman will likely need 
to undergo a cesarean delivery. Additionally, the fetal 
condition can dictate a change in delivery mode based 
on the fetal heart rate tracing.
ANATOMY OF LABOR PAIN
Uterine contractions, cervical dilation, and perineal dis-
tention cause pain during labor and delivery. Afferent 
somatic and visceral sensory fibers from the uterus and 
cervix travel to the spinal cord with sympathetic nerve 
fibers (Fig. 33.3). Most painful stimuli in the first stage of 
labor are the result of afferent nerve impulses from the 
lower uterine segment and cervix, with visceral pain aris-
ing from the uterine body. Nerve fibers from the uterus 
and cervix course with the hypogastric nerves and sym-
pathetic chain to the dorsal root ganglia of levels T10–L1. 
In the second stage of labor, additional somatic pain is 
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
584
transmitted from afferent nerves innervating the vagina 
and perineum and results from distension, ischemia, and 
tissue injury of these areas as the fetus descends into the 
pelvis and delivers. These afferent impulses travel pri-
marily via the pudendal nerve to dorsal root ganglia of 
levels S2–S4. Neuraxial analgesic techniques must block 
levels T10–L1 to provide pain relief during the first stage 
of labor and also include S2–S4 for efficacy during the 
second stage of labor.
The mother, fetus, and labor course can all be affected 
by the physiologic effects of labor pain. Pain stimulates 
the sympathetic nervous system, elevates plasma cat-
echolamine levels, creates reflex maternal tachycardia 
and hypertension, and can decrease UBF. In addition, 
changes in uterine activity can occur with the rapid 
decrease in plasma epinephrine concentrations associ-
ated with the onset of neuraxial analgesia. Variations in 
epinephrine levels can result in a range of uterine effects, 
including a transient period of uterine hyperstimulation 
(tachysystole), a period of uterine quiescence, or conver-
sion of a dysfunctional uterine activity pattern to a more 
S2
S3
S4
T10
T11
T12
L1
Fig. 33.3 Schematic Diagram of Pain Pathways During 
Pregnancy. Visceral pain during the first stage of labor is caused 
by uterine contraction and cervical dilation. Afferent sensory fibers 
from the uterus and cervix travel with sympathetic nerve fibers 
and enter the spinal cord at T10–L1. Somatic afferents from the 
vagina and perineum travel via the pudendal nerve to levels S2–S4.
regular pattern. There is variation in the severity of pain 
reported by women during labor and delivery. However, 
the intensity of pain during labor increases with cervical 
dilation. In the absence of medical contraindications to 
labor pain relief options, maternal request is a sufficient 
indication for treatment of pain during labor.16
METHODS OF LABOR ANALGESIA
Nonpharmacologic Techniques
There are many nonpharmacologic techniques for labor 
analgesia. Three theoretical models describe how these 
techniques work by their effects on endogenous labor 
pain pathways.17 Hydrotherapy, massage, position 
changes, and transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation 
(TENS) inhibit pain fiber transmission by providing tac-
tile stimulation to an area of pain (gate control model). 
Acupuncture/acupressure, sterile water injections, and 
TENS cause pain at sites remote from labor pain, which 
stimulates the endorphin system, leading to decreased 
overall pain (diffuse noxious inhibitory control model). 
The CNS control model focuses on attention divergence 
from labor pain using Lamaze, meditation, hypnosis, 
relaxation, expectation management, and music. Though 
data for analgesic benefit with these techniques are 
limited and modest, acupuncture, acupressure, TENS, 
relaxation, and massage techniques offer some element 
of patient control and increased patient satisfaction.18
Hypnosis and intradermal water injection techniques 
show no significant analgesic benefit beyond control 
populations. Nonetheless, perceived patient autonomy 
and patient control appear to substantially contribute 
to a woman's satisfaction with labor and delivery in 
comparison with analgesic efficacy. Additionally, a 
meta-analysis reviewing the effectiveness of a sup-
port individual (e.g., doula, family member) noted that 
women with a support individual used fewer pharmaco-
logic analgesia methods, had a decreased length of labor, 
were more likely to have a vaginal birth, and were less 
likely to have negative feelings about childbirth.19
Systemic Medications
Systemic analgesics can be beneficial for women in the 
early stages of spontaneous or induced labor. However, 
use of these medications is typically limited by both dose 
and timing.20 These limits are dictated by the potential 
for maternal sedation, respiratory compromise, loss of 
airway protection, and proximity to time of delivery 
because of concern for adverse neonatal effects. Whereas 
systemic opioid analgesics are commonly used for labor, 
use of sedatives, anxiolytics, and dissociative agents is 
rare.
IV
Chapter 33 Obstetrics
585
Opioids (also see Chapter 9)
All opioids readily cross the placental barrier and can 
cause neonatal effects, including decreased fetal heart 
rate variability and neonatal dose-related respiratory 
depression. Additionally, maternal side effects are com-
mon and include nausea, vomiting, pruritus, and delayed 
gastric emptying.
Fentanyl has a short duration of action and no active 
metabolites, which makes it a preferable analgesic for 
labor. When administered in small intravenous (IV) bolus 
doses of 50 to 100 mcg per hour, there are no significant 
differences in neonatal Apgar scores and respiratory 
effort compared with newborns of mothers not receiving 
fentanyl.21
Meperidine has a longer duration of action (maternal 
half-life 2 to 3 hours) and is metabolized to an active 
metabolite (normeperidine). Meperidine can be admin-
istered IV (12.5 to 25 mg) or intramuscularly (IM) (25 
to 50 mg). The fetal and neonatal half-life of meperi-
dine is prolonged (13 to 23 hours) and highly variable. 
Increased levels of neonatal normeperidine have been 
associated with decreased Apgar scores, increased time 
to sustained respiration, lower fetal oxygen saturation 
levels, abnormal neurobehavior, and difficulty initiat-
ing breastfeeding.17 22 Despite these undesirable side 
effects, it remains a commonly used labor analgesic 
worldwide, likely because of cost, ease of administra-
tion, and availability.
Morphine, like meperidine, also has an active metabo-
lite (morphine-6-glucuronide) and a longer duration of 
action. Notably, morphine causes profound maternal 
sedation, has a prolonged half-life in neonates, and 
is no longer commonly used. It remains occasionally 
administered IM in combination with promethazine to 
provide latent labor analgesia (for 2.5 to 6 hours) and 
rest. This technique is termed morphine sleep and based 
on a prospective cohort study does not affect maternal or 
neonatal outcomes.23
Remifentanil has a rapid onset and fast elimination 
by plasma and tissue esterases with significant tis-
sue metabolism.17 The primary benefit of remifentanil 
over other opioid labor analgesics is the minimization 
of neonatal side effects because of its rapid metabo-
lism. Although remifentanil patient-controlled analgesia 
(PCA) does not provide superior pain relief compared 
with epidural labor analgesia,24 remifentanil provides 
better pain relief with improved patient satisfaction 
compared with other opioids and does not appear to 
adversely affect neonatal outcomes.25 A retrospective 
comparison of remifentanil and fentanyl PCA for labor 
analgesia found more transient maternal desaturation 
with remifentanil, but fentanyl resulted in greater need 
for assisted neonatal ventilation and supplemental oxy-
gen.26 Because of maternal safety concerns (specifically 
related to respiratory effects), remifentanil use in labor 
is typically reserved for women with contraindications 
to neuraxial techniques. When remifentanil is used for 
labor analgesia, continuous pulse oximetry, end-tidal CO2
monitoring, oxygen supplementation, and 1:1 nursing 
are recommended.27
Nitrous Oxide (also see Chapter 7)
Use of inhaled nitrous oxide (N2O) for labor analgesia 
began in the 1880s, with increased use in the 1930s 
after invention of a portable device for administration. 
Although many countries have high utilization rates 
(>50%), it is only over the past decade that it has been 
widely available in the United States as an option for 
labor analgesia. The mechanisms of N2O are not well 
understood, and there are few high-quality studies exam-
ining its efficacy, optimization, and potential adverse 
impacts.28 N2O is an N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) 
antagonist, but may also modulate pain perception via 
alpha-2 receptors in the spinal cord dorsal horn and 
release endogenous opioids in the brain. N2O possesses 
many desirable qualities for labor analgesia, including 
rapid onset, rapid elimination, and no effect on uterine 
contractility. It can be used in all stages of labor, with 
no studies to suggest a detrimental effect of N2O on the 
fetus or neonate.29 Although the Food and Drug Admin-
istration (FDA) issued a 2016 communication30 warning 
against lengthy or repeated use of 11 anesthetic agents 
in children less than 3 and pregnant women during the 
third trimester, N2O was not included. Side effects are 
well tolerated, most commonly nausea, dysphoria, and 
dizziness. Although N2O provides less analgesic effect 
than epidural analgesia, it offers a safe and satisfactory 
analgesic option for many women that allows mobility 
and control of analgesic administration during labor.31
It is self-administered in a fixed mixture of 50% N2O 
with 50% oxygen via facemask. Out of concern for 
maternal respiratory depression and loss of airway 
reflexes with deeper levels of sedation, coadministration 
of systemic opioids or other sedating medications is not 
recommended.29 Emissions of this greenhouse gas are 
significantly reduced in the labor setting with use of the 
demand valve, and occupational exposure risk is negli-
gible when N2O is administered with proper scavenging 
equipment (also see Chapter 49).
Neuraxial (Regional) Analgesia
In the United States, neuraxial analgesia (e.g., epidural, 
spinal, dural puncture epidural [DPE], combined spinal 
epidural [CSE]) is the most widely used method for labor 
analgesia. Neuraxial analgesia typically involves the 
administration of local anesthetics in combination with 
opioid analgesics into the epidural and/or intrathecal 
space. Adjuvant drugs such as epinephrine32 and clo-
nidine33 have been shown to decrease the dose of local 
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
586
anesthetics or opioids required for analgesia. The FDA 
has issued a “black box” warning regarding increased 
risk of hypotension and bradycardia with neuraxial clo-
nidine in obstetrics, and caution should be used.
Local Anesthetics
Local anesthetics are discussed in detail in Chapter 10. 
Bupivacaine and ropivacaine are the most commonly 
used local anesthetics for labor analgesia, and both are 
extremely safe when appropriately dosed for epidural or 
intrathecal administration. An accidental, large intravas-
cular dose of any local anesthetic can result in signifi-
cant maternal morbidity (seizures, loss of consciousness, 
severe arrhythmias, and cardiovascular collapse) or 
mortality and the potential for fetal accumulation (ion 
trapping); see previous section “Physiology of the Utero-
placental Circulation.” Immediate recognition and treat-
ment are essential, see “Systemic Toxicity and Excessive 
Blockade.” Optimal local anesthetic concentration, dos-
ing, and delivery techniques are discussed within “Neu-
raxial Dosing and Delivery Techniques.”
Neuraxial Opioids
The neuraxial opioids fentanyl and sufentanil are com-
monly used in obstetric anesthesia in combination 
with local anesthetics to improve the quality of labor 
analgesia and allow a reduction in local anesthetic con-
centration. Although administration of opioids alone in 
the epidural space can provide moderate analgesia, the 
doses required are associated with significant maternal 
side effects (nausea, sedation, pruritus), and the anal-
gesia is inferior compared with dilute solutions of local 
anesthetic alone. Coadministration of neuraxial opioids 
with local anesthetics improves the quality of analgesia 
and has local anesthetic-sparing effects. The addition of 
neuraxial opioids is associated with dose-related mater-
nal side effects, including pruritus, sedation, and nausea. 
In addition, administration of intrathecal opioids can 
result in fetal bradycardia independent of hypotension.20
The mechanism for fetal bradycardia is unclear but may 
result from uterine hyperactivity after the rapid onset of 
analgesia.
NEURAXIAL TECHNIQUES
The most effective form of labor pain relief with the 
highest rate of maternal satisfaction is neuraxial anal-
gesia.34 Excellent analgesia is achieved with a labor 
epidural, without sedating side effects, and the mother 
remains able to actively participate during labor. All of 
these factors can increase maternal satisfaction with the 
labor experience. However, a negative experience with 
the childbirth process can result when there is poor com-
munication about neuraxial labor analgesia, provision 
of neuraxial pain relief is delayed, or analgesia is inad-
equate.35
Preoperative Assessment
Before initiation of any neuraxial blockade, anesthesia 
providers should assess the woman's pregnancy and 
health history; perform a focused physical examina-
tion; discuss risks, benefits, and alternatives; and obtain 
consent. Routine laboratory tests are not required in 
otherwise healthy women.6 Resuscitation equipment and 
drugs must be immediately available to manage seri-
ous complications secondary to initiation of epidural or 
spinal blocks (see “Contraindications and Complications 
of Neuraxial Anesthesia” section below). During initia-
tion of neuraxial blockade, the mother and fetus must 
be closely monitored (maternal vital signs and fetal heart 
rate monitoring).36 Current recommendations allow oth-
erwise healthy laboring women to have modest amounts 
of clear liquids regardless of whether a labor epidural is 
in place. In complicated labors (e.g., by morbid obesity, 
difficult airway, concerning fetal status), the anesthesia 
provider might consider restricting oral intake.6
Timing and Placement of Epidural
Regardless of cervical dilation, maternal request for relief 
of labor pain is sufficient justification for epidural place-
ment according to current ASA and American College of 
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) guidelines.6,16 In 
the past, there were concerns that early epidural place-
ment might adversely affect labor progress. However, 
randomized controlled clinical trials (RCTs) comparing 
women receiving either systemic opioids or neuraxial 
analgesia in early labor (both spontaneous and induced) 
demonstrated no difference in rates of cesarean deliv-
ery.37,38 A Cochrane review based on studies up to 2017 
comparing use of labor epidural with either no epidural 
or systemic opioid labor analgesia also noted no differ-
ence in rates of cesarean delivery, but a modest increase 
in the length of the second stage (about 15 minutes) 
and an increased rate of instrumented vaginal delivery 
in women using neuraxial labor analgesia.39 However, 
a secondary analysis of trials conducted after 2005 
found there was no longer an association between use 
of a labor epidural and need for instrumented vagi-
nal delivery. A 2015 clinical trial found no difference 
between epidurals dosed with fentanyl alone vs. local 
anesthetic, suggesting a prolonged second stage is not 
a result of decreased pushing effort secondary to local 
anesthetic effects.40 This increase in the second stage is 
not harmful to the infant or mother. As long as the fetal 
status remains reassuring and there is ongoing progress 
towards delivery, the duration of the second stage does 
not dictate intervention.41
IV
Chapter 33 Obstetrics
587
Epidural Technique (also see Chapter 17)
Epidurals provide continuous pain relief during labor via 
a catheter-based technique. Placement involves inser-
tion of a specialized needle (Tuohy) between vertebral 
spinous processes in the back and into the epidural space 
(Fig. 33.4). To prevent unintentional dural puncture (“wet 
tap”), the Tuohy needle has a slightly curved blunt tip. 
Placement can occur with the patient in the sitting or 
lateral position, depending on the anesthesia provider's 
experience and the position that provides optimal expo-
sure to anatomic landmarks. Aseptic techniques should 
always be used during neuraxial placement per ASA 
task force recommendations. These recommendations 
include (1) removal of jewelry (e.g., rings and watches), 
handwashing/use of hand sanitizer before donning 
sterile gloves, and wearing of caps, masks, and ster-
ile gloves; (2) use of individual packets of antiseptic 
Spinal cord
Conus medullaris
Filum terminale
Interspinous
ligament
Supraspinous
ligament
Dura mater
Needle in
epidural space
Sacrococcygeal
ligament
L5
L4
L3
L2
L1
S1
S2
S3
S4
S5
Ligamentum flavum
Fig. 33.4 Schematic diagram of lumbosacral anatomy showing 
needle placement for epidural block.
(e.g., chlorhexidine) for skin preparation, allowing for 
adequate drying time; (3) sterile draping of the patient; 
(4) aseptic techniques during equipment preparation (e.g., 
ultrasound) and placement of needles and catheters; and 
(5) use of sterile occlusive dressings at the catheter inser-
tion site.42 The needle is typically inserted between the 
L3 and L4 spinous processes. The needle traverses the 
skin and subcutaneous tissues, supraspinous ligament, 
interspinous ligament, the ligamentum flavum, and then 
reaches the epidural space (Fig. 33.5). The tip of the 
Tuohy needle should not penetrate the dura, which forms 
the boundary between the intrathecal or subarachnoid 
space and the epidural space. The epidural space is found 
using a tactile technique called loss of resistance. To 
perform this technique, an air- or saline-filled syringe 
is attached to the Tuohy needle, and tactile resistance is 
noted with pressure on the plunger of the syringe as the 
needle is advanced towards the epidural space. Resist-
ance dramatically decreases when the tip of the needle is 
advanced through the ligamentum flavum (dense resist-
ance) into the epidural space (no resistance). Average 
depth of the epidural space is about 5 cm from the skin. 
Once properly positioned, a catheter is inserted through 
the needle. The needle is removed and the epidural cath-
eter is secured with 4 to 5 cm remaining in the epidural 
space for use with intermittent or continuous injection. 
To minimize unintended catheter migration, the catheter 
should be secured with a sterile dressing only after the 
patient has returned to a neutral upright or lateral posi-
tion. Local anesthetics and/or opioids (discussed earlier) 
are administered via the epidural catheter to achieve and 
maintain analgesia throughout the labor and delivery 
course. The epidural catheter can also be used for instru-
mented vaginal or cesarean delivery and opioid (e.g., 
morphine) administration for postoperative analgesia 
when appropriate.
Combined Spinal Epidural and Dural Puncture 
Epidural Techniques
The CSE and DPE techniques follow the epidural tech-
nique noted earlier, but after the loss of resistance a 
spinal needle (≤25 gauge, pencil-point) is inserted into 
the epidural needle, using a needle-through-needle 
technique. For a DPE, once CSF is visualized in the 
spinal needle hub, the spinal needle is removed and the 
epidural catheter is placed as described with the epi-
dural technique. Compared with an epidural, the benefit 
of the DPE may be fewer one-sided blocks, less sacral 
sparing, and slightly faster onset of analgesia, with less 
hypotension and pruritis than a CSE.20,43 The benefits of 
the DPE require use of a 25-gauge or larger spinal nee-
dle. For the CSE, an intrathecal dose of local anesthetic 
and/or opioid is administered through the spinal needle 
before removal. The benefit of the CSE is the quick onset 
(about 2 minutes) of analgesia, along with better sacral 
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
588
EPIDURAL ANALGESIA
Interspinous ligament
Spinous process
1
2
Epidural space
Ligamentum flavum
COMBINED SPINAL–EPIDURAL ANALGESIA
Interspinous ligament
Spinous process
1
2
3
4
Epidural space
Ligamentum flavum
A
B
Fig. 33.5 Technique of Epidural and Combined Spinal-Epidural Analgesia. (A) Epidural catheter 
placement for labor analgesia. (1) The desired epidural space L2–L4 is identified. After infiltration 
with local anesthetic, a Tuohy needle is seated in the intervertebral ligaments. A syringe is connected 
to the epidural needle for confirmation of degree of resistance using constant or periodic pressure 
on the plunger. As the needle tip is passed from the high resistance of the ligaments to the low 
resistance in the epidural space, a sudden loss of resistance is recognized by the anesthesia provider 
and advancement is stopped. (2) An epidural catheter is advanced through the needle into the space. 
Analgesic medications are administered through the catheter after a “test dose.” (B) Combined spinal-
epidural analgesia. (1) After Tuohy needle placement into the epidural space, (2) a spinal needle (24–26 
gauge) is introduced through the epidural needle into the subarachnoid space. (3) Proper placement 
is confirmed by free flow of the cerebrospinal fluid. A bolus of local anesthetic and/or opioid is given 
through the spinal needle. (4) After spinal needle removal, an epidural catheter is advanced through the 
Tuohy into the epidural space. The epidural catheter can be used for continuation of labor analgesia. 
(Adapted from Eltzschig HK, Lieberman ES, Camann WR. Regional anesthesia and analgesia for labor 
and delivery. N Engl J Med. 2003;348:319–332.)
IV
Chapter 33 Obstetrics
589
spread, fewer one-sided blocks, and fewer catheter fail-
ures compared with a plain epidural.20 However, with a 
CSE compared with DPE or epidural, there appears to be 
increased opioid-based pruritis, increased risk of uterine 
tachysystole, and greater incidence of fetal bradycardia 
after block placement. Although there is not an increased 
risk of headache with a CSE technique compared with an 
epidural, use of a 25-gauge spinal needle required for 
optimal DPE efficacy requires further study regarding 
possible minimally increased risk of headache.20 44
Neuraxial Dosing and Delivery Techniques
An epidural catheter allows infusion of local anesthetic 
with or without opioid drugs. In addition, anesthesia 
providers can bolus the catheter with either the same or 
a more concentrated solution of local anesthetic. Pro-
grammable infusion pumps allow a patient-controlled 
epidural analgesia (PCEA) method of delivering the 
chosen anesthetic mixture with or without a background 
infusion. Compared with a continuous infusion alone, a 
PCEA method of delivery allows for a decrease in medi-
cal personnel, decreased motor block, improved patient 
satisfaction, and lower local anesthetic consumption.6 45
Adding a background infusion to PCEA further improves 
labor analgesia, reduces the need for clinician boluses, 
and does not increase maternal or neonatal adverse 
events. Programmed intermittent epidural bolus (PIEB) is 
a more recent method of administering automated fixed 
epidural boluses at scheduled intervals. PIEB can be used 
alone or with a PCEA technique. A 2018 Cochrane sys-
tematic review suggests that compared with a continuous 
infusion technique, PIEB may reduce local anesthetic 
usage, improve maternal satisfaction, and decrease the 
need for rescue boluses.46 Using PIEB with PCEA allows 
a basal analgesia with the ability for the patient to tailor 
additional analgesia depending on her own preferences, 
which may change as the labor progresses.
Because of concerns that dense motor blockade 
may increase the need for assisted vaginal delivery, the 
concentrations of labor epidural local anesthetics have 
decreased as practice has evolved. Typical maintenance 
infusion concentrations for epidural bupivacaine (0.04% 
to 0.125%) or ropivacaine (0.0625% to 0.2%) are both 
effective. Opioids such as fentanyl (2 mcg/mL) or sufen-
tanil (0.2 mcg/mL) may be added to the infusion mixture 
to augment analgesia and decrease local anesthetic 
requirements, but increase the side effects of pruritus, 
nausea, and sedation in a dose-dependent fashion. Opi-
oids can also be bolused through the epidural catheter 
with typical doses of fentanyl 50 to 100 mcg or sufentanil 
5 to 10 mcg to improve analgesia. Dilute concentra-
tions of epinephrine (1:300,000 to 1:800,000) can also 
be added to the epidural mixture to augment analgesia. 
If using a dilute solution (0.0625% bupivacaine with 
2mcg/ml fentanyl) with PIEB volumes of 10 mL, higher 
bolus rates of flow (500 mL/hr) and intervals of 40 to 45 
minutes between each PIEB may improve efficacy of the 
labor analgesia.47,48
For CSEs the initial intrathecal dose can include an 
opioid, a local anesthetic, or a combination of the two. 
Typical intrathecal doses for opioids are fentanyl (10 to 
20 mcg) or sufentanil (1.5 to 5 mcg), and local anesthetic 
doses include bupivacaine (1.25 to 3.5 mg) and ropiv-
acaine (2 to 5 mg). Use of opioids alone is associated 
with increased rates of severe pruritus,49 and higher-dose 
intrathecal opioids (e.g., sufentanil 7.5 mcg) are associ-
ated with increased risk of fetal bradycardia even in the 
absence of hypotension.50 When combined with 2.5 mg 
intrathecal bupivacaine, 15 mcg of fentanyl appears to be 
an optimal dose, with increasing amounts not improving 
analgesic efficacy but potentially increasing undesired 
side effects.51
Before initiation of an epidural catheter, a test dose
should be performed to evaluate the possibility of unin-
tended IV or intrathecal catheter placement. Commonly, 
3 mL of 1.5% lidocaine containing 1:200,000 epinephrine 
is used. Increases in heart rate and blood pressure >20% 
above baseline (intravascular placement) or rapid analgesia 
and lower extremity motor block (intrathecal placement) 
note epidural catheter misplacement. Maternal vital signs 
should be obtained before placement of neuraxial analge-
sia (heart rate, pulse oximetry, and blood pressure). When-
ever bolusing the epidural catheter, aspirate the catheter 
first to help confirm it has not migrated into the intrathecal 
or intravascular space. Administer the anesthetic mixture 
incrementally while monitoring maternal vitals (blood 
pressure and pulse oximetry) and fetal heart rate (FHR). 
Unintended complications can occur when a catheter is 
initially bolused (e.g., unintended intrathecal administra-
tion, local anesthetic systemic toxicity). Consequently, the 
patient should be under direct observation by an anesthe-
sia provider, labor nurse, or midwife for at least 20 minutes 
after initial administration of neuraxial medication, with 
maternal heart rate and pulse oximetry monitoring, and 
blood pressure measured at least every 5 minutes.36
Instrumented vaginal delivery may become necessary 
for arrest of descent and/or fetal indications. Use of for-
ceps often requires a denser block with perineal anesthe-
sia. Supplementation with 5 to 10 mL of an epidural local 
anesthetic (e.g., 2% lidocaine or 3% 2-chloroprocaine) 
may be needed.
Spinal Labor Analgesia
Placement of spinal medications provides rapid analge-
sia when delivery is imminent in the advanced second 
stage. It is also useful for instrumented (forceps/vacuum) 
delivery, management of retained placenta, or repair 
of high-degree perineal lacerations. A 25- to 27-gauge 
“pencil point” spinal needle is selected to reduce the risk 
of postdural puncture headache. Intrathecal medications 
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
590
are commonly administered in doses similar to those used 
in the spinal portion of a CSE (e.g., 2.5 mg bupivacaine 
with 15 mcg fentanyl) to provide analgesic onset within 
minutes. This type of labor analgesia lasts about 60 to 
90 minutes and is significantly less than that needed 
for cesarean delivery. To optimize anesthesia for per-
ineal laceration repair, hyperbaric local anesthetic can 
be administered followed by leaving the patient in the 
sitting position for 5 minutes to achieve a dense sensory 
block in the perineal region (“saddle block”).
CONTRAINDICATIONS OF NEURAXIAL 
ANESTHESIA
Certain conditions contraindicate neuraxial procedures. 
These include (1) patient refusal, (2) infection at the needle 
insertion site, (3) significant coagulopathy, (4) hypovolemic 
shock, (5) increased intracranial pressure from mass lesion, 
and (6) inadequate resources or provider expertise.52
Other conditions such as systemic infection, neurologic 
disease, and mild coagulopathies are relative contraindi-
cations that should be evaluated on a case-by-case basis 
using current guidelines. Human immunodeficiency virus 
(HIV) and hepatitis infection are not contraindications 
to neuraxial technique in pregnant women. For women 
with thrombocytopenia or receiving thromboprophylaxis, 
recent guidelines provide guidance on placement of neu-
raxial anesthesia53-55 (also see Chapter 23).
COMPLICATIONS OF NEURAXIAL 
ANESTHESIA
The rates of inadequate neuraxial labor analgesia requir-
ing catheter replacement are approximately 7% to 12% 
for epidurals and 3% to 7% for CSEs based on two 
retrospective studies.56 57 The rate of accidental dural 
puncture during epidural catheter placement is approxi-
mately 1% to 2%, and about half of these will result 
in a severe headache, which is typically managed with 
analgesics, hydration, rest, caffeine, or blood patch if 
necessary. Other potential side effects from neuraxial 
blockade include pruritus, nausea, shivering, urinary 
retention, motor weakness, low back soreness, and a 
prolonged block. More serious complications of meningi-
tis, epidural hematoma, and nerve or spinal cord injury 
are extremely rare. A multicenter database analysis of 
257,000 obstetric patients examined rates of serious 
neurologic events.58 The rate of epidural abscess or men-
ingitis was 1:63,000, epidural hematoma was 1:251,000, 
and high neuraxial block 1:4,300. A 2006 meta-analysis 
of 1.37 million women receiving labor epidurals noted 
rates of deep epidural infections 1:145,000, epidural 
hematoma 1:168,000, and persistent neurologic injury 
remaining greater than 1 year at 1:240,000.59 Discussion 
of informed consent is essential before labor analgesia, 
and a patient's recall of neuraxial risks does not appear 
to be reduced in the presence of labor pain.60
Systemic Toxicity and Excessive Blockade 
(also see Chapter 10)
Infrequent but occasionally life-threatening compli-
cations can result from administration of neuraxial 
anesthesia. The most serious complications are from 
accidental IV or intrathecal injections of local anesthet-
ics. An unintended bolus of IV local anesthetic causes 
dose-dependent consequences ranging from minor side 
effects (e.g., tinnitus, perioral tingling, mild blood pres-
sure and heart rate changes) to major complications 
(seizures, loss of consciousness, severe arrhythmias, car-
diovascular collapse). The severity depends on the dose, 
type of local anesthetic, and preexisting condition of the 
woman. Bupivacaine has more affinity for sodium chan-
nels than lidocaine and dissociates more slowly. In addi-
tion, its high protein affinity makes cardiac resuscitation 
more difficult and prolonged. Measures that minimize the 
likelihood of accidental intravascular injection include 
careful aspiration of the catheter before injection, test 
dosing, and incremental administration of therapeutic 
doses. Successful resuscitation and support of the mother 
will reestablish UBF. This will provide adequate fetal oxy-
genation and allow time for excretion of local anesthetic 
from the fetus. The neonate has an extremely limited 
ability to metabolize local anesthetics and may have 
prolonged convulsions if emergent delivery is required.
A high spinal (total spinal) can result from an unrec-
ognized epidural catheter placed subdurally, migration of 
the catheter during its use, or an overdose of local anes-
thetic in the epidural space (i.e., high epidural). Both high 
spinals and high epidurals can result in severe maternal 
hypotension, bradycardia, loss of consciousness, and 
blockade of the motor nerves to the respiratory muscles.
Treatment
Treatment of complications resulting from both intravas-
cular injection and high spinal are directed at restoring 
maternal and fetal oxygenation, ventilation, and circu-
lation. Intubation, vasopressors, fluids, and advanced 
cardiac life support (ACLS) algorithms are often required. 
ACLS guidelines for pregnancy include use of manual left 
uterine displacement to relieve aortocaval compression, 
avoidance of lower extremity vessels for drug delivery, 
and no modifications to pharmacologic or defibrillation 
protocols except removal of fetal and uterine monitors 
before shock61 (also see Chapter 45). If a local anes-
thetic overdose occurs, consider use of a 20% IV lipid 
emulsion to bind the drug and decrease toxicity.62 For 
cardiac arrest with unsuccessful resuscitation where the 
fundal height is at or above the level of the umbilicus 
(approximately 20 weeks’ gestation), the fetus should be 
IV
Chapter 33 Obstetrics
591
emergently delivered if the mother is not resuscitated 
within 5 minutes of the arrest.61 This guideline for emer-
gent cesarean delivery increases the chances of survival 
for both the mother and neonate. In addition, the use of 
checklists and simulation can improve performance dur-
ing rare but critical events.
Hypotension
Hypotension (decrease in systolic blood pressure >20%) 
secondary to decreased systemic vascular resistance is 
the most common complication of neuraxial blockade 
for labor analgesia, with rates of approximately 14%.63
Prophylactic measures include left uterine displacement 
and hydration. Although a standard for timing, amount, 
and hydration fluid remain controversial, all agree dehy-
dration should be avoided. Prehydration with up to 1 L 
IV crystalloid does not appear to significantly decrease 
rates of hypotension from low-dose labor epidurals.64
Treatment of hypotension consists of further uterine 
displacement, IV fluids, and vasopressor administration. 
Either phenylephrine or ephedrine can be used to treat 
hypotension (see “Anesthesia for Cesarean Delivery”). If 
treated promptly, transient maternal hypotension does 
not lead to fetal depression or neonatal morbidity.
Increased Core Temperature
A rise in core maternal body temperature and fever are 
associated with labor epidural analgesia. Although it was 
originally believed that all laboring women who had 
epidural analgesia gradually increased their core tempera-
ture, more current studies suggest that only about 20% 
of women who receive epidural labor analgesia develop 
a fever, and the remaining 80% have no increase in core 
body temperature.65 Although the etiology of the maternal 
temperature rise remains uncertain, an association with 
noninfectious inflammation mediated by proinflamma-
tory cytokines is supported most consistently in the lit-
erature. This rise in maternal temperature is not associated 
with a change in white blood cell count or an infectious 
process and is not reduced with prophylactic antibiotics, 
so treatment is not necessary.66 In addition, the fever 
associated with epidural labor analgesia does not increase 
the incidence of neonatal sepsis and need not affect neo-
natal septic workup. Although some studies note no effect 
on fetal well-being, other studies suggest maternal tem-
peratures greater than 38°C are associated with adverse 
neonatal outcomes, including seizures, hypotonia, and 
need for a period of assisted ventilation.66 67
ANESTHESIA FOR CESAREAN DELIVERY
The majority of cesarean deliveries are performed with 
neuraxial anesthesia. Use of regional anesthesia (1) 
avoids the risks of maternal aspiration and difficult air-
way associated with general anesthesia, (2) allows less 
anesthetic exposure to the neonate, (3) has the benefit of 
an awake mother, and (4) allows placement of neuraxial 
opioids to decrease postoperative pain. Sometimes the 
severity of the fetal condition and emergent nature of 
the situation (e.g., fetal bradycardia or uterine rupture) 
necessitate the use of general anesthesia for its rapidity 
and reliability. Other times, general anesthesia is required 
when regional anesthesia is contraindicated (e.g., coagu-
lopathy or severe hemorrhage). In addition to its rapid 
and dependable onset, benefits of general anesthesia over 
regional include a secure airway, controlled ventilation, 
and potential for less hemodynamic instability. Current 
ASA guidelines6 recommend the “timely administration 
of oral nonparticulate antacids, IV H2-receptor antago-
nists, and/or metoclopramide for aspiration prophylaxis” 
before the induction of anesthesia in pregnant women. In 
emergent situations, an oral nonparticulate antacid may 
be most appropriate.
Spinal Anesthesia
For a pregnant woman without an epidural catheter, spi-
nal anesthesia is the most common regional anesthetic 
technique used for cesarean delivery. The block is rapid 
in onset, does not carry the risk of systemic drug toxic-
ity because of the smaller dose, and is more reliable in 
providing surgical anesthesia from the midthoracic level 
to the sacrum compared with epidural anesthesia. The 
incidence of postdural puncture headache has become 
low (<5%) with the introduction of smaller diameter (≤25 
gauge), noncutting, “pencil-point” spinal needles. Mater-
nal hypotension is more likely and more profound with 
spinal anesthesia than with epidural anesthesia. Untreated 
maternal hypotension can result in fetal bradycardia and 
acidosis. A consensus statement regarding hypotension 
after spinal anesthesia for cesarean delivery recommends 
prophylactic infusion of an alpha agonist (i.e., phenyle-
phrine initiated at 25 to 50 mcg/min), rapid crystalloid 
infusion with initiation of spinal anesthesia (co-loading), 
and left uterine displacement to reduce the incidence 
and severity of hypotension.68 The recommendation is to 
maintain systolic blood pressure above 80% of baseline. 
Because maternal heart rate correlates significantly with 
cardiac output, ephedrine and/or glycopyrrolate should 
also be considered in cases of low maternal heart rate.68
Administration of prophylactic norepinephrine has been 
demonstrated to have improved maternal heart rate and 
cardiac output compared with phenylephrine.69 However, 
phenylephrine is currently recommended because of the 
amount of supporting data. Spinal anesthesia can be 
safely used for patients with preeclampsia. A typical spi-
nal anesthetic could consist of bupivacaine (10 to 15 mg), 
with fentanyl (15 mcg) and preservative-free morphine 
(150 mcg) added to augment the spinal and decrease 
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
592
postoperative pain. A large variety of other combina-
tions of local anesthetic and opioid doses are also used. 
A hyperbaric solution of local anesthetic is often used to 
facilitate anatomic and gravitational control of the block 
distribution. The medication will flow with the spinal 
curvature to a block position near T4. The duration of 
a single-shot spinal anesthetic is variable, but normally 
provides adequate surgical anesthesia for ≥90 minutes.
A continuous spinal anesthetic technique with 
intrathecal catheter placement is a rarely used alterna-
tive, sometimes chosen in cases of accidental dural 
puncture during attempted epidural catheter placement. 
This allows the advantage of a titratable, reliable, dense 
anesthetic, but carries the risks of high spinal if the 
intrathecal catheter is mistaken for an epidural catheter 
or the provider is unfamiliar with the technique. The 
rates of rare complications such as meningitis or neuro-
logic impairment from local anesthetic toxicity with use 
of a spinal catheter may be somewhat higher than the 
other neuraxial techniques but remain unknown. Some 
data suggest that leaving the spinal catheter in place for 
24 hours after delivery decreases the risk of postdural 
puncture headache.70
Epidural Anesthesia
Epidural anesthesia is an excellent choice for cesar-
ean delivery when an indwelling, functioning epidural 
catheter has been placed for labor analgesia. It allows 
titration to the desired level of anesthesia and ability 
to extend the block time if needed. It is also ideal for 
patients who cannot tolerate the sudden onset of sym-
pathectomy, such as some patients with severe cardiac 
disease. Some disadvantages include a slower onset 
compared with spinal anesthesia and a greater risk of 
maternal systemic drug toxicity. The volume and con-
centration of local anesthetic drugs used for surgical 
anesthesia are larger than those used for labor analgesia; 
however, the technique of catheter placement, test dos-
ing, and potential complications are similar. A standard 
dosing regimen for epidural anesthesia for cesarean 
delivery could include approximately 15 to 20 mL of 
2% lidocaine or 3% 2-chloroprocaine in divided doses. 
For urgent cesarean deliveries, 3% 2-chloroprocaine is 
often selected because it has the most rapid onset of 
any epidural local anesthetics. Compared with lidocaine, 
2-chloroprocaine diminishes both the efficacy and dura-
tion of epidural morphine administered for postopera-
tive analgesia.71 Addition of epinephrine (1:200,000) or 
fentanyl (50 to 100 mcg) can enhance the intensity and 
duration of the block and increase the systemic toxicity 
threshold. Typically, the anesthesia provider attempts 
to provide sensory anesthesia to the T4 level. Epidural 
block failure rates for cesarean delivery after use of a 
labor epidural range between 1.7% and 19.8%.72 Predic-
tors of failure to convert a labor epidural to surgical 
anesthesia for cesarean delivery include neuraxial block 
placement by a nonspecialist obstetric anesthesiologist 
(odds ratio [OR] 4.6), an increased number of manual 
boluses during labor (OR 4.4), and the urgency of a 
cesarean delivery (OR 2.5).73 In some cases conversion 
to general endotracheal anesthesia may be required. 
Epidural morphine (e.g., 2 mg) is typically administered 
near the end of the procedure to decrease postoperative 
pain for up to 24 hours.
Combined Spinal Epidural Anesthesia
In selected circumstances, use of a CSE technique offers 
the advantage of a spinal anesthetic with rapid, reliable 
onset of a dense block and the ability to administer 
additional local anesthetic through the epidural catheter. 
This allows titration of the block level or extension of 
the block duration if the surgical procedure lasts for a 
longer period.
General Anesthesia
General anesthesia is used in obstetric practice for 
cesarean delivery, typically when neuraxial anesthesia 
is contraindicated or for emergencies because of its 
rapid and predictable action. Based on data from 1997 
to 2002, the relative risk of general anesthesia is 1.7 
times that of neuraxial anesthesia.74 Although the mor-
tality associated with general anesthesia can be caused 
by intubation failure or induction problems, a large 
portion of this mortality is the result of airway obstruc-
tion and/or hypoventilation occurring on extubation, 
in the postanesthesia care unit, or in the postpartum 
ward.74 Appropriate airway examination, preparation, 
and familiarity with techniques and an algorithm for 
the difficult airway are critical for providing a safe 
anesthetic (Fig. 33.6), in addition to appropriate post-
operative monitoring. A multiinstitutional database of 
adverse obstetric anesthesia events indicates that cur-
rent rates of failed intubation are approximately 1:533, 
although none of the 10 failed obstetric intubations 
resulted in maternal mortality.58 The sequence of events 
for inducing general anesthesia for cesarean delivery are 
detailed in Box 33.1.
After administration of a nonparticulate antacid, 
preoxygenation, and confirmation of surgical readi-
ness, a rapid-sequence induction is typically performed 
and a cuffed endotracheal tube placed. Surgical inci-
sion is made after confirmation of tracheal intubation 
and adequate ventilation. Anesthesia is maintained by 
administration of a combination of a halogenated agent 
and benzodiazepines, opioid analgesics, propofol, nitrous 
oxide, and additional muscle relaxant if needed. During 
typical general anesthesia for cesarean delivery, opioids 
and benzodiazepines are administered after the baby is 
delivered to avoid placental transfer of these agents to 
IV
Chapter 33 Obstetrics
593
the neonate. Before delivery of the baby, the primary 
anesthetic for the incision and delivery is the induc-
tion agent, as there is typically little time for significant 
uptake and distribution of the inhaled agents into either 
the mother or fetus. If intubation attempts fail, the 
cesarean delivery may proceed if the anesthesia provider 
can reliably ventilate the mother with either facemask 
or laryngeal mask airway6 (see Fig. 33.6). Halogenated 
agents are often partially or completely replaced with 
other anesthetic agents (e.g., total intravenous anesthesia 
[TIVA] with propofol and opioids) after delivery to further 
reduce the risk of uterine atony.
unable to intubate
• mask ventilation
  with 100% oxygen
• call for assistance
• maintain cricoid
  pressure
clinical
judgement
failure
failure
supraglottic
airway
ventilation
return of
effective
spontaneous
ventilation?
invasive
airway**
awaken
patient
failure
no
“best attempt”
laryngoscopy*
success
cesarean delivery
Clinical
judgement
success
success
success
yes
assess fetal
well-being
• Ventilate
with 100% O2
and
  halogenated
  agent
• Proceed
with C/D
• fetal status
• airway status
• ? cesarean
• ? more
• ? awaken
secure
airway
patient
delivery
Multidisciplinary
discussion:
minimal or
no fetal
distress
significant
fetal
distress
* Multiple laryngoscopy attemps may cause
inceasingly difficult mask ventilation
** Types of invasive airway procedures
    include cricothyrotomy, transtracheal
    jet ventilation, and surgical tracheotomy
Consider another
attempt at
definitive airway
management after
 delivery
success
Fig. 33.6 Algorithm for Difficult Airway Management With Failed Intubation in Obstetrics. C/D,
cesarean delivery. (Adapted from Hughes S, Levinson G, Rosen M. Shnider and Levinson's Anesthesia for 
Obstetrics, 4th ed. Lippincott, Williams & Wilkins Philadelphia, PA 2002.)
Induction Drugs (also see Chapter 8)
A number of different drugs are used by anesthesia pro-
viders to rapidly induce general anesthesia. Propofol is a 
highly lipid-soluble drug with a rapid onset of action that 
renders the patient unconscious within approximately 30 
seconds. Propofol is associated with decreased systemic 
arterial pressure after induction, especially when opioids 
are coadministered. Because it is preservative-free and 
lipid-based, propofol supports rapid microbial growth 
at room temperature and must be drawn up only hours 
before use. Propofol administration has no significant 
effect on neonatal behavior scores with induction doses 
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
594
of 2.5 mg/kg, but larger doses (9 mg/kg) are associated 
with newborn depression.
Etomidate also has a rapid onset of action because of 
its high lipid solubility. Its rapid hydrolysis results in a 
relatively short duration of action. At typical induction 
doses (0.3 mg/kg), etomidate has minimal effects on the 
maternal cardiovascular system, making it an appropriate 
choice for patients with hemodynamic compromise. How-
ever, etomidate is painful on injection, can cause invol-
untary muscle tremors, has higher rates of nausea and 
vomiting (compared with propofol, which has antiemetic 
properties), and can increase the risk of seizures in 
patients with decreased thresholds. It also decreases neo-
natal cortisol production (typically <6 hours in duration), 
with uncertain clinical significance.
Ketamine produces a rapid onset of anesthesia, but 
unlike propofol, ketamine's sympathomimetic character-
istics increase maternal arterial pressure, heart rate, and 
cardiac output through central stimulation of the sym-
pathetic nervous system, making it also appropriate for 
patients with hemodynamic compromise. Doses greater 
than those typical for induction of general anesthesia (1 
to 1.5 mg/kg) can lower seizure threshold and increase 
uterine tone, which reduces uterine arterial perfusion. In 
low doses (0.25 mg/kg), ketamine is a profound analgesic, 
but has been associated with undesirable psychomimetic 
side effects (bad dreams), which can be lessened by 
coadministration of benzodiazepines. Both ketamine and 
Box 33.1
General Anesthesia for Cesarean Section: A 
Suggested Technique
•Administer a nonparticulate oral antacid (sodium citrate)
before induction of anesthesia
•Place standard monitors and maintain left uterine
displacement
•Start an infusion of crystalloid solution through a large-
bore intravenous catheter
•Preoxygenate for 3 minutes or four maximal breaths over
30 seconds
•After confirming surgeon is ready and patient prepped,
an assistant should apply cricoid pressure and maintain it 
until the position of the endotracheal tube is verified*
•Administer induction agent and neuromuscular blocking
agent in rapid sequence, wait 30 to 60 seconds, and then 
initiate direct laryngoscopy for tracheal intubation
•After confirming endotracheal tube placement,
communicate to surgeon to begin incision
•Administer oxygen in air and a volatile anesthetic
•After delivery, anesthesia may be maintained by
administering a combination of a halogenated agent and 
benzodiazepines, opioid analgesics, propofol, nitrous oxide 
and additional muscle relaxant as needed
•Extubate the trachea when the patient is fully awake and
strong
*Not all agree that cricoid pressure is efficacious or required in every 
patient.
etomidate are considered appropriate for induction of 
anesthesia in a pregnant woman who is actively hemor-
rhaging, has uncertain blood volume, and is at risk for 
profound hypotension.
Neuromuscular Blocking Drugs and Reversal Agents 
(also see Chapter 11)
Succinylcholine (1 to 1.5 mg/kg IV) remains the neu-
romuscular blocking drug of choice for obstetric anes-
thesia because of its rapid onset (30 to 45 seconds) and 
short duration of action. Because it is highly ionized 
and poorly lipid soluble, only small amounts cross the 
placenta. It is normally hydrolyzed in maternal blood 
by the enzyme pseudocholinesterase and does not 
generally interfere with fetal neuromuscular activity. 
Although pseudocholinesterase activity is decreased 
in pregnancy, neuromuscular blockade by succinyl-
choline is not significantly prolonged. If large doses 
are administered (2 to 3 mg/kg), succinylcholine levels 
become detectable in umbilical cord blood; however, 
extremely high doses (10 mg/kg) are needed for the 
transfer to result in neonatal neuromuscular blockade. 
If the hydrolytic enzyme is present either in low con-
centration or in a genetically determined atypical form, 
prolonged maternal paralysis can occur, and the return 
of neuromuscular strength should always be verified 
before extubation or before additional nondepolarizing 
muscle relaxants are administered.
Rocuronium is an acceptable alternative to succinyl-
choline. It provides adequate intubating conditions in 
approximately 90 seconds at doses of 0.6 mg/kg and 
under 60 seconds at doses of 1.2 mg/kg. Unlike succinyl-
choline, it has a much longer duration of action, decreas-
ing maternal safety in the event the anesthesia provider 
is unable to intubate or ventilate the patient. However, 
with a large intravenous dose of sugammadex (16 mg/
kg), neuromuscular block with rocuronium can be rapidly 
reversed, and sugammadex is effective and safe to use 
at the conclusion of a cesarean delivery (typically 2 to 4 
mg/kg).75 The Society for Obstetric Anesthesia and Peri-
natology currently recommends avoidance in pregnant 
woman undergoing nonobstetric surgery, as sugammadex 
reduces unbound progesterone in pharmacologic studies 
and could theoretically affect the length of pregnancy.76
Consequently, a standard reversal option is coadmin-
istration of neostigmine and glycopyrrolate. Glycopyr-
rolate is poorly transferred across the placenta, whereas 
neostigmine is more capable of crossing. Although this 
combination is frequently administered to pregnant 
women undergoing nonobstetric surgery for neuromus-
cular blockade reversal without adverse effect, there have 
been case reports of profound fetal bradycardia when 
glycopyrrolate and neostigmine were coadministered.77
Consequently, it has been suggested that neostigmine be 
administered with atropine (which crosses the placenta) to 
pregnant women who require reversal of neuromuscular 
IV
Chapter 33 Obstetrics
595
blockade. If administered after cesarean delivery, placen-
tal transfer is irrelevant.
Uterine smooth muscle is not affected by neuromuscu-
lar blockade. Under normal circumstances, nondepolar-
izing neuromuscular blockers do not cross the placenta 
in amounts significant enough to cause neonatal muscle 
weakness. However, when large doses are administered 
over long periods, neonatal neuromuscular blockade can 
occur. A paralyzed neonate will have normal cardiovas-
cular function but no spontaneous ventilatory move-
ments or reflex responses, and skeletal muscle flaccidity 
is present. Treatment consists of respiratory support until 
the neonate excretes the drug, which may take up to 48 
hours. Antagonism of nondepolarizing neuromuscular 
blocking drugs with cholinesterase inhibitors may be 
attempted, but adequate respiratory support is the main-
stay of treatment.
Maintenance of Anesthesia
Maintenance of anesthesia for cesarean delivery often 
includes the inhalation of a low concentration (<0.75 
MAC) of halogenated anesthetic in addition to other 
agents (e.g., propofol), with opioids administered after 
the baby is delivered to avoid the concern of placental 
transfer to the neonate. Placental transfer of volatile 
anesthetics is rapid because they are nonionized, highly 
lipid-soluble substances of low molecular weight. Fetal 
concentrations depend on the concentration and dura-
tion of anesthetic administered to the mother. In 2016 the 
FDA published a warning that “repeated or lengthy use 
of general anesthetic and sedation drugs during surgeries 
or procedures in children younger than three years or in 
pregnant women during the third trimester may affect 
the development of children's brains.”30 This warning 
comes from concern that administration of drugs that 
bind to gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) or NMDA 
receptors could result in long-term effects on children's 
learning and behavior. No specific anesthetic agent (e.g., 
halogenated anesthetics, propofol, ketamine) is known to 
be safer than another, and there is no association known 
between use of general anesthesia for urgent cesarean 
delivery and neurocognitive disability later in life78 (also 
see Chapter 12).
The impact of general anesthesia on neonatal out-
come, especially in the presence of fetal distress, has been 
studied for many years. A depressed fetus is likely to be 
associated with a depressed neonate, and general anes-
thesia is selected because it is the most rapidly acting and 
reliable anesthetic technique to allow cesarean delivery. 
A Cochrane review of 16 studies comparing neuraxial 
blockade with general anesthesia in otherwise uncompli-
cated cesarean deliveries found that “no significant dif-
ference was seen in terms of neonatal Apgar scores of 6 
or less and of 4 or less at one and five minutes and need 
for neonatal resuscitation.”79 The authors concluded that 
there was no evidence to show that neuraxial anesthesia 
was superior to general anesthesia for neonatal outcome. 
The induction to delivery interval is not as important to 
neonatal outcome as the interval from uterine incision 
to delivery, when UBF may be compromised and fetal 
asphyxia may occur. A prolonged time from induction to 
delivery may result in a lightly anesthetized neonate but 
not an asphyxiated neonate. If excessive concentrations 
of volatile anesthetics are administered for extended peri-
ods, neonatal effects of these drugs, as evidenced by flac-
cidity, respiratory depression, and decreased tone, may be 
anticipated. Importantly, if neonatal depression is caused 
by the transfer of anesthetic drugs, the infant is merely 
anesthetized and should respond to simple treatment 
measures such as assisted ventilation of the lungs until 
the anesthetic is eliminated. Rapid improvement of the 
infant should be expected. If this does not occur, other 
causes of neonatal depression should be investigated. For 
these reasons, it is critical that clinicians experienced 
with neonatal ventilation are present at cesarean deliver-
ies under general anesthesia. A discussion of the opera-
tive and anesthetic plan by the neonatologist, obstetri-
cian, and anesthesia provider is crucial for optimizing the 
outcome of neonates in these situations.
ABNORMAL PRESENTATIONS AND 
MULTIPLE BIRTHS
Multiple Gestations
Around 3% of live births in the United States are from 
multiple gestation pregnancy, with 97% of these being 
twins. Multiple gestation pregnancies carry increased 
risks of preterm labor, hypertensive disorders of preg-
nancy, gestational diabetes, hyperemesis gravidarum, 
anemia, preterm premature rupture of membranes, intra-
uterine growth restriction, and intrauterine fetal demise. 
Approximately 50% of twin pregnancies result in pre-
term birth with threefold greater perinatal mortality than 
singleton pregnancies.80 The cesarean delivery rate for 
multiple gestation pregnancies is approximately 75%. 
Compared with planned vaginal delivery, a planned 
cesarean delivery does not decrease the risk of fetal or 
neonatal death.81 In most twin pregnancies, both fetuses 
are in the vertex (head down) position, although vaginal 
delivery can still be attempted when the second twin is 
breech. A discussion with the obstetrician and planning 
for a possible “breech extraction” is beneficial for all 
attempted twin vaginal deliveries regardless of position-
ing of each fetus. Additionally, an emergent cesarean 
delivery may be required if the second twin changes 
position after the first twin is delivered or if the second 
twin develops fetal bradycardia. Epidural placement 
should be strongly considered for women with twin 
gestation attempting vaginal delivery. Presence of an 
epidural catheter can facilitate delivery and extraction 
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
596
of the second twin. When the second twin is breech, 
epidural analgesia allows optimal analgesia and relaxa-
tion of the perineum during delivery of the head or if 
instrumented vaginal delivery is required to deliver the 
second twin. Administration of agents that provide rapid 
uterine relaxation (e.g., IV nitroglycerin) may be required 
to improve delivery conditions for the second twin and 
reduce the risk of head entrapment. Administration of 
a small volume of a more concentrated local anesthetic 
near delivery can optimize analgesia and potentially 
allow for rapid transition to neuraxial anesthesia for 
cesarean delivery in the event of head entrapment and/
or fetal bradycardia.
Abnormal Presentations
Breech Presentation
Singleton breech presentation at term is uncommon (3% 
to 4%). However, the majority of women with breech 
presentation have a planned cesarean delivery. Although 
breech vaginal delivery is possible, few centers in the 
United States offer singleton vaginal breech delivery. 
In addition, current evidence demonstrates possible 
short-term benefits in neonatal and maternal morbid-
ity from a planned cesarean delivery of a breech term 
fetus, although long-term benefits remain uncertain.82
As a result, obstetric guidelines are flexible with regard 
to vaginal breech delivery recommendations depending 
on patient desires and the obstetrician's level of experi-
ence. Women should undergo pelvimetry, an ultrasound 
to determine fetal weight, and counseling by the obste-
trician to review the risks of the procedure. Women 
attempting vaginal breech delivery should be encouraged 
to have an epidural placed during labor, as the anesthetic 
management and risks are similar to breech extraction of 
the second twin discussed earlier.
External cephalic version (ECV) is a procedure that 
involves rotating the fetus into a cephalic position 
via external palpation and pressure of the fetal parts. 
Ultrasound and fetal heart rate monitoring can help 
assess fetal distress during ECV. ECV has been shown 
to decrease the cesarean delivery rate.82 Terbutaline is 
a tocolytic that facilitates uterine relaxation and nearly 
doubles success rates for ECV.83 In a meta-analysis of 18 
RCTs, ECV under neuraxial anesthesia had significantly 
higher odds of decreased pain, improved satisfaction, 
and successful fetal version compared with control 
(OR = 2.59).84 Although neuraxial anesthesia is more 
likely to cause hypotension, the rates of nonreassuring 
fetal response and emergent cesarean delivery are not 
increased. Risks of ECV include placental abruption, fetal 
bradycardia, and rupture of membranes. Although these 
risks are low, ECV should be performed in a facility where 
cesarean delivery can occur and an anesthesia provider 
is immediately available in case an urgent or emergent 
cesarean delivery is needed.
Shoulder Dystocia
A shoulder dystocia is an obstetric emergency that occurs 
in up to 3% of vaginal deliveries. Diagnosis is made when 
expulsion of the infant after delivery of the fetal head is 
obstructed by the fetal shoulders within the maternal pel-
vis. Risk factors include macrosomia, maternal diabetes, 
history of dystocia, and instrumented delivery. The risks 
of postpartum hemorrhage (PPH) and fourth-degree lac-
eration are increased for deliveries complicated by shoul-
der dystocia. Upon diagnosis of shoulder dystocia, the 
obstetrician performs a set of maneuvers to deliver the 
infant. Cases of shoulder dystocia occurring for 7 min-
utes or longer have a significant increased risk of neona-
tal brain injury. The final maneuver (Zavanelli maneuver) 
in a failed delivery because of shoulder dystocia requires 
pushing the fetal head back into the pelvis and pro-
ceeding with emergent cesarean delivery. Fetal injuries 
and sequelae of shoulder dystocia are brachial plexus 
injury (Erb palsy), neurologic injury from asphyxia, and 
fractured clavicle or humerus. These neurologic injuries 
typically improve over time with roughly less than 10% 
resulting in permanent Erb palsy. The average perinatal 
mortality rate is estimated at 0.4% to 0.5% for deliveries 
complicated by shoulder dystocia.85
HYPERTENSIVE DISORDERS OF PREGNANCY
The clinical spectrum of hypertensive diseases during 
pregnancy has a significant impact on maternal and 
neonatal mortality and morbidity. Hypertensive dis-
orders in pregnancy are classified into four types: (1) 
preeclampsia-eclampsia, (2) chronic hypertension, (3) 
chronic hypertension with superimposed preeclampsia, 
and (4) gestational hypertension. Gestational hyperten-
sion is new-onset elevated blood pressure occurring after 
20 weeks’ gestation, most often near term and with the 
etiology unclear but with the need for increased surveil-
lance during pregnancy. If the elevated blood pressure 
persists through 12 weeks postpartum, the woman is con-
sidered to have chronic hypertension. Chronic hyperten-
sion is elevated blood pressures predating pregnancy or 
occurring before 20 weeks’ gestation. These women are 
at higher risk for developing superimposed preeclampsia.
Preeclampsia
Preeclampsia is a pregnancy-specific progressive disor-
der with multiorgan system involvement that affects 3% 
to 5% of all pregnancies.86 The greatest risk factors for 
developing preeclampsia include a history of preeclamp-
sia and chronic hypertension. Other risk factors include 
nulliparity, multigestation pregnancy, pregestational dia-
betes, systemic lupus erythematosus or antiphospholipid 
antibody syndrome, renal disease, body mass index 
greater than 30 kg/m2, maternal age <17 or >35 years, 
IV
Chapter 33 Obstetrics
597
and use of assisted reproductive therapy. Diagnostic cri-
teria are detailed in Boxes 33.2 and 33.3, which define 
preeclampsia into two distinct categories: (1) preeclamp-
sia and (2) preeclampsia with severe features. A subcat-
egory of severe preeclampsia is HELLP syndrome, which 
is a constellation of hemolysis, elevated liver enzymes, 
and low platelet count. Eclamptic seizures develop in 
less than 2% of patients with preeclampsia and less than 
Criteria for Preeclampsia With Severe Features
•Systolic blood pressure of 160 mm Hg or higher or
diastolic blood pressure of 110 mm Hg or higher on two 
occasions at least 4 hours apart (unless antihypertensive 
therapy is initiated before this time)
•Thrombocytopenia (platelet count <100 × 109/L)
•Impaired liver function: elevated transaminases twice
normal concentration or severe persistent right upper 
quadrant or epigastric pain unresponsive to medication
•Renal insufficiency (serum creatinine concentration greater
than 1.1 mg/dL or a doubling of the serum creatinine 
concentration in the absence of other renal disease)
•Pulmonary edema
•New-onset headache unresponsive to medications and
without other diagnoses
•Visual disturbances
Box 33.3
Preeclampsia With Severe Features
Adapted from Gestational Hypertension and Preeclampsia: ACOG 
Practice Bulletin, No. 222. Obstet Gynecol. 2020;135:e237–e260.
Criteria for Preeclampsia
Blood Pressure
•Greater than or equal to 140 mm Hg systolic or greater
than or equal to 90 mm Hg diastolic on two occasions 
at least 4 hours apart after 20 weeks of gestation in a 
woman with a previously normal blood pressure
•Greater than or equal to 160 mm Hg systolic or greater
than or equal to 110 mm Hg diastolic; hypertension can 
be confirmed within a short interval (minutes) to facilitate 
timely antihypertensive therapy
AND new onset of ≥1 of the following:
•Proteinuria
–
≥300 mg in 24-hour urine collection
–
Protein/creatinine ratio ≥0.3
–
Dipstick reading of 2+ (used if no other methods 
available)
•Thrombocytopenia (platelet count <109/L)
•Renal insufficiency (creatinine concentrations greater
than 1.1 mg/d: or a doubling of the serum creatinine)
•Impaired liver function (elevated transaminases twice
normal concentration)
•Pulmonary edema
•Headache (unresponsive to medication) or visual
disturbances
Box 33.2
Preeclampsia Definitions
Adapted from Gestational Hypertension and Preeclampsia: ACOG 
Practice Bulletin, No. 222. Obstet Gynecol. 2020;135:e237–e260.
4% of patients with preeclampsia and severe features.87
Eclamptic seizures may take place before, during, or after 
labor and delivery. Although symptoms of headache and 
visual disturbances frequently occur before eclampsia, 
one in five patients with eclampsia report no symptoms 
before the seizure.88 Interestingly, many women (20% to 
38%) do not have typical signs of preeclampsia (hyper-
tension or proteinuria) before the seizure episode.87
Several mechanisms have been proposed in the develop-
ment of preeclampsia, including chronic ischemia of the 
uteroplacental unit, maternal immune reactions, genetic 
factors, increased trophoblast apoptosis, and angiogenic 
factor imbalances.87 Pathophysiology may include failure 
of spiral artery remodeling, which creates decreased pla-
cental perfusion, and subsequent placental hypoxia and 
oxidative stress.86 Ultimately this damages placental villi 
and increases maternal angiogenic protein levels.
Definitive treatment of preeclampsia is with delivery. 
The timing of delivery versus expectant management is 
based on disease severity and gestational age.87 In patients 
with stable preeclampsia without severe features, the preg-
nancy is typically monitored until 37 weeks’ gestation. 
Delivery is recommended if severe features develop after 
34 weeks’ gestation. Before 34 weeks’ gestation, expectant 
management may be considered with stable maternal and 
fetal condition, including controlled maternal blood pres-
sure. Administration of corticosteroids is recommended to 
assist with fetal lung maturity if delivery before 34 weeks’ 
gestation is anticipated. It is critical for the anesthesia 
provider to be aware of these patients and their clinical 
course, as they can rapidly deteriorate and require urgent 
or emergent delivery. Hypertensive disorders of pregnancy 
are associated with long-term biologic changes that con-
fer a significantly increased future risk of cardiovascular 
disease, including stroke and hypertension later in life.87,89
Intrapartum Management
Invasive monitoring is not typically required, and central 
venous access may increase risk without clear benefit. 
However, in cases of preeclampsia with severe hyperten-
sion refractory to primary antihypertensive therapies, 
an invasive pressure line and/or central venous catheter 
may be beneficial. Judicious volume expansion before 
initiation of neuraxial blockade is generally supported, 
as patients with preeclampsia have low plasma oncotic 
pressure yet are prone to fluid overload, with potential 
for pulmonary complications.
Magnesium
Administration of magnesium sulfate to patients with 
preeclampsia decreases eclampsia rates by more than half 
and reduces the risk of placental abruption.90 The risk 
of eclamptic seizures in patients with severe features is 
fourfold greater than in patients without severe features. 
Guidelines recommend magnesium sulfate for prevention 
of seizures in women with gestational hypertension with 
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
598
severe features and preeclampsia with severe features or 
eclampsia.87 However, these guidelines do not recom-
mend routine magnesium prophylaxis for patients with 
gestational hypertension or preeclampsia without severe 
features.87 91 Magnesium can significantly increase the 
efficacy and duration of both depolarizing and non-
depolarizing muscle relaxants. Magnesium sulfate also 
increases uterine and smooth muscle relaxation.
Magnesium sulfate is typically administered via a 4- to 
6-gram IV loading dose over 20 to 30 minutes, followed 
by a continuous infusion of 1 g/hr until 12 to 24 hours 
after delivery. For women who require cesarean delivery 
before the onset of labor, the magnesium infusion should 
ideally begin before surgery and continue during surgery 
and for 24 hours after delivery.87 For women who deliver 
vaginally, the infusion should also continue for 24 hours 
after delivery. The therapeutic range is 6 to 8 mg/dL for 
seizure prophylaxis. Magnesium toxicity can be evalu-
ated by deep tendon reflexes, respiratory assessment, 
and neurologic status. At magnesium levels of 10 mg/dL, 
loss of deep tendon reflexes occurs; electrocardiogram 
(ECG) findings include prolonged P-R interval and wid-
ened QRS. Respiratory arrest occurs at magnesium levels 
of 15 to 20 mg/dL, with asystole occurring at levels 
greater than 20 to 25 mg/dL. Although half of the dietary 
intake of magnesium is absorbed in the intestine, regula-
tion of serum magnesium is managed primarily by the 
kidney. Patients with oliguria and worsening renal func-
tion can rapidly develop magnesium toxicity. In addi-
tion to monitoring for signs of toxicity, determination 
of magnesium levels in patients with renal dysfunction 
should be considered.87 If toxicity develops, IV calcium 
chloride (500 mg) or calcium gluconate (1 g) (which act 
as magnesium antagonists) should be administered, in 
addition to IV furosemide to promote urinary excretion 
of magnesium.
Antihypertensives
Current guidelines recommend expeditiously treating 
severe hypertension for prevention of heart failure 
or myocardial ischemia, renal injury, and/or intracer-
ebral hemorrhage/ischemia.92 Antihypertensive treatment 
should be started expeditiously for patients with acute 
severe hypertension (systolic blood pressure ≥160 mm Hg 
or diastolic blood pressure ≥110 mm Hg). First-line agents 
include IV labetalol or hydralazine and oral nifedipine. 
If blood pressure remains unresponsive, infusions of 
rapid-acting vasoactive medications (e.g., nicardipine) 
with placement of invasive arterial monitoring may be 
necessary.87 Maternal blood pressure and fetal heart rate 
must be monitored closely during initiation of antihy-
pertensive therapy. The therapeutic blood pressure goal is 
only 10% to 20% below the severe thresholds described 
earlier (i.e., goal blood pressure approximately 130/85) in 
order to maintain appropriate uteroplacental perfusion 
and prevent fetal compromise.
Neuraxial Analgesia Considerations
The ACOG considers neuraxial analgesia the preferred 
analgesic method for labor or cesarean delivery in patients 
with preeclampsia.87 However, care to maintain appropri-
ate maternal blood pressure and cardiac output is needed 
to prevent a reduction in uteroplacental perfusion pressure 
(see “Complications of Neuraxial Anesthesia”). Neuraxial 
analgesia offers the advantage of avoiding general anes-
thesia for urgent or emergent cesarean delivery in the 
setting of increased airway edema and risk for stroke with 
sympathetic response to direct laryngoscopy. For women 
with preeclampsia, a thorough evaluation of the patient's 
current status should be performed, including hemoglobin 
and platelet levels, before placement of any neuraxial 
block, given the potential for thrombocytopenia. A 2021 
consensus statement from the Society for Obstetric Anes-
thesia and Perinatology addressed the use of neuraxial 
procedures in obstetric patients with thrombocytopenia. 
The statement concluded that the risk of epidural hema-
toma from neuraxial anesthesia with a platelet count 
≥70 × 109/L is likely to be very low, assuming no additional 
contraindications to neuraxial anesthesia exist.53 Addition-
ally, this consensus statement recommends evaluating a 
coagulation panel in the setting of preeclampsia and a 
platelet count less than 100 × 109/L. Regardless, the deci-
sion to place a neuraxial block should be based on a frank 
discussion with the patient of risk versus benefit, in addi-
tion to other anesthetic and analgesic alternatives. If an 
epidural is placed in a patient with thrombocytopenia, cau-
tion should be taken before epidural catheter removal, as 
platelet levels often decrease further after delivery. Bleed-
ing time has no demonstrated value in this clinical context.
The anesthesia provider must be prepared for urgent 
delivery, given the potential for placental insufficiency 
with preeclampsia. Exaggerated upper airway edema is 
frequent in patients with preeclampsia, which increases 
the risk of difficult intubation if an emergent general 
anesthetic is required. Tracheal intubation may produce 
further hypertension during laryngoscopy; a small dose 
of nitroglycerine (2.0 mcg/kg) or esmolol (1.5 mg/kg) can 
attenuate this response when administered with propofol 
for induction.93 If there is concern for a difficult airway, 
appropriate alternatives such as video laryngoscopy 
with the initial intubation attempt should be considered 
(also see Chapter 16). Postpartum uterine atony is com-
mon with magnesium sulfate infusion and is accentu-
ated if inhaled anesthetic is used for maintenance of 
general anesthesia. Pitocin and prostaglandins are safe 
for uterine atony, but methylergonovine (Methergine) is 
contraindicated, as it can precipitate hypertensive crisis.
HEMORRHAGE IN PREGNANT WOMEN
Hemorrhage in pregnant women remains a significant 
cause of maternal mortality. Placenta previa, abruptio 
IV
Chapter 33 Obstetrics
599
placentae, and uterine rupture are the major causes of 
bleeding and uncontrolled hemorrhage during the third 
trimester and labor. PPH occurs in approximately 3% of 
deliveries in the United States and is most commonly 
the result of uterine atony. Common problems identi-
fied with obstetric hemorrhages leading to significant 
morbidity and mortality include (1) poor quantification 
of blood loss, (2) unrecognized associated risk factors for 
hemorrhage, (3) delayed initiation of treatment, and (4) 
inadequate readiness and resources including insufficient 
transfusion of appropriate blood products in a massive 
hemorrhage situation.94
Placenta Previa
Placenta previa results from an abnormal uterine implan-
tation of the placenta in front of the presenting fetus. The 
incidence is approximately 1 in 200 pregnancies. Risk 
factors include advanced age, multiparity, assisted repro-
ductive techniques, prior hysterotomy, and prior placenta 
previa. Historically, the classic presentation of placenta 
previa is painless vaginal bleeding that occurs preterm in 
the third trimester. Most previas are now diagnosed ante-
natally by ultrasonography. A trial of labor is acceptable 
if the placental edge is farther than 2 cm from the inter-
nal os, but cesarean delivery is required if the placenta 
is within 1 cm of the cervical os.95 For patients whose 
placentas lie between 1 and 2 cm from the cervical os or 
who have a shortened cervix or thickened placental edge, 
the optimal management remains uncertain, and delivery 
management is individualized based on current circum-
stances.95 Neuraxial anesthesia is an appropriate choice 
if there is no active bleeding or hypovolemia. The use 
of two large-bore IV lines with fluid warmers and avail-
ability of invasive monitoring is suggested with cesarean 
delivery, given the increased risk of placenta accreta with 
known previa (see “Placenta Accreta Spectrum” below).
Massive Hemorrhage
For emergency situations with active hemorrhage, gen-
eral anesthesia may be required. Ketamine (1 to 1.5 
mg/kg IV) or etomidate (0.3 mg/kg) are useful drugs 
for induction of anesthesia. If a massive hemorrhage 
occurs, activation of a massive transfusion protocol 
with availability of fresh frozen plasma, platelets, and 
fibrinogen in addition to packed red blood cells may 
be needed for transfusion in ratios similar to a trauma 
resuscitation, as a dilutional coagulopathy can result in 
such a situation96 (also see Chapter 43). In these cases 
of uncontrolled rapid hemorrhage, point-of-care testing 
can significantly assist in determining appropriate trans-
fusion components. However, there may be situations 
of massive hemorrhage when there is not time to wait 
for the return of laboratory studies, and transfusion of 
appropriate blood products should be based on clinical 
judgement, with adjustments as laboratory information 
becomes available. Use of tranexamic acid (1 to 2 g) in 
PPH reduces the risk of death from exsanguination, with 
the most treatment benefit if it is administered within 3 
hours of delivery.97 Neonates delivered from pregnant 
women in hemorrhagic shock are likely to be acidotic and 
hypovolemic and may need resuscitation. If hemorrhage 
is not controlled with standard measures, the obstetric 
team can consider (1) uterine artery ligation, (2) B-Lynch 
sutures, (3) an intrauterine balloon or vaccum device, (4) 
use of arterial embolization by interventional radiology 
(if the patient is stable for transport), or (5) hysterectomy.
Abruptio Placentae
Placental abruption is separation of the placenta after 20 
weeks of gestation but before delivery. The incidence is 
approximately 0.4 to 1 in 100 pregnancies. Risk factors 
include advanced age, hypertension, trauma, smoking, 
cocaine use, chorioamnionitis, premature rupture of mem-
branes, previa, and history of prior abruption. Placental 
abruption is associated with a greater risk of perinatal 
mortality; maternal mortality; and maternal morbidity, 
including hemorrhage, coagulopathy, thromboembolism, 
and acute kidney injury.98 When the separation involves 
only the placental margin, the escaping blood can appear 
as vaginal bleeding often associated with uterine tender-
ness. Alternatively, large volumes of blood loss (>2 L) can 
remain entirely concealed in the uterus. Chronic bleeding 
and clotting between the uterus and placenta can cause 
maternal disseminated intravascular coagulopathy (DIC). 
Ultrasound is specific if abruption is noted, but has poor 
sensitivity, and a normal examination does not exclude 
abruption. Definitive treatment of abruptio placentae is 
to deliver the pregnancy. The anesthetic plan is based 
on both the delivery urgency and the abruption sever-
ity. Epidural analgesia can be used for labor and vaginal 
delivery if there are no signs of maternal hypovolemia, 
active bleeding, clotting abnormalities, or fetal distress. 
However, severe blood loss necessitates emergency cesar-
ean delivery and the use of a general anesthetic similar to 
that described for massive hemorrhage. It is predictable 
that neonates born under these circumstances will be 
acidotic and hypovolemic.
Uterine Rupture
Uterine rupture is poorly defined and includes cases 
ranging from scar dehiscence to those with catastrophic 
uterine wall rupture. In addition to prior uterine scar, 
uterine rupture is associated with rapid spontaneous 
delivery, motor vehicle trauma, trauma from instru-
mented vaginal delivery, large or malpositioned fetus, 
and excessive oxytocin stimulation. After a single prior 
cesarean delivery with a low transverse incision, a trial 
of labor after cesarean (TOLAC) is associated with a ≤1% 
incidence of uterine rupture.99 Spontaneous rupture of an 
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
600
unscarred uterus is far more rare. The clinical presenta-
tion is variable with no finding being 100% sensitive. 
Signs and symptoms may include fetal bradycardia, 
persistent abdominal pain, vaginal bleeding, cessation of 
contractions, loss of station, maternal hypotension, and 
breakthrough pain with epidural analgesia.100 Persistent 
abdominal pain is not always a diagnostic finding but 
has a high correlation, and an abnormal FHR pattern is 
often the first and most common sign associated with 
uterine rupture. Neuraxial labor analgesia may be used 
as part of TOLAC and should not be expected to mask 
signs and symptoms of uterine rupture. Immediate evalu-
ation, aggressive resuscitation, and general anesthesia 
for emergent cesarean delivery are normally required for 
management. Often uterine repair by the obstetrician can 
occur after an emergent cesarean delivery if a minor scar 
dehiscence is present, but hysterectomy is needed for 
most cases of uterine wall rupture of an unscarred uterus. 
When vaginal birth is planned after a previous cesarean 
delivery, it is recommended that “TOLAC be attempted in 
facilities that can provide cesarean delivery for situations 
that are immediate threats to the life of the woman or 
fetus”99 should a uterine rupture occur. Appropriate staff-
ing considerations include obstetric, anesthesia, pediatric, 
and nursing personnel.
Retained Placenta
Retained placenta, which occurs in about 2% to 3% of all 
vaginal deliveries, usually necessitates manual explora-
tion of the uterus. If epidural analgesia was not used for 
vaginal delivery, manual removal of the placenta may be 
initially attempted with analgesia provided by IV admin-
istration of opioids. If uterine relaxation is necessary for 
placenta removal, boluses of IV nitroglycerin (200 mcg) 
are normally effective but have not been shown to reduce 
the need for manual uterine extraction. Additionally, 
relocation to the operating room and placement of neu-
raxial analgesia may be beneficial for thorough evalua-
tion. Rarely, induction of general anesthesia with tracheal 
intubation and administration of a volatile anesthetic to 
provide uterine relaxation and anesthesia will be neces-
sary. An effort to obtain accurate blood loss is critical in 
determining an appropriate anesthetic and resuscitation 
plan, as retained placenta is significantly associated with 
an increased risk of PPH and need for transfusion.
Uterine Atony
Uterine atony is a common cause of PPH and can occur 
immediately after delivery or several hours later. Risk 
factors for postpartum uterine atony include retained 
products, long labor, high parity, macrosomia, polyhy-
dramnios, excessive oxytocin augmentation, and chorio-
amnionitis. Active management of the third stage using 
oxytocin administration, uterine massage, and umbilical 
cord traction are recommended to reduce PPH risk with-
out increasing the risk of retained placenta.101 The amount 
of oxytocin used to prevent PPH is highly variable and 
includes continuous infusions of 20 to 40 IU diluted in 
up to 1 L of crystalloid administered after delivery as a 
“wide open” IV infusion in addition to protocols using 
algorithms that bolus 3 IU at a time in an effort to reduce 
the overall oxytocin dose required to prevent PPH. No 
differences in the uterine tone, maternal hemodynamics, 
side effects, or blood loss were observed between these 
different methods of oxytocin dosing.102 Whereas a dilute 
solution of oxytocin typically exerts minimal cardiovas-
cular effects, rapid IV injection of even 3 to 5 IU is associ-
ated with tachycardia, vasodilation, and hypotension and 
should be administered over 30 seconds or more.102
Periodic communication between anesthesia provid-
ers and the obstetric team is key in reducing PPH by 
progressing rapidly to additional types of uterotonics if 
oxytocin is not effective. Methylergonovine (0.2 mg IM) is 
an ergot derivative administered to improve uterine tone. 
Because of the significant vasoconstriction, it is relatively 
contraindicated in patients with preeclampsia and patients 
with pulmonary hypertension or ischemic cardiac disease. 
The prostaglandin F2α (0.25 mg IM) is another uterotonic 
used to treat refractory atony. It is associated with nau-
sea, tachycardia, pulmonary hypertension, desaturation, 
and bronchospasm. It should be avoided in patients 
with asthma and pulmonary hypertension. Prostaglandin 
E1 or misoprostol (600 mcg oral/sublingual/rectal) can 
also be effective in treating atony. It has no significant 
cardiac effects, but may cause hyperthermia. If PPH is 
not controlled with these initial methods, more invasive 
techniques and blood product transfusion will be urgently 
needed, as described earlier in “Massive Hemorrhage.”
Placenta Accreta Spectrum
Placenta accreta spectrum (PAS) refers to the range of 
pathologic adherence and growth of the placenta into the 
uterine wall. Placental implantation beyond the endo-
metrium gives rise to (1) placenta accreta vera, which is 
implantation and adherence onto the myometrium; (2) 
placenta increta, which is implantation into the myo-
metrium; and (3) placenta percreta, which is penetration 
through the full thickness of the myometrium (Fig. 33.7). 
With placenta percreta, implantations may occur onto 
bowel, bladder, ovaries, or other pelvic organs and ves-
sels. PAS can produce a markedly adherent placenta that 
cannot be removed without tearing the myometrium and 
producing a life-threatening severe hemorrhage.
The incidence of PAS is between 0.8 and 3.1 per 
1000 pregnancies, and it is the most common cause of 
peripartum hysterectomy in the United States.103 Ultra-
sonography diagnosis of placenta accreta has a positive 
predictive value of only 68% and a diagnostic sensitiv-
ity of 55%, with a negative predictive value of 98% and 
IV
Chapter 33 Obstetrics
601
specificity of 88%.104 Consequently, anesthetic manage-
ment should not be exclusively guided by antepartum 
ultrasound results. These abnormal placental implanta-
tions occur more frequently in association with placenta 
previa. In patients with placenta previa and no previous 
cesarean delivery, the incidence of accreta is approxi-
mately 3%. However, the risk of PAS associated with 
placenta previa increases with the number of previous 
cesarean deliveries. With one previous uterine incision, 
the incidence of placenta accreta has been reported to 
be 11%; with two previous uterine incisions, the rate is 
40%; and with three or more prior uterine incisions, the 
incidence rises to above 60%.105
In patients with PAS, massive and rapid intraoperative 
blood loss is common, with reported median blood loss 
ranging from 2000 to 5000 mL, and in some, substan-
tially more. Coagulopathies develop in approximately 
20% of these patients, and a significant portion require 
hysterectomies. Placenta accreta is not reliably diag-
nosed until the uterus is open. The anesthesia provider 
must keep this possibility in mind and be prepared to 
treat sudden massive blood loss. Choice of anesthesia 
technique (neuraxial, general, or neuraxial with conver-
sion to general) may often be individualized and deter-
mined by patient comorbidities, degree and certainty of 
PAS, specific patient preferences, resource availability, 
Myometrium
Serosa
Placenta
accreta
Placenta increta
Placenta
percreta
Fig. 33.7 Classification of Placenta Accreta Spectrum Based 
on the Degree of Penetration of Myometrium. (From Kamani 
AAS, Gambling DR, Chritlaw J, et al. Anesthetic management of 
patients with placenta accreta. Can J Anaesth. 1987;34:613–
617, with permission.)
and provider familiarity and preference.106 For patients 
with a preoperative diagnosis of PAS or high suspicion, 
preparations for massive hemorrhage are needed as noted 
earlier (e.g., large-bore IV access, invasive monitoring, 
blood products readily available). Use of intraoperative 
cell salvage and tranexamic acid administration should 
be considered for intraoperative management of PAS.106
AMNIOTIC FLUID EMBOLISM
The incidence of amniotic fluid embolism (AFE) is cur-
rently estimated between 1 and 6 cases per 100,000 
deliveries.58,107 Clinical features of AFE include the sud-
den onset of maternal hypotension, respiratory distress, 
altered mental status, DIC, cardiopulmonary arrest, and 
absence of fever.108 AFE typically occurs during labor 
or within 30 minutes of delivery of the placenta. In 
rare instances, AFE may occur during the first or sec-
ond trimester of pregnancy, at the time of pregnancy 
termination, or amniocentesis.109 The exact cause and 
pathogenesis of AFE remain uncertain, but it is believed 
to be a type of hypersensitivity reaction with activation 
of proinflammatory mediators to some component of the 
amniotic fluid.
The diagnosis of AFE remains a clinical diagnosis of 
exclusion. Although aspirating amniotic fluid debris such 
as fetal squamous cells from the maternal pulmonary 
circulation was once considered diagnostic, it is now well 
established that fetal cells are present in the circulation 
of all pregnant women. There is no specific diagnostic 
laboratory or postmortem finding to either confirm or 
refute the diagnosis of AFE.109,110 Conditions that mimic 
AFE include venous air embolism, pulmonary thrombo-
embolism, acute hemorrhage (i.e., uterine rupture, atony, 
abruption, accreta), peripartum cardiomyopathy, sepsis, 
anaphylaxis, local anesthetic toxicity, high spinal, and 
aspiration of gastric contents. AFE should be considered 
in the differential diagnosis of any sudden cardiores-
piratory collapse of a laboring or recently delivered 
patient, while working to rule out other pathologies. 
Point-of-care echocardiography is a valuable aid in both 
diagnosis and management of any patient having acute 
cardiovascular collapse (also see Chapter 21). Patients 
with AFE can have echocardiography findings of right 
ventricular failure, including a D-shaped septum, acute 
pulmonary hypertension, and right ventricular systolic 
dysfunction.111
Treatment of AFE is supportive and directed toward 
cardiopulmonary resuscitation with multidisciplinary 
care, inotropic support, determination of clotting status, 
possible transfusion, and correction of hypoxemia or 
postpartum uterine atony. Rapid onset of coagulopathy 
may occur, resulting in life-threatening hemorrhage. Tra-
cheal intubation and mechanical ventilation are almost 
always required.109,110
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
602
ANESTHESIA FOR NONOBSTETRIC 
SURGERY DURING PREGNANCY
The overall incidence of nonobstetric surgery during 
pregnancy is 1% to 2%, with trauma, appendicitis, 
cholecystitis, and malignancy being the most frequent 
indications.112 In addition to management of hemody-
namics and ventilation, taking into account the physi-
ologic changes of pregnancy, anesthesia management 
objectives for pregnant women undergoing nonobstetric 
surgery include prevention of intrauterine fetal hypoxia 
and acidosis. Early in pregnancy, concerns include risk 
for spontaneous abortion with surgical procedures; later 
in pregnancy, concerns include premature labor associ-
ated with surgery. Elective procedures should always 
be delayed until after pregnancy. If surgery is required, 
the second trimester is often preferred. Regardless of 
trimester, a pregnant woman should never be denied 
an indicated surgical procedure or have that surgery 
delayed because this can adversely affect the health 
of the pregnant woman and fetus.113 A retrospective 
cohort study of women who had nonobstetric general 
surgery during pregnancy and a matched cohort of 
women who were not pregnant noted that there were 
more emergency operations in the pregnant patient 
group, but found no difference in rates of mortality or 
morbidity.114 Laparoscopic surgery is considered as safe 
as open approaches during any trimester, and the indi-
cations for its use are the same as nonpregnant patients. 
Most investigations comparing laparoscopic with open 
techniques note no significant difference in fetal or 
maternal outcomes. If a laparoscopic technique is used, 
in addition to considerations discussed later, low pneu-
moperitoneum pressures (10 to 15 mm Hg) should be 
used if feasible.
For operations during pregnancy, the anesthesia 
provider should (1) determine an anesthetic plan that 
optimizes the maternal and fetal condition; (2) consult 
an obstetrician and perinatologist in order to optimize 
plans for unexpected events; (3) determine a plan for 
fetal monitoring, if appropriate; and (4) discuss a plan 
in the event of a cesarean delivery or maternal arrest. 
When nonobstetric surgery is planned, the “surgery 
should be done at an institution with neonatal and pedi-
atric services; an obstetric care provider with cesarean 
delivery privileges should be readily available; and a 
qualified individual should be readily available to inter-
pret fetal heart rate patterns.”113 There is no evidence 
that a regional anesthetic technique is better than using 
general anesthesia for nonobstetric surgery during preg-
nancy, and there is some retrospective evidence that use 
of regional techniques for abdominal surgery may result 
in higher rates of preterm labor compared with general 
anesthesia.115 Regional techniques should only be chosen 
over general anesthesia when typically used for a given 
surgery.
Avoidance of Teratogenic Drugs
There is always the possibility that anesthesia will be 
unknowingly administered to women with an early 
undiagnosed pregnancy. For this reason, ASA guidelines 
recommend that “pregnancy testing may be offered to 
female patients of childbearing age and for whom the 
result would alter the patient's management.”116 Routine 
pregnancy testing before elective surgery for women 
of childbearing age remains controversial. Most drugs, 
including anesthetics, have been demonstrated to be 
teratogenic in at least one animal species. In humans, 
the critical period of organogenesis is between 15 and 
56 days of gestation. No currently used anesthetic 
agents have been shown to have any teratogenic effects 
in humans when using standard concentrations at any 
gestational age,113 with the exception of cocaine. Neu-
rodegeneration and widespread apoptosis after exposure 
to anesthetics has been clearly established in develop-
ing animals, and a few studies demonstrate cognitive 
impairment in adult animals after neonatal anesthetic 
exposure. No specific anesthetic agent is known to be 
safer than another. The FDA published a warning in 2016 
that “repeated or lengthy use of general anesthetic and 
sedation drugs during surgeries or procedures in children 
younger than three years or in pregnant women during 
the third trimester may affect the development of chil-
dren's brains.”117 This warning is based on concern that 
anesthetic or sedative drugs that bind to GABA or NMDA 
receptors could result in long-term effects on children's 
learning and behavior. Despite this warning, “there is 
no evidence that in utero human exposure to anesthetic 
or sedative drugs has any effect on the developing fetal 
brain”113 (also see Chapter 12).
Avoidance of Intrauterine Fetal Hypoxia 
and Acidosis
Avoidance of decreased UBF and oxygenation is critical 
to fetal well-being, as both hypercapnia and hypocapnia 
result in reduced UBF and fetal acidosis. The devel-
opment of intrauterine fetal hypoxia and acidosis is 
minimized by avoiding maternal hypotension with left 
uterine displacement after mid-gestation and by pre-
venting arterial hypoxemia and excessive changes in 
Paco2. High maternal inspired concentrations of oxygen 
do not increase the risk for in utero retrolental fibro-
plasia (retinopathy) because the oxygen consumption 
of the placenta plus the distribution of maternal and 
fetal blood flow in the placenta prevent fetal Pao2 from 
exceeding 60 mm Hg, even if maternal Pao2 exceeds 
500 mm Hg.13
FHR monitoring via Doppler is possible at 16 to 18 
weeks gestational age, but the utility of FHR variability 
as a marker of well-being is not established until 25 to 
27 weeks of gestation. If the fetus is considered previable, 
IV
Chapter 33 Obstetrics
603
preprocedure and postprocedure FHR assessment is gen-
erally considered sufficient. Regardless of fetal viability, 
ACOG and ASA state that the “decision to use fetal moni-
toring should be individualized and, if used, should be 
based on gestational age, type of surgery, and facilities 
available.”113 The greatest value of fetal monitoring is that 
by displaying fetal compromise, it allows further optimi-
zation of the maternal and fetal condition. Currently there 
is no evidence for the efficacy of FHR monitoring. In 
addition, interpretation is difficult because placement and 
signal acquisition may be challenging, a trained person 
is needed for FHR interpretation, and most anesthetics 
reduce FHR variability.
Prevention of Preterm Labor
The underlying pathology requiring surgery, and not 
the anesthetic technique, has been associated with an 
increased risk for preterm delivery. Intraabdominal pro-
cedures have a greater risk than minor peripheral pro-
cedures. After successful completion of surgery, both the 
FHR and maternal uterine activity should be monitored. 
Preterm labor can be treated with tocolytics (e.g., nifedi-
pine or indomethacin) in consult with an obstetrician. 
Although magnesium sulfate does not demonstrate effi-
cacy as a tocolytic, in situations where there is concern 
for preterm delivery, administration of magnesium sul-
fate can reduce the risk of cerebral palsy.118 In addition, 
maternal corticosteroid administration is recommended 
for concern of significantly preterm delivery to decrease 
neonatal respiratory morbidity.118 Postoperative analge-
sics can alter the perception of contractions, stressing the 
need for external monitoring.
Management of Anesthesia
Before proceeding, a plan for fetal monitoring, potential 
maternal arrest, and implications of an urgent cesarean 
delivery should be discussed with the surgeon, an obste-
trician, and a perinatologist. When appropriate, neuraxial 
anesthetic techniques should be considered, given appro-
priate provider experience and circumstance, as they limit 
fetal drug exposure and maternal risks associated with 
general anesthesia. When a general anesthetic is chosen, 
aspiration prophylaxis and left uterine displacement 
should be used. Induction technique should be similar 
to that for cesarean delivery with general anesthesia 
previously discussed. Eucarbia should be maintained (30 
mm Hg ETco2), in addition to adequate uterine perfu-
sion with fluids and appropriate vasopressor use such 
as phenylephrine. Regardless of the anesthetic technique 
selected, inspired oxygen concentration should be 50% 
or greater. Postoperative issues to address include deep 
venous thrombosis prophylaxis, FHR and uterine activ-
ity monitoring for at least 24 hours, and postoperative 
analgesia plan.
DIAGNOSIS AND MANAGEMENT OF 
FETAL DISTRESS
Overview
Intrapartum fetal monitoring evolved with the goal to 
identify fetal hypoxia during labor and allow clinicians 
to intervene before acidosis and long-term fetal damage 
occur. The fetal brain responds to peripheral and central 
stimuli via chemoreceptors, baroreceptors, and direct 
effects of metabolic changes within the CNS, which ulti-
mately affect FHR. FHR monitoring was developed as a 
basic, nonspecific method of tracking fetal oxygenation 
and distress. Excellent external FHR monitors are availa-
ble, but it is often necessary to apply an internal fetal scalp 
electrode to obtain accurate continuous FHR monitoring.
Key Evaluation Components
The assessment of FHR interpretation involves evaluation 
of (1) uterine contractions, (2) baseline FHR, (3) baseline 
FHR variability, (4) presence of accelerations, (5) periodic 
or episodic decelerations, and (6) changes or trends of 
FHR patterns over time.119
Uterine Contractions
Uterine contractions can be monitored externally or 
internally. External monitors only convey contraction 
frequency, but internal monitoring allows for both fre-
quency and measurement of intrauterine pressure (in 
Montevideo units). Uterine activity and definitions are 
detailed in Box 33.4. Uterine contractions can decrease 
placental perfusion and oxygen delivery via constric-
tion of the spiral arteries. If a tonic contraction or period 
of tachysystole occurs during labor, treatment with 
•Normal: ≤5 contractions in 10 minutes, averaged over a
30-minute window
•Tachysystole: >5 contractions in 10 minutes, averaged
over a 30-minute window
•Characteristics of uterine contractions: tachysystole
should be always qualified as to presence or absence of 
associated FHR decelerations.
–
Tachysystole applies to either spontaneous or 
stimulated labor. The clinical response to tachysystole 
may differ depending on whether contractions are 
spontaneous or stimulated.
–
Hyperstimulation and hypercontractility are not 
defined and should be abandoned.
Box 33.4
Uterine Activity Terminology
Data from Macones GA, Hankins GD, Spong CY, et al. The 2008 
National Institute of Child Health and Human Development workshop 
report on electronic fetal monitoring: Update on definitions, 
interpretation, and research guidelines. J Obstet Gynecol Neonatal 
Nurs. 2008;37(5):510–515.
FHR, Fetal heart rate.
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
604
subcutaneous terbutaline or IV nitroglycerin can briefly 
relax the uterus and restore fetal perfusion.
Baseline FHR
Baseline FHR is determined by approximating the mean 
FHR rounded to increments of 5 bpm during a 10-minute 
window, excluding accelerations, decelerations, and peri-
ods of marked FHR variability (change >25 bpm). Normal 
baseline FHR ranges from 110 to 160 bpm; fetal brady-
cardia is defined as FHR <110 bpm; and fetal tachycardia 
is defined as FHR >160 bpm.
Variability
Baseline variability is also determined by examining 
fluctuations that are irregular in amplitude and frequency 
during a 10-minute window, excluding accelerations and 
decelerations. Variability is classified as follows: absent 
FHR variability: amplitude range undetectable; minimal 
FHR variability: amplitude range greater than undetect-
able and ≤5 bpm; moderate FHR variability: amplitude 
range 6 to 25 bpm; and marked FHR variability: ampli-
tude range >25 bpm.
Accelerations
An acceleration is an abrupt increase in FHR defined 
as an increase from the acceleration onset to the peak 
in >30 seconds. In addition, the peak must be ≥15 bpm 
and last ≥15 seconds from the onset to return. Before 32 
weeks of gestation, accelerations are defined as having a 
peak ≥10 bpm and a duration of ≥10 seconds.
Decelerations
Decelerations are classified as variable or late based on 
specific criteria (Fig. 33.8). A prolonged deceleration 
is present when there is a visually apparent decrease 
in the FHR from the baseline that is ≥15 bpm, lasting 
≥2 minutes.
Late decelerations are a result of uteroplacental insuf-
ficiency causing relative fetal brain hypoxia during a 
contraction. The change results in sympathetic response 
and increased peripheral vascular resistance, elevating 
the fetal blood pressure, which is detected by the fetal 
baroreceptors and results in a decrease in the FHR. This 
response is termed a “reflex” late deceleration. A second 
type of late deceleration is caused by myocardial depres-
sion in the presence of worsening hypoxia. A moderate 
drop in FHR indicates some uteroplacental insufficiency; 
however, a more severe drop in FHR can indicate near 
total insufficiency. Although many texts associate early 
deceleration with head compression, this remains contro-
versial, as early deceleration may reflect vagal activity 
from mild hypoxia that mirrors the uterine contraction.120
Early decelerations are typically <20 bpm below baseline 
and though considered benign, might evolve into a more 
typical late deceleration. Variable decelerations are gen-
erally synonymous with umbilical cord compression. An 
ominous sinusoidal FHR pattern is defined as having a 
smooth sine wave–like pattern with a cycle frequency 
of 3 to 5/min that persists for ≥20 minutes and can be 
associated with placental abruption.119
Minimal to undetectable FHR variability in the pres-
ence of decelerations is associated with fetal acidemia. 
Severe decelerations (<70 bpm for >60 sec) are associated 
with fetal acidemia and are extremely ominous with the 
absence of variability.121
The FHR tracing is a nonspecific assessment of fetal 
acidosis and should be interpreted over time in relation 
to the clinical context and fetal and maternal factors. A 
normal fetus will experience episodes of hypoxia during 
labor and tolerate these periods without long-term neu-
rologic sequelae.
FHR Categories
A three-tiered FHR classification system is currently used 
for a more general fetal assessment (Box 33.5).122 An FHR 
classification may move between categories throughout 
the labor course. A category I FHR tracing is considered 
normal and predicts a normal fetal acid–base state at the 
time of assessment; no specific intervention is necessary. 
To qualify as category 1, all of the following criteria 
must be present: (1) baseline FHR of 110 to 160 bpm, (2) 
moderate baseline FHR variability, (3) no late or variable 
decelerations, (4) early decelerations may be present or 
absent, and (5) accelerations may be present or absent.
A category II FHR tracing is considered indeterminate 
and includes all tracings not in categories I or III. Exam-
ples include fetal tachycardia, prolonged decelerations 
more than 2 minutes but less than 10 minutes, and recur-
rent late decelerations with moderate baseline variability. 
Category II tracings require continued monitoring and 
reevaluation in light of the entire clinical scenario.
A category III FHR tracing is associated with an 
abnormal fetal acid–base status. Category III tracings 
include either (1) a sinusoidal FHR pattern or (2) absent 
FHR variability with recurrent late decelerations, recur-
rent variable decelerations, or bradycardia. These tracings 
require prompt patient evaluation and efforts to improve 
the fetal condition, such as intrauterine resuscitation with 
change in maternal position, treatment of hypotension, 
use of supplemental oxygen, and treatment of tachy-
systole if present. If the FHR tracing does not improve 
despite these interventions, expeditious delivery should 
proceed.
EVALUATION OF THE NEONATE AND 
NEONATAL RESUSCITATION
The transition from fetal to neonatal life involves an 
adjustment from a fluid- to an air-filled environment 
with major physiologic changes in the pulmonary 
and circulatory systems. Antepartum and intrapartum 
IV
Chapter 33 Obstetrics
605
A
B
Fig. 33.8 Fetal Heart Rate Decelerations. The upper section of each tracing is the fetal heart rate. 
The lower section displays uterine activity. (A) Variable deceleration with minimal variability. (B) Late 
deceleration with minimal variability.
events can predict how safe and successful the tran-
sition to neonate will be. Umbilical cord gases are 
frequently sent at delivery as a measure of fetal assess-
ment. Umbilical artery values reflect fetal well-being, 
and umbilical vein values are a reflection of maternal 
status and uteroplacental perfusion. Typical values are 
shown in Table 33.2.
Assessment of neonates immediately after birth is 
important to promptly identify depressed infants who 
require active resuscitation. The Apgar scoring system 
provides a simplified method for rapid neonatal assess-
ment at 1, 5, and 10 minutes after delivery. Five param-
eters are assessed and assigned a numerical value (0, 
1, or 2) to identify neonates who need resuscitation 
(Table 33.3). It has not been surpassed as a method of 
facilitating recognition and guiding resuscitation man-
agement of a newborn at birth. Approximately 10% 
of newborns need some assistance to begin breath-
ing, and less than 1% require advanced cardiopulmo-
nary resuscitation that includes chest compressions and 
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
606
administration of resuscitation medications.123 Most 
newborns (Apgar ≥8) require little treatment other than 
suctioning of the nose and mouth, tactile stimulation 
to promote breathing, and avoiding hypothermia. The 
neonate's skin should be wiped dry and the baby placed 
on a radiantly heated bed, covered with warm blankets, 
or placed in skin-to-skin contact with the mother. Apgar 
scores of 10 are rare because the acrocyanosis persists in 
a normal newborn well past 5 minutes of life.
Category I. An FHR tracing with normal baseline rate 
(110–160 bpm), moderate FHR variability, absence of late 
or variable decelerations, and possible presence of early 
decelerations.
Category II. Everything not included in categories I and 
III. Most authorities believe that the middle category 
(category II) needs to be subdivided into three further 
subcategories, based on the severity of the periodic 
changes (IIb) and then reduction of FHR variability (Iic).
Category III. An FHR tracing with absent FHR variability, 
recurrent decelerations or bradycardia, or a sinusoidal 
pattern.
No central fetal acidemia, but FHR pattern
suggests intermittent reductions in O2 which
may result in fetal O2 debt
Evidence of actual or impending damaging fetal
asphyxia
Measurement
Mean Artery
Mean Vein
pH
7.27
7.34
Pco2 (mm Hg)
50
40
Po2 (mm Hg)
20
30
Bicarbonate (mEq/L)
23
21
Base excess (mEq/L)
−3.6
−2.6
Table 33.2
Normal Blood Gas Values of Umbilical Artery 
and Vein
Data derived from Thorp JA, Rushing RS. Umbilical cord blood gas 
analysis. Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am. 1999;26(4):695–709.
Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation
Management of neonates in the delivery room falls into 
30-second evaluations and interventions, as detailed in 
Fig. 33.9. At delivery, a delay in umbilical cord clamping 
for at least 30 to 60 seconds after birth is recommended 
for vigorous term and preterm infants to increase hemo-
globin levels and improve iron stores.124 Once the infant 
is placed under a radiant warmer and drying and stimula-
tion have occurred, the first 30-second evaluation begins 
based on the 2020 American Heart Association guide-
lines.123 The initial survey takes into account gestational 
age and starts with the determination of tone, breathing, 
and crying. If breathing and crying do not occur, clearing 
of the airway (mouth then nose) and repeated stimulation 
should be performed while maintaining optimal airway 
positioning and euthermia—this is the next 30-second 
evaluation.
Evaluation for apnea, gasping, and heart rate occur 
with determination of the 1-minute Apgar score; possible 
interventions include positive pressure ventilation (PPV) 
and placement of pulse oximetry and ECG monitoring. 
Initiate PPV with air (21% Fio2) and titrate supplemental 
oxygen to achieve the preductal (right upper extremity) 
oxygen saturation approximating the expected value 
after birth for healthy infants (see Fig. 33.9). In the event 
of heart rate <100, PPV efficacy should be evaluated by 
checking for chest movement, optimizing PPV delivery, 
and considering the need for intubation or laryngeal 
mask airway placement. If the heart rate drops below 60, 
then chest compressions, intubation, and ventilation with 
100% oxygen should commence with ECG monitoring 
and preparation for umbilical vein cannulation. Infants 
greater than 36 weeks’ gestation assessed to have moder-
ate to severe hypoxic ischemic encephalopathy should be 
enrolled in a therapeutic hypothermia protocol.
If meconium is present, an individual skilled in tra-
cheal intubation should be present at the time of birth. 
Box 33.5
FHR Tracing Criteria for Decelerations
FHR, Fetal heart rate.
Data from Macones GA, Hankins GD, Spong CY, et al. The 2008 
National Institute of Child Health and Human Development workshop 
report on electronic fetal monitoring: Update on definitions, 
interpretation, and research guidelines. J Obstet Gynecol Neonatal 
Nurs. 2008;37(5):510–515 and Parer JT, Ikeda T. A framework for 
standardized management of intrapartum fetal heart rate patterns. 
Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2007;197(1):26.e1–e6.
Criterion
2
1
0
Heart rate 
(beats/min)
>100
<100
Absent
Breathing
Irregular, 
crying
Slow
Absent
Reflex 
irritability
Cry
Grimace
No response
Muscle tone
Active
Flexion of the 
extremities
Limp
Color
Pink
Body pink, 
extremities 
cyanotic
Cyanotic
Table 33.3
Evaluation of a Neonate Using the Apgar Score
For each of the five criteria, the value of 0, 1, or 2 is added to 
calculate a total score.
IV
Chapter 33 Obstetrics
607
Infant stays with mother for routine
care: warm and maintain normal
temperature, position airway,
clear secretions if needed, dry.
Ongoing evaluation
Antenatal counseling
team briefing and equipment check
Position and clear airway
SpO2 monitor
Supplementary O2 as needed
Consider CPAP
Labored breathing or
persistent cyanosis?
Postresuscitation care
Team debriefing
Warm and maintain normal
temperature, position airway, clear
secretions if needed, dry, stimulate
Check chest movement
Ventilation corrective steps if needed
ETT or laryngeal mask if needed
1 min
2 min
3 min
4 min
5 min
10 min
60%-65%
65%-70%
70%-75%
75%-80%
80%-85%
85%-95%
Targeted preductal SpO2
after birth
Intubate if not already done
Chest compressions
Coordinate with PPV
100% O2
ECG monitor
Consider emergency UVC
IV epinephrine
If HR persistently below 60/min
Consider hypovolemia
Consider pneumothorax
PPV
SpO2 monitor
Consider ECG monitor
Term gestation?
Good tone?
Breathing or cying?
Apnea or gasping?
HR below 100/min?
HR below 100/min?
HR below 60/min?
HR below 60/min?
Birth
No
No
No
No
Yes
1 minute
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Fig. 33.9 NRP Resuscitation Flow Diagram. (Based on figure from Neonatal resuscitation: 2020 
American Heart Association Guidelines update for cardiopulmonary resuscitation and emergency 
cardiovascular care. Circulation. 2020;142:S524–S550.)
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
608
1. Kacmar RM, Gaiser R. Physiologic 
changes of pregnancy. In: Chestnut DH, 
Wong CA, Tsen LC, Ngan Kee WD, 
Beilin Y, Mhyre JM, Bateman BT, eds. 
Chestnut’s Obstetric Anesthesia: Princi-
ples and Practice. 6th ed. Philadelphia: 
Elsevier; 2020:13–37.
2. Page SM, Rollins MD. Physiology and 
pharmacology of obstetric anesthe-
sia. In: Hemmings HC, Egan TD, eds. 
Pharmacology and Physiology for Anes-
thesia, Foundations and Clinical Appli-
cation. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 
2019:732–751.
3. Afari HA, Davis EF, Sarma AA. Echo-
cardiography for the Pregnant Heart. 
Curr Treat Options Cardiovasc Med. 
2021;23:55.
4. Higuchi H, Takagi S, Zhang K, etal. 
Effect of lateral tilt angle on the volume 
of the abdominal aorta and inferior 
vena cava in pregnant and nonpreg-
nant women determined by magnetic 
resonance imaging. Anesthesiology. 
2015;122:286–293.
5. Porter JS, Bonello E, Reynolds F. The 
influence of epidural administration of 
fentanyl infusion on gastric emptying in 
labour. Anaesthesia. 1997;52:1151–1156.
6. Practice Guidelines for Obstetric Anes-
thesia: An Updated Report by the 
American Society of Anesthesiologists 
Task Force on Obstetric Anesthesia 
and the Society for Obstetric Anesthe-
sia and Perinatology. Anesthesiology. 
2016;124:270–300.
7. Hey VM, Ostick DG, Mazumder JK, 
etal. Pethidine, metoclopramide and the 
gastro-oesophageal sphincter. A study 
in healthy volunteers. Anaesthesia. 
1981;36:173–176.
8. Paranjothy S, Griffiths JD, Broughton 
HK, etal. Interventions at caesarean sec-
tion for reducing the risk of aspiration 
pneumonitis. Cochrane Database Syst 
Rev. 2014:CD004943.
9. Palahniuk RJ, Shnider SM. Eger EI, 2nd: 
Pregnancy decreases the requirement for 
inhaled anesthetic agents. Anesthesiol-
ogy. 1974;41:82–83.
10. Gin T, Chan MT. Decreased minimum 
alveolar concentration of isoflurane 
in pregnant humans. Anesthesiology. 
1994;81:829–832.
11. Ueyama H, Hagihira S, Takashina M, 
etal. Pregnancy does not enhance vola-
tile anesthetic sensitivity on the brain: 
an electroencephalographic analysis 
study. Anesthesiology. 2010;113:577–
584.
12. Morton SU, Brodsky D. Fetal Physiology 
and the Transition to Extrauterine Life. 
Clin Perinatol. 2016;43:395–407.
13. Haydon ML, Gorenberg DM, Nageotte 
MP, etal. The effect of maternal oxygen 
administration on fetal pulse oximetry 
during labor in fetuses with nonreassur-
ing fetal heart rate patterns. Am J Obstet 
Gynecol. 2006;195:735–738.
14. Sanchez-Alcaraz A, Quintana MB, 
Laguarda M. Placental transfer and neo-
natal effects of propofol in caesarean 
section. J Clin Pharm Ther. 1998;23:19–
23.
15. Caughey AB. Evidence-Based Labor and 
Delivery Management: Can We Safely 
Reduce the Cesarean Rate? Obstet Gynecol 
Clin North Am. 2017;44:523–533.
16. ACOG Practice Bulletin No. 209. Obstet-
ric Analgesia and Anesthesia. Obstet 
Gynecol. 2019;133:e208–e225.
17. Markley JC, Rollins MD. Non-Neuraxial 
Labor Analgesia: Options. Clin Obstet 
Gynecol. 2017;60:350–364.
18. Arendt KW, Tessmer-Tuck JA. Nonphar-
macologic labor analgesia. Clin Perina-
tol. 2013;40:351–371.
19. Bohren MA, Hofmeyr GJ, Sakala C, etal. 
Continuous support for women during 
childbirth. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2017;7:Cd003766.
20. Nanji JA, Carvalho B. Pain manage-
ment during labor and vaginal birth. 
Best Pract Res Clin Obstet Gynaecol. 
2020;67:100–112.
21. Rayburn W, Rathke A, Leuschen 
MP, etal. Fentanyl citrate analgesia 
during labor. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 
1989;161:202–206.
22. Nissen E, Widstrom AM, Lilja G, etal. 
Effects of routinely given pethidine 
during labour on infants' developing 
breastfeeding behaviour. Effects of 
dose-delivery time interval and vari-
ous concentrations of pethidine/nor-
pethidine in cord plasma. Acta Paediatr. 
1997;86:201–208.
23. Maykin MM, Ukoha EP, Tilp V, etal. 
Impact of therapeutic rest in early labor 
on perinatal outcomes: a prospective 
study. Am J Obstet Gynecol MFM. 
2021;3:100325.
24. Freeman LM, Bloemenkamp KW, Frans-
sen MT, etal. Patient controlled analgesia 
with remifentanil versus epidural anal-
gesia in labour: randomised multicentre 
equivalence trial. BMJ. 2015;350:h846.
No significant interventions are needed if the infant is 
vigorous with good respiratory effort and muscle tone 
after delivery. However, if poor muscle tone and inad-
equate breathing efforts are present, resuscitation should 
commence with PPV if the infant is not breathing or the 
heart rate is less than 100/min.123 Routine intubation for 
tracheal suction in this setting is no longer suggested. 
Instead, emphasis is made on initiating ventilation 
within the first minute of life in a nonbreathing or inef-
fectively breathing infant by clearing the airway and use 
of PPV.
Epinephrine
Epinephrine is indicated in the event the heart rate con-
tinues to stay below 60 despite PPV. The dose is 0.01 to 
0.03 mg/kg IV administered rapidly. The dose may be 
repeated every 3 to 5 minutes, if necessary.
Hypovolemia
Although cardiac arrest secondary to hypovolemia is 
rare, the following conditions may lead to hypovolemia 
in the neonate: placental abruption, placenta previa, or 
vasa previa. Volume expansion should be instituted in 
a newborn who appears to have suffered blood loss or 
if shock has not responded to the resuscitation meas-
ures discussed previously. Blood or isotonic crystalloid 
(preferably normal saline) in 10 mL/kg aliquots may be 
administered in the delivery room.
Glucose
Hypoglycemia should be suspected after deliveries in 
which the newborn experienced severe asphyxia, intrau-
terine growth restriction, or maternal diabetes. During 
the resuscitation, a heelstick can determine the blood 
glucose level.
REFERENCES
IV
Chapter 33 Obstetrics
609
25. Weibel S, Jelting Y, Afshari A, etal. 
Patient-controlled 
analgesia 
with 
remifentanil versus alternative paren-
teral methods for pain management in 
labour. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2017;4:Cd011989.
26. Marwah R, Hassan S, Carvalho JC, 
etal. Remifentanil versus fentanyl for 
intravenous patient-controlled labour 
analgesia: an observational study. Can J 
Anaesth. 2012;59:246–254.
27. Van de Velde M, Carvalho B. Remifen-
tanil for labor analgesia: an evidence-
based narrative review. Int J Obstet 
Anesth. 2016;25:66–74.
28. Likis FE, Andrews JC, Collins MR, etal. 
Nitrous oxide for the management of 
labor pain: a systematic review. Anesth 
Analg. 2014;118:153–167.
29. Rollins MD, Arendt KW, Carabello BA, 
et al. Nitrous Oxide. American Society 
of Anesthesiologists (ASA) Guidelines. 
(Available at: https://www.asahq.org/
about-asa/governance-and-committees/
asa-committees/committee-on-obstet-
ric-anesthesia/nitrous-oxide) 2020 - 
Accessed April 27, 2021.
30. American Society of Anesthesiologists. 
ASA Response to the FDA Med Watch 
Warning - December 16, 2016. (Availa-
ble at: https://www.asahq.org/advocacy-
and-asapac/fda-and-washington-alerts/
washington-alerts/2016/12/asa-
response-to-the-fda-med-watch) 2016 - 
Accessed April 27, 2021.
31. Richardson MG, Lopez BM, Baysinger 
CL, etal. Nitrous Oxide During Labor: 
Maternal Satisfaction Does Not Depend 
Exclusively on Analgesic Effectiveness. 
Anesth Analg. 2017;124:548–553.
32. Polley LS, Columb MO, Naughton NN, 
etal. Effect of epidural epinephrine 
on the minimum local analgesic con-
centration of epidural bupivacaine in 
labor. Anesthesiology. 2002;96:1123–
1128.
33. Lee A, Landau R, Lavin T, etal. Com-
parative efficacy of epidural clonidine 
versus epidural fentanyl for treating 
breakthrough pain during labor: a rand-
omized double-blind clinical trial. Int J 
Obstet Anesth. 2020;42:26–33.
34. Jones L, Othman M, Dowswell T, 
etal. Pain management for women 
in labour: an overview of systematic 
reviews. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2012;2012:Cd009234.
35. Attanasio L, Kozhimannil KB, Jou J, 
etal. Women's Experiences with Neu-
raxial Labor Analgesia in the Listening 
to Mothers II Survey: A Content Analy-
sis of Open-Ended Responses. Anesth 
Analg. 2015;121:974–980.
36. American Society of Anesthesiologists 
Guidelines for Neuraxial Anesthesia in 
Obstetrics. (Available at: http://www.
asahq.org/∼/media/sites/asahq/files/
public/resources/standards-guidelines/
guidelines-for-neuraxial-anesthesia-in-
obstetrics.pdf) 2021. Accessed - July 30, 
April 27, 2021.
37. Sng BL, Leong WL, Zeng Y, etal. Early 
versus late initiation of epidural analge-
sia for labour. Cochrane Database Syst 
Rev. 2014;10:CD007238.
38. Wong CA, Scavone BM, Peaceman AM, 
etal. The risk of cesarean delivery 
with neuraxial analgesia given early 
versus late in labor. N Engl J Med. 
2005;352:655–665.
39. Anim-Somuah M, Smyth RM, Cyna AM, 
etal. Epidural versus non-epidural or 
no analgesia for pain management in 
labour. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2018;5:CD000331.
40. Craig MG, Grant EN, Tao W, etal. A ran-
domized control trial of bupivacaine and 
fentanyl versus fentanyl-only for epi-
dural analgesia during the second stage 
of labor. Anesthesiology. 2015;122:172–
177.
41. American College of O, Gynecologists, 
Society for Maternal-Fetal M. Safe pre-
vention of the primary cesarean delivery. 
Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2014;210:179–193.
42. Practice Advisory for the Prevention. 
Diagnosis, and Management of Infectious 
Complications Associated with Neuraxi-
al Techniques: An Updated Report by the 
American Society of Anesthesiologists 
Task Force on Infectious Complications 
Associated with Neuraxial Techniques 
and the American Society of Regional 
Anesthesia and Pain Medicine. Anesthe-
siology. 2017;126:585–601.
43. Chau A, Bibbo C, Huang CC, etal. Dural 
Puncture Epidural Technique Improves 
Labor Analgesia Quality With Fewer 
Side Effects Compared With Epidural 
and Combined Spinal Epidural Tech-
niques: A Randomized Clinical Trial. 
Anesth Analg. 2017;124:560–569.
44. Bradbury CL, Singh SI, Badder SR, etal. 
Prevention of post-dural puncture head-
ache in parturients: a systematic review 
and meta-analysis. Acta Anaesthesiol 
Scand. 2013;57:417–430.
45. Heesen M, Bohmer J, Klohr S, etal. 
The effect of adding a background 
infusion to patient-controlled epidural 
labor analgesia on labor, maternal, and 
neonatal outcomes: a systematic review 
and meta-analysis. Anesth Analg. 
2015;121:149–158.
46. Sng BL, Zeng Y, de Souza NNA, etal. 
Automated mandatory bolus versus 
basal infusion for maintenance of epi-
dural analgesia in labour. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev. 2018;5:CD011344.
47. Delgado C, Ciliberto C, Bollag L, etal. 
Continuous epidural infusion ver-
sus programmed intermittent epidur-
al bolus for labor analgesia: optimal 
configuration of parameters to reduce 
physician-administered top-ups. Curr 
Med Res Opin. 2018;34:649–656.
48. Epsztein Kanczuk M, Barrett NM, Arzola 
C, etal. Programmed Intermittent Epi-
dural Bolus for Labor Analgesia During 
First Stage of Labor: A Biased-Coin 
Up-and-Down Sequential Allocation 
Trial to Determine the Optimum Interval 
Time Between Boluses of a Fixed Vol-
ume of 10 mL of Bupivacaine 0.0625% 
With Fentanyl 2 μg/mL. Anesth Analg. 
2017;124:537–541.
49. Asokumar B, Newman LM, McCarthy RJ, 
etal. Intrathecal bupivacaine reduces 
pruritus and prolongs duration of fen-
tanyl analgesia during labor: a prospec-
tive, randomized controlled trial. Anesth 
Analg. 1998;87:1309–1315.
50. Van de Velde M. Neuraxial analgesia 
and fetal bradycardia. Curr Opin Anaes-
thesiol. 2005;18:253–256.
51. Wong CA, Scavone BM, Slavenas JP, 
etal. Efficacy and side effect profile of 
varying doses of intrathecal fentanyl 
added to bupivacaine for labor analge-
sia. Int J Obstet Anesth. 2021;13:19–24.
52. Neal JM, Barrington MJ, Brull R, etal. 
The Second ASRA Practice Advisory 
on Neurologic Complications Associ-
ated With Regional Anesthesia and Pain 
Medicine: Executive Summary 2015. Reg 
Anesth Pain Med. 2015;40:401–430.
53. Bauer ME, Arendt K, Beilin Y, etal. The 
Society for Obstetric Anesthesia and 
Perinatology Interdisciplinary Consensus 
Statement on Neuraxial Procedures in 
Obstetric Patients With Thrombocytope-
nia. Anesth Analg. 2021;132:1531–1544.
54. Horlocker TT, Vandermeuelen E, Kopp 
SL, etal. Regional Anesthesia in the 
Patient Receiving Antithrombotic or 
Thrombolytic Therapy: American Soci-
ety of Regional Anesthesia and Pain 
Medicine Evidence-Based Guidelines 
(Fourth Edition). Reg Anesth Pain Med. 
2018;43:263–309.
55. Leffert L, Butwick A, Carvalho B, etal. 
The Society for Obstetric Anesthesia 
and Perinatology Consensus State-
ment on the Anesthetic Management 
of Pregnant and Postpartum Women 
Receiving Thromboprophylaxis or High-
er Dose Anticoagulants. Anesth Analg. 
2018;126:928–944.
56. Pan PH, Bogard TD, Owen MD. Inci-
dence and characteristics of failures 
in obstetric neuraxial analgesia and 
anesthesia: a retrospective analysis of 
19,259 deliveries. Int J Obstet Anesth. 
2004;13:227–233.
57. Booth JM, Pan JC, Ross VH, etal. Com-
bined Spinal Epidural Technique for 
Labor Analgesia Does Not Delay Rec-
ognition of Epidural Catheter Failures: 
A Single-center Retrospective Cohort 
Survival 
Analysis. 
Anesthesiology. 
2016;125:516–524.
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
610
58. D'Angelo R, Smiley RM, Riley ET, etal. 
Serious complications related to obstet-
ric anesthesia: the serious complication 
repository project of the Society for 
Obstetric Anesthesia and Perinatology. 
Anesthesiology. 2014;120:1505–1512.
59. Ruppen W, Derry S, McQuay H, etal. 
Incidence of epidural hematoma, infec-
tion, and neurologic injury in obstetric 
patients with epidural analgesia/anes-
thesia. Anesthesiology. 2006;105:394–
399.
60. Burkle CM, Olsen DA, Sviggum HP, etal. 
Parturient recall of neuraxial analgesia 
risks: Impact of labor pain vs no labor 
pain. J Clin Anesth. 2017;36:158–163.
61. Panchal AR, Bartos JA, Cabañas JG, 
etal. Part 3: Adult Basic and Advanced 
Life Support: 2020 American Heart 
Association Guidelines for Cardiopul-
monary Resuscitation and Emergen-
cy Cardiovascular Care. Circulation. 
2020;142:S366–s468.
62. Neal JM, Neal EJ, Weinberg GL. Ameri-
can Society of Regional Anesthesia and 
Pain Medicine Local Anesthetic Sys-
temic Toxicity checklist: 2020 version. 
Reg Anesth Pain Med. 2021;46:81–82.
63. Simmons SW, Taghizadeh N, Dennis AT, 
etal. Combined spinal-epidural versus 
epidural analgesia in labour. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev. 2012;10:CD003401.
64. Hofmeyr G, Cyna A, Middleton P. Pro-
phylactic intravenous preloading for 
regional analgesia in labour. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev. 2004:CD000175.
65. Arendt KW, Segal BS. The associa-
tion between epidural labor analge-
sia and maternal fever. Clin Perinatol. 
2013;40:385–398.
66. Sharpe EE, Arendt KW. Epidural Labor 
Analgesia and Maternal Fever. Clin 
Obstet Gynecol. 2017;60:365–374.
67. Greenwell EA, Wyshak G, Ringer SA, 
etal. Intrapartum temperature elevation, 
epidural use, and adverse outcome in 
term infants. Pediatrics. 2012;129:e447–
e454.
68. Kinsella SM, Carvalho B, Dyer RA, etal. 
International consensus statement on 
the management of hypotension with 
vasopressors during caesarean section 
under spinal anaesthesia. Anaesthesia. 
2018;73:71–92.
69. Ngan Kee WD, Lee SW, Ng FF, etal. 
Randomized double-blinded comparison 
of norepinephrine and phenylephrine for 
maintenance of blood pressure during 
spinal anesthesia for cesarean delivery. 
Anesthesiology. 2015;122:736–745.
70. Orbach-Zinger S, Jadon A, Lucas DN, 
etal. Intrathecal catheter use after 
accidental dural puncture in obstetric 
patients: literature review and clinical 
management recommendations. Anaes-
thesia. 2021;76:1111–1121.
71. Toledo P, McCarthy RJ, Ebarvia MJ, 
etal. The interaction between epidural 
2-chloroprocaine and morphine: a ran-
domized controlled trial of the effect 
of drug administration timing on the 
efficacy of morphine analgesia. Anesth 
Analg. 2009;109:168–173.
72. Carvalho B. Failed epidural top-up for 
cesarean delivery for failure to progress 
in labor: the case against single-shot 
spinal anesthesia. Int J Obstet Anesth. 
2012;21:357–359.
73. Mankowitz SK, Gonzalez Fiol A, Smiley 
R. Failure to Extend Epidural Labor 
Analgesia for Cesarean Delivery Anes-
thesia: A Focused Review. Anesth Analg. 
2016;123:1174–1180.
74. Abir G, Mhyre J. Maternal mortality and 
the role of the obstetric anesthesiolo-
gist. Best Pract Res Clin Anaesthesiol. 
2017;31:91–105.
75. Richardson MG, Raymond BL. Sug-
ammadex Administration in Pregnant 
Women and in Women of Reproductive 
Potential: A Narrative Review. Anesth 
Analg. 2020;130:1628–1637.
76. Society for Obstetric Anesthesia and 
Perinatology Statement on Sugamma-
dex during pregnancy and lactation 
Ad Hoc task force: Willett, Butwick, 
Togioka, Bensadigh, Hofer, Zakowski 
April 22, 2019,
77. Clark RB, Brown MA, Lattin DL. Neostig-
mine, atropine, and glycopyrrolate: does 
neostigmine cross the placenta? Anes-
thesiology. 1996;84:450–452.
78. De Tina A, Palanisamy A. General 
Anesthesia During the Third Trimester: 
Any Link to Neurocognitive Outcomes? 
Anesthesiol Clin. 2017;35:69–80.
79. Afolabi BB, Lesi FE. Regional versus 
general anaesthesia for caesarean sec-
tion. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2012;10:CD004350.
80. Murray SR, Stock SJ, Cowan S, etal. 
Spontaneous preterm birth prevention 
in multiple pregnancy. Obstet Gynaecol. 
2018;20:57–63.
81. Melka S, Miller J, Fox NS. Labor and 
Delivery of Twin Pregnancies. Obstet 
Gynecol Clin North Am. 2017;44:645–
654.
82. ACOG Committee Opinion No. 745. 
Mode of Term Singleton Breech Deliv-
ery. Obstet Gynecol. 2018;132:e60–e63.
83. External 
Cephalic 
Version. 
ACOG 
Practice Bulletin, Number 221. Obstet 
Gynecol. 2020;135:e203–e212.
84. Hao Q, Hu Y, Zhang L, etal. A Sys-
tematic Review and Meta-analysis of 
Clinical Trials of Neuraxial, Intravenous, 
and Inhalational Anesthesia for Exter-
nal Cephalic Version. Anesth Analg. 
2020;131:1800–1811.
85. Dajani NK, Magann EF. Complications 
of shoulder dystocia. Semin Perinatol. 
2014;38:201–204.
86. Chappell LC, Cluver CA, Kingdom J, etal. 
Pre-eclampsia. Lancet. 2021;398:341–
354.
87. Gestational 
Hypertension 
and 
Preeclampsia: ACOG Practice Bul-
letin, Number 222. Obstet Gynecol. 
2020;135:e237–e260.
88. Cooray SD, Edmonds SM, Tong S, etal. 
Characterization of symptoms imme-
diately preceding eclampsia. Obstet 
Gynecol. 2011;118:995–999.
89. Grandi SM, Vallee-Pouliot K, Reynier P, 
etal. Hypertensive Disorders in Preg-
nancy and the Risk of Subsequent Car-
diovascular Disease. Paediatr Perinat 
Epidemiol. 2017;31:412–421.
90. Duley L, Gulmezoglu AM, Henderson-
Smart DJ, etal. Magnesium sulphate 
and other anticonvulsants for women 
with pre-eclampsia. Cochrane Database 
Syst Rev. 2010:CD000025.
91. Brown MA, Magee LA, Kenny LC, 
etal. The hypertensive disorders of 
pregnancy: ISSHP classification, diag-
nosis & management recommendations 
for international practice. Pregnancy 
Hypertens. 2018;13:291–310.
92. Committee Opinion No. 692. Emer-
gent Therapy for Acute-Onset, Severe 
Hypertension During Pregnancy and 
the Postpartum Period. Obstet Gynecol. 
2017;129:e90–e95.
93. Pant M, Fong R, Scavone B. Preven-
tion of peri-induction hypertension 
in preeclamptic patients: a focused 
review. Anesth Analg. 2014;119:1350–
1356.
94. Scavone BM, Main EK. The National 
Partnership for Maternal Safety: a call 
to action for anesthesiologists. Anesth 
Analg. 2015;121:14–16.
95. Vahanian SA, Vintzileos AM. Placental 
implantation abnormalities: a modern 
approach. Curr Opin Obstet Gynecol. 
2016;28:477–484.
96. Salmanian B, Clark SL, Hui SR, etal. 
Massive Transfusion Protocols in 
Obstetric Hemorrhage: Theory versus 
Reality. Am J Perinatol. 2021.
97. Effect of early tranexamic acid admin-
istration on mortality, hysterectomy, 
and other morbidities in women with 
post-partum haemorrhage (WOMAN): 
an international, randomised, double-
blind, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet. 
2017;389:2105–2116.
98. Downes KL, Grantz KL, Shenassa ED. 
Maternal, Labor, Delivery, and Perina-
tal Outcomes Associated with Placental 
Abruption: A Systematic Review. Am J 
Perinatol. 2017;34:935–957.
99. ACOG Practice Bulletin No. 205. 
Vaginal Birth After Cesarean Deliv-
ery. Obstet Gynecol. 2019;133:e110–
e127.
100. Guiliano M, Closset E, Therby D, etal. 
Signs, symptoms and complications 
of complete and partial uterine rup-
tures during pregnancy and delivery. 
Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol. 
2014;179:130–134.
IV
Chapter 33 Obstetrics
611
101. Practice Bulletin No. 183. Postpar-
tum Hemorrhage. Obstet Gynecol. 
2017;130:e168–e186.
102. Kovacheva VP, Soens MA, Tsen LC. A 
Randomized, Double-blinded Trial of 
a "Rule of Threes" Algorithm versus 
Continuous Infusion of Oxytocin dur-
ing Elective Cesarean Delivery. Anes-
thesiology. 2015;123:92–100.
103. Einerson BD, Weiniger CF. Placenta 
accreta spectrum disorder: updates 
on anesthetic and surgical manage-
ment strategies. Int J Obstet Anesth. 
2021;46:102975.
104. Silver RM, Barbour KD. Placenta accre-
ta spectrum: accreta, increta, and per-
creta. Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am. 
2015;42:381–402.
105. Silver RM, Landon MB, Rouse DJ, etal. 
Maternal morbidity associated with 
multiple repeat cesarean deliveries. 
Obstet Gynecol. 2006;107:1226–1232.
106. Warrick CM, Rollins MD. Peripartum 
Anesthesia Considerations for Pla-
centa Accreta. Clin Obstet Gynecol. 
2018;61:808–827.
107. Ito F, Akasaka J, Koike N, etal. Inci-
dence, diagnosis and pathophysiology 
of amniotic fluid embolism. J Obstet 
Gynaecol. 2014;34:580–584.
108. Clark SL, Romero R, Dildy GA, etal. 
Proposed diagnostic criteria for the 
case definition of amniotic fluid embo-
lism in research studies. Am J Obstet 
Gynecol. 2016;215:408–412.
109. Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine. 
Electronic address psoPacheco LD, 
Saade G, etal. Amniotic fluid embolism: 
diagnosis and management. Am J 
Obstet Gynecol. 2016;215:B16–B24.
110. Clark SL. A Biomarker for Amniotic 
Fluid Embolism: The Search Continues. 
Bjog. 2021.
111. Simard C, Yang S, Koolian M, etal. The 
role of echocardiography in amniotic 
fluid embolism: a case series and review 
of the literature. Can J Anaesth. 2021.
112. Vasco Ramirez M, Valencia GC. 
Anesthesia for Nonobstetric Surgery 
in Pregnancy. Clin Obstet Gynecol. 
2020;63:351–363.
113. ACOG Committee Opinion No. 775. 
Nonobstetric Surgery During Pregnan-
cy. Obstet Gynecol. 2019;133:e285–
e286.
114. Moore HB, Juarez-Colunga E, Bron-
sert M, etal. Effect of Pregnancy on 
Adverse Outcomes After General Sur-
gery. JAMA Surg. 2015;150:637–643.
115. Hong JY. Adnexal mass surgery and 
anesthesia during pregnancy: a 10-year 
retrospective review. Int J Obstet 
Anesth. 2006;15:212–216.
116. American Society of Anesthesiologists 
Quality Management and Departmental 
Administration Committee. Pregnancy 
Testing Prior to Anesthesia and Sur-
gery. (Available at: Pregnancy-Testing-
Prior-to-anesthesia-and-surgery.pdf) 
2016. Accessed - July 30, 2021
117. Andropoulos DB, Greene MF. Anesthe-
sia and Developing Brains - Implica-
tions of the FDA Warning. N Engl J 
Med. 2017;376:905–907.
118. Tsakiridis I, Mamopoulos A, Athanasi-
adis A, etal. Antenatal Corticosteroids 
and Magnesium Sulfate for Improved 
Preterm Neonatal Outcomes: A Review 
of Guidelines. Obstet Gynecol Surv. 
2020;75:298–307.
119. Macones GA, Hankins GD, Spong CY, 
etal. The 2008 National Institute of 
Child Health and Human Develop-
ment workshop report on electronic 
fetal monitoring: update on definitions, 
interpretation, and research guide-
lines. J Obstet Gynecol Neonatal Nurs. 
2008;37:510–515.
120. Lear CA, Galinsky R, Wassink G, etal. 
The myths and physiology surrounding 
intrapartum decelerations: the critical 
role of the peripheral chemoreflex. J 
Physiol. 2016;594:4711–4725.
121. Parer JT, King T, Flanders S, etal. Fetal 
acidemia and electronic fetal heart rate 
patterns: is there evidence of an asso-
ciation? J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med. 
2006;19:289–294.
122. ACOG Practice Bulletin No. 106. Intra-
partum fetal heart rate monitoring: 
nomenclature, interpretation, and gen-
eral management principles. Obstet 
Gynecol. 2009;114:192–202.
123. Aziz K, Lee CHC, Escobedo MB, etal. 
Part 5: Neonatal Resuscitation 2020 
American Heart Association Guidelines 
for Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation and 
Emergency Cardiovascular Care. Pedi-
atrics. 2021:147.
124. Delayed Umbilical Cord Clamping After 
Birth: ACOG Committee Opinion Sum-
mary, Number 814. Obstet Gynecol. 
2020;136:1238–1239.
612
Chapter
Providing anesthetic care for infants and children poses 
unique challenges because of the profound differences in 
physiology, pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of 
anesthetic drugs, and wide variety of procedures that these 
patients undergo, which are often very different from the 
adult population. The developmental physiology, pharmacol-
ogy, fluid and transfusion therapy, and airway management 
in pediatric anesthesia will be defined. Anesthetic consid-
erations and techniques in pediatric patients, especially 
in neonates, who are the most unique group of pediatric 
patients, will be reviewed. The new field of fetal surgery will 
be addressed, and the growing areas of anesthesia in remote 
locations for pediatric patients and anesthetic neurotoxicity 
in the developing brain will be discussed briefly. In the final 
section the most common types of congenital heart disease 
(CHD) and their pathophysiology will be reviewed.
DEVELOPMENTAL PHYSIOLOGY
Respiratory System
Lung Development
Lung development begins in the fourth week of gesta-
tion, but extrauterine survival becomes possible only 
DEVELOPMENTAL PHYSIOLOGY
Respiratory System
Cardiovascular System
Renal System
Hematologic System
PHARMACOLOGIC DIFFERENCES
Pharmacokinetics
Hepatic Metabolism
Renal Excretion
Pharmacology of Inhaled Anesthetics
FLUIDS AND ELECTROLYTES
Intraoperative Fluid Administration
Glucose Administration
TRANSFUSION THERAPY
Maximum Allowable Blood Loss
Transfusion of Blood Products
Antifibrinolytics
Recombinant Factor VIIa
PEDIATRIC AIRWAY
Airway Assessment
Airway Management Techniques
Difficult Pediatric Airway
ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
Preoperative Evaluation and Preparation
Perioperative Considerations
The Postanesthesia Care Unit
MEDICAL AND SURGICAL DISEASES 
AFFECTING THE NEONATE
Necrotizing Enterocolitis
Abdominal Wall Defects: Gastroschisis and 
Omphalocele
Tracheoesophageal Fistula
Congenital Diaphragmatic Hernia
Patent Ductus Arteriosus
Retinopathy of Prematurity
Myelomeningocele
Pyloric Stenosis
PEDIATRICS
Erin A. Gottlieb, Dean B. Andropoulos
34
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE
Left-to-Right Shunts
Right-to-Left Shunts
Obstructive Lesions
Transposition of the Great Arteries
Single-Ventricle Lesions
Conclusion
SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
Anesthesia for the Former Premature Infant
Anesthesia for Remote Locations
Ex Utero Intrapartum Therapy Procedure and 
Fetal Surgery
Anesthetic Neurotoxicity and Neuroprotection 
in the Developing Brain
IV
Chapter 34 Pediatrics
613
when terminal air sacs begin to form and the capillary 
network surrounding them is sufficient for pulmonary 
gas exchange around the 26th week. Alveolar formation 
begins by the 36th postconceptual week, but most alveoli 
form postnatally. Type II pneumocytes begin producing 
surfactant around the 24th week of gestation, and pro-
duction of this mixture of phospholipids and surfactant 
proteins is critical for reducing surface tension and facili-
tating the inflation of alveoli.
Chest Wall and Respiratory Muscles
The ribs extend from the vertebral column horizontally 
in infants compared with a caudad angle in adults. This 
configuration renders the accessory muscles of respira-
tion ineffective in infants. The ribcage also tends to move 
inward during inspiration because of the high cartilage 
content in the ribs of neonates and infants. This para-
doxical chest wall movement occurs commonly under 
general anesthesia and is the result of decreased tone of 
the intercostal muscles and upper airway obstruction. The 
diaphragm increases its work to maintain tidal volume, 
which can lead to fatigue.
The mature diaphragm has a low content of type 
I (slow twitch, high oxidative capacity) muscle fibers. 
Before 37 weeks' postconceptual age, less than 10% 
of the diaphragmatic fibers are type I. A term infant 
has approximately 25% type I fibers, and an adult has 
approximately 50%. This means that the diaphragm is 
more likely to become fatigued in premature and term 
infants, leading to earlier respiratory failure.
Chest wall compliance decreases throughout child-
hood and adolescence owing to the ossification of the 
ribs and development of thoracic muscle mass. The elas-
tic recoil pressure of the lung increases throughout this 
time from an increase in pulmonary elastic fibers.
Respiratory Variables
There are some major differences in static lung volumes 
and respiratory variables among children of different 
ages and adults (also see Chapter 5). Table 34.1 illus-
trates the major differences in these and other variables 
between infants and adults. Total lung capacity (TLC) 
is much larger per kilogram in adults compared with 
infants. This is largely because of the relative efficiency 
and strength of adult muscles of inspiration and effort.
Functional residual capacity (FRC) is similar on a per 
kilogram basis among age groups. However, the mechan-
ical reasons for this similarity differ. The FRC in adults is 
defined as the volume at which passive elastic forces of 
the chest wall are balanced by the recoil of the lung. This 
is the volume at end exhalation. In infants both the elas-
tic recoil of the chest and the recoil pressure of the lung 
are very low. This would predict an FRC of about 10% of 
TLC. However, the FRC is about 40% of TLC owing to a 
prolongation of the expiratory time constant by a process 
known as laryngeal braking
In an apneic infant the lung volume is smaller than 
the FRC. Thus an apneic infant has a disproportionately 
smaller store of intrapulmonary oxygen than an adult, 
and hypoxemia will develop rapidly if the airway is 
poorly maintained.
In infants the closing capacity (CC) is larger than the 
FRC, so during exhalation, small airways start to collapse 
and trap air. In adults the CC is smaller than the FRC.
Factors Affecting Respiration
In both infants and adults Pao2, Paco2, and pH control 
ventilation. An increase in Paco2 increases minute ven-
tilation by increasing respiratory rate and tidal volume. 
This response to hypercapnia is not enhanced by hypox-
emia. In fact, hypoxia may depress the hypercapnic ven-
tilatory response.
High inspired oxygen concentrations depress newborn 
respiratory drive, and low inspired oxygen concentra-
tions stimulate it. However, continued hypoxia will 
eventually lead to respiratory depression. Hypoglycemia, 
anemia, and hypothermia also decrease respiratory drive.
Metabolic demand drives minute ventilation. As 
oxygen consumption increases, alveolar minute ventila-
tion increases. Although tidal volume also increases, the 
increase in respiratory rate is the predominant variable 
that increases minute ventilation in infants.
Breathing Patterns
Normal newborn breathing is periodic. There are pauses 
of less than 10 seconds and periods of increased respira-
tory activity. Periodic breathing is different from apnea, 
a ventilatory pause associated with desaturation and 
bradycardia. Apnea is associated with prematurity and 
is treated with respiratory stimulants (e.g., caffeine) and 
with tactile stimulation such as stroking or rocking. Post-
operative apnea in former premature infants is an impor-
tant consideration in the planning of outpatient surgery.
Cardiovascular System
Fetal Circulation
The fetal circulation is characterized by (1) increased 
pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR) with very little pul-
monary blood flow, (2) decreased systemic vascular resist-
ance (SVR) with the placenta as the major low-resistance 
vascular bed, and (3) right-to-left blood flow through 
the ductus arteriosus and foramen ovale (Fig. 34.1). At 
birth, three events change the circulation into its post-
natal configuration. First, alveolar oxygen concentration 
increases, and alveolar carbon dioxide concentration 
decreases with the expansion of the lungs. This results in 
a decrease in PVR. Second, the low-resistance placental 
bed is removed from the circulation when the umbilical 
cord is clamped. This results in an increase in SVR. The 
decrease in PVR leads to an increase in pulmonary blood 
flow and therefore an increase in blood return to the left 
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
614
side of the heart. The increase in left atrial pressure func-
tionally closes the foramen ovale.
The three fetal channels that close after birth are the 
ductus arteriosus, ductus venosus, and foramen ovale. 
The ductus arteriosus is functionally closed in 98% of 
neonates at 4 days of life. It constricts because of an 
increase in arterial oxygen tension and a decrease in 
prostaglandins released from the placenta. Later, the con-
stricted duct becomes fibrotic, becoming the ligamentum 
arteriosum. The ductus venosus closes with the clamping 
of the umbilical vein. The portal pressure decreases, and 
the ductus venosus closes. Via the ductus venosus, an 
umbilical venous catheter enters the inferior vena cava 
and becomes a true central venous catheter. The foramen 
ovale is patent in many infants and is probe patent in 
30% of adults.
If pulmonary artery vasoconstriction occurs in the 
first few days of life as a result of hypoxemia, acidosis, 
or pulmonary hypertension, blood can shunt right to left 
through the previously functionally closed foramen ovale 
or the ductus arteriosus, resulting in profound hypoxemia 
and acidosis. This is termed persistent fetal circulation
and can be life threatening. Treatment is directed toward 
decreasing PVR.
Variable
Units
Neonate
6 mo
12 mo
3 yr
5 yr
9 yr
12 yr
Adult
Approx. weight
kg
3
7
10
15
19
30
50
70
Respiratory rate
breaths/min
50 ± 10
30 ± 5
24 ± 6
24 ± 6
23 ± 5
20 ± 5 18 ± 5
12 ± 3
Tidal volume
mL
21
45
78
112
170
230
480
575
mL/kg
6–8
6–8
6–8
6–8
7–8
7–8
7–8
6–7
Minute ventilation
mL/min
1050
1350
1780
2460
4000
6200
6400
mL/kg/min
350
193
178
164
210
124
91
Alveolar ventilation
mL/min
665
1245
1760
1800
3000
3100
mL/kg/min
222
125
117
95
60
44
Dead space/tidal 
volume ratio
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
Oxygen consumption
mL/kg/min
6–8
3–4
Vital capacity
mL
120
870
1160
3100
4000
mL/kg
40
58
61
62
57
Functional residual 
capacity
mL
80
490
680
1970
3000
mL/kg
27
33
36
39
43
Total lung capacity
mL
160
1100
1500
4000
6000
mL/kg
53
73
79
80
86
Closing volume as 
percentage of vital 
capacity
%
20
8
4
Number of alveoli
Saccules × 106
30
112
129
257
280
300
Specific compliance
CL/FRC:mL/cm 
H2O/L
0.04
0.038
0.06
0.05
Specific conductance 
of small airways
mL/s/cm H2O/g
0.02
3.1
1.7
1.2
8.2
13.4
Hematocrit
%
55 ± 7
37 ± 3
35 ± 2.5
40 ± 3
40 ± 2
40 ± 2 42 ± 2
43–48
Arterial pH
pH units
7.30–7.40
7.35–7.45
7.35–7.45
Paco2
mm Hg
30–35
30–40
30–40
Pao2
mm Hg
60–90
80–100
80–100
Table 34.1
Age-Dependent Respiratory Variables
Modified and reproduced with permission from O'Rourke PP, Crone RK. The respiratory system. In Gregory GA, ed. Gregory's Pediatric Anesthesia. 
2nd ed. New York: Churchill Livingstone: 1989:63–91.
IV
Chapter 34 Pediatrics
615
Neonatal Myocardium
The neonatal myocardium is characterized by poorly organ-
ized myocytes that contain fewer contractile elements than 
the adult myocardium, in which the myocytes are well 
organized in a parallel arrangement. The sarcoplasmic 
reticulum in the neonatal heart is immature with disorgan-
ized T-tubules. The neonatal myocardium depends heavily 
on the concentration of free ionized calcium for contractil-
ity. Transfusion of blood products to neonates may cause 
hypocalcemia and depressed cardiac function, which can be 
treated with calcium administration (also see Chapter 25).
Although the stroke volume of neonates is usually 
fixed and the cardiac output usually increases by increas-
ing heart rate only, the neonate can increase stroke 
volume up to a point according to the Frank-Starling 
relationship if the afterload is kept low.1
Autonomic Innervation of the Heart
The parasympathetic nervous system predominates early 
in life, while the sympathetic nervous system is still 
developing. This imbalance is clinically relevant and can 
be seen as marked bradycardia or even asystole during 
laryngoscopy, orogastric tube placement, or tracheal 
suctioning in the neonate or infant. Many anesthesia 
providers will pretreat with an anticholinergic—atropine 
or glycopyrrolate—before airway instrumentation.
Newborn Cardiovascular Assessment
The newborn cardiovascular examination should focus 
on the hemodynamics, including heart rate and arterial 
blood pressure (in all extremities) and oxygen saturation 
measurements. Other parts of the examination include 
capillary refill, peripheral pulses, respiratory status, and 
the possible presence of a murmur or third or fourth heart 
sound on auscultation. Urine output trends should be 
assessed. Analysis of arterial, venous, or capillary blood 
gases should be performed if acidosis is suspected. If per-
formed, results of a chest radiograph, electrocardiogram, 
or echocardiogram should be reviewed. Normal cardio-
vascular variables are displayed in Table 34.2
To arm
Superior vena cava
Right atrium
Foramen ovale
Pulmonary artery
Fetal Circulation
Ductus venosus
Umbilical vein
Placenta
Umbilical cord
Maternal
To left leg
Hypogastric arteries
Aorta
Bladder
Portal 
vein
Umbilical 
arteries
Left ventricle
Right ventricle
Inferior vena cava
Left kidney
Fetal
Aorta
To arm
To head
Left atrium
Lung
Liver
Lung
Ductus
arteriosus
Umbilicus
Arterial blood
Mixed arterial-venous blood
Venous blood
Waste from 
fetus
Blood and oxygen 
from mother
Fig. 34.1 Course of the fetal circulation in late gestation. Note the selective blood flow patterns across 
the foramen ovale and the ductus arteriosus. (From Greeley WJ, Cripe CC, Nathan AT. Anesthesia for 
pediatric cardiac surgery. In Miller RD, ed. Miller's Anesthesia, Vol 2, 8th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 
2015:2799–2853.)
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
616
Renal System
Postnatally, the kidneys replace the placenta in main-
taining metabolic homeostasis. The glomerular filtration 
rate (GFR) is 15% to 30% of adult values at birth and 
increases to 50% at 5 to 10 days of life. Adult values 
are reached by 1 year of age. The low GFR affects the 
neonate's ability to excrete sodium, water loads, and 
some drugs. Tubular function develops after 34 weeks of 
gestation. The tubules are immature and have a reduced 
threshold at which bicarbonate is no longer completely 
reabsorbed by the kidney. This is associated with the 
inability of young infants to respond to an acid load 
and the slightly reduced values of pH (7.37) and plasma 
bicarbonate (22 mEq/L). Infants also have decreased 
concentrating ability and a low level of production and 
excretion of urea. Blood urea nitrogen (BUN) remains 
normal because less urea is being produced. Creatinine 
immediately postnatally equals the maternal value and 
decreases in the first 48 hours to levels of 0.5 mEq/L or 
less if renal function is normal.
Hematologic System
The blood volume in the newborn ranges from 82 to 
93 mL/kg for the term newborn to 90 to 105 mL/kg for 
the preterm newborn. After the first year of life, blood 
volume declines to approximately 70 to 80 mL/kg. The 
normal newborn hemoglobin is 14 to 20 g/dL. Fetal 
hemoglobin (HbF) makes up 70% to 80% of the hemo-
globin at birth. HbF has a higher affinity for oxygen 
than does adult hemoglobin. The higher affinity of HbF 
for oxygen shifts the oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve 
to the left. The P50 of HbF is 18 to 20 mm Hg, and the 
P50 of adult hemoglobin is 27 mm Hg. The difference in 
P50 between the two types of hemoglobin facilitates the 
uptake of oxygen by the fetus at the placental interface.
The physiologic nadir in hemoglobin occurs at 9 to 
12 weeks of life and is 10 to 11 g/dL in the term infant. 
The decreased hemoglobin values do not affect oxygen 
delivery because of a shift in the oxyhemoglobin disso-
ciation curve to the right. The rightward shift is caused 
by an increase in 2,3-diphosphoglycerate (2,3-DPG) and 
the replacement of HbF by adult hemoglobin, which 
facilitates the unloading of oxygen in the tissues. The 
hemoglobin concentration stabilizes at 11.5 to 12 g/dL 
until 2 years of age, after which it increases gradually to 
adult values during puberty.
At birth, the vitamin K–dependent coagulation factors 
(II, VII, IX, X) are present at 20% to 60% of adult levels. 
This may lead to a prolonged prothrombin time. It can 
take several weeks for these factors to reach normal val-
ues owing to synthesis in an immature liver. Prophylactic 
intramuscular (IM) vitamin K is given to all newborns. 
In addition, maternal ingestion of some drugs, including 
anticonvulsants and warfarin, can cause vitamin K defi-
ciency in the newborn.
PHARMACOLOGIC DIFFERENCES
Pharmacokinetics
Protein binding of drugs is different between infants and 
adults. Some of this difference is because of a lower con-
centration of serum protein/albumin in younger children. 
There is also a lower affinity of protein-bound drugs for 
serum proteins in neonates compared with adults. With 
decreased protein binding, the concentration of free drug 
is increased, resulting in an increase in drug effect. The 
effect of decreased protein binding is most apparent in 
highly protein-bound drugs such as phenytoin, bupiv-
acaine, barbiturates, and diazepam (also see Chapter 4).
The difference in body composition also has an effect 
on pharmacokinetics. Preterm and term neonates have 
a larger percentage of total body water compared with 
older children and adults. This is reflected in an increase 
in the volume of distribution (Vd). A larger initial dose 
of drug is needed to reach the same therapeutic serum 
level and pharmacologic effect when the Vd is increased. 
In neonates larger initial doses are required for digoxin, 
succinylcholine, and antibiotics. Fentanyl is an important 
example of a commonly used anesthetic in neonates that 
requires larger initial doses. Also, neonates and infants 
may be more sensitive to the effects of certain drugs 
and need lower serum blood levels to achieve the same 
effects. Medications should be given slowly and titrated 
to predetermined effects.
There is also a decreased percentage of fat and mus-
cle in small infants compared with older children and 
adults. Drugs that rely on redistribution to these tissues 
for the termination of clinical effects may last longer 
Normal Range
Age Group
Heart Rate 
(beats/min)
Systolic Blood 
Pressurea (mm Hg)
Neonate 
(<30 days)
120–160
60–75
1–6 mo
110–140
65–85
6–12 mo
100–140
70–90
1–2 yr
90–130
75–95
3–5 yr
80–120
80–100
6–8 yr
75–115
85–105
9–12 yr
70–110
90–115
13–16 yr
60–110
95–120
>16 yr
60–100
100–125
Table 34.2
Normal Heart Rate and Systolic Blood 
Pressure as Functions of Age
aAs measured using an oscillometric blood pressure device.
IV
Chapter 34 Pediatrics
617
in small infants. Thiopental and propofol, for example, 
depend on redistribution for awakening after a single 
dose.
Hepatic Metabolism
Hepatic metabolism of drugs changes lipid-soluble, 
pharmacologically active drugs into usually inactive, 
nonlipid-soluble drugs for excretion. The activity of 
most hepatic enzymes is reduced in neonates, as is blood 
flow to the liver. This can result in a longer duration 
of effect of some pharmacologic drugs. Again, fentanyl 
is an important example. Hepatic metabolism of drugs 
approximates 50% of adult values at birth in a full-term 
neonate, rapidly increases during the first month of life 
to near-adult values, and is fully mature by 1 or 2 years 
of age.
Renal Excretion
Neonatal kidneys become more efficient with age. Owing 
to immature glomerular and tubular function, drugs that 
depend on the kidney for excretion such as aminoglyco-
sides have prolonged elimination half-times in neonates. 
Glomerular and tubular function is nearly mature at 20 
postnatal weeks and is fully mature at 2 years.
Pharmacology of Inhaled Anesthetics
Fa/Fi is the ratio of concentration of alveolar (Fa) to 
inspired (Fi) anesthetic. At the beginning of an inhaled 
induction of anesthesia, Fa is zero and Fi is large. As the 
Fa/Fi increases toward 1, induction of anesthesia occurs. 
The Fa/Fi ratio increases more rapidly in neonates com-
pared with adults, which means that anesthesia can be 
induced more rapidly than in adults.2 There is a larger 
alveolar ventilation to FRC ratio (Va/FRC) in neonates 
compared with adults and thus a more rapid increase 
in Fa/Fi. The ratio is 5:1 in neonates and 1.5:1 in adults 
(also see Chapter 7).
Infants and small children may have an increased 
cardiac output during an inhaled induction via a mask 
because of preoperative anxiety. Increased cardiac out-
put is associated with increased pulmonary blood flow 
and higher uptake of anesthetic from the lungs, which 
decreases Fa and slows the increase in Fa/Fi. Therefore 
as a result of uptake, the rate of anesthetic induction 
would slow down. However, the increased cardiac output 
also increases anesthetic delivery to the vessel-rich group 
(VRG), and the partial pressure of anesthetic in the VRG 
equilibrates with Fa. The partial pressure of anesthetic in 
the venous blood approaches the partial pressure in the 
alveoli and speeds the increase in Fa/Fi
In neonates there are also reduced tissue/blood solubil-
ity and reduced blood/gas solubility. Blood solubility of 
the higher-solubility inhaled anesthetics (e.g., isoflurane) 
is 18% lower in neonates. Therefore there is less uptake 
from the alveoli, and the increase in Fa/Fi is more rapid. 
The blood solubility of the less soluble inhaled anesthet-
ics, such as sevoflurane and desflurane, does not differ 
between infants and adults, and Fa/Fi does not increase 
as rapidly. The reduced tissue solubility of isoflurane also 
contributes to a more rapid increase in Fa/Fi in neonates 
compared with adults.
Effect of Shunt on Inhaled Induction of Anesthesia
Left-to-right shunts are mostly intracardiac (ven-
tricular or atrial septal defects) and are associated with 
increased pulmonary blood flow. These have no real 
effect on the rate at which induction of anesthesia 
occurs. Right-to-left shunts involve a portion of the 
systemic venous return that bypasses gas exchange in 
the lungs and is circulated systemically. Right-to-left 
shunts can be either intracardiac (tetralogy of Fallot 
[TOF]) or intrapulmonary (endobronchial intubation, 
atelectasis). Right-to-left shunts slow the rise in Fa/Fi
and delay induction of anesthesia. This is more pro-
nounced with less soluble anesthetics such as sevoflu-
rane and desflurane.
Minimum Alveolar Concentration
Minimum alveolar concentration (MAC) varies with age. 
The MAC of inhaled anesthetic drugs is highest in infants 
1 to 6 months old. The MAC is 30% less in full-term 
neonates for isoflurane and desflurane. Sevoflurane MAC 
at term is the same as at age 1 month.2 The presence 
and degree of prematurity decrease MAC. This may be 
because of the immaturity of the central nervous system 
or neurohumoral factors. Cerebral palsy and develop-
mental delay also reduce the MAC by 25%3 (also see 
Chapter 7).
FLUIDS AND ELECTROLYTES
Intraoperative Fluid Administration
Intravenous (IV) fluid given to children in the operating 
room serves one of four purposes: replacement of a defi-
cit, maintenance fluids, balancing ongoing losses, and 
treatment of hypovolemia (also see Chapter 24). Although 
hypotonic solutions such as 0.2% normal saline with 
added dextrose and potassium are often used outside the 
operating room for maintenance fluid administration, 
generally, non–glucose-containing isotonic solutions are 
given in the operating room in order to avoid hypona-
tremia and serum potassium concentration abnormalities. 
Lactated Ringer solution and Plasma-Lyte A are the most 
commonly used isotonic solutions in pediatric patients. 
Administration of 5% albumin is the most common col-
loid used in pediatric patients, but disagreement exists as 
to the efficacy of this therapy versus isotonic crystalloid 
administration.
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
618
Replacement of Preoperative Fluid Deficits
The preoperative deficit is the number of hours that a 
patient has had no oral intake or has been nil per os (NPO) 
multiplied by the hourly maintenance fluid requirement 
of the patient (Table 34.3). Generally, 50% of the deficit is 
replaced in the first hour of anesthesia, and the remaining 
50% is replaced during the following 2 hours.4
Patients presenting for emergency surgery may have 
larger fluid deficits from vomiting, fever, third-space 
fluid loss, or blood loss that needs to be taken into 
account. The use of warmed fluids should be consid-
ered to avoid hypothermia with administration of large 
amounts of intravascular volume replacement.
Maintenance Fluids
The hourly maintenance rate should be calculated using 
the “4-2-1 rule” and should be administered in the form 
of isotonic solution throughout the case.
Ongoing Fluid Losses
Ongoing losses can be characterized as whole blood loss, 
third-space loss, and evaporation. When blood or colloid 
is used to replace blood loss, a ratio of 1:1 is used. When 
crystalloid is used to replace blood loss, a ratio of 3:1 is 
used. Third-space and evaporative losses vary with the 
invasiveness of the procedure, from noninvasive such as 
a strabismus repair to very invasive such as an explora-
tory laparotomy for necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC) (see 
Table 34.3). Third-space losses can be replaced with iso-
tonic crystalloid.
Treatment of Hypovolemia
Intravascular volume can be monitored in pediatric 
patients by assessing the hemodynamic variables for 
the age group. Tachycardia and decreased arterial blood 
pressure suggest hypovolemia. Monitoring of urine 
output or central venous pressure can provide other 
information about intravascular volume status. If hypov-
olemia is suspected, a 10 to 20 mL/kg bolus of crystalloid 
or colloid can be given.
Glucose Administration
Glucose-containing solutions should not be used rou-
tinely in pediatric patients intraoperatively.4 They should 
not be used to replace intravascular fluid deficits, third-
space losses, or blood loss. In children older than 1 year 
of age the stress and catecholamine release associated 
with surgery usually prevent hypoglycemia. Glucose is 
commonly given to patients who are younger than 1 year 
of age or less than 10 kg. Pediatric patients at greater risk 
for developing hypoglycemia include premature and term 
neonates and any patient who is critically ill or who has 
hepatic dysfunction. Patients receiving total parenteral 
nutrition with high dextrose concentrations preopera-
tively can either be continued on a reduced rate of the 
same infusion or can be converted to a 5% or 10% dex-
trose-containing infusion to maintain the administration 
of glucose. An infusion pump should be used for high-
concentration dextrose solutions to avoid bolus adminis-
tration. Blood glucose concentration should be monitored 
closely in patients with risk of glucose instability.
TRANSFUSION THERAPY
Maximum Allowable Blood Loss
Before anesthesia, the maximum allowable blood loss 
(MABL) should be calculated for a given case and to 
prepare for possible transfusion of red blood cells (also 
Fluid Requirements
Basis for Replacement
Hourly
24 Hr
Maintenance
Weight (kg)
<10
11–20
>20
4 mL/kg
40 mL + 2 mL/kg >10 kg
60 mL + 1 mL/kg >20 kg
100 mL/kg
1000 mL + 50 mL/kg >10 kg
1500 mL + 20 mL/kg >20 kg
Replacement of Ongoing Lossesa
Type of surgery
Noninvasive (e.g., inguinal hernia repair, clubfoot repair)
Mildly invasive (e.g., ureteral reimplantation)
Moderately invasive (e.g., elective bowel reanastomosis)
Significantly invasive (e.g., bowel resection for necrotizing 
enterocolitis)
0–2 mL/kg/hr
2–4 mL/kg/hr
4–8 mL/kg/hr
≥10 mL/kg/hr
Table 34.3
Fluid Replacement in Children
aReplacement for ongoing losses with crystalloid must always be integrated with the patient's current cardiorespiratory status, status as 
evaluated during the surgical procedure, estimated blood loss with plans for blood product replacement, and baseline medical problems.
IV
Chapter 34 Pediatrics
619
see Chapter 25). The estimated blood volume (EBV) is 
dependent on the age of the child and hematocrit (Hct):
MABL = EBV × (Patient Hct – 
minimum acceptable Hct)/patient Hct
Initial treatment for blood loss is to maintain intra-
vascular volume by administering crystalloid or colloid 
solution. When the Hct reaches the threshold, red blood 
cells should be transfused. The minimum acceptable 
Hct depends on patient age and comorbid conditions. 
For example, a higher Hct (e.g., 30%–45%) is desired in 
patients with cyanotic CHD, those with significant pul-
monary disease, and infants with apnea/bradycardia or 
tachypnea/tachycardia.
Transfusion of Blood Products
Packed Red Blood Cells
Transfusion of 10 to 15 mL/kg of packed red blood cells 
(PRBCs) should increase the hemoglobin concentration 
by 2 to 3 g/dL. The estimated volume of transfusion of 
PRBCs should be predicted in advance in order to split 
units of cells in the blood bank into 10 to 15 mL/kg 
aliquots. This reduces the waste of a residual unit when 
only 60 mL, for example, is required for transfusion. It 
also allows the blood bank to reserve the remaining unit 
for later administration to the same patient, reducing 
multiple donor exposure for the patient.
Special processing of PRBCs, including leukocyte 
reduction and irradiation, is warranted in some settings, 
including young infants less than 4 months of age and 
immunosuppressed or transplant patients. Leukocyte 
reduction is achieved by removing white blood cells by 
filtration to a maximum concentration of 5 × 106 leu-
kocytes per PRBC unit. White blood cells are responsible 
for febrile, nonhemolytic transfusion reactions; human 
leukocyte antigen (HLA) allosensitization; and transmis-
sion of cytomegalovirus.
Irradiation of blood products is necessary to reduce 
the risk of transfusion-associated graft-versus-host dis-
ease, a potentially fatal condition in which transfused 
lymphocytes engraft and proliferate in the bone mar-
row of the recipient. Irradiated blood should be given 
to immunocompromised children and to children with 
normal immunity who share an HLA haplotype with the 
donor. For this reason, all directed donor blood from 
family members is irradiated.
Platelets
Platelet concentrates are either derived from whole blood 
or collected by apheresis. They are suspended in plasma, 
which contains coagulation factors. Administration of 5 
to 10 mL/kg of platelet concentrate should increase the 
platelet count by 50,000/dL to 100,000/dL. Indications 
for platelet transfusion are dependent on platelet num-
ber, function, and the presence or absence of bleeding. 
Platelets are a cellular component of blood and may 
require irradiation using the same criteria noted earlier 
for PRBCs.
Fresh Frozen Plasma
Fresh frozen plasma (FFP) is administered to correct 
coagulopathy caused by insufficient coagulation fac-
tors. It contains all coagulation factors and regulatory 
proteins. Administration of 10 to 15 mL/kg will increase 
factor levels by 15% to 20%. Prothrombin complex con-
centrates are derived from human plasma and contain 
vitamin K–dependent coagulation factors. The use of 
these agents has been described as a substitute for FFP 
for emergent reversal of anticoagulation and for the 
treatment of coagulopathy after cardiopulmonary bypass 
surgery.5-7
Cryoprecipitate and Fibrinogen Concentrate
Cryoprecipitate and fibrinogen concentrate are sources of 
fibrinogen for replacement. Cryoprecipitate is primarily 
used as a source of fibrinogen, factor VIII, factor XIII, and 
von Willebrand factor. It is ideal for administration to 
infants because of high levels of these factors in a small 
volume. Administration of 1 unit (10–20 mL) for every 5 
kg to a maximum of 4 units is usually adequate for cor-
recting coagulopathy caused by insufficient fibrinogen. 
Fibrinogen concentrate is a plasma-derived source of 
fibrinogen. It is increasingly being used for fibrinogen 
replacement in pediatric cardiac surgery and other com-
plex pediatric surgeries, including craniosynostosis and 
scoliosis repair. Viscoelastic testing, rotational throm-
boelastometry (ROTEM), or thromboelastography (TEG) is 
often used to guide replacement8–10 (also see Chapter 23).
Antifibrinolytics
Antifibrinolytics include aprotinin, a serine protease 
inhibitor, and tranexamic acid and ε-aminocaproic acid, 
lysine analogs. These drugs can decrease bleeding and 
the transfusion requirements during pediatric cardiac, 
spine, and cranial reconstructive surgery. Aprotinin is 
not currently available for use owing to concerns about 
adverse effects in adults.
Recombinant Factor VIIa
Recombinant factor VIIa is indicated for the treatment 
and prevention of bleeding in patients with factor VII 
deficiency and hemophiliacs with inhibitors to factors 
VIII and IX. Over the last 10 years, there have been multi-
ple reports of off-label use of the drug in nonhemophiliac 
pediatric patients in a variety of situations, including 
postcardiopulmonary bypass bleeding and trauma with a 
reduction in transfusion of blood products and normali-
zation of coagulation studies. Concerns remain about the 
potential for thromboembolic complications.11
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
620
PEDIATRIC AIRWAY
Airway Assessment
There is no valid airway assessment in children that is 
similar to the Mallampati classification in adults. Chil-
dren are often uncooperative with examination. Care 
should be taken to inspect for micrognathia, midface 
hypoplasia, limited mouth opening or cervical mobility, 
and other craniofacial anomalies that can predict difficult 
laryngoscopy. The patient and parents should be ques-
tioned about the presence of loose teeth or orthodontic 
appliances that may be dislodged or broken during air-
way manipulation (also see Chapter 16).
Airway Management Techniques
Airway management techniques in children are similar 
to those in adult patients, although the anatomy differs. 
Infants and young children have larger craniums, and 
thus it is unnecessary to place a pillow under the occiput 
to achieve the “sniffing position” for airway management. 
The tongue is often relatively large in young infants and 
can more easily obstruct the airway. The cricoid ring is the 
narrowest part of the airway of the infant and young child 
instead of the laryngeal aperture at the vocal cords, as in 
adults. However, recent magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) 
and bronchoscopic data indicate that the pediatric airway 
is cylindrical, and the narrowest part is the glottis, as in 
adults.12 The larynx is positioned relatively higher, at C4 in 
the neonate rather than C6 as in the adult. The epiglottis is 
omega-shaped and soft in the infant rather than U-shaped 
and stiff in the adult. Management of the airway using a 
facemask is more common in children. An appropriately 
sized mask should be selected, and care should be taken to 
optimally position the patient to avoid airway obstruction. 
If obstruction is encountered, continuous positive airway 
pressure of 5 to 10 cm H2O or an oral airway can be intro-
duced to restore airway patency.
Supraglottic airway (SGA) devices are also made in 
pediatric sizes and can be used for routine cases or as 
part of a difficult airway algorithm. SGA devices allow 
the patient to breathe spontaneously with no upper air-
way obstruction and without instrumentation of the tra-
chea. They can also be used safely with pressure control 
mechanical ventilation in children. A 2014 metaanalysis 
found that the use of the laryngeal mask during pediatric 
anesthesia was associated with a decreased incidence of 
respiratory complications, including desaturation, laryn-
gospasm, cough, and breath-holding, compared with 
tracheal intubation.13 In a 2017 randomized controlled 
trial of SGA versus endotracheal tube in infants under-
going elective procedures there were fewer perioperative 
adverse respiratory events with the SGA as well.14
Endotracheal tubes are used for a large percentage of 
anesthetics in children. Historically, uncuffed tubes were 
the standard of care in children younger than 8 years of 
age because of concerns about subglottic stenosis and 
postextubation stridor. However, with the introduction of 
endotracheal tubes with high-volume/low-pressure cuffs, 
some studies suggest that there is no increased risk of air-
way edema with cuffed tubes and that the use of cuffed 
tubes may decrease the number of laryngoscopies and 
intubations caused by inappropriate tube size. As a result 
of innovation in material and design, cuffs are now very 
thin and do not enlarge the outer diameter of the tube, 
and downsizing the inner diameter tube size to compen-
sate for the bulk of the cuff is no longer recommended.15
A comparison of classic sizing for uncuffed and cuffed 
tubes and the new recommendations for cuffed tubes is 
displayed in Table 34.4. The Microcuff endotracheal tube 
differs from the conventional endotracheal tube in that it 
has a thinner polyurethane cuff that is positioned closer 
to the tip of the tube. With this design change, the Mur-
phy eye was eliminated. There are some situations where 
this tube is advantageous, such as a distal tracheoe-
sophageal fistula located very close to the carina, where 
ventilation with a conventional endotracheal tube may 
result in a loss of tidal volume through the fistula.16 The 
lack of Murphy eye can also lead to an increased inability 
to ventilate when the tip becomes occluded with blood or 
secretions or when the tube is inappropriately deep (on 
the carina or in the mainstem bronchus). This can lead to 
barotrauma from an inability to exhale or the need for an 
emergent tube exchange.17 18
Age Group
Uncuffed ETT Size 
(ID mm)
Cuffed ETT Size 
(ID mm)
Preterm
2.5–3.0
NA
Term
3.0–3.5
3.0–3.5
1–6 mo
3.5
3.5
7–12 mo
4.0
3.5–4.0
1–2 yr
4.5
4.0–4.5
3–4 yr
4.5–5.0
4.5
5–6 yr
5.0–5.5
4.5–5.0
7–8 yr
NA
5.0–5.5
9–10 yr
NA
5.5–6.0
11–12 yr
NA
6.0–6.5
13–14 yr
NA
6.5–7.0
14+ yr
NA
7.0–7.5
Depth of insertion:
Multiplying the ID of the ETT by 3 yields the proper depth 
of insertion to the lips in centimeters. Example: 4.0 mm 
ETT × 3 = 12 cm for depth of insertion.
Table 34.4
Oral Endotracheal Tube (ETT) Size for Age
ID, Inner diameter.
IV
Chapter 34 Pediatrics
621
Difficult Pediatric Airway
The difficult airway in children can be challenging 
because of a lack of patient cooperation in most age 
groups, which makes awake endotracheal intubation vir-
tually impossible. Most techniques are performed under 
deep sedation or general anesthesia. A difficult airway 
should be anticipated in patients with craniofacial abnor-
malities or syndromes including Pierre Robin, Treacher 
Collins, and Goldenhar syndromes. A plan for manage-
ment of the airway and equipment should be prepared.
Anesthesia can be induced intravenously or via inha-
lation. Adequacy of ventilation via a mask should be 
determined. At this point, the airway can be visualized 
or managed with a variety of airway adjuncts, including 
the optical stylet, videolaryngoscope, flexible fiber-optic 
bronchoscope, and the SGA, all of which are made in one 
or more pediatric sizes.19 The SGA can be used as the 
primary airway management for the case or as a backup 
plan if tracheal intubation is required, either by temporar-
ily securing the airway or as a conduit through which an 
endotracheal tube can be placed.20 Maintaining oxygena-
tion, either during periods of apnea or during intubation 
attempts in infants, can be accomplished using high-flow 
nasal cannula, modified nasopharyngeal airway, or modi-
fied nasal Ring-Adair-Elwyn (RAE) endotracheal tube.21
Prenatally diagnosed difficult airways (e.g., large 
cystic hygroma) are occasionally delivered as an ex utero
intrapartum therapy (EXIT) procedure during which the 
fetus is partially delivered via cesarean section and the 
airway is secured while oxygenation is achieved via pla-
cental exchange (see later discussion).
ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
Preoperative Evaluation and Preparation
The preoperative evaluation of a pediatric patient differs 
from that of an adult for many reasons (also see Chapter 
13). The age and weight of the child are extremely impor-
tant, as equipment such as laryngoscopes, endotracheal 
tubes, masks, and IV fluid setups are based on the age 
and size of the child. Drugs are commonly dosed based 
on weight, and accuracy is critical to avoid underdos-
age and overdosage. A history of prematurity is impor-
tant, including the gestational age at which the patient 
was delivered and any sequelae of prematurity such 
as cerebral palsy, chronic lung disease, and apnea and 
bradycardia. If the child has a genetic or dysmorphic 
syndrome, distinguishing features should be reviewed for 
potential impact on the anesthetic, including craniofacial 
or cervical spine abnormalities, that may lead to a diffi-
cult endotracheal intubation. Previous anesthetic history 
should be reviewed. A history of sleep-disordered breath-
ing (obstructive sleep apnea), heralded by obstructed 
breathing or loud snoring during sleep, may be associated 
with difficult facemask ventilation and higher sensitivity 
to opioid-induced respiratory depression.
The family should be questioned about risk factors for 
malignant hyperthermia (MH), including family history 
of MH, patient history of MH, and congenital myopa-
thies such as central core disease or King-Denborough 
syndrome. The parents should also be questioned about 
the presence of muscular dystrophies. Although possibly 
not associated with true MH, exposure to succinylcholine 
and inhaled anesthetics can result in hyperkalemia and 
rhabdomyolysis in patients with muscular dystrophy, and 
a nontriggering anesthetic (e.g., propofol) should be used.
A review of systems should be performed, and any per-
tinent positive findings should be explored. The patient 
and parent should be questioned about the presence or 
recent history of congestion, cough, fever, vomiting, or 
diarrhea, which may affect the decision to proceed with 
an elective procedure. Vital signs, including heart rate, 
respiratory rate, temperature, and arterial blood pressure, 
should be measured. Use of a pulse oximeter can be used 
to screen for occult cardiac or pulmonary disease.
Physical examination should include a general assess-
ment of the patient's growth and development. The 
airway should be examined as thoroughly as possible 
with attention to craniofacial abnormalities, presence 
of micrognathia, and tonsillar size. The heart and 
lungs should be auscultated to evaluate for murmurs 
and wheezing or decreased breath sounds. The patient 
should be examined for any signs of infectious process, 
including rhinorrhea, tonsillar exudate, fever, and cough. 
Extremities should be examined for potential sites for IV 
access.
Preoperative Laboratory Testing
Routine preoperative laboratory testing for healthy 
children undergoing outpatient surgery is not indicated 
except in the case of urine pregnancy testing (UPT) (see 
later discussion). However, preoperative testing may be 
indicated in children with organ system dysfunction. For 
example, BUN, creatinine, and potassium levels should 
be tested preoperatively in patients with renal disease. 
Hemoglobin should be measured in former premature 
infants at risk for anemia having procedures associated 
with significant blood loss. Radiologic examination is 
not routinely performed. However, if recent radiographs, 
computed tomography (CT) scans, or MRIs are available, 
they should be reviewed. If echocardiogram results or 
subspecialist notes are available, they should also be 
reviewed.
Preoperative UPT of pediatric patients is a controver-
sial topic. Adolescent females are unlikely to admit that 
they are sexually active or if there is a chance that they 
might be pregnant. Parents are reluctant to believe that 
their child might be pregnant. Asking the parent and 
child about the possibility of pregnancy can be uncom-
fortable for all parties. For these reasons, most hospitals 
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
622
have a policy on preoperative UPT and will test all female 
patients beginning at menarche or at an arbitrary age 
(e.g., 10 years old). Occasionally, a UPT will be positive, 
and there must be a process for verification. There must 
also be a process for revealing the results to the patient 
and parents and for counseling, based on local institu-
tional considerations and individual state law.22
Recent Upper Respiratory Tract Infection
The presence or recent history of upper respiratory tract 
infection (URI) is another controversial topic. Whereas 
cancellations for URI were quite common in the past, the 
present view is that the risks associated with anesthetiz-
ing a child with URI are manageable with little morbidity. 
Still, there is a slightly increased risk of airway hyper-
reactivity with associated bronchospasm, laryngospasm, 
and postoperative arterial desaturation caused by atelec-
tasis. Parents should be questioned about the presence of 
a URI. The patient should be examined for nasal conges-
tion, cough, wheezing, and fever, and if a decision is 
made to proceed with the anesthetic, care should be taken 
to minimize risk of an adverse respiratory event.23 Signs 
of lower respiratory tract infection (productive cough, 
fever, rales, wheezing, rhonchi, diminished or absent 
breath sounds) require cancellation of elective surgery. 
Practical considerations usually result in minor surgery 
being performed in the face of URI, especially ear, nose, 
and throat (ENT) procedures when URI is frequent, and 
the surgery will often decrease the frequency of these 
infections. Elective major surgery (i.e., intraabdominal, 
intrathoracic, cardiac) is usually postponed for 2 to 6 
weeks.
Preoperative Fasting Guidelines
It is difficult for both the parents and the patient to keep a 
child NPO for an extended period, and fasting can lead to 
significant perioperative distress for the child and family. 
However, adherence to fasting guidelines minimizes the 
risk of aspiration of gastric contents. In the absence of 
bowel obstruction, gastroesophageal reflux, or other con-
ditions leading to delayed gastric emptying NPO guide-
lines in children are as follows: Solid foods are allowed 
until 6 to 8 hours before anesthesia; milk, fortified breast 
milk, and infant formula until 6 hours before; unfortified 
breast milk until 4 hours before; and clear liquids until 
2 hours before anesthesia.24 Forethought in scheduling 
and giving preoperative instructions about NPO times 
can minimize the time without oral intake, and children 
who are scheduled later in the day are often able to ingest 
clear liquids until 2 hours before the beginning of the 
anesthetic. The American Society of Anesthesiologists 
guidelines currently reflect a fasting time of 2 hours for 
clear fluids. However, multiple global pediatric anesthe-
sia societies (Europe, Australia, New Zealand) endorse a 
more liberal fasting time for clear fluids of 1 hour before 
an elective procedure. The 1-hour fasting time for clear 
liquids is being adopted at some large children's hospitals 
in the United States.25,26
Premedication
Both parental and patient anxiety can lead to significant 
perioperative stress and dissatisfaction. Attempts should 
be made to allay anxiety during the preoperative inter-
view. If it appears that the family and child are signifi-
cantly anxious, premedication may be required to calm 
and sedate the child. This may, in turn, improve parental 
anxiety.
The most widely used premedication in North America 
is midazolam. It can be administered via oral, intranasal, 
rectal, and IM routes. Midazolam 0.5 to 0.75 mg/kg pro-
vides adequate anxiolysis and sedation approximately 
20 minutes after oral administration. Rarely, a child will 
experience a paradoxical reaction to midazolam charac-
terized by agitation. Diazepam and lorazepam are most 
often used in older children and also produce sedation 
and amnesia.
Ketamine, a phencyclidine derivative, can also be used 
as an oral, nasal, rectal, or IM premedication. It produces 
sedation, amnesia, and analgesia, but it is also associ-
ated with excessive salivation, nystagmus, postoperative 
nausea and vomiting (PONV), and hallucinations. It does 
not depress airway reflexes, and airway tone is preserved. 
IM ketamine may be administered to agitated or devel-
opmentally delayed children who refuse to breathe via a 
mask or accept drugs for premedication.
The α2-agonist clonidine, given orally, provides pre-
operative sedation that is similar to that produced by 
benzodiazepines. It acts centrally and peripherally to 
decrease arterial blood pressure. Anesthetic requirements 
are decreased so that a lower concentration of volatile 
anesthetic is required to produce the same effect. Clo-
nidine does not cause airway obstruction and reduces 
requirements for postoperative pain medication. Cloni-
dine has a longer onset of effect than most other drugs 
used for premedication and must be given at least 1 hour 
before the anesthetic. This reduces clonidine's utility in 
most busy, rapid-case-turnover settings.
Dexmedetomidine, another α2-agonist, is becoming 
increasingly popular as a premedication. Though its onset 
is slightly longer than that of midazolam, it produces 
satisfactory sedation for parental separation and accept-
ance of breathing via a mask when given intranasally at 
a dose of 1 to 2 μg/kg. It also reduces the requirement 
for rescue analgesia and the incidence of postoperative 
agitation, delirium, and shivering.27
Parental presence at induction of anesthesia (PPIA) is 
another technique used to allay both patient and parental 
anxiety. The parent accompanies the child to either the 
operating room or an induction room for the induction 
of anesthesia. It can be comforting for both the parent 
and child. However, occasionally PPIA increases parental 
anxiety and can lead to increased patient anxiety and 
IV
Chapter 34 Pediatrics
623
physiologic changes in the parent, including syncope. 
The temperament of both the child and the parent should 
be considered before the suggestion of PPIA.28 A recent 
Cochrane review of nonpharmacologic interventions for 
assisting anesthetic induction in children concluded that 
PPIA is not useful. Other nonpharmacologic techniques, 
including low-sensory stimulation environment, hand-
held video games, and behavioral intervention, are more 
likely to reduce anxiety and improve patient cooperation 
during induction of anesthesia.29
Perioperative Considerations
Thermoregulation and Heat Loss
Because of a larger surface area to weight ratio, small 
infants tend to lose heat more rapidly by both radiation 
and convection than adults when placed in a cold envi-
ronment. Small infants are unable to shiver and rely on 
nonshivering thermogenesis by metabolizing brown fat 
for heat production. Heat loss can also be limited by ther-
moregulatory vasoconstriction. The warming of the oper-
ating room environment and the use of radiant warmers, 
warmed IV fluids, airway humidification, and forced air 
warming can help to preserve normothermia in children.
Perioperative hyperthermia may be caused by infec-
tion, inflammatory states, or overzealous warming. 
Hyperthermia is a late sign in MH; the first signs are 
usually tachycardia, hypercarbia, and acidosis.
Monitoring (Also See Chapter 20)
Standard American Society of Anesthesiologists moni-
tors include electrocardiography (ECG), blood pressure 
monitoring, pulse oximetry, and capnography, and they 
should be used in every pediatric anesthetic. A nerve 
stimulator is recommended for monitoring neuromus-
cular blockade. The continuous auscultation of breath 
sounds via esophageal or precordial stethoscope is also 
recommended, but some surveys demonstrate that this 
monitor is being used less in favor of other monitors.30
The monitoring of temperature is mandatory to detect 
MH or, more commonly, hypothermia.
Invasive arterial blood pressure and central venous 
pressure monitoring are indicated for invasive sur-
gery and for patients with significant cardiopulmonary 
comorbid conditions. Monitoring cerebral oxygenation 
via near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS) can be helpful 
during cardiac surgery and other cases in which cerebral 
perfusion may be compromised. Monitoring of processed 
electroencephalogram is also available for children to 
estimate and trend anesthetic depth, although there is 
some controversy over the reliability of this modality in 
children.31
Routes of Induction of Anesthesia
General anesthesia can be induced via inhalation or 
through the administration of IV or IM drugs in children. 
An inhaled induction of anesthesia with sevoflurane 
in oxygen with or without nitrous oxide is a common 
method used in children because it does not require IV 
access. The child is taken to the operating or induction 
room, monitors are placed, and a facemask is applied. The 
concentration of inhaled anesthetic should be increased 
slowly in a cooperative child. As induction progresses, 
the child will usually pass through stage 2, the excite-
ment phase. During this phase, coughing, vomiting, 
involuntary movement, and laryngospasm are possible. 
Attention should be devoted to the adequacy of the mask 
airway and the extent of obstruction. After the patient 
has passed through stage 2, an IV catheter can be placed. 
If laryngospasm occurs before placement of the periph-
eral IV catheter, treatment with continuous positive 
airway pressure or IM succinylcholine may be required.
IV induction is selected in children who already have 
IV access, who request an IV induction, or for whom 
an IV induction is indicated (full stomach, persistent 
gastroesophageal reflux disease, significant potential for 
cardiopulmonary compromise). In some medical centers a 
peripheral IV catheter is placed in all children presenting 
for surgery. The most common induction anesthetic in 
children is propofol 2 to 3 mg/kg. Neuromuscular block-
ade, usually rocuronium 0.6 to 1.2 mg/kg or vecuronium 
0.08 to 0.1 mg/kg, is often used to facilitate tracheal 
intubation, particularly in older children. Intubation of 
the trachea without muscle relaxation, facilitated by a 
bolus of propofol 1 to 1.5 mg/kg after induction of anes-
thesia with sevoflurane, is a common approach in infants 
and young children without significant cardiopulmonary 
disease.
IM induction of anesthesia is used most commonly 
in developmentally delayed or severely uncooperative 
children and can be achieved with IM administration of 
ketamine (5 mg/kg). IM atropine or glycopyrrolate can 
be administered with the ketamine to decrease excess 
salivation. An IM ketamine induction may also be used 
in children with burns, poor peripheral veins, and a dif-
ficult airway because of extensive scarring for whom 
an inhaled induction of anesthesia may result in loss of 
both airway tone and the ability to ventilate the lungs 
via a mask.
Maintenance of Anesthesia
Anesthesia is maintained with inhaled anesthetic or IV 
administration of drugs or a combination of the two. 
Muscle relaxant can be used to facilitate operative 
exposure. However, neuromuscular blockade is probably 
used less frequently in children than in adults (also see 
Chapter 11).
Emergence
In pediatric anesthetic practice the decision to extu-
bate the trachea while deeply anesthetized, or after 
emergence, must be made on a case-by-case basis. In 
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
624
some circumstances children are allowed to regain their 
airway reflexes and are extubated “awake.” However, 
extubation during deep anesthesia and emergence 
without an endotracheal tube in place is a common 
practice in pediatric anesthesia. Advantages to wait-
ing to extubate the trachea until the patient is awake 
include the ability to protect against aspiration of 
stomach contents or blood/secretions from the airway, 
and the relative safety of passing through stage 2 with 
an endotracheal tube in place. Advantages of extuba-
tion during deep anesthesia include no coughing or 
straining against suture lines or incisions and removal 
of the endotracheal tube before it leads to airway reac-
tivity, both of which lead to a smoother emergence. 
The child then emerges in the operating room or in the 
recovery room, and meticulous attention is needed to 
ensure that laryngospasm or airway obstruction does 
not go undetected during or after transfer to the pos-
tanesthesia care unit (PACU).
Pain Management (Also See Chapter 40)
Analgesic drugs used for pain control in children include 
acetaminophen, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs 
(NSAIDs), and opioids, and they can be administered by 
an oral, IM, or IV route. The most common opioids used 
in pediatric anesthesia are fentanyl and morphine. Side 
effects include sedation, respiratory depression, pruritus, 
and nausea/vomiting.
IV acetaminophen is now available and is a useful 
addition to systemic opioids in perioperative pain man-
agement. It is critical that perioperative acetaminophen 
administration is communicated between all providers 
and parents and documented on the medical record to 
prevent duplicate dosing and hepatotoxicity.
NSAIDs, including ketorolac, can be associated with 
platelet dysfunction, gastrointestinal bleeding, and renal 
dysfunction. Therefore patient comorbid conditions 
should be considered such as renal impairment and 
risk of bleeding (tonsillectomy, cardiac surgery) before 
administration of NSAIDs for pain control. Advantages 
of acetaminophen and NSAIDs include lack of excessive 
sedation and respiratory depression, which are common 
side effects of opioids.
Regional Anesthesia (Also See Chapters 17 and 18)
Regional anesthesia for intraoperative and postoperative 
pain control provides excellent analgesia with minimal 
side effects and decreases the requirement for opioid and 
nonopioid pain relievers. The single-shot caudal injection 
with local anesthetic is most commonly used for surgery 
at or below the level of the umbilicus. Alternatively, a 
catheter can be advanced into the caudal epidural space 
for delivery of an infusion of local anesthetic, which can 
be continued into the postoperative period. In children 
younger than 5 years of age the catheter can usually be 
advanced to any spinal level and deliver local anesthetic 
to the associated dermatomes. In addition, the epidural 
space can be accessed relatively easily from the lumbar 
or thoracic level with subsequent placement of a catheter.
Other commonly performed regional blocks include 
brachial plexus, ilioinguinal nerve, femoral nerve, lateral 
femoral cutaneous nerve, sciatic and popliteal nerve, 
ankle, and penile blocks. These blocks are performed 
using landmark technique supplemented by ultrasound 
guidance; a peripheral nerve stimulator is also occasion-
ally used by some anesthesia providers. When perform-
ing regional blocks in children, the child is commonly 
receiving a general anesthetic and is therefore unable to 
communicate the elicitation of a paresthesia or extreme 
pain on injection, which indicates a possible perineural 
injection. For this reason, guidance with ultrasound is 
widely assumed to increase the safety of peripheral nerve 
blocks in children.32
Spinal anesthesia has also been used as the sole anes-
thetic or in combination with a general anesthetic for 
a variety of cases. The technique gained popularity as 
an alternative to general anesthesia in former preterm 
infants having inguinal hernia repair who were at high 
risk for perioperative apnea. This technique has been 
expanded to infants undergoing longer urologic surgeries 
(e.g., hypospadias repair) for longer than 60 minutes.33
Spinal anesthesia has also been used in older infants and 
children with and without increased risk for a general 
anesthetic.34
The Postanesthesia Care Unit (Also See 
Chapter 39)
Airway Monitoring
The PACU is a critical phase of the perioperative expe-
rience where a number of problems may be encoun-
tered. Many patients are transferred deeply anesthetized 
without an endotracheal tube from the operating room 
and will emerge from general anesthesia in the PACU. 
Transport from the operating room to the PACU must be 
carefully monitored to detect hypoventilation or airway 
obstruction; many institutions require supplemental 
oxygen administration and even pulse oximetry during 
transport. As the patient regains airway reflexes, there 
is an increased risk for airway obstruction. The airway 
must be monitored closely for signs of obstruction, 
laryngospasm, and hypoxemia, and a self-inflating or 
Jackson–Rees–style ventilating circuit and mask must be 
available to provide oxygen, continuous positive airway 
pressure, and ventilation. In addition, succinylcholine 
should be available to facilitate emergent reintubation 
or management of laryngospasm. The airway should also 
be monitored for stridor/postintubation croup caused 
by swelling. Treatment with dexamethasone, humidi-
fied oxygen, or nebulized racemic epinephrine may be 
warranted. Patients should also be monitored closely for 
apnea and hypoventilation in the recovery area.
IV
Chapter 34 Pediatrics
625
Postoperative Nausea and Vomiting
PONV is ranked by parents as the most unwanted side 
effect of anesthesia. A recent study identified four 
risk factors that predict PONV in children: age 3 years 
and older, strabismus surgery, duration of surgery, 
and previous history of postoperative vomiting in the 
patient or in a parent or sibling. Risk reduction can 
be achieved with interventions or strategies including 
liberal fluid administration, the use of total IV anesthe-
sia, the opiate-sparing effects of regional anesthesia/
analgesia, and the use of IV acetaminophen or the 
alpha-2 agonist dexmedetomidine or clonidine.35 Two-
drug pharmacologic prophylaxis with ondansetron and 
dexamethasone has an expected relative risk reduction 
for PONV of approximately 80%.36 Aprepitant, an oral 
neurokinin-1 receptor antagonist, shows promise as a 
prophylactic antiemetic in pediatric patients. This may 
be helpful in patients who are at high risk of PONV but 
have a contraindication or relative contraindication to 
ondansetron (e.g., long QT) or corticosteroids (diabetes 
mellitus).37 As administration of aprepitant and the IV 
NK-1 receptor antagonist fosaprepitant are associated 
with decreased efficacy of oral contraceptives, appropri-
ate counseling of patients receiving the drug should be 
performed.38
Emergence Agitation and Delirium
Emergence agitation (EA) and emergence delirium (ED) 
are characterized by inconsolability, restlessness, non-
purposeful movements, incoherence, lack of eye contact, 
and decreased awareness of surroundings. EA/ED is fre-
quently encountered in the PACU and can be troublesome 
to families, recovery room caregivers, and anesthesia 
care providers. Contributors to the development of EA/
ED may include volatile anesthesia, type of surgery, the 
age of the patient, parental and/or patient anxiety, pre-
existing patient behavior, and the quality of interaction 
between the patient/family and health care staff. Unfor-
tunately, EA/ED can be associated with postoperative 
maladaptive behavior lasting days to weeks.39 The Pedi-
atric Anesthesia Emergence Delirium (PAED) scale was 
developed to assist in the diagnosis of ED, as pain can be 
difficult to distinguish from EA/ED. Though many drugs, 
including propofol, fentanyl, clonidine, and dexmedeto-
midine, may decrease the incidence of ED, only low-dose 
ketamine and nalbuphine decrease the incidence without 
prolonging emergence.
Pain Control
The adequacy of pain control must be assessed frequently 
for pediatric patients of all ages from neonates to ado-
lescents. Patients are recovering from a wide spectrum 
of procedures with differing amounts of associated pain. 
The children may be preverbal, nonverbal, or devel-
opmentally delayed and unable to communicate their 
pain level. There are several scales for assessing pain in 
children, including the FLACC (face, legs, activity, cry, 
consolability) and Wong–Baker Faces Pain Scale, along 
with evaluating vital signs. However, pain can be con-
fused with anxiety, ED, and anger in children. Opioids 
can be titrated to effectively treat moderate to severe 
postoperative pain. NSAIDs or acetaminophen can also 
be administered, and if an epidural catheter is in place, it 
can be assessed for functionality and redosed.
Discharge Criteria
PACUs are often structured in two stages. Patients are 
transferred from the operating room directly to the first 
stage of recovery, where the airway is assessed continu-
ously and acute postoperative pain and PONV are treated. 
After patients are awake with a stable airway and pain 
under control, they may be moved to a second stage to 
complete recovery. The modified Aldrete scoring system 
is the most frequently used scoring system to determine 
discharge readiness. In the outpatient setting patients 
may go directly from the operating room to second-stage 
recovery, known as fast tracking.
Behavioral Recovery
Children can develop maladaptive behavioral changes 
after surgery, including sleep and eating disturbances, 
separation anxiety, new-onset enuresis, and other behav-
ioral issues. Parental anxiety, parental presence at 
induction, parental presence in the PACU, and the use 
of premedication have been shown to influence the 
incidence of these behavioral changes. Most of these 
behavioral changes do not persist beyond 3 days post-
operatively. However, avoidance of negative behavior 
changes is associated with higher patient/parent satisfac-
tion and a better overall perioperative experience.28
MEDICAL AND SURGICAL DISEASES 
AFFECTING THE NEONATE
Necrotizing Enterocolitis
NEC is a common surgical emergency in the neonate. 
This condition is primarily seen in premature infants, 
with over 90% of affected patients born before 36 weeks 
of gestation. The incidence of NEC among premature and 
low-birth-weight infants is 3% to 7% and is inversely 
proportional to gestational age. From 20% to 40% of 
infants with NEC will require surgery, with a surgical 
mortality rate of 23% to 36%.40
The pathophysiology of NEC involves intestinal 
mucosal ischemic injury secondary to reduced mesenteric 
blood flow, often in conjunction with a patent ductus 
arteriosus (PDA), with its resultant “steal” of blood flow 
away from the systemic circulation. Bacterial infection 
is also an important component, and signs of abdominal 
sepsis are prominent. Ischemia, infection, and inflam-
mation may result in full-thickness necrosis of small 
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
626
intestine, particularly in the ileocolic region, with result-
ant intestinal perforation.
Clinical Manifestations
The patient presenting for surgery for NEC is most often 
a preterm infant, with other complications of prema-
turity such as respiratory distress syndrome, PDA, a 
history of birth asphyxia, or other cardiorespiratory 
instability. Clinical signs include abdominal distention; 
bloody stools; dilated intestinal loops and pneumatosis 
intestinalis on abdominal radiograph; temperature insta-
bility; and signs of sepsis, including thrombocytopenia, 
hemodynamic instability, and disseminated intravascular 
coagulopathy (DIC). Intestinal perforation is evident on 
abdominal radiography and is a surgical emergency; 
these patients are often critically ill or unstable with 
hypotension, DIC, metabolic acidosis, and worsening 
respiratory status.
Medical and Surgical Treatment
Initial treatment of NEC without intestinal perforation or 
other signs of extensive bowel necrosis is usually medical, 
with broad-spectrum antibiotics, gastric decompression, 
serial abdominal examination and radiographs, and care-
ful monitoring for signs of cardiorespiratory decompensa-
tion. Originally, surgery for NEC with perforation was by 
laparotomy, resection of necrotic intestine, and creation 
of ostomies. This necessitated later reconstructive surgery 
and often resulted in resection of extensive lengths of 
small intestine, resulting in short-gut syndrome. In more 
recent years primary peritoneal drainage, whereby a small 
incision is made and a surgical drain is left in place, has 
gained popularity for smaller, sicker infants, who may 
then have definitive surgery later when their medical 
condition has improved. Some patients may not require 
further treatment at all, and survival using this more con-
servative approach is comparable in many series.40
Management of Anesthesia
Surgery for NEC is most often emergent, and preoperative 
preparation should focus on assessment and correction 
of fluid and electrolyte abnormalities, hemodynamic and 
respiratory instability, providing broad-spectrum antibi-
otics, and correcting coagulation abnormalities. Surgery 
for NEC can be performed at the bedside in the neonatal 
intensive care unit (NICU), necessitating a mobile surgical 
and anesthesia team and equipment. Most patients are 
already tracheally intubated. Monitoring often includes 
a peripheral arterial catheter; umbilical artery catheters 
are often removed because of concern over further mes-
enteric ischemia. Central venous access is often desirable, 
but attempts to secure invasive monitors should not 
delay emergent surgery.
Anesthesia with synthetic opioids such as fentanyl 
is the regimen best tolerated in the critically unstable 
neonate. Doses are titrated, starting at 2 to 5 μg/kg, but 
additional doses are added to provide 20 to 50 μg/kg 
fentanyl if tolerated. Volatile anesthetics are often not 
tolerated owing to vasodilatory effects, and small doses of 
benzodiazepines such as midazolam 0.05 to 0.1 mg/kg or 
ketamine 0.5 mg/kg may be added. Muscle relaxation with 
rocuronium, vecuronium, or another nondepolarizing neu-
romuscular blocking drug is necessary. Because of large 
fluid losses from exposed intestine undergoing resection, 
IV fluid requirements are often very large, at 10 to 20 mL/
kg/hr, and 5% albumin, PRBCs, FFP, and platelets are often 
infused in the face of DIC and significant blood loss. Ino-
tropic support in the form of dopamine 5 to 10 μg/kg/min 
or epinephrine 0.03 to 0.05 μg/kg/min is often needed and 
should be instituted early, rather than infusing excessive 
amounts of IV fluid to maintain blood pressure in unsta-
ble patients. Calcium chloride or gluconate bolus is often 
necessary to maintain normal ionized calcium levels to 
preserve myocardial contractility and vascular tone, par-
ticularly with infusion of significant volumes of citrated 
blood products. Frequent analysis of arterial blood gases to 
measure acid–base status and oxygenation, in addition to 
serum electrolytes, glucose, ionized calcium, and lactate, 
is often desirable to direct therapy. Mechanical ventila-
tion is adjusted to maintain Pao2 50 to 70 mm Hg and 
Spo2 90% to 95% in the premature infant; however, in the 
extremely ill patient it is preferable to maintain somewhat 
higher oxygen tensions to allow for a margin of safety. 
Hemoglobin should be maintained at 10 to 15 g/dL to 
preserve oxygen-carrying capacity. Temperature manage-
ment is critical, and these surgeries are often performed on 
the patient's overhead warming bed. The operating room 
temperature must be 85°F to 90°F (29–32°C) or higher, and 
forced air warming and warmed blood products must be 
used in an effort to maintain core temperature at 96.8°F 
(36°C) or higher. Postoperatively, mechanical ventilation, 
inotropic and fluid support, and antibiotics are continued, 
and a full report of the operation and anesthetic is given 
to the NICU team.
Abdominal Wall Defects: Gastroschisis and 
Omphalocele
Gastroschisis is an abdominal wall defect whereby the 
intestines protrude, usually to the right of the umbilical 
cord, without a covering sac, with the umbilical cord 
not part of the defect (Fig. 34.2).41 These infants most 
often do not have associated congenital or chromosomal 
anomalies. An omphalocele is a midline defect with the 
intestines covered by a peritoneal sac and the umbili-
cal cord incorporated into the defect (Fig. 34.3). These 
neonates frequently have other associated anomalies, 
including CHD.
Medical and Surgical Treatment
These diagnoses may be made prenatally, and presurgi-
cal management includes covering the exposed bowel 
IV
Chapter 34 Pediatrics
627
with plastic or other synthetic material, attention to 
fluid replacement, and prevention of volvulus and bowel 
ischemia. Nasogastric decompression is important to 
minimize fluid and air accumulation. The size of the 
defects varies greatly; formerly even large defects were 
candidates for primary surgical reduction of the vis-
cera and fascial closure, as this was thought to prevent 
later intestinal complications. However, with excessive 
increases in intraabdominal pressure, an abdominal 
compartment syndrome can arise, resulting in intes-
tinal ischemia and renal failure. In addition, the sud-
den increase in intraabdominal pressure may lead to 
increased ventilatory requirements, often necessitating 
days of sedation, muscle relaxation, and careful moni-
toring of ventilatory and hemodynamic status. Now a 
staged approach is often used, which involves contain-
ing the viscera in a Silastic silo with its edges sutured to 
the peritoneum around the defect. Then, using gravity, 
compression of the bowel, traction, and expansion of 
the abdominal cavity, the viscera are gradually reduced 
into the peritoneal cavity over a period of days to weeks. 
Surgical closure of the peritoneum and skin is undertaken 
at the end of this period. Some small to moderate-sized 
defects can be managed with a similar staged reduction 
strategy, with the peritoneum and skin defects healing by 
secondary intention.
Management of Anesthesia
Because of the modern staged approach, the challenges 
of providing anesthesia for a one-stage reduction and 
closure are rarely encountered. Still, the initial surgery is 
often to suture the Silastic silo and partially reduce the 
viscera. Preoperative preparation includes maintaining 
adequate fluid replacement to account for losses from 
the exposed viscera. These infants may be premature but 
are often full term and have a stable cardiorespiratory 
status. The general considerations noted earlier for NEC 
surgery concerning temperature management and fluid 
replacement apply to surgery for abdominal wall defects. 
Induction of anesthesia and tracheal intubation can be 
accomplished with a variety of drugs, with precautions 
to prevent aspiration of gastric contents. The umbilical 
vessels are not available, so secure large-bore venous 
access should be obtained, and possibly arterial catheter 
monitoring for patients with very large defects or unsta-
ble cardiorespiratory status. IV fluid replacement of 10 
to 20 mL/kg/hr is important, along with administration 
of 5% or 10% dextrose at maintenance rates. Anesthesia 
can be maintained with volatile anesthetics, benzodiaz-
epines, and opioids, with the dose depending on plans 
for tracheal extubation at the end of the procedure. If 
the primary procedure is silo placement without primary 
reduction, the tracheas of full-term infants can often be 
extubated at the end of the procedure, and subsequent 
reductions can be done at the bedside with small-dose 
sedation. The final fascial and skin closure will require 
a full general anesthetic. If a full reduction and closure 
of a major defect is planned, arterial and central venous 
Fig. 34.2 Gastroschisis. Note position to the right of the 
umbilical cord, which is not included in the defect. It is also 
not covered with a peritoneal sac. (From Marven S, Owen 
A. Contemporary postnatal surgical management strategies 
for congenital abdominal wall defects. Semin Pediatr Surg. 
2008;17:224, used with permission.)
Fig. 34.3 A giant omphalocele supported with dressing collar. 
Note the midline position, covering with peritoneal sac, and 
inclusion of the umbilical cord. (From Marven S, Owen A. 
Contemporary postnatal surgical management strategies 
for congenital abdominal wall defects. Semin Pediatr Surg. 
2008;17:223, used with permission.)
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
628
pressure monitoring are important, along with bladder 
catheterization and careful management of cardiores-
piratory status. This often requires significant increases 
in positive end-expiratory pressure, additional fluid 
administration, and inotropic support, in addition to pro-
longed postoperative ventilation, sedation, and muscle 
relaxation.
Tracheoesophageal Fistula
Tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) is seen in five differ-
ent anatomic configurations (Fig. 34.4), with the most 
common being type C, with esophageal atresia and a 
distal TEF. Diagnosis is made when the neonate expe-
riences choking and cyanosis when attempting oral 
feeds. The chest and abdominal radiograph reveal an 
inability to pass an orogastric tube, which lodges in 
the blind esophageal pouch, and the presence of gas-
filled intestines from the distal TEF. Infants with TEF 
often have other anomalies, and many have VACTERL 
association (vertebral defects, imperforate anus, cardiac 
defects, tracheoesophageal fistula, renal anomalies, limb 
anomalies). A thorough evaluation for these additional 
defects, especially cardiac, should be undertaken in 
these infants. The severity of illness can be mild (e.g., 
feeding difficulties in a full-term neonate with no res-
piratory distress), but some patients are critically ill. 
Severe respiratory failure can result from continuous 
aspiration of gastric contents via the distal TEF, exac-
erbated by respiratory distress syndrome and massive 
abdominal distention from filling of the stomach with 
gas from the TEF. Patients at more frequent risk of peri-
operative morbidity and mortality include those with 
complex CHD, weight less than 2 kg, poor pulmonary 
compliance, large pericarinal fistulas, and those sched-
uled for thoracoscopic repair.42
Surgical Approaches
Earlier approaches were usually staged, often first 
performing a gastrostomy under local anesthesia to 
decompress the stomach and allow some recovery of 
pulmonary function. Then, a right thoracotomy would 
be performed to ligate the TEF and possibly to recon-
struct the esophageal atresia. Other approaches included 
a cervical esophagostomy to drain the upper esophageal 
pouch and prevent aspiration. In recent years the staged 
approach has largely been abandoned. In the current era 
a one-stage ligation of the TEF with primary esophageal 
repair, without a gastrostomy, is the preferred strategy in 
about 80% to 90% of patients.43 Critically ill premature 
infants may still require gastrostomy before thoracotomy 
and TEF ligation, and if the gap between esophageal seg-
ments is too long, gastrostomy followed by esophageal 
dilation and stretching may be required after the initial 
thoracotomy. Outcomes of neonatal TEF surgery vary; the 
critically ill premature infant or neonate with multiple 
anomalies has a higher mortality and morbidity rate; the 
full-term neonate without other problems has an opera-
tive survival rate approaching 100%.
Anesthetic Management
The critically ill neonate with high ventilation pressures 
and gastric distention will emergently undergo anesthesia 
for right thoracotomy and ligation of the TEF. These infants 
may present in extremis owing to a large TEF, with most 
of the tidal volume being lost through the TEF, severely 
compromising ventilation. Manual ventilation, inotropic 
support, sodium bicarbonate, and vasoactive bolus drugs 
Type C
Type A
Type E
Type D
Type B
Fig. 34.4 Classification of tracheoesophageal anomalies in descending order of incidence. Type A (8%) 
is esophageal atresia without a tracheoesophageal fistula. Type B (1%) is esophageal atresia with a 
proximal tracheoesophageal fistula. Type C (86%) is esophageal atresia with a distal tracheoesophageal 
fistula. Type D (1%) is esophageal atresia with both proximal and distal tracheoesophageal fistulas. Type 
E (4%) is an H-type fistula without esophageal atresia. (From Gross RE. Artesia of the esophagus. In The 
Surgery of Infancy and Childhood. Philadelphia: Saunders; 1953:75–102.)
IV
Chapter 34 Pediatrics
629
such as epinephrine and atropine may be needed until 
the TEF is ligated and the stomach decompressed. More 
commonly the trachea is intubated and there are varying 
degrees of difficulty with ventilation. After the patient 
is transported carefully to the operating room, anesthe-
sia is carefully induced with the administration of IV or 
inhaled anesthetics and muscle relaxants. The patient is 
then positioned for right thoracotomy. An arterial catheter 
is essential for monitoring of arterial blood pressure and 
gas exchange. Very careful attention is paid to adequacy 
of ventilation during the entire case, as the endotracheal 
tube may migrate into the TEF and compromise ventila-
tion. End-tidal CO2, careful observation of lung inflation 
and chest movement, and a precordial stethoscope in the 
left axillary area are important monitors. Periods of diffi-
cult ventilation and hypoxemia during lung retraction and 
TEF ligation should be expected. Normally, after the TEF is 
ligated, ventilation improves dramatically.
In the patient whose trachea is not intubated awake 
tracheal intubation was classically considered to be the 
best technique, but in the modern era this is rarely prac-
ticed. Instead, either IV or inhaled induction of anesthesia, 
with muscle relaxation, can be achieved after suction-
ing the upper esophageal pouch and administration of 
oxygen. Then, an endotracheal tube is passed into the 
distal trachea, and gentle positive-pressure ventilation 
is accomplished with careful assessment of effectiveness 
of ventilation. Endotracheal tube migration into the TEF 
should be suspected with ventilation difficulties. Bron-
choscopy is performed in some centers to assess the size 
and position of the TEF before surgery and to properly 
position the endotracheal tube; only in the presence of a 
large TEF (>3 mm) located near the carina is there likely to 
be difficulty with ventilation.44 After ligation of the TEF, 
the esophagus is usually repaired primarily. Some centers 
are performing TEF repair via the video-assisted thora-
coscopy approach, which itself can cause difficulty with 
ventilation secondary to the CO2 insufflation. Although it 
is possible to extubate the trachea in the operating room 
in a vigorous full-term infant without complications, a 
more prudent approach is to leave the trachea intubated 
to allow adequate analgesic administration in the NICU. 
If the patient requires reintubation, the subsequent air-
way manipulation could disrupt the esophageal repair. A 
nasogastric tube is placed by the surgeon in the operating 
room for early gastric decompression and feeding.
Congenital Diaphragmatic Hernia
Congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH) is a defect in the 
diaphragm evident early in gestation, which results in 
the herniation of the intestines, spleen, and sometimes 
stomach or liver, into the thorax. Most commonly this 
is on the left side through the foramen of Bochdalek 
and results in severe restriction of lung development 
(Fig. 34.5). This lesion is often diagnosed prenatally; 
the neonate with significant defects presents with res-
piratory failure, requiring mechanical ventilation. These 
neonates present with a scaphoid abdomen, bowel 
sounds in the chest, respiratory distress, and cyanosis 
of varying degrees. Pulmonary hypertension from lung 
hypoplasia and immediate postnatal elevation in PVR 
cause right-to-left shunting through patent foramen 
ovale and ductus arteriosus, often resulting in severe 
cyanosis from persistent fetal circulation. In these cases 
surgical treatment, which consists of an abdominal or 
thoracoabdominal incision to reduce the viscera into 
the abdominal cavity and repair the diaphragm either 
primarily or with a synthetic mesh material, must be 
delayed while therapy is instituted to stabilize the medi-
cal condition of the infant. Laparoscopic repair has also 
been described. High-frequency oscillatory ventila-
tion (HFOV) to improve gas exchange in hypoplastic 
lungs, inhaled nitric oxide (iNO) to treat the pulmonary 
hypertension, or extracorporeal membrane oxygena-
tion (ECMO) to stabilize the cardiorespiratory status in 
the most severely affected neonates may be necessary. 
Surgical repair is then undertaken several days later, 
sometimes while on ECMO, which results in reduction 
of the abdominal viscera but does not solve the problem 
of lung hypoplasia and pulmonary hypertension, which 
may require days or weeks of support until they improve 
sufficiently.45
Management of Anesthesia
These infants are often critically ill. Transport to the 
operating room is achieved carefully. HFOV may need to 
Fig. 34.5 Left-sided congenital diaphragmatic hernia. Note bowel 
loops filling the left hemithorax and nasogastric tube in the 
stomach, which is also herniated through the defect. The heart 
is shifted to the right side of the chest. (From de Buys Roessingh 
AS, Dinh-Xuan A. Congenital diaphragmatic hernia: Current 
status and review of the literature. Eur J Pediatr. 2009;168:398, 
used with permission.)
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
630
be transitioned to conventional ventilation, as surgery 
with HFOV may not be possible. iNO should be contin-
ued throughout the operating room course. Anesthesia 
is often provided with high-dose synthetic opioids such 
as fentanyl 25 to 50 μg/kg or more to provide analgesia 
and blunt the pulmonary hypertensive response to pain-
ful stimuli. Volatile anesthetics are often not tolerated, 
so small doses of benzodiazepines or ketamine can pro-
vide amnesia. Monitoring of arterial and central venous 
pressures is essential, and inotropic support with dopa-
mine or epinephrine is often necessary. Frequent arterial 
blood gases are analyzed, and changes in ventilation 
are made to maximize oxygenation, reduce Paco2, and 
increase pH to lower pulmonary artery pressures. After 
left thoracoabdominal incision at the costal margin, 
the abdominal contents are reduced out of the thorax, 
which may acutely improve ventilation. The diaphragm 
is reconstructed with a synthetic mesh material. Manual 
ventilation or ventilation with an intensive care unit 
(ICU) ventilator may be necessary throughout the case, 
as many standard anesthesia machine ventilators are 
often not capable of delivering the high inspired gas 
flows and small tidal volumes necessary to ventilate 
such patients. The patient is transported back to the 
NICU, where HFOV may need to be reinstated and iNO 
should be continued.
The most severely ill neonates with CDH receive ECMO 
support, and surgery may be done while on ECMO, which 
is problematic because of bleeding secondary to hep-
arinization. Adequate blood products, including PRBCs, 
platelets, and FFP, must be available if the repair is done 
on ECMO. Anesthesia is provided with high-dose opioids, 
benzodiazepines, or ketamine.
Patent Ductus Arteriosus
The PDA is most often seen in the premature neonate 
and can result in pulmonary overcirculation and pulmo-
nary edema, reduced ventilatory compliance, and ven-
tilator dependence worsened by concurrent respiratory 
distress syndrome or pneumonia. The PDA may prevent 
weaning from the ventilator and result in secondary 
complications such as feeding intolerance or NEC. Clini-
cal presentation includes persistent pulmonary edema, 
bounding pulses, and wide pulse pressure from diastolic 
runoff from the aorta to the pulmonary artery through 
the PDA. Sometimes, the large left-to-right shunt from 
the PDA causes cardiac failure and hypotension requir-
ing inotropic support. Diagnosis is made with transtho-
racic echocardiography. Attempts at medical closure 
with indomethacin, ibuprofen, or acetaminophen may be 
successful, though some of these pharmacologic agents 
may adversely affect renal and platelet function. This 
should be considered in the preoperative evaluation of a 
neonate with PDA who has failed medical therapy and 
requires surgical intervention.46
Management of Anesthesia
The patient is often a small premature neonate weigh-
ing 500 to 1000 g who is ventilator dependent and may 
be hemodynamically unstable. Surgery may be done at 
the bedside in the NICU in some medical centers. Trans-
port to the operating room must be done carefully with 
continuous monitoring. Anesthesia is normally provided 
with synthetic opioids such as fentanyl 25 to 50 μg/
kg, muscle relaxation with a nondepolarizing drug, and 
small doses of benzodiazepines or ketamine, as volatile 
anesthetics are usually not tolerated. Arterial monitoring 
is useful for frequent assessment of hemodynamics and 
arterial blood gases. A left thoracotomy is done, and the 
PDA is approached via a retropleural dissection. Careful 
monitoring of ventilation with visual inspection, capnog-
raphy, and a precordial or esophageal stethoscope is per-
formed, as ventilation is easily compromised. Because of 
the risk of worsening retinopathy of prematurity (ROP), 
target Pao2 is normally 50 to 80 mm Hg and Spo2 90% to 
95%, so high inspired Fio2 is avoided unless absolutely 
necessary. The PDA is often larger than the descending 
thoracic aorta; monitoring with a pulse oximeter and 
blood pressure cuff on the lower extremity is important 
to ensure that the surgeon identifies and ligates the cor-
rect structure. The PDA can be ligated with sutures or 
surgical clips. PRBCs must be immediately available in 
case there is bleeding from damage to the paper-thin 
PDA. Maintenance of normothermia and provision of 
glucose is critically important during PDA ligation in the 
premature infant. Most infants will remain mechanically 
ventilated for some period after PDA ligation. In recent 
years, very small PDA occlusion devices have become 
available for transcatheter occlusion in premature infants 
in the cardiac catheterization laboratory. This approach 
has a low incidence of complications and has become the 
preferred method in many centers.47
In contrast to the premature infant with otherwise 
normal cardiac anatomy in whom the PDA must be 
closed, infants with CHD may be dependent on the PDA 
to provide pulmonary blood flow in the case of pul-
monary atresia or stenosis, or systemic blood flow in 
the case of hypoplasia of left-sided cardiac structures 
such as severe coarctation of the aorta or hypoplastic 
left-sided heart syndrome. Prostaglandin E1 is infused 
in these patients at 0.01 to 0.05 μg/kg/min and must be 
maintained until a stable source of pulmonary blood flow 
is established via surgical or transcatheter intervention.
Retinopathy of Prematurity
ROP is a vasoproliferative disease affecting premature or 
low-birth-weight infants. Five stages of ROP exist, and 
in stages 4 and 5, retinal detachment occurs, which can 
result in permanent visual loss.48 The pathophysiology is 
complex, with the more premature infants at higher risk, 
but one of the main causes is excessive oxygen tensions 
IV
Chapter 34 Pediatrics
631
in the vessels of the retina, accompanied by wide swings 
in oxygen tension such as those seen in cardiopulmonary 
instability with ventilated premature infants with respira-
tory distress syndrome, PDA, sepsis, apnea/bradycardia, 
and other problems associated with prematurity. Thus 
Spo2 is maintained at 88% to 93% in many premature 
infants, with resulting oxygen tensions of 50 to 70 mm 
Hg targeted. Excessive oxygen tensions, as may be seen 
with general endotracheal anesthesia, are to be avoided, 
even if short-lived. The challenge for the anesthesia pro-
vider caring for such infants is to manage oxygenation 
with these restrictions in mind.
Premature infants hospitalized in the NICU receive 
regular retinal examinations, and if high-risk type I or 
greater ROP is diagnosed, urgent surgical therapy is 
undertaken within 24 to 72 hours to maximize visual 
outcomes. This often results in the urgent scheduling of 
treatment during evening and weekend hours. Retinal 
ablative therapy with indirect laser photocoagulation of 
proliferating vessels in one or both eyes is the treatment 
of choice. Cryotherapy may also be used, and at more 
severe stages, a vitrectomy may be required.
Management of Anesthesia
Because of the urgent or emergent nature of ROP surgery, 
the patient may not have feeding withheld. If the patient 
is still ventilated, any anesthetic technique, usually in 
conjunction with muscle relaxation, may be used. If the 
patient is not ventilated, any technique for induction, 
followed by muscle relaxation and endotracheal intuba-
tion, may be used. As these cases may last several hours, 
especially with extensive disease in both eyes, attention 
must be paid to patient temperature and provision of glu-
cose during the surgery. Because of the often prolonged 
nature of the anesthetic, the risk of postanesthetic apnea 
in the premature infant, and the eye discomfort necessi-
tating analgesia after the procedure, mechanical ventila-
tion should be controlled after ROP surgery for 12 to 24 
hours. Regardless of airway management after surgery, 
the patient must be carefully monitored in the NICU set-
ting for postanesthetic problems.
Myelomeningocele
Myelomeningocele is a developmental defect of the neu-
ral tube, resulting in an open neural placode covered only 
by a thin membrane and cerebrospinal fluid. The defect 
is often diagnosed prenatally, varies in size, and may be 
located in the thoracolumbar or lumbosacral spine areas. 
The most common presentation is a lumbosacral mye-
lomeningocele in a full-term infant. Preoperatively, it is 
critical not to allow the sac covering the spinal defect to 
rupture, which will increase the risk of meningitis. These 
infants are nursed prone, with a moist gauze covering 
the defect. Surgery is scheduled emergently and consists 
of dissection of nerve roots and covering the defect with 
fascia and skin. In addition, over 75% of infants have 
hydrocephalus, and many have Arnold-Chiari malforma-
tion of the spinal cord and brainstem; these patients will 
require a ventriculoperitoneal shunt, usually done after 
the initial repair. Long-term outcome depends on early 
repair to prevent infection and the level of spinal cord 
dysfunction.49
Management of Anesthesia
Great care must be taken to prevent rupture of the sac 
covering the myelomeningocele during transport and 
positioning for induction of anesthesia and surgery. 
The infant cannot lie directly supine for this reason. 
Anesthetic induction and endotracheal intubation can 
be performed with the infant in the left lateral decubitus 
position. An alternative approach is to carefully place 
the infant supine in a doughnut-shaped padded foam 
bolster so that the myelomeningocele defect is in the 
center but not touching the operating room bed. After 
confirmation of endotracheal tube position, the infant is 
positioned prone for surgery. Any technique can be used 
for induction and maintenance of anesthesia, but the 
surgeon usually performs the repair under the microscope 
and requests that no muscle relaxant be used during the 
repair portion of the surgery so that motor function can 
be assessed. In addition, as patients with myelomenin-
gocele repair at birth are at highest risk for developing 
latex allergy, all surgical gloves and all other materials in 
contact with the patient must be latex free. After surgery, 
the trachea can be extubated, using the same positioning 
techniques as for intubation. The patient then is turned 
prone and is kept in this position in which the infant will 
be nursed for several days. Myelomeningocele is now 
often repaired in utero, using open or fetoscopic tech-
niques (see later).50
Pyloric Stenosis
Pyloric stenosis is hypertrophy of the pyloric muscle lead-
ing to a gastric outlet obstruction. A typical presentation 
is a young infant between 2 and 8 weeks of age with 
persistent projectile vomiting. This results in weight loss, 
dehydration, and electrolyte imbalance consisting of a 
hypochloremic, hypokalemic metabolic alkalosis from loss 
of hydrogen and chloride ions from stomach contents. 
These infants may develop severe dehydration, lethargy, 
poor skin turgor, sunken eyes and fontanel, poor urine 
output, and plasma chloride concentrations as low as 65 to 
70 mEq/dL. Historically, these patients presented late with 
marked malnutrition.51 Diagnosis is by clinical history; 
there is a 5:1 male predominance, and average age at pres-
entation is 5 to 6 weeks. An olive-shaped and -sized mass 
may be palpable in the epigastrium; definitive diagnosis is 
made by ultrasound. Repair of pyloric stenosis is not a sur-
gical emergency. The patient must be rehydrated, starting 
with a bolus of 10 to 20 mL/kg of normal saline or lactated 
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
632
Ringer solution, followed by greater-than-maintenance-
rate IV fluids (usually 5% dextrose in half-normal saline 
with potassium chloride). The fluid and electrolyte status 
is followed carefully and laboratory values rechecked 
periodically. When the patient has been rehydrated to a 
normal vascular volume and normal or near-normal elec-
trolytes, the patient is ready for surgery. Some groups use 
a chloride value of >100 mEq/L and adequate urine output 
to determine readiness for surgery.52 This preparation may 
require 12 to 72 hours, depending on the severity at pres-
entation.53 The degree of preoperative metabolic alkalosis 
also correlates with the duration of postoperative emesis, 
time to goal feeds, and length of stay.54
Management of Anesthesia
After adequate rehydration, the patient is brought to the 
operating room, and gastric contents are evacuated with 
a large-bore orogastric suction catheter before induction 
of anesthesia to reduce the risk of aspiration. Although 
awake tracheal intubation was the preferred technique in 
the past, this is rarely practiced in the modern era. After 
preoxygenation, the patient is administered an IV induc-
tion dose of propofol 2 to 2.5 mg/kg. Cricoid pressure is 
applied, and paralysis is achieved with succinylcholine 1 
to 2 mg/kg (after pretreatment with atropine) or, prefer-
ably, a nondepolarizing muscle relaxant such as rocuro-
nium. A modified rapid-sequence technique, with rapid 
small tidal volume via mask ventilation through cricoid 
pressure, may be used to prevent arterial desaturation 
in a young infant whose oxygen consumption is two to 
three times that of the adult. Inhalation induction may 
also be employed, though not as commonly in the United 
States.55 After successful confirmation of tracheal intuba-
tion, maintenance of anesthesia proceeds with a volatile 
anesthetic. Opioids are often avoided because of the 
risk of postanesthetic apnea in pyloric stenosis. Instead, 
postoperative analgesia is provided by local anesthetic 
infiltration of the incision by the surgeon, in addition to 
acetaminophen or ketorolac. Supplemental regional anes-
thesia/analgesia, most commonly via a caudal approach, 
may also be employed.55 Surgery proceeds either via 
small open epigastric incision or via laparoscopy with 
CO2 insufflation of the abdomen. After conclusion of 
the surgery, a nasogastric tube may be left in place. The 
trachea is extubated after reversal of nondepolarizing 
muscle relaxant and full return of airway reflexes, in 
addition to a regular breathing pattern without pauses or 
apnea. Because of the metabolic alkalosis seen in many 
pyloric stenosis patients, cerebrospinal fluid pH may be 
increased, causing a reduction in respiratory drive, which 
is not corrected for 12 to 48 hours. This, in conjunction 
with respiratory drive that may not be fully mature until 
44 weeks' postconceptual age, may place even full-term 
infants undergoing pyloromyotomy at risk for postanes-
thetic apnea. These patients should be monitored for 12 
to 24 hours after anesthesia for this complication.56
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE
CHD is present in approximately 1 in 100 live births and 
is the most common indication for surgery or invasive 
catheter treatment in the first year of life.57 This section 
will describe the basic classification of CHD and the fun-
damental pathophysiology of the most common lesions. 
Preanesthetic evaluation and preparation are similar 
to that described earlier; in addition, an ECG, chest 
radiograph, and echocardiogram are available for cardiac 
surgery and most noncardiac procedures. Cardiac cath-
eterization, CT, and MRI are also frequently employed 
to assist in preoperative planning. An important consid-
eration is whether the patient has had previous correc-
tive or palliative cardiac surgery and whether there are 
residual defects. Detailed anesthetic management of CHD 
is beyond the scope of this chapter and is available in a 
number of reference textbooks.58,59
Left-to-Right Shunts
Left-to-right shunts arise from a communication between 
the left and right chambers of the heart or between the 
great vessels—the aorta and pulmonary artery. Ventricu-
lar septal defect (VSD) (Figs. 34.6 and 34.7), atrial septal 
defect (ASD) (Fig. 34.8), and PDA (Fig. 34.9) are the three 
most common CHD lesions and together comprise approx-
imately 50% of all lesions.57 The pathophysiology of these 
lesions depends on the degree of left-to-right shunting, 
which in turn derives from a number of factors (Fig. 
34.10), including the size and position of the defect, pres-
sure gradient between chambers, relative pulmonary and 
systemic vascular resistance, and relative compliance of 
right versus left ventricle. Increased flow across the defect 
results in increased pulmonary blood flow and return to 
the left atrium and left ventricle. Significant shunting (i.e., 
greater than a pulmonary to systemic blood flow ratio 
of 2:1) may result in pulmonary venous congestion and 
interstitial pulmonary edema, which results in increased 
work of breathing manifested by tachypnea, intercostal 
retractions, and poor feeding in infants with congestive 
heart failure. Flow and pressure in the pulmonary artery 
are increased with large left-to-right shunts, which can 
result in permanent remodeling of the pulmonary vas-
culature if the defect is not closed. The resulting fixed 
pulmonary hypertension causes right ventricular (RV) 
hypertrophy, and pressure in the RV can exceed left ven-
tricular (LV) pressure, resulting in reversal of the shunt to 
a right-to-left shunt. The patient then becomes cyanotic 
and can progress to Eisenmenger syndrome, a condition 
of long-standing irreversible cyanosis. Eisenmenger syn-
drome is very rare in the modern era because of the early 
correction of left-to-right shunting defects. Surgical or 
catheter repair of these defects is undertaken at any time 
in life, ranging from infancy to adulthood, depending on 
the size of the defect and severity of symptoms.
IV
Chapter 34 Pediatrics
633
Right-to-Left Shunts
Right-to-left shunting lesions result from obstruction 
of outflow from the right ventricle and shunting across 
a VSD because of higher pressure in the right ventricle 
compared with the left ventricle. The degree of resulting 
cyanosis depends on the degree of obstruction in the 
right ventricle and the size of the VSD. In addition, SVR 
will also affect the amount of shunting. The most com-
mon right-to-left shunt lesion is TOF, about 6% of CHD 
patients,57 consisting of RV outflow tract obstruction at 
the pulmonary subvalvar and valvar location, and large 
VSD with overriding aorta. The two additional compo-
nents of the tetralogy are RV hypertrophy and right-sided 
aortic arch (in 25% of patients) (Figs. 34.11 and 34.12).
Obstructive Lesions
Obstructive lesions can be seen at multiple locations in 
the heart and great vessels; the most common is valvar 
pulmonic stenosis, with a prevalence of about 13% of 
CHD. Coarctation of the aorta, usually near where the 
ductus arteriosus inserts, is observed in about 7% of CHD 
(Fig. 34.13) and valvar aortic stenosis in 5%.57 Left-sided 
obstruction (i.e., to LV outflow) is less well tolerated; 
LV hypertrophy can occur and if untreated can result in 
coronary ischemia, ventricular arrhythmias, and death. 
Pulmonary valvar stenosis is usually well tolerated unless 
severe; the right ventricle can exhibit hypertrophy, but 
coronary ischemia usually does not result. Left- and 
right-sided obstructive lesions are amenable to surgical 
or catheter correction; timing will depend on symptoms 
and severity of pathophysiology and can range from the 
newborn period to adulthood.
Transposition of the Great Arteries
Dextro-transposition of the great arteries (d-TGA) occurs 
when the aorta arises from the right ventricle and the 
pulmonary artery from the left ventricle (Fig. 34.14). 
D-TGA comprises approximately 4% of CHD lesions.57
This results in the systemic venous return being ejected 
from the aorta without being oxygenated in the lungs, 
resulting in profound cyanosis (Fig. 34.15). Survival at 
birth depends on mixing of oxygenated blood from the 
Fig. 34.6 Ventricular septal defect (VSD). Left-to-right shunt 
between left and right ventricles can result in pulmonary 
overcirculation and congestive heart failure. (Reproduced with 
permission from Cabrera AG, Bastrero P, Qureshi AM, et al. 
Ventricular septal defect. In Mery CR, Bastrero P, Hall SR, et al. 
[eds.] Texas Children's Hospital Handbook of Congenital Heart 
Disease. Houston: Texas Children's Hospital; 2020:97.)
Fig. 34.7 Chest radiograph in an infant with large VSD 
demonstrating cardiomegaly and pulmonary edema. (Reproduced 
with permission from Cabrera AG, Bastrero P, Qureshi AM, et al. 
Ventricular septal defect. In Mery CR, Bastrero P, Hall SR, et al. 
[eds.] Texas Children's Hospital Handbook of Congenital Heart 
Disease. Houston: Texas Children's Hospital: 2020:99.)
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
634
left side of the heart to the right side of the heart, at the 
ventricular, atrial, or PDA levels. Approximately 15% 
to 20% of neonates with d-TGA have a VSD and tend 
to have less cyanosis; if there is no VSD, the neonate is 
maintained on prostaglandin-E1 to keep the ductus arte-
riosus patent. Many of these patients undergo a balloon 
atrial septostomy, a catheter-based procedure to create 
a large ASD to allow more mixing and better systemic 
oxygenation, which promotes physiologic stability before 
surgery. Surgery consists of the neonatal arterial switch 
operation performed in the first weeks of life. Surgery 
for d-TGA is a common neonatal procedure, comprising 
about 10% of neonatal cardiac surgeries.
Single-Ventricle Lesions
A functional single ventricle results from severe obstruc-
tion or atresia of structures on the left or right side of 
the heart, that is, aortic or mitral stenosis or atresia 
resulting in hypoplastic left heart syndrome (HLHS) 
(Fig. 34.16) or tricuspid atresia resulting in hypoplastic 
right heart syndrome. Together, these conditions have 
a prevalence of approximately 4% of CHD,57 but the 
patients undergo a disproportionate number of surger-
ies and catheter procedures as neonates and infants. In 
HLHS systemic blood flow depends on flow through 
the right ventricle, out the pulmonary artery, through 
a large PDA, and into the aorta. Aortic flow to the 
brachiocephalic vessels and the coronary arteries is 
retrograde because of no or very limited antegrade flow 
across the aortic valve. Complete mixing of the systemic 
and pulmonary circulations results, and as PVR declines 
over the first days of life, blood flow is preferentially 
directed toward the lungs, resulting in severe overcircu-
lation, steal of flow from the systemic circulation, low 
systemic cardiac output, lactic acidosis and shock, and 
death if not treated (Fig. 34.17). The PDA is maintained 
with PGE1, and staged palliative surgery is undertaken 
Fig. 34.8 Atrial septal defect. Note left-to-right shunting; 
because of the lower pressures in the atria, the degree of 
shunting tends to be much less than in moderate and large 
VSD, and symptomatology is less severe; small ASDs are often 
not diagnosed until later in childhood or even adulthood. 
(Reproduced with permission from Kailin J, Liou A, Adachi I. 
Atrial septal defect. In Mery CR, Bastrero P, Hall SR, et al. [eds.] 
Texas Children's Hospital Handbook of Congenital Heart Disease. 
Houston: Texas Children's Hospital; 2020:68.)
Fig. 34.9 Patent Ductus Arteriosus. Degree of left-to-right 
shunting from the high-pressure aorta to the pulmonary 
artery is influenced by the diameter, length, and tortuosity 
of the PDA. (Reproduced with permission from Andropoulos 
DB, Gottlieb EA. Congenital heart disease. In Fleischer LA 
[ed.] Anesthesia and Uncommon Diseases. 6th ed. Philadelphia: 
Elsevier; 2012:92.)
IV
Chapter 34 Pediatrics
635
in the neonatal period to reconstruct the aortic arch 
and provide systemic flow through a neo-aortic valve 
(anatomic pulmonary valve) and a more stable and con-
trollable source of pulmonary blood flow with a shunt 
or right ventricle to pulmonary artery conduit. Stage 
I palliation for HLHS is a common neonatal surgery, 
comprising about 10% of operations in this age group. 
Hypoplastic right heart also results in circulatory mix-
ing but is usually much better tolerated because of the 
presence of a systemic left ventricle; neonatal surgical 
or catheter procedures to increase or decrease pulmo-
nary blood flow may be necessary.
Fig. 34.10 Pathophysiology of left-to-right shunting lesions. The flow diagram depicts factors that affect 
left-to-right shunting at the atrial, ventricular, and great artery level and the pathophysiology produced 
by these shunts. A large shunt will result in LV failure, RV failure, and pulmonary edema. Increased 
pulmonary blood flow and pulmonary artery pressures lead to pulmonary hypertension and eventually 
Eisenmenger syndrome. These final common outcomes are highlighted in bold lettering. See text for 
detailed discussion. BP, Blood pressure; LA, left atrium; LV, left ventricle; LVEDP, left ventricular end-
diastolic pressure; LVEDV, left ventricular end-diastolic volume; PVR, pulmonary vascular resistance; RV,
right ventricle; RVEDP, right ventricular end-diastolic pressure; RVEDV, right ventricular end-diastolic 
volume; SVR, systemic vascular resistance. (Reproduced with permission from Andropoulos DB, 
Gottlieb EA. Congenital heart disease. In Fleischer LA [ed.] Anesthesia and Uncommon Diseases. 6th ed. 
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2012:91.)
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
636
Conclusion
The increased longevity in all forms of CHD that has 
resulted from the myriad of advances in surgical and 
medical therapy over the past 70+ years has resulted in 
a significant population of survivors of CHD number-
ing over 2.4 million children and adults in the United 
States.57 The anesthesia provider is increasingly likely to 
provide care for these patients in the course of everyday 
practice.
SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
Anesthesia for the Former Premature Infant
Many former premature infants present for surgery, 
either during their initial hospitalization or later as 
outpatients. The most common procedures include 
inguinal herniorrhaphy, circumcision, eye examina-
tion, and strabismus surgery. Although many infants 
Fig. 34.11 Tetralogy of Fallot. Note large VSD and obstruction to 
RV outflow at the subvalvar and valvar level, resulting in right-
to-left shunting and cyanosis. (Reproduced with permission 
from Cabrera AG, Bastrero P, Hall SR, et al. Tetralogy of Fallot. In 
Mery CR, Bastrero P, Hall SR, et al. [eds.] Texas Children's Hospital 
Handbook of Congenital Heart Disease. Houston: Texas Children's 
Hospital; 2020:113.)
Fig. 34.12 Chest radiograph in an infant with tetralogy of Fallot. 
Note decreased vascular markings in lung fields from decreased 
pulmonary blood flow and “boot-shaped” heart from hypoplastic 
main pulmonary artery. (Reproduced with permission from 
Cabrera AG, Bastrero P, Hall SR, et al. Tetralogy of Fallot. In Mery 
CR, Bastrero P, Hall SR, et al. [eds.] Texas Children's Hospital 
Handbook of Congenital Heart Disease. Houston: Texas Children's 
Hospital; 2020:114.)
Fig. 34.13 Severe coarctation of the aorta in the neonate. A 
large patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) supplies blood flow to the 
aorta distal to the coarctation. Ao, Aorta; CoA, coarctation; PA,
pulmonary artery; PDA, patent ductus arteriosus. (Reproduced 
with permission from Lopez KN, Tume SC, Hall SR, et al. Aortic 
coarctation and interrupted aortic arch. In Mery CR, Bastrero 
P, Hall SR, et al. [eds.] Texas Children's Hospital Handbook of 
Congenital Heart Disease. Houston: Texas Children's Hospital; 
2020:209.)
IV
Chapter 34 Pediatrics
637
have recovered well without sequelae, many have 
chronic conditions such as bronchopulmonary dyspla-
sia (need for supplemental oxygen beyond 30 days of 
life after a diagnosis of respiratory distress syndrome), 
apnea and bradycardia, anemia, hydrocephalus from 
intraventricular hemorrhage, visual disturbances, and 
developmental delay. The infant's postconceptual age 
is important; an infant born at 28 weeks' gestation 
who presents at 12 weeks for surgery is now 40 weeks' 
postconceptual age and is equivalent in many respects 
to only a full-term infant, not an infant at 3 months 
of age. The major risk in this regard is postanesthetic 
apnea, which in some cases is fatal. The risk of postan-
esthetic apnea increases with increasing prematurity at 
birth and younger age at the time of the anesthetic.60
Although the time at which the risk of apnea is elimi-
nated is not clear, 50 weeks' postconceptual age or less 
is commonly used as the cutoff point for admitting 
former premature infants for 24 hours of apnea moni-
toring after receiving an anesthetic.
Fig. 34.14 d-transposition of the great arteries. Note the 
pulmonary artery (PA) arises from the left ventricle (LV), and 
the aorta (Ao) arises from the right ventricle (RV). There is an 
atrial septal defect (ASD) in this example. (Reproduced with 
permission from Cabrera AG, Checchia PA, Andropoulos DB, 
et al. Transposition of the great arteries. In Mery CR, Bastrero 
P, Hall SR, et al. [eds.] Texas Children's Hospital Handbook of 
Congenital Heart Disease. Houston: Texas Children's Hospital; 
2020:120.)
Fig. 34.15 Physiology in d-TGA. Oxygenated blood recirculates 
through the lungs; deoxygenated systemic venous blood 
recirculates through the body; survival depends on mixing of 
oxygenated blood into the systemic circulation by a communication 
at one or more levels. (Reproduced with permission from Cabrera 
AG, Checchia PA, Andropoulos DB, et al. Transposition of the great 
arteries. In Mery CR, Bastrero P, Hall SR, et al. [eds.] Texas Children's 
Hospital Handbook of Congenital Heart Disease. Houston: Texas 
Children's Hospital; 2020:120.)
Fig. 34.16 Hypoplastic left heart syndrome. Mitral and aortic 
atresia are present in this example. Blood flows from the left 
atrium (LA) to the right atrium (RA), the right ventricle (RV), to 
the pulmonary artery (PA). Systemic blood flow is provided by the 
large ductus arteriosus into the aorta. Complete mixing of the 
pulmonary and systemic circulations occurs. (Reproduced with 
permission from Andropoulos DB, Gottlieb EA. Congenital heart 
disease. In Fleischer LA [ed.] Anesthesia and Uncommon Diseases, 
6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2012:120.)
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
638
Anesthesia for Remote Locations
Anesthesia and sedation for diagnostic and therapeu-
tic procedures are increasing for children in locations 
remote from the operating room, and the clinical com-
plexity of the patients requiring care is also increasing 
(also see Chapter 38). These procedures include MRI 
and CT scans, interventional radiology procedures, 
bone marrow aspirations, gastrointestinal endoscopy, 
auditory brainstem evoked response testing, and 
cardiac catheterization. Techniques vary widely and 
include moderate or deep sedation, general anesthesia 
with IV drugs, volatile anesthetics with facemask or 
Fig. 34.17 Pathophysiology of single-ventricle lesions. Complete mixing of systemic and pulmonary 
venous blood occurs in the ventricle. Optimal oxygen delivery involves a balance between systemic 
and pulmonary vascular resistance. (Reproduced with permission from Andropoulos DB, Gottlieb EA. 
Congenital heart disease. In Fleischer LA [ed.] Anesthesia and Uncommon Diseases, 6th ed. Philadelphia: 
Elsevier; 2012:122.)
IV
Chapter 34 Pediatrics
639
SGA, or full general endotracheal anesthesia. Fre-
quently used anesthetics include propofol, ketamine, 
barbiturates, benzodiazepines, and opioids. The cen-
tral alpha-2 agonist dexmedetomidine is increasingly 
being used for nonpainful diagnostic studies such as 
MRI.61 The same standards for preoperative evalua-
tion, monitoring, and recovery must be maintained for 
anesthesia in remote locations to ensure safety in this 
environment.62
Ex Utero Intrapartum Therapy Procedure and 
Fetal Surgery
The EXIT procedure was first performed in 1989. The 
purpose is to secure the neonatal airway while the fetus 
is still being oxygenated via the placenta. The mother 
is placed under general anesthesia, a hysterotomy is 
made, and the fetus is partially delivered. This strategy 
can be used to oxygenate the fetus while the airway is 
secured by direct laryngoscopy, rigid bronchoscopy, or 
tracheostomy while on placental bypass. Indications 
include large neck masses, congenital airway obstruc-
tion, and previous tracheal occlusion for CDH. The EXIT 
procedure has also been used for patients with fetal 
anomalies in whom neonatal resuscitation may be dif-
ficult, including large thoracic masses, CDH, unilateral 
pulmonary agenesis, and some complex cardiac lesions. 
Maintenance of placental bypass provides time to estab-
lish IV access and an airway, give resuscitative drugs, 
and cannulate for ECMO when necessary in a controlled 
manner.63
Fetal interventions have been performed as open 
midgestational (hysterotomy-based) procedures involv-
ing exteriorization and replacement of the fetus and as 
minimally invasive procedures assisted by fetoscopy, 
ultrasound, and echocardiography. An open approach 
has been used to treat myelomeningocele, congeni-
tal cystic adenomatoid malformation, and sacrococcy-
geal teratoma with varied success. Minimally invasive 
approaches have been taken to treat CDH, bladder outlet 
obstruction, HLHS, and twin–twin transfusion syndrome, 
among others.
Open midgestational procedures and EXIT procedures 
are usually performed with maternal general anesthesia, 
and minimally invasive procedures can be performed 
with maternal local, sedation, regional, general, or 
combined regional and general techniques. General 
anesthesia with inhaled anesthetic provides anesthesia to 
both the mother and the fetus, and a high concentration 
volatile anesthetic (2 MAC) can be used to provide uterine 
relaxation. Anesthetic and resuscitative drugs can then 
be given directly to the fetus via an IM, IV, intracardiac, 
or intraamniotic route. For minimally invasive proce-
dures, it is important to discuss the need for fetal immo-
bility preoperatively. For some fetal cardiac procedures, 
general anesthesia is required for the mother, and fenta-
nyl, vecuronium, and atropine must be delivered directly 
to the fetus for safety reasons.
A preoperative plan should be made for intrauterine 
fetal resuscitation in advance. Maternal interventions, 
including left lateral positioning, oxygen delivery, and 
blood pressure augmentation with volume or vasopres-
sor administration, can facilitate fetal resuscitation. 
Atropine, epinephrine, calcium gluconate, sodium bicar-
bonate, and PRBCs can be delivered to the fetus, and car-
diac compressions and drainage of pericardial effusions 
can be carried out.64,65
Anesthetic Neurotoxicity and Neuroprotection 
in the Developing Brain
Neonatal rodent models of prolonged anesthesia with 
γ-aminobutyric acid agonists (isoflurane, midazolam, 
propofol) or N-methyl-d-aspartate antagonists (keta-
mine) produce accelerated apoptosis, or programmed cell 
death, of neurons in the developing brain.66 These data 
raised concern that commonly used anesthetic drugs 
could be having similar effects in the developing human 
brain, generating intense interest and a number of new 
research avenues to determine if this effect applies to 
human neonates and infants. Criticism of the animal 
studies includes the fact that most were conducted in 
the absence of a surgical stimulus and that the exposure 
periods were quite prolonged compared with the corre-
sponding exposure of a human infant during anesthesia 
and surgery. Other animal models have demonstrated 
that anesthetics such as ketamine and desflurane are 
neuroprotective in animal models that include surgery 
or painful stimuli. Recently completed studies investi-
gating the effects of anesthetic exposure early in life 
include (1) the GAS study examining neurocognitive 
performance after either a general or spinal anesthetic 
during infancy67; (2) the PANDA (Pediatric Anesthesia 
& Neurodevelopment Assessment) study comparing 
neurocognitive performance in sibling cohorts in which 
one sibling had an anesthetic exposure before 3 years 
of age68; and (3) the MASK study comparing neurocog-
nitive performance in children exposed to anesthesia 
before 3 years of age with those without an exposure.69
These studies have reported no effect on pure cognitive 
neurodevelopmental testing (e.g., intelligence quotient) 
after brief single or multiple exposures to general anes-
thesia. A small effect on behavioral problems and execu-
tive function was reported after a single exposure and 
a small effect on fine motor and reading performance 
and behavioral problems after multiple exposures. Data 
are lacking on the effect of prolonged exposures over 
about 3 hours. Currently there is insufficient evidence to 
change the current approach to anesthesia in the infant 
(also see Chapter 12).
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
640
REFERENCES
1. Andropoulos DB. Physiology and molec-
ular biology of the developing circula-
tion. In: Andropoulos DB, ed. Anesthesia 
for Congenital Heart Disease. 3rd ed. 
Oxford, UK: Wiley Blackwell; 2015:
84–105.
2. Lerman J. Inhalation agents in pediat-
ric anaesthesia—An update. Curr Opin 
Anaesthesiol. 2007;20:221–226.
3. Frei FJ, Haemmerle MH, Brunner R, Kern 
C. Minimum alveolar concentration for 
halothane in children with cerebral pal-
sy and severe mental retardation. Anes-
thesia. 1997;52:1056–1060.
4. Bailey AG, McNaull PP, Jooste E, etal. 
Perioperative crystalloid and colloid flu-
id management in children: Where are 
we and how did we get here?. Anesth 
Analg. 2010;110:375–390.
5. Navaratnam M, Ng A, Williams GD, 
etal. Perioperative management of 
pediatric en-bloc combined heart-liver 
transplants: A case series review. Pediatr 
Anesth. 2016;26:976–986.
6. Adams CB, Vollman KE, Leventhal EL, 
etal. Emergent pediatric anticoagulation 
reversal using a 4-factor prothrombin 
complex concentrate. Am J Emerg Med. 
2016;34 1182.e1–1182.e2.
7. Jooste EH, Machovec KA, Einhorn LM, 
etal. 3-Factor prothrombin complex 
concentrates in infants with refrac-
tory bleeding after cardiac surgery. J 
Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth. 2016;30:
1627–1631.
8. Haas T, Spielmann N, Dillier C, etal. 
Higher fibrinogen concentrations for 
reduction of transfusion requirements 
during major paediatric surgery: A pro-
spective randomized trial. Br J Anaesth. 
2015;115:234–243.
9. Galas FR, de Almeida JP, Fukushima JT, 
etal. Hemostatic effects of fibrinogen 
concentrate compared with cryoprecipi-
tate after cardiac surgery: A randomized 
pilot trial. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2014;148:1647–1655.
10. Romlin B, Wahlander H, Berggren H, 
etal. Intraoperative thromboelastometry 
is associated with reduced transfusion 
prevalence in pediatric cardiac surgery. 
Anesth Analg. 2011;112:30–36.
11. Alten JA, Benner K, Green K, etal. Pedi-
atric off-label use of recombinant factor 
VIIa. Pediatrics. 2009;123:1066–1072.
12. Dalal PG, Murray D, Messner AH, 
etal. Pediatric laryngeal dimensions: 
An age-based analysis. Anesth Analg. 
2009;108:1475–1479.
13. Luce V, Harkouk H, Brasher C, etal. 
Supraglottic airway devices vs tracheal 
intubation in children: A quantitative 
meta-analysis of respiratory compli-
cations. Paediatr Anaesth. 2014;24:
1088–1098.
14. Drake-Brockman TFE, Ramgolam A, 
Zhang G, etal. The effect of endotrache-
al tubes versus laryngeal mask airways 
on perioperative respiratory adverse 
events in infants: A randomized con-
trolled trial. Lancet. 2017;389:701–708.
15. Salgo B, Schmitz A, Henze G, etal. Eval-
uation of a new recommendation for 
improved cuffed tracheal tube size selec-
tion in infants and small children. Acta 
Anaesthesiol Scand. 2006;50:557–561.
16. Gupta A, Gupta N. Ineffective ventila-
tion in a neonate with a large pre-carinal 
tracheoesophageal fistula and bilateral 
pneumonitis—Microcuff endotracheal 
tube to our rescue!. J Neonatal Surg. 
2017;6:14.
17. Lam H, Kitzman J, Matthews R, Young L, 
Austin TM. Symptomatic endotracheal 
tube obstruction in infants intubated 
with Microcuff® endotracheal tubes. 
Pediatr Anesth. 2016;26:767–775.
18. Matsuoka W, Ide K, Matsudo T, etal. The 
occurrence and risk factors of inappro-
priately deep tip position of Microcuff 
pediatric endotracheal tube during PICU 
stay: A retrospective cohort pilot study. 
Pediatr Crit Care Med. 2019;20:e510–
e515.
19. Fiadjoe J, Stricker P. Pediatric difficult 
airway management: current devic-
es and techniques. Anesthesiol Clin. 
2009;27:185–195.
20. Jagannathan N, Sequera-Ramos L, Sohn 
L, etal. Elective use of supraglottic 
airway devices for primary airway man-
agement in children with difficult air-
ways. Br J Anaesth. 2014;112:742–748.
21. Hsu G, Fiadjoe JE. The pediatric difficult 
airway: Updates and innovations. Anes-
thesiol Clin. 2020;38:459–475.
22. Wheeler M, Coté CJ. Preoperative preg-
nancy testing in a tertiary care children's 
hospital: A medico-legal conundrum. J 
Clin Anesth. 1999;11:56–63.
23. Tait AR, Malviya S. Anesthesia for 
the child with an upper respiratory 
tract infection: Still a dilemma?. Anesth 
Analg. 2005;100:59–65.
24. Practice guidelines for preoperative 
fasting and the use of pharmacologic 
agents to reduce the risk of pulmo-
nary aspiration. Application to healthy 
patients undergoing elective proce-
dures: a report by the American Soci-
ety of Anesthesiologists Task Force on 
Preoperative Fasting. Anesthesiology. 
1999;90(3):896–905.
25. Thomas M, Morrison C, Newton R, 
Schindler E. Consensus statement for 
clear fluids fasting for elective pediat-
ric general anesthesia. Pediatr Anesth. 
2018;28:411–414.
26. Isserman R, Elliott E, Subramanyam 
R, Kraus B, etal. Quality improvement 
project to reduce pediatric clear liquid 
fasting times prior to anesthesia. Pediatr 
Anesth. 2019;29:698–704.
27. Sun Y, Lu Y, Huang Y, etal. Is dexme-
detomidine superior to midazolam as 
a premedication in children? A meta-
analysis of randomized controlled trials. 
Paediatr Anaesth. 2014;24:863–874.
28. Sadhasivam S, Cohen LL, Szabova A, 
etal. Real-time assessment of perio-
perative behaviors and prediction of 
perioperative outcomes. Anesth Analg. 
2009;108:822–826.
29. Mayande A, Cyna AM, Yip P, etal. 
Non-pharmacological interventions for 
assisting the induction of anaesthesia 
in children (review). Cochrane Database 
Syst Rev. 2015;7:CD006447.
30. Watson A, Visram A. Survey of the use of 
oesophageal and precordial stethoscopes 
in current paediatric anaesthetic practice. 
Paediatr Anaesth. 2001;11:437–442.
31. Davidson AJ. Monitoring the anaesthetic 
depth in children—An update. Curr Opin 
Anaesthesiol. 2007;20:236–243.
32. Pinto N, Sawardekar A, Suresh S. 
Regional anesthesia: Options for the 
pediatric patient. Anesthesiol Clin. 
2020;38:559–575.
33. Trifa M, Tumin D, Whitaker EE, Bhalla 
T, Jayanthi VR, Tobias JD. Spinal anes-
thesia for surgery longer than 60 min 
in infants: Experience from the first 2 
years of a spinal anesthesia program. J 
Anesth. 2018;32:637–640.
34. Tobias JD. Spinal anaesthesia in 
infants and children. Paediatr Anaesth. 
2000;10:5–16.
35. Gan TJ, Belani KG, Bergese S, etal. Fourth 
Consensus Guidelines for the Manage-
ment of Postoperative Nausea and Vomit-
ing. Anesth Analg. 2020;131:411–448.
36. Engelman E, Salengros JC, Barvais L. How 
much does pharmacologic prophylaxis 
reduce postoperative vomiting in children? 
Calculation of prophylaxis effectiveness 
and expected incidence of vomiting under 
treatment using Bayesian meta-analysis. 
Anesthesiology. 2008;109:1023–1035.
37. Kanaparthi A, Kukura S, Slenkovich N, 
etal. Perioperative administration of 
Emend® (aprepitant) at a tertiary care 
children’s hospital: A 12-month survey. 
Clin Pharmacol. 2019;11:155–160.
38. Bailard N, Rebello E. Aprepitant and 
fosaprepitant decrease the effectiveness 
of hormonal contraceptives. Br J Clin 
Pharmacol. 2018;84:602–603.
39. Mason KP. Paediatric emergence delir-
ium: A comprehensive review and 
interpretation of the literature. Br J 
Anaesthesia. 2017;118:335–343.
40. Henry MC, Moss RL. Neonatal necrotiz-
ing enterocolitis. Semin Pediatr Surg. 
2008;17:98–109.
IV
Chapter 34 Pediatrics
641
41. Marven S, Owen A. Contemporary post-
natal surgical management strategies 
for congenital abdominal wall defects. 
Semin Pediatr Surg. 2008;17:222–235.
42. Broemling N, Campbell F. Anesthetic 
management of congenital tracheoe-
sophageal fistula. Paediatr Anaesth. 
2011;21:1092–1099.
43. Orford J, Cass DT, Glasson MJ. Advances 
in the treatment of oesophageal atresia 
over three decades: The 1970s and the 
1990s. Pediatr Surg Int. 2004;20(6):
402–407.
44. Andropoulos DB, Rowe RW, Betts 
JM. Anaesthetic and surgical airway 
management during tracheo-oesoph-
ageal fistula repair. Paediatr Anaesth. 
1998;8:313–319.
45. de Buys Roessingh AS, Dinh-Xuan A. 
Congenital diaphragmatic hernia: Cur-
rent status and review of the literature. 
Eur J Pediatr. 2009;168:393–406.
46. Malviya MN, Ohlsson A, Shah SS. 
Surgical versus medical treatment with 
cyclooxygenase inhibitors for symp-
tomatic patent ductus arteriosus in 
preterm infants (review). Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev. 2013;3:CD003951.
47. Sathanandam SK, Gutfinger D, O'Brien 
L, Forbes TJ, Gillespie MJ, Berman DP, 
etal. Amplatzer Piccolo Occluder clini-
cal trial for percutaneous closure of 
the patent ductus arteriosus in patients 
700 grams. Catheter Cardiovasc Interv. 
2020;96:1266–1276.
48. Sylvester CL. Retinopathy of prema-
turity. Semin Ophthalmol. 2008;23:
318–323.
49. Thompson DN. Postnatal management 
and outcome for neural tube defects 
including spina bifida and encephalo-
coeles. Prenat Diagn. 2009;29:412–419.
50. Sanz Cortes M, Lapa DA, Acacio 
GL, etal. Proceedings of the First 
Annual Meeting of the International 
Fetoscopic Myelomeningocele Repair 
Consortium. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol. 
2019;53:855–863.
51. Taghavi K, Powell E, Patel B, McBride 
CA. The treatment of pyloric stenosis: 
Evolution in practice. J Paediatr Child 
Health. 2017;53:1105–1110.
52. Kamata M, Cartabuke RS, Tobias JD. 
Perioperative care of infants with 
pyloric stenosis. Pediatr 
Anesth. 
2015;25:1193–1206.
53. Bissonnette B, Sullivan PJ. Pyloric ste-
nosis. Can J Anaesth. 1991;38:668–676.
54. Kelay A, Hall NJ. Perioperative com-
plications of surgery for hypertrophic 
pyloric stenosis. Eur J Pediatr Surg. 
2018;28:171–175.
55. Cartabuke RS, Tobias JD, Rice J, 
Tumin D. Current perioperative care 
of infants with pyloric stenosis: Com-
parison of survey results. J Surg Res. 
2018;223:244–250 e3.
56. Andropoulos DB, Heard MB, John-
son KL, etal. Postanesthetic apnea in 
full-term infants after pyloromyotomy. 
Anesthesiology. 1994;80:216–219.
57. Virani SS, Alonso A, Aparicio HJ, 
etal. Heart Disease and Stroke Sta-
tistics-2021 update: A report from the 
American Heart Association. Circula-
tion. 2021;143:e254–e743.
58. Andopoulos DB, Stayer SA, Mossad EB, 
Miller-Hance WC. Anesthesia for Con-
genital Heart Disease. 3rd ed. Hoboken: 
Wiley-Blackwell; 2015.
59. Whiting D, DiNardo JA, Odegard KC. 
Anesthesia for congenital heart disease. 
In: Andropoulos DB, Gregory GA, eds. 
Gregory's Pediatric Anesthesia. 6th ed. 
Hoboken: Wiley-Blackwell; 2020.
60. Coté CJ, Zaslavsky A, Downes JJ, etal. 
Postoperative apnea in former preterm 
infants after inguinal herniorrhaphy: 
A combined analysis. Anesthesiology. 
1995;82(4):809–822.
61. Mason KP. Sedation trends in the 21st 
century: The transition to dexmedeto-
midine for radiological imaging studies. 
Paediatr Anaesth. 2010;20:265–272.
62. Campbell K, Torres L, Stayer S. Anesthe-
sia and sedation outside the operating 
room. Anesthesiol Clin. 2014;32:25–43.
63. De Buck F, Deprest J, Van de Velde M. 
Anesthesia for fetal surgery. Curr Opin 
Anaesthesiol. 2008;21:293–297.
64. Lin EE, Tran KM. Anesthesia for 
fetal surgery. Semin Pediatr Surg. 
2013;22:50–55.
65. Brusseau R, Mizrahi-Arnaud A. Fetal 
anesthesia and pain management for 
intrauterine therapy. Clin Perinatol. 
2013;40:429–442.
66. Loepke AW, Soriano SG. An assessment 
of the effects of general anesthetics on 
developing brain structure and neu-
rocognitive function. Anesth Analg. 
2008;106:1681–1707.
67. McCann ME, de Graaff JC, Dorris L, 
etal. Neurodevelopmental outcome at 
5 years of age after general anaesthe-
sia or awake-regional anaesthesia in 
infancy (GAS): An international, multi-
centre, randomised, controlled equiva-
lence trial. Lancet. 2019;393:664–677.
68. Sun LS, Li G, Miller TL, Salorio C, 
Byrne MW, Bellinger DC, etal. Asso-
ciation between a single general 
anesthesia exposure before age 36 
months and neurocognitive outcomes 
in later childhood. JAMA. 2016;315:
2312–2320.
69. Warner DO, Zaccariello MJ, Katusic SK, 
etal. Neuropsychological and behavio-
ral outcomes after exposure of young 
children to procedures requiring gen-
eral anesthesia: The Mayo Anesthesia 
Safety in Kids (MASK) Study. Anesthe-
siology. 2018;129:89–105.
642
Chapter
INTRODUCTION
The proportion of the U.S. population over the age of 
65 continues to grow (Fig. 35.1). This segment of the 
population is expected to double between the years 2020 
and 2060, and the number of people aged 80 and over is 
expected to triple within this time frame.1 Globally, the 
population aged 65 years and over is the fastest-growing 
age group, and in most parts of the world, survival 
beyond age 65 years continues to improve.2 Not surpris-
ingly, more and more anesthetics are being administered 
to the elderly, who are increasingly presenting for surgi-
cal procedures of varying complexity and invasiveness. 
In 2015 35% of all surgeries performed in the United 
States were for patients aged 65 and older.3 4
The practicing anesthesia provider must have a solid 
understanding of the anesthetic considerations unique to 
the elderly patient. The preoperative assessment should 
focus on how best to optimize the older patient for a 
surgical procedure (also see Chapter 13). Issues such as 
frailty, cognitive function, nutritional status, and func-
tional independence are more likely to affect perioperative 
outcomes in this age group. The safe delivery of anesthe-
sia care to an older patient requires an appreciation of the 
many physiologic changes that accompany normal aging, 
in addition to the significant differences in the pharma-
cokinetics and pharmacodynamics of the most commonly 
used anesthetic agents. An increased understanding of the 
neurobiology of perioperative neurocognitive disorders 
may allow anesthesia providers to lessen the risk of post-
operative delirium (POD) and cognitive decline. Despite 
the recognized importance of these geriatric-specific 
anesthetic considerations, a 2020 survey study sent to 
American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) members 
suggested low adherence to best practices in the anes-
thetic care of geriatric populations.5 For example, survey 
respondents reported low rates of preoperative geriatric 
evaluations, preoperative screening for frailty or cognitive 
INTRODUCTION
THE PHYSIOLOGIC CHANGES OF AGING
Cardiovascular System
Pulmonary System
Renal System
Nervous System
Gastrointestinal System
Hematologic System
PHARMACOLOGIC CONSIDERATIONS
Pharmacology of Specific Anesthetic 
Medications in the Elderly
PREOPERATIVE ASSESSMENT AND RISK 
MANAGEMENT
INTRAOPERATIVE CONSIDERATIONS
POSTOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
Acute Pain
Hypoxemia
Fluid Management
CHRONIC PAIN IN THE ELDERLY
PERIOPERATIVE NEUROCOGNITIVE 
DISORDERS
Postoperative Delirium
Postoperative Neurocognitive Disorders
SUMMARY
GERIATRICS
Tyler Seth Chernin
35
IV
Chapter 35 Geriatrics
643
disorders, and POD screening in their care of patients over 
65 years old.
THE PHYSIOLOGIC CHANGES OF AGING
In the 1940s the American physiologist Walter Cannon 
coined the term homeostenosis to explain the over-
arching principle that as a person ages, their ability to 
respond to physiologic stressors and shift back to a state 
of homeostasis is impaired.6 This concept provides a 
helpful framework through which to consider the physi-
ologic changes that accompany normal aging. For the 
most part, basal physiologic processes remain intact, 
while physiologic reserves are progressively diminished 
over time. Once those reserves are exhausted, a person 
is more predisposed to disease, a concept referred to as 
frailty (Fig. 35.2). In this section we will consider the 
main physiologic changes of aging most relevant to the 
anesthesia provider caring for the elderly surgical patient. 
Most importantly, it is essential to distinguish between 
the normal physiologic processes that occur with aging 
from the disease states that are more common in this 
population. Indeed, disease is not a normal part of the 
aging process (Table 35.1).
Cardiovascular System
One characteristic change that accompanies the aging 
process is the decrease in elastin production that begins 
to occur around the fourth decade of life. Within the 
cardiovascular system, this leads to fibrosis within the 
media of the aorta and other large muscular arteries 
and reduced compliance within both the arterial and 
venous systems.7 Approximately 80% of blood volume is 
normally stored in the venous system, which is a useful 
adaptive mechanism to help maintain cardiac output (CO) 
when preload is reduced. Decreased compliance (“stiff-
ening”) of venous capacitance vessels makes them less 
effective at compensating for reductions in preload. This 
is one of the reasons why elderly patients often experi-
ence labile blood pressure during anesthesia.8 Changes in 
the vascular endothelial layer include alterations in nitric 
oxide metabolism that predispose to vasoconstriction, 
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
1900
1910
1920
1930
1940
1950
1960
1970
1980
1990
2000
2010
2020
2030
2040
2050
0
5
10
15
20
25
Millions
65+ population (left scale)
65+ as proportion of total population (right scale)
Percent
Sources: 1900 to 1940, and 1960 to 1980, U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1983: 1950. U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1953: 1990.
U.S. Bureau of the Census. 1990: 2000. U.S. Census Bureau. 2001; 2010, U.S. Census Bureau, 2011; 2020 to 2050, U.S. Census
Bureau, 2012a: 1900 to 2010. decennial census: 2020 to 2050. 2012 National Population Projections, Middle series.
Population Aged 65 and Over: 1900 to 2050
(For information on confidentiality protection, nonsampling error, and definitions, see
www.census.gov/prod/cen2010/doc/sf1/pdf)
Fig. 35.1 The projected aging of the U.S. population. Bars represent the total number of persons 
aged 65 or older (millions), and the graphical line represents the data as a proportion of the total U.S. 
population (%). (Reproduced from United States Census Bureau. West LA, Cole S, Goodkind D, et al. 
65+ in the United States: 2010. June 2014. https://www.census.gov/content/dam/Census/library/
publications/2014/demo/p23-212.pdf. Accessed January 3, 2021.)
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
644
platelet aggregation, and endothelial dysfunction. Pro-
gressive calcific deposits within valvular structures and 
fibrosis within the cardiac conduction system increase 
the risk of dysrhythmias. Taken together, these changes 
lead to an increase in systolic blood pressure, systemic 
vascular resistance, and pulse pressure while diastolic 
blood pressure tends to decrease.9
Because of the progressive increase in left ventricular 
afterload, the left ventricle hypertrophies with age and 
becomes less compliant, impairing early ventricular 
filling and resulting in higher filling pressures, a reli-
ance on atrial systole, and a tendency toward diastolic 
dysfunction (Fig. 35.3). Total cardiac myocyte number 
decreases, but the resulting myocytes hypertrophy, 
which is further enhanced by a reduction in the pro-
cess of cellular autophagy, an intracellular mechanism 
whereby by-products of cell turnover are normally 
degraded by lysosomal activity.10 There are also changes 
to cardiac calcium currents, which impair ventricular 
relaxation. These structural and functional changes 
lead to a less compliant, hypertrophied left ventricle 
predisposed to myocardial ischemia in the setting of 
hypotension, especially within the subendocardial layer.9
The elderly patient is less able to compensate for con-
ditions of hypovolemia and hypervolemia. Although 
early studies suggested that ejection fraction (EF) and 
CO decreased with age, aging is clearly a risk factor for 
developing cardiovascular disease. It is likely that many 
prior studies inadvertently included subjects with latent 
coronary artery disease that caused systolic dysfunc-
tion.9 Therefore it is now generally accepted that resting 
EF and CO do not decrease with aging; however, the 
ability to augment CO under conditions of increased 
demand is decreased.10
Resting heart rate (HR) and maximum HR steadily 
decline with age. This is partly because of fibrous and 
fatty infiltration within the sinoatrial node and a loss 
of pacemaker cells.10 Although sympathetic nervous 
system (SNS) output increases with age, with higher lev-
els of circulating norepinephrine and epinephrine, SNS 
GENETICS
Epigenetic
Mechanisms
ENVIROMENT
NUTRITIONAL
INSUFFICIENCY
Cellular
Aging
PHYSICAL
INACTIVITY
Declining Mood,
Cognition and
Social Support
Illness/
Physiologic
Stress
Physiologic
Reserve
Functional
Abilities
Morbidity
Falls
Delirium
Disability
Hospital
Admissions
Increased
Care Needs
FRAILTY
Fig. 35.2 A conceptual model of physiologic reserve, functional ability, and frailty. As the aging 
process occurs (dashed, arrowed line), physiologic reserves and functional abilities normally decline. 
A multitude of other factors and processes (genetics, environment, cellular aging, nutritional status, 
physical inactivity, mood and social support) may hasten or slow down this process. At a certain point, 
the aging process or an acute physiologic stressor causes the individual to enter into a state of frailty 
(dashed, horizontal line), at which point they are at risk of poor outcomes, such as morbidity, falls, 
cognitive decline, and increased health care needs. These outcomes may further worsen the conditions 
of frailty. (Reproduced with permission from Khan KT, Hemati K, Donovan AL. Geriatric physiology and 
the frailty syndrome. Anesthesiol Clin. 2019;37[3]:453–474.)
IV
Chapter 35 Geriatrics
645
Organ System
Structural Changes
Functional Changes
Body composition
Decreased muscle mass
Decreased water content
Increased fat content
Reduced Vd for hydrophilic agents
Increased Vd for lipophilic agents
Cardiovascular
Fibrosis within vascular media layer
Fibrosis of conduction system
Calcification of valvular structures
Reduced myocyte number
LV hypertrophy
Increased LV afterload
Increased SBP, Increased PP
Decreased DBP
Increased LV filling pressures
Decreased PNS tone
Increased SNS output
Desensitized B-adrenergic receptors
Decreased resting HR and max HR
Decreased ability to augment EF/CO
Endothelial dysfunction
Pulmonary
Decreased elastin within lung parenchyma
Decreased alveolar surface area
Decreased thoracic vertebral column height
Relative flattening of diaphragm
Increased lung compliance
Decreased CW compliance
Increased A-a gradient, reduced Pao2
Increased dead space and shunt
Increased CC and CV
Blunted response to hypoxemia/hypercarbia
Decreased mucociliary function
Unchanged TLC
Increased RV and FRC
Decreased ERV, VC, FEV1, FVC
Renal
Renal cortical atrophy
Decreased number of nephrons
Decreased GFR
Decreased RBF
Renal vascular dysautonomy
Decreased RAAS activity
Decreased ability to conserve/excrete sodium
Decreased ability to reabsorb free water
Diminished tubular function
Decreased drug clearance
Nervous
Brain atrophy, decreased number of neurons
Increased CSF volume
Reduced dopamine, serotonin, acetylcholine, 
glutamate, BNF signaling
More permeable blood brain barrier
Demyelination of peripheral nerve fibers
Diminished executive function
Diminished short-term memory
Decreased CBF
Increased sensitivity to sedative agents
Increased risk of perioperative neurocognitive disorders
Gastrointestinal/
hepatic
Decreased esophageal muscle compliance
Hepatic atrophy
Decreased LES tone
Increased aspiration risk
Prolonged gastric emptying
Decreased gastric bicarbonate/PG production
Decreased HBF
Decreased albumin production
Decreased drug clearance
Hematologic
Decreased bone marrow mass
Increase in some circulating clotting factors
Increased platelet adhesiveness
Increased risk for DVT
Immunosenescence
Table 35.1
Selected Physiologic Effects of Aging by Organ System
BNF, Brain neurotrophic factor; CBF, cerebral blood flow; CC, closing capacity; CO, cardiac output; CV, closing volume; CW, chest wall; DBP,
diastolic blood pressure; DVT, deep venous thrombosis; EF, ejection fraction; ERV, expiratory reserve volume; FEV1, forced expired volume in 
1 second; FRC, functional residual capacity; FVC, forced vital capacity; GFR, glomerular filtration rate; HBF, hepatic blood flow; HR, heart rate; 
LES, lower esophageal sphincter; LV, left ventricle; PG, prostaglandin; PNS, parasympathetic nervous system; PP, pulse pressure; RAAS, renin–
angiotensin–aldosterone system; RBF, renal blood flow; RV, residual volume; SBP, systolic blood pressure; SNS, sympathetic nervous system; VC,
vital capacity; Vd, volume of distribution.
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
646
responsiveness is reduced because of both a downregu-
lation in the number of beta-adrenergic receptors and 
reduced receptor responsiveness as a result of changes 
to adenylate cyclase signaling pathways.10 Parasympa-
thetic nervous system (PNS) regulation also decreases 
with a blunting of the normal HR variability at rest seen 
in younger patients and a less robust increase in HR 
in response to anticholinergic medications.10 As such, 
maximum HR tends to decrease by one beat per minute 
per year over the age of 50.7 Similarly, the effectiveness 
of the HR component of the baroreceptor response is 
reduced, further predisposing to hypotension in the set-
ting of vasodilation.
Pulmonary System
Lung function tends to decline beginning around the 
third decade of life. This is caused in part by age-related 
loss of elastin within the lung parenchyma, in addition 
to progressive anatomic changes to the chest wall, res-
piratory musculature, and airway that occur with aging.11
Resting arterial partial pressure of oxygen (Pao2) stead-
ily declines with a widening of the A-a gradient. This is 
explained by a steady loss of alveolar and pulmonary 
capillary surface area, leading to redistribution of pulmo-
nary blood flow, worsening V/Q mismatch, and increas-
ing anatomic dead space.8 As elasticity declines within 
the lung itself, the tendency of smaller airways to col-
lapse increases at lower lung volumes, increasing shunt 
fraction and further contributing to resting hypoxemia. 
This is illustrated by an increase in closing capacity (CC) 
with age, which tends to exceed supine functional resid-
ual capacity (FRC) around the age of 45 and sitting FRC 
by age 6512 (Fig.35.4). This loss of elasticity also leads to 
an increase in lung compliance and a physiologic state of 
functional emphysema, with a tendency toward air trap-
ping.11 There is also a significant blunting of the normal 
physiologic compensatory responses to both hypoxemia 
100
80
60
40
20
0
0
20
40
60
80
100
Age (y)
Age (y)
Resldual Volume
Expiratory
Reserve
Volume
Closing Volume
Tidal Volume
Inspiratory Reserve Volume
Functional
Residual
Capacity
The Four Main Block Volume
Total Lung Capacity (%)
Fig. 35.4 Age-related changes in selected lung volumes. This figure illustrates the main changes 
to lung volumes that occur during the aging process (x-axis). A number of changes to the lung 
parenchyma (loss of elastin, increased compliance), chest wall (reduced compliance), and diaphragm 
(relative flattening) lead to a steady rise in residual volume (RV) and functional residual capacity (FRC), 
with a reduction in expiratory reserve volume (ERV), inspiratory reserve volume (IRV), and vital capacity 
(VC = ERV + Tidal volume + IRV). Total lung capacity is generally unchanged. Importantly, closing 
volume (CV) and closing capacity (CV + RV) also steadily rise. When lung volumes decrease below CC 
(depicted by the star), small airways start to close, shunting increases, and hypoxemia ensues. CC tends 
to exceed FRC when supine around the age of 45 and when sitting by age 65 (not depicted in this 
image). (Image reproduced with permission from Zaugg M, Lucchinetti E. Respiratory function in the 
elderly. Anesthesiol Clin North Am. 2000;18[1]:47-vi.)
Volume
Pressure
Diastolic dysfunction
Normal
Fig. 35.3 Depiction of the diastolic function. (From Barnett SR. 
Elderly patients. In Pardo MC, Miller RD, eds. Basics of Anesthesia. 
7th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018:610.)
IV
Chapter 35 Geriatrics
647
Renal System
Renal cortical atrophy appears to be a normal part of 
the aging process (Fig. 35.5). This loss of renal mass is 
accompanied by a progressive decline in renal function.14
At the microscopic level, there are fewer functioning 
nephrons because of progressive nephrosclerosis with 
renal tubular atrophy. The remaining nephrons tend 
to hypertrophy, which may represent a compensatory 
response. At the macroscopic level, in addition to corti-
cal loss, there tends to be a higher incidence of renal 
cysts and benign tumors.14 Renal blood flow (RBF) also 
decreases with age as a result of anatomic changes within 
the renal vasculature, a 10% decrease per decade over 
the age of 40.8 This makes the kidneys less responsive to 
changes in volume status, which is further exacerbated 
by a decrease in activity of the renin–angiotensin–aldos-
terone system (RAAS) and other autonomic reflexes 
within the kidney, a term referred to as renal vascular 
dysautonomy.15 By age 60, there are lower circulating 
levels of renin and aldosterone.8 This places the elderly 
patient at particularly high risk for ischemic complica-
tions in the setting of hypotension. In addition, there is a 
diminished reserve among renal tubular cells for regen-
eration after ischemic insults.15
Glomerular filtration rate (GFR) declines with age, 
with some estimates showing a decrease of 1 mL/year 
over the age of 50.14 However, serum creatinine levels 
remain normal because of a parallel reduction in muscle 
mass.16 The ability to conserve and excrete sodium and 
to concentrate and dilute urine is impaired, and with it 
and hypercarbia; however, the ability to excrete carbon 
dioxide is generally well-maintained.6
The chest wall becomes less compliant because of stiff-
ening of the muscles and joints of the thorax. Combined 
with loss of thoracic vertebral disc space height, overall 
chest wall remodeling leads to a relative flattening of the 
diaphragm, which makes contraction less efficient.6 There 
is also a reduction in the number of type 2 fast-twitch 
fibers, which may lead to diaphragmatic fatigue.11 Alto-
gether, this leads to an increase in work of breathing for 
the elderly patient under conditions of exercise or stress. 
Total lung capacity (TLC) tends to remain unchanged, 
partly because of opposite changes in compliance between 
the chest wall (reduced) and lung (increased). Although 
not considered a normal part of the aging process, restric-
tive lung physiology is common in the elderly in the 
setting of significant spinal kyphosis. The following lung 
volumes increase with age: residual volume (RV) by 5% to 
10% per decade and FRC by 1% to 3% per decade. Lung 
volumes that decrease with age include vital capacity (VC) 
(40% decrease between the ages of 20 and 70),8 forced 
vital capacity (FVC), and forced expiratory volume in 1 
second (FEV1).11 Oxygen diffusing capacity (DLCO) also 
steadily declines at about 5% per decade.6
Loss of pharyngeal muscle tone and blunting of 
the normal protective airway reflexes predispose to 
airway obstruction and pulmonary aspiration.8 Muco-
ciliary function also becomes less effective with age, and 
impaired pulmonary macrophage and neutrophil activity 
can increase the risk of infectious complications and 
subsequent tissue injury.13
Fig. 35.5 The aging kidney. Renal cortical atrophy begins around the age of 30 (10% loss per decade 
above age 30), accompanied by a reduction in renal blood flow (10% per decrease over above age 
40) and a progressive decline in renal function. Medullary volume initially increases, which may be 
compensatory, a process that ceases around the age of 60. (Reproduced with permission from O'Neill 
CW. Structure, not just function. Kidney Int. 2014;85[3]:503–505.)
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
648
the ability to rapidly compensate for changes in volume 
status, predisposing to conditions of hypovolemia and 
hypervolemia and hyponatremia and hypernatremia.12
Thirst response is diminished in the elderly, which can 
further aggravate hypovolemia. A reduced ability to 
reabsorb free water is caused by a lower tonicity within 
the renal medulla, lower GFR, and reduced tubular 
activity. The ability to excrete excess free water is simi-
larly impaired, which predisposes to hyponatremia in 
the setting of hypoosmolar fluid loads.15 Reductions in 
GFR and in renin and aldosterone activity predispose to 
hyperkalemia. This also leads to changes in the ability to 
excrete and reabsorb many types of medications.8
Nervous System
Although a complete discussion of the neurologic effects 
of aging is beyond the scope of this chapter, the most 
notable change is a progressive loss of brain mass and 
nervous system function. The process of progressive 
brain atrophy appears to begin earlier in men but occurs 
at a more rapid pace in women.8 Volume loss within the 
central nervous system (CNS) appears more pronounced 
in the prefrontal cortex and medial temporal lobes, 
affecting white matter more than gray matter—at a rate 
of 5% per decade over the age of 40.17 These anatomic 
changes may explain why many elderly patients experi-
ence impairments in attention and executive function 
and short-term memory.12 Parallel changes are seen with 
increasing cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) volume over time and 
decreasing cerebral blood flow (CBF) by 5% to 20%.6 At 
the microscopic level, there is a reduction in the number 
of neurons and levels of many neurotransmitters, such as 
dopamine, serotonin, acetylcholine, glutamate, and brain 
neurotrophic factor.17 Neuronal synapses decrease along 
with specific reductions in cholinergic and muscarinic 
neurons.18 The blood–brain barrier tends to become more 
permeable, and there is a loss of capillary networks and 
signs of arteriosclerosis and intimal thickening within the 
intracerebral vessels.8 On a more global level, the aging 
patient experiences multiple impairments in process-
ing of sensory inputs across many systems that present 
notable risk factors for perioperative complications. This 
is manifested by an increased risk for falls, POD, and 
cognitive impairment.
Gastrointestinal System
As noted earlier, the elderly patient is at greater risk for 
aspiration. From a gastrointestinal perspective, there 
is reduced esophageal muscle compliance and lower 
esophageal sphincter tone with advancing age, in addi-
tion to prolonged gastric emptying.8 Although gastric 
acid production likely remains normal, there is reduced 
gastric prostaglandin and bicarbonate production, which 
may predispose to gastritis and a higher risk of gastric 
irritation from nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs 
(NSAIDs).6 Similar to other organ systems, the liver 
atrophies with age by up to 20% to 40% by the age of 
80.8 With the reduction in liver mass comes a reduction 
in hepatic blood flow (HBF)—a 50% decrease between 
the ages of 30 and 100, according to some estimates.19
Reduced HBF places the liver at greater risk of ischemia. 
Hepatic function also steadily declines, with decreased 
albumin production, which may lead to higher plasma 
levels of certain acidic drugs. Additionally, cytochrome 
P450 metabolism is less effective with aging.12
Hematologic System
Hematopoietic reserves decline with aging as bone mar-
row mass decreases and fat content increases.20 Advanced 
age can be considered a prothrombotic state, as there is 
increased platelet adhesiveness combined with slightly 
higher levels of certain clotting factors, such as fibrino-
gen; factors V, VII, and IX; high-molecular-weight kini-
nogen; and prekallikrein. There is also reduced activity 
of the antithrombotic plasminogen activator inhibitor-1.6
This may explain why geriatric patients are at greater 
risk of deep venous thrombosis (DVT). The term immu-
nosenescence refers to the fact that the aging immune 
system is less effective at recognizing and mounting a 
robust immune response to novel antigens, which seems 
to impair lymphocytic responses in particular.6
PHARMACOLOGIC CONSIDERATIONS
Many unique pharmacodynamic (PD) and pharmacoki-
netic (PK) changes to commonly administered anesthetic 
drugs accompany the aging process. Elderly patients are, 
in general, more sensitive to most anesthetic agents, 
which may in part be explained by changes at the recep-
tor level. From a PK standpoint, the physiologic changes 
of aging described earlier lead to notable differences in 
the absorption, volume of distribution (Vd), metabolism, 
and clearance of many medications. Oral bioavailability 
may be affected by changes in gastric pH and gastric 
emptying and by reductions in gastrointestinal tract and 
HBF that may affect the amount of drug that reaches the 
systemic circulation.21 Total body water (TBW) decreases 
by 10% to 15%, with a reduction in muscle mass and 
an increase of 20% to 40% in fat mass. As a result, the 
Vd for hydrophilic agents is reduced with a resultant 
increase in their plasma concentration; the opposite 
is true for lipophilic agents21,15 (Fig. 35.6). Addition-
ally, serum albumin, which normally binds to acidic 
drugs, steadily decreases with age, which increases the 
unbound fraction of drug in the bloodstream.15 On the 
other hand, levels of alpha-1-acid glycoprotein, which 
normally binds basic drugs, increase with age and sub-
sequently reduce the levels of unbound drug.21 With 
IV
Chapter 35 Geriatrics
649
the reduction in HBF and hepatic enzymatic activity 
comes a reduced clearance for medications that depend 
on hepatic metabolism and potentially higher plasma 
levels and a prolongation of action. A similar process 
occurs for drugs that depend on renal clearance because 
of reductions in RBF and GFR.12 Considering that many 
common comorbid conditions of the elderly, in addition 
to polypharmacy and nutritional status, also markedly 
affect drug sensitivity, it is difficult to make universal 
recommendations for drug dosing that neatly apply to 
all geriatric patients undergoing anesthesia. The general 
consensus, though, is that nearly all drug doses should be 
initially reduced, with potentially longer timing between 
repeated dosing, and should always be titrated to clinical 
effect (Tables 35.2 and 35.3).
Pharmacology of Specific Anesthetic 
Medications in the Elderly
Volatile Anesthetics (Also See Chapter 7)
The minimum alveolar concentration (MAC) for volatile 
anesthetics is reduced by 6% per decade over the age 
of 40, with a reduction of 8% per decade for nitrous 
oxide.15 21 This is likely explained by PD changes in the 
CNS, such as neuronal loss, in addition to changes in 
neurotransmitter levels and functional connectivity.15 22
Propofol (Also See Chapter 8)
Induction doses of propofol should generally be reduced 
by at least 20% and maintenance infusions by 30% to 
50%, though dosing should always be titrated to clinical 
effect.23 Elderly patients are more sensitive to the effects 
of propofol and may exhibit reduced clearance because 
of reductions in hepatic metabolism.24 In one study of 
healthy volunteers 75-year-old subjects required roughly 
half the dose of their 20-year-old counterparts for the 
same clinical endpoint. In addition, the former were 
found to achieve deeper anesthetic states as measured by 
electroencephalogram (EEG), which took longer to reach 
and recover from.25
Etomidate (Also See Chapter 8)
There is a reduction in both clearance and Vd for eto-
midate in the elderly. Although no known PD changes 
accompany aging, induction doses should be reduced 
by up to 50% to 66% in patients aged 80 and older.15 21
Etomidate boluses produce less hypotension and can be 
helpful in avoiding postinduction hypotension but can 
produce myoclonus and adrenal suppression.
Ketamine (Also See Chapter 8)
Some of the benefits of ketamine include less respiratory 
depression and hypotension, which is ideal given the 
exaggerated hypotensive response often seen in elderly 
patients, especially during induction. The transient 
increase in HR and blood pressure can be of concern 
in patients with coronary artery disease or stenotic 
valvular lesions. Concern regarding the dysphoric side 
effects and potential for worsening delirium have been 
raised regarding its use in the geriatric population. 
Despite this, evidence of a pro-delirium effect appears 
to be mixed,21 and a cautious reduction in both induc-
tion and maintenance dosing is recommended, though 
exact guidelines are lacking in the literature. Ketamine 
Adipose Tissue
Body Water
Muscle Mass
Clearance
Or
Sensitivity
Vdwater
Vdlipid
Fig. 35.6 Changes in body composition in elderly patients. Vd, Volume of distribution. (From Rivera R, 
Antognini JF. Perioperative drug therapy in elderly patients. Anesthesiology. 2009;110[5]:1176–1181.)
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
650
is metabolized in the liver to norketamine, which is an 
active metabolite.24
Benzodiazepines (Also See Chapter 8)
Benzodiazepines should be used with caution in the 
elderly because of their observed tendency to cause 
and/or worsen delirium. If administered, their doses 
should be significantly reduced because of both PD-
related increases in sensitivity and PK-related changes 
that reduce their metabolism and potentially prolong 
their effects. They also have a synergistic effect on res-
piratory depression when administered with opioids.21
The midazolam dosage should likely be reduced by at 
least 50% in the elderly.15 21 The active metabolite of 
midazolam, hydroxymidazolam, is renally excreted.15 21
Lorazepam undergoes glucuronidation, with no active 
metabolites, but may exhibit a delayed peak and pro-
longed effect.24
Opioids (Also See Chapter 9)
Elderly patients are more sensitive to both the analge-
sic and respiratory effects of opioids, and most sources 
recommend a dose reduction of approximately 50%.12 15
Again, this is the result of both PD- and PK-related 
Drug/Drug Class
Response
Diuretics
Hypokalemia
Hypovolemia
Centrally acting 
antihypertensives
Decreased autonomic nervous 
system activity
β-Adrenergic antagonists
Decreased autonomic nervous 
system activity
Decreased anesthetic requirements
Bronchospasm
Bradycardia
Cardiac antidysrhythmics Potentiation of neuromuscular 
blocking drugs
Digitalis
Cardiac dysrhythmias
Cardiac conduction disturbances
Tricyclic 
antidepressants
Anticholinergic effects
Antibiotics
Potentiation of neuromuscular 
blocking drugs
Oral hypoglycemics
Hypoglycemia
Alcohol
Increased anesthetic requirements
Delirium tremens
Drug/Drug Class
Adjustments/Considerationsa
Volatile anesthetics
6% decreased MAC per decade over 
age 40
Propofol
Decrease induction dose by 20%
Decrease maintenance infusion dose 
by 30%–50%
Etomidate
Decrease induction dose
Ketamine
Decrease induction and maintenance 
infusion dosesb
Dexmedetomidine
Decrease dose by 33%
Possibly affected by 
hypoalbuminemia
Acetaminophen
No adjustments with normal hepatic 
function and weight
Consider maximum daily dose of 2 g 
with weight <50 kg
Opioids
Decrease doses by 50%
Consider avoiding morphine/
meperidine because of renally 
cleared metabolites
Remifentanil—Decrease bolus dose by 
50%, maintenance dose by 66%
NSAIDs
Decrease dose by 25%–50%
Avoid with GFR <60
Possibly increased risk of GI bleeding 
and cardiac complications
Benzodiazepines
Decrease dose significantly
Prolonged effects
Contributes to delirium and cognitive 
dysfunction
Midazolam—Decrease bolus dose by 
at least 50%
Gabapentinoids
Decrease dose
May have synergistic effects with 
opioids on respiratory depression
Local Anesthetics 
(LAs)—Neuraxial/
Regional Route
Decrease dose
May have prolonged effects
Amide LAs hepatically metabolized
Higher risk of local anesthetic 
systemic toxicity (LAST)
Neuromuscular 
Blocking Drugs
Effects may be prolonged
No significant pharmacodynamic 
changes
Careful monitoring of depth of 
blockade recommended to avoid 
residual effects
Sugammadex
May have slower onset and longer 
time for full reversal
Table 35.2
Drugs Often Taken by Elderly Patients That 
May Contribute to Adverse Effects or Drug 
Interactions
From Barnett SR. Elderly patients. In Pardo MC, Miller RD, eds. Basics 
of Anesthesia. 7th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018:610.
Table 35.3
Medication Dosing Adjustments and Other 
Considerations in the Elderly
GFR, Glomerular filtration rate; MAC, minimum alveolar concentration.
aGeneral dosing recommendations. Drugs should always be titrated 
to clinical effect.
bExact dosing recommendations in the elderly not available.
IV
Chapter 35 Geriatrics
651
changes in the geriatric patient. Of note, opioids that 
depend on renal clearance are best avoided, namely 
meperidine and morphine, both of which are converted 
to active metabolites (normeperidine, morphine-6-glucu-
ronide, and morphine-3-glucuronide, respectively) that 
are excreted by the kidneys and may accumulate.21 26
Meperidine may contribute to delirium because of its 
anticholinergic effects. Fentanyl can be an ideal agent 
because there are fewer PK-related considerations and no 
active metabolites, though older patients are more sensi-
tive to its effects.24 Remifentanil can also be advanta-
geous, because its metabolism by nonspecific tissue and 
plasma esterases does not depend on end-organ function, 
though it does appear to have reduced clearance in the 
elderly and a slower onset and offset. Remifentanil bolus 
doses should be reduced by 50% and infusion rates by 
up to two-thirds.15
Dexmedetomidine (Also See Chapter 8)
Elderly patients are likely more sensitive to the effects of 
the alpha2-agonist dexmedetomidine, with dose reductions 
of up to one-third recommended by some sources as a 
result of reduced drug clearance.27 Lower albumin levels 
may also affect the amount of free drug in the plasma. The 
potential role of dexmedetomidine infusion in preventing 
PD is a subject of ongoing investigation.24
Acetaminophen
Acetaminophen is a centrally acting cyclooxygenase 
inhibitor that is well-tolerated by most patients. Sig-
nificant hepatic dysfunction is the main contraindication 
in any patient, and generally no dose adjustments are 
needed in the elderly.28
Nonsteroidal Antiinflammatory Drugs
NSAIDs should be used with caution in the elderly because 
of their side effect profile. As inhibitors of the cyclooxy-
genase enzyme, they have analgesic and antiinflammatory 
effects but can precipitate renal failure, cause gastrointes-
tinal bleeding, and possibly increase the risk of cardiac 
disease. Doses should generally be reduced by 25% to 50% 
and avoided in patients with GFR <60 mL/min.28
Local Anesthetics (Also See Chapter 10)
The degree of systemic absorption of local anesthetics 
(LAs), and hence risk for toxicity, depends on many fac-
tors such as site of injection, degree of local vascularity, 
dose and volume, and presence of adjunctive agents. The 
amount of absorption from the neuraxial space may be 
lower in the elderly because of reduced vascularity.24
Amide LAs are hepatically metabolized, so doses should 
be reduced, given the risk for higher plasma concentra-
tions in the setting of reduced HBF. Alpha-1-acid gly-
coprotein binds many LAs, and as mentioned earlier, its 
levels tend to rise with aging, though the clinical signifi-
cance of this to dosing remains unclear.24
Neuromuscular Blocking Agents (Also See Chapter 11)
No significant PD-related changes to neuromuscular 
blocking agents occur with the aging process. However, 
age-related reductions in hepatic and renal function can 
prolong the effect of certain agents, such as rocuronium.21
Cisatracurium, which is metabolized by Hoffmann elimi-
nation, is an attractive option. Regardless of the choice 
of agent, it is important to judiciously monitor the level 
of neuromuscular blockade, as even small residual effects 
can lead to clinically significant respiratory compromise. 
Sugammadex appears to have a slower onset of action 
and time for full recovery, as demonstrated by train-of-
four (TOF) monitoring.29
PREOPERATIVE ASSESSMENT AND RISK 
MANAGEMENT (ALSO SEE CHAPTER 13)
The goal of preoperative assessment is to analyze rel-
evant information obtained through history, physical 
examination, medical record review, and preoperative 
testing in order to formulate an anesthetic plan that best 
balances patient safety with the specific needs of the 
procedure. In the geriatric patient the following issues 
arise more frequently and should be evaluated prospec-
tively: cognitive function and decision-making capacity, 
functional capacity, nutritional status, frailty, and polyp-
harmacy. Elderly patients are more likely to present with 
comorbidities that may significantly affect the choice of 
anesthetic, and some geriatric patients may not be able 
to provide a reliable history because of cognitive decline, 
hearing or vision impairment, or other factors. As a 
result, the preoperative assessment of the geriatric patient 
may not be a straightforward process, and care should 
be taken to ensure that the patient and other relevant 
decision-makers have a thorough understanding of the 
procedure and the risks involved.
There are many published tools for assessing cogni-
tive function.30 Examples include the Mini Mental Status 
Exam (MMSE), Mini-Cog, and others (Box 35.1). This is 
important both to assess baseline cognitive function for 
the purposes of capacity and decision-making ability 
and to help guide a patient through the perioperative 
process with the necessary support structures to ensure 
optimal recovery and rehabilitation. A 2019 metaanalysis 
showed that preoperative deficiencies as measured by the 
MMSE correlated with POD, in-hospital mortality, and 
1-year mortality.31 Having a sense of baseline cognition 
is also an important part of the process for diagnosing 
and managing perioperative neurocognitive disorders, 
which are discussed later. Decision-making capacity in a 
medical context is defined by proficiency in four major 
areas: the ability to understand the various treatment 
options, an appreciation of the type and severity of dis-
ease and its consequences, the ability to reason between 
the various treatment options offered, and finally, the 
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
652
ability to make an informed choice.32 Assessing for mood 
disorders such as depression is also an essential part of 
the process, as is evaluating for substance use disorders, 
the latter of which is commonly screened using the 
CAGE questionnaire.33 Often, subclinical impairments 
in these domains can be challenging to identify but can 
have important consequences during the perioperative 
period.
Functional capacity is broadly assessed by evaluating 
a patient's ability to carry out activities of daily living 
(ADLs) and instrumental activities of daily living (IADLs) 
(Box 35.2). Impairments in preoperative functional status 
correlate with a number of postoperative complications. 
The recovery plan for an elderly patient may require 
specific attention to nutritional support, physical therapy 
and rehabilitation, fall prevention, or other issues found 
during the preoperative assessment.32 Deficits in hearing, 
vision, and swallowing ability should be documented, as 
they may also affect postoperative care. Falls are often of 
particular concern to the elderly patient, who may present 
with baseline deficiencies in balance and coordination, 
which can be aggravated by anesthetic and analgesic 
medications given perioperatively. The Timed Up and Go 
Test is one available tool for assessing mobility and can 
be used to define risk level for falls32 (Box35.3).
Poor nutritional status is associated with a number 
of perioperative complications, including surgical site 
infections, pneumonia, and urinary tract infections.30 32
Objective measures such as albumin level <3 g/dL, body 
mass index <18.5 kg/m2, or an unexplained loss of 10% 
to 15% of body weight within the preceding 6 months 
are notably worrisome signs and may be indications for 
delaying elective procedures when targeted interventions 
are feasible.34
Frailty is defined by a global reduction in physi-
ologic reserve that limits a patient's ability to respond to 
physiologic stressors and return to a state of homeostasis 
(see Fig. 35.2). Although not strictly a condition of the 
elderly, increasing age is a major contributor to the frail 
state. There is no uniformly accepted method for meas-
uring frailty; however, multiple tools are available for 
quantifying it. The two main tools include frailty phe-
notype models (e.g., Fried Index) or deficit accumulation 
approaches (e.g., Modified Frailty Index)30 (Table 35.4). 
Box 35.1
Cognitive Assessment With the Mini-Cog Test: 
Three-Item Recall and Clock Draw
1. Get the patient's attention, then say:
“I am going to say three words that I want you to 
remember now and later. The words are: banana, sunrise, 
chair. Please say them for me now.” Give the patient three 
tries to repeat the words. If unable after three tries, go to 
the next item.
2. Say all the following phrases in the order indicated:
“Please draw a clock in the space below. Start by drawing 
a large circle. Put all the numbers in the circle and set the 
hands to show 11:10 (10 past 11).” If the subject has not 
finished clock drawing in 3 minutes, discontinue and ask for 
recall items.
3. Say:
“What were the three words I asked you to remember?”
Scoring
•Three-item recall (0–3 points); clock draw (0 or 2 points)
•1 point for each correct word; 0 points for abnormal
clock; 2 points for normal clock
•A normal clock has all of the following elements:
–
All numbers 1 to 12, each only once, are present in the 
correct order and direction (clockwise) inside the circle.
–
Two hands are present, one pointing to 11 and one 
pointing to 2.
–
Any clock missing any of these elements is scored 
abnormal. Refusal to draw a clock is scored abnormal.
•Total score of 0, 1, or 2 suggests possible impairment.
•Total score of 3, 4, or 5 suggests no impairment.
From Mini-Cog.com. Copyright S. Borson (soob@uw.edu), used with 
permission.
Box 35.2
Activities of Daily Living and Instrumental 
Activities of Daily Livinga
Activities of Daily Living
Bathing
Dressing
Toileting
Transferring
Eating
Instrumental Activities of Daily Living
Use of telephone
Use of public transportation
Shopping
Preparation of meals
Housekeeping
Taking medications properly
Managing personal finances
aFrom Barnett SR. Elderly patients. In Pardo MC, Miller RD, eds. Basics 
of Anesthesia. 7th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018:610.
Box 35.3
Assessment of Gait and Mobility Limitations 
With the Timed Up and Go (TUG) Test
Patients should sit in a standard armchair with a line 10 feet in 
length in front of the chair. They should use standard footwear 
and walking aids and should not receive any assistance.
Have the patient perform the following commands:
•Rise from the chair (if possible, without using the
armrests)
•Walk to the line on the floor (10 feet)
•Turn
•Return to the chair
•Sit down again
From Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The Timed Up 
and Go (TUG) Test. http://www.cdc.gov/steadi/pdf/tug_test-a.pdf/. 
Accessed June 1, 2016.
IV
Chapter 35 Geriatrics
653
Overall, frailty is best viewed as an overall assessment 
of risk based on age and disease-related factors across 
multiple organ systems.35 Multiple studies have shown 
that increasing frailty is associated with higher morbidity 
and mortality, an association that may be stronger than 
simply considering age alone.36 A 2018 study among 
ambulatory surgical patients using the American Col-
lege of Surgeons National Surgical Quality Improvement 
Program (NSQIP) database found that a modified frailty 
index (mFI) tool correlated strongly with perioperative 
adverse outcomes, independent of age and comorbidities. 
The authors argue that access to care for elderly surgical 
patients, even at extremes of age, should not be limited 
simply by a blanket assessment of risk based on chrono-
logic age.37 Assessing preoperative frailty, like functional 
capacity and cognitive function, can be an important 
part of the anesthetic and surgical planning process 
by helping to guide what specific interventions might 
present the least risk to the patient. Finally, studies are 
underway to determine what effect frailty has on the risk 
of developing postoperative neurocognitive disorders. A 
2020 retrospective analysis of elective hip arthroplasties 
found that baseline frailty index (using the Edmonton 
Frailty Scale) correlated well with the risk of cognitive 
decline at 3 and 12 months postoperatively.36
About 40% of patients over the age of 65 use five 
or more medications, with 12% to 19% taking ten or 
more medications.38 The issue of polypharmacy is thus 
extremely relevant to the geriatric patient and neces-
sitates a thorough review of all prescription and over-
the-counter medications being used by the patient before 
undergoing surgery. The preoperative period is also an 
opportunity to assess compliance with, and appropriate-
ness of, prescribed medications. Clear instructions should 
be given to elderly patients or their caregivers regarding 
which medications should be discontinued in the pre-
operative period. Polypharmacy can contribute to poor 
outcomes, including falls, increased incidence of adverse 
drug reactions, hospital length of stay, and mortality38
(see Table 35.2). Although not unique to the geriatric 
patient, patients should generally be instructed to con-
tinue β-blockers and statins,30 with most clinicians rec-
ommending discontinuation of angiotensin-converting 
enzyme (ACE) inhibitors and angiotensin receptor block-
ers (ARBs) on the day of surgery to avoid intraoperative 
hypotension. To help reduce the risk of delirium, elderly 
patients should avoid benzodiazepines and anticholiner-
gic medications whenever possible, especially during the 
perioperative period.32
Optimizing an elderly patient before surgery can be 
challenging because the geriatric patient is more likely 
to present with one or more significant comorbidities. 
Additionally, geriatric patients are at a greater risk for 
perioperative complications.39 A thorough assessment 
Name
Description
Modified Frailty 
Index (mFI)a
Compilation of deficits/impairments into an index based on 
symptoms, signs, laboratory values, disease states, and disabilities 
based on NSQIP database
mFI-11—11 factors used
mFI-5—5 factors used
Hopkins Frailty 
Scoreb
Five domains: weight loss, grip strength/weakness, exhaustion, low 
physical activity, slowed walking speed
Score: 0, nonfrail; 1–2, prefrail; 
3–5, frail
Edmonton Frail 
Scalec
Standardized assessment of cognition, general health, functional 
independence and performance, social support, medication usage, 
nutritional status, mood, continence
Scored out of 17, higher scores 
associated with increasing 
frailty
FRAIL Scaled
Five domains: fatigue, resistance, ambulation, illnesses, weight loss
Score: 0, nonfrail; 1–2, prefrail; 
3-5, frail
Groningen Frailty 
Indicatore
15-item questionnaire, 8 indicators: mobility, physical fitness, vision, 
hearing, nutrition, morbidity, cognition, psychosocial
Score out of 15, 4 or greater 
indicative of frailty
Table 35.4
Selected Frailty Assessment Methods in the Perioperative Setting
NSQIP, National Surgical Quality Improvement Program.
Reproduced with permission from Khan KT, Hemati K, Donovan AL. Geriatric physiology and the frailty syndrome. Anesthesiol Clin. 
2019;37(3):453–474.
aFarhat JS, Velanovich V, Falvo AJ, et al. Are the frail destined to fail? Frailty index as predictor of surgical morbidity and mortality in the elderly. 
J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2012;72(6):1526–1530 and Subramaniam S, Aalberg JJ, Soriano RP, et al. New 5-Factor Modified Frailty Index using 
American College of Surgeons NSQIP data. J Am Coll Surg. 2018;226(2):173–181.e8.
bFried LP, Tangen CM, Walston J, et al. Cardiovascular Health Study Collaborative Research Group. Frailty in older adults: Evidence for a 
phenotype. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2001;56(3):M146–M156.
cRolfson DB, Majumdar SR, Tsuyuki RT, et al. Validity and reliability of the Edmonton Frail Scale. Age Ageing. 2006;35(5):526–529.
dMorley JE, Malmstrom TK, Miller DK. A simple frailty questionnaire (FRAIL) predicts outcomes in middle aged African Americans. J Nutr Health 
Aging. 2012;16(7):601–608.
eSteverink N, Slaets JPJ, Schuurmans H, et al. Measuring frailty: Development and testing of the Groningen Frailty Indicator (GFI). Gerontologist. 
2001;41(special issue 1):236–237.
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
654
of cardiac, pulmonary, and renal systems should be per-
formed at a minimum before any procedure. No specific 
preoperative studies are recommended solely on the 
basis of age. Providers should order laboratory, imag-
ing, and other tests as required by the patient's medical 
conditions and the risks posed by the procedure (also see 
Chapter13). Efforts to mitigate the risk of major adverse 
cardiac events (MACEs) often involve the 2014 Ameri-
can College of Cardiology/American Heart Association 
(ACC/AHA) Guideline on Perioperative Cardiovascular 
Evaluation and Management of Patients Undergoing 
Noncardiac Surgery for managing preoperative cardiac 
testing.40 The guideline is a useful tool for adult patients 
of any age, though cognitive and functional limitations 
may make subjective assessments of exercise tolerance 
difficult. Generally, routine electrocardiograms are rec-
ommended only for patients with a history of, or risk 
factors for, cardiac disease or those undergoing interme-
diate- to high-risk procedures.30 Preoperative pulmonary 
optimization for patients with chronic lung disease may 
involve pulmonary function testing (PFT), preoperative 
inspiratory muscle training, smoking cessation, and chest 
x-ray (CXR).32 A Comprehensive Geriatric Assessment 
(CGA) is a formalized evaluation by a geriatric special-
ist that provides a more global assessment of the elderly 
patient and can be useful before a planned procedure. 
A geriatrician may then make recommendations for 
specific modifiable interventions, namely those related 
to polypharmacy, nutritional status, prehabilitation, and 
postoperative planning.30 Exercise prehabilitation, ide-
ally in the form of regular aerobic and strength training 
at least 2 weeks before surgery, may significantly reduce 
the risk of complications and functional decline among 
elderly, frail patients. In addition, malnutrition can be 
targeted during prehabilitation programs with focused 
nutritional programs.35 Finally, efforts to reduce the risk 
of POD are essential, as discussed later.
INTRAOPERATIVE CONSIDERATIONS
The choice between general anesthesia, regional anesthe-
sia, and monitored anesthesia care is often heavily influ-
enced by the type of procedure being performed (also see 
Chapter14). When options exist between various types 
of anesthetics or a combination thereof, anesthesia pro-
viders must carefully balance the safety of the geriatric 
patient during the procedure with the goal of ensuring 
a successful recovery and avoidance of common postop-
erative problems, such as delirium and cardiopulmonary 
complications. Much research has focused on the choice 
between general anesthesia and neuraxial anesthesia in 
the elderly, especially within the hip fracture population. 
To date, few trials have shown conclusive evidence that 
one technique is significantly superior to another, except 
for a possible reduction in DVT incidence within the 
neuraxial group in a 2016 Cochrane review on the sub-
ject41 (Table 35.5). There are many possible explanations 
General Anesthesia
Regional Anesthesia
Technical Considerations
Difficult mask ventilation in edentulous patients
Neck stiffness reducing ROM
Exaggerated hemodynamic response to 
laryngoscopy
Neuraxial techniques may be challenging; 
ligament ossification, positioning
Greater LA spread in neuraxial space
Risk of Deep Venous 
Thrombosis (DVT)
Variable
May be reduced with neuraxial techniques
Polypharmacy
May contribute to drug–drug interactions 
perioperatively
Regional techniques are often opioid-sparing
Fewer systemic medications needed
Elderly patients at higher risk of LAST
Risk of Perioperative 
Neurocognitive Disorders
No conclusive evidence of one technique being superior. May be confounded by depth of sedation 
used during regional anesthetics.
Hemodynamic (HD) 
Stability
Variable
Hypotension common with neuraxial techniques
PNBs under sedation may provide superior HD 
stability
Perioperative Use of 
Anticoagulant/
Antiplatelet 
Medications
May present surgery-specific contraindications
Frequently contraindicates neuraxial and certain 
PNB procedures
Epidural catheters may complicate postoperative 
DVT prophylaxis/anticoagulation
Pain Control
Variable
Often superior
LA, Local anesthetic; LAST, local anesthetic systemic toxicity; PNB, peripheral nerve block; ROM, range of motion
Table 35.5
Considerations Regarding Regional Versus General Anesthesia in the Elderly
IV
Chapter 35 Geriatrics
655
for this, including significant variability in the depth of 
sedation used in the regional/neuraxial groups, which 
can at times approach that of a general anesthetic and 
confound the results. Furthermore, the presence of 
comorbidities and frequency of anticoagulant medication 
usage may often prevent a given patient from receiv-
ing a neuraxial technique who would have otherwise 
benefited.
Despite this, there are many potential benefits to 
avoiding general anesthesia in the elderly. Regional 
techniques are opioid-sparing, have the potential to limit 
polypharmacy and its associated complications in the 
perioperative period, and may better attenuate the physi-
ologic stress response to pain.24 42 Although neuraxial 
techniques have the potential for hypotension, overall 
hemodynamics during a regional anesthetic may provide 
superior cardiovascular stability.24 Further research is 
needed to define specific blood pressure targets; how-
ever, hypotension should be avoided at all times. Several 
studies have shown a greater risk of myocardial, cer-
ebrovascular, and renal complications with mean arterial 
pressure (MAP) below 65 mm Hg or significant devia-
tions from baseline MAP.43 Neuraxial procedures can 
be more challenging to perform in the elderly because 
of ossification of ligaments, altered alignment of the 
vertebral column, presence of kyphosis, or difficulties 
in achieving optimal positioning.24 Older patients are 
more sensitive to LAs, and the lower compliance of the 
epidural space may lead to greater spread during bolus 
administration.42 Similarly, LAs administered into the 
subarachnoid space tend to block higher dermatomal 
levels and produce more profound blockade because of 
the overall decreased CSF volume and increased CSF 
specific gravity.24 Peripheral nerve blocks (PNBs) are 
an excellent choice in elderly, frail patients and often 
avoid some of the contraindications and complications 
inherent with neuraxial procedures (e.g., anticoagulant 
medications, hypotension). Age-related demyelination 
of peripheral nerve fibers makes them more susceptible 
to blockade by LAs, and given doses may last longer 
because of reduced vascularity of the nerve fibers and 
surrounding tissues.24 Despite the safety profile of PNBs 
performed under ultrasound guidance, elderly patients 
are at greater risk of local anesthetic systemic toxicity 
(LAST), which may be related to higher free fractions of 
LA in the bloodstream and slower hepatic metabolism of 
amide local anesthetics.24 42
The approach to airway management in the geriatric 
patient is similar to a younger patient, with some unique 
considerations. Because of ligament ossification and joint 
stiffening, older patients may have significantly reduced 
range of motion of the cervical spine. Edentulous patients 
can be more difficult to mask ventilate without an oral 
airway, and loss of protective airway reflexes makes 
the elderly patient at higher risk of pulmonary aspira-
tion. There may also be an exaggerated hemodynamic 
response to laryngoscopy, although this response can be 
attenuated with short-acting β-blockers.12
POSTOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
Acute Pain (Also See Chapter 40)
There is no evidence that subjective pain perception is 
affected by the aging process. In fact, pain is often under-
treated and underreported in the elderly. This is especially 
true for those with underlying dementia, in whom pain 
assessment can be challenging.28,42 A number of pain 
scoring systems are widely used in health care settings, 
with some specifically designed for patients presenting 
along the spectrum of cognitive impairment, namely 
the Critical Care Pain Observation Tool (CPOT) and the 
Faces Pain Scale28 (Table 35.6). When available, informa-
tion from family members and caregivers can provide 
valuable insight into a patient's subjective experience 
of pain, as many elderly patients who cannot self-report 
their pain may exhibit behavioral changes that tend to be 
underappreciated by an unfamiliar provider.
Overall, there is no doubt that acute postoperative pain 
control in the elderly patient can be challenging. The physi-
ologic changes of aging detailed earlier result in PK and PD 
alterations that make geriatric patients more susceptible to 
the adverse effects of many common classes of analge-
sics.28,44 This is compounded by the issue of polypharmacy 
and the presence of comorbidities that may further narrow 
the therapeutic index. Elderly patients are often at greater 
risk of respiratory depression from opioids in addition to 
injuries from falls related to sedative agents.16,28,42 On the 
other hand, uncontrolled pain can lead to delirium, an 
inability to participate in physical therapy and rehabilita-
tion, and chronic pain syndromes. The physiologic effects 
of pain can also lead to SNS stimulation that may adversely 
affect underlying cardiovascular disease.
Patient-controlled analgesia (PCA), the mainstay of 
inpatient acute postsurgical pain management in many 
health care settings, is likely of limited use in an elderly 
patient with dementia. Taken together, the best strategy 
is a multidisciplinary approach that involves all members 
of the perioperative team along with geriatric expertise 
to help devise multimodal pain regimens that balance 
the comfort and safety of the patient. Using a combina-
tion of medications may contribute to polypharmacy but 
may also allow reduced dosages of each agent to help 
limit their individual side effects. Providers should use 
adjunctive medications with fewer CNS side effects, such 
as scheduled acetaminophen or reduced-dose NSAIDs, 
combined with opioids and other potent analgesics that 
are dosed appropriately for age and any end-organ dys-
function. Use of regional anesthetic strategies should be 
emphasized whenever possible. Ultimately, there is no 
“one size fits all” method for managing acute pain in the 
elderly, medically complex patient.
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
656
Hypoxemia
Hypoxemia in the postoperative period is common in 
many older patients. The physiologic effects of aging on 
the pulmonary system detailed earlier in this chapter lead 
to a higher propensity for V/Q mismatch and shunting. 
Combined with a reduced hypoxic ventilatory drive and a 
propensity for pulmonary aspiration, providers must main-
tain their vigilance when monitoring elderly patients in the 
postanesthesia care unit (PACU) (also see Chapter39). Pulse 
oximetry should be maintained at all times, along with 
supplemental oxygen and the use of incentive spirometry 
when patients are sufficiently alert to participate.16 22
Fluid Management (Also See Chapter 24)
Fluid management throughout the perioperative period 
is complicated by the fact that the aging kidney is less 
efficient at responding to conditions of hypervolemia and 
hypovolemia, in addition to alterations in serum sodium 
levels.12 15 Older patients are also more likely to have coex-
isting congestive heart failure, which may further com-
plicate the assessment of volume status. Measurement of 
urine output alone may not accurately reflect volume sta-
tus. Providers should consider physical examination find-
ings, such as mucus membrane moisture and orthostatic 
blood pressure changes, along with data from laboratory 
tests (e.g., lactate, electrolytes) and bedside transthoracic 
echocardiogram to evaluate ventricular filling to make 
better-informed decisions regarding fluid therapy.
CHRONIC PAIN IN THE ELDERLY (ALSO SEE 
CHAPTER 44)
Chronic pain is unfortunately common in the elderly and 
likely underreported, partly because of widely held and 
erroneous beliefs that pain is a normal part of the aging 
process.44 Causes of chronic pain in the older patient are 
often the result of degenerative processes such as osteo-
arthritis, but may also be a result of cancer and neuropa-
thy.44 Similarly to the issues surrounding self-reporting of 
acute, postsurgical pain, diagnosing chronic pain in the 
elderly patient with cognitive decline can be a challenge. 
Providers should also consider coexisting mental health 
problems, such as depression, which are common in the 
elderly and may contribute to certain chronic pain syn-
dromes. Focusing treatment strategies on pharmacother-
apy, physical therapy, and interventional pain procedures 
is one approach to managing chronic pain in the older 
patient.44 It is also important to consider how the treat-
ment plan will improve the patient's functional status, as 
opposed to pain scores alone. Tricyclic antidepressants 
Tool
Assessment
Ideal Population
Visual Analog Scale
Patient places mark on graded line 
representing pain scale
Cognitively intact patients with difficulty 
speaking
Numeric Rating Scale
Pain score of 0–10
Cognitively intact, but validated in mild to 
moderate cognitively impaired patients
Verbal Descriptor Scale
Patient describes pain as “mild, 
moderate or severe”
Cognitively intact, but validated in mild to 
moderate cognitively impaired patients
Faces Scale
Patient chooses face that describes 
level of pain (frowning to smiling)
Validated in mild to moderate cognitively 
impaired patients
Pain Assessment Checklist for Seniors With 
Limited Ability to Communicate (PACSLAC)a
Observer scored assessment on 
a wide variety of scales of 
behavior, movement, facial 
expression
Validated in severe cognitively impaired 
patients
Pain Assessment in Advanced Dementia 
(PAINAD)b
Doloplus-2c
Observer-scored assessment of 
somatic, psychomotor, and 
psychosocial parameters
Table 35.6
Common Pain Scoring Tools
Data from Falzone E, Hoffmann C, Keita H. Postoperative analgesia in elderly patients. Drugs Aging. 2013;30(2):81–90; and Gagliese L, Katz J. 
Age differences in postoperative pain are scale dependent: A comparison of measures of pain intensity and quality in younger and older surgical 
patients. Pain. 2003;103(1–2):11–20. Modified from McKeown JL. Pain management issues for the geriatric surgical patient. Anesthesiol Clin. 
2015;33(3):563–576.
aFuchs-Lacelle S, Hadjistavropoulos T. Development and preliminary validation of the pain assessment checklist for seniors with limited ability to 
communicate (PACSLAC). Pain Manag Nurs. 2004;5(1):37–49.
bWarden V, Hurley AC, Volicer L. Development and psychometric evaluation of the Pain Assessment in Advanced Dementia (PAINAD) scale. J Am 
Med Dir Assoc. 2003;4(1):9–15.
cLefebvre-Chapiro S. The DOLOPLUS 2 scale—Evaluating pain in the elderly. Eur J Palliat Care. 2001;8:191–194.
IV
Chapter 35 Geriatrics
657
(TCAs) and serotonin–norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors 
(SNRIs) can be effective adjuncts for many chronic pain 
syndromes, and it is important to continue these medi-
cations throughout the perioperative period whenever 
possible to avoid withdrawal symptoms.42 The disadvan-
tage of TCAs are their anticholinergic effects, which can 
potentiate cognitive dysfunction, and their tendency to 
cause orthostatic hypotension and potentially lead to falls. 
SNRIs have better safety profiles but can also potentially 
lead to falls. Gabapentinoids are widely used to treat both 
acute and chronic pain but can cause sedation and should 
be titrated slowly in the elderly. They may also cause 
synergistic respiratory depression when coadministered 
with opioids.44 Interventional procedures, such as epidural 
steroid, facet joint, and sacroiliac joint injections, can be 
very helpful in improving pain and function while also 
helping to reduce polypharmacy. Finally, physical therapy 
and rehabilitation programs have been shown to improve 
strength and mobility45 and even have positive effects on 
mood, all of which lead to enhanced quality of life.
PERIOPERATIVE NEUROCOGNITIVE 
DISORDERS
Cognitive dysfunction in the postoperative period is one 
of the most frequent complications seen in the elderly 
surgical patient.46 The nomenclature for describing the 
various perioperative cognitive syndromes was revised 
in 2018 to better standardize definitions across the fields 
of psychiatry, neurology, geriatrics, and surgery. The 
umbrella term perioperative neurocognitive disorder (PND)
now uses the diagnostic criteria already described in the 
DSM-5 with respect to cognitive disorders. The various 
subgroups are further defined by their temporal relation-
ship to the surgical event. The older term postoperative 
cognitive dysfunction (POCD) was largely a research term 
used in the anesthesia literature, and the heterogeneity in 
defining POCD made comparison across different studies 
inconsistent. Although a universally accepted neuropsy-
chiatric testing method to diagnose PNDs has yet to be 
defined, the hope is that this new clinical framework will 
foster enhanced collaboration across disciplines.
According to these new guidelines, preoperative neu-
rocognitive disorders are, by definition, present before 
surgery or anesthesia (Table 35.7). Delayed neurocognitive 
recovery is a new cognitive impairment in the postopera-
tive period that resolves by postoperative day 30. A post-
operative neurocognitive disorder (abbreviated here pNCD 
and formerly referred to as POCD) is any cognitive deficit 
that persists beyond postoperative day 30 but resolving 
by 12 months. Cognitive decline beyond 12 months is 
defined as the same as it would be during the preopera-
tive period.47 Delirium is a separate clinical entity that is 
sometimes further defined as emergence or postoperative
depending on its specific timing relative to surgery, and 
for the purposes of this chapter will be considered sepa-
rately from the term pNCD (Table 35.8).
With respect to defining cognitive impairment, mild cog-
nitive dysfunction is defined as one to two standard devia-
tions from normal (as assessed by neuropsychiatric testing) 
with intact ADLs. Major cognitive dysfunction requires more 
than two standard deviations from normal plus some objec-
tive impairment in ADLs. In both cases, there must also be 
an element of “cognitive concern,” a subjective assessment 
of cognitive dysfunction reported by the patient, caregiver, 
or clinician.48 All of the aforementioned PNDs are graded 
as mild or major according to these criteria.
Postoperative Delirium
Delirium is defined by an acute, fluctuating disturbance 
in consciousness characterized by alterations in aware-
ness, attention, and cognition that develops over a 
short period and is not ascribed to a previous cognitive 
Period
Old 
Nomenclature
New 
Nomenclature
Before surgery
Preexisting 
cognitive 
impairment
Mild and major 
NCD
Between surgery and 
hospital discharge
POD
POD
Between hospital 
discharge and 30 
days postdischarge
POCD
dNCR
Between 30 days 
postdischarge 
and 1 year 
postdischarge
POCD
Mild and major 
postoperative 
NCD
After 1 year 
postdischarge
POCD
Mild and major 
NCD
Adapted from Evered LA, Vitug S, Scott DA, et al. Preoperative frailty 
predicts postoperative neurocognitive disorders after total hip joint 
replacement surgery. Anesth Analg. 2020;131(5):1582–1588.
dNCR, Delayed neurocognitive recovery; DSM-5, Diagnostic and 
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th ed.; NCD, neurocognitive 
disorder; POCD, postoperative cognitive dysfunction; POD,
postoperative delirium.
The new nomenclature for perioperative neurocognitive disorders 
(NCD) contrasted with the older term postoperative cognitive 
dysfunction (POCD). The newer terminology incorporates existing 
clinical definitions used in the DSM-5 with respect to cognitive 
disorders and defines the type of postoperative NCD based on the 
timing postsurgery. Delayed neurocognitive recovery (dNCR) refers 
to a new cognitive deficit occurring up to 30 days postoperatively, 
and postoperative NCD refers to deficits arising after 30 days and 
up to 12 months postoperatively. Deficits occurring outside of these 
timelines are simply referred to as mild or major NCDs based on 
existing DSM-5 criteria.
Table 35.7
Revised Nomenclature for Perioperative 
Neurocognitive Disorders
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
658
disorder.47 49 Although the distinction between emer-
gence delirium and postoperative delirium (POD) can 
be challenging, the former is usually defined by a very 
early onset before or at arrival in the PACU.50 Clinically, 
POD is often formally diagnosed using the Confusion 
Assessment Method (CAM) or Riker Sedation Agitation 
Scale49 50 and can present as hyperactive, hypoactive, or 
mixed types in terms of the perceived level of agitation of 
the patient, with hypoactive delirium carrying the worst 
prognosis for subsequent morbidity and mortality47 (see 
Table 35.7; also see Chapter41). One of the strongest pre-
dictors for POD is preexisting cognitive impairment, with 
other notable risk factors being advanced age, number 
of medical comorbidities, frailty, higher ASA score, pro-
longed mechanical ventilation, and uncontrolled pain.51
In addition, many commonly used perioperative medica-
tions are known to precipitate delirium, such as benzo-
diazepines, anticholinergic agents, and steroids.49 POD is 
common in the elderly, with estimates ranging from 26% 
to 35%46 and is most common after cardiac, vascular, 
and hip fracture surgeries.49 Although the specific type of 
anesthetic does not seem to affect the incidence, emerg-
ing literature suggests that deeper planes of anesthesia as 
measured by EEG or processed EEG may carry the highest 
risk.47 51 The exact biologic basis for delirium is unknown, 
but a neuroinflammatory state precipitated by the physi-
ologic stress of surgery combined with a more permeable 
blood–brain barrier in the elderly patient is a leading 
theory.51 Unfortunately, the presence of POD increases 
the risk of morbidity and mortality at 6 to 12 months and 
is also a strong predictor of the eventual development 
of permanent cognitive dysfunction and dementia.22 47 49
Strategies for preventing this complication include fre-
quent reorienting of elderly patients in the postoperative 
period, early provision of visual and hearing aids, avoid-
ance of urinary catheters and restraints, and proactive geri-
atric consultation. The initial approach to treatment should 
always focus on addressing any underlying causes, such 
as pain, physiologic derangements (e.g., hypoxemia, elec-
trolyte imbalances, hypovolemia), effects from medication 
interactions or polypharmacy, and substance withdrawal. 
Pharmacologic intervention, usually in the form of antip-
sychotic medications like haloperidol, should be reserved 
for extreme cases when patients are at risk of harming 
themselves or others.12 49 51 Numerous studies have also 
examined the effects of intraoperative dexmedetomidine 
and ketamine on preventing POD, with mixed results. 
Ultimately, the most successful strategy is likely one that 
involves a coordinated and consistent effort among car-
egivers, employing evidence-based pharmacologic and 
behavioral tools.50
Postoperative Neurocognitive Disorders
Unlike delirium, delayed neurocognitive recovery and 
postoperative neurocognitive disorders are characterized 
by deficits in memory, learning, language, motor, and 
executive functions.51 Many original studies of POCD 
found incidences of around 16% to 21% at 3 months 
postoperatively,52 with some studies finding rates as high 
as 30% to 60%.47 Much of this heterogeneity may be 
explained by a lack of consistency in the definitions and 
Tool
Sensitivity (%)
Specificity (%)
Criteria
Confusion 
Assessment 
Method 
(CAM)a
94–100
90–95
Nine criteria from DSM-III-R: acute onset and fluctuating course, 
inattention, disorganized thinking, altered level of consciousness, 
disorientation, memory impairment, perceptual disturbances, increased 
or decreased psychomotor activity, sleep–wake cycle disturbance
CAM-ICUb
95–100
89–93
Four items: acute onset or fluctuating course, inattention, disorganized 
thinking, altered level of consciousness
Delirium Symptom 
Interviewc
90
80
Seven criteria from DSM-III: disorientation, consciousness, sleep–
wake cycle, perceptual disturbance, speech, psychomotor activity, 
fluctuating behavior
Nursing Delirium 
Screening 
Scaled
86
87
Five items: disorientation, behavior, communication, hallucinations, 
psychomotor retardation
Reproduced with permission from Schenning KJ, Deiner SG. Postoperative delirium in the geriatric patient. Anesthesiol Clin. 2015;33(3):505–516.
aInouye SK, van Dyck CH, Alessi CA, et al. Clarifying confusion: The Confusion Assessment Method. A new method for detection of delirium. Ann 
Intern Med. 1990;113(12):941–948.
bEly EW, Margolin R, Francis J, et al. Evaluation of delirium in critically ill patients: Validation of the Confusion Assessment Method for the 
Intensive Care Unit (CAM-ICU). Crit Care Med. 2001;29(7):1370–1379.
cAlbert MS, Levkoff SE, Reilly C, et al. The delirium symptom interview: An interview for the detection of delirium symptoms in hospitalized 
patients. J Geriatr Psychiatry Neurol. 1992;5(1):14–21.
dGaudreau JD, Gagnon P, Harel F, et al. Fast, systematic, and continuous delirium assessment in hospitalized patients: The nursing delirium 
screening scale. J Pain Symptom Manage. 2005;29(4):368–375.
Table 35.8
Common Delirium Screening Tools
IV
Chapter 35 Geriatrics
659
1. Mather M, Jacobsen LA, Pollard KM. Population Bulletin: 
Aging in the United States. 2015;70(2). https://www.prb.org/
wp-content/uploads/2016/01/aging-us-population-bulletin-1.
pdf. [Accessed January 4th, 2021].
2. United Nations. Department of Economic and Social Affairs, 
Population Division. World Population Ageing. 2019;2019
Highlights (ST/ESA/SER.A/430).
3. Deiner S, Westlake B, Dutton RP. Patterns of surgical care and 
complications in elderly adults. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2014;62:829–
835.
4. Lee PHU, Gawande AA. The number of surgical procedures in an 
American lifetime in 3 states. J Am Coll Surg. 2008;207(3):S75.
5. Deiner S, Fleisher LA, Leung JM, etal. Adherence to recom-
mended practices for perioperative anesthesia care for older 
adults among US anesthesiologists: Results from the ASA Com-
mittee on Geriatric Anesthesia-Perioperative Brain Health 
Initiative ASA member survey. Perioper Med (Lond). 2020;9:6. 
Published 2020 Feb 25.
6. Taffet GE, Schmader KE. Normal aging. In: Post TW, ed. UpTo-
Date. Waltham: UpToDate; 2020.
7. Rooke GA. Autonomic and cardiovascular function in the geri-
atric patient. Anesthesiol Clin North America. 2000;18(31,46):
v–vi.
8. Alvis BD, Hughes CG. Physiology considerations in geriatric 
patients. Anesthesiol Clin. 2015;33(3):447–456.
9. Cheitlin MD. Cardiovascular physiology-changes with aging. 
Am J Geriatr Cardiol. 2003;12(1):9–13.
10. Obas V, Vasan RS. The aging heart. Clin Sci (Lond). 2018;132(13):
1367–1382.
11. Tran D, Rajwani K, Berlin DA. Pulmonary effects of aging. Curr 
Opin Anaesthesiol. 2018;31(1):19–23.
12. Deiner S, Silverstein JH. Anesthesia for geriatric patients. Min-
erva Anestesiol. 2011;77(2):180–189.
13. Hearps AC, Martin GE, Angelovich TA, etal. Aging is associated 
with chronic innate immune activation and dysregulation of 
monocyte phenotype and function. Aging Cell. 2012;11:867–
875.
14. Denic A, Glassock RJ, Rule AD. Structural and functional 
changes with the aging kidney. Adv Chronic Kidney Dis. 
2016;23(1):19–28.
15. Akhtar S, Ramani R. Geriatric pharmacology. Anesthesiol Clin. 
2015;33(3):457–469.
16. Monarch S, Wren K. Geriatric anesthesia implications. J Perian-
esth Nurs. 2004;19(6):379–384.
17. Brown EN, Purdon PL. The aging brain and anesthesia. Curr 
Opin Anaesthesiol. 2013;26(4):414–419.
18. Schliebs R, Arendt T. The cholinergic system in aging and neu-
ronal degeneration. Behav Brain Res. 2011;221:555.
19. McLean AJ, Le Couteur DG. Aging biology and geriatric clinical 
pharmacology. Pharmacol Rev. 2004;56:163.
diagnosis of POCD. These syndromes can also be more 
challenging to diagnose because they require dedicated 
neuropsychiatric testing, a more time-consuming process 
than many of the delirium screening tools that are widely 
available. Additionally, clearly demonstrating a relation-
ship to surgery or anesthesia also requires an assessment of 
preoperative baseline cognitive function, which may not 
be available. The fact that elderly patients are inherently 
at risk for developing dementia irrespective of surgery 
can confound the diagnostic process. Although pNCDs 
are not exclusive to the elderly population, advanced age 
is clearly a strong risk factor.47 In fact, many established 
risk factors for the development of pNCD overlap with 
POD, including advanced age and preoperative cognitive 
impairment.47 Other risks include presence of cerebrovas-
cular disease, lower educational level, and POD itself.51
Further similarities to POD include an association with a 
greater risk for postoperative complications such as mor-
tality and functional decline. Initial theories suggested an 
association with intraoperative insults such as hypoten-
sion and hypoxemia, but there does not seem to be a clear 
causal relationship there, nor with specific types of anes-
thetic techniques or agents. A neuroinflammatory state 
generated by the stress of surgery, combined with specific 
patient-related factors, seems to offer the best explana-
tion for why certain patients develop cognitive decline.53
Strategies that may offer some benefit in preventing 
pNCD include prehabilitation programs for high-risk 
patients and educational programs for patients and car-
egivers.47 51 Because POD is an established risk factor for 
pNCD, avoiding the following triggers for delirium may 
be effective: uncontrolled pain, use of benzodiazepines 
and anticholinergic medications, disruption of sleep–wake 
cycles, and deep planes of anesthesia.47 51
SUMMARY
Globally, elderly segments of the population are expand-
ing rapidly and are increasingly presenting for surgical 
procedures in both the inpatient and ambulatory settings. 
Anesthesia providers must have a solid understanding of 
the physiologic effects of aging and the many comorbid 
conditions that often accompany the aging process in 
order to safely and effectively tailor their anesthetics 
to meet the needs of this growing patient population. 
Future research is needed to elucidate many of the neu-
robiologic mechanisms behind how the anesthetic state 
and the physiologic effects of surgery affect the aging 
brain and contribute to the spectrum of PNDs frequently 
encountered in the elderly. Improved understanding will 
hopefully lead to more specific interventions for safe 
perioperative care and improved functional and cognitive 
independence afterward.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The editors and publisher would like to thank Dr. Sheila 
Barnett for contributing to this chapter in the previous 
edition of this work. It has served as the foundation for 
the current chapter.
REFERENCES
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
660
20. French RA, Broussard SR, Meier WA, etal. Age-associated 
loss of bone marrow hematopoietic cells is reversed by 
GH and accompanies thymic reconstitution. Endocrinology. 
2002;143:690.
21. Andres TM, McGrane T, McEvoy MD, Allen BFS. Geriatric phar-
macology: An update. Anesthesiol Clin. 2019;37(3):475–492.
22. Society American Geriatrics. New Frontiers in Geriatrics 
Research: An Agenda for Surgical and Related Medical Special-
ties. Cook DJ. Geriatric Anesthesia. 2021. Accessed January 5th. 
http://newfrontiers.americangeriatrics.org/chapter.php?ch=2.
23. Shafer SL. The pharmacology of anesthetic drugs in elderly 
patients. Anesthesiol Clin North America. 2000;18(1):1–29, v.
24. Lin C, Darling C, Tsui BCH. Practical regional anesthesia guide 
for elderly patients. Drugs Aging. 2019;36(3):213–234.
25. Schnider TW, Minto CF, Shafer SL, etal. The influence of age on 
propofol pharmacodynamics. Anesthesiology. 1999;90:1502–
1516.
26. Smith HS. Opioid metabolism. Mayo Clin Proc. 2009;84(7):613–
624.
27. Wang C, Zhang H, Fu Q. Effective dose of dexmedetomidine 
as an adjuvant sedative to peripheral nerve blockade in elderly 
patients. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand. 2018;62:848–856.
28. Rajan J, Behrends M. Acute pain in older adults: Recom-
mendations for assessment and treatment. Anesthesiol Clin. 
2019;37(3):507–520.
29. Muramatsu T, Isono S, Ishikawa T, etal. Differences of recovery 
from rocuronium-induced deep paralysis in response to small 
doses of sugammadex between elderly and nonelderly patients. 
Anesthesiology. 2018;129(5):901–911.
30. Barnett SR. Preoperative assessment of older adults. Anesthesiol 
Clin. 2019;37(3):423–436.
31. Cao SJ, Chen D, Yang L, Zhu T. Effects of an abnormal mini-
mental state examination score on postoperative outcomes in 
geriatric surgical patients: A meta-analysis. BMC Anesthesiol. 
2019;19(1):74.
32. Nakhaie M, Tsai A. Preoperative assessment of geriatric 
patients. Anesthesiol Clin. 2015;33(3):471–480.
33. Ewing JA. Detecting alcoholism. The CAGE questionnaire. 
JAMA. 1984;252(14):1905–1907.
34. Chow WB, Rosenthal RA, Merkow RP, etal. American College 
of Surgeons National Surgical Quality Improvement Program, 
American Geriatrics Society. Optimal preoperative assessment 
of the geriatric surgical patient: A best practices guideline from 
the American College of Surgeons National Surgical Quality 
Improvement Program and the American Geriatrics Society. J 
Am Coll Surg. 2012;215(4):453–466.
35. McIsaac DI, MacDonald DB, Aucoin SD. Frailty for perioperative 
clinicians: A narrative review. Anesth Analg. 2020;130(6):1450–
1460.
36. Evered LA, Vitug S, Scott DA, Silbert B. Preoperative frailty pre-
dicts postoperative neurocognitive disorders after total hip joint 
replacement surgery. Anesth Analg. 2020;131(5):1582–1588.
37. Seib CD, Rochefort H, Chomsky-Higgins K, etal. Association of 
patient frailty with increased morbidity after common ambula-
tory general surgery operations. JAMA Surg. 2018;153(2):160–
168.
38. Barnett SR. Polypharmacy and perioperative medications in the 
elderly. Anesthesiol Clin. 2009;27:377–389.
39. Khan KT, Hemati K, Donovan AL. Geriatric physiology and the 
frailty syndrome. Anesthesiol Clin. 2019;37(3):453–474.
40. Fleisher LA, Fleischmann KE, Auerbach AD, etal. 2014 ACC/
AHA guideline on perioperative cardiovascular evaluation and 
management of patients undergoing noncardiac surgery: A 
report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart 
Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Car-
diol. 2014;64(22):e77–e137.
41. Guay J, Parker MJ, Gajendragadkar PR, Kopp S. Pain manage-
ment issues for the geriatric surgical patient. Cochrane Database 
Syst Rev. 2016;2:CD000521.
42. McKeown JL. Pain management issues for the geriatric surgical 
patient. Anesthesiol Clin. 2015;33(3):563–576.
43. Aucoin S, McIsaac DI. Emergency general surgery in older 
adults: A review. Anesthesiol Clin. 2019;37(3):493–505.
44. Schwan J, Sclafani J, Tawfik VL. Chronic pain management in 
the elderly. Anesthesiol Clin. 2019;37(3):547–560.
45. de Vries NM, van Ravensberg CD, Hobbelen JSM, etal. 
Effects of physical exercise therapy on mobility, physical 
functioning, physical activity and quality of life in commu-
nity-dwelling older adults with impaired mobility, physical 
disability and/or multi-morbidity: A meta-analysis. Ageing Res 
Rev. 2012;11(1):136–149.
46. Subramaniyan S, Terrando N. Neuroinflammation and perioper-
ative neurocognitive disorders. Anesth Analg. 2019;128(4):781–
788.
47. Olotu C. Postoperative neurocognitive disorders. Curr Opin 
Anaesthesiol. 2020;33(1):101–108.
48. Evered L, Silbert B, Knopman DS, etal. Recommendations for 
the nomenclature of cognitive change associated with anaesthe-
sia and surgery-2018. Anesthesiology. 2018;129(5):872–879.
49. Schenning KJ, Deiner SG. Postoperative delirium in the geriatric 
patient. Anesthesiol Clin. 2015;33(3):505–516.
50. Donovan AL, Whitlock EL. Intraoperative dexmedetomidine to 
prevent postoperative delirium: In search of the magic bullet. À 
la recherche du remède miracle: administration peropératoire de 
dexmédétomidine pour prévenir le delirium postopératoire. Can 
J Anaesth. 2019;66(4):365–370.
51. Rengel KF, Pandharipande PP, Hughes CG. Special considera-
tions for the aging brain and perioperative neurocognitive dys-
function. Anesthesiol Clin. 2019;37(3):521–536.
52. Evered L, Scott DA, Silbert B, Maruff P. Postoperative cognitive 
dysfunction is independent of type of surgery and anesthetic. 
Anesth Analg. 2011;112:1179–1185.
53. Evered LA, Silbert BS. Postoperative cognitive dysfunction and 
noncardiac surgery. Anesth Analg. 2018 Aug;127(2):496–505.
661
Chapter
Patients waiting for a transplantable organ share a hope 
for the future that is predicated on the availability of an 
organ donor. Donor death must be declared before organ 
procurement.1 Donation after brain death (DBD) is the 
most common setting in which donation occurs. Organ 
shortages have led to the resurgence of interest in dona-
tion after cardiac death (DCD).2 The ethical considera-
tions related to DCD donation are challenging, yet DCD 
donation is increasing in response to the national organ 
shortage.3
CONSIDERATIONS FOR ORGAN 
TRANSPLANTATION
Because of the shortage of available organs, not all 
potential recipients on the waiting list survive long 
enough to undergo a transplant procedure. Those who 
do typically wait a year or more. Prelisting assessments 
may be outdated by the time an organ is identified, and 
supplemental testing may be indicated. This testing may 
necessitate a deferral of the scheduled transplant, which 
must be weighed against the risk of further deterioration 
that can preclude transplantation. Untreated systemic 
infection, incurable malignancy, untreated substance 
abuse, and lack of sufficient social support to comply 
with posttransplant care can preclude transplantation.
Once the decision is made to proceed with transplan-
tation, coordination between the donor procedure and 
multiple recipient hospitals may be involved. Because 
not all donor organs are suitable for transplantation, 
the recipient operation should not begin until visual or 
biopsy-based confirmation of organ suitability has been 
made. During the time between the identification of the 
donor and the procurement surgery, the recipient's lat-
est laboratory values should be reviewed. If necessary, 
dialysis can be performed. The anesthetic plan should 
be reviewed with the patient and family as part of the 
consent process before surgery.
CONSIDERATIONS FOR ORGAN 
TRANSPLANTATION
KIDNEY TRANSPLANTATION
Preoperative Assessment
Intraoperative Management
Postoperative Management
LIVER TRANSPLANTATION
Preoperative Assessment
Intraoperative Management
Postoperative Management
HEART TRANSPLANTATION
Preoperative Evaluation
Intraoperative Management
Postoperative Management
LUNG TRANSPLANTATION
Preoperative Evaluation
Intraoperative Management
Postoperative Management
PANCREAS TRANSPLANTATION
CONCLUSION
ORGAN 
TRANSPLANTATION
Randolph H. Steadman, Victor W. Xia
36
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
662
Almost all living donations are performed laparoscopi-
cally; few are converted to open procedures.6
Diabetes is the most common cause of end-stage 
renal disease, followed by hypertension and glomeru-
lonephritis (Box 36.2). These three causes account for 
over two-thirds of the cases of renal failure. Patients 
with these conditions should be medically managed to 
achieve treatment goals while on the waiting list (also 
see Chapter 28).
Although cardiovascular disease is the leading cause 
of death in patients receiving dialysis, cardiovascular 
risk factors are often undertreated.7 After transplant, 
the cardiovascular risk diminishes from a 10-fold to a 
twofold increase compared with that of normal patients. 
Accordingly, the preoperative assessment should focus on 
screening for ischemic heart disease and management of 
hypertension, diabetes, and dyslipidemia. Ischemic heart 
disease may be silent, particularly in diabetic patients. 
As a result of preexisting vasodilatation stress, echocar-
diography is probably superior to thallium imaging in 
predicting postoperative cardiac events, although false-
positive and false-negative findings occur with both 
techniques.8 Coronary angiography, accompanied by 
therapeutic intervention for significant lesions, should be 
considered in patients with reversible cardiac ischemia or 
in those with significant risk.
Congestive heart failure is prevalent in dialysis 
patients, but in the absence of ischemic heart disease 
does not preclude safe transplantation. Ejection fraction 
typically improves after transplantation. The preoperative 
focus is on optimal medical management of heart failure 
and maintenance of intravascular fluid balance.
Anemia may increase cardiovascular risk, particularly 
in patients with ischemic heart disease. Erythropoietin, 
when used to correct anemia to levels of 12 g/dL or less, 
lessens the risk of blood transfusion (see Chapter 25).
Hyperkalemia is common in patients with renal insuf-
ficiency and may be associated with increased risks 
during transplant surgery, particularly during reperfu-
sion. However, mild increases in potassium may reflect 
normal homeostasis for renal failure, and potassium 
levels of 5.0 to 5.5 mEq/L are acceptable in this popu-
lation. Dialysis-dependent patients may benefit from 
dialysis immediately before transplantation; however, 
a reduced intravascular central volume may offset the 
benefits of reduced potassium levels.
Intraoperative Management
Donor kidneys are usually implanted in the iliac fossa. 
Vascular anastomoses are most frequently to the exter-
nal iliac artery and vein, and the ureter is anastomosed 
directly to the bladder (Fig. 36.1). Chronic renal disease 
can affect drug excretion via the kidney but also through 
changes in plasma protein binding or hepatic metabolism. 
When the protein binding is diminished, the free fraction 
KIDNEY TRANSPLANTATION
Kidney transplantation confers a survival advantage and 
cost saving over dialysis for the management of renal 
failure4 (Box 36.1). Quality of a graft can be assessed by 
kidney donor risk index (KDRI), which is calculated from 
several donor characteristics.5 There is a higher risk of 
graft failure in donors with advanced age, hypertension, 
diabetes, in grafts with prolonged ischemia times, and 
in recipients with high panel reactive antibodies (PRAs) 
levels, which indicate sensitization to human leukocyte 
antigens.
Preoperative Assessment
The number of kidney transplants has been increasing in 
the United States and the number of patients waiting for 
a kidney transplant has been declining. However, a severe 
mismatch between organ need and supply remains. For 
deceased donor kidney transplant, 60% of candidates 
wait more than 5 years.6 This makes it challenging to 
maintain an up-to-date pretransplant assessment. Cur-
rently approximately one-third of kidney transplants are 
living-related, which significantly shortens the waiting 
time and facilitates scheduling preoperative evaluation. 
Box 36.2
Kidney Transplant Recipient: Preoperative 
Assessment
Cardiovascular
Ischemic heart disease
Congestive heart failure
Hypertension
Diabetes
Renal
Hyperkalemia
Acidosis
Anemia
Dialysis history (route and frequency)
Box 36.1
Kidney Transplantation Facts
•The kidney is the most frequently transplanted solid
organ.
•More than 16,000 deceased donor and 6000 live donor
kidney transplant procedures were performed in the 
United States in 2018.
•Five-year posttransplantation survival rates are 92% for
recipients of live donor grafts and 83% for deceased 
donor recipients.
•Transplantation provides significant quality-of-life and
mortality benefits over dialysis for the treatment of end-
stage kidney disease.
From Hart A, Smith JM, Skeans MA, et al. OPTN/SRTR 2018 annual 
data report: Kidney. Am J Transplant. 2020;20(Suppl s1):20–130.
IV
Chapter 36 Organ Transplantation
663
sugammadex has been safely administered to patients 
with end-stage renal disease.9
The 6-glucuronide metabolite of morphine has clinical 
activity that can result in a prolonged duration of action. 
Meperidine should be avoided because of the seizure-
inducing potential of its metabolite, normeperidine.
Inhaled anesthetics can be used in renal failure 
patients. Although sevoflurane's metabolite, compound A, 
is nephrotoxic in rats, similar effects have not been seen in 
humans. Serum fluoride concentrations of 30 μmol occur 
in humans after sevoflurane administration, but do not 
produce renal damage. Isoflurane is metabolized to fluo-
ride, but the extent of metabolism is so small that fluoride 
levels are negligible. Desflurane is not contraindicated 
in renal failure, but like the other volatile anesthetics, it 
produces a decrease in renal blood flow and glomerular 
filtration rate in a dose-dependent manner.
Intravascular fluid balance should be maintained in 
patients undergoing kidney transplantation. Typically, 
crystalloid is used for this purpose, with colloids pre-
ferred by some centers. In an intensive care unit (ICU) 
population (also see Chapter 41) balanced salt solutions 
(e.g., lactated Ringer's solution, Plasma-Lyte) are pre-
ferred over hyperchloremic crystalloids such as normal 
saline. These balanced salt solutions are associated with 
a lower incidence of acute kidney injury and a reduced 
need for renal replacement.10 Paradoxically, their effect 
on serum potassium levels is less than that of potassium-
free hyperchloremic solutions, which are more likely to 
increase serum blood potassium concentrations by gen-
erating a hyperchloremic acidosis. Albumin is the typical 
colloid of choice; hydroxyethyl starch solution is associ-
ated with a more frequent risk of acute kidney injury.11
Monitoring arterial blood pressure via an arterial 
catheter is avoided in some centers in order to pre-
serve arterial access for dialysis, whereas other centers 
use arterial monitoring regularly in an aging recipient 
population with increasingly common comorbid condi-
tions. Central venous pressure (CVP) monitoring is now 
recognized as a poor monitoring method of preload and 
fluid responsiveness.12 Placement of a central venous line 
should be reserved for medications that require admin-
istration into a high-flow vein such as rabbit antithy-
mocyte globulin, an immunosuppression induction drug. 
Induction of immunosuppression is increasingly common 
as efforts to increase the living donor pool include the 
use of unrelated living donors, nondirected donors, and 
donor exchange programs.
Delayed graft function and acute tubular necrosis can 
lead to renal replacement therapy after transplantation. 
The factors responsible include donor hemodynamics, 
graft warm ischemia, and recipient hemodynamics. Ade-
quate hydration reduces the incidence of acute tubular 
necrosis. There are few data to support the intraopera-
tive use of diuretics, and there is considerable variability 
between surgeons regarding the intraoperative use of 
of the drug is increased. This results in an increase in the 
volume of distribution and the clearance. The net effect for 
the unbound fraction is similar to that in normal patients.
Some drugs require particular caution when adminis-
tered in patients with renal failure. They include neuro-
muscular blocking (NMB) drugs (also see Chapter 11) and 
certain opioids (also see Chapter 9). Long-acting NMB 
agents that are excreted via the kidneys (e.g., pancuro-
nium) are best avoided. Even intermediate-duration NMBs 
that are hepatically metabolized, such as vecuronium and 
rocuronium, may have a prolonged action in patients 
with renal failure. Cisatracurium's duration of action 
is more predictable because of spontaneous breakdown 
(also see Chapter 11). Although atracurium undergoes 
similar elimination, it is less potent than cisatracurium, 
so its breakdown product, laudanosine, is found in 
higher concentrations. Laudanosine can cause seizures 
at high concentrations; however, such concentrations are 
unlikely to occur after clinical administration.
Since its introduction in the US market in 2015, 
sugammadex has gained popularity as a reversal agent 
for aminosteroid NMB agents. Because the sugamma-
dex–NMB complex is renally excreted, it is not US Food 
and Drug Administration approved for use in patients 
with end-stage renal disease because of concerns of 
recurring paralysis if the complex dissociates. However, 
Bladder
mucosa
Uretero-
neocystostomy
External iliac
artery and vein
Incision
External and internal oblique muscle
Transversus 
abdominis muscle
Transversalis fascia
Peritoneum
Ureter
Hypogastric artery
Spermatic cord
Inferior epigastric
vessels divided
Bladder
Fig. 36.1 Kidney recipient operation. (From Townsend CM 
Jr, Beauchamp RD, Evers BM, et al., eds. Sabiston Textbook of 
Surgery. 18th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders Elsevier; 2007, used with 
permission.)
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
664
Patients with liver failure have no alternatives to liver 
transplantation. Currently the median time to transplant 
for waiting list candidates is 11 months. For the highest-
acuity recipients, those with Model for End-stage Liver 
Disease (MELD) scores of 35 or more (a group accounting 
for a fifth of transplants), median wait time is 7 days.17
The MELD score is used to allocate grafts to the highest-
acuity candidate on the wait list; it is directly correlated 
with the recipient's 90-day mortality risk in the absence 
of transplantation. International normalized ratio (INR) 
of prothrombin time, creatinine, bilirubin, and sodium 
are used to derive the MELD score. Online tools are avail-
able for this calculation.18 Currently the most common 
indications for liver transplantation in the United States 
are nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) and alcoholic 
liver disease, followed by malignancy, cholestatic disease, 
hepatitis C, and acute liver failure. (ALF)17 Hepatitis C, 
the most common indication for transplantation over the 
previous decade, has decreased significantly because of 
antiviral agents introduced in 2013. NASH, a diagnosis 
associated with metabolic syndrome and obesity, is an 
increasingly prevalent indication for transplantation.
An ongoing shortage of donors has led to the increased 
use of marginally viable grafts, defined as organs from 
elderly donors; DCD donors; donors with steatotic livers, 
obesity, malignancy, prolonged ICU stays, bacterial infec-
tion, or high-risk lifestyle; donors on multiple vasopres-
sor infusions; or those who had suffered cardiac arrest.19
Preoperative Assessment
The proportion of liver transplant candidates over the age 
of 65 has doubled over the last decade and now accounts 
for a quarter of those on the wait list.17 A higher percent-
age are hospitalized and have comorbid conditions (also 
see Chapter 28). Liver transplant candidates have many 
symptoms ranging from fatigue to multiple organ failure 
(Box 36.3). Encephalopathy, common in end-stage liver 
disease (ESLD), can lead to sensitivity to sedative and 
analgesic medications, increased risk of aspiration of 
gastric contents, and the need for endotracheal intuba-
tion to protect the airway.
The pretransplant cardiac evaluation includes an 
assessment for ischemic heart disease and screening 
for portopulmonary hypertension (PPHTN). Dobutamine 
stress echocardiography and nuclear scans are common 
screening tests to rule out coronary artery disease; how-
ever, they are associated with both false-positive and 
false-negative results.8 In older patients with diabetes 
multiple risk factors, or a history of coronary disease, 
left-sided heart catheterization may be indicated (also 
see Chapter 26 and 35). More than two-thirds of ESLD 
patients have a hyperdynamic circulation characterized 
by a high cardiac output and low systemic vascular 
resistance (SVR), most likely because of circulating 
vasoactive substances not cleared by the liver. This 
diuretics.13 Although of unproven benefit in preventing 
acute kidney injury in a general perioperative population, 
administration of osmotic diuretics, such as mannitol, 
during transplantation may be helpful.14
Postoperative Management
Maintaining renal perfusion is an important considera-
tion and is best accomplished by maintaining an adequate 
intravascular volume. Dopamine, large-dose diuretics, and 
osmotic diuretics are of no proven benefit in the postop-
erative period. Postoperative analgesia can be achieved 
by epidural infusion, although many centers prefer intra-
venously administered patient-controlled analgesia with 
fentanyl or morphine (also see Chapter 40). Nonsteroidal 
antiinflammatory drugs should be avoided.
Enhanced recovery after surgery (ERAS) pathways 
that include discontinuation of opioids after the first 
postoperative day have been demonstrated to accelerate 
recovery and decrease length of hospital stay after renal 
transplantation.15
LIVER TRANSPLANTATION
The liver is second to the kidney as the most frequently 
transplanted solid organ. The number of deceased donor 
liver transplants increased by 26% over the last 5 years.16
Box 36.3
Liver Transplant Recipient: Preoperative 
Assessment
•Neurologic
–
Encephalopathy
–
Cerebral edema (acute liver failure)
•Cardiovascular
–
Hyperdynamic circulation
–
Cirrhotic cardiomyopathy
–
Portopulmonary hypertension
•Pulmonary
–
Restrictive lung disease
–
Ventilation-perfusion mismatch
–
Intrapulmonary shunts
–
Hepatopulmonary syndrome
•Gastrointestinal
–
Portal hypertension
–
Variceal bleeding
–
Ascites
•Renal/metabolic
–
Hepatorenal syndrome
–
Acid–base abnormalities
•Hematologic
–
Coagulopathy
–
Anemia
•Musculoskeletal
–
Muscle atrophy
IV
Chapter 36 Organ Transplantation
665
chosen anesthetic should maintain SVR. The intermediate-
duration NMB drugs metabolized by the liver can have a 
prolonged duration of action; however, after reperfusion, 
evidence of liver function typically occurs and metabo-
lism of these drugs improves. Alternatively, cisatracurium, 
which undergoes Hofmann elimination, can be selected 
to avoid these concerns. Seizures can also be caused by 
an accumulation of normeperidine, so meperidine should 
be avoided. The metabolite of morphine, 6-glucuronide 
morphine, can accumulate and cause a prolonged effect. 
Fentanyl and the other synthetic opioids are safe choices. 
Volatile anesthetics have similar, mild effects on hepatic 
blood flow. Sevoflurane undergoes metabolism by the 
liver, but the metabolite, compound A, is not toxic to the 
liver or kidneys in humans.
Intraoperative monitoring varies among medical 
centers (Box 36.4). An arterial line is placed, followed 
by a central venous catheter (CVC) and pulmonary artery 
catheter (PAC), or CVC alone. Continuous cardiac output 
measurement from arterial waveform analysis may not 
accurately reflect cardiac output in liver recipients as a 
result of low SVR, high cardiac output, and vasopressor 
administration. Stroke volume and pulse pressure varia-
tion, although more accurate than CVP monitoring for 
predicting fluid responsiveness, are less accurate dur-
ing mechanical ventilation with smaller tidal volumes 
(<8 mL/kg) and in the presence of cardiac arrhythmias 
(also see Chapter 20).23 Transesophageal echocardiogra-
phy (TEE) is often used, which may obviate the need for 
PAC monitoring in the operating room. TEE represents 
the gold standard for cardiac preload monitoring; how-
ever, interpretation is operator dependent, and monitor-
ing into the postoperative period is not feasible.
Venovenous bypass, using an extracorporeal circuit 
to reroute blood from the inferior vena cava (IVC) and 
portal venous systems to the upper body, is used in some 
hyperdynamic state can be confused with sepsis and is 
exacerbated by graft reperfusion.
Resting echocardiography is the test of choice in 
screening for PPHTN. An estimated right ventricular sys-
tolic pressure of less than 50 mm Hg by echocardiography 
rules out significant PPHTN. Right-sided heart catheteri-
zation is indicated if estimated right ventricular pressure 
exceeds 50 mm Hg. The definitive diagnosis of PPHTN 
is made when the mean pulmonary artery (PA) pressure 
is more than 25 mm Hg in the presence of an increased 
transpulmonary gradient (mean PA minus PA occlusion 
pressure >12) and an increased pulmonary vascular resist-
ance (>3 Wood units, or >240 dynes-sec/cm5). Moderate 
PPHTN (mean PA pressure >35 mm Hg, pulmonary vas-
cular resistance [PVR] >5 Wood units) is associated with 
increased perioperative mortality, and treatment before 
transplant should be considered. Severe PPHTN (mean PA 
pressure >45 to 50 mm Hg) is considered a contraindica-
tion to liver transplantation at many centers.20
Hepatopulmonary syndrome (resting, room air Pao2
<70 mm Hg in the presence of an intrapulmonary shunt 
on bubble echocardiography) resolves after transplanta-
tion; however, Pao2 levels less than 50 mm Hg while 
breathing room air are associated with increased acuity, 
longer postoperative hospital stays, and, in some studies 
a higher postoperative mortality rate.
Renal disease is common in patients who present for 
liver transplantation. If not long-standing, hepatorenal 
syndrome may resolve after transplantation. Before 
transplantation, excessive intravascular volume, acido-
sis, or hyperkalemia may necessitate renal replacement 
therapy. The coagulopathy of ESLD is multifactorial and 
requires correction in the presence of active bleeding. 
Despite abnormal clotting tests (prolonged INR, hypofi-
brinogenemia, and thrombocytopenia), patients with 
ESLD should not be considered “auto-anticoagulated,” 
as levels of endogenous anticoagulants may be more 
significantly reduced than clotting factors, leading to 
thrombosis.21
ALF accounts for less than 5% of liver transplants. 
ALF is distinct from chronic liver disease because of the 
potential for cerebral edema, which is the most common 
cause of death in ALF.22 Cerebral edema is managed 
similarly to other causes of increased intracranial pres-
sure (also see Chapter 30). The cause of ALF often pre-
dicts whether spontaneous recovery without transplant is 
likely. The survival rate in those receiving transplants is 
similar to the posttransplant survival rate in patients with 
chronic liver disease.
Intraoperative Management
Intraoperative management requires a consideration 
of the effects of liver failure on drug metabolism. Pre-
operative anxiolytic medication should be used spar-
ingly in patients with a history of encephalopathy. The 
Box 36.4
Liver Transplantation: Unique Aspects of 
Case Preparation
Transfusion
Red blood cells: 6–10 units for adults
Fresh frozen plasma: 6–10 units for adults
Rapid infusion device
Medication
Vasopressors: phenylephrine, epinephrine (10 and 
100 μg/mL), vasopressin
Calcium chloride: for infusion and bolus
Insulin: for infusion (e.g., for poststeroid hyperglycemia and/
or hyperkalemia unresponsive to diuretics)
Monitors
Arterial line
Central venous pressure catheter
Pulmonary artery catheter
Transesophageal echocardiography
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
666
infusions are preferred to repeated bolus dosing. Calcium 
given immediately before reperfusion blunts the effect of 
hyperkalemia on the myocardium. α-Adrenergic agonists 
and alkalizing drugs may be required to maintain SVR 
and pH, respectively.
During the neohepatic phase, fibrinolysis can occur, 
resulting in ongoing oozing as a result of microvascular 
bleeding. If fibrinolysis is not self-limited, antifibrinolytic 
drugs can be administered. Metabolic acidosis, which 
worsens during the anhepatic phase and peaks after rep-
erfusion, should improve when the liver starts function-
ing. Additional signs of liver function include increased 
core temperature and decreasing calcium requirement 
(indicating citrate metabolism by the liver). On occasion, 
oliguric patients with hepatorenal syndrome may show 
an increase in urine output in the operating room.
Postoperative Management
Posttransplant patient survival rates are 89% at 1 year 
and 77% at 5 years.16 Thrombosis of the hepatic artery 
in the early postoperative period usually necessitates 
retransplantation. Infection is a major threat to survival 
in the initial months after transplant.
HEART TRANSPLANTATION
Heart transplantation is the definitive treatment for 
patients with advanced heart failure. Currently, the two 
most common indications for heart transplantation are 
idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy and ischemic cardio-
myopathy, which account for nearly 90% of heart trans-
plants.25 Congenital heart disease and retransplantation 
each account for less than 5% of heart transplants. Over 
3000 heart transplants are performed annually in the 
United States, and 1-year survival is about 90%.25
Preoperative Evaluation
Although patients undergo extensive multidisciplinary 
evaluation before being listed, a detailed preanesthetic 
evaluation is often challenging because of the urgent 
nature of the surgery, the complex clinical presen-
tation, and multiple comorbid conditions (also see 
centers to attenuate the effects of IVC clamping on intra-
vascular volume; however, it has risks and adds to the 
length of the procedure.
The operation is divided into three phases: prean-
hepatic, anhepatic, and neohepatic. In the preanhe-
patic phase dissection and preparation for the native 
hepatectomy occur. This phase is associated with blood 
loss, particularly in the presence of varices and prior 
abdominal surgery. Vascular isolation of the native liver 
(cross-clamping of the IVC, portal vein, and hepatic 
artery) begins the anhepatic phase. Excision of the native 
liver occurs next and is followed by implantation of 
the donor graft. The implantation involves anastomoses 
of the suprahepatic IVC, the infrahepatic IVC, and the 
portal vein (Fig. 36.2). An alternative “piggyback” tech-
nique involves anastomosis of the donor hepatic veins 
to the recipient vena cava, followed by portal anasto-
mosis. The anhepatic period is typically quiescent from 
a hemodynamic perspective. Reperfusion follows portal 
anastomoses and begins the neohepatic period. Reperfu-
sion is the most precarious event during the procedure 
because of the release of cold, acidotic effluent from 
the graft and lower extremities (Box 36.5). Reperfusion 
syndrome is characterized by a decrease in systemic 
blood pressure and SVR.24 The portal effluent contains 
vasoactive peptides that reduce SVR and can increase 
pulmonary resistance. Hyperkalemia can be life threaten-
ing. If hyperkalemia is a concern, dialysis is helpful if 
started early in the preanhepatic period. Insulin is effec-
tive if given at least 10 to 15 minutes before reperfusion; 
Fig. 36.2 Liver recipient operation. Illustrated are the anastomoses 
of the donor and recipient suprahepatic IVC, infrahepatic IVC, portal 
vein, hepatic artery, and duct-to-duct biliary anastomosis, which 
can be performed with or without T-tube placement. Alternatively 
(inset), in the presence of disease of the bile duct, biliary drainage 
is via a choledochojejunostomy. IVC, Inferior vena cava. (From 
Townsend CM Jr., Beauchamp RD, Evers BM, et al., eds. Sabiston 
Textbook of Surgery. 18th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders Elsevier; 2007, 
used with permission.)
IVC
T-tube in 
common duct
Gallbladder
fossa
Hepatic artery
Celiac axis
The recipient
procedure
Portal
vein
Splenic vein
Box 36.5
Liver Transplantation: Treatment for the 
Physiologic Changes of Reperfusion
•Hyperkalemia: calcium, bicarbonate, insulin, and glucose
•Acidosis: bicarbonate, other buffers such as tris 
(hydroxymethyl) aminomethane
•Decreased SVR: α-agonists
•Hypothermia: warm saline peritoneal lavage
SVR, Systemic vascular resistance.
IV
Chapter 36 Organ Transplantation
667
heart rate response to hemodynamic changes is absent, 
and drugs acting indirectly on the heart are ineffective. 
Bradycardia can be treated with pacing (usually 80 to 100 
beats/min) or chronotropic drugs such as isoproterenol. 
Second, failure to wean from cardiopulmonary bypass is 
often caused by right-sided heart failure. Several possible 
mechanisms are related to right-sided heart failure during 
heart transplantation: preexisting pulmonary hyperten-
sion can be worsened during reperfusion of the donor 
heart, and the right ventricle is particularly prone to 
ischemia/reperfusion injury. The primary treatment goals 
for right-sided heart failure during heart transplantation 
are to increase contractility of the right ventricle and 
decrease PA resistance. Failure to respond may neces-
sitate mechanical right ventricular support. Worsening 
pulmonary hypertension during heart transplantation is 
multifactorial. An increase in cardiac output, pulmonary 
vessel spasm, and blood or air embolism are all possi-
ble causes. Adequate ventilation and oxygenation, with 
avoidance of hypoxia and hypercarbia, can prevent an 
increase in pulmonary vasculature resistance. Treatment 
of pulmonary hypertension with nonselective vasodila-
tors such as nitroglycerin and sodium nitroprusside can 
decrease SVR and result in systemic hypotension. Selec-
tive vasodilators such as inhaled nitric oxide, aerosolized 
iloprost (a carbacyclin analog of prostaglandin I2), and 
sildenafil (inhaled or infused) may be helpful.
Postoperative Management
Postoperative management targets adequate oxygena-
tion, ventilation, intravascular volume, pulmonary and 
systemic pressures, coagulation, and body temperature. 
Extubation of the trachea is considered when stable 
hemodynamics and adequate spontaneous ventilation 
have been achieved. Some patients require permanent 
pacemaker implantation because of the loss of sinus 
node function.27 Most patients require inotropic and 
chronotropic support in the first few days after heart 
Chapter 13).26 Many patients require inotropic drugs or 
mechanical support at the time of heart transplantation. 
Preoperative evaluation should focus on medications 
(particularly the need for inotropic and anticoagulant 
drugs) and current cardiac status, including dependence 
on a pacemaker, implantable cardiac defibrillator, and/or 
mechanical support (intraaortic balloon pump, venoarte-
rial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation [VA-ECMO], 
or ventricular assist device). The patient should not have 
severe, irreversible pulmonary hypertension or an active 
infectious disease. For patients with multiple organ fail-
ure, combined heart transplantation with other organs 
(e.g., lung, kidney, liver) may be considered.
Intraoperative Management
In addition to standard monitors, invasive hemodynamic 
monitors (arterial lines, CVCs, and PACs) are routinely 
inserted for heart transplantation.27 The right internal 
jugular vein remains a preferred site despite a concern 
that it may jeopardize postoperative biopsies. The PAC 
needs to be withdrawn to the jugular vein before the 
native heart is excised. Alternatively, the PAC is inserted 
at the central venous position and is advanced after the 
donor heart is implanted. In some institutions a PAC with 
capability of continuous monitoring of mixed venous O2
saturation and cardiac output is also used. TEE plays an 
important role in assessing intravascular volume status, 
contractility, and valvular function, while monitoring for 
thromboembolism.
Patients who are having a heart transplant often have 
a full stomach because of the urgency of the procedure; 
therefore a rapid-sequence induction of anesthesia is 
appropriate. The choice of anesthetic is dictated by the 
patient's cardiac status. A failing heart is dependent on 
preload and sensitive to afterload. Even small changes 
in venous return, vascular resistance, rhythm, heart rate, 
and contractility can lead to hemodynamic collapse. 
Anesthetics with minimal hemodynamic impact are often 
chosen to induce anesthesia. Etomidate is a reasonable 
selection. Maintenance of anesthesia is often achieved by 
administration of a combination of a volatile anesthetic 
and an opioid. A large-dose opioid technique can be used 
as well.
Management goals during heart transplantation are 
dictated by the underlying congestive heart failure and 
the need to avoid conditions that increase PA pressure 
(Box 36.6). Weaning from cardiopulmonary bypass for 
heart transplantation is managed similarly to other car-
diac surgeries. Patients are rewarmed. Acid–base and 
electrolytes should be in the normal range, the lungs are 
ventilated with 100% oxygen, and the cardiac chambers 
are free of air.
Several intraoperative issues are unique to heart 
transplantation. First, the transplanted heart is dener-
vated, and bradycardia can occur after reperfusion. The 
Box 36.6
Heart Transplantation: Perioperative Goals
•Maintain systemic blood pressure to maintain coronary
filling
•Optimize preload
•Reduce afterload to improve ejection fraction
•Avoid pulmonary vasoconstriction
–
Maintain oxygenation
–
Avoid hypercapnia
–
Avoid high tidal volumes
–
Correct acid–base abnormalities
–
Avoid nitrous oxide
•Support contractility
–
Pharmacologic drugs
–
Intraaortic balloon pump
–
Assist devices
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
668
hemodynamic instability. Positive-pressure ventilation 
can cause a decreased venous blood return. Patients 
with severe pulmonary hypertension are at risk of car-
diac arrest during induction of anesthesia. Emergent 
cardiopulmonary bypass is established in this situation. 
Positive-pressure ventilation can cause further damage 
to diseased lungs and worsen hypoxia and hypercarbia. 
Air trapping and barotrauma should be avoided. Protec-
tive ventilation strategies, including small tidal volumes, 
should be considered.30
The most challenging intraoperative issues associated 
with lung transplantation involve ventilation-reperfusion 
mismatch and pulmonary hypertension. Strategies to 
treat hypoxemia during lung transplant are similar to 
those seen in thoracic surgery (also see Chapter 27). At 
the time of PA clamping, increased PA pressure is often 
encountered. Methods to reduce PA pressure include 
intravascular fluid restriction and nonselective and selec-
tive pulmonary vasodilators in both intravenous and 
inhaled forms. Excessive intravascular fluid administra-
tion should be avoided because noncardiogenic pulmo-
nary edema is a frequent development in lung transplant 
patients.
Postoperative Management
Special care for lung transplant patients in the postopera-
tive period is provided to avoid barotrauma/volutrauma 
and anastomotic dehiscence during positive-pressure 
mechanical ventilation. Denervation of the allograft 
leads to a loss of normal cough reflexes, predisposing to 
infection. Anastomotic dehiscence and respiratory failure 
caused by sepsis or rejection are the primary causes of 
post–lung transplantation mortality.29
PANCREAS TRANSPLANTATION
The most common indication for pancreas transplanta-
tion is type 1 diabetes. However, in recent years, more 
transplants are being performed in patients with type 
2 diabetes.31 The transplanted pancreas can provide 
endogenous insulin and restore normoglycemia and the 
glucagon response. Diabetes mellitus affects cardiovas-
cular, autonomic, nervous, renal, gastrointestinal, and 
metabolic systems (also see Chapter 29). The preoperative 
evaluation should focus on the functional status of the 
vital organs. Ischemic heart disease is a primary cause of 
perioperative death. Diagnosis of coronary artery disease 
in this patient population is difficult in the presence of 
neuropathy and silent ischemia. If coronary artery dis-
ease is suspected, a preoperative stress test or coronary 
artery angiogram should be performed. The preoperative 
evaluation should also include examination of renal 
function, acid–base status, electrolytes, and hemoglobin. 
Most pancreas transplants are performed simultaneously 
transplant. Posttransplant bleeding and a nonfunctional 
graft are life threatening and need to be identified and 
managed emergently. Coronary allograft vasculopathy 
and immunosuppression-related side effects, including 
malignancy, are the most common threats to long-term 
survival after heart transplantation.26
LUNG TRANSPLANTATION
Currently, over 2000 lung transplants are performed 
annually in the United States. Posttransplant survival 
is gradually improving; 1-year posttransplant survival 
is currently 89%.28 Chronic obstructive lung disease, 
bronchiectasis, and interstitial lung disease are common 
indications for adult lung transplantation.29 In children 
cystic fibrosis is the most common indication for lung 
transplantation. Bilateral lung transplant is the most 
common type (75%) of transplant performed.28 Typically 
bilateral lung transplant involves two sequential single-
lung transplants during a single surgery, which allows 
contralateral lung ventilation during implantation and 
may avoid cardiopulmonary bypass.29 The decision to 
perform a single lung transplant versus a bilateral lung 
transplant is made based upon the underlying diagnosis, 
comorbidities, and potential effects of the native lung on 
the allograft.
Preoperative Evaluation
The preoperative evaluation should focus on the sever-
ity of lung disease, the baseline function of other vital 
organs, the airway, and interval changes since the last 
examination (also see Chapter 13). The preoperative 
administration of anxiolytic drugs should be performed 
with caution, as too much sedation or uncontrolled 
anxiety can worsen pulmonary hypertension. Supple-
mental oxygen is administered cautiously because most 
lung transplant patients depend on their hypoxic drive. 
Epidural analgesia should be considered in lung trans-
plant patients for postoperative pain control (also see 
Chapter 40).
Intraoperative Management
In addition to standard monitors, arterial catheters, CVCs, 
and PACs are usually placed. In some institutions a PAC 
with continuous mixed venous O2 saturation and cardiac 
output monitoring is used. Endobronchoscopy is neces-
sary during lung transplantation. In addition to assess-
ing the position of the double-lumen endotracheal tube, 
endobronchoscopy can examine the airway anastomoses 
for stenosis, bleeding, and obstruction secondary to blood 
or sputum. TEE is often used during lung transplantation.
Induction of anesthesia needs to balance the risk 
of aspiration of gastric contents with hypoxia and 
IV
Chapter 36 Organ Transplantation
669
intraoperative hyperglycemia may adversely affect islet 
function and promote posttransplant infection, and pos-
treperfusion graft function can lead to hypoglycemia.
CONCLUSION
Patients presenting for organ transplantation have end-
stage disease of one or more organs, and many are criti-
cally ill. Anesthetic management tailored to the patient's 
comorbid conditions is vital for successful transplant. 
Vigilant anesthetic care, both before and after the 
transplant, can have a profound impact on minimizing 
complications and improving posttransplant outcomes. 
Successful transplantation reverses organ failure and 
promotes the recovery of organ systems beyond the 
transplanted organ.
with kidney transplantation.31 Compared with pancreas 
alone or pancreas after kidney transplant, simultaneous 
pancreas and kidney transplant recipients experience the 
best outcomes. However, recent data suggest pancreas 
transplant after living donor kidney transplant as a rea-
sonable alternative, albeit with the requirement of two 
separate surgeries.32
Pancreas transplantation can be performed with gen-
eral or regional anesthesia. Invasive monitors should be 
considered if there is cardiovascular disease. The choice of 
anesthetic drugs should take into account the possibility 
of severe postinduction hypotension caused by diabetic 
autonomic nervous system dysfunction. Administration 
of NMB drugs not dependent on renal excretion for their 
elimination is preferred if renal function is impaired 
(also see Chapter 11). Glucose levels should be closely 
monitored intraoperatively and postoperatively. Severe 
1. Xia V, Steadman R. Anesthesia for organ 
procurement. In: Gropper M, ed. Miller's 
Anesthesia. 9th ed.: Philadelphia: Else-
vier; 2020:1993–2005.
2. Israni AK, Zaun D, Hadley N, Rosen-
dale JD, Schaffhausen C, McKinney W, 
etal. OPTN/SRTR 2018 Annual Data 
Report: Deceased Organ Donation. Am J 
Transplant. 2020;20(Suppl s1):509–541. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/ajt.15678
3. Bernat JL. Conceptual Issues in DCDD 
Donor Death Determination. Hastings 
Cent Rep. 2018;48(Suppl 4):S26–S28. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/hast.948
4. Reese PP, Shults J, Bloom RD, Mussell 
A, Harhay MN, Abt P, etal. Functional 
status, time to transplantation, and sur-
vival benefit of kidney transplantation 
among wait-listed candidates. Am J 
Kidney. 2015;66:837–845. https://doi.
org/10.1053/j.ajkd.2015.05.015
5. Zhong Y, Schaubel DE, Kalbfleisch JD, 
Ashby VB, Rao PS, Sung RS. Reevaluation 
of the Kidney Donor Risk Index. Trans-
plantation. 2019;103:1714–1721. https://
doi.org/10.1097/TP.0000000000002498
6. Hart A, Smith JM, Skeans MA, Gustaf-
son SK, Wilk AR, Castro S, etal. OPTN/
SRTR 2018 Annual Data Report: Kidney. 
Am J Transplant. 2020;20(Suppl s1):20–
130. https://doi.org/10.1111/ajt.15672
7. Delville M, Sabbah L, Girard D, Elie C, 
Manceau S, Piketty M, etal. Prevalence 
and predictors of early cardiovascular 
events after kidney transplantation: eval-
uation of pre-transplant cardiovascular 
work-up. PloS One. 2015;10:e0131237. 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pone.0131237
8. Lentine KL, Costa SP, Weir MR, Robb JF, 
Fleisher LA, Kasiske BL, etal. Cardiac 
disease evaluation and management 
among kidney and liver transplanta-
tion candidates: a scientific statement 
from the American Heart Association 
and the American College of Cardiology 
Foundation: endorsed by the Ameri-
can Society of Transplant Surgeons, 
American Society of Transplantation, 
and National Kidney Foundation. Cir-
culation. 2012;126:617–663. https://doi.
org/10.1161/CIR.0b013e31823eb07a
9. Adams DR, Tollinche LE, Yeoh CB, Art-
man J, Mehta M, Phillips D, etal. 
Short-term safety and effectiveness 
of sugammadex for surgical patients 
with end-stage renal disease: a two-
centre retrospective study. Anaesthe-
sia. 
2020;75:348–352. 
https://doi.
org/10.1111/anae.14914
10. Yunos NM, Bellomo R, Hegarty C, Story 
D, Ho L, Bailey M. Association between 
a chloride-liberal vs chloride-restrictive 
intravenous fluid administration strategy 
and kidney injury in critically ill adults. 
JAMA. 2012;308:1566–1572. https://
doi.org/10.1001/jama.2012.13356
11. Mutter 
TC, 
Ruth 
CA, 
Dart 
AB. 
Hydroxyethyl starch (HES) versus 
other fluid therapies: effects on kid-
ney 
function. 
Cochrane 
Database 
Syst Rev. 2013:CD007594. https://doi.
org/10.1002/14651858.CD007594.pub3
12. Marik PE, Baram M, Vahid B. Does 
central venous pressure predict fluid 
responsiveness? A systematic review 
of the literature and the tale of seven 
mares. Chest. 2008;134:172–178. htt-
ps://doi.org/10.1378/chest.07-2331
13. Hanif F, Macrae AN, Littlejohn MG, 
Clancy MJ, Murio E. Outcome of 
renal transplantation with and with-
out intra-operative diuretics. Int J 
Surg. 
2011;9:460–463. 
https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.ijsu.2011.04.010
14. Yang B, Xu J, Xu F, Zou Z, Ye C, 
Mei C, etal. Intravascular admin-
istration 
of 
mannitol 
for 
acute 
kidney injury prevention: a system-
atic review and meta-analysis. PloS One. 
2014;9:e85029. https://doi.org/10.1371/
journal.pone.0085029
15. Espino KA, Narvaez JRF, Ott MC, Kayler 
LK. Benefits of multimodal enhanced 
recovery pathway in patients undergo-
ing kidney transplantation. Clin Trans-
plant. 2018;32. https://doi.org/10.1111/
ctr.13173
16. OPTN/SRTR 
2018. 
Annual 
Data 
Report: Introduction. Am J Transplant. 
2020;20(Suppl s1):9.
17. Kwong A, Kim WR, Lake JR, Smith JM, 
Schladt DP, Skeans MA, etal. OPTN/
SRTR 2018 Annual Data Report: Liv-
er. Am J Transplant. 2020;20(Suppl 
s1):193–299. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/
ajt.15674
18. Kamath P. MELD Score (12 and older). 
n.d. 
https://www.mdcalc.com/meld-
score-model-end-stage-liver-disease-
12-older (accessed August 13, 2020).
19. Attia M, Silva MA, Mirza DF. The 
marginal liver donor–an update. Trans-
pl Int. 2008;21:713–724. https://doi.
org/10.1111/j.1432-2277.2008.00696.x
20. Krowka MJ, Fallon MB, Kawut SM, 
Fuhrmann V, Heimbach JK, Ramsay 
MAE, etal. International Liver Trans-
plant Society Practice Guidelines: 
Diagnosis 
and 
management 
of 
hepatopulmonary syndrome and por-
topulmonary hypertension. Transplanta-
tion. 2016;100:1440–1452. https://doi.
org/10.1097/TP.0000000000001229
21. Lisman T, Caldwell SH, Burroughs AK, 
Northup PG, Senzolo M, Stravitz RT, 
etal. Hemostasis and thrombosis in 
patients with liver disease: the ups and 
downs. J Hepatol. 2010;53:362–371. htt-
ps://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhep.2010.01.042
22. Stravitz RT. Critical management deci-
sions in patients with acute liver failure. 
REFERENCES
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
670
Chest. 2008;134:1092–1102. https://doi.
org/10.1378/chest.08-1071
23. Rudnick MR, Marchi LD, Plotkin JS. 
Hemodynamic 
monitoring 
during 
liver transplantation: A state of the 
art review. World J Hepatol. 2015;7:
1302–1311. 
https://doi.org/10.4254/
wjh.v7.i10.1302
24. Paugam-Burtz C, Kavafyan J, Merckx 
P, Dahmani S, Sommacale D, Ram-
say M, etal. Postreperfusion syndrome 
during liver transplantation for cir-
rhosis: outcome and predictors. Liver 
Transplant. 2009;15:522–529. https://
doi.org/10.1002/lt.21730
25. Colvin M, Smith JM, Hadley N, Skeans 
MA, Uccellini K, Goff R, etal. OPTN/
SRTR 2018 Annual Data Report: Heart. 
Am 
J 
Transplant. 
2020;20(Suppl 
s1):340–426. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/
ajt.15676
26. Ramsingh D, Harvey R, Runyon A, 
Benggon M. Anesthesia for Heart 
Transplantation. 
Anesthesiol 
Clin. 
2017;35:453–471. 
https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.anclin.2017.05.002
27. Neethling E, Moreno Garijo J, Man-
galam TK, Badiwala MV, Billia P, 
Wasowicz M, etal. Intraoperative and 
early postoperative management of 
heart transplantation: anesthetic impli-
cations. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth. 
2020;34:2189–2206. 
https://doi.
org/10.1053/j.jvca.2019.09.037
28. Valapour M, Lehr CJ, Skeans MA, Smith 
JM, Uccellini K, Lehman R, etal. OPTN/
SRTR 2017 Annual Data Report: Lung. 
Am J Transplant. 2019;19(Suppl 2):404–
484. https://doi.org/10.1111/ajt.15279
29. Deshpande R, Kurup V. Chapter 3 - 
Restrictive Respiratory Diseases and 
Lung Transplantation editors. In: Hines 
R, Marschall K, eds. Stoeltings Anes-
thesia and Co-Existing Disease. 7th ed.: 
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018:33–52.
30. Verbeek GL, Myles PS. Intraopera-
tive protective ventilation strategies 
in lung transplantation. Transplant 
Rev. 
2013;27:30–35. 
https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.trre.2012.11.004.
31. Kandaswamy R, Stock PG, Gustaf-
son SK, Skeans MA, Urban R, Fox A, 
etal. OPTN/SRTR 2018 Annual Data 
Report: Pancreas. Am J Transplant. 
2020;20(Suppl s1):131–192. https://doi.
org/10.1111/ajt.15673.
32. Fridell JA, Niederhaus S, Curry M, Urban 
R, Fox A, Odorico J. The survival advan-
tage of pancreas after kidney transplant. 
Am J Transplant. 2019;19:823–830. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/ajt.15106.
671
Chapter
INTRODUCTION
Ambulatory anesthesia is a rapidly growing field involv-
ing three distinct entities: outpatient anesthesia (the 
primary focus of this chapter), office-based anesthesia 
(OBA), and non–operating room anesthesia (NORA) (also 
see Chapter 38). The idea of outpatient anesthesia started 
over 100 years ago when an ambulatory surgical center 
(ASC) was opened in Iowa;1 50 years later, the first mod-
ern ASC was opened in Phoenix, Arizona, in 1970. Since 
then, indications for outpatient surgery have expanded, 
and outpatient anesthesia has been performed in many 
different types of facilities. In 2014 over half of hospital 
visits (inpatient or ambulatory) that included invasive, 
therapeutic surgeries were performed in a hospital-owned 
ambulatory surgery setting.2
The Society for Ambulatory Anesthesia (SAMBA)3 was 
founded in 1985 to become a resource for providers who 
practice in settings outside of hospital-based operating 
rooms. SAMBA periodically issues statements regarding 
the practice of ambulatory anesthesia and has published 
an evidence-based guide to the management of ASCs.4
The American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) issued 
guidelines for ambulatory anesthesia and surgery in 
2003; these guidelines were reaffirmed in 2018.5
Ambulatory Anesthesia Settings
In ambulatory surgery a patient is anticipated to come to 
the facility on the day of surgery, undergo a surgery or 
invasive procedure, and be discharged home on the same 
day (or within 23 hours). Ambulatory surgery can be 
performed in several different types of facilities, includ-
ing an outpatient office, freestanding ASC, freestanding 
ASC with extended stay (less than 23 hours), ASC within 
a hospital complex, hospital operating room, and NORA 
locations (Fig. 37.1). The capabilities at each facility will 
affect patient selection and the procedures performed.
INTRODUCTION
Ambulatory Anesthesia Settings
Non–Operating Room Anesthesia
Office-Based Anesthesia
PATIENT SELECTION
SURGERIES AND PROCEDURES
PREOPERATIVE EVALUATION
Obstructive Sleep Apnea
Obesity
Chronic Kidney Disease
Implanted and Other Medical Devices
Difficult Airway Management
Substance Use Disorder
ANESTHETIC TECHNIQUES
POSTOPERATIVE CARE
QUALITY IMPROVEMENT
ADVANCES AND NEW TRENDS IN 
OUTPATIENT ANESTHESIA
CONCLUSION
OUTPATIENT 
ANESTHESIA
Chihiro Toda, Basem B. Abdelmalak
37
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
672
Non–Operating Room Anesthesia
Historically known as remote anesthesia or out-of-
operating room anesthesia, NORA is an anesthesia 
service provided in a hospital unit, albeit away from 
the regular operating rooms. Common NORA proce-
dures include cardiac catheterization, electrophysiology 
procedures, gastrointestinal endoscopy, interventional 
radiology procedures, and others (also see Chapter 38). 
Challenges of the NORA setting include the follow-
ing: (1) patients who are deemed “too sick” for an 
invasive surgery with general anesthesia and are now 
offered a minimally invasive alternative; (2) limited 
physical access to patients because of obstacles such 
as fluoroscopy equipment; and (3) limited availability 
of medication, staff, or rescue equipment. Compared 
with patients undergoing procedures in the main oper-
ating room, patients receiving NORA are older, and 
monitored anesthesia care (MAC) is the more common 
anesthesia choice.6
Office-Based Anesthesia
Surgery and other procedures can also be performed 
outside a hospital or ASC setting at small offices. These 
procedures are generally elective surgeries of short dura-
tion with minimal estimated blood loss; examples include 
cosmetic plastic surgery, complex dental procedures, 
Outpatient
NORA
OBA
• Dentistry offices
• Plastic surgery offices
• Main hospital pavilion
• Outpatient surgery suite attached to a hospital facility
• ASC within a hospital complex
• Freestanding ASC
• Extended stay ASC
• Endoscopy, bronchoscopy
• Interventional radiology
• Cardiac catheterization laboratory
• Electrophysiology laboratory
• Nuclear medicine
Fig. 37.1 Examples of different ambulatory anesthesia settings. ASC, Ambulatory surgery center; NORA, 
non–operating room anesthesia; OBA, office-based anesthesia.
podiatric procedures, and certain vascular surgical pro-
cedures (e.g., varicose vein treatment).
Office-based surgery facilities have generally been 
less regulated than ASCs. However, patient safety con-
cerns have led to increasing state legislation and profes-
sional society guidelines by organizations including the 
American College of Surgeons and ASA.7 Demand for 
office-based surgery (and anesthesia) has been increas-
ing. Some offices are equipped with an established 
anesthesia machine and recovery room; in others, the 
anesthesia providers must transport their own equip-
ment and medications from one office to another as they 
provide this unique service. The logistical issues regard-
ing management of Drug Enforcement Administration 
(DEA)–controlled medications provide a challenge to 
anesthesia practice in the office-based setting. How-
ever, OBA providers experience a different professional 
environment than a hospital-based provider. Many 
work closely with specific surgery office teams and 
have greater flexibility in their scheduling and financial 
arrangements.
PATIENT SELECTION
Careful selection and optimization of patients are 
essential for safe outpatient anesthesia. In addition, 
the type of facility should be appropriate for the 
IV
Chapter 37 Outpatient Anesthesia
673
procedure and patient comorbidities. For example, a 
patient with multiple medical comorbidities may be 
better suited for care in the outpatient surgery suite 
within the main operating room of a hospital or a 
NORA location versus an office-based practice. Other 
patients can safely undergo their procedure in a free-
standing ASC or an OBA practice setting. The preop-
erative evaluation and optimization process should 
proceed in the same manner as a patient scheduled for 
inpatient surgery (also see Chapter 13). The ASA Prac-
tice Guidelines for Postanesthetic Care recommend that 
a responsible individual should accompany a patient 
home after surgery.8
SURGERIES AND PROCEDURES
The most commonly performed ambulatory surgery pro-
cedures are listed in Box 37.1. In addition, certain pro-
cedures are performed on an ambulatory basis over 90% 
of the time (Box 37.2). The spectrum of ambulatory sur-
geries has been expanding, coincident with the substan-
tial growth in equipment, techniques, and expertise in 
performing minimally invasive surgeries. More recently, 
freestanding ASCs have embarked on performing major 
joint surgeries, such as knee and hip arthroplasty, as an 
outpatient procedure. These programs use strict patient 
selection criteria and an anesthetic regimen that facili-
tates early mobility and adequate pain control. The suc-
cess of an outpatient major joint program depends on a 
dedicated ASC team and a protocol that spans the perio-
perative period starting with patient selection (ideally, a 
medically stable, motivated patient), surgical scheduling, 
Box 37.1
Ten Most Common Ambulatory Procedures in 
the United States2
1. Lens and cataract procedures
2. Muscle, tendon, and soft tissue operating room 
procedures (most commonly rotator cuff repair and 
trigger finger surgery)
3. Incision or fusion of joint or destruction of joint lesion 
(most commonly knee and shoulder arthroscopies)
4. Cholecystectomy and common duct exploration
5. Excision of semilunar cartilage of knee
6. Inguinal and femoral hernia repair
7. Repair of diaphragmatic, incisional, and umbilical hernia
8. Tonsillectomy and/or adenoidectomy
9. Decompression of peripheral nerve
10. Operating room procedures of the skin and breast, 
including plastic procedures on breast
Analysis of data from hospital-based ambulatory surgery settings 
and hospital inpatient settings. Procedures were defined as those 
involving incision, excision, manipulation, or suturing of tissue that 
breaks the skin; typically requiring operating room use; and requiring 
sedation, regional, or general anesthesia to control pain.
Box 37.2
Procedures Performed in an Ambulatory 
Setting More Than 90% of the Time2
Operations on the eye
Tympanoplasty and myringotomy
Excision of semilunar cartilage of knee
Inguinal and femoral hernia repair
Tonsillectomy and/or adenoidectomy
Decompression of peripheral nerve
Lumpectomy or quadrantectomy of breast
Bunionectomy or repair of toe deformities
Plastic procedures on nose
Varicose vein stripping (lower limb)
Data analysis same as in Box 37.1.
preoperative nutrition, patient education, discharge plan-
ning, and postoperative pain management and physical 
therapy regimen.9
PREOPERATIVE EVALUATION
Although many ambulatory procedures are of short 
duration and associated with lesser physiologic impact 
than those performed in hospital operating rooms, pre-
operative evaluation follows the same principles (also 
see Chapter 13). However, the following conditions can 
present specific challenges in ambulatory anesthesia.
Obstructive Sleep Apnea (also see Chapter 48)
Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) represents the most com-
mon sleep-related breathing disorder. Concerns about 
OSA for patients undergoing ambulatory surgery include 
the risk of difficult airway management, intraopera-
tive hypoxemia, need for tracheal reintubation, unan-
ticipated hospital admission, and even hypoxemic brain 
injury and death. A 2012 SAMBA consensus statement 
recommended the use of the STOP-BANG screening 
questionnaire for preoperative screening; other comor-
bid conditions such as hypertension, arrhythmias, heart 
failure, cerebrovascular disease, and metabolic syndrome 
should be evaluated as well.10 Opioids are likely to 
exacerbate OSA in the perioperative period, so pain-
ful ambulatory surgery that is not amenable to nono-
pioid analgesia techniques should be reconsidered or 
rescheduled as an inpatient surgery. Finally, the SAMBA 
statement notes that a majority of patients with known 
OSA used continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) or 
bilevel positive airway pressure (BiPAP) postoperatively, 
which likely contributes to a safe perioperative course. If 
the patient is not able (or is not willing) to use CPAP or 
BiPAP postoperatively, they may not be suitable for an 
outpatient procedure.10 In terms of specific STOP-BANG 
scores, a 2018 metaanalysis showed that patients with a 
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
674
STOP-BANG score ≥3 were associated with an increased 
risk of postoperative complications.11
The ASA has also published practice guidelines for 
perioperative management of OSA. The ASA Task Force 
recommends that the following factors be considered 
when determining whether inpatient or outpatient care 
is most appropriate for a patient with OSA who requires 
surgery: (1) sleep apnea status, (2) anatomic and physi-
ologic abnormalities, (3) status of coexisting diseases, 
(4) nature of surgery, (5) type of anesthesia, (6) need 
for postoperative opioids, (7) patient age, (8) adequacy 
of postdischarge observation, and (9) capabilities of the 
outpatient facility.12
Obesity
Obesity has been a much-debated issue in outpatient 
anesthesia. A 1999 observational study of over 17,000 
patients undergoing ambulatory surgery found that 
patients with obesity (body mass index [BMI] >30 kg/m2) 
had an increased likelihood of developing intraoperative 
and postoperative respiratory events.13 Other concerns 
associated with obesity and ambulatory surgery include 
the increased risk of OSA, difficult airway management, 
use of vasopressors, and risk of unplanned admission or 
readmission.14 Facility logistics may include operating 
room bed capacity, equipment requirements, and pres-
ence of a lift team and other resources. As with patients 
with OSA, a multimodal approach should be taken for 
postoperative analgesia to reduce opioid administration 
that can suppress respiratory drive.12 15
Most freestanding ASCs have developed their own 
criteria for accepting obese patients. Some use BMI cut-
offs, most commonly BMI >50 kg/m2, whereas others use 
a lower BMI limit of 40 kg/m2. Other factors relevant to 
BMI limits for ambulatory surgery include type of obesity 
(central vs. peripheral), type of procedure, availability of 
specialized equipment and personnel, and options for an 
extended postoperative stay.
Chronic Kidney Disease
A patient with end-stage renal disease (ESRD) on dialysis 
can safely undergo surgery in an ambulatory setting as 
long as reasonable precautions are followed. Preoperative 
considerations for patients with ESRD are described in 
detail in Chapter 28. Issues include timing and method 
of dialysis in addition to attention to other comorbidities 
such as hypertension, coronary artery disease, diabetes 
mellitus, electrolyte abnormalities, altered volume status, 
and platelet dysfunction. Anesthesia providers should 
consider using anesthesia agents with minimal depend-
ence on renal excretion. Although succinylcholine causes 
the same rise in potassium for patients with or without 
ESRD and is convenient for short surgeries, other muscle 
relaxants can be considered if the baseline potassium 
is not known to be normal. Regional anesthesia is an 
attractive option for these patients; however, even 
patients with ESRD receiving regular dialysis may exhibit 
uremic platelet dysfunction.
Implanted and Other Medical Devices
Patients with implanted medical devices such as a pace-
maker, implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD), spinal 
cord or peripheral nerve stimulator, or insulin pump16 can 
safely undergo ambulatory surgery. However, these devices 
need to be evaluated preoperatively; considerations include 
the medical condition being addressed and any specific 
testing required. For example, patients with a pacemaker or 
ICD require regular device interrogation. Pacemakers and 
ICDs may require reprogramming depending on the location 
of the planned procedure (also see Chapter 26). This may 
require coordination with a cardiologist, who may not be 
readily available at a freestanding ASC.
Difficult Airway Management
Patients with a history of difficult airway management, 
or anticipated difficulty with airway management, do 
not represent an absolute contraindication to having the 
surgery at a freestanding ASC. However, an anesthesia 
provider may consider this a relative contraindication 
depending on the planned procedure, nature of airway 
difficulty, availability of specialized airway equipment, 
and skills of the anesthesia provider. One option is to 
avoid airway management altogether by a carefully exe-
cuted regional anesthetic technique with a judicious plan 
for sedation. Regardless of whether a freestanding ASC 
accepts patients with potential difficult airway manage-
ment, the ASC should have the equipment to manage an 
unanticipated difficult airway if encountered.
Substance Use Disorders
Patients with acute intoxication are not suitable for 
ambulatory surgery, but those with substance use disor-
ders may be cared for at ambulatory surgical facilities. 
Potential issues for patients with opioid use disorder 
include postoperative pain management, including opi-
oid tolerance or use of medication-assisted treatment 
with buprenorphine (also see Chapter 40). Multimodal 
analgesia, including nonopioid analgesics and peripheral 
nerve block when feasible, may be required to minimize 
complications such as respiratory depression.
ANESTHETIC TECHNIQUES
Choice of anesthesia technique is discussed in detail in 
Chapter 14. For outpatient surgeries, the most common 
risk of general anesthesia that results in prolonged stay 
IV
Chapter 37 Outpatient Anesthesia
675
is postoperative nausea and vomiting (PONV). Spinal 
anesthesia can be used for lower extremity orthopedic 
surgeries. The potential benefits of spinal anesthesia for 
outpatient surgery include no need for airway instru-
mentation (unless complicated by a total spinal) and 
decreased risk of PONV.17 Although spinal anesthesia also 
provides postoperative analgesia, prolonged motor block-
ade can delay discharge (also see Chapter 17).
Peripheral nerve blocks can provide surgical anes-
thesia, postoperative analgesia, or both. In either case a 
peripheral nerve block as a part of a multimodal analge-
sia strategy can reduce the total amount of opioids (also 
see Chapter 18). This is especially important because 
postoperative opioid use is a significant risk factor for 
PONV (Box 37.3).
MAC is a term used to describe a specific anesthesia 
service in which an anesthesiologist has been requested 
to participate in the care of a patient undergoing a 
diagnostic or therapeutic procedure. This service could 
range from monitoring without administering any 
medication at all, to managing hemodynamics, and 
inducing varying degrees of sedation on the depth-
of-sedation continuum, up to and including providing 
general anesthesia. However, the term is commonly 
used to describe deep sedation or general anesthesia in 
a spontaneously breathing patient without a secured 
airway. When this technique is used to avoid inhaled 
anesthesia, the risk of PONV is reduced. Disadvantages 
of this approach include an unsecured airway and 
occasionally patient discomfort if the anesthesia pro-
vider is concerned that additional analgesic medication 
would cause excessive respiratory depression. Although 
MAC is often considered easier and safer than general 
anesthesia, closed claim analysis documents significant 
potential complications, most notably respiratory com-
plications that may have been preventable with proper 
monitoring.18 19
POSTOPERATIVE CARE
Postoperative recovery can be divided into three phases. 
Phase I is the early stage of recovery and typically 
occurs in a postanesthesia care unit (PACU). During this 
phase, the patient awakens from the sedative effects of 
Box 37.3
Simplified Apfel Score to Predict PONV
Risk Factors for PONV
1. Female gender
2. Nonsmoker status
3. Postoperative opioid use
4. History of PONV/motion sickness
PONV, Postoperative nausea and vomiting.
Simplified risk score used to predict PONV after general anesthesia. 
Each factor adds roughly 20% to the risk of PONV.17
Box 37.4
Risk Factors for Postdischarge Nausea and 
Vomiting23 24
Female gender
Age <50 years old
History of PONV
Use of opioids in PACU
Nausea in PACU
PACU, Postoperative anesthesia care unit; PONV, postoperative 
nausea and vomiting.
anesthesia medications, physiologic reflexes return, and 
issues such as pain management and nausea/vomiting 
are managed. Once the patient is awake, is hemody-
namically stable, and has minimal PONV or pain, phase 
II recovery begins and continues until the patient is ready 
to go home (so-called street readiness). Phase II recovery 
can occur in the PACU or in a different area. Scoring 
systems such as the modified Aldrete score, which con-
sists of activity, respiration, circulation, consciousness, 
and oxygenation, are commonly used to determine PACU 
discharge readiness20 (also see Chapter 39).
Improvements in surgical techniques and short-acting 
anesthesia drugs enable patients to recover from anes-
thesia faster—some patients meet the criteria to transfer 
from phase I to phase II as they are leaving the operating 
room. In that case the patient can be directly admitted 
to phase II, an approach called fast-tracking. Phase III 
recovery occurs at home after PACU discharge.
Postdischarge nausea and vomiting (PDNV)21 is rec-
ognized as an important issue after ambulatory surgery. 
Additional research now address this entity as ambula-
tory anesthesiologists extend their expertise in the man-
agement of PONV.22 The incidence of PDNV was reported 
to be 37% in the first 48 hours after discharge. Independ-
ent predictors of PDNV are listed in Box 37.4.23,24
QUALITY IMPROVEMENT
Minor adverse events are common after ambulatory 
surgery and anesthesia. Postdischarge symptoms can 
include drowsiness, headache, nausea, emesis, myalgia, 
and sore throat.25 Other important measures to track after 
ambulatory surgery include escalation of care, unplanned 
hospital admission, and readmission after discharge from 
a freestanding ASC.
Analysis of closed malpractice claims is an approach 
to studying anesthesia-related safety concerns that was 
started by the ASA and the University of Washington 
at Seattle in 1984. Using a similar methodology, a 2017 
study analyzed closed claims from the medical malprac-
tice insurer The Doctors Company.26 The study compared 
claims related to anesthesia care in ASCs compared with 
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
676
hospital operating rooms. ASC claims were more likely 
to be classified as medium severity than hospital operat-
ing room claims and were more likely to involve dental 
damage or pain. However, ASC claims were less likely to 
involve death or respiratory or cardiac arrest, and mean 
indemnity payment was significantly lower for ASC 
claims, averaging $87,888 versus $107,325 for operating 
room claims.26 The limitations of closed claims analysis 
apply to this study, which include their retrospective 
nature and inability to truly compare the event rates in 
the two groups because the denominator for risk calcula-
tion is unknown.
The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) 
has developed a payment incentive program to encour-
age providers to provide better care and improve the 
quality of their services. The ASA Committee on Perfor-
mance and Outcome Measures has formed a Technical 
Expert Panel for the development of quality measures 
for ambulatory anesthesia. Leadership of ambulatory 
anesthesia providers is needed to monitor quality metrics 
and develop plans to improve patient care in this setting.
ADVANCES AND NEW TRENDS IN 
OUTPATIENT ANESTHESIA
Developments in pharmacology have led to new medica-
tions that may have a role in outpatient anesthesia, includ-
ing long-acting local anesthetics using microtechnology, 
sedatives, and antiemetics. For example, liposomal bupi-
vacaine is bupivacaine hydrochloride encapsulated within 
multiple nonconcentric lipid bilayers. This allows the medi-
cation to diffuse slowly over an extended period. Compared 
with bupivacaine, which lasts approximately 8 hours, 
liposomal bupivacaine can last up to 72 hours. However, 
its efficacy and cost-effectiveness have not clearly been 
demonstrated over standard local anesthetics.27 28
Remimazolam is an ultra-short-acting intravenous 
benzodiazepine used in anesthesia and procedural seda-
tion.29 It is rapidly metabolized into its pharmacologi-
cally inactive metabolite by nonspecific tissue esterase.30
Because of its rapid onset and predictable recovery, remi-
mazolam may have an advantage over other sedatives 
(also see Chapter 8).
Other trends in ambulatory surgery include patient 
access and financial implications of care at an ASC 
versus a hospital outpatient setting. In general, ASC 
procedure costs are lower than those for hospital-based 
outpatient surgery. In addition, many hospitals have 
long wait times for surgical scheduling compared with 
an ASC, which may translate into improved access for 
patients undergoing surgery at an ASC.
CONCLUSION
Demand for ambulatory anesthesia is increasing, and 
anesthesia providers will care for higher-risk patients 
undergoing more complex procedures in the ambula-
tory settings. Proper selection of patients and facilities 
is essential to provide safe anesthesia care and enhance 
recovery while minimizing complications and cost.
REFERENCES
1. Waters RM. The downtown anesthesia 
clinic. Am J Surg. 1919;33(7):71–77.
2. Statistical Brief #223. Healthcare Cost 
and Utilization Project (HCUP). July 
2020. Agency for Healthcare Research 
and Quality, Rockville, MD. www.hcup-
us.ahrq.gov/reports/statbriefs/sb223-
Ambulatory-Inpatient-Surgeries-2014.
jsp Accessed November 9, 2021.
3. Society 
of 
Ambulatory 
Anesthe-
sia (SAMBA). https://sambahq.org/. 
Accessed November 9, 2021
4. Rajan N. (ed) Manual of Practice Man-
agement for Ambulatory Surgery Cent-
ers Book: An Evidence-Based Guide: 
Springer Nature Switzerland; 2020.
5. American Society of Anesthesiologists 
(ASA) Guidelines for Ambulatory Anes-
thesia and Surgery. https://www.asahq.
org/standards-and-guidelines/guide-
lines-for-ambulatory-anesthesia-and-
surgery Accessed November 9, 2021
6. Chang B, Kaye AD, Diaz JH, Westlake 
B, Dutton RP, Urman RD. Interventional 
procedures outside of the operating 
room: Results from the National 
Anesthesia Clinical Outcomes Registry. 
J Patient Saf. 2018 Mar 14(1):9–16. 
doi:10.1097/PTS.0000000000000156 
PMID: 29461406.
7. Osman BM, Shapiro FE. Office-based 
anesthesia: A comprehensive review 
and 2019 Update. Anesthesiol Clin. 
2019;37(2):317–331.
8. Apfelbaum JL, Silverstein JH, Chung FF, 
Connis RT, Fillmore RB, Hunt SE, Nick-
inovich DG, Schreiner MS, Silverstein 
JH, Apfelbaum JL, Barlow JC, Chung FF, 
Connis RT, Fillmore RB, Hunt SE, Joas TA, 
Nickinovich DG, Schreiner MS. American 
Society of Anesthesiologists Task Force on 
Postanesthetic Care. Practice guidelines 
for postanesthetic care: An updated report 
by the American Society of Anesthesiolo-
gists Task Force on Postanesthetic Care. 
Anesthesiology. 2013 Feb 118(2):291–307. 
doi:10.1097/ALN.0b013e31827773e9 
PMID: 23364567.
9. Amundson AW, Panchamia JK, Jacob 
AK. Anesthesia for same-day total joint 
replacement. Anesthesiology Clinics. 
2019;37(2):251–264.
10. Joshi GP, Ankichetty SP, Gan TJ, Chung F. 
Society for Ambulatory Anesthesia con-
sensus statement on preoperative selection 
of adult patients with obstructive sleep 
apnea scheduled for ambulatory surgery. 
Anesth Analg. 2012 Nov 115(5):1060–
1068. doi:10.1213/ANE.0b013e318269cfd7 
Epub 2012 Aug 10. PMID: 22886843.
11. Nagappa M, Subramani Y, Chung F. Best 
perioperative practice in management 
of ambulatory patients with obstructive 
sleep apnea. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol. 
2018;31(6):700–706 Dec.
12. American Society of Anesthesiologists. 
Practice guidelines for the perioperative 
management of patients with obstruc-
tive sleep apnea. Practice guidelines 
for the perioperative management of 
patients with obstructive sleep apnea: 
An updated report by the American 
Society 
of 
Anesthesiologists 
Task 
Force on perioperative management of 
patients with obstructive sleep apnea. 
Anesthesiology. 2014;120:268–286.
13. Chung F, Mezei G, Tong D. Pre-existing 
medical conditions as predictors of adverse 
AL GRAWANY
IV
Chapter 37 Outpatient Anesthesia
677
events in day-case surgery. Br J Anaesth. 
1999;83:262–270.
14. Stierer TL, Wright C, George A, Thomp-
son RE, Wu CL, Collop N. Risk assess-
ment of obstructive sleep apnea in 
a population of patients undergoing 
ambulatory surgery. J Clin Sleep Med. 
2010 Oct 15;6(5):467–472.
15. Prabhakar A, Helander E, Chopra N, 
Kaye AJ, Urman RD, Kaye AD. Preopera-
tive assessment for ambulatory surgery. 
Curr Pain Headache Rep. 2017 Aug 
31;21(10):43.
16. Abdelmalak B, Ibrahim M, Yared JP, 
Modic MB, Nasr C. Perioperative gly-
cemic management in insulin pump 
patients undergoing noncardiac surgery. 
Curr Pharm Des. 2012;18(38):6204–6214.
17. Apfel CC, Läärä E, Koivuranta M, Greim 
CA, Roewer N. A simplified risk score 
for predicting postoperative nausea and 
vomiting: Conclusions from cross-vali-
dations between two centers. Anesthesi-
ology. 1999 Sep 91(3):693–700.
18. Bhananker SM, Posner KL, Cheney FW, 
Caplan RA, Lee LA, Domino KB. Injury 
and liability associated with monitored 
anesthesia care: A closed claims analysis. 
Anesthesiology. 2006;104(2):228–234.
19. Metzner J, Posner KL, Domino KB. The 
risk and safety of anesthesia at remote 
locations: The US closed claims analysis. 
Curr Opin Anaesthesiol. 2009;22(4):
502–508.
20. Aldrete JA. The post-anesthetic recov-
ery score revisited. J Clin Anesth. 
1995;7:89–91.
21. Chinnappa V, Chung F. Post-discharge 
nausea and vomiting: An overlooked 
aspect of ambulatory anesthesia?. Can 
J Anaesth. 2008;55(9):565–571. English, 
French. doi:10.1007/BF03021429. PMID: 
18840585.
22. Gan TJ, Belani KG, Bergese S, Chung F, 
Diemunsch P, Habib AS, Jin Z, Kovac 
AL, Meyer TA, Urman RD, Apfel CC, 
Ayad S, Beagley L, Candiotti K, Englesa-
kis M, Hedrick TL, Kranke P, Lee S, Lip-
man D, Minkowitz HS, Morton J, Philip 
BK. Fourth consensus guidelines for the 
management of postoperative nausea 
and vomiting. Anesth Analg. 2020 Aug 
131(2):411–448.
23. Apfel CC, Philip BK, Cakmakkaya OS, 
etal. Who is at risk for postdischarge 
nausea and vomiting after ambulatory 
surgery?. Anesthesiology. 2012;117:
475–486.
24. Odom-Forren J, Jalota L, Moser DK, 
Lennie TA, Hall LA, Holtman J, Hooper 
V, Apfel CC. Incidence and predictors of 
postdischarge nausea and vomiting in a 
7-day population. J Clin Anesth. 2013 
Nov 25(7):551–559.
25. Wu CL, Berenholtz SM, Pronovost PJ, 
Fleisher LA. Systematic review and 
analysis of postdischarge symptoms 
after outpatient surgery. Anesthesiology. 
2002;96(4):994–1003.
26. Ranum D, Beverly A, Shapiro FE, Urman 
RD. Leading causes of anesthesia-related 
liability claims in ambulatory surgery 
centers. J Patient Saf. 2017 Nov 16.
27. Hamilton TW, Athanassoglou V, Triv-
ella 
M, 
Strickland 
LHH, 
Mellon 
S, Murray D, Pandit HG. Liposomal 
bupivacaine peripheral nerve block 
for the management of postoperative 
pain. Cochrane Database of Syst Rev. 
2016;8. doi:10.1002/14651858 Art. No.: 
CD011476CD011476.pub2. Accessed 09 
November 2021.
28. Ilfeld BM, Eisenach JC, Gabriel RA. 
Clinical effectiveness of liposomal bupi-
vacaine administered by infiltration or 
peripheral nerve block to treat post-
operative pain. Anesthesiology. 2021;
134(2):283–344.
29. Keam SJ. Remimazolam: First approval. 
Drugs. 2020 Apr 80(6):625–633.
30. Rogers WK, McDowell TS. Remima-
zolam, a short-acting GABA(A) receptor 
agonist for intravenous sedation and/
or anesthesia in day-case surgical and 
non-surgical procedures. IDrugs. 2010 
Dec 13(12):929–937.
Chapter
ANESTHESIA FOR 
PROCEDURES IN 
NONOPERATING 
ROOM LOCATIONS
Wilson Cui, Chanhung Z. Lee
ELECTROCONVULSIVE THERAPY
Electrically Induced Seizures
Anesthesia Evaluation
Psychotropic Medications
Management of Anesthesia and Seizure
Physiologic Responses to Seizure and Treatment
Side Effects
Procedures performed outside the operating room 
(OR) fall under the term nonoperating room anesthesia 
(NORA), which refers to providing anesthesia care at any 
location away from traditional OR suites (Box 38.1). In 
response to the need for minimally invasive interventions 
in addition to the rapid advancement in imaging and 
other technologies, the number of NORA procedures has 
markedly increased in many medical and surgical spe-
cialties. Even as more hybrid ORs are being built inside 
or close to the main operating suites, NORA is increas-
ingly becoming a significant part of anesthesia care. Data 
from the National Anesthesia Clinical Outcomes Registry 
(NACOR) has shown that the proportion of NORA cases 
increased from 28% to 36% of all anesthesia cases in the 
period 2010–2014.1 Knowledge and skills for providing 
anesthesia in NORA locations has recently become part of 
the core curriculum of residency training required by the 
Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education, 
given the need for specific preparation of anesthesiolo-
gists in this fast-growing area.2
Many patients treated in NORA locations are deemed 
“too sick” to undergo traditional surgical interven-
tions. The NACOR data analysis has also revealed a 
higher mean age and higher proportion of patients with 
American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) Physical 
Status class III–IV in the NORA group compared with 
the OR group.1 As with most anesthetics, both patient 
38
CHARACTERISTICS OF NORA LOCATIONS
Importance of Communication
Standard of Care and Equipment
SAFETY AND CONCERNS IN RADIOLOGY 
SUITES
Radiation Safety Practices
Monitoring the Radiation Dose
Adverse Reactions to Contrast Materials
MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING
MRI Safety Considerations
Monitoring Issues in MRI Suites
Compatible Equipment
ANESTHESIA FOR NONINVASIVE IMAGING 
PROCEDURES
Physiologic Monitoring
Oxygen Administration
Pharmacologically Induced Sedation
Management of Anesthesia for CT
Management of Anesthesia for MRI
INTERVENTIONAL RADIOLOGY
Interventional Neuroradiology
Body Interventional Radiology
ENDOSCOPY AND 
ENDOSCOPIC RETROGRADE 
CHOLANGIOPANCREATOGRAPHY
Anesthesia Evaluation and Management
Challenges and Complications
CATHETER-BASED CARDIOLOGY 
PROCEDURES
Adult Cardiac Catheterization
Electrophysiology Studies
Structural Heart Disease Intervention
Pediatric Studies
Challenges and Complications
678
IV
Chapter 38 Anesthesia for Procedures in Nonoperating Room Locations
679
and procedure factors must be considered (Table 38.1). 
Anesthesia-related concerns include (1) maintenance of 
patient comfort, immobility, and physiologic stability; (2) 
perioperative management of anticoagulation; (3) readi-
ness for sudden unexpected complications during the 
procedure; (4) provision of smooth and rapid emergence 
from anesthesia and sedation at appropriate times (which 
may even be required during the procedure); and (5) 
appropriate postprocedural monitoring and management 
during transport. Another study of the NACOR database 
compared anesthetic complications between NORA and 
OR locations.3 Although NORA procedures have overall 
lower morbidity and mortality rates compared with OR 
procedures, the incidence of death in the subgroup of 
NORA cardiology and NORA radiology locations (0.05%) 
was slightly higher than the OR (0.04%).
Box 38.1
NORA Locations That Commonly Require Anesthesia Services
Radiology and Nuclear Medicine
Diagnostic radiology and nuclear medicine
Computed tomography
Fluoroscopy
Therapeutic radiology
Interventional body angiography (can involve embolization 
or stent placement)
Interventional neuroangiography (can involve embolization 
or stent placement)
Magnetic resonance imaging
Positron emission tomography (PET) scan
Radiation Therapy
Standard x-ray therapy with collimated beams
Gamma knife x-ray surgery for brain tumors and arteriovenous 
malformations
CyberKnife x-ray surgery for central nervous system, body 
tumors, and arteriovenous malformations
Electron beam radiation therapy (usually intraoperative)
Cardiology
Cardiac catheterization with or without electrophysiologic studies
Cardioversion
Structural cardiac intervention
Gastroenterology
Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy
Colonoscopy
Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography
Pulmonary Medicine
Tracheal and bronchial stent placement
Bronchoscopy
Pulmonary lavage
Psychiatry
Electroconvulsive therapy
Urology
Extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy
Nephrostomy tube placement
General Dentistry and Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery
Reproductive Health
In vitro fertilization procedures
Patient
Procedure
History of anxiety
Duration
Chronic opiate dependency
Nonsupine position
High oxygen requirement
Breath holding
Sleep apnea
Immobilization
Altered mental status
Degree of invasiveness
Inability to follow commands
Comorbid conditions
Table 38.1
Factors Considered for the Involvement of 
Anesthesia Services
This chapter emphasizes the unique aspects of work-
ing in some of the common NORA locations, which often 
include special medical, procedural, and safety concerns, 
and corresponding anesthesia approaches.
CHARACTERISTICS OF NORA LOCATIONS
Importance of Communication
Remote locations are structured differently from the typi-
cal OR, but clear communication is prudent for efficient 
and safe practice in either site. With clear communica-
tion, the actions of anesthesia personnel can be inte-
grated with those of the procedural team involved in the 
NORA intervention. The anesthesia provider should have 
a detailed plan for communicating with more centrally 
located anesthesia colleagues and technicians in case 
help is urgently required. For instance, an unexpected 
difficult airway can be especially challenging because 
of the remote NORA location. Additional anesthesia 
personnel and resources should be immediately available 
if needed. Sometimes the anesthesia providers in NORA 
locations feel isolated from the facilities available to OR 
personnel. The lack of mutual experience and vocabulary 
presents challenges for anesthesia providers and other 
staff working in NORA locations. Anesthesia providers 
and proceduralists should have a shared understanding 
of the specifics and challenges in the procedures in addi-
tion to those in medical care. Anesthesia providers work-
ing in an unfamiliar remote location must keep track of 
the identity and role of personnel participating in the 
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
680
interventional procedure or patient care. During times 
when the anesthesia provider may need experienced 
medical assistance (e.g., tracheal intubation, placement 
of an invasive monitor, or intravenous access), the avail-
ability of qualified staff members must be identified. 
Readily available preoperative documents for all patients 
in remote locations must include patient history and 
physical examination by the attending proceduralist. 
Patient arrival and check-in arrangements should be 
similar to those for patients undergoing procedures in a 
traditional OR setting.
Standard of Care and Equipment
Anesthesia care provided in remote locations must adhere 
to the same standards as those for the OR. The ASA has 
issued a Statement on Nonoperating Room Anesthetizing 
Locations that posts minimal guidelines for NORA proce-
dures. In summary, the statement recommends adequate 
monitoring capabilities, the means to deliver supple-
mental oxygen via a facemask with positive-pressure 
ventilation, the availability of suction, the equipment for 
providing controlled mechanical ventilation, an adequate 
supply of anesthetic drugs and ancillary equipment, and 
supplemental lighting for procedures that involve dark-
ness. The same perioperative precautions for infectious 
diseases must be followed in NORA locations to protect 
the health and safety of patients and health care workers. 
During the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pan-
demic, mitigating the risk of airborne transmission poses 
extra challenges because an isolation room may not be 
readily available in every NORA location. One option is 
to perform airway management (intubation and extuba-
tion) in a designated negative-pressure room for patients 
with confirmed or suspected COVID-19 infection.4
It is not always possible to place the anesthesia 
workstation in close proximity to the patient owing to 
the presence of essential, specialized equipment such as 
fluoroscopy systems. The additional distance and mate-
rial between the anesthetized patient and the provider 
pose further safety concerns for both parties. There are 
frequently additional hazards, such as exposure to radia-
tion, loud sound levels, and heavy mechanical equip-
ment. Advance preparation should be made to ensure 
all the necessary safety equipment are available, such as 
personal radiation protective garments, portable radia-
tion shields, and eye and ear protection. If anesthetic 
gases are to be used, scavenging must be sufficient to 
ensure that trace amounts are below the upper limits set 
by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration 
(OSHA) (also see Chapter 49). After the procedure, one 
often has to travel longer distances to the postanesthesia 
care unit (PACU). To do so safely and expeditiously, these 
remote locations should have available sufficient supplies 
of supplemental oxygen, transport monitors, and elevator 
access keys. The anesthesia provider should always know 
the location of the nearest defibrillator, fire extinguisher, 
gas shutoff valves, and exits.
SAFETY AND CONCERNS IN RADIOLOGY 
SUITES
Imaging-related procedures for both diagnostic and 
interventional purposes represent a major component of 
NORA anesthetizing locations.
Radiation Safety Practices
Ionizing radiation and radiation safety issues are com-
monly encountered in NORA locations.5 Radiation inten-
sity and exposure decrease with the inverse square of 
the distance from the emitting source. Frequently, the 
anesthesia provider can be located immediately behind 
a portable lead-glass shield. Regardless of whether this 
is possible, the anesthesia provider should wear a lead 
apron and a lead thyroid shield and remain at least 1 to 
2 m away from the radiation source. Radiation-induced 
cataracts are a recognized hazard for interventional 
cardiologists and radiologists. A 2017 study of eye lens 
dosimetry in anesthesiology highlighted the importance 
of maintaining radiation safety standards and adequate 
eye protection for anesthesia providers working for a 
significant time in the radiology suite.6 Clear commu-
nication between the radiology and anesthesia teams is 
crucial for limiting radiation exposure.
Monitoring the Radiation Dose
Anesthesia providers, like all other health care workers 
who are at risk for radiation exposure, can monitor their 
monthly dosage by wearing radiation exposure badges. 
The physics unit of measurement for a biologic radiation 
dose is the sievert (Sv): 100 rem = 1 Sv. Because some 
types of ionizing radiation are more injurious than oth-
ers, the biologic radiation dose is a product of the type-
specific radiation weighting factor (or “quality factor”) 
and the ionizing energy absorbed per gram of tissue. 
Radiation exposure can be monitored with one or more 
film badges. In the United States the average annual dose 
from cosmic rays and naturally occurring radioactive 
materials is about 3 mSv (300 mrem). Patients undergoing 
a chest radiograph receive a dose of 0.04 mSv, whereas 
those undergoing a computed tomography (CT) scan of 
the head receive 2 mSv. Federal guidelines set a limit of 
50 mSv for the maximum annual occupational dose.
Adverse Reactions to Contrast Materials
Contrast materials are used in more than 10 million 
diagnostic radiology procedures performed each year. 
In 1990 fatal adverse reactions after the intravenous 
IV
Chapter 38 Anesthesia for Procedures in Nonoperating Room Locations
681
administration of contrast media were estimated to occur 
approximately once every 100,000 procedures, whereas 
serious adverse reactions were estimated to occur 0.2% 
of the time with ionic materials and 0.4% of the time 
with low-osmolarity materials. Radiocontrast materials 
can trigger anaphylaxis in sensitive patients, and such 
reactions necessitate aggressive intervention, including 
the administration of oxygen, intravenous fluids, and 
epinephrine, with epinephrine being the essential com-
ponent of therapy (also see Chapter 45).7
Adverse drug reactions are more common after the 
injection of iodinated contrast agents (used for x-ray 
examinations such as CT) than after gadolinium contrast 
agents (used for magnetic resonance imaging [MRI]). The 
signs and symptoms of anaphylaxis can be mild (nausea, 
pruritus, diaphoresis), moderate (faintness, emesis, urti-
caria, laryngeal edema, bronchospasm), or severe (seizures, 
hypotensive shock, laryngeal edema, respiratory distress, 
cardiac arrest). Premedication can be used to inhibit the 
activation of mast cells and basophils, which release 
inflammatory cytokines such as histamine, serotonin, and 
bradykinin and cause severe vasodilation and possible 
shock. The mainstays of treatment include steroids and 
antihistamines, administered on the night before and the 
morning of the procedure, with a typical regimen of 40 mg 
prednisone, 20 mg famotidine, and 50 mg diphenhy-
dramine for an adult. Patients undergoing contrast proce-
dures usually have induced diuresis from the intravenous 
osmotic load presented by the contrast agent. Adequate 
hydration of these patients is important to prevent wors-
ening of coexisting hypovolemia or azotemia. Chemotoxic 
reactions to contrast media are typically dose-dependent 
(unlike anaphylactic reactions) and related to the osmolar-
ity and ionic strength of the contrast agent.
A serious adverse reaction called nephrogenic systemic 
fibrosis (NSF) can occur after exposure to gadolinium-
based MRI contrast agents.8 In NSF there is fibrosis of the 
skin, connective tissue, and sometimes internal organs. 
The severity can range from mild to fatal. However, NSF 
apparently occurs only when severe renal impairment 
(e.g., dialysis-dependent renal failure) also exists. Anes-
thesia providers and radiologists should not unnecessar-
ily administer gadolinium-containing MRI contrast agent 
to patients with renal disease.
MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING
MRI is a standard diagnostic tool that can supplement or 
replace conventional x-ray techniques. However, scan-
ning sequences and acquisition time can be long, up to 
several hours, and image degradation is more common 
because of motion artifact. The MRI “bore,” where the 
patient is positioned, is a tube with a diameter of only 
60 to 70 cm and a length of approximately 120 cm. Thus 
patient cooperation and inability to remain motionless 
are the primary indication for sedation or general anes-
thesia. Patients who routinely require anesthesia services 
for MRI include children or adults with claustrophobia, 
severe pain, or critical illness.
MRI Safety Considerations
Although MRI does not involve ionizing radiation, other 
safety issues are prominent in the magnet suite. Hearing 
loss may occur from high sound levels during the scan. 
Electrical burns can occur if incompatible monitoring 
equipment is attached to the patient. Similarly, patients 
with ferromagnetic implants should never be placed 
inside a large magnetic field, as device heating and 
malfunction can result in patient injury. Finally, missile 
injury can occur if ferromagnetic objects are brought 
within the vicinity of the magnetic field.
Objects in the magnet room need to be both MRI safe 
and MRI compatible. The term “MR conditional” was 
defined by the American Society for Testing and Materi-
als to describe an item that poses no known hazards in 
a specified MRI environment (based on the static mag-
netic field strength and spatial gradient field generated 
by the MRI model). Before entering the magnet room, 
one needs to ensure the patient has been screened and 
cleared by MRI technicians to rule out the presence of 
susceptible metal objects such as incompatible ortho-
pedic hardware, cardiac implantable electronic devices 
(CIEDs), or catheters with ferromagnetic material. Only 
an MRI-compatible fiber-optic pulse oximeter should 
be used; otherwise, burns can result at the point of skin 
contact with a standard pulse oximeter. Similar concerns 
pertain to any other monitoring or management devices 
that make patient contact. Of note, some popular brands 
of athletic clothing contain metallic microfibers that can 
result in skin burns during MRI.
Missile injury in an MRI suite is a serious and life-
threatening risk. The superconducting electrical currents 
that generate an MRI scanner's large magnetic field are 
always “on.” Therefore MRI scanners are always sur-
rounded by large magnetic field gradients (up to 6 m 
away). Magnetic field gradients can pull metallic objects 
into the magnet with alarming speed and force. Certain 
metals such as nickel and cobalt are dangerous because 
they are magnetic, whereas other metals such as alu-
minum, titanium, copper, and silver do not pose a missile 
danger. These metals are used to make MRI-compatible 
intravenous poles, fixation devices, and nonmagnetic 
anesthesia workstations. MRI-compatible intravenous 
infusion pumps are clinically available. If one must bring 
susceptible metal items such as infusion pumps into the 
MRI magnet room, they should be safely located and 
fixed, preferably bolted to a wall or floor. The additional 
equipment should be placed and verified as secure before 
the patient enters the MRI scanner. In the event that an 
object is pulled into the magnet causing patient injury 
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
682
and equipment damage the superconducting magnet can 
be turned off immediately. This process, called quench-
ing, should only be performed by MRI technicians. The 
superconducting magnet of an MRI operates at cryogenic 
temperatures near absolute zero and requires coolant (cry-
ogen) such as liquid helium to maintain the low tempera-
ture. The quenching process involves a rise in temperature 
of the superconducting magnet with escape of cryogen 
into a venting system outside the MRI room. However, 
cryogen can escape into the MRI room and displace oxy-
gen, which can cause cold injury and asphyxiation.
Monitoring Issues in MRI Suites
Many anesthesia providers prefer to be outside the mag-
net room during the scan. This practice is acceptable 
as long as the provider (1) has access to all vital sign 
monitor displays and (2) can view the patient through a 
window or video camera. Critically ill patients undergo-
ing MRI may require an arterial line for blood pressure 
monitoring. If the pressure transducer is classified as 
“MR conditional” for the particular MRI scanner, then 
it may be used during the procedure along with an 
MRI-compatible pressure cable and monitoring system. 
Otherwise, a long extension of pressure tubing must be 
added so that pressure transducers and their electrical 
cables can be located far from the magnet, preferably 
outside the magnet room. The radiofrequency pulse from 
an MRI can cause the pressure transducer, and the pulse 
oximeter, to generate artifacts that can be misleading. 
Fortunately, visual inspection of the waveforms allows 
rapid recognition. The use of IV extensions and stopcocks 
in vascular access lines increases the risk of inadvertent 
disconnection; these connections should be tightened 
and verified as secure before imaging.
Compatible Equipment
Typically, a patient requiring general anesthesia for MRI 
is anesthetized using a primary anesthesia workstation 
outside the magnet room. A second anesthesia worksta-
tion inside the magnet room must be MRI safe and have 
fully functioning suction, physiologic monitoring, and 
ventilator capabilities. If a critical event occurs during 
MRI, the scan is stopped immediately, and the patient 
must be promptly transferred from the magnet room 
back to the primary workstation so that optimal care and 
additional help can be provided.
ANESTHESIA FOR NONINVASIVE IMAGING 
PROCEDURES
Because noninvasive imaging procedures do not cause 
pain, most adult patients do not need sedation or general 
anesthesia. The ASA has described a continuum of depth 
of sedation that includes progressive levels of sedation, 
including minimal sedation (anxiolysis), moderate seda-
tion (so-called “conscious sedation”), deep sedation, and 
general anesthesia (also see Chapter 14). For those adult 
patients who require sedation, anxiolysis (pharmacologic 
or nonpharmacologic) may be all that is required. In 
many medical centers minimal sedation and moderate 
sedation can be provided by appropriately trained non-
anesthesia personnel, whereas deep sedation and general 
anesthesia must be administered by anesthesia providers. 
For pediatric patients, deep sedation or general anesthe-
sia is often required to facilitate the imaging procedure. 
In addition to the requirements for sedation, comorbidi-
ties such as airway compromise, severe cardiopulmonary 
disease, or morbid obesity may require an anesthesia 
provider to assure maintenance of adequate oxygenation, 
hemodynamic stability, patient immobility, and minimi-
zation of pain and anxiety during the procedure.
Physiologic Monitoring
The ASA Standards for Basic Anesthetic Monitoring (also 
see Chapter 20) are applicable to all noninvasive imaging 
procedures. Commonly available nasal cannulas incorpo-
rate an integrated CO2 sampling line. The resulting cap-
nography can provide the respiratory rate and pattern, 
though the expired CO2 waveform and concentration are 
more difficult to interpret in a nonintubated patient. If 
capnography is not possible, ventilation must be assessed 
by continuous visual inspection, auscultation, or both.
Oxygen Administration
Supplemental oxygen via a nasal cannula should come 
from a dedicated flowmeter instead of the anesthesia 
workstation common gas outlet. This approach permits 
more rapid deployment of the anesthesia workstation 
breathing circuit for delivering noninvasive oxygen 
or positive-pressure ventilation if the patient develops 
hypoventilation, hypoxemia, or apnea. For procedures 
of long duration, humidified oxygen should be given via 
nasal cannula to promote patient comfort by minimiz-
ing drying of the nasal and pharyngeal mucosa. Certain 
patients, including infants and small children, will not 
tolerate a nasal cannula but can receive oxygen with a 
blow-by method.
Pharmacologically Induced Sedation
Many medications can be used to provide sedation for 
imaging procedures (also see Chapters 8 and 9). For 
brief procedures, a small dose of a rapid-onset, short-
acting opioid such as remifentanil or alfentanil is often 
an appropriate selection. Lengthier sedation can usually 
be managed successfully with a continuous propofol 
infusion, with or without supplemental intravenous 
IV
Chapter 38 Anesthesia for Procedures in Nonoperating Room Locations
683
opioids or benzodiazepines (or both). Dexmedetomidine 
is another useful drug, primarily in procedures lasting 
more than an hour. Because dexmedetomidine is less 
likely to cause respiratory depression compared with 
propofol, it is especially useful for patients with severe 
pulmonary hypertension or those who require frequent 
assessment of mental status.
Management of Anesthesia for CT
CT is often used for intracranial imaging and for studies 
of the thorax and abdomen. Because CT is painless, non-
invasive, and generally of short duration, adult patients 
undergoing elective diagnostic scans rarely require more 
than emotional support. In addition, the bore of the CT 
scan is much more open than an MRI, so claustrophobia 
is rarely an issue. CT scanning is a crucial diagnostic tool 
in several acute settings, including traumatic injury (head 
and abdominal), acute stroke, and acute altered mental 
status of unknown cause. CT scanning is also used for 
urgent assessment of gastrointestinal integrity or acute 
pulmonary embolism in critically ill patients, who may 
require complex care during ICU transport. Sedation or 
general anesthesia is often essential for such patients and 
for children and adults who have difficulty remaining 
motionless.
Management of Anesthesia for MRI
For pediatric patients (also see Chapter 34), a common 
technique consists of (1) inhaled induction of anesthesia 
with sevoflurane; (2) placement of intravenous catheter; 
(3) intravenous infusion of propofol; and (4) either nasal 
cannula, laryngeal mask airway, or endotracheal tube 
for airway management, based on patient comorbid 
conditions. For adults who require general anesthesia for 
MRI, the body region being imaged may influence air-
way management choice. For example, in some patients 
spontaneously breathing with a supraglottic airway, even 
slight airway obstruction can cause excessive motion 
during brain MRI scan, which can be avoided with an 
endotracheal airway.
INTERVENTIONAL RADIOLOGY
Interventional radiology (IR) is a rapidly changing field 
as a result of continuing improvement in imaging qual-
ity and technologic advances. The ability to combine 
real-time, noninvasive imaging with minimally invasive, 
often catheter based, interventions offers great benefits 
to patients who otherwise have to experience the stress 
of an open surgery and possibly lengthier recovery. 
Interventional neuroradiology (INR), also called endovas-
cular neurosurgery, mixes traditional neurosurgery with 
neuroradiology while also including certain aspects of 
head and neck surgery. Body IR mixes general surgery 
with general radiology. In angiographic procedures the 
relevant blood vessel trees are imaged, after which a 
decision is made to advance to one or more therapeutic 
interventions via drugs, devices, or both. The list of IR 
procedures is extensive and continues to grow.
Interventional Neuroradiology
Anesthesia Choice
Most medical centers routinely use general endotracheal 
anesthesia for complex procedures or those of long 
duration, but there is no clearly superior anesthetic tech-
nique.9 The specific choice of anesthesia may be guided 
primarily by the procedure needs and cardiovascular and 
cerebrovascular considerations.10 Advantages of general 
anesthesia include control of ventilation and immobility, 
which improves image quality. Intermittent apnea may 
be requested by the interventional team to even further 
reduce motion artifact during digital subtraction angiog-
raphy. Mechanical ventilation goals include maintenance 
of normocapnia or slight hypocapnia as long as intracra-
nial pressure is normal. A patient with increased intrac-
ranial pressure may benefit from mild hyperventilation 
before anesthesia induction and during maintenance 
of anesthesia in order to counteract inhaled anesthetic-
induced cerebral vasodilation (also see Chapter 30). As 
an alternative to general anesthesia, minimal or moder-
ate sedation has the advantage of allowing assessment 
of neurologic function during the procedure. A variety 
of medications can be used for sedation based on the 
experience of the provider and the goals of anesthetic 
management.
Access and Monitoring
The INR suite requires multiple imaging screens and a 
large fluoroscopy C-arm device that is capable of exten-
sive movement around the patient. As a result, the dis-
tance from the intravenous catheter to the intravenous 
fluid bag can be twice as long as normal. The tubing 
extensions must be securely connected and of sufficient 
length to prevent accidental dislodgement. Infusions 
of intravenous anesthetics or vasoactive drugs should 
be connected as close to the intravenous catheter as 
possible to minimize tubing dead space. For procedures 
involving the blood supply to the central nervous sys-
tem (CNS), arterial line placement for continuous blood 
pressure monitoring may be prudent. A significant vol-
ume of fluid (e.g., heparinized flush solution and radio-
graphic contrast agent) can be administered through 
catheters placed by the interventional team, in addition 
to the fluid administered by the anesthesia provider. 
Foley catheter placement will facilitate assessment of 
urine output and assist in fluid management decisions 
and will promote patient comfort by avoiding bladder 
distention.
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
684
Arterial Blood Pressure Management
Baseline arterial blood pressure and cardiovascular reserve 
should be assessed carefully because blood pressure 
manipulation is commonly required during INR pro-
cedures and treatment-related perturbations regularly 
occur. Maintenance of arterial blood pressure within a 
predetermined range is particularly important in patients 
with cerebrovascular disease. Arterial blood pressure 
targets should always be discussed preoperatively with 
the interventional team. Deliberate hypertension, that is, 
maintaining a higher-than-normal arterial blood pressure, 
is used in INR patients with occlusive cerebrovascular 
disease to promote collateral cerebral blood flow. Such 
cases include patients undergoing emergency thromboly-
sis11 and patients with aneurysmal subarachnoid hemor-
rhage in whom vasospasm has developed. Maintaining 
normal or supranormal arterial pressure is also important 
in patients with tumors that compromise blood flow to 
the spinal cord, kidneys, and other organs. Conversely, 
prevention of arterial hypertension may be critical in 
certain patients, including those with recently ruptured 
intracranial aneurysms or recently obliterated intracranial 
arteriovenous malformation. Patients who have under-
gone cerebrovascular angioplasty and stent placement in 
extracranial conductance vessels such as the carotid artery 
are susceptible to posttreatment cerebral hyperperfusion 
injury and require careful monitoring and timely interven-
tion of arterial blood pressure after the procedure (also see 
Chapter 30). Besides traditional approaches to blood pres-
sure control within fixed ranges, the use of near-infrared 
spectroscopy (a measure of brain tissue oxygenation) or 
neuroangiographic findings may lead to individual-spe-
cific blood pressure targets in the postintervention period 
to avoid both hypoperfusion and hyperperfusion.12 13
Management of Neurologic and Procedural Crises
Crisis management during an INR procedure requires a 
well-thought-out plan coupled with rapid and effective 
communication between the anesthesia and radiology 
teams. The initial responsibility of the anesthesia pro-
vider is to assure that airway patency, gas exchange, and 
hemodynamic status remain intact. Then the anesthesia 
provider should communicate with the procedural team 
and determine whether the INR problem is hemorrhagic 
or occlusive.
In the setting of vascular occlusion the goal is to 
increase distal perfusion by augmentation of arterial 
blood pressure with or without direct thrombolysis. This 
may require preparation and administration of a vaso-
pressor infusion.
If the problem is hemorrhage, the anesthesia provider 
should discuss with the interventional team whether to 
immediately cease heparin administration and adminis-
ter reversal with protamine. Complications of protamine 
administration include hypotension, anaphylaxis, and 
pulmonary hypertension. Most cases of vascular rupture 
can be managed in the angiography suite. The INR team 
can attempt to seal the rupture site via endovascular 
approach and may abort the originally planned procedure. 
In addition, a ventriculostomy catheter may be placed 
emergently in the angiography suite if elevated intracra-
nial pressure is suspected. Patients with suspected rupture 
will require emergent head CT scan; emergent craniotomy 
may be needed depending on imaging findings.
Body Interventional Radiology
Interventional radiologists use x-rays, CT, ultrasound, 
MRI, and other imaging modalities to perform image-
guided procedures throughout the body. These proce-
dures are usually performed using needles and catheters, 
which are regarded as minimally invasive compared with 
traditional surgery. This section highlights the general 
approaches and challenges of anesthesia management 
for the most common image-guided procedures, such 
as diagnostic procedures, catheter drainage, stent place-
ment, tumor ablation, vascular angioplasty and emboli-
zation treatment, and site-specific delivery of therapeutic 
agents (Table 38.2). The transjugular intrahepatic por-
tosystemic shunt (TIPS) procedure deserves special rec-
ognition because of the severity of illness in its patient 
population.14
Vascular
Liver/Biliary
Cancer
Miscellaneous
Angiography
Biliary drainage and stenting
Percutaneous (needle) biopsy
Abscess drainage
Balloon angioplasty
Transjugular liver biopsy
Chemoembolization
Chest tube
Embolization
Transjugular intrahepatic 
portosystemic shunt
Radiofrequency ablation
Percutaneous nephrostomy 
tube
Central venous/hemodialysis 
access
Gastrostomy tube
Thrombolysis
Vena cava filter
Table 38.2
List of Common Interventional Radiology Procedures
IV
Chapter 38 Anesthesia for Procedures in Nonoperating Room Locations
685
Anesthesia Evaluation and Management
The anesthesia requirements of patients undergoing IR 
procedures can vary greatly. Because of the minimally 
invasive nature, many procedures in the IR suites are 
performed with minimal sedation without an anesthe-
sia provider present. However, a number of factors can 
prompt the involvement of the anesthesia provider (see 
Table 38.1). The presence of an anesthesia provider 
allows the proceduralists to focus their complete atten-
tion on the intervention at hand. A clear and detailed 
discussion should take place among the team members so 
the proceduralists can specify their intraprocedural needs 
and the anesthesia provider can describe any anesthetic 
concerns.
The preprocedural evaluation by the anesthesia pro-
vider follows the same approach as with any other 
anesthetic (also see Chapter 13). The choice of anesthetic 
technique follows the same principles outlined earlier 
in this chapter (also see Chapter 14). Patients who have 
altered mental status or cognitive dysfunction—dementia, 
delirium, encephalopathy, or developmental delay—may 
not be candidates for sedation if they are expected to 
cooperate and breath-hold during the procedure. The 
medication list should be reviewed. Special concerns 
for body interventional procedures include therapy with 
the oral antihyperglycemic metformin, which may cause 
lactic acidosis if administered with intravenous contrast 
agent in the setting of renal failure. Lactic acidosis is 
extremely rare when a patient with normal renal function 
receives both metformin and intravenous contrast agent. 
ASA Practice Guidelines for Preoperative Fasting should 
be followed, as with any other elective procedure.
If general anesthesia is not the initial anesthetic choice, 
the anesthesia provider should be prepared to escalate the 
level of sedation as needed, up to and including general 
anesthesia. Therefore all necessary equipment, monitors, 
and medications should be available.
Transjugular Intrahepatic Portosystemic Shunt
Patients who are scheduled to undergo the TIPS proce-
dure have significant liver disease and complications of 
portal hypertension, which can include variceal bleed-
ing, ascites, and hepatorenal syndrome. The Model for 
End-Stage Liver Disease (MELD) score serves as a marker 
of liver disease severity and is a predictor of short-term 
mortality risk in these patients, who may be candidates 
for liver transplantation. Anesthetic evaluation should 
focus on the multisystem effects of liver failure, includ-
ing cardiovascular, pulmonary, neurologic, renal, and 
hematologic manifestations (also see Chapter 28). Hepatic 
encephalopathy is a common finding in this patient pop-
ulation and is a contraindication for TIPS. Coagulopathy 
and thrombocytopenia may increase bleeding risk and 
require correction before the procedure.
The anesthetic management of a patient undergoing 
the TIPS procedure can be quite challenging. Because of 
the presence of cardiopulmonary comorbid conditions, 
coagulopathy, and the unpredictable length of the proce-
dure, most proceduralists prefer general anesthesia. Medi-
cations that have significant liver metabolism and biliary 
clearance should be avoided or minimized. The presence 
of tense ascites and gastroesophageal reflux are obvious 
risk factors for pulmonary aspiration of gastric contents. 
An endotracheal tube is preferred for airway manage-
ment (as opposed to a supraglottic airway) because the 
neck must be rotated to provide internal jugular venous 
access. Lastly, the anesthesia provider must be aware 
of several important post-TIPS complications: altered 
mental status because of post-TIPS encephalopathy, mas-
sive hemorrhage from intrahepatic bleeding or vascular 
injury, and worsening liver failure from decreased portal 
vein blood flow.
Challenges: Hemostasis and Anticoagulation
Many IR procedures involve access of the arterial tree 
with large-diameter catheters. To minimize the risk of 
thromboembolic complication, the anesthesia provider is 
often asked to maintain intraprocedural anticoagulation. 
This is usually achieved with intravenous heparin, and 
the degree of anticoagulation is monitored with whole-
blood activated clotting time (ACT). Heparin has the 
advantage of a short half-life and reliable reversal with 
protamine. For patients with heparin or protamine allergy 
or heparin-induced thrombocytopenia, direct thrombin 
inhibitors are alternatives. However, there is no reliable 
reversal for these drugs. They are metabolized by the 
liver, and the plasma half-life of bivalirudin, shortest in 
the group, is 25 minutes.
Frequently IR embolization is performed as urgent 
therapy for acute hemorrhage. Common applications 
include gastrointestinal, uterine, or other intraabdominal 
bleeding. Diagnostic angiography is performed to iden-
tify the site and mechanism of bleeding. Often, coils and 
thrombotic agents can be injected into the culprit arterial 
branch to stop the bleeding. To safely induce anesthesia 
and to rapidly secure the airway in a bleeding patient can 
be challenging. The patient's vital signs may further dete-
riorate after induction of anesthesia, and resuscitation is 
required with medication, fluid, and blood transfusion 
(also see Chapters 24 and 25). In addition to acute ane-
mia, coagulopathy and thrombocytopenia are common, 
either as the cause of the initial hemorrhage or as the 
result of dilution from fluid replacement or factor con-
sumption. The correction of coagulopathy should ideally 
be guided by laboratory data and a treatment algorithm. 
However, timely data may not be available during an 
emergency. The decision whether to transfuse will depend 
on the patient's medical history (e.g., presence of hema-
tologic and hepatic diseases), recent medications (e.g., 
anticoagulant or antiplatelet therapy), physical find-
ings (e.g., of disseminated intravascular coagulopathy), 
and the clinician's judgment. In addition to platelets, 
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
686
plasma, and cryoprecipitate, recombinant factors and 
factor concentrates may offer the benefit of correcting 
factor deficiency without the risk of transfusion-related 
complications.
ENDOSCOPY AND 
ENDOSCOPIC RETROGRADE 
CHOLANGIOPANCREATOGRAPHY
Endoscopy is frequently performed for the diagnosis and 
screening of gastrointestinal conditions. Indications for 
upper endoscopy (esophagogastroduodenoscopy [EGD]) 
include gastroesophageal reflux, bleeding, dysphagia, 
protracted pain or nausea, accidental ingestion, and 
abnormal imaging. Additionally, therapeutic interven-
tions such as treatment of bleeding source, ablation of 
Barrett esophagus, biopsy and removal of abnormal 
growth, dilation and stenting of stricture, and feeding 
tube placement can be performed. The development of 
high-frequency endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) using a 
small-caliber catheter through the biopsy channel of the 
endoscope can provide high-resolution images of benign 
and neoplastic lesions in the gastrointestinal tract.
For EGD, the patient is typically placed in a left lat-
eral position with the neck flexed. The usual sequence 
of events includes (1) application of topical anesthesia 
to the patient's pharynx with either lidocaine or benzo-
caine; (2) placement of a plastic mouth guard to minimize 
risk of damage to teeth or endoscope; (3) administration 
of medications to achieve minimal to moderate sedation; 
(4) insertion of endoscope through mouth into esopha-
gus; (5) examination of esophagus, gastroesophageal 
junction, stomach, pylorus, and duodenum as required; 
and (6) performance of therapeutic maneuvers when 
necessary.
Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography 
(ERCP) is often performed for the diagnosis and possi-
ble treatment of bile duct and pancreatic duct diseases. 
ERCP requires specialized equipment, including a dedi-
cated fluoroscopy system. Common indications include 
jaundice, acute biliary pancreatitis, chronic pancreatitis 
of unknown cause, pancreatic pseudocyst, suspected 
biliary or pancreatic malignancy, sphincter of Oddi dis-
orders, duct stricture, and postoperative bile leak. ERCP 
interventions include sphincterotomy, dilation, stenting 
(e.g., bile duct, fistulas, stricture, bile leak), drain place-
ment, EUS, and tissue biopsy. The patient is typically 
placed in a left lateral or prone position with the head 
turned toward the endoscopist. The first portion of the 
procedure is similar to EGD whereby the endoscope 
is advanced past the pharynx and is inserted into the 
esophagus. Once the endoscope is in the duodenum, it is 
rotated to face the papilla. A cannula is inserted into the 
papilla, contrast agent is injected, and the duct is visual-
ized under fluoroscopy. Excessive intestinal motility can 
impede endoscopic examination and can be inhibited 
by the administration of either anticholinergic drugs or 
glucagon.
Anesthesia Evaluation and Management
Anesthesia providers are often asked to care for patients 
requiring procedures in the gastrointestinal endoscopy 
suite.15 The standard approach to preprocedural evalua-
tion (also see Chapter 13) and anesthetic choice (also see 
Chapter 14) applies in this setting. Simple EGD and ERCP 
in otherwise healthy patients can be performed with 
minimal or moderate sedation administered by a trained 
nonanesthesia provider. However, anesthesia services 
(whether monitored anesthesia care or general anesthe-
sia) may be requested if the procedure is expected to be 
challenging or prolonged, patient immobility is desired, 
or the patient's history suggests airway difficulty or 
other comorbid conditions. Hepatobiliary dysfunction 
is common in patients who require ERCP. These patients 
may have coagulopathy because of decreased synthesis 
of coagulation factors and thrombocytopenia (also see 
Chapter 28). Blood product transfusion may be necessary 
before the endoscopy, especially for the more invasive 
ERCP.
The choice of anesthetic technique requires clear com-
munication between the patient, endoscopist, and anes-
thesia provider. Although minimal or moderate sedation 
is the most common technique for uncomplicated EGD, 
deep sedation or general anesthesia may be necessary for 
EGD based on patient comorbid conditions or severity 
of clinical status (e.g., critically ill patient with massive 
hematemesis). A short-acting anxiolytic, midazolam, 
combined with an analgesic, fentanyl, used by anesthesia 
and nonanesthesia providers alike, can be quite effec-
tive in providing mild to moderate sedation for routine 
endoscopy. Propofol is a commonly used agent by anes-
thesia providers to provide a deeper level of anesthesia, 
favored for its rapid onset and short duration of action.
ERCP is considered to be a riskier procedure com-
pared with EGD, based on the nature of the procedure 
and the typical patient population. The patient is most 
often in the prone position, and the anesthesia provider 
has limited access to the patient's airway because the 
endoscopist stands next to the patient's head. Finally, the 
room is darkened to allow better viewing of the fluoros-
copy screen, and the provider must wear protective lead 
shields to minimize exposure to ionizing radiation. Fac-
tors that may increase the risk of adverse events include 
ASA class >3, Mallampati airway score of 4, ascites, 
obesity, sleep apnea, chronic lung disease, and signifi-
cant alcohol use. General anesthesia with endotracheal 
intubation may be safer in such patients.16 Many patients 
undergo repeat ERCP and have developed a preference 
for monitored anesthesia care versus general anesthesia 
based on their experience.
IV
Chapter 38 Anesthesia for Procedures in Nonoperating Room Locations
687
Challenges and Complications
Complications of EGD or ERCP can generally be grouped 
by sedation and airway, procedure, and patient-related 
factors (Table 38.3). The most common complications 
are adverse respiratory events—hypoxemia, hypercapnia, 
aspiration, loss of airway, and cardiopulmonary arrest. 
Although the goal in the sedated patient is to maintain 
spontaneous respiration, airway obstruction and an 
inability to ventilate can occur with very little warning. 
It is often more prudent to continually assess the effec-
tiveness of ventilation with direct observation and moni-
toring with capnography than to rely solely on pulse 
oximetry, as hypoxemia can be a late sign of hypoven-
tilation. The anesthesia provider's ability to intervene is 
further complicated by the shared airway during upper 
endoscopy. Topical benzocaine administration can lead 
to methemoglobinemia (also see Chapter 10).
Procedure-related complications, such as esophageal 
perforation, are rare but can be life threatening. Esopha-
geal perforation is more likely to occur in patients with 
a history of stricture, previous perforation, previous 
surgery, or other anatomic abnormalities. Symptoms 
may include neck, chest, or abdominal pain. Clinical 
signs are often nonspecific (e.g., tachycardia, tachypnea, 
hypotension, abdominal distention, and even sepsis). 
Clinical suspicion should be raised especially if the 
symptoms do not resolve or are self-limited. The diag-
nosis of perforation is usually made radiographically, 
often with the use of water-soluble contrast material. 
Depending on the lesion, some perforations can be man-
aged medically, whereas others constitute surgical emer-
gencies. Another rare but potentially fatal complication 
is gas embolism, which is more common during ERCP 
than other GI endoscopy procedures. Whereas minor 
cases are likely subclinical and underreported, large 
venous gas embolisms can cause dyspnea, right heart 
strain or failure, and even cardiopulmonary collapse. 
Both the endoscopist and the anesthesia provider must 
remain vigilant for this possibility.
The anesthetic management of a patient with upper 
gastrointestinal bleeding can be especially challenging. 
Tracheal intubation may be complicated by ongoing 
hematemesis. Large-bore, possibly central, venous access 
is required to continue resuscitation with fluid, blood, 
and vasopressors. Often the patient may be coagulopathic, 
either because of a preexisting underlying cause or ongo-
ing blood loss. A typical example is a patient who has 
end-stage liver disease with deficiency in coagulation fac-
tors, thrombocytopenia, portal hypertension, and variceal 
bleeding. For anesthesia providers caring for such criti-
cally ill patients, anesthesia management is further com-
plicated by the location outside the operating suite, where 
resources and help are often far away.
CATHETER-BASED CARDIOLOGY 
PROCEDURES
Adult Cardiac Catheterization
Patients needing coronary artery or peripheral artery 
angiography usually show evidence of coronary ischemia 
on noninvasive cardiac stress tests or other clinical mani-
festations of atherosclerosis. Preprocedural assessment 
and preparation should be focused on their cardiopul-
monary functional status, airway, relevant medications, 
and other common comorbid conditions such as diabetes 
mellitus and renal insufficiency.
Percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) usually 
involves the cannulation of one or more peripheral arter-
ies, such as the radial, brachial, or femoral. A noninvasive 
arterial blood pressure monitor should be placed on an 
extremity that is not involved with the procedure. The cardi-
ologist will inject local anesthetic at the site of cannulation 
supplemented by intravenous sedation using midazolam 
Sedation and Airway-Related
Procedure-Related
Patient-Related
Hypoxemia
Bleeding
Bleeding
Excessive secretion
Perforation
Coagulopathy
Aspiration
Pancreatitis (ERCP)
Thrombocytopenia
Laryngospasm
Air embolism (insufflation of air by 
endoscopist)
Cardiac arrhythmia (e.g., if epinephrine is injected 
into gastrointestinal mucosa to stop hemorrhage)
Bronchospasm
Hypercarbia (CO2 insufflation may be 
used by endoscopist to improve visibility)
Methemoglobinemia (from 
topical benzocaine, if used)
Contrast agent allergy
Table 38.3
Complications of Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) or Endoscopic Retrograde Cholangiopancreatography 
(ERCP)
ERCP, Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography.
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
688
and fentanyl. PCI is usually well tolerated by the patient 
with light sedation. Anesthesia care is requested when the 
patient has a history of severe anxiety, an inability to lie flat 
because of chronic pain or orthopnea, or high-grade coro-
nary stenosis such as chronic total occlusion (CTO). PCI in 
CTO lesions is more technically challenging, and therefore 
longer in duration, and has a higher risk of complications. 
Sometimes, a PCI may require mechanical device support, 
such as intraaortic balloon pump, extracorporeal circula-
tory life support (ECLS), or percutaneous ventricular assist 
device. In these clinical situations a dedicated anesthesia 
provider is invaluable in providing sedation, managing the 
airway, and supporting hemodynamic stability.
General anesthesia is rarely indicated unless the patient 
is unable to cooperate and remain still, there is ongoing 
need for pulmonary resuscitation (e.g., from hypoxemia 
or hypercarbia), or a surgical exposure for ECLS can-
nulation is planned. The risk of hemodynamic instability 
during general anesthesia is clearly high. Because the 
procedure duration is usually short, an opiate-based 
induction of anesthesia is not desirable. A small dose of 
propofol, etomidate, ketamine, or an inhaled induction 
of anesthesia may be appropriate. Either a low concen-
tration of inhaled anesthetic or intravenous anesthetic 
infusion is usually sufficient to maintain anesthesia. 
The use of vasoconstrictors may be needed to maintain 
systemic vascular resistance, and inotropic drugs such as 
dobutamine, epinephrine, or dopamine may be needed in 
patients with severely depressed left ventricular ejection 
fraction. Finally, as with any NORA location, the anes-
thesia provider may be emergently called to the cath-
eterization suite to help resuscitate a patient, including 
securing the airway and possibly organizing transport to 
the intensive care unit (ICU) or OR.
Electrophysiology Studies
Catheter-Based Ablation
Electrophysiology (EP) covers the diagnosis of cardiac 
dysrhythmias, detailed mapping of their circuitry, and 
treatment with catheter-based ablation.17 With rapid 
advancements in cardiac monitors, CT, MRI, and cath-
eter technologies, a wide variety of dysrhythmias—
atrial fibrillation (AF), supraventricular tachyarrhythmias 
(SVTs), and ventricular tachycardia (VT)—are amendable 
to EP study and treatment. The characteristics of patients 
undergoing EP studies and ablation can vary greatly, 
ranging from healthy young adults with isolated dys-
rhythmia to those with end-stage heart failure with left 
ventricular assist devices. Preprocedural evaluation of 
these patients should focus on their cardiopulmonary 
reserve (particularly signs and symptoms when dysrhyth-
mias occur), airway, comorbid conditions, and relevant 
medications, especially anticoagulants such as heparin, 
warfarin and the newer direct factor Xa inhibitors, and 
direct thrombin inhibitors.
The intracardiac catheters are usually placed via the 
femoral and internal jugular veins, unless a retrograde 
approach to the left side of the heart via the femoral 
artery is planned. Endocardial mapping studies are per-
formed with stimulation and recording from the internal 
and external electrodes, followed by catheter ablation of 
the endocardium (usually with radiofrequency energy) to 
produce a scar that disrupts dysrhythmia generation or 
propagation. Generous subcutaneous injection of local 
anesthetics and intravenous administered sedation medi-
cations during cannulation is sufficient for most patients. 
The anesthetic plan and monitoring should take into con-
sideration the patient's comfort and cooperation, clinical 
stability, and the need for successful EP study and abla-
tion of dysrhythmia of interest.17,18 An EP study can be 
time-consuming and requires the patient to lie flat and 
remain motionless for an extended period, which can be 
challenging for anyone but especially those with chronic 
anxiety or pain. During the study, the patient may 
become unstable because of induction of tachyarrhyth-
mia or from ventricular pacing. A history of syncope or 
angina during a tachycardic episode or preexisting car-
diomyopathy may suggest depressed cardiac output and 
significant hypotension in the setting of tachycardia, and 
invasive arterial pressure monitoring may be warranted. 
A successful EP study requires stable catheter-tissue 
contact, which can be negatively affected by cardiac, 
respiratory, and patient motion. Some arrhythmias are 
more difficult to induce than others.
The ideal anesthetic regimen would provide the fol-
lowing: (1) patient comfort, (2) patient immobility, (3) 
predictable respiratory pattern, (4) unchanged autonomic 
tone, (5) unchanged inducibility of arrhythmia, and 
(6) unchanged intrinsic pacemaker (PM) function and 
conduction propagation. However, an ideal anesthetic 
agent does not exist.16 For example, propofol and dexme-
detomidine decrease sympathetic tone, and remifentanil 
decreases sinus and atrioventricular (AV) node function. 
For most EP studies, the patient receives deeper sedation 
during the initial cannulation and catheter insertion and 
minimal sedation thereafter to ensure minimal suppres-
sion of catecholamine-dependent arrhythmias such as 
SVT, paroxysmal AF, or VT.
For patients with chronic AF, the success rate of abla-
tion is higher for patients receiving general anesthesia.17
The AF ablation procedure typically involves endocardial 
ablation that isolates pulmonary vein ostia from the rest 
of the left atrium. General anesthesia allows predictable 
respiratory movement during ablation, monitoring of 
esophageal temperature to avoid left atrial perforation, 
and detection of any phrenic nerve stimulation. For pro-
cedures involving catheters in the left-sided chambers 
of the heart, anticoagulation is usually achieved with 
intravenous heparin to avoid thromboembolic complica-
tions.17 Finally, vascular sheaths are continually flushed 
to remain patent and ablation catheters are cooled with 
IV
Chapter 38 Anesthesia for Procedures in Nonoperating Room Locations
689
irrigated fluid to avoid thrombus buildup. Because the 
amount of fluid can be substantial over a long procedure, 
patients with a history of heart failure may require a diu-
retic to avoid excessive intravascular volume.
Cardiac Implantable Electronic Devices
Another common group of procedures performed in the 
EP suite is the placement of CIEDs, such as implantable 
cardioverter-defibrillators (ICDs) and PMs. The anesthesia 
provider should understand the indication of the device, 
whether it is heart block, primary prevention for sudden 
cardiac death in cardiomyopathy, secondary prevention 
for a history of VT, or biventricular pacing for cardiac 
resynchronization therapy. Transcutaneous pacing and 
defibrillator devices should be attached to the patient, 
and the anesthesia provider should understand how to 
operate these devices to institute emergency pacing or 
defibrillation. Again, the procedure can be performed 
successfully with subcutaneous local anesthetic injection 
and intravenous sedation and analgesia medications. 
However, the anesthesia provider may decide that gen-
eral anesthesia may be safer, for example, in a patient 
with altered mental status. The cardiologist may choose 
to perform a defibrillation threshold test, in which fibril-
lation is intentionally induced and the device's ability 
to sense and terminate fibrillation is confirmed. In some 
patients, such as those with severe systolic left ventricu-
lar dysfunction (e.g., ischemic cardiomyopathy), the brief 
loss of cardiac output and perfusion, even for seconds, 
may be poorly tolerated. For these patients, invasive 
pressure monitoring is advisable to facilitate timely treat-
ment of hypotension. Before the test, administration of 
oxygen and a small intravenous dose of a short-acting 
anesthetic to produce amnesia is appropriate.
Cardioversion
The anesthesia provider is frequently involved in car-
ing for patients who are undergoing cardioversion for 
atrial fibrillation or atrial flutter.17 Because of the risk 
of thromboembolic disease in these patients, cardiover-
sion is often immediately preceded by a transesophageal 
echocardiogram (TEE) to examine the left atrium for 
thrombus. TEE may be bypassed if the patient has been 
receiving therapeutic anticoagulation.
For cardioversion without TEE, the patient first under-
goes a few minutes of preoxygenation. Then, a small 
dose of hypnotic, such as propofol, is given to render the 
patient amnestic. After cardioversion, the anesthesia pro-
vider monitors the patient, relieves any airway obstruc-
tion, and provides additional oxygen until satisfactory 
recovery of mentation and airway reflexes before PACU 
transport.
For TEE before cardioversion, the echocardiographer 
may choose to topicalize the upper airway with local 
anesthetics to suppress gag reflex during probe inser-
tion. The drawback with topicalization is that the loss 
of airway reflex may linger beyond the procedure and 
limit the patient's ability to manage excessive secretions. 
A common anesthetic choice is a short-acting hypnotic 
such as propofol infusion. Supplemental oxygen is 
started before TEE probe insertion. Sedatives are titrated 
to accommodate the passage of the probe; typically, a 
lower dose is required for the rest of the examination. 
Maneuvers such as jaw thrust, chin lift, or pharyngeal 
suctioning may be necessary to avoid obstruction or clear 
secretions.
Structural Heart Disease Intervention
Catheter-based intervention for the treatment of struc-
tural heart diseases is a rapidly evolving field. Balloon 
valvuloplasty or even valve replacement can be per-
formed on all of the intracardiac valves. Atrial septal 
defect (ASD), patent foramen ovale (PFO), ventricular 
septal defect (VSD), and coronary fistula can be closed 
with expandable devices. These procedures are performed 
using fluoroscopy with additional guidance using echo-
cardiography. Because a significant proportion of this 
patient population has had previous sternotomy for 
cardiac surgery, the transcatheter approach avoids the 
morbidity and risk of repeat sternotomy and inadvertent 
cardiac injury.
General anesthesia has a number of advantages: an 
immobile patient, controlled ventilatory movement, ease 
of continuous TEE examination, and a secured airway 
in the case of hemodynamic instability or when open 
surgery is needed. The induction of anesthesia may be 
challenging, however, given the implications of the car-
diac lesion being treated. Pediatric patients with cyanotic 
heart lesions or adult patients with palliative treatment of 
congenital heart diseases may be especially challenging. 
A thorough preprocedural discussion is required between 
the anesthesia provider, congenital cardiologist, inter-
ventional cardiologist, and cardiac surgeon to address 
the cardiac anatomy, surgical history, and potential 
anesthetic concerns.
Pediatric Studies
Caring for neonates, infants, and children who are under-
going invasive cardiac studies and procedures is one of 
the most challenging tasks faced by the anesthesia pro-
vider (also see Chapter 34). To safely anesthetize these 
patients requires a deep understanding of the neonatal 
cardiopulmonary physiology, complex anatomy of car-
diac lesions, pharmacology, pediatric airway, and other 
coexisting congenital diseases. Because of their age and 
cognitive development, most pediatric patients require 
either general anesthesia or deep sedation for these 
procedures. Special attention must be paid to the pos-
sibility of a difficult airway, the rapidity of ventilation 
problems adversely affecting cardiovascular stability, 
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
690
the pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic properties 
of anesthetic drugs, and the avoidance of hypothermia. 
The onset of intravenous and inhaled anesthetics will 
be significantly altered owing to the presence of intra-
cardiac or extracardiac shunts. Similarly, the onset of 
medication effect can be delayed as a result of conges-
tive heart failure and low cardiac output. The following 
conditions should be avoided because they can lead to 
increased pulmonary vascular resistance and right-sided 
heart failure: hypoxemia, hypercapnia, excessive positive 
airway pressure, metabolic acidosis, hypothermia, and 
painful stimulation without adequate analgesia. How-
ever, in patients with intracardiac shunts, hyperoxia and 
resulting pulmonary vasodilation may promote excessive 
left-to-right shunt and cause systemic hypotension. Also, 
cyanotic patients often develop secondary polycythemia 
to compensate for chronic oxygen deprivation. This 
places them at a higher risk of thrombotic complications 
during the procedures. The rule of thumb is to have the 
cyanotic patient remain at preanesthetic hemodynamic 
and oxygenation baseline, which can be a considerable 
challenge during anesthesia.
Challenges and Complications
Providing anesthetic care in interventional cardiology 
locations can be challenging. The typical arrangement 
of a room designed for the interventional cardiologist 
frequently places the anesthesia provider far away from 
the patient, with other equipment serving as obstacles. 
The anesthesia provider should always be prepared to 
escalate the depth of anesthesia, secure the airway, and 
provide resuscitation in case of emergency. The most 
common complications with interventional cardiology 
procedures are related to vascular access that include 
bleeding, hematoma, pneumothorax, and vascular injury. 
In addition, intracardiac catheters can trigger arrhythmia 
and heart blocks, which may cause significant cardiovas-
cular changes.
Rarely, cardiac perforation can occur, resulting in per-
icardial effusion and tamponade. Clinical signs include 
persistent hemodynamic instability unrelated to the 
induced arrhythmia and refractory to routine adminis-
tration of vasoconstrictors and intravenous fluids. The 
procedural team should be informed if perforation is 
suspected. The diagnosis can be confirmed with echo-
cardiography. Blood products should be ordered imme-
diately. Perhaps anticoagulation should be reversed after 
a consultation with the proceduralist. One or more of 
the venous sheaths can be used for intravascular vol-
ume resuscitation. The management options for a new 
pericardial effusion in this setting could include the 
following: (1) a “wait-and-watch” approach if the effu-
sion is small and self-limiting, (2) emergent pericardial 
drain placement, or (3) rapid mobilization for surgi-
cal decompression of tamponade. Thus communication 
and understanding of the procedural plan between the 
anesthesia provider and the cardiologist are crucial. The 
cardiologist's specialty expertise can be an asset during a 
cardiovascular emergency, including the rapid placement 
of invasive lines for monitoring and fluid resuscitation.
ELECTROCONVULSIVE THERAPY
Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) is an effective treatment 
for patients suffering from severe depression (both uni-
polar and bipolar types), psychotic depression, and schiz-
ophrenia.19 For severe depression, ECT has the following 
advantages compared with antidepressant medication 
alone: more rapid remission, decreased acute suicide risk, 
and reduced relapse rate. Most guidelines recommend 
ECT for patients who have failed medical therapy with 
antidepressants, have depression with severe psychotic 
features (e.g., catatonia), or patients at risk of suicide who 
need a rapid, definitive treatment response. The Ameri-
can Psychiatric Association also recommends its use as 
maintenance therapy. ECT exerts its therapeutic effect 
by inducing a generalized seizure. The efficacy of ECT 
for depression is influenced by technique-related factors 
such as electrode placement, length of convulsion, and 
number of ECT treatments. Generalized seizures likely 
change the neurobiology of depression by increasing 
CNS γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) concentration, normal-
izing serotonin function, and suppressing hypothalamic–
pituitary–adrenal axis hyperactivity.19
Electrically Induced Seizures
A trained ECT physician produces a generalized seizure 
by placing two electrodes in bifrontotemporal (bilateral), 
right unilateral, or bifrontal positions on the patient's 
head. The right unilateral or bifrontal position is often 
chosen over the bilateral position to minimize side effects 
of ECT such as short-term cognitive dysfunction. On 
the other hand, the bilateral electrode position has the 
advantages of ease of use, lower energy requirement, and 
higher efficacy (i.e., lower remission rate). A brief (0.5 
to 2 ms) or an ultra-brief (<0.5 ms) pulse of electrical 
charge, usually 100 to 600 μC (microcoulombs) is applied 
with the goal to trigger a seizure of at least 15 seconds 
duration. Seizure threshold can either be determined 
empirically during the initial ECT treatment or based on 
the patient's age (for bilateral position). Threshold can 
be affected by a number of factors (e.g., chronic medica-
tion, blood pH) and may increase over the course of the 
treatment series. The electrical duration of the seizure is 
monitored with single-channel electroencephalography 
(EEG). Motor seizure activity can also be followed; how-
ever, motor activity typically stops before the electrical 
activity. Seizures shorter than 15 seconds or a complete 
lack of seizure may be subtherapeutic, whereas prolonged 
IV
Chapter 38 Anesthesia for Procedures in Nonoperating Room Locations
691
seizures (>120 seconds) may be harmful. Adjustment of 
stimulation by the ECT physician and possible interven-
tion by the anesthesia provider may be necessary. A typi-
cal therapeutic course may involve three treatments per 
week and a total of 6 to 20 treatments.
Anesthesia Evaluation
Before starting ECT, a patient should undergo a full medi-
cal evaluation by the ECT physician and the anesthesia 
provider (also see Chapter 13).20 Any interval change in 
health and side effects from previous treatments should 
be elicited during subsequent visits. Because of the CNS 
and cardiovascular changes associated with the induced 
seizure, special attention should be given to the presence 
of coexisting cardiovascular and CNS disease. Approxi-
mately one-third of patients undergoing ECT are aged 
65 years or older, with an increased incidence of cardio-
pulmonary conditions (also see Chapter 35). Patients with 
unstable cardiac disease, such as malignant hypertension, 
decompensated heart failure, or hemodynamically signif-
icant arrhythmia, should be evaluated and optimized by a 
cardiologist. Patients with CIEDs can undergo ECT safely 
with certain precautions in place, as described later. 
Patients with unstable fractures may be at risk owing to 
motor seizure activity, though the risk is mitigated with 
adequate neuromuscular blockade.
Standard preoperative fasting guidelines should be fol-
lowed. Chronic medication for cardiovascular or pulmonary 
diseases should usually be continued. One exception is the 
bronchodilator drug theophylline, which can increase the 
risk of status epilepticus. Chronic anticoagulation (e.g., 
warfarin) should be continued, as the risk of bleeding is 
minimal. Chronic medications for gastroesophageal reflux 
disease should be taken, but there is no evidence for routine 
prophylactic use of an antacid, H2 antagonist, or proton 
pump inhibitor in an asymptomatic patient.20
Psychotropic Medications
Many ECT patients are receiving psychotropic medica-
tions. Lithium, anticonvulsants, and benzodiazepines, 
which may shorten seizure duration, may be tapered 
under the direction of the ECT physician. However, 
many psychotropic medications (e.g., monoamine oxi-
dase inhibitors, serotonin reuptake inhibitors, tricyclic 
antidepressants, lithium, and benzodiazepines) have 
sympathomimetic, anticholinergic, and CNS effects and 
can cause serious drug–drug interactions with commonly 
used perioperative medications.20
Management of Anesthesia and Seizure
The steps in anesthesia management are described in 
Table 38.4 20 If the patient has an ICD, the defibrillation 
function should be temporarily deactivated, typically 
with a magnet, so that the device does not misinterpret 
the ECT electrical stimulus as a tachyarrhythmia. For a 
patient who is PM-dependent, a magnet placed over the 
PM usually converts it to an asynchronous mode. This 
is required because the electrical artifact from the ECT 
stimulus and resulting motor movement can cause PM 
inhibition, leading to severe bradycardia or asystole. 
An external defibrillator machine with PM capabilities 
should be immediately available for those patients with 
CIEDs.
The most common induction drug is intravenous 
methohexital (0.5 to 1.5 mg/kg), a short-acting barbi-
turate. By contrast, propofol is a potent anticonvulsant 
that may increase seizure threshold and shorten seizure 
duration when used during ECT.20 An alternative is 
intravenous etomidate (0.2 to 0.3 mg/kg),21 which has 
the advantage of maintaining hemodynamic stability 
and can decrease seizure threshold and augment sei-
zure duration in some patients. However, etomidate can 
induce nonepileptic myoclonic activity and cause adrenal 
insufficiency with just a single dose. Ketamine is another 
alternative, but its use is controversial, as it may cause 
posttreatment confusion.21 If a patient has undergone 
prior ECT, the anesthesia provider should determine what 
induction drug and dose were administered, the resulting 
seizure duration, and the presence of any adverse effects. 
A subtherapeutic seizure may prompt a dose adjustment 
or a change of the induction drug, in consultation with 
the ECT physician. A prolonged seizure (>2 minutes) can 
be terminated by a small propofol bolus.
Once the patient loses consciousness, the manual blood 
pressure cuff on the distal limb is inflated (see Table 38.4). 
A fast-acting neuromuscular blocker, usually succinylcho-
line (0.5 to 1.5 mg/kg), is then administered. For patients 
with a contraindication to succinylcholine, rocuronium 
can be substituted, which can be rapidly reversed after the 
seizure with sugammadex (see Chapter 11).
Physiologic Responses to Seizure and 
Treatment
The electrically induced seizure can have profound effects 
on the patient's vital signs.20 The first (tonic) phase is 
characterized by profound parasympathetic discharge 
that can lead to bradycardia, AV block, atrial arrhythmia, 
premature atrial or ventricular contraction, hypotension, 
or even asystole. Treatment with atropine or glycopyr-
rolate may be necessary for profound bradycardia. How-
ever, the tonic phase is rapidly followed by the second 
(clonic) phase of sympathetic overstimulation character-
ized by tachycardia and hypertension, which can also be 
profound. This may be exacerbated by hypoventilation 
and the resultant hypercarbia. Although the hemody-
namic response usually subsides quickly after seizure 
termination, persistent hypertension and tachycardia, 
especially in patients with significant cardiovascular 
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
692
Management Step
Description
Comment
1. Monitoring
Standard monitors plus the monitors 
described later.
Invasive pressure monitoring is rarely indicated.
Additional manual BP cuff on distal 
limb with EMG leads attached to ECT 
machine.
Manual BP cuff is inflated before NMB 
administration so that the distal extremity can 
display muscle movement and EMG activity of the 
induced seizure.
ECT leads attached to patient's head.
ECT leads will record EEG seizure activity.
Peripheral nerve stimulator (PNS).
PNS can assess onset and duration of NMB
2. Preoxygenation
Preoxygenation by facemask.
Thorough preoxygenation is necessary because the 
patient will be apneic during the seizure.
3. Induction of anesthesia
Methohexital or etomidate are the most 
common agents.
See text for details.
4. Inflation of manual BP 
cuff on distal extremity
Inflation of the manual cuff above 
systolic blood pressure prevents NMB 
from reaching the distal extremity.
Seizure-related motor movement and EMG activity 
can be recorded distal to the manual BP cuff.
5. Neuromuscular blockade
Succinylcholine is given unless there is a 
contraindication.
NMB minimizes side effects from seizure-related 
motor activity such as myalgia or lactic acidosis. 
Also, NMB reduces oxygen consumption from 
muscle metabolism that would be increased during 
a generalized tonic-clonic seizure.
6. Hyperventilation
Mask ventilation and hyperventilation.
Hypocapnia from hyperventilation can lower seizure 
threshold and facilitate ECT.
7. Electrical stimulation and 
induced seizure
A bite block is placed before electrical 
stimulation.
Bite block reduces the risk of tongue laceration 
during seizure.
When succinylcholine fasciculations stop, 
NMB should be adequate for treatment.
If rocuronium is used or if fasciculations are not 
well seen, peripheral nerve stimulation can confirm 
NMB.
Electrical and motor monitoring of 
seizure duration.
EEG monitoring for electrical activity and EMG or 
observation of distal extremity is recorded for the 
duration.
8. Assess physiologic effects 
of seizure
Cardiovascular manifestations can 
include bradycardia, tachycardia, and 
hypertension.
See text for details.
9. Monitor respiratory, 
neuromuscular, and 
mental status
PNS monitoring for recovery after NMB. 
Airway obstruction may require chin lift/
jaw thrust or oral airway placement. The 
level of consciousness begins to return 
several minutes after seizure ends.
Spontaneous respirations will become stronger as 
NMB abates. Supraglottic airway may be useful if 
airway obstruction persists despite mask ventilation 
with oral airway. Endotracheal intubation is rarely 
needed.
Table 38.4
Steps in Anesthesia Management for Electroconvulsive Therapy
BP, Blood pressure; ECT, electroconvulsive therapy; EEG, electroencephalography; EMG, electromyography; NMB, neuromuscular blockade; PNS,
peripheral nerve stimulator.
diseases at risk for ischemia, may require treatment such 
as β-adrenergic antagonists (e.g., esmolol or labetalol) 
and other antihypertensives (e.g., hydralazine).
Side Effects
Side effects of ECT are common. If a patient has had 
prior ECT treatments, the anesthesia provider should 
review the prior anesthesia record to determine the 
intraoperative hemodynamic response and post-ECT 
experience of the patient. If the patient had an excessive 
sympathetic response during past treatments, the anes-
thesia provider may choose to administer prophylactic 
β-adrenergic antagonists immediately before seizure 
induction. Post-ECT symptoms such as headache, mus-
cle pain, or nausea may be treated with small doses of 
opiates, acetaminophen, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory 
drugs, or antiemetics.
IV
Chapter 38 Anesthesia for Procedures in Nonoperating Room Locations
693
REFERENCES
1. Nagrebetsky A, Gabriel RA, Dutton RP, 
etal. Growth of nonoperating room 
anesthesia care in the United States: a 
contemporary trends analysis. Anesth 
Analg. 2017;124:1261–1267.
2. Boggs SD, Luedi MM. Nonoperating 
room anesthesia education: Preparing 
our residents for the future. Curr Opin 
Anaesthesiol. 2019;32:490–497.
3. Chang B, Kaye AD, Diaz JH, etal. 
Interventional procedures outside of 
the operating room: results from the 
National Anesthesia Clinical Outcomes 
Registry. J Patient Saf. 2018;14:9–16.
4. Wax RS, Christian MD. Practical rec-
ommendations for critical care and 
anesthesiology teams caring for novel 
coronavirus (2019-nCoV) patients. Can J 
Anaesth. 2020;67:568–576.
5. Orme NM, Rihal CS, Gulati R, etal. 
Occupational health hazards of work-
ing in the interventional laboratory: a 
multisite case control study of physi-
cians and allied staff. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2015;65:820–826.
6. Vaes B, Van Keer K, Struelens L, etal. 
Eye lens dosimetry in anesthesiology: a 
prospective study. J Clin Monit Comput. 
2017;31:303–308.
7. Rosado Ingelmo A, Doña Diaz I, Cabañas 
Moreno R, etal. Clinical Practice Guide-
lines for Diagnosis and Management of 
Hypersensitivity Reactions to Contrast 
Media. J Investig Allergol Clin Immunol. 
2016;26:144–155.
8. Woolen SA, Shankar PR, Gagnier JJ, 
etal. Risk of nephrogenic systemic fibro-
sis in patients with stage 4 or 5 chronic 
kidney disease receiving a group II gado-
linium-based contrast agent: a systematic 
review and meta-analysis. JAMA Intern 
Med. 2020;180:223–230.
9. Talke P, Dowd CF, CZ Lee. Interventional 
neuroradiology: anesthetic manage-
mentCottrell and Patel's Neuroanesthe-
sia. : Elsevier 2016 6th ed..
10. Schönenberger S, Hendén PL, Simon-
sen CZ, etal. Association of general 
anesthesia vs procedural sedation with 
functional outcome among patients 
with acute ischemic stroke undergoing 
thrombectomy: a systematic review and 
meta-analysis. JAMA. 2019;322:1283–
1293.
11. Businger J, Fort AC, Vlisides PE, etal. 
Management of acute ischemic stroke-
specific focus on anesthetic manage-
ment for mechanical thrombectomy. 
Anesth Analg. 2020;131:1124–1134.
12. Ghuman M, Tsang ACO, Klostranec JM, 
etal. Sentinel angiographic signs of cer-
ebral hyperperfusion after angioplasty 
and stenting of intracranial atheroscle-
rotic stenosis: a technical note. AJNR 
Am J Neuroradiol. 2019;40:1523–1525.
13. Petersen NH, Silverman A, Strander SM, 
etal. Fixed compared with autoregu-
lation-oriented blood pressure thresh-
olds after mechanical thrombectomy for 
ischemic stroke. Stroke. 2020;51:914–
921.
14. Chana A, James M, Veale P. Anaesthe-
sia for transjugular intrahepatic por-
tosystemic shunt insertion. BJA Educ. 
2016;16:405–409.
15. Bhavani S. Non-operating room anesthe-
sia in the endoscopy unit. Gastrointest 
Endosc Clin N Am. 2016;26:471–483.
16. Smith ZL, Mullady DK, Lang GD, etal. 
A randomized controlled trial evaluating 
general endotracheal anesthesia versus 
monitored anesthesia care and the inci-
dence of sedation-related adverse events 
during ERCP in high-risk patients. Gas-
trointest Endosc. 2019;89:855–862.
17. Fujii S, Zhou JR, Dhir A. Anesthesia for 
cardiac ablation. J Cardiothorac Vasc 
Anesth. 2018;32:1892–1910.
18. Mittnacht AJ, Dukkipati S, Mahajan A. 
Ventricular tachycardia ablation: a com-
prehensive review for anesthesiologists. 
Anesth Analg. 2015;120:737–748.
19. Lisanby SH. Electroconvulsive ther-
apy for depression. N Engl J Med. 
2007;357:1939–1945.
20. Bryson EO, Aloysi AS, Farber KG, etal. 
Individualized anesthetic management 
for patients undergoing electrocon-
vulsive therapy: a review of current 
practice. Anesth Analg. 2017;124:1943–
1956.
21. Soehle M, Bochem J. Anesthesia for 
electroconvulsive therapy. Curr Opin 
Anaesthesiol. 2018;31:501–505.
Section
V
Chapter 39
POSTANESTHESIA RECOVERY, 697
Chapter 40
PERIOPERATIVE PAIN MANAGEMENT, 716
THE RECOVERY 
PERIOD
697
Chapter
The postanesthesia care unit (PACU) is managed by anes-
thesiologists, who provide general medical supervision 
and coordination of patient care. Historically, PACUs did 
not become a standard part of hospital design until the 
late 1940s, after an influential study of mortality within 
24 hours of anesthesia induction noted a significant 
number of deaths resulting from inadequate nursing care 
and respiratory obstruction in the immediate postopera-
tive period. In contemporary practice the PACU serves as 
the location for patients to safely transition from anes-
thesia (of any type) to lower levels of care, including the 
hospital ward or home. The PACU staff must be prepared 
to identify and manage early complications of anesthesia 
and surgery, which will be described later. In addition, 
the PACU can be the site of care for complex, critically 
ill, mechanically ventilated postoperative patients who 
require short-term intensive care (also see Chapter 41).
ADMISSION TO THE POSTANESTHESIA 
CARE UNIT
EARLY POSTOPERATIVE PHYSIOLOGIC 
CHANGES
UPPER AIRWAY OBSTRUCTION
Loss of Pharyngeal Muscle Tone
Residual Neuromuscular Blockade
Laryngospasm
Airway Edema or Hematoma
Obstructive Sleep Apnea
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS OF ARTERIAL 
HYPOXEMIA IN THE PACU
Alveolar Hypoventilation
Decreased Alveolar Partial Pressure of Oxygen
Ventilation-Perfusion Mismatch and Shunt
Increased Venous Admixture
Decreased Diffusion Capacity
PULMONARY EDEMA IN THE PACU
Postobstructive Pulmonary Edema
Transfusion-Related Acute Lung Injury
MONITORING AND TREATMENT 
OF HYPOXEMIA
Oxygen Supplementation
Limitations of Pulse Oximetry
Oxygen Delivery Systems
Continuous Positive Airway Pressure
Noninvasive Positive-Pressure Ventilation
HEMODYNAMIC INSTABILITY
Systemic Hypertension
Systemic Hypotension
Myocardial Ischemia
Cardiac Arrhythmias
RENAL DYSFUNCTION
Oliguria
Contrast Nephropathy
Intraabdominal Hypertension
Rhabdomyolysis
POSTANESTHESIA 
RECOVERY
Matthias R. Braehler, Ilan Mizrahi
39
POSTOPERATIVE HYPOTHERMIA 
AND SHIVERING
Mechanism
Treatment
POSTOPERATIVE NAUSEA AND VOMITING
Prevention and Treatment
DELIRIUM
Risk Factors
Prophylaxis and Management
Emergence Agitation
DELAYED AWAKENING
Treatment
DISCHARGE CRITERIA
POSTANESTHESIA SCORING SYSTEMS
Section V THE RECOVERY PERIOD
698
ADMISSION TO THE POSTANESTHESIA 
CARE UNIT
The PACU is staffed by specially trained nurses skilled in 
the prompt recognition of postoperative complications. 
Upon arrival at the PACU, a member of the anesthesia 
team provides the PACU nurse with an information hand-
off including pertinent details of the patient’s history, 
medical condition, anesthesia management, and surgery. 
The American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) Stand-
ards for Postanesthesia Care1 emphasize that particular 
attention should be directed toward monitoring oxygena-
tion, ventilation, circulation, level of consciousness, and 
temperature. Although a vital sign frequency is not stated 
in the ASA Standards for Postanesthesia Care, a common 
practice is to record them at least every 15 minutes while 
the patient is in the unit. Vital signs and other pertinent 
information are recorded as part of the patient's medical 
record. More specific recommendations regarding evalu-
ation and interventions in the PACU can be found in the 
ASA Practice Guidelines for Postanesthesia Care.2
EARLY POSTOPERATIVE PHYSIOLOGIC 
CHANGES
Emergence from general anesthesia and surgery may 
be accompanied by a number of physiologic distur-
bances that affect multiple organ systems (Box 39.1). 
Box 39.1
Physiologic Disorders Manifested in the 
Postanesthesia Care Unit
Neurologic
Delayed awakening
Emergence agitation
Delirium
Nausea and vomiting
Pain
Respiratory
Upper airway obstruction
Arterial hypoxemia
Hypoventilation
Cardiovascular
Hypotension
Hypertension
Cardiac arrhythmias
Renal
Oliguria
Hematologic
Bleeding
Coagulopathy
Metabolic
Decreased body temperature
Electrolyte and acid–base abnormalities
In a prospective study of more than 18,000 consecutive 
admissions to the PACU the complication rate was found 
to be as high as 24%. Nausea and vomiting (10%), the 
need for upper airway support (7%), and hypotension 
(3%) were the most common.3 Despite the significant 
incidence of nausea and vomiting in the PACU, the most 
serious adverse outcomes occur with airway/respiratory 
and cardiovascular compromise. A 2002 analysis of the 
Australian Incident Monitoring Study (AIMS) database 
(a voluntary self-report of actual or potential anesthesia 
incidents) contained over 8000 reports, with approxi-
mately 6% occurring in the recovery area. Of these 
incidents, the most common problems included airway 
(21%), respiratory (23%), cardiovascular (24%), and drug 
error (11%).4 These reports highlight the vulnerability of 
patients during transport from the operating room to the 
PACU. Airway obstruction and hypoventilation can be 
difficult to detect clinically; therefore increased vigilance 
is required during this phase of care.
UPPER AIRWAY OBSTRUCTION
Loss of Pharyngeal Muscle Tone
The most frequent cause of airway obstruction in the 
immediate postoperative period is the loss of pharyngeal 
muscle tone in a sedated or obtunded patient. The persis-
tent effects of inhaled and intravenous (IV) anesthetics, 
neuromuscular blocking drugs, and opioids all contribute 
to the loss of pharyngeal tone in this setting.
In an awake patient opening of the upper airway is 
facilitated by the contraction of the pharyngeal muscles 
at the same time that negative inspiratory pressure is 
generated by the diaphragm. As a result, the tongue and 
soft palate are pulled forward, tenting the airway open 
during inspiration. This pharyngeal muscle activity is 
depressed during sleep, and the resulting decrease in tone 
can promote airway obstruction. A vicious cycle then 
ensues wherein the collapse of compliant pharyngeal 
tissue during inspiration produces a reflex compensatory 
increase in respiratory effort and negative inspiratory 
pressure that promotes further airway obstruction.
The effort to breathe against an obstructed airway is 
characterized by a paradoxical breathing pattern consist-
ing of retraction of the sternal notch and exaggerated 
abdominal muscle activity. Collapse of the chest wall 
and protrusion of the abdomen with inspiratory effort 
produce a rocking motion that becomes more prominent 
with increasing airway obstruction. Obstruction second-
ary to loss of pharyngeal tone can be relieved by simply 
opening the airway with the “jaw thrust maneuver” or 
continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) applied via 
a facemask (or both). Support of the airway is needed 
until the patient has adequately recovered from the 
effects of drugs administered during anesthesia. If the 
V
Chapter 39 Postanesthesia Recovery
699
airway obstruction cannot be overcome by the afore-
mentioned approach, placement of an oropharyngeal or 
nasopharyngeal airway, a supraglottic airway device, or 
an endotracheal tube (ETT) may be required.
Residual Neuromuscular Blockade
Postoperative residual neuromuscular blockade is very 
common, with reported incidences between 20% and 
40%.5 A 2015 study even found that 56% of patients 
(the majority of whom received neostigmine for neuro-
muscular blockade reversal) had residual neuromuscular 
blockade upon arrival in the PACU.6 When evaluating 
upper airway obstruction in the PACU, the possibility of 
residual neuromuscular blockade should be considered in 
any patient who received neuromuscular blocking drugs 
during anesthesia. Residual neuromuscular blockade may 
not be evident upon arrival in the PACU because the dia-
phragm recovers from neuromuscular blockade before the 
pharyngeal muscles do. With an ETT in place, end-tidal 
carbon dioxide concentrations and tidal volumes may 
indicate adequate ventilation while the ability to maintain 
a patent upper airway and clear upper airway secretions 
remains compromised. The stimulation associated with 
tracheal extubation, followed by the activity of patient 
transfer to the gurney and subsequent encouragement to 
breathe deeply, may keep the airway open during transport 
to the PACU. Only after the patient is calmly resting in 
the PACU does upper airway obstruction become evident. 
Even patients treated with intermediate- and short-acting 
neuromuscular blocking drugs may manifest residual 
paralysis in the PACU despite what was deemed clinically 
adequate pharmacologic reversal in the operating room.
The recovery from neuromuscular blockade and the 
assessment of residual blockade can be done by clini-
cal assessment and by using a nerve stimulator (also see 
Chapter 11). Measurement of the train-of-four (TOF) ratio 
is a subjective assessment that is often misleading when 
done by touch or observation alone. The use of quantita-
tive TOF measurement is the most reliable indicator of 
adequate reversal. Significant signs and symptoms of 
clinical weakness persist up to a ratio of 0.7, whereas 
pharyngeal function is not restored to normal until an 
adductor pollicis TOF ratio is greater than 0.9.
Qualitative TOF measurement and 5-second sustained 
tetanus at 50 Hz are insensitive and will not detect resid-
ual paralysis. In an awake patient clinical assessment of 
reversal of neuromuscular blockade is preferred to the 
application of painful TOF or tetanic stimulation. Clini-
cal evaluation includes grip strength, tongue protrusion, 
ability to lift the legs off the bed, and the ability to lift the 
head off the bed for a full 5 seconds. Of these maneuvers, 
the 5-second sustained head lift has been considered to 
be the standard, reflecting not only generalized motor 
strength but, more importantly, the patient's ability to 
maintain and protect the airway. However, studies have 
Box 39.2
Causes of Prolonged Neuromuscular Blockade 
(also see Chapter 11)
Factors Contributing to Prolonged Nondepolarizing 
Neuromuscular Blockade
Drugs
Inhaled anesthetic drugs
Local anesthetics (lidocaine)
Cardiac antiarrhythmics (procainamide)
Antibiotics (polymyxins, aminoglycosides, lincosamides, 
metronidazole, tetracyclines)
Corticosteroids
Calcium channel blockers
Dantrolene
Furosemide
Metabolic and physiologic states
Hypermagnesemia
Hypocalcemia
Hypothermia
Respiratory acidosis
Hepatic/renal failure
Myasthenia syndromes
Factors Contributing to Prolonged Depolarizing 
Neuromuscular Blockade
Excessive dose of succinylcholine
Reduced plasma cholinesterase activity
Decreased levels
Extremes of age (newborn, old age)
Disease states (hepatic disease, uremia, malnutrition, 
plasmapheresis)
Hormonal changes
Pregnancy
Contraceptives
Glucocorticoids
Inhibited activity
Irreversible (echothiophate)
Reversible (edrophonium, neostigmine, pyridostigmine)
Genetic variant (atypical plasma cholinesterase)
shown that the 5-second head lift is remarkably insensi-
tive and should not routinely be used to assess recovery 
from neuromuscular blockade. The ability to strongly 
oppose the incisor teeth against a tongue depressor is a 
more reliable indicator of pharyngeal muscle tone. This 
maneuver correlates with an average TOF ratio of 0.85.
When a PACU patient demonstrates signs and/or 
symptoms of muscular weakness in the form of res-
piratory distress and/or agitation, one must suspect that 
there could be residual neuromuscular blockade, and 
prompt review of possible etiologic factors is indicated 
(Box 39.2). Common factors include respiratory acidosis 
and hypothermia, alone or in combination. Upper airway 
obstruction as a result of the residual depressant effects 
of volatile anesthetics or opioids (or both) may result in 
progressive respiratory acidosis after the patient is admit-
ted to the PACU and external stimulation is minimized. 
Section V THE RECOVERY PERIOD
700
Simple measures such as warming the patient, airway 
support, and correction of electrolyte abnormalities can 
facilitate recovery from neuromuscular blockade.
A 2016 study of one institution's surgical database 
found that patients who had received neuromuscular 
blocking drugs but did not receive reversal agents had 
a 2.3 times greater risk of developing postoperative 
pneumonia compared with those who did receive rever-
sal agents.7 The introduction of sugammadex may have 
a major impact on residual paralysis in patients who 
received aminosteroid neuromuscular blocking drugs. 
Although reversal with neostigmine requires a baseline 
twitch response and the time until the patient has a TOF 
ratio of ≥0.9 is highly variable, sugammadex can be 
administered at any depth of neuromuscular blockade 
and most commonly produces full recovery (TOF ratio 
≥0.9) within several minutes after administration (also 
see Chapter 11). The increased availability and use of sug-
ammadex as an alternative to neostigmine will result in a 
decreased incidence of residual neuromuscular blockade 
in the PACU. Indeed, a 2020 study comparing sugam-
madex with neostigmine for neuromuscular blockade 
reversal confirmed that the risk of postoperative pneumo-
nia, respiratory failure, and other major complications is 
significantly lower with sugammadex.8
Laryngospasm
Laryngospasm refers to a sudden spasm of the vocal 
cords that completely occludes the laryngeal opening via 
forceful contractions of the laryngeal muscles. It typi-
cally occurs in the transitional period when the extubated 
patient is emerging from general anesthesia. Although 
laryngospasm is most likely to occur in the operating 
room at the time of extubation, patients who arrive in 
the PACU asleep after general anesthesia are also at risk 
for laryngospasm upon awakening, triggered by airway 
irritants such as secretions or blood. Treatment of laryn-
gospasm involves suctioning to remove the stimulus and 
applying a jaw thrust with CPAP (up to 40 cm H2O) to 
break the laryngospasm. However, if this fails, immedi-
ate skeletal muscle relaxation can be achieved with suc-
cinylcholine (0.1 to 1 mg/kg intravenously or 4 mg/kg 
intramuscularly [IM]). If laryngospasm persists, one should 
proceed with emergent intubation with a full dose of an 
induction agent and intubating dose of a muscle relaxant. 
Because of the risk of causing glottic injury, the anesthe-
sia provider should not attempt to forcibly pass an ETT 
through a glottis that is closed because of laryngospasm.
Airway Edema or Hematoma
Airway edema is a possible complication of prolonged 
procedures in the prone or Trendelenburg position, pro-
cedures involving the airway and neck (including thy-
roidectomy, carotid endarterectomy, and cervical spine 
procedures), and those with large-volume resuscitation. 
Although facial and scleral edema is an important physi-
cal sign that can alert the clinician to the presence of 
airway edema, visible external signs may not accompany 
significant edema of pharyngeal tissue. Patients who had 
a difficult intubation or repeated airway instrumentation 
may also have increased airway edema. If extubation is 
to be attempted in these patients in the PACU, evaluation 
of airway patency must precede removal of the ETT. This 
is commonly done with a leak test.9 The patient's ability 
to breathe around the ETT can be evaluated by suction-
ing the oral pharynx and deflating the ETT cuff. With 
occlusion of the proximal end of the ETT, the patient is 
then asked to breathe around the tube. Satisfactory air 
movement suggests that the patient's airway will remain 
patent after tracheal extubation. An alternative method 
measures the intrathoracic pressure required to produce a 
leak around the ETT with the cuff deflated. Lastly, when 
ventilating patients in the volume control mode, one can 
measure the exhaled tidal volume before and after cuff 
deflation. The presence of a cuff leak demonstrates the 
likelihood of successful extubation, but is not a guar-
antee, just as a failed cuff leak does not rule out a suc-
cessful extubation. The cuff leak test should not take the 
place of sound clinical judgment when deciding to safely 
extubate the patient. If concern for airway compromise is 
significant, the patient can be extubated with a tracheal 
tube exchange catheter left in place as a conduit to rein-
troduce an ETT.
If airway edema is deemed significant enough to pre-
clude extubation, the following measures can facilitate 
resolution of edema: (1) sitting the patient upright to 
ensure venous drainage and reduce any component of 
dependent edema, (2) diuretic administration; and (3) IV 
dexamethasone to decrease airway swelling.
External airway compression is most often caused 
by hematomas after thyroid, parathyroid, or carotid 
surgeries. Patients may complain of pain and/or pres-
sure and dysphagia and can demonstrate signs of res-
piratory distress. Mask ventilation may not be possible 
in a patient with a large hematoma. An attempt can be 
made to decompress the airway by releasing the clips or 
sutures on the wound and evacuating the hematoma. If 
emergency tracheal intubation is required, then difficult 
airway equipment and surgical backup to perform an 
emergency tracheostomy are crucial; one should assume 
increased difficulty secondary to laryngeal and airway 
edema and possible tracheal deviation or compression. If 
the patient is able to spontaneously ventilate, then awake 
intubation is preferred because visualization of the vocal 
cords by direct laryngoscopy may not be possible.
Obstructive Sleep Apnea (also see Chapter 48)
Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is an often-overlooked 
cause of airway obstruction in the PACU, given that the 
V
Chapter 39 Postanesthesia Recovery
701
Box 39.3
Factors Contributing to Postoperative Arterial 
Hypoxemia by Mechanism of Hypoxemia
Right-to-Left Intrapulmonary Shunt or Ventilation-
Perfusion Mismatch
Atelectasis (with decreased functional residual capacity, e.g., 
postsurgical or from obesity)
Pulmonary edema (e.g., from fluid overload, postobstructive 
edema, transfusion-related lung injury, acute respiratory 
distress syndrome)
Aspiration of gastric contents
Pneumothorax
Pulmonary embolus (can also cause reduced cardiac output)
Alveolar Hypoventilation
Residual effects of anesthetics and/or neuromuscular blocking 
drugs
Venous Admixture
Reduced cardiac output
Congestive heart failure
Diffusion Hypoxia
From nitrous oxide administration (though unlikely if patient 
receiving supplemental oxygen)
Increased Oxygen Consumption
Shivering
Decreased Oxygen Delivery
Unrecognized disconnection of oxygen source
Empty oxygen tank
hypoxemic if significant hypoventilation occurs while 
breathing room air.
Arterial hypoxemia secondary to hypercapnia can be 
reversed by administering supplemental oxygen or by 
normalizing the patient's Paco2 by external stimulation to 
awaken the patient, pharmacologic reversal of opioid or 
benzodiazepine effect, or controlled mechanical ventilation.
vast majority of patients are undiagnosed at the time of 
surgery. Patients with OSA have more frequent cardiopul-
monary complications and need for intensive care unit 
(ICU) transfer.10
Patients with OSA are particularly prone to airway 
obstruction and should not be extubated until they are 
fully awake and following commands. Once in the PACU, 
a patient with OSA is exquisitely sensitive to opioids, 
and, when possible, continuous regional anesthesia and 
multimodal opioid-sparing analgesic (acetaminophen, 
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs [NSAIDs], dex-
medetomidine) techniques should be used11 (also see 
Chapter 40). Benzodiazepines can have a greater effect 
on pharyngeal muscle tone than opioids, and the use of 
benzodiazepines in the perioperative setting can signifi-
cantly contribute to airway obstruction in the PACU.
When caring for a patient with OSA, plans should 
be made preoperatively to provide CPAP in the imme-
diate postoperative period. Patients should be asked to 
bring their own CPAP machines with them on the day 
of surgery to enable the equipment to be set up before 
the patient's arrival in the PACU.12 13 Patients who do 
not routinely use CPAP at home or who do not have 
their machines with them may require additional atten-
tion from the respiratory therapist to ensure proper fit 
of the CPAP delivery device (mask or nasal airways) and 
to determine the amount of positive pressure needed to 
prevent upper airway obstruction. Patients with known 
or suspected OSA should have continuous pulse oximetry 
monitoring in the postoperative period.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS OF ARTERIAL 
HYPOXEMIA IN THE PACU (ALSO SEE 
CHAPTER 5)
Atelectasis and alveolar hypoventilation are the most com-
mon causes of transient postoperative arterial hypoxemia 
in the immediate postoperative period. Clinical correlation 
should guide the workup of a postoperative patient who 
remains persistently hypoxemic. Review of the patient's 
history, operative course, and clinical signs and symptoms 
will direct the workup to rule in possible causes (Box 39.3).
Alveolar Hypoventilation
Review of the alveolar gas equation demonstrates that 
hypoventilation alone is sufficient to cause hypoxemia 
in a patient breathing room air (Box 39.4). At sea level, 
a normocapnic patient breathing room air will have an 
alveolar oxygen pressure (PAo2) of 100 mm Hg. Thus a 
healthy patient without a significant alveolar-arterial 
gradient will have a Pao2 near 100 mm Hg. In the same 
patient an increase in Paco2 from 40 to 80 mm Hg (from 
alveolar hypoventilation) results in a PAo2 of 50 mm Hg. 
Hence, even a patient with normal lungs will become 
Box 39.4
Hypoventilation as a Cause of Arterial 
Hypoxemia
P
F
PB
PH
P
RQ
AO
IO
O
ACO
2
2
2
2




Paco2 = 40 mm Hg
P
mm Hg
AO2 






0 21 760
47
40
0 8
150
50
100
Paco2 = 80 mm Hg
P
mm Hg
AO2
0 21 760
47
80
0 8
150 100
50






(
)
FIO2, Fraction of inspired oxygen concentration; Pao2, alveolar oxygen 
pressure; PB, barometric pressure; PH2O, vapor pressure of water; RQ,
respiratory quotient.
Section V THE RECOVERY PERIOD
702
Decreased Alveolar Partial Pressure of Oxygen
Diffusion hypoxia refers to the rapid diffusion of nitrous 
oxide into alveoli at the end of a nitrous oxide anesthetic 
(also see Chapter 7). Nitrous oxide dilutes the alveolar gas 
and produces a transient decrease in Pao2 and Paco2. In a 
patient breathing room air the resulting decrease in Pao2
can produce arterial hypoxemia, whereas a decreased 
Paco2 can depress the respiratory drive. In the absence of 
supplemental oxygen administration diffusion hypoxia 
can persist for 5 to 10 minutes after discontinuation of 
a nitrous oxide anesthetic; therefore it may contribute 
to arterial hypoxemia in the initial minutes in the PACU.
Ventilation-Perfusion Mismatch and Shunt
Hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction refers to the attempt 
of normal lungs to optimally match ventilation and per-
fusion (also see Chapter 5). This response constricts ves-
sels in poorly ventilated regions of the lung and directs 
pulmonary blood flow to well-ventilated alveoli. In the 
PACU the residual effects of inhaled anesthetics and 
vasodilators, such as nitroprusside and dobutamine, will 
blunt hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction and contrib-
ute to arterial hypoxemia.
Unlike ventilation-perfusion mismatch, a true shunt 
will not respond to supplemental oxygen. Causes of post-
operative pulmonary shunt include atelectasis, pulmonary 
edema, gastric aspiration, pulmonary emboli, and pneu-
monia. Of these, atelectasis is probably the most common 
cause of pulmonary shunting in the immediate postopera-
tive period. Mobilization of the patient to the sitting posi-
tion, incentive spirometry, and positive airway pressure 
by facemask can be effective in treating atelectasis.
Increased Venous Admixture
Increased venous admixture typically refers to low 
cardiac output states. It is caused by the mixing of 
desaturated venous blood with oxygenated arterial blood. 
Normally, only 2% to 5% of cardiac output is shunted 
through the lungs, and this shunted blood with a normal 
mixed venous saturation has a minimal effect on Pao2. 
In low cardiac output states blood returns to the heart 
severely desaturated. Additionally, the shunt fraction 
increases significantly in conditions that impede alveolar 
oxygenation, such as pulmonary edema and atelectasis. 
Under these conditions, mixing of desaturated shunted 
blood with saturated arterialized blood decreases Pao2
Decreased Diffusion Capacity
A decreased diffusion capacity may reflect the pres-
ence of underlying lung disease such as emphysema, 
interstitial lung disease, pulmonary fibrosis, or primary 
pulmonary hypertension. In this regard the differential 
diagnosis of arterial hypoxemia in the PACU must include 
the contribution of any preexisting pulmonary condition.
PULMONARY EDEMA IN THE PACU
Pulmonary edema in the immediate postoperative period 
is often cardiogenic in nature, secondary to intravascu-
lar volume overload or congestive heart failure. Other 
causes of noncardiogenic pulmonary edema include 
postobstructive pulmonary edema (secondary to airway 
obstruction), sepsis with acute respiratory distress syn-
drome, or transfusion-related acute lung injury (TRALI) 
(also see Chapter 41).
Postobstructive Pulmonary Edema
Postobstructive pulmonary edema (also referred to as 
negative pressure pulmonary edema, NPPE) is a rare, but 
significant, consequence of laryngospasm (or, less com-
monly, other upper airway obstruction) that may follow 
extubation. The etiology of NPPE is multifactorial but 
is clearly correlated with the generation of exaggerated 
negative intrathoracic pressure during inspiration against 
a closed glottis. The resulting negative intrathoracic pres-
sure augments venous return, which in turn increases 
pulmonary hydrostatic pressures, promoting the move-
ment of fluid into the interstitial and alveolar spaces 
from the pulmonary capillaries. Patients who are mus-
cular are at increased risk of postobstructive pulmonary 
edema secondary to their ability to generate significant 
inspiratory force.
The resulting arterial hypoxemia develops quickly 
(usually within 90 minutes of the upper airway obstruc-
tion) and is accompanied by dyspnea, pink frothy 
sputum, and bilateral fluffy infiltrates on the chest radio-
graph. Treatment is generally supportive and includes 
supplemental oxygen, diuresis, and, in severe cases 
initiation of positive-pressure ventilation. These patients 
should be monitored for 2 to 12 hours postoperatively. 
When recognized and treated immediately, NPPE typi-
cally resolves within 12 to 48 hours; however, if diag-
nosis and therapy are delayed, mortality rates can reach 
40%. Although uncommon, pulmonary hemorrhage and 
hemoptysis have been observed.14
Transfusion-Related Acute Lung Injury
The differential diagnosis of pulmonary edema in the 
PACU should include TRALI in any patient who intraoper-
atively received blood products. TRALI usually manifests 
within 2 to 4 hours after the transfusion of plasma-con-
taining blood products, including packed red blood cells, 
whole blood, fresh frozen plasma, or platelets. TRALI 
occurs when recipient neutrophils become activated by 
donor plasma and then release inflammatory mediators, 
V
Chapter 39 Postanesthesia Recovery
703
which cause increased pulmonary vascular permeability 
resulting in pulmonary edema. Clinical manifestations 
include fever, pulmonary infiltrates on chest radiograph, 
cyanosis, and systemic hypotension. The sudden onset of 
hypoxemic respiratory failure can occur up to 6 hours 
after the conclusion of the transfusion, and TRALI may 
first present when the patient is in the PACU.15
Treatment is supportive and includes supplemental 
oxygen and diuresis. Approximately 80% of patients will 
recover within 48 to 96 hours.16 Mechanical ventilation 
may be needed to support hypoxemia and respiratory 
failure, and vasopressors may be required to treat refrac-
tory hypotension.
MONITORING AND TREATMENT OF 
HYPOXEMIA
Oxygen Supplementation
In the era of cost containment one could argue that the 
routine delivery of supplemental oxygen to all patients 
recovering from general anesthesia is a costly and 
unnecessary practice. The argument against the use of 
routine oxygen supplementation relies on the fact that 
continuous pulse oximetry, now a PACU standard, readily 
identifies those patients who will require oxygen therapy. 
Moreover, the majority of patients after general anesthe-
sia do not develop hypoxemia. However, a significant per-
centage of patients will become hypoxemic at some point 
during their PACU stay. Thus the safe practice of postan-
esthesia care without oxygen supplementation requires 
ideal conditions at all times—functioning oxygen delivery 
apparatus at every bedside and sufficient personnel for 
observation and immediate intervention. The degree of 
vigilance is likely unrealistic, and the risk of adverse out-
come to even a small number of patients is unwarranted.
Limitations of Pulse Oximetry
The ASA Standards for Postanesthesia Care require a 
quantitative method of assessing oxygenation such as 
pulse oximetry. However, pulse oximetry does not reflect 
the adequacy of ventilation, especially in patients receiv-
ing supplemental oxygen. When monitoring ventilation 
in the PACU, pulse oximetry is not a substitute for close 
observation by trained personnel.
Oxygen Delivery Systems (also see Chapter 41)
The degree of hypoxemia, the surgical procedure, and 
patient compliance determine the oxygen delivery system 
of choice in the PACU. Regardless of the delivery system, 
oxygen should be humidified in order to prevent the 
subsequent dehydration of the nasal and/or oral mucosa. 
Patients who have undergone head and neck surgery 
may not be candidates for facemask oxygen because of 
the risk of pressure necrosis on incision sites and micro-
vascular muscle flaps, whereas nasal packing prohibits 
the use of nasal cannulas after other procedures. Face 
tent oxygen or blow-by setups are viable alternatives in 
cases in which tight-fitting masks and straps are con-
traindicated.
The delivery of oxygen through a traditional nasal 
cannula with bubble humidifier is usually limited to a 
maximum flow of 6 L/min to minimize the discomfort 
and complications that result from inadequate humidifi-
cation. As a general rule, each liter per minute of oxygen 
flow through nasal cannula increases the Fio2 by 0.04, 
with 6 L/min delivering an Fio2 of approximately 0.44.
Simple facemasks are generally used in the postopera-
tive setting in patients who are breathing spontaneously 
yet require a higher oxygen concentration to maintain their 
oxygen saturation. Oxygen flow rates should be at least 
5 L/min in order to prevent rebreathing of exhaled CO2.
Maximum oxygen delivery to extubated patients 
traditionally required delivery by facemask through a 
nonrebreather system or high-flow nebulizer. However, 
these systems can be inefficient, and inadequate mask fit 
and/or high-minute ventilation requirements can result 
in significant entrainment of room air. Newer high-flow 
nasal cannula (HFNC) devices can comfortably deliver 
oxygen at 60 L/min, 37°C, and 99.9% relative humidity. 
The delivery of high-flow oxygen directly to the naso-
pharynx produces an Fio2 equal to that delivered by tra-
ditional mask devices. The efficacy of these devices may 
be enhanced by a CPAP effect resulting from the high gas 
flow.17 A 2017 metaanalysis evaluated the use of HFNC 
(or noninvasive ventilation) compared with conventional 
oxygen therapy in ICU or emergency department patients 
with hypoxemic respiratory failure. In this population 
HFNC reduced the need for intubation and mechanical 
ventilation compared with conventional oxygen therapy 
but was equivalent to noninvasive ventilation for pre-
venting these outcomes.18
Continuous Positive Airway Pressure
As discussed earlier, respiratory failure in the immediate 
postoperative period is often the result of transient and 
rapidly reversible conditions such as splinting from pain, 
diaphragmatic dysfunction, muscular weakness, and 
pharmacologically depressed respiratory drive. Readily 
reversible hypoxemia may be caused by hypoventilation, 
atelectasis, or volume overload. The application of CPAP 
can decrease hypoxemia resulting from atelectasis by 
recruiting alveoli and can reduce work of breathing.19
One surgical population at increased risk of postop-
erative pulmonary complications is patients undergo-
ing major abdominal surgery. A 2014 Cochrane review 
of postoperative CPAP in this setting provided very 
low-quality evidence that CPAP may reduce atelectasis, 
Section V THE RECOVERY PERIOD
704
pneumonia, and reintubation, with uncertain effects on 
hypoxemia, need for invasive ventilation, or mortality.20
Many patients with obesity undergoing gastric bypass 
surgery have OSA and would benefit significantly from 
postoperative CPAP therapy. Yet surgeons may be hesi-
tant to embrace this modality for fear that applying posi-
tive pressure to the airway would inflate the stomach and 
proximal intestine and result in anastomotic disruption.
Noninvasive Positive-Pressure Ventilation
Even with the application of CPAP in the PACU, a number 
of patients will require additional ventilatory support. 
Noninvasive positive-pressure ventilation (NIPPV) can 
be an effective alternative to endotracheal intubation in 
the ICU setting (also see Chapter 41). Although the use 
of NIPPV for patients with specific causes of acute or 
chronic respiratory failure is well established, its applica-
tion in the PACU is more limited.
Careful consideration of both patient and surgical 
factors must guide the decision to use noninvasive modes 
of ventilation in the PACU. Relative contraindications 
include hemodynamic instability or life-threatening 
arrhythmias, altered mental status, high risk of aspira-
tion, inability to use nasal or facial mask (e.g., for head 
and neck procedures), and refractory hypoxemia.21
NIPPV can be delivered by facemask using the pres-
sure support mode of a mechanical ventilator. Alter-
natively, the use of a biphasic positive airway pressure 
machine allows the delivery of positive pressure with 
nasal pillows, nasal mask, or facemask.
NIPPV should be considered postoperatively in patients 
with OSA, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), 
and cardiogenic pulmonary edema. In the immediate 
postoperative period using PPV or HFNC in patients with 
hypoxemia after extubation (or risk factors for worsening 
hypoxemia) may help prevent acute respiratory failure 
and the need for reintubation.22
HEMODYNAMIC INSTABILITY
Hemodynamic compromise in the PACU patient can 
manifest in a number of ways—systemic hypertension, 
hypotension, tachycardia, or bradycardia—alone or in 
combination. Hemodynamic instability in the PACU has 
a negative impact on long-term outcome. Interestingly, 
postoperative systemic hypertension and tachycardia are 
associated with an increased risk of unplanned critical 
care admission and a higher mortality than hypotension 
and bradycardia.
Systemic Hypertension
Patients with a history of essential hypertension are at 
greatest risk for significant systemic hypertension in the 
Box 39.5
Factors Leading to Postoperative Hypertension
Cardiovascular
Preoperative hypertension
Hypervolemia
Respiratory
Arterial hypoxemia
Hypercapnia
Neurologic
Pain
Emergence agitation
Shivering
Nausea/vomiting
Increased intracranial pressure
Increased sympathetic nervous system activity
Drug-related
Withdrawal from β-blocker, clonidine
Withdrawal from opioids, benzodiazepines
Alcohol withdrawal
Substance 
use 
(e.g., 
cocaine, 
methamphetamine, 
phencyclidine)
Gastrointestinal/genitourinary
Bowel distention
Urinary retention
PACU, especially if they did not take their morning anti-
hypertensive medications. Additional factors are listed in 
Box 39.5. The surgical procedures most commonly asso-
ciated with postoperative hypertension include carotid 
endarterectomy and intracranial procedures.
Systemic Hypotension
Postoperative hypotension can be attributed to the fol-
lowing mechanisms: (1) hypovolemic (decreased preload), 
(2) distributive (decreased systemic vascular resistance), 
(3) cardiogenic (intrinsic pump failure), and/or (4) extra-
cardiac/obstructive (Box 39.6). Prolonged hypotension of 
any cause can lead to shock, a state of circulatory fail-
ure characterized by cellular or tissue hypoxia and vital 
organ dysfunction (also see Chapter 41).
The underlying cause of hypotension and/or shock 
must be identified and treated. Fluids, blood products, 
and vasopressors can be used as needed to restore intra-
vascular volume and support organ perfusion while the 
patient is being assessed or undergoing a subsequent 
therapeutic procedure.
Hypovolemic Shock
Systemic hypotension in the PACU is often the result 
of decreased intravascular volume and preload and, as 
such, responds favorably to IV fluids. Common causes 
of decreased intravascular volume in the immediate 
postoperative period include ongoing third-space trans-
location or loss of fluid, inadequate intraoperative fluid 
V
Chapter 39 Postanesthesia Recovery
705
replacement, and loss of sympathetic nervous system 
tone as a result of neuraxial blockade.
Patients in hypovolemic shock often have typical 
clinical signs, including tachycardia, tachypnea, mottled 
skin, and decreased urine output.
Ongoing bleeding and hemorrhagic shock should be 
ruled out in patients who have undergone a surgical 
procedure in which significant blood loss was possible. 
Tachycardia may not be a reliable indicator of hypov-
olemia or anemia if the patient is taking β-blockers or 
calcium channel blockers. Regardless of the estimated 
intraoperative blood loss, if the patient is unstable, then 
point-of-care hemoglobin can be measured at the bedside 
to eliminate laboratory turnover time.
Distributive Shock
Iatrogenic sympathectomy secondary to regional or 
neuraxial anesthetic techniques is an important cause of 
hypotension in the perioperative period. A high sympa-
thetic block (to T4) will decrease vascular tone and block 
the cardioaccelerator fibers. If not treated promptly, the 
resulting bradycardia in the presence of severe hypoten-
sion can lead to cardiac arrest even in young healthy 
patients. Vasopressors, including phenylephrine and 
Box 39.6
Differential Diagnosis of Hypotension in the 
Postanesthesia Care Unit
Hypovolemic
Intravascular volume depletion
Persistent fluid losses
Ongoing third-space translocation of fluid
Bowel preparation
Gastrointestinal losses
Surgical bleeding
Increased capillary permeability
Distributive
Sepsis
Burns
Decreased vascular tone
Allergic reactions (anaphylactic)
Spinal shock (cord injury, iatrogenic high spinal)
Adrenal insufficiency
Cardiogenic
Myocardial ischemia or infarction
Cardiomyopathy
Valvular disease
Cardiac arrhythmias
Drug induced (β-blockers, calcium channel blockers, local 
anesthetic systemic toxicity)
Extracardiac/Obstructive
Pulmonary embolus
Pericardial disease
Cardiac tamponade
Tension pneumothorax
ephedrine, are pharmacologic treatments of hypotension 
caused by sympathetic nervous system blockade.
Patients who are critically ill may rely on increased 
sympathetic tone to maintain systemic blood pressure 
and heart rate. In these patients even minimal doses of 
inhaled anesthetics, opioids, or sedative-hypnotics can 
decrease sympathetic nervous system tone and produce 
significant systemic hypotension.
Allergic (anaphylactic) reactions may be the cause 
of hypotension in the PACU (also see Chapter 45). In 
addition to profound hypotension, patients experienc-
ing an allergic reaction often present with associated 
rash/hives, bronchospasm/wheezing, stridor, and facial 
edema. Patients should be treated immediately, with 
prompt removal of the offending agent, steroids, H1 
and H2 blockers, fluids, and vasopressors. Epinephrine is 
the drug of choice to treat hypotension secondary to an 
allergic reaction. Increased serum tryptase concentration 
can confirm the occurrence of an allergic reaction. How-
ever, the blood specimen for tryptase determination must 
be obtained within 30 to 120 minutes after the allergic 
reaction, and the results are not typically available for 
several days. Neuromuscular blocking drugs are the most 
common cause of anaphylactic reactions in the surgical 
setting, followed by natural rubber latex, antibiotics, and 
others.23
If sepsis is suspected as the cause of hypotension in 
the PACU, blood cultures should be obtained, and empiric 
antibiotic therapy initiated as soon as possible. Urinary 
tract manipulation and biliary tract procedures can result 
in a sudden onset of severe systemic hypotension sec-
ondary to sepsis. Although fluid resuscitation is the most 
important immediate intervention, vasopressor support is 
often required. Norepinephrine is the pressor of choice in 
septic patients (also see Chapter 41).
Cardiogenic Shock
Significant cardiogenic causes of postoperative hypoten-
sion include myocardial ischemia and infarction, cardio-
myopathy, and cardiac arrhythmias. Myocardial ischemia 
and cardiac arrhythmias are discussed separately in the 
next section of this chapter. The differential diagnosis 
of cardiogenic shock depends on the surgical procedure 
and the patient's preoperative cardiac risk and medi-
cal condition. To determine the cause of hypotension, 
central venous pressure monitoring, echocardiography, 
and, rarely, pulmonary artery catheter monitoring may 
be required. The mortality rate for those in cardiogenic 
shock is remarkably high, reaching up to 70%. Patients 
may require immediate postoperative placement of an 
intraaortic balloon pump (IABP), cardiac catheterization 
and stenting, echocardiography, or a surgical procedure 
for a mechanical/valvular abnormality.
The potential for local anesthetic toxicity must be 
considered when assessing perioperative hypotension. 
For example, a patient may have received local or 
Section V THE RECOVERY PERIOD
706
regional anesthetic at the end of surgery immediately 
before PACU transfer. Central nervous system signs 
(including tinnitus, confusion, altered mental status, and 
ultimately seizures) may not always precede cardiovascu-
lar collapse. Once recognized, supportive therapy should 
be immediately provided to support cardiovascular func-
tion. Twenty percent lipid emulsion therapy should be 
initiated—bolus 1.5 cc/kg IV over 2 to 3 minutes followed 
by a continuous rate of 0.25 cc/kg per minute. Repeated 
boluses can be given every 5 minutes if cardiovascular 
collapse continues24 (also see Chapter 10).
Extracardiac/Obstructive Shock
Impaired diastolic filling, which ultimately results in 
decreased preload, can lead to shock if not promptly 
recognized and treated. Inferior vena cava (IVC) com-
pression, tension pneumothorax, cardiac tamponade, 
constrictive pericarditis, and excessive positive end-
expiratory pressure (PEEP) can lead to diminished filling 
and compromised venous return. Intrathoracic tumor 
and tension pneumothorax typically present similarly 
to hypovolemic shock—tachycardia and hypotension, 
possibly with associated distended neck veins.
Patients may need to undergo emergent needle 
thoracostomy and chest tube placement for a tension 
pneumothorax, a pericardiocentesis for tamponade, or 
thrombolysis/embolectomy for a pulmonary embolism. 
Point-of-care ultrasound can be very helpful in both the 
diagnosis and management of these conditions (also see 
Chapter 21).
Myocardial Ischemia
Detection of myocardial ischemia in the PACU can be 
challenging because of the patient's inability to identify 
or communicate symptoms related to cardiac ischemia. 
In one study of patients over 45 years of age undergoing 
noncardiac surgery only 35% of patients with postopera-
tive myocardial infarction complained of typical chest 
pain.25 The ASA Practice Guidelines for Postanesthesia 
Care discuss routine pulse, blood pressure, and electro-
cardiographic monitoring during emergence and recov-
ery.2 Although there are certain categories of patients or 
procedures for whom routine electrocardiographic moni-
toring may not be necessary, there was agreement that 
these monitoring modalities can detect cardiovascular 
complications and reduce adverse outcomes.
Low-Risk Patients
ST-segment changes on the electrocardiogram (ECG) in 
the PACU should be interpreted in light of the patient's 
cardiac history and risk index. In low-risk patients (<45 
years of age, no known cardiac disease, only one risk 
factor), postoperative ST-segment changes on the ECG 
do not usually indicate myocardial ischemia. Relatively 
benign causes of ST-segment changes in these low-risk 
patients include anxiety, esophageal reflux, hyperven-
tilation, and hypokalemia. In general, low-risk patients 
require only routine PACU observation unless associated 
signs and symptoms warrant further clinical evaluation. 
A more aggressive evaluation is indicated if the changes 
are accompanied by cardiac rhythm disturbances, hemo-
dynamic instability, angina, or associated symptoms.
High-Risk Patients
In contrast to low-risk patients, ST-segment and T-wave 
changes on the ECG in high-risk patients can be signifi-
cant even in the absence of typical signs or symptoms 
of myocardial ischemia. In this patient population any 
ST-segment, T-wave, or rhythm changes that are com-
patible with myocardial ischemia should prompt further 
evaluation to rule out myocardial ischemia. Determina-
tion of serum troponin levels is indicated when myo-
cardial ischemia or infarction is suspected in the PACU. 
Once blood samples for measurement of troponin and a 
12-lead ECG are completed, arrangements must be made 
for the appropriate cardiology follow-up.
Even small increases of troponin in the postoperative 
period are associated with an increased short- and long-
term mortality rate, and there is currently no defined 
management strategy for these patients.26–29 As a result, 
current American Heart Association/American College 
of Cardiology (AHA/ACC) guidelines cite insufficient 
evidence regarding routine postoperative 12-lead ECG 
or troponin measurements in patients at high risk for 
perioperative myocardial ischemia but without ongoing 
signs or symptoms. These guidelines recommend against 
routine screening of an unselected patient population 
using troponin measurements.30
Cardiac Arrhythmias
Perioperative cardiac arrhythmias are frequently tran-
sient and multifactorial in cause. Box 39.7 lists several 
factors that may increase a patient's risk of arrhythmia. 
Appropriate diagnosis and treatment of these conditions 
are often necessary to restore baseline cardiac rhythm 
and maintain hemodynamic stability.
Tachyarrhythmias
Sinus tachycardia is the most common tachyarrhythmia 
in the PACU. Although all the causes in Box 39.7 may 
contribute to sinus tachycardia, the most common in the 
PACU include postoperative pain, agitation, hypoventila-
tion, hypovolemia, shivering, and stimulation of the ETT 
in an intubated patient.
The incidence of new postoperative atrial arrhythmias 
may be as high as 10% after major noncardiothoracic 
surgery. The incidence is even higher after cardiac and 
thoracic procedures when the cardiac arrhythmia is often 
attributed to atrial irritation. These new-onset atrial 
arrhythmias are not benign because they are associated 
V
Chapter 39 Postanesthesia Recovery
707
with a longer hospital stay and increased mortality 
rate.31
For a patient with new-onset atrial fibrillation, control 
of the ventricular response rate is the immediate goal. 
Hemodynamically unstable patients may require prompt 
electrical cardioversion, but most patients can be treated 
pharmacologically with an IV β-blocker or calcium 
channel blocker.32 Ventricular rate control with these 
drugs will often facilitate restoration of sinus rhythm 
in the postoperative patient whose arrhythmia may be 
catecholamine driven. If the goal of therapy is chemical 
cardioversion, an amiodarone infusion can be initiated 
in the PACU.
In the PACU setting premature ventricular contrac-
tions (PVCs) and ventricular bigeminy are common. PVCs 
often reflect increased sympathetic nervous system stim-
ulation, which may occur around tracheal extubation and 
with transient hypercapnia. True ventricular tachycardia 
generally reflects the presence of underlying cardiac 
disease. For patients with polymorphic ventricular tachy-
cardia from torsades de pointes, QT-interval prolongation 
on the ECG may be intrinsic or drug related (e.g., from 
amiodarone, procainamide, methadone, haloperidol, or 
droperidol).
Bradyarrhythmias
Bradycardia in the PACU is often iatrogenic. Drug-related 
causes include β-adrenergic blocker therapy, neostigmine 
Box 39.7
Factors Leading to Postoperative Cardiac 
Arrhythmias
Cardiovascular
Preoperative cardiac arrhythmias
Myocardial ischemia
Hypertension
Intravascular volume shifts
Respiratory
Hypoxemia
Hypercarbia (respiratory acidosis)
Neurologic
Pain
Agitation
Substance withdrawal
Metabolic
Hypothermia
Hyperthermia
Electrolyte abnormalities
Anemia
Medication-Related
Anticholinesterases
Anticholinergics
Vasopressors (especially catecholamines)
Digitalis intoxication
Box 39.8
Postoperative Renal Dysfunction
Prerenal
Hypovolemia (bleeding, sepsis, third-space fluid loss, 
inadequate volume resuscitation)
Hepatorenal syndrome
Low cardiac output
Renal vascular obstruction or disruption
Intraabdominal hypertension
Renal
Ischemia (acute tubular necrosis)
Radiographic contrast dyes
Rhabdomyolysis
Tumor lysis
Hemolysis
Postrenal
Surgical injury to the ureters
Obstruction of the ureters with clots or stones
Mechanical (urinary catheter obstruction or malposition)
reversal of neuromuscular blockade, opioid administra-
tion, and treatment with dexmedetomidine. Procedure- 
and patient-related causes include bowel distention, 
increased intracranial or intraocular pressure, and spinal 
anesthesia. A high spinal block of cardioaccelerator fib-
ers originating from T1 through T4 can produce severe 
bradycardia. The resulting sympathectomy, and possible 
intravascular volume depletion and associated decreased 
venous return, can result in sudden cardiac arrest, even 
in young healthy patients.
Treatment
The urgency of treatment of a cardiac arrhythmia 
depends on the physiologic consequences (principally 
systemic hypotension and myocardial ischemia). Tach-
yarrhythmia decreases diastolic and coronary perfusion 
time and increases myocardial oxygen consumption. Its 
impact depends on the patient's underlying cardiac func-
tion, and it is most harmful in patients with coronary 
artery disease. Bradycardia is more deleterious in patients 
with a fixed stroke volume, such as infants and patients 
with restrictive pericardial disease or cardiac tampon-
ade. The specific management of both bradyarrhythmias 
and tachyarrhythmias is described further in the AHA 
Guidelines Update for Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation 
and Emergency Cardiovascular Care 202032 (also see 
Chapter 45).
RENAL DYSFUNCTION
The differential diagnosis of postoperative renal dys-
function includes prerenal, intrarenal, and postrenal 
etiologies (Box 39.8). Frequently, the cause of renal insuf-
ficiency in the postoperative periods is multifactorial, 
Section V THE RECOVERY PERIOD
708
with an intraoperative insult exacerbating preexisting 
renal insufficiency.33 In the PACU diagnostic efforts 
should focus on the identification and treatment of 
readily reversible causes of oliguria (i.e., urine output 
less than 0.5 mL/kg/hr). For example, urinary catheter 
obstruction or dislodgment is easily remedied and often 
overlooked. When appropriate, one should confer with 
the surgical team regarding the details of the surgical 
procedure to rule out anatomic obstruction or disruption 
of the ureters, bladder, or urethra.
Patient-related factors play a role in the development 
of acute kidney injury (AKI) in the postoperative period. 
Comorbidities such as preexisting renal insufficiency, 
diabetes mellitus, hypertension, morbid obesity, male sex, 
and old age are a number of issues that should be con-
sidered when identifying if a patient is at an increased 
risk of perioperative renal dysfunction. In addition to 
nonmodifiable patient risk factors, the surgical proce-
dure itself comprises an independent risk factor in the 
development of perioperative renal dysfunction, with 
cardiac surgery, emergency surgery, and major surgery 
(vascular, transplant, thoracic) all serving to increase the 
probability.
A number of perioperative events may alter renal 
perfusion. Angiography can result in ischemic injury sec-
ondary to renal vasoconstriction and direct renal tubular 
injury from contrast agents. Perioperative volume deple-
tion can exacerbate acute tubular necrosis caused by sep-
sis. The surgical procedure itself can alter renal vascular 
patency, decreasing renal perfusion. Finally, increased 
intraabdominal pressure (IAP) can impair renal perfusion.
Judicious intraoperative fluid management is of utmost 
importance during the perioperative period (also see 
Chapter 24). Hemodynamics must be monitored to ensure 
that relative intravascular volume is sufficient to allow 
for adequate tissue perfusion. Crystalloid solutions are 
ubiquitous in the operating room and PACU. Balanced 
solutions (lactated Ringer's [LR], PlasmaLyte) may be 
superior to chloride-only-containing solutions (NaCl), as 
hyperchloremia is associated with the development of 
AKI. A 2018 study of critically ill adult patients rand-
omized to receive balanced crystalloid or saline revealed 
that saline had an increased risk of renal replacement 
therapy or persistent renal dysfunction compared with 
balanced solutions.34 In general, hydroxyethyl starch 
solutions (HES) should be avoided, as there are no clear 
benefits to their use.
The risk of developing postoperative AKI was increased 
when mean arterial pressure (MAP) <60 mm Hg for 
>20 minutes or MAP <55 mm Hg for >10 minutes.35 Vaso-
pressors may be needed as an adjunct to fluid therapy in 
hypotensive patients. To date, there is no evidence that one 
vasopressor is superior to the other. Although low-dose 
dopamine can increase urine output, there is no evidence 
that it is renoprotective, and it is not a recommended treat-
ment strategy for prevention or treatment of AKI.
Oliguria
Intravascular Volume Depletion
The most common cause of oliguria in the immediate 
postoperative period is intravascular volume depletion. 
If the patient also demonstrates signs of hypovolemia, a 
fluid challenge (500 to 1000 mL of crystalloid) is usually 
effective in restoring urine output. Patients with a history 
of hypertension may require higher MAPs to produce 
adequate urine output. Volume resuscitation to maximize 
renal perfusion is particularly important to prevent ongo-
ing ischemic injury and the development of acute tubular 
necrosis.
If a fluid challenge is contraindicated or oliguria per-
sists, assessment of intravascular fluid volume status and 
cardiac function is indicated to differentiate hypovolemia 
from sepsis and low cardiac output states. A fractional 
excretion of sodium <1% can be useful in suggesting 
prerenal etiology, assuming that diuretics have not been 
given. However, the diagnosis of prerenal azotemia will 
not differentiate hypovolemia, congestive heart failure, 
or hepatorenal syndrome. Further evaluation with central 
venous monitoring or echocardiography may facilitate 
the differential diagnosis.
Postoperative Urinary Retention
Ultrasonography can measure bladder volume and iden-
tify urinary retention in the PACU.36 Using this technique, 
urinary retention is generally defined as bladder volume 
greater than 600 mL in conjunction with an inability to 
void within 30 minutes. The strongest predictive factors 
are age older than 50 years and intraoperative fluid more 
than 750 mL. Bladder ultrasound is an efficient and accu-
rate method to identify patients at high risk of urinary 
retention. The ASA Practice Guidelines for Postanesthetic 
Care do not recommend a routine requirement for urina-
tion before PACU discharge, although this may be neces-
sary for selected ambulatory surgery patients.
Contrast Nephropathy
An increasing number of patients receive IV contrast for 
angiographic procedures for aortic, peripheral vascular, 
or cerebral vascular disease. In these patients contrast 
nephropathy should always be considered in the dif-
ferential diagnosis of postoperative renal dysfunction. 
Prompt diagnosis is crucial, as contrast nephropathy, in 
general, is one of the reversible causes of postoperative 
AKI. The creatinine tends to increase within 24 to 48 
hours after the administration of contrast media, typi-
cally returning to the patient's baseline within 1 week. 
Perioperative attention to adequate hydration is indicated 
in any patient who has received an IV contrast agent. 
Intravascular volume expansion with isotonic saline is 
the single most effective means of protection against 
contrast nephropathy.37 AKI prevention strategies such 
V
Chapter 39 Postanesthesia Recovery
709
as routine administration of acetylcysteine or alkalini-
zation of the urine with a sodium bicarbonate infusion 
have not definitively demonstrated benefit and are not 
recommended.37
Intraabdominal Hypertension
Intraabdominal hypertension (IAH) should be consid-
ered in any patient with oliguria and a tense abdomen 
after abdominal surgery. Elevated intraabdominal pres-
sure (IAP) can impede renal perfusion and lead to renal 
ischemia and postoperative renal dysfunction. Normal 
IAP in a patient who is not obese is approximately 5 mm 
Hg. IAH is defined as a sustained IAP greater than 12 
mm Hg, with abdominal compartment syndrome (ACS) 
defined as a sustained IAP greater than 20 mm Hg associ-
ated with new organ dysfunction/failure.38
Elevation of IAP impairs venous drainage from the 
kidney secondary to the increased vascular resistance 
that ensues when the renal vein is compressed. When 
IAPs reach 15 mm Hg, oliguria tends to develop, whereas 
anuria is not common until pressures reach approxi-
mately 30 mm Hg. Bladder pressure, an indirect assess-
ment of IAP, should be measured in patients in whom 
IAH is suspected, to ensure the initiation of prompt 
intervention to relieve the pressure and therefore restore 
renal perfusion.39
Medical management of increased IAP includes meas-
ures to improve abdominal wall compliance, evacuation 
of intraluminal gastrointestinal contents (e.g., nasogas-
tric decompression), and correction of positive fluid bal-
ance.38 For a patient with primary ACS, however, surgical 
decompression of the abdomen may be required.
Rhabdomyolysis
Rhabdomyolysis may complicate the postoperative course 
of patients who have suffered major crush or thermal 
injury. Patients may complain of myalgias, abdominal 
pain, nausea, and weakness. Myoglobinuria may be 
present, and creatine kinase (CK) levels are elevated. 
The incidence is also significantly increased in morbidly 
obese patients undergoing bariatric surgery. Risk factors 
include increased body mass index (BMI) and the length 
of the surgery. Patient history and the operative course 
should guide the decision to measure CK in the PACU. 
Early aggressive hydration to maintain urine output is 
the mainstay of treatment. Electrolyte abnormalities, 
including hyperkalemia, hyperphosphatemia, and hypoc-
alcemia, must be detected and corrected immediately. 
Loop diuretics can be administered if volume overload 
occurs. The infusion of mannitol to enhance the elimi-
nation of myoglobin casts from the renal tubules and 
bicarbonate to protect against renal tubular myoglobin 
toxicity is commonly practiced but may not provide 
further benefit.
POSTOPERATIVE HYPOTHERMIA AND 
SHIVERING
Postoperative hypothermia, defined as a core temperature 
<36°C, is a detrimental and unpleasant condition that can 
occur after general and neuraxial anesthesia. The ASA 
Practice Guidelines for Postanesthesia Care recommend that 
patient temperature be periodically assessed during emer-
gence and recovery and that normothermia should be a goal 
during this time.2 Mild to moderate hypothermia (33°C to 
35°C) inhibits platelet function, coagulation factor activity, 
and drug metabolism.40 Hypothermia may also exacerbate 
postoperative bleeding, prolong neuromuscular blockade, 
and delay awakening. Whereas these immediate conse-
quences are associated with a prolonged PACU stay, long-
term deleterious effects can include an increased incidence 
of myocardial ischemia and myocardial infarction and 
delayed wound healing. Postoperative shivering also often 
occurs after general and neuraxial anesthesia and can be 
uncomfortable for patients. The incidence of postoperative 
shivering may be as high as 66% after general anesthesia. 
Independent risk factors include young age, endoprosthetic 
(joint replacement) surgery, and core hypothermia.
Mechanism
Postoperative hypothermia occurs secondary to redis-
tribution and heat loss during surgery. Postoperative 
shivering is usually, but not always, associated with 
hypothermia. Although thermoregulatory mechanisms 
can explain shivering in the hypothermic patient, a 
number of different mechanisms have been proposed to 
explain shivering in normothermic patients. One pro-
posed mechanism is based on the observation that the 
brain and spinal cord do not recover simultaneously 
from general anesthesia. The more rapid recovery of 
spinal cord function is thought to result in uninhibited 
spinal reflexes manifested as clonic activity. This theory 
is supported by the fact that doxapram, a central nerv-
ous system stimulant, is somewhat effective in abolishing 
postoperative shivering.
Treatment
Patients who are hypothermic upon arrival in the PACU 
should be actively warmed using a forced air warmer 
or warm blankets to avoid both immediate and delayed 
complications of hypothermia. Accurate core body tem-
perature can be obtained at the tympanic membrane; 
however, this may be technically challenging—oral and 
axillary temperatures are usually close to core temperature 
and can be reasonably used for patients recovering from 
anesthesia.41 A number of opioids and α2-adrenergic ago-
nists have been shown to be effective in abolishing shiver-
ing once it has started. Of those, meperidine (12.5–25 mg 
IV) is the most commonly used agent in adults.
Section V THE RECOVERY PERIOD
710
POSTOPERATIVE NAUSEA AND VOMITING
Without prophylactic intervention, roughly one-third 
of patients who undergo inhalational anesthesia will 
develop postoperative nausea and vomiting (PONV) 
(range, 10%–80%).42 The consequences of PONV include 
delayed discharge from the PACU, unanticipated hospital 
admission, increased incidence of pulmonary aspiration, 
and significant postoperative discomfort. The ability to 
identify high-risk patients for prophylactic intervention 
can significantly improve the quality of patient care and 
satisfaction in the PACU. From a patient's perspective, 
PONV may be more uncomfortable than postoperative 
pain.
Prevention and Treatment
The likelihood of a patient experiencing PONV depends 
on several risk factors and increases with the num-
ber of those risk factors (Fig. 39.1). These factors can 
be divided into patient-related, anesthesia-related, and 
surgery-related risk factors. As for patient-related risk 
factors, female gender, nonsmoking status, history of 
PONV and/or motion sickness, the need for postoperative 
opioids, and young age (<50 years) have been identified 
Fig. 39.1 PONV risk factor summary. Intraoperative and 
postoperative risk factors of PONV in adults; the size of each 
segment is proportional to the odds ratios of PONV associated 
with each risk factor. PONV, Postoperative nausea and vomiting. 
(Figure reused with permission from the American Society for 
Enhanced Recovery.)
as independent risk factors.43 Anesthesia-related risk 
factors are the use of volatile anesthetics and nitrous 
oxide, in addition to the administration of higher doses 
of perioperative opioids and neostigmine for reversal of 
neuromuscular blockade. As for surgery-related risk fac-
tors, the length of surgery and certain surgical procedures 
(cholecystectomy, laparoscopy, gynecologic surgery) have 
been identified as significant contributing factors.
Prophylactic measures to prevent PONV include 
modification of anesthetic technique and pharma-
cologic intervention. Whenever feasible, a regional 
anesthesia technique should be used, the use of volatile 
anesthetics and nitrous oxide should be restricted, and 
measures to reduce the postoperative use of opioids 
(e.g., multimodal analgesia) should be used. As for 
pharmacologic interventions, multiple drugs are avail-
able for prophylaxis and treatment of PONV. Box 39.9
lists different recommended antiemetic medications 
commonly administered for both prophylaxis and treat-
ment of PONV, which should be chosen tailored to the 
individual patient.
An international panel of experts just published the 
Fourth Consensus Guidelines for the Management of 
Postoperative Nausea and Vomiting.42 These advocate 
a very liberal approach to prophylaxis and recommend 
giving two antiemetic agents to all patients with one 
or two risk factors and giving three to four antiemetic 
agents to all patients with more than two risk factors. If 
an adequate number and dose of antiemetic drugs given 
at the appropriate time are ineffective, simply giving 
more of the same class of drug in the PACU is unlikely to 
produce any significant benefit. It is not recommended to 
redose any medication of the same class within 6 hours 
after the initial dose. Therefore a drug from another class 
that has not previously been administered should be 
chosen for treatment of PONV in the PACU.
DELIRIUM
Postoperative delirium (POD) is defined as an acute and 
fluctuating alteration of mental state of reduced aware-
ness and disturbance of attention (also see Chapter 35). 
POD often starts in the recovery room but can occur up 
to 5 days after surgery. The incidence of POD depends on 
preoperative and intraoperative risk factors and is highly 
variable, with incidences between 4% and 75% reported 
in the literature. It is important to distinguish between 
the hyperactive and the hypoactive subtype of delirium, 
because the latter may easily go unnoticed and therefore 
untreated. Multiple studies across different surgical spe-
cialties in both elective and emergency cases have shown 
that POD is associated with worse surgical outcomes, 
increased hospital length of stay, functional decline, 
higher rates of institutionalization, higher mortality, and 
higher cost and resource utilization.44
V
Chapter 39 Postanesthesia Recovery
711
Risk Factors
POD has been linked to multiple risk factors. These 
are commonly distinguished between predisposing fac-
tors (inherent to the patient) and precipitating factors 
(triggering the onset of delirium)44 (Box 39.10). Major 
predisposing patient risk factors include age >65 years, 
cognitive impairment, severe illness or comorbidity bur-
den, hearing or vision impairment, and presence of infec-
tion. In the perioperative context the performed surgical 
procedure acts as a physiologic stressor, with the extent 
of surgery having a major impact on the likelihood of 
developing delirium. The highest-risk procedures include 
cardiac surgery, vascular surgery, and hip fracture 
surgery. Risk assessment is a shared clinical responsibil-
ity and should ideally be implemented in a perioperative 
clinical pathway.
Prophylaxis and Management
Patients at increased risk of POD should ideally be identi-
fied before entering the operating room by using a delir-
ium risk screening tool (e.g., the AWOL-S delirium risk 
stratification tool).45 Patients who screen as high risk for 
developing delirium should ideally be put on a delirium 
reduction pathway to decrease their likelihood of develop-
ing delirium in the postoperative phase. Such a pathway 
should include recommendations for the preoperative, 
intraoperative, and postoperative care of the patient. Once 
the patient is in the recovery room, any deliriogenic medi-
cations should be avoided (e.g., anticholinergics, sedative-
hypnotics, meperidine),46 unless the specific needs for 
any of these medications outweigh their potential risks 
(e.g., benzodiazepines for seizures or for benzodiazepine/
alcohol withdrawal). Simple measures, such as frequent 
reorientation, sensory enhancement (ensuring glasses, 
hearing aids, or listening amplifiers are available upon 
arrival in the PACU), pain control, cognitive stimulation, 
simple communication standards and approaches to pre-
vent the escalation of behaviors, and keeping the patients 
in their circadian rhythm can decrease the incidence of 
developing POD by 30% to 40%.47 Screening for delirium 
in the PACU should be performed before the patient leaves 
the unit (e.g., with the Nursing Delirium Screening Scale 
[NuDESC] or Confusion Assessment Method [CAM] score). 
If prevention has failed and the patient screens posi-
tive, prompt evaluation of possible precipitating factors 
should occur (see Box 39.10).44 Treatment of causative 
factors and symptoms has a major impact on reducing 
the duration of delirium and should therefore be initiated 
immediately. Generally, multicomponent nonpharmaco-
logic interventions described earlier should be used for 
all patients with delirium. Pharmacologic interventions 
should only be used in the lowest effective dose for 
patients with agitated delirium when other interventions 
have failed and the patients pose a substantial harm to 
themselves or others. The medication of choice is halop-
eridol starting at 0.5 to 1 mg IM/IV.
Emergence Agitation
Persistent POD should not be confused with emergence 
agitation, which is a transient confusional state that 
is associated with emergence from general anesthesia. 
Emergence agitation is common in children, with more 
than 30% experiencing agitation or delirium at some 
period during their PACU stay (also see Chapter 34). It 
usually occurs within the first 10 minutes of recovery 
but can have an onset later in children who are brought 
to the recovery room asleep. The peak age of emergence 
Box 39.9
Commonly Used Antiemetics, With 
Adult Doses
Anticholinergics
Scopolamine: transdermal patch, 1.5 mg
Apply to a hairless area behind the ear before surgery; 
remove 24 hours postoperatively
Antihistamines
Hydroxyzine: 12.5–25 mg IM
Phenothiazines
Promethazine: 6.25–12.5 mg IV/IM
Prochlorperazine: 2.5–10 mg IV/IM
Butyrophenones
Droperidol: 0.625–1.25 mg IV
See black box warning regarding torsades de pointes: 
monitor the ECG for prolongation of the QT interval for 
2–3 hs after administration—preoperative 12-lead ECG 
recommended
Haloperidol: 0.5 to <2 mg IM/IV
Use with caution if prolonged QT interval present in ECG
Nk-1 Receptor Antagonists
Aprepitant: 40 mg PO before induction of anesthesia
Casopitant: 150 mg PO before induction of anesthesia
Prokinetic
Metoclopramide: 10–20 mg IV
Minimal antiemetic properties, avoid in patients with any 
possibility of gastrointestinal obstruction
Serotonin Receptor Antagonists
Ondansetron: 4 mg IV 30 minutes before conclusion of 
surgery
Granisetron: 0.35–3 mg IV near the conclusion of surgery
Tropisetron: 2 mg IV near the conclusion of surgery
Ramosetron: 0.3 mg IV near the conclusion of surgery
Palonosetron: 0.075 mg IV with induction of anesthesia
Dolasetron: 12.5 mg IV 15–30 minutes before conclusion of 
surgery (no longer marketed in the United States because of 
risk of QTc prolongation and torsades de pointes)
Corticosteroids
Dexamethasone: 4–8 mg IV with induction of anesthesia
Methylprednisolone: 40 mg IV with induction of anesthesia
ECG, Electrocardiogram; IM, intramuscularly; IV, intravenously; PO, by 
mouth.
Section V THE RECOVERY PERIOD
712
agitation in children is between 2 and 4 years. Unlike 
delirium, emergence agitation typically resolves quickly 
and is followed by uneventful recovery. In contrast to 
children, the incidence of emergence agitation in adults 
is estimated to only be between 3% and 5%. In children 
emergence agitation is most frequently associated with 
rapid “wake up” from inhalational anesthesia. Other possi-
ble etiologic factors include intrinsic characteristics of the 
anesthetic, postoperative pain, type of surgery, age, pre-
operative anxiety, underlying temperament, and adjunct 
medications. Awareness of these contributors allows one 
to identify and treat children who are at increased risk.
DELAYED AWAKENING
Even after prolonged surgery and anesthesia, a response 
to stimulation should occur within 60 to 90 minutes. If 
emergence has not taken place by that time, there are 
multiple potential causes. Residual anesthetic drug effects 
are the most frequent cause of delayed emergence. The 
most common drugs to consider are benzodiazepines, 
opioids, and neuromuscular blocking drugs; however, 
after a very long anesthetic, propofol and volatile anes-
thetics can also cause a delay in emergence. Other causes 
of delayed emergence are listed in Box 39.11 48–51
Box 39.11
Causes of Delayed Emergence From General 
Anesthesia48 49
Residual anesthetic drug effects
Substance use (alcohol, others)
Central anticholinergic syndrome
Serotonin syndrome
Neurologic disorders
Cerebral hypoxia
Acute stroke (embolic, ischemic, hemorrhagic)
Seizures (with postictal state)
Elevated intracranial pressure
Metabolic disturbances
Hypothermia
Electrolyte imbalances (especially sodium disorders)
Hypoglycemia
Liver dysfunction (causing hepatic encephalopathy)
Treatment
For a patient in the PACU with delayed emergence, the 
initial management includes the following steps: (1) con-
firm airway, breathing, and circulatory status; (2) ensure 
that all anesthetic agents have been discontinued; (3) 
check core temperature and begin rewarming if neces-
sary; (4) perform a neurologic examination to detect 
focal findings; (5) evaluate for residual neuromuscular 
blockade and treat if required; (6) consider laboratory 
tests with rapid turnaround such as glucose (to rule out 
hypoglycemia) and arterial blood gas with electrolytes (to 
evaluate for hypercarbia, sodium disorders).48 49 The fol-
lowing reversal medications can be considered depending 
on clinical context: (1) naloxone 40 mcg every 2 minutes 
up to 200 mcg (for suspected residual opioid effect), (2) 
flumazenil 0.1 to 0.2 mg every 1 minute up to 1 mg (for 
suspected residual benzodiazepine effect), (3) physostig-
mine 1 to 4 mg (for suspected central anticholinergic 
syndrome). If there is concern for acute stroke, consider 
“code stroke” activation with a neurologist, which will 
require a stat brain computed tomography (CT). If the 
patient remains unresponsive despite these management 
steps, admission to the ICU for further neurologic moni-
toring and evaluation is indicated.
DISCHARGE CRITERIA
Although specific PACU discharge criteria may vary, 
certain general principles are universally applicable 
(Box 39.12). Patient mental status should be clear or at 
baseline level. Hemodynamic criteria are based on the 
patient's baseline hemodynamics without specific sys-
temic blood pressure and heart rate requirements. Dis-
charge criteria should be designed to minimize the risk 
of cardiorespiratory or central nervous system depression 
after leaving the PACU.2
Box 39.10
Risk Factors for Delirium
Predisposing (Baseline)
Cognitive impairment (e.g., dementia)
Age >65 years
Sensory impairment (vision, hearing)
Severe illness (e.g., requiring ICU admission)
Presence of infection
Poor functional status (e.g., frailty, limited mobility)
Alcohol abuse
Malnutrition
Precipitating
Medications or medication withdrawal: Psychotropic 
medications (antidepressants, antiepileptics, antipsychotics, 
benzodiazepines), 
anticholinergics, 
muscle 
relaxants, 
antihistamines, GI antispasmodics, opioid analgesics, 
antiarrhythmics, corticosteroids, more than six total 
medications, more than three new inpatient medications
Pain
Hypoxemia
Hypoglycemia
Electrolyte abnormalities
Malnutrition
Dehydration
Environmental change (e.g., ICU admission)
Sleep–wake cycle disturbances
Urinary catheter use
Restraint use
Infection
GI, Gastrointestinal; ICU, intensive care unit.
V
Chapter 39 Postanesthesia Recovery
713
POSTANESTHESIA SCORING SYSTEMS
To standardize and facilitate discharge from PACU, sev-
eral different scoring systems have been developed and 
updated over time. The most commonly used postanes-
thesia scoring system to monitor recovery from anes-
thesia is the Aldrete score, which was first described in 
1970. In its latest version it assigns a number of 0, 1, or 
2 to five variables: activity, respiration, circulation, con-
sciousness, and oxygen saturation (Table 39.1). Another 
system, the Postanesthesia Discharge Scoring System 
(PADS), was designed to determine when a patient can be 
discharged home after outpatient surgery (Table 39.2).52
Box 39.12
General Principles for Discharge From the 
Postanesthesia Care Unit
1. Patients should be observed until they are no longer at 
increased risk for cardiorespiratory depression.
2. Patients should be routinely required to have a responsible 
person accompany them home after outpatient surgery.
3. Requiring patients to urinate before discharge should 
not be part of a routine discharge protocol and may be 
necessary only in selected patients.
4. The demonstrated ability to drink and retain clear fluids 
should not be part of a routine discharge protocol but 
may be appropriate for selected patients.
5. A minimum mandatory stay in the unit should not be 
required.
Adapted from Practice guidelines for postanesthetic care. 
Anesthesiology. 2013;118:291–307.
Variable Evaluated
Score
Activity
Able to move four extremities on command
2
Able to move two extremities on command
1
Able to move no extremities on command
0
Breathing
Able to breathe deeply and cough freely
2
Dyspnea
1
Apnea
0
Circulation (systemic blood pressure)
Within 20% of the preanesthetic level
2
20%–49% of the preanesthetic level
1
≥50% of the preanesthetic level
0
Consciousness
Fully awake
2
Arousable
1
Not responding
0
Oxygen Saturation (pulse oximetry)
>92% while breathing room air
2
Needs supplemental oxygen to maintain saturation 
>90%
1
<90% even with supplemental oxygen
0
Table 39.1 Criteria for Determining Release From the 
Postanesthesia Care Unit: The Modified Aldrete 
Score
Adapted from Aldrete JA. The post anaesthesia recovery score 
revisited. J Clin Anesth. 1995;7:89–91.
Score ≥ 9 required for discharge.
Variable Evaluated
Scorea
Vital signs (stable and consistent with age and 
preanesthetic baseline)
Systemic blood pressure and heart rate within 
20% of the preanesthetic level
2
Systemic blood pressure and heart rate 20%–40% 
of the preanesthetic level
1
Systemic blood pressure and heart rate >40% of 
the preanesthetic level
0
Activity Level
Steady gait without dizziness or meets the 
preanesthetic level
2
Requires assistance
1
Unable to ambulate
0
Nausea and Vomiting
None to minimal
2
Moderate
1
Severe (continues after repeated treatment)
0
Pain (minimal to no pain, controllable withoral 
analgesics)
Yes
2
No
1
Surgical Bleeding (consistent with that expected 
for the surgical procedure)
Minimal (does not require dressing change)
2
Moderate (up to two dressing changes required)
1
Severe (more than three dressing changes 
required)
0
Table 39.2 Criteria for Determination of Discharge Score 
for Release Home to a Responsible Adult: The 
Postanesthesia Discharge Scoring System 
(PADS)
aPatients achieving a score of at least 9 are ready for discharge.
Modified from Marshall SI, Chung F. Discharge criteria and 
complications after ambulatory surgery. Anesth Analg. 1999;88:508–
517.
Section V THE RECOVERY PERIOD
714
REFERENCES
1. American Society of Anesthesiolo-
gists; Standards for Postanesthesia Care, 
Approved by the ASA House of Dele-
gates on Oct. 27, 2004 and last amended 
on Oct. 23, 2019. https://www.asahq.
org/standards-and-guidelines/stand-
ards-for-postanesthesia-care. Accessed 
February 4, 2021.
2. Apfelbaum JL, Silverstein JH, Chung FF, 
etal. American Society of Anesthesiolo-
gists Task Force on Postanesthetic Care. 
Practice guidelines for postanesthetic 
care: An updated report by the American 
Society of Anesthesiologists Task Force 
on Postanesthetic Care. Anesthesiology. 
2013;118(2):291–307.
3. Hines R, etal. Complications occurring 
in the postanesthesia care unit: A survey. 
Anesth Analg. 1992;74(4):503–509.
4. Kluger MT, Bullock MF. Recovery room 
incidents: A review of 419 reports from 
the Anaesthetic Incident Monitor-
ing Study (AIMS). Anaesthesia. 2002;
57(11):1060–1066.
5. Brull SJ, Kopman AF. Current status of 
neuromuscular reversal and monitoring: 
Challenges and opportunities. Anesthe-
siology. 2017;126(1):173–190.
6. Fortier LP, McKeen D, Turner K, etal. 
The RECITE Study: A Canadian pro-
spective, multicenter study of the 
incidence and severity of residual neu-
romuscular blockade. Anesth Analg. 
2015;121(2):366–372.
7. Bulka CM, Terekhov MA, Martin BJ, 
etal. Nondepolarizing neuromuscular 
blocking agents, reversal, and risk of 
postoperative pneumonia. Anesthesiol-
ogy. 2016;125(4):647–655.
8. Kheterpal S, Vaughn MT, Dubovoy TZ, 
etal. Sugammadex versus neostigmine 
for reversal of neuromuscular block-
ade and postoperative pulmonary com-
plications (STRONGER): A multicenter 
matched cohort analysis. Anesthesiol-
ogy. 2020;132(6):1371–1381.
9. Kuriyama A, Jackson JL, Kamei J. Per-
formance of the cuff leak test in adults 
in predicting post-extubation airway 
complications: A systematic review and 
meta-analysis. Crit Care. 2020;24:640.
10. Abdelsattar ZM, Hendren S, Wong SL, 
Campbell Jr DA, Ramachandran SK. The 
impact of untreated obstructive sleep 
apnea on cardiopulmonary complications 
in general and vascular surgery: A cohort 
study. Sleep. 2015;38(8):1205–1210.
11. Lam KA, Kunder S, Wong J, Doufas A, 
Chung F. Obstructive sleep apnea, pain, 
and opioids. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol. 
2016;29:134–140.
12. Chung F, Memtsoudis SG, Ramachan-
dran SK, Nagappa M, Opperer M, Cozo-
wicz C, etal. Society of Anesthesia and 
Sleep Medicine guidelines on preopera-
tive screening and assessment of adult 
patients with obstructive sleep apnea. 
Anesth Analg. 2016;123:452–473.
13. Nagappa M, Mokhlesi B, Wong J, Wong 
D, Kaw R, Chung F. The effects of 
continuous positive airway pressure on 
postoperative outcomes in obstructive 
sleep apnea patients undergoing surgery. 
Anesth Analg. 2015;120:1013–1023.
14. Bhattacharya M, Kallet RH, Ware LB, 
Matthay MA. Negative-pressure pulmo-
nary edema. Chest. 2016;150(4):927–
933.
15. Semple JW, Rebetz J, Kapur R. Transfu-
sion-associated circulatory overload and 
transfusion-related acute lung injury. 
Blood. 2019;133(17):1840–1853.
16. Vlaar AP, Toy P, Fung M, Looney MR, 
Juffermans NP, Bux J, etal. A consensus 
redefinition of transfusion-related acute 
lung injury. Transfusion. 2019;59:2465–
2476.
17. Chaudhuri D, Granton D, Wang DX, 
Burns KEA, Helviz Y, Einav S, etal. 
High-flow nasal cannula in the imme-
diate postoperative period: A system-
atic review and meta-analysis. Chest. 
2020;158(5):1934–1946.
18. Zhao, etal. High-flow nasal cannula 
oxygen therapy is superior to con-
ventional oxygen therapy but not to 
noninvasive mechanical ventilation on 
intubation rate: A systematic review 
and 
meta-analysis. 
Critical 
Care. 
2017;21:184.
19. Chung F, Nagappa M, Singh M. Mokhlesi 
CPAP in the perioperative setting. Chest. 
2016;149:586–597.
20. Ireland CJ, Chapman TM, Mathew SF, 
Herbison GP, Zacharias M. Continuous 
positive airway pressure (CPAP) during 
the postoperative period for preven-
tion of postoperative morbidity and 
mortality following major abdominal 
surgery. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2014;2014(8):CD008930.
21. Jaber S, Chanques G, Jung B, Riou B. 
Postoperative noninvasive ventilation. 
Anesthesiology. 2010;112:453–461.
22. Stéphan F, Barrucand B, Petit P, Rézai-
guia-Delclaux S, Médard A, Delannoy 
B, etal. High-flow nasal oxygen vs 
noninvasive positive airway pressure in 
hypoxemic patients after cardiothoracic 
surgery: A randomized clinical trial. 
JAMA. 2015;313(23):2331–2339.
23. Hepner DL, Castells MC. Anaphylaxis 
during the perioperative period. Anesth 
Analg. 2003;97(5):1381–1395.
24. Neal JM, Barrington MJ, Fettiplace 
MR, etal. The Third American Soci-
ety of Regional Anesthesia and Pain 
Medicine Practice Advisory on Local 
Anesthetic Systemic Toxicity: Executive 
summary 2017. Reg Anesth Pain Med. 
2018;43:113–123.
25. Hepner DL, Castells MC. Anaphylaxis 
during the perioperative period. Anesth 
Analg. 2003;97(5):1381–1395.
26. Devereaux PJ, Xavier D, Pogue J, etal. 
Characteristics and short-term prognosis 
of perioperative myocardial infarction 
in patients undergoing noncardiac sur-
gery: A cohort study. Ann Intern Med. 
2011;154(8):523–528.
27. Beaulieu RJ, Sutzko DC, Albright J, 
Jeruzal E, Osborne NH, Henke PK. Asso-
ciation of high mortality with post-
operative myocardial infarction after 
major vascular surgery despite use of 
evidence-based therapies. JAMA Surg. 
2020;155(2):131–137.
28. Verbree-Willemsen L, Grobben RB, van 
Waes JA, etal. Causes and prevention of 
postoperative myocardial injury. Eur J 
Prev Cardiol. 2019;26(1):59–67.
29. Vascular Events In Noncardiac Surgery 
Patients Cohort Evaluation (VISION) 
Study InvestigatorsDevereaux PJ, Chan 
MT, Alonso-Coelho P, etal. Association 
between postoperative troponin levels 
and 30-day mortality among patients 
undergoing noncardiac surgery. JAMA. 
2012;307(21):2295–2304.
30. Botto F, Alonso-Coello P, Chan MT, 
etal. Myocardial injury after noncardiac 
surgery: A large, international, prospec-
tive cohort study establishing diagnos-
tic criteria, characteristics, predictors, 
and 30-day outcomes. Anesthesiology. 
2014;120(3):564–578.
31. Fleisher LA, Fleischmann KE, Auerbach 
AD, etal. 2014 ACC/AHA guideline on 
perioperative cardiovascular evaluation 
and management of patients undergoing 
noncardiac surgery: Executive summary: 
The ASA Standards for Postanesthesia Care require 
that a physician accept responsibility for the discharge 
of patients from the PACU.1 This is the case even 
when the decision to discharge the patient is made 
at the bedside by the PACU nurse in accordance with 
hospital-sanctioned discharge criteria or scoring systems. 
If discharge criteria are to be used, they must first be 
approved by the department of anesthesia and the hospi-
tal medical staff.53 A responsible physician's name must 
be noted on the record.
V
Chapter 39 Postanesthesia Recovery
715
A report of the American College of 
Cardiology/American Heart Association 
Task Force on Practice Guidelines. Cir-
culation. 2014;130(24):2215–2245.
32. Bhave PD, Goldman LE, Vittinghoff E, 
etal. Incidence, predictors, and out-
comes associated with postoperative 
atrial fibrillation after major noncardiac 
surgery. Am Heart J. 2012;164(6):918–
924.
33. Panchal AR, Bartos JA, Cabañas JG, 
etal. Part 3: Adult Basic and Advanced 
Life Support: 2020 American Heart 
Association Guidelines for Cardiopul-
monary Resuscitation and Emergen-
cy Cardiovascular Care. Circulation. 
2020;142:S366–S468.
34. Bhave PD, Goldman LE, Vittinghoff E, 
etal. Incidence, predictors, and out-
comes associated with postoperative 
atrial fibrillation after major noncardiac 
surgery. Am Heart J. 2012;164(6):918–
924.
35. Baldini G, Bagry H, Aprikian A, Carli F, 
Warner DS, Warner MA. Postoperative 
urinary retention: Anesthetic and perio-
perative considerations. Anesthesiology. 
2009;110:1139–1157.
36. Semler MW, etal. Balanced crystalloids 
versus saline in critically ill adults. 
N Engl J Med. 2018;378(9):829–839.
37. Sun LY, Wijeysundera DN, Tait GA, 
Beattie WS. Association of intraop-
erative hypotension with acute kidney 
injury after elective noncardiac surgery. 
Anesthesiology. 2015;123:515–523.
38. Kowalik U, Plante MK. Urinary retention 
in surgical patients. Surg Clin North Am. 
2016;96(3):453–467.
39. Mehran R, Dangas GD, Weisbord SD. 
Contrast-associated acute kidney injury. 
N Engl J Med. 2019;380(22):2146–2155.
40. Kirkpatrick AW, Roberts DJ, De Waele J, 
Jaeschke R, Malbrain ML, De Keulenaer, 
etal. Intra-abdominal hypertension and 
the abdominal compartment syndrome: 
Updated consensus definitions and clini-
cal practice guidelines from the World 
Society of the Abdominal Compart-
ment Syndrome. Intensive Care Med. 
2013;39(7):1190–1206.
41. Murphy PB, Parry NG, Sela N, Leslie K, 
Vogt K, Ball I. Intra-abdominal hyper-
tension is more common than previously 
thought: A prospective study in a mixed 
medical-surgical ICU. Crit Care Med. 
2018;46(6):958–964.
42. Sessler DI. Perioperative thermoregu-
lation and heat balance. Lancet. 
2016;387:2655–2664.
43. Sessler DI. Perioperative tempera-
ture 
monitoring. 
Anesthesiology. 
2021;134:111–118.
44. Gan TJ, Belani KG, Bergese S, etal. Fourth 
consensus guidelines for the manage-
ment of postoperative nausea and vomit-
ing. Anesth Analg. 2020;131(2):411–448.
45. Apfel CC, Philip BK, Cakmakkaya OS, 
Shilling A, Shi YY, Leslie JB, Allard 
M, Turan A, Windle P, Odom-Forren J, 
Hooper VD, Radke OC, Ruiz J, Kovac A. 
Who is at risk for postdischarge nausea 
and vomiting after ambulatory surgery?. 
Anesthesiology. 2012;117:475–486.
46. Mohanty S, Rosenthal RA, Russell MM, 
etal. Optimal perioperative management 
of the geriatric patient: A best practices 
guideline from the American College 
of Surgeons NSQIP and the American 
Geriatrics Society. J Am Coll Surg. 
2016;222(5):930–947.
47. Whitlock EL, Braehler MR, Kaplan JA, 
Finlayson E, Rogers SE, Douglas V, 
Donovan AL. Derivation, validation, sus-
tained performance, and clinical impact 
of an electronic medical record-based 
perioperative delirium risk stratification 
tool. Anesth Analg. 2020;131(6):1901–
1910.
48. By the 2019 American Geriatrics Soci-
ety Beers Criteria® Update Expert Pan-
el. American Geriatrics Society 2019 
Updated AGS Beers Criteria® for Poten-
tially Inappropriate Medication Use 
in Older Adults. J Am Geriatr Soc. 
2019;67(4):674–694.
49. The American Geriatrics Society Expert 
Panel. Postoperative delirium in older 
adults: Best practice statement from the 
American Geriatrics Society. J Am Coll 
Surg. 2015;220(2):136–148.
50. Tzabazis A, Miller C, Dobrow MF, 
Zheng K, Brock-Utne JG. Delayed emer-
gence after anesthesia. J Clin Anesth. 
2015;27(4):353–360. doi:10.1016/j.jcli-
nane.2015.03.023 Epub 2015 Apr 23. 
PMID: 25912729.
51. Misal US, Joshi SA, Shaikh MM. Delayed 
recovery from anesthesia: A postgradu-
ate educational review. Anesth Essays 
Res. 2016;10(2):164–172.
52. Aldrete JA. The post anaesthesia recov-
ery score revisited. J Clin Anesth. 
1995;7:89–91.
53. Marshall SI, Chang F. Discharge criteria 
and complications after ambulatory sur-
gery. Anesth Analg. 1999;88:508–517.
716
Chapter
Postoperative pain is a complex physiologic reaction 
to tissue injury. For many patients, the primary con-
cern about surgery is how much pain they will experi-
ence after the procedure. Similarly, postoperative pain 
management is an integral part of anesthesia care. 
Postoperative pain is directly related to patient satisfac-
tion, which has evolved into an important measure for 
high-quality health care. Postoperative pain produces 
acute adverse physiologic effects with manifestations in 
multiple organ systems, leading to significant morbidity 
(Box 40.1). Catecholamines released in response to pain 
may result in tachycardia and hypertension, which may 
induce myocardial ischemia in susceptible patients. Pain 
after upper abdominal or thoracic surgery often leads to 
hypoventilation from splinting. This promotes atelectasis, 
which impairs ventilation-to-perfusion relationships and 
increases the likelihood of arterial hypoxemia and pneu-
monia. Pain that limits postoperative ambulation com-
bined with a stress-induced hypercoagulable state may 
contribute to an increased incidence of deep vein throm-
bosis. In a 2015 observational study 54% of patients 
experienced moderate to extreme acute postoperative 
pain at the time of their discharge from the hospital.1
This represents an improvement in postoperative pain 
management as compared with an earlier study in which 
64% of patients had the same level of pain at hospital 
discharge.2 However, it is concerning that in the more 
recent study 46% reported a moderate to extreme level of 
postoperative pain 2 weeks after discharge.
Factors that positively correlate with increased postop-
erative pain include preoperative opioid intake, increased 
body mass index, anxiety, depression, pain intensity 
level, characteristics of fibromyalgia, and the duration 
of surgical operation.3 Factors that negatively correlate 
include increased patient age and the level of the sur-
geon’s operative experience. Despite these findings being 
replicated in numerous studies, the immediate postopera-
tive pain assessment may suffer from significant observer 
bias. In addition to the previous factors positively and 
COMMON TERMINOLOGY
In-Hospital (Inpatient) Pain Service
NEUROBIOLOGY OF PAIN
Nociception
Modulation of Nociception
Preventive Analgesia
Multimodal Approach to Perioperative Recovery
Opioid-Induced Hyperalgesia
Opioid-Sparing Versus Opioid-Free Techniques
ANALGESIC DELIVERY SYSTEMS
Patient-Controlled Analgesia
SYSTEMIC THERAPY
Oral Administration
Intravenous Administration
Subcutaneous Administration
Transmucosal Administration
Perioperative Management of Buprenorphine
NEURAXIAL ANALGESIA
Intrathecal Administration
Epidural Administration
Side Effects of Neuraxial Analgesic Drugs
Most Common Side Effects
Anticoagulants
Infection
SURGICAL SITE (INCISION) INFILTRATION
INTRAARTICULAR ADMINISTRATION
PARAVERTEBRAL BLOCKS
PERIPHERAL NERVE BLOCK
Techniques
Adjuvant Drugs
REGIONAL ANALGESIA
Catheter Versus Single-Shot Techniques
TRANSVERSUS ABDOMINIS PLANE BLOCK
PERIOPERATIVE PAIN 
MANAGEMENT
Heather A. Columbano, Robert W. Hurley, 
Meredith C.B. Adams
40
V
Chapter 40 Perioperative Pain Management
717
negatively associated with the postoperative pain, the 
factor that was most highly associated with the first 
postoperative pain score was which nurse was perform-
ing the assessment.4
A perioperative plan reflecting risk factors should be 
developed to decrease patients' postoperative pain.5-7 But 
other comorbidities may affect the design of the “ideal” 
postoperative pain plan. For example, despite having 
a lower predictive risk for postoperative pain, elderly 
patients can present with significant management chal-
lenges. Elderly patients are at higher risk for cognitive 
dysfunction in the perioperative period because of vari-
ous factors, including increased sensitivity to drugs and 
other medical comorbidities (also see Chapter 35). Patients 
taking opioids for chronic pain relief preoperatively have 
higher pain scores, higher opioid consumption, and lower 
pain thresholds in the immediate postoperative period.8 9
Perioperative management plans that incorporate these 
variables may favor the use of regional anesthesia 
because of the decreased mortality rate and infrequent 
incidence of postoperative cognitive dysfunction and 
pain. Preoperative regional analgesia may enhance pain 
control, decrease adverse cognitive effects, and improve 
postoperative recovery overall.10 Well-controlled pain 
Box 40.1
Adverse Physiologic Effects 
of Postoperative Pain
Pulmonary System
Atelectasis
Decreased lung volumes
Ventilation-to-perfusion mismatching
Arterial hypoxemia
Hypercapnia
Pneumonia
Cardiovascular System
Sympathetic nervous system stimulation
Systemic hypertension
Tachycardia
Myocardial ischemia
Cardiac dysrhythmias
Endocrine System
Hyperglycemia
Sodium and water retention
Protein catabolism
Immune System
Decreased immune function
Coagulation System
Increased platelet adhesiveness
Decreased fibrinolysis
Hypercoagulation
Deep vein thrombosis
Gastrointestinal System
Ileus
Genitourinary System
Urinary retention
postoperatively will enhance postoperative rehabilitation, 
which may improve short- and long-term recovery in 
addition to the quality of life after surgery.11
Beyond the perioperative period, postoperative pain 
may have long-term consequences as well. Poorly con-
trolled postoperative pain may be an important predictive 
factor for the development of chronic postsurgical pain 
(CPSP),12 defined as pain after a surgery lasting longer 
than the normal recuperative healing time. CPSP is a 
largely unrecognized problem that may occur in 10% to 
65% of postoperative patients, with 2% to 10% of these 
patients experiencing severe CPSP.13 Transition from acute 
to chronic pain occurs very quickly, and long-term behav-
ioral and neurobiologic changes occur much earlier than 
previously anticipated.14 CPSP is relatively common after 
surgical procedures such as limb amputation (30% to 83%), 
thoracotomy (22% to 67%), sternotomy (27%), breast sur-
gery (11% to 57%), and gallbladder surgery (up to 56%).15
Improved understanding of the epidemiology and 
pathophysiology of postoperative pain has increased the 
use of multimodal management of pain in an effort to 
improve patient comfort, decrease perioperative morbid-
ity, and reduce cost. Cost reduction is primarily achieved 
by shortening the time spent in postanesthesia care 
units (PACUs), intensive care units (ICUs), and hospi-
tals. Multimodal approaches involve the use of multiple 
mechanistically distinct medications with the application 
of peripheral nerve or neuraxial analgesia. The added 
complexity of a true multimodal approach to periop-
erative pain requires the formation of perioperative pain 
management services, most often directed by an anesthe-
siologist or pain medicine physician.
COMMON TERMINOLOGY
•Pain (nociception): Pain is described as an unpleasant 
sensory and emotional experience caused by actual or 
potential tissue damage or described in terms of such 
damage.16
•Acute pain: Acute pain follows injury to the body and 
generally recedes when the bodily injury heals. For 
instance, acute pain occurs during the time needed 
for inflammation to subside or for acute injuries, 
such as lacerations or incisions, to repair with the 
union of separated tissues. It is often, but not always, 
associated with objective physical signs of autonomic 
nervous system activity (e.g., increased heart rate).
•Chronic (persistent) pain: Chronic pain is pain that 
has persisted beyond the time of healing.16 The length 
of time is determined by the nature of the injury or 
surgical operation, but the pain is considered to be 
chronic (persistent) when it exceeds 3 months (or 
half the days in a 6-month period) in duration. Of 
note, CPSP is now a diagnosis in the International 
Classification of Diseases (ICD-11).17
Section V THE RECOVERY PERIOD
718
•Pain management: Pain management is the clinical 
practice of relieving acute, subacute, and chronic 
(persistent) pain through the implementation of 
psychological, physical therapeutic, pharmacologic, 
and interventional (procedural) methods. Physicians, 
advanced practice clinicians (nurse practitioners 
and physician assistants), physical therapists, and 
psychologists commonly participate in pain management 
in inpatient and outpatient settings.
In-Hospital (Inpatient) Pain Service
•Perioperative (acute) pain medicine service: The 
perioperative pain medicine service is a team of highly 
specialized members who practice acute pain medicine 
and regional analgesic interventions for the patient 
who is about to undergo surgery, undergoing surgery, 
and in the process of recovery from surgery and in 
trauma-induced pain. The role of the perioperative pain 
physician is to reduce the pain resulting from surgery and 
minimize the period of recuperation and to inhibit the 
development of chronic (persistent) pain through early 
intervention. A revival of the concept of a transitional 
pain service is meant to provide overlap for acute pain 
in patients with chronic pain (acute on chronic pain) as 
they transition to ambulatory (outpatient) care.18
•Chronic (persistent) pain medicine service: The chronic 
pain medicine service is a multidisciplinary team of 
providers who treat chronic (persistent pain) and cancer 
pain using diverse treatment modalities, including 
psychological interventions, analgesic medications, 
and regional analgesic and chronic pain procedural 
interventions. The patient population served includes 
the perioperative patient with preoperative chronic/
persistent pain issues, the inoperable patient with 
chronic/persistent pain issues, and patients who have 
not undergone surgery but have comorbid persistent 
pain. The role of the inpatient chronic pain physician 
is to attenuate the patient's pain, provide rationalized 
pain medication care, and transition the patient to 
outpatient pain care.
•Many institutions do not make the distinctions noted
earlier and treat all patients within the hospital with 
pain regardless of modality of treatment, etiology of 
pain, or duration of pain. These institutions may call 
the service an inpatient pain service, and it can be 
staffed by regional anesthesiologists, pain physicians, 
advanced practice clinicians, or a combination of 
these individuals.
NEUROBIOLOGY OF PAIN
Nociception
Nociception involves the recognition and transmis-
sion of painful stimuli. Stimuli generated from thermal, 
mechanical, or chemical tissue damage may activate 
nociceptors, which are free afferent nerve endings of 
myelinated Aδ and unmyelinated C fibers. These periph-
eral afferent nerve endings send axonal projections into 
the dorsal horn of the spinal cord, where they synapse 
with second-order afferent neurons. Axonal projections 
of second-order neurons cross to the contralateral side of 
the spinal cord and ascend as afferent sensory pathways 
(e.g., spinothalamic tract) to the level of the thalamus.19
Along the way, these neurons divide and send axonal 
projections to the reticular formation and periaqueductal 
gray matter. In the thalamus second-order neurons syn-
apse with third-order neurons, which send axonal projec-
tions into the sensory cortex.
Surgical incision produces tissue injury, with con-
sequent release of histamine and inflammatory media-
tors, such as peptides (e.g., bradykinin), lipids (e.g., 
prostaglandins), neurotransmitters (e.g., serotonin), and 
neurotrophins (e.g., nerve growth factor).20 The release 
of inflammatory mediators activates peripheral nocic-
eptors, which initiate transduction and transmission of 
nociceptive information to the central nervous system. 
Noxious stimuli are transduced by peripheral nociceptors 
and transmitted by Aδ and C nerve fibers from periph-
eral visceral and somatic sites to the dorsal horn of the 
spinal cord, where integration of peripheral nociceptive 
and descending inhibitory modulatory input (i.e., sero-
tonin, norepinephrine, γ-aminobutyric acid [GABA], and 
enkephalin) or descending facilitatory input (i.e., chol-
ecystokinin, excitatory amino acids, dynorphin) occurs. 
Further transmission of nociceptive information is deter-
mined by complex modulating influences in the spinal 
cord. Some impulses pass to the ventral and ventrolateral 
horns to initiate spinal reflex responses. These segmen-
tal responses may be associated with increased skeletal 
muscle tone, inhibition of phrenic nerve function, or 
even decreased gastrointestinal motility. Other signals are 
transmitted to higher centers through the spinothalamic 
and spinoreticular tracts, where they produce cortical 
responses to ultimately generate the perception of pain.
Modulation of Nociception
The question of how the disease of chronic pain develops 
from the symptom of acute pain remains unanswered. 
The traditional dichotomy between acute and chronic 
pain is somewhat arbitrary, as animal and clinical studies 
demonstrate that acute pain may become chronic pain. 
However, the duration of painful or noxious stimuli, type 
of stimuli, genetic or phenotypic makeup, or other possi-
ble factors leading to the transition from the symptom of 
acute pain to the disease of chronic pain remains unclear.
Noxious stimuli can produce expression of new genes 
(the basis for neuronal sensitization) in the dorsal horn of 
the spinal cord within 1 hour, and these changes are suf-
ficient to alter behavior within the same time frame.21,22
V
Chapter 40 Perioperative Pain Management
719
Additionally, the intensity of acute postoperative pain is 
a significant predictor of chronic postoperative pain.15
Continuous release of inflammatory mediators in the 
periphery sensitizes functional nociceptors and acti-
vates dormant nociceptors (Box 40.2).14 Sensitization of 
peripheral nociceptors results in a decreased threshold for 
activation, increased discharge rate with activation, and 
increased rate of spontaneous discharge. Intense nox-
ious input from the periphery may also produce central 
sensitization and hyperexcitability. Central sensitization 
is the development of “persistent post-injury changes 
in the central nervous system that result in pain hyper-
sensitivity.”23 Hyperexcitability is the “exaggerated and 
prolonged responsiveness of neurons to normal afferent 
input after tissue damage.”23 Noxious input can trigger 
the cascade that leads to functional changes in the dorsal 
horn of the spinal cord and other sequelae. Ultimately, 
these changes may later cause postoperative pain to be 
perceived as more painful than would otherwise have 
been experienced. The neural circuitry in the dorsal horn 
is extremely complex, and we are just at the beginning of 
understanding the specific role of the various neurotrans-
mitters and receptors in the process of nociception.20 22
Key receptors (e.g., N-methyl-D-aspartate [NMDA]) 
may play a significant role in the development of chronic 
pain after an acute injury. Neurotransmitters or second 
messenger effectors (e.g., substance P, protein kinase C-γ) 
may also play important roles in spinal cord sensitiza-
tion and chronic pain (Box 40.3).21 Our understanding 
of the neurobiology of nociception includes the dynamic 
integration and modulation of nociceptive transmission 
at several levels. Still, the specific roles of various recep-
tors, neurotransmitters, and molecular structures in the 
process of nociception are not fully understood.
Preventive Analgesia
The development of central or peripheral sensitization 
after traumatic injury or surgical incision can result in 
amplification of postoperative pain.3 Therefore prevent-
ing the establishment of altered central processing by 
analgesic treatment may, in the short term reduce post-
procedural or traumatic pain and accelerate recovery. In 
Box 40.2
Endogenous Mediators of Inflammation
Prostaglandins (PGE1 > PGE2)
Histamine
Bradykinin
Serotonin
Acetylcholine
Lactic acid
Hydrogen ions
Potassium ions
PGE1, PGE2, prostaglandins E1 and E2
Box 40.3
Examples of Pain-Modulating 
Neurotransmitters
Excitatory
Glutamate
Aspartate
Vasoactive intestinal polypeptide
Cholecystokinin
Gastrin-releasing peptide
Angiotensin
Substance P
Inhibitory
Enkephalins
Endorphins
Somatostatin
the long term the benefits may include a reduction in 
chronic pain and improvement in the patient's quality 
of recovery and life satisfaction. Although the concept 
of preventive analgesia in decreasing postinjury pain is 
valid, the findings of clinical trials are mixed.24–26
The precise definition of preventive analgesia is one of 
the major controversies in perioperative pain medicine, 
contributing to the confusion regarding its clinical rel-
evance. Preemptive analgesia can be defined as an anal-
gesic intervention initiated before the noxious stimulus 
develops in order to block peripheral and central pain 
transmission.27 Preventive analgesia can be functionally 
defined as an attempt to block pain transmission before 
the injury (incision), preventing the establishment of 
altered, and after the injury and throughout the recov-
ery period. Preventive analgesia has been examined in 
trials of Enhanced Recovery After Surgery (ERAS).28,29
Confining the definition of preemptive analgesia to 
only the immediate preoperative or early intraopera-
tive (incisional) period may not be clinically relevant 
or appropriate because the inflammatory response may 
last well into the postoperative period and continue to 
maintain peripheral sensitization. However, preventive 
analgesia is a clinically relevant phenomenon. Katz and 
McCartney12 described an analgesic benefit of preventive 
analgesia but no such benefit with the preemptive strat-
egy. Maximal clinical benefit is observed when there is 
complete blockade of noxious stimuli, with extension of 
this blockade into the postoperative period. Central sen-
sitization and persistent pain after surgical incision are 
predominantly maintained by the incoming barrage of 
sensitized peripheral pain fibers throughout the perioper-
ative period,30 which extend into the postsurgical recov-
ery period. By preventing central sensitization and its 
prolongation by peripheral input, preventive analgesia, 
along with intensive multimodal analgesic interventions, 
could, theoretically, reduce acute postprocedure pain/
hyperalgesia and therefore chronic pain after surgery.15
Section V THE RECOVERY PERIOD
720
Multimodal Approach to Perioperative 
Recovery
A multimodal approach to analgesia is a broad definition 
that may include a combination of interventional anal-
gesic techniques (epidural or peripheral nerve catheter or 
peripheral nerve block) and a combination of systemic 
pharmacologic therapies (nonsteroidal antiinflammatory 
drugs [NSAIDs], α-adrenergic agonists, NMDA receptor 
antagonists, membrane stabilizers, and opioid admin-
istration). Postprocedural or posttraumatic pain is best 
managed through this multimodal approach.31
The principles of a multimodal strategy include a 
sufficient improvement of the patient's pain to instill a 
sense of control over their pain, enable early mobiliza-
tion, allow early enteral nutrition, and attenuate the 
perioperative stress response. The secondary goal of this 
approach is to maximize the benefit (analgesia) while 
minimizing the risk (side effects of the medication being 
used). These goals are often achieved through regional 
anesthetic techniques and a combination of analge-
sic medications. In amenable pain conditions epidural 
anesthesia and analgesia is an integral part of the mul-
timodal strategy because of the superior analgesia and 
physiologic benefits conferred by epidural analgesia.32 A 
multimodal approach involving a combination of neu-
raxial analgesia and systemic analgesics during recovery 
from radical prostatectomy resulted in a reduction of 
opioid use, lower pain scores, and decreased length of 
stay.33 Patients undergoing major abdominal or thoracic 
procedures managed with a multimodal strategy have a 
reduction in hormonal and metabolic stress, preservation 
of total-body protein, shorter times to tracheal extuba-
tion, lower pain scores, earlier return of bowel function, 
and earlier achievement of criteria for discharge from the 
ICU.34 Integrating the most recent data and techniques 
for surgery, anesthesiology, and pain treatment, the mul-
timodal approach is an extension of clinical pathways 
or fast-track protocols by revamping traditional care 
programs into effective postoperative rehabilitation path-
ways.34 This approach may decrease perioperative mor-
bidity, decrease the length of hospital stay, and improve 
patient satisfaction without compromising safety. How-
ever, the widespread implementation of these programs 
requires multidisciplinary collaboration, changes in the 
traditional principles of postoperative care, additional 
resources, and expansion of the traditional acute pain 
service, all of which may be difficult in the current 
medical-economic climate.
Opioid-Induced Hyperalgesia
Short-term administration of opioids in the perioperative 
setting may lead to a paradoxical increase in the patient's 
pain severity and decrease in their pain tolerance.9
This has been demonstrated in humans who received 
intraoperative opioid infusion for operative analgesia and 
in human and animal experimental models.35 Although 
the clinical impact of opioid-induced hyperalgesia (OIH) 
has not been fully elucidated, the possibility of it contrib-
uting to acute postoperative pain should be considered. 
OIH has also been implicated as a risk for the develop-
ment of CPSP, and the pro-nociceptive process involves 
the activation of the NMDA receptor.35
Opioid-Sparing Versus Opioid-Free Techniques
The desire for improved postoperative analgesic out-
comes along with concern that short-term opioid use 
may lead to chronic opioid therapy in some patients in 
light of the opioid crisis has led to increasing interest 
in opioid-sparing and even opioid-free analgesic tech-
niques. A recent review of opioid-sparing versus opioid-
free approaches in the perioperative period concluded 
that although complete opioid sparing is possible in some 
contexts and procedures, there is no evidence that opioid-
free strategies have lasting benefits above and beyond 
opioid-sparing techniques.36 In fact, the risk of persistent 
postoperative opioid use was not found to differ between 
the opioid-sparing versus opioid-free approaches.37
Multimodal analgesic approaches can clearly reduce 
pain and opioid consumption in some settings. However, 
adjuvant medications are not free of undesirable effects 
or additional risks. For example, gabapentinoids, benzo-
diazepines, and “muscle relaxants” (e.g., baclofen) can 
produce additive or, in fact, potentiate opioid-induced 
respiratory depression. In a 2020 meta analysis of 281 
randomized controlled trials comparing gabapentinoids 
with controls no clinical difference in acute, subacute, 
or chronic pain was observed, and the adverse events 
of dizziness and visual disturbance were greater with 
gabapentinoid use.38
The need to tailor the perioperative analgesic plan 
specific to the needs of the individual patient is critical. A 
patient's comorbidities and preoperative pain medication 
regimen, in addition to the specific surgical procedure 
being performed, should be taken into account when 
formulating an analgesic plan. The goal is to develop 
multimodal analgesia regimens that provide long-lasting 
benefit with improved recovery trajectories while opti-
mizing drug selection to limit risks and side effects. 
Additional trials are needed to evaluate the short- and 
long-term benefits and risks of the perioperative use of 
opioid-sparing (and opioid-free) techniques.
ANALGESIC DELIVERY SYSTEMS
The traditional delivery systems for the management 
of perioperative pain include oral and parenteral on-
demand administration of analgesics. Based on consensus 
guidelines and/or hospital-driven protocols, continuous 
V
Chapter 40 Perioperative Pain Management
721
intravenous (IV) infusions of analgesics such as ketamine 
and lidocaine are increasingly being used.39 A patient-
controlled analgesia (PCA) mechanism can be delivered 
via oral, IV, subcutaneous (SC), epidural, and intrathecal 
routes and by peripheral nerve catheter (Tables 40.1 to 
40.3). This medication delivery technique is based on 
improved understanding of the neurophysiology of pain 
and the potential deleterious effects of postoperative pain. 
The formation of perioperative pain management ser-
vices, directed by anesthesiologists with expertise in the 
pharmacology of analgesics and regional analgesia, has 
facilitated the widespread application of these techniques 
and improved the care of the postoperative patient.
Patient-Controlled Analgesia
When compared with traditional methods of intermittent 
intramuscular (IM) or IV injections of opioids to man-
age perioperative pain, PCA provides better analgesia 
with more safety, less total drug use, less sedation, fewer 
nocturnal sleep disturbances, and more rapid return to 
physical activity.40 PCAs are designed to safely allow 
patient-administered analgesic medications. Upon acti-
vation of the delivery system, limits are placed on the 
number of doses per unit of time that will be admin-
istered to the patient. There is also a minimum time 
interval that must elapse between dose administrations 
(lockout interval). Also, a continuous background infu-
sion superimposed on patient-controlled boluses can be 
implemented. Most patients determine a level of pain 
that is acceptable, and their dosage requirements taper as 
they recover. Patient acceptance of PCA is high because 
it restores the patient's autonomy. Some institutions 
employ pulse oximetry monitoring to assess the respira-
tory depression associated with opioid administration. 
Although better than having no specific monitor at all, 
pulse oximetry may not capture the relationship between 
respiratory depression and opioid administration. The 
addition of supplemental oxygen lowers the detection 
sensitivity of pulse oximetry as a monitor for respiratory 
depression and renders this monitor ineffective (also see 
Chapter 20). Capnography and respiratory rate are more 
Agent
Route of 
Administration
Dose (mg)
Half-life (hr)
Onset (hr)
Analgesic 
Action (hr)
Peak Duration (hr)
Opioids and Opioid Derivatives
Morphine
Intravenous
2.5–15
2–3.5
0.25
0.125
2–3
Intramuscular
10–15
3
0.3
0.5–1.5
3–4
Oral
30–60
3
0.5–1
1–2
4
Codeine
Oral
15–60
4
0.25–1
0.5–2
3–4
Hydromorphone
Intravenous
0.2–1.0
2–3
0.2–0.25
0.25
2–3
Intramuscular
1–4
2–3
0.3–0.5
1
2–3
Oral
1–4
2–3
0.5–1
1
3–4
Fentanyl
Intravenous
20–50 (μg)
0.5–1
5–10 min
5 min
1–1.5
Transmucosal*
200–1600 (μg)
2–12
0.1–0.25
0.5–1
0.25–0.5
Transdermal
12.5–100 (μg)
20–27
12–24
20–72
72
Oxymorphone
Oral
5–10
3.3–4.5
0.5
1
2–6
Intravenous
0.5–1
3–5
0.15
0.25
3–6
Subcutaneous
1–1.5
3–5
0.15
0.25
3–6
Intramuscular
1–1.5
3–5
0.15
0.25
3–6
Hydrocodone
Oral
5–7.5
2–3
30
90
3–4
Oxycodone
Oral
5
3–5
0.5
1–2
4–6
Methadone
Oral
2.5–10
3–4
0.5–1
1.5–2
4–8
Other
Tramadol†
Oral
50–100
5–6
0.5–1
1–2
4–6
Table 40.1 Oral and Parenteral Analgesics for Treatment of Perioperative Pain
*Transmucosal fentanyl is most appropriately reserved for breakthrough malignant (cancer) pain.
†Not classified by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration as an opioid; however, tramadol possesses naloxone partial-reversal analgesia.
Section V THE RECOVERY PERIOD
722
specific monitors of respiratory depression. However, 
capnography is not readily available in all institutions 
and is not needed universally for patients receiving opi-
oid therapy. Capnography is best reserved for patients 
with substantial comorbidities that increase the risks 
associated with opioid therapy.
SYSTEMIC THERAPY
Oral Administration
Oral administration of analgesics is not optimal for 
the management of moderate to severe perioperative 
pain, primarily because of the nil per os (NPO) status of 
patients in the immediate postoperative period. Tradi-
tionally, postoperative patients are switched to oral anal-
gesics (aspirin, acetaminophen, COX-1/COX-2 inhibitors, 
opioids) when pain has diminished to the extent that the 
need for rapid adjustments of analgesia level is unlikely.
The increased complexity of outpatient surgical proce-
dures has introduced the need for perioperative analgesia 
plans that enable moderate to severe postoperative pain 
to be effectively treated in the outpatient setting. NSAIDs, 
although not effective when given alone preoperatively, 
are effective for acute postsurgical pain and CPSP when 
given as part of a preoperative polypharmacologic 
regimen. Preoperative administration of acetaminophen 
may improve acute postoperative pain but has not been 
shown to reduce CPSP. Amine reuptake inhibitors such 
as tricyclic antidepressants and serotonin-norepinephrine 
reuptake inhibitors (e.g., duloxetine) have received mixed 
evidence about their efficacy in acute postoperative pain 
or the prevention of CPSP. In a recent study of elec-
tive orthopedic surgery patients adding perioperative 
duloxetine 60 mg to a multimodal analgesia regimen 
significantly lowered total postoperative opioid con-
sumption and reduced pain without significant adverse 
effects.41 Preoperative and postoperative vitamin C has 
been found to reduce the incidence of complex regional 
Lockout Interval (min)
Drug Concentration
Size of Bolus*
Continuous Infusion
Agonists
Morphine (1 mg/mL)
Adult
0.5–2.5 mg
5–10
—
Pediatric
0.01–0.03 mg/kg (max, 
0.15 mg/kg/hr)
5–10
0.01–0.03 mg/kg/hr
Fentanyl (0.01 mg/mL)
Adult
10–20 μg
4–10
—
Pediatric
0.5–1 μg/kg (max, 4 μg/kg/hr)
5–10
0.5–1 mg/kg/hr
Hydromorphone (0.2 mg/mL)
Adult
0.05–0.25 mg
5–10
—
Pediatric
0.003–0.005 mg/kg (max, 
0.02 mg/kg/hr)
5–10
0.003–0.005 mg/kg/hr
Alfentanil (0.1 mg/mL)
0.1–0.2 mg
5–8
—
Methadone (1 mg/mL)
0.5–2.5 mg
8–20
—
Oxymorphone (0.25 mg/mL)
0.2–0.4 mg
8–10
—
Sufentanil (0.002 mg/mL)
2–5 μg
4–10
—
Agonist-Antagonists
Buprenorphine (0.03 mg/mL)
0.03–0.1 mg
8–20
—
Nalbuphine (1 mg/mL)
1–5 mg
5–15
—
Pentazocine (10 mg/mL)
5–30 mg
5–15
—
Table 40.2 Guidelines for Delivery Systems Used in Intravenous Patient-Controlled Analgesia
*All doses are for adult patients unless noted otherwise. Units vary across agents for size of the bolus (mg versus mg/kg vs. μg vs. μg/kg) and 
continuous infusion (mg/kg/hr versus mg/kg/hr). The anesthesia provider should proceed with titrated intravenous loading doses if necessary 
to establish initial analgesia. Individual patient requirements vary widely, with smaller doses typically given to elderly or critically ill patients. 
Continuous infusions are not initially recommended for opioid-naive adult patients.
Modified from Wu HE, Elkassabany, Wu.Miller Anesthesia 9th ed.
V
Chapter 40 Perioperative Pain Management
723
pain syndrome (CRPS) after orthopedic extremity surgery. 
A systematic review found moderate-level evidence sup-
porting the use of a 2-g preoperative dose of vitamin C 
as an adjunct for reducing postoperative morphine con-
sumption and high-level evidence supporting periopera-
tive vitamin C supplementation of 1 g per day for 50 days 
for CRPS I prevention.42
The use of gabapentinoids, which were heavily used in 
multimodal analgesia protocols, has since been challenged. 
The evidence of harm and risk has grown without signifi-
cant gains in benefit. Perioperative gabapentinoid use has 
been found to be associated with greater postoperative res-
piratory depression, noninvasive ventilation, and naloxone 
use.43 In fact, when gabapentinoids are combined with opi-
oids, the risk of respiratory depression is even greater than 
when opioids are administered alone. Thus the routine use 
of perioperative gabapentinoids for treatment of postoper-
ative pain is no longer supported.38 This change in practice 
highlights the need for further evidence-based studies of 
nonopioid analgesics in the perioperative setting.
Intravenous Administration
Intermittent IV administration of small doses of opioids 
(see Table 40.1 and Table 40.2) is commonly used to treat 
acute and severe pain in the PACU or ICU, where continu-
ous nursing surveillance and monitoring are available. 
With a small IV dose of an opioid, the time delay for 
analgesia and the variability in plasma concentrations 
characteristic of IM injections are minimized. Rapid 
redistribution of the opioid produces a shorter duration 
of analgesia after a single IV administration than after 
an IM injection.
Ketamine is traditionally recognized as an intraop-
erative anesthetic; however, it is also effective in small 
(subanesthetic or analgesic—up to 15 μg/kg/min) dose 
infusions for postoperative analgesia partly because 
of its direct analgesic properties through antagonism 
of the NMDA receptor. Ketamine also reduces the OIH 
associated with intraoperative opioid infusion.35 Patients 
receiving large doses of opioids may experience hyperal-
gesia, resulting in increased excitatory amino acid release 
in the spinal cord. Ketamine directly inhibits the actions 
of the excitatory amino acids and reverses OIH, leading 
to improved postoperative pain. A preoperative IV keta-
mine bolus dose of 0.5 mg/kg followed by an intraopera-
tive infusion of subanesthetic (4 to 5 μg/kg/min) keta-
mine reduces postoperative pain and CPSP. This indirect 
antihyperalgesic effect may occur through suppression 
of central sensitization.44 The benefit of subanesthetic 
dosing of ketamine also includes a decrease in postopera-
tive nausea or vomiting, with minimal adverse effects. 
Subanesthetic ketamine infusions do not cause halluci-
nations or cognitive impairment. The incidence of side 
effects, such as dizziness, itching, nausea, or vomiting, is 
comparable to that seen with opioids. Therefore, the use 
of perioperative ketamine in patients, especially at high 
risk for the development of CPSP, is warranted.29 39
Drug
Intrathecal or Subarachnoid 
Single Dose
Epidural Single Dose
Epidural Continuous 
Infusion
Opioid*
Fentanyl
5–25 μg
50–100 μg
25–100 μg/hr
Sufentanil
2–10 μg
10–50 μg
10–20 μg/hr
Alfentanil
—
0.5–1 mg
0.2 mg/hr
Morphine
0.1–0.3 mg
1–5 mg
0.1–1 mg/hr
Hydromorphone
—
0.5–1 mg
0.1–0.2 mg/hr
Extended-release morphine†
Not recommended
5–15 mg
Not recommended
Local Anesthetic†
Bupivacaine
5–15 mg
25–150 mg
1–25mg/hr
Ropivacaine
Not recommended
25–200 mg
6–20 mg/hr
Adjuvant Medications
Clonidine
Not recommended
100–900 μg
10–50 μg/hr
Table 40.3 Neuraxial Analgesics
*Doses are based on use of a neuraxial opioid alone. No continuous intrathecal or subarachnoid infusions are provided. Smaller doses may be 
effective when administered to the elderly or when injected in the cervical or thoracic region. Units vary across drugs for single dose (mg versus 
μg) and continuous infusion (mg/hr vs. μg/hr).
†Most commonly used in combination with an opioid, in which case the total dose of local anesthetic is reduced.
Modified from "Wu HE, Elkassabany, Wu. Miller Anesthesia 9th ed.
Section V THE RECOVERY PERIOD
724
Lidocaine, with its short half-life of 90 to 120 min-
utes, is the local anesthetic of choice for continuous IV 
infusions for both intraoperative anesthetic and post-
operative analgesia. However, caution must be used in 
patients with delayed elimination because of hepatic or 
renal insufficiency, which may cause drug accumulation 
and lead to local anesthetic toxicity. The reported ben-
efits of perioperative lidocaine infusions have included 
reductions in pain scores, nausea, ileus duration, opioid 
requirements, and length of hospital stay. Lidocaine's 
mechanism of action for postoperative analgesic benefits 
is not fully understood, but likely goes beyond its func-
tion as a sodium channel blocker, given its persistent 
effects for many hours or even days after termination of 
the infusion. Lidocaine is likely involved in inflamma-
tory signaling through the blockade of the priming of the 
polymorphonuclear granulocyte in addition to neuronal 
effects by blocking the excitatory responses of glycine in 
wide-dynamic-range neurons.45 Perioperative lidocaine 
infusions are commonly used in doses ranging from 1.5 
to 3mg/kg/hr or 40 μg/kg/min after an induction bolus 
of 1.0mg/kg intraoperatively. Postoperative infusions are 
commonly run at 0.5 to 1.0 mg/min. Current meta analy-
ses have shown that perioperative lidocaine infusions 
are likely beneficial, but also suggest that their clinical 
effectiveness differ based on the surgical procedure.45
Toxicity from perioperative lidocaine infusion in these 
dose ranges is rare but may present with symptoms of 
tinnitus, perioral numbness, and cardiac dysrhythmias.
Acetaminophen can be given IV in addition to orally 
and rectally. This has increased the ability to provide 
additional nonopioid analgesia to patients who are NPO 
but refuse rectal administration. Despite assumptions that 
IV preparations are more potent or effective, to date no 
clinical trial has demonstrated a difference in efficacy 
between oral and IV formulations.46 Although the formu-
lations differ in bioavailability and time to onset of anal-
gesia, IV dosing has not been associated with improved 
efficacy and is associated with increased cost.
Preoperative 
administration 
of 
dexamethasone 
decreases acute postoperative pain scores and decreases 
opioid consumption.47 There appears to be dose depend-
ence of this benefit with increased efficacy at doses >10 mg. 
Intraoperative administration of clonidine decreases post-
operative pain, but bradycardia and hypotension limit the 
benefits of its modest analgesic properties. Intraoperative 
magnesium administration is associated with reduction of 
postoperative pain or opioid requirements.48 The mecha-
nism of action is thought to be through the accentuation 
of blockade of the NMDA receptor.
Subcutaneous Administration
SC administration of select medications (e.g., hydromor-
phone) is highly efficacious and is a practical approach 
for providing analgesia in patients without IV access or 
those in need of long-term, home-based analgesic care. 
Hydromorphone exhibits the same pharmacokinetics 
whether it is administered subcutaneously or intrave-
nously. This route of administration is primarily used in 
palliative care populations.
Transmucosal Administration
Transmucosal delivery of analgesics, such as fentanyl, 
may serve as an alternative to the oral administration 
of NSAIDs and opioids, especially when a rapid onset 
of drug effect is desirable. However, these medications 
rarely have a role in the management of postoperative 
pain because IV, IM, SC, or PO delivery routes are suf-
ficient for the delivery of analgesic medications.
Perioperative Management of Buprenorphine
In light of the opioid epidemic, an increasing number 
of patients are receiving medication-assisted treatment 
for opioid use disorder (OUD). The U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA) has approved three medications 
for the treatment of opioid dependence: methadone, nal-
trexone, and buprenorphine. This section addresses the 
challenges in perioperative pain management of patients 
receiving buprenorphine for OUD and/or chronic pain. 
Patients taking buprenorphine-containing medications 
have similar challenges to the opioid-tolerant patient 
in the perioperative setting, but also present challenges 
related to the partial mu-opioid agonist pharmacodynam-
ics of buprenorphine. Although buprenorphine is a partial 
agonist, when given in conjunction with a full mu-opioid 
agonist, it functions as a pharmacologic antagonist (also 
see Chapter 9). Buprenorphine also possesses variable time 
to dissociation from the opioid receptor; therefore when 
used in combination with a full agonist (e.g., morphine, 
hydromorphone, oxycodone), its action as an antagonist 
may abate unpredictably. This can develop a dangerous 
situation in which previously appropriate dosages of one 
of the full agonists is now enough to result in respiratory 
depression or other dose-related adverse events.
Although it is ideal to discontinue buprenorphine 
3-5 days in advance of surgery in patients taking it for 
chronic pain treatment, it is often not feasible in many of 
our surgical settings in which patients are first seen by the 
anesthesia provider immediately before the operation. Dis-
continuing buprenorphine in a patient with OUD can precip-
itate withdrawal symptoms, and substitution of a full opioid 
agonist may provoke OUD relapse. In patients with OUD, 
presurgical planning is necessary to avoid major complica-
tions from resultant full agonist opioid therapy, including 
precipitating patient cravings and subsequent relapse.49 If 
a patient has not discontinued their buprenorphine therapy 
well in advance of surgery, they should receive their baseline 
buprenorphine via sublingual or transdermal routes.
Alternatively, and if necessary, the provider can con-
vert the patient's buprenorphine requirements to the IV 
V
Chapter 40 Perioperative Pain Management
725
equivalent dose of buprenorphine while the patient is in 
the immediate perioperative period. While the patient is 
maintained on a stable dosage of buprenorphine, addi-
tional full agonist opioids may be titrated to pain reduc-
tion. Alternatively, nonopioid adjuvants, including clo-
nidine, ketamine,50 51 lidocaine, or dexmedetomidine, can 
be used instead of opioids for the patient's postoperative 
pain. In patients with OUD Some authors suggest stop-
ping buprenorphine preoperatively and switching to a 
short-acting opioid or methadone to prevent withdrawal 
symptoms if the surgery is major and will generate severe 
pain. The choice of methadone is a reasonable one, as 
it is an effective full opioid agonist but also has a long 
half-life, thereby providing benefit for continuation of 
medication-assisted therapy.
Regardless of the approach, coordinated communica-
tion between the pain team, surgical service, and the 
primary buprenorphine prescriber should take place to 
make sure that the patient eventually goes back to their 
prescribed buprenorphine dose.50 Sometimes, the logis-
tics of this process can be difficult. Therefore more often 
than not, anesthesia providers opt to continue buprenor-
phine perioperatively and optimize all components of 
multimodal analgesia for postoperative pain manage-
ment. Regional anesthesia and local infiltration tech-
niques should be used whenever feasible in these patients 
(Table 40.4).51
NEURAXIAL ANALGESIA 
(ALSO SEE CHAPTER 17)
A variety of neuraxial (intrathecal and epidural) and 
peripheral regional analgesic techniques are employed 
for postoperative pain. In general, when compared with 
systemic opioids, neuraxial and peripheral regional anal-
gesia techniques can provide superior analgesia, espe-
cially when local anesthetics are applied; furthermore, 
these techniques may decrease morbidity and mortality 
rates.52 Clinical judgment is required when using these 
techniques in the presence of various anticoagulants (see 
later discussion). The benefits and risks of the analgesic 
techniques used for each patient must be weighed based 
on the patient's medical history, including preoperative 
opioid and nonopioid pain medication use in addition to 
the specific surgery being performed.
Preoperative Assessment
Intraoperative Plan
Postoperative Management
Hospital Discharge
- Past medical history, 
including chronic pain 
history
- Medications: to include 
buprenorphine dose and 
route
- Physical examination
- Timing of surgery (>3 
days consider holding 
buprenorphine)
- If cannot discontinue 
buprenorphine therapy well 
in advance of surgery, the 
patient should receive their 
baseline buprenorphine 
via sublingual or 
transdermal routes
- Buprenorphine prescribing 
provider
- Establish goals of care
- Continue buprenorphine 
therapy as needed based 
on the preoperative 
assessment and plan
- If necessary, convert the 
patient’s buprenorphine 
requirements to the 
intravenous equivalent of 
buprenorphine for increased 
post operative pain needs
- Multimodal analgesia 
strategies (regional, 
NSAIDs/acetaminophen, 
ketamine, lidocaine, PCA, 
etc.)
- Full opioid agonists with 
caution, as may require 
higher dose
- Continue buprenorphine 
therapy as needed based on 
the preoperative assessment 
and plan
- If necessary, convert the 
patient’s buprenorphine 
requirements to the 
intravenous equivalent of 
buprenorphine
- Multimodal analgesia 
strategies (regional, NSAIDs/
acetaminophen, ketamine, 
lidocaine, PCA, etc.)
- Full opioid agonists with 
caution, as may require 
higher dose
- Consider converting 
buprenorphine to methadone 
if able to prevent acute 
withdrawal
- Coordinated communication 
between the acute pain 
team, surgical service, and 
the primary buprenorphine 
prescriber
- Continue on preoperative 
buprenorphine dose
- Continue multimodal 
analgesia pain 
management
- Establish follow-up with 
pain team/buprenorphine 
prescribing provider
- Confirm strong social 
support in place for 
patient
- Provide written 
instructions for pain 
regimen and contact 
phone numbers
- Rediscuss goals of care
Table 40.4 Perioperative Management of Buprenorphine
Section V THE RECOVERY PERIOD
726
Intrathecal Administration
Intrathecal administration of an opioid can provide 
short-term to intermediate-length postoperative analge-
sia after a single injection. The intrathecal route offers 
the advantage of precise and reliable placement of low 
concentrations of the drug near its site of action. The 
onset of analgesic effects after intrathecal opioid admin-
istration is directly proportional to the lipid solubility of 
the drug. Duration of effect is longer with more hydro-
philic compounds. Morphine produces peak analgesic 
effects in 20 to 60 minutes and postoperative analgesia 
for 12 to 36 hours. Adding a small dose of fentanyl to 
the morphine-containing opioid solution may speed the 
onset of analgesic effect. For lower abdominal procedures 
performed with spinal anesthesia (e.g., cesarean section), 
morphine may be added to the local anesthetic solution 
to increase the duration of analgesia.
The primary disadvantage of an intrathecal opioid 
injection is the lack of flexibility inherent to a single-shot 
modality. Clinicians must either repeat the injection or 
consider other options when the analgesic effect of the 
initial dose diminishes. The practical aspects of leaving a 
catheter in the intrathecal space for either continuous or 
repeated intermittent opioid injections is controversial, 
especially in view of reports of cauda equina syndrome 
after continuous spinal anesthesia with hyperbaric local 
anesthetic solutions injected through a small-diameter 
catheter.
Epidural Administration
Continuous infusion of a local anesthetic through an 
epidural catheter is a common method of providing 
perioperative analgesia. Epidural infusion of local anes-
thetic alone may be used for postoperative analgesia 
and may be done to avoid opioid-related side effects. 
However, there is a significant failure rate (from regres-
sion of sensory block and inadequate analgesia) and 
relatively frequent incidence of motor block and hypo-
tension. Pain control is generally more effective with 
combined local anesthetic and opioid epidural infusion.
The benefit of opioid monotherapy (i.e., without local 
anesthetic) in epidural infusions is that they generally do 
not cause motor block or hypotension from sympathetic 
blockade. There are mechanistic differences between 
continuous epidural infusions of lipophilic (e.g., fentanyl, 
sufentanil) and hydrophilic (e.g., morphine, hydromor-
phone) opioids. The analgesic site of action (spinal vs. 
systemic) for continuous epidural infusions of lipophilic 
opioids is not clear, although several randomized clini-
cal trials suggest that it is systemic53 because there were 
no differences in plasma concentrations, side effects, or 
pain scores between those who received IV or epidural 
infusions of fentanyl. A continuous infusion rather than 
an intermittent bolus of epidural opioids may provide 
superior analgesia with fewer side effects. Hydrophilic 
opioid epidural infusions have a spinal mechanism of 
action.
The impact of epidural analgesia with local anesthetics 
is dependent on the total dose administered rather than 
the volume or concentration; therefore a higher-concen-
tration local anesthetic delivered in a small volume is 
functionally equivalent to that of a low concentration in 
a higher volume.
Clinical efficacy of epidural analgesia (local anesthetic 
with and without opioids) for abdominal surgeries has 
demonstrated superior pain relief in the initial postopera-
tive period, with fewer gastrointestinal-related side effects 
compared with systemic opioid therapy; however, there 
is an increased incidence of pruritus. Epidural analgesia is 
beneficial for major joint surgery of the lower extremity 
but has the associated disadvantages of neuraxial anal-
gesia. Thoracic epidural analgesia has been the mainstay 
of analgesia for thoracotomy, but paravertebral blockades 
may be just as effective with a more favorable side effect 
profile.54 One of the primary benefits of epidural analge-
sia for traumatic rib fractures is the decreased duration of 
mechanical ventilation when compared with using a local 
anesthetic alone (e.g., intercostal nerve block).
Side Effects of Neuraxial Analgesic Drugs
Many medication-related (opioid and local anesthetic) 
side effects can occur with postoperative epidural anal-
gesia. When side effects are suspected, the patient's 
overall clinical status should be evaluated so that serious 
comorbidities are not inappropriately attributed to epi-
dural analgesia. The differential diagnosis for a patient 
with neuraxial analgesia and hypotension should also 
include hypovolemia, bleeding, and a decreased cardiac 
output. Patients with respiratory depression should also 
be evaluated for acute stroke, pulmonary edema, and 
evolving sepsis. Standing orders and nursing protocols 
for analgesic regimens, neurologic monitoring, treatment 
of side effects, and physician notification about critical 
variables should be required for all patients receiving 
neuraxial and other types of postoperative analgesia.
Most Common Side Effects
The most frequent side effects of neuraxial analgesia are 
described in Box 40.4. Although respiratory depression 
and hypotension are the most life-threatening of the 
side effects, the others can be particularly troublesome 
to patients.
Anticoagulants
The concurrent use of anticoagulants with neuraxial 
anesthesia and analgesia has always been a controversial 
V
Chapter 40 Perioperative Pain Management
727
issue in anesthesia management. Traditionally, the inci-
dence of spinal hematoma is estimated at approximately 
1 in 150,000 for epidural block, with a less frequent inci-
dence of 1 in 220,000 for spinal blocks.55 Low-molecular-
weight heparin was used in Europe without significant 
problems before its introduction in North America. 
However, the incidence of spinal hematoma increased to 
as frequent as 1 in 40,800 for spinal anesthetics and 1 in 
6600 for epidural anesthetics (1 in 3100 for postoperative 
epidural analgesia) in the United States between 1993 
and 1998. The estimate of the more frequent incidence 
of spinal hematomas after epidural catheter removal is 
based in part on the FDA's MedWatch data, which sug-
gest that epidural catheter removal may be a traumatic 
event, although this is still a relatively controversial 
issue.
The different types and classes of anticoagulants vary 
in pharmacokinetic properties that affect the timing 
of neuraxial catheter or needle insertion and catheter 
removal. Despite a number of observational and retro-
spective studies investigating the incidence of spinal 
hematoma in the setting of various anticoagulants and 
neuraxial techniques, there is no definitive conclusion 
regarding the absolute safety of neuraxial anesthesia 
with anticoagulation.
Box 40.4
Most Common Side Effects of Neuraxial 
Analgesia for Perioperative Pain Management
•Urinary retention (10%–30%): Epidural administration of 
local anesthetics and/or opioids is associated with urinary 
retention.
•Nausea, vomiting, and pruritus (15%–18%): Pruritus 
is one of the most common side effects of epidural or 
intrathecal administration of opioids, with an incidence 
of approximately 60% compared with about 15%–18% 
for local epidural anesthetic administration or systemic 
opioids.
•Motor block (2%–3%): In most cases motor block resolves 
within 2 hr after discontinuing the epidural infusion. 
Persistent or increasing motor block should be promptly 
evaluated, and spinal hematoma, spinal abscess, and 
intrathecal catheter migration should be considered as 
part of the differential diagnosis.
•Hypotension (0.3%–7%): Local anesthetics used in an 
epidural analgesic regimen may block sympathetic fibers 
and contribute to postoperative hypotension.
•Respiratory depression (0.1%–0.9%): Neuraxial opioids 
administered in appropriate doses are not associated with 
a more frequent incidence of respiratory depression than 
that seen with systemic administration of opioids. Risk 
factors for respiratory depression with neuraxial opioids 
include larger dose, geriatric age group, concomitant 
administration of systemic opioids or sedatives, the 
possibility of prolonged or extensive surgery, the presence 
of comorbidities, and thoracic surgery.
The American Society of Regional Anesthesia and 
Pain Medicine (ASRA) lists a series of consensus 
statements, based on the available literature, for the 
administration (insertion and removal) of neuraxial 
techniques in the presence of various anticoagulants, 
including oral anticoagulants (warfarin), antiplatelet 
agents, fibrinolytics-thrombolytics, standard unfrac-
tionated heparin, and low-molecular-weight heparin. 
The ASRA consensus statements include the concepts 
that (1) the timing of neuraxial needle or catheter 
insertion or removal should reflect the pharmacoki-
netic properties of the specific anticoagulant, (2) fre-
quent neurologic monitoring is essential, (3) concurrent 
administration of multiple anticoagulants may increase 
the risk of bleeding, and (4) the analgesic regimen 
should be tailored to facilitate neurologic monitoring, 
which may be continued in some cases for 24 hours 
after epidural catheter removal. An updated version of 
the ASRA consensus statements on neuraxial anesthesia 
and anticoagulation56,57 can be found on their website 
(www.asra.com), with some of these statements address-
ing the newer anticoagulants.
Infection
Infection associated with postoperative epidural analge-
sia may result from exogenous or endogenous sources. 
Serious infections (e.g., meningitis, spinal abscess) asso-
ciated with epidural analgesia are rare (<1 in 10,000), 
although some researchers report a more frequent inci-
dence (approximately 1 in 1000 to 1 in 2000).58 Closer 
examination of the studies that report a more frequent 
incidence of epidural abscesses reveal that the patients 
had a relatively longer duration of epidural analgesia 
or the presence of coexisting immunocompromising or 
complicating diseases (e.g., malignancy, trauma). Use of 
epidural analgesia in the general surgical population, 
with a typical duration of postoperative catheterization 
of approximately 2 to 4 days, is generally not associated 
with epidural abscess formation. A trial of postoperative 
epidural analgesia (mean catheterization of 6.3 days) in 
more than 4000 surgical cancer patients did not reveal 
any abscesses.
SURGICAL SITE (INCISION) INFILTRATION
Surgical site infiltration with local anesthetic before inci-
sion and before tissue closure is recommended for the 
reduction of postoperative pain.59 Liposomal bupivacaine 
was approved in 2011 for surgical site administration 
after bunionectomy and hemorrhoidectomy. Although 
this extended-release formulation is designed to slowly 
release bupivacaine to surrounding tissues over 96 hours, 
it was superior to placebo only for the first 24 hours after 
administration.60
Section V THE RECOVERY PERIOD
728
INTRAARTICULAR ADMINISTRATION
Intraarticular injection of opioids may provide analge-
sia for up to 24 hours postoperatively and prevent the 
development of CPSP. Opioid receptors are found in the 
peripheral terminals of primary afferent nerves, which 
may explain this improved analgesia despite the lack of 
response with the addition of opioids to perineural anes-
thetic injections. The analgesic benefit of intraarticular 
opioids over systemic administration has not been 
demonstrated, and the systemic analgesic effect of these 
injections has not been excluded. Extended-release bupi-
vacaine was found to be less effective than traditional 
local anesthetic and opioid infiltration in one study 
and no different from traditional bupivacaine alone 
in another.60 Glenohumeral intraarticular continuous 
catheters have been associated with chondrolysis when 
bupivacaine is used and therefore should be avoided.61
PARAVERTEBRAL BLOCKS
The increased use of paravertebral blockade can be 
directly correlated with the beneficial effects for patients 
undergoing breast surgery. This block provides an effec-
tive mechanism for controlling acute pain associated 
with this procedure but has also demonstrated benefit in 
decreasing the development of CPSP over other analgesic 
regimens.62 This technique can be performed as a single-
shot technique or as a continuous catheter infusion to 
provide ongoing perioperative analgesia. This use of this 
technique has expanded to thoracic, cardiac, and pediat-
ric applications.63
PERIPHERAL NERVE BLOCK
Peripheral nerve blockade can provide analgesia as part 
of an autonomous or multimodal pain regimen (also see 
Chapter 18). Single-shot injections can provide coverage 
for intraoperative pain control. However, many provid-
ers feel that the risk of the intervention warrants the 
prolonged benefit, which includes postoperative pain 
control, and have driven the need for flexible duration 
of action. Intermediate-term pain relief (<24 hours) can 
be achieved with a combination of a local anesthetic 
and adjuvant drugs in a single injection. Longer-acting 
pain control may be indicated by the surgical technique, 
rehabilitation needs, and patient comorbidities and can 
be achieved by using perineural catheters for continuous 
local anesthetic infusions.
Techniques
Nerve blocks can be inserted using anatomic land-
marks, nerve stimulation, and ultrasound guidance. 
The efficacy between ultrasound-guided techniques 
and nerve stimulation varies, depending on the skill 
of the provider, primarily resulting in differences in 
comfort during placement and procedural time of the 
blockade. Nonetheless, these techniques provide a 
comparable quality of analgesia and similar complica-
tion profile.64
Adjuvant Drugs
Commonly used adjuvant drugs include epinephrine, 
clonidine, dexmedetomidine, and opioids.65 Epinephrine 
for peripheral nerve blockade significantly increases the 
duration of the blockade with minimal side effects. The 
mechanism of this effect is primarily through vasocon-
striction. Epinephrine can also increase the sensitivity of 
intravascular injection; concentrations of 2.5 to 5 μg/mL 
are generally used. Opioids probably should not be added 
to a peripheral nerve blockade. Clonidine is beneficial 
in extending the duration of preoperative blockade but 
has less value with perineural catheters. The mechanism 
is most likely peripheral α2-adrenergic receptor–medi-
ated and dose-dependent. Clonidine is a better preemp-
tive analgesic when added to a local anesthetic block 
than when used as a single drug. Side effects, including 
hypotension, bradycardia, and sedation, are less likely 
to occur in doses <1.5 μg/kg.66 The use of clonidine 
increases the duration of analgesia and motor blockade 
by approximately 2 hours. More recently, the addition 
of dexmedetomidine to peripheral nerve blocks has 
been shown to improve analgesia duration and opioid 
reduction.67
REGIONAL ANALGESIA
Efficacy and safety are the primary limiting factors in 
the implementation of any therapeutic measure. Regional 
analgesia is an effective technique for perioperative pain 
control and a multimodal analgesic plan. The advantages, 
disadvantages, and technical details are discussed in 
detail in Chapter 18. This section focuses on the utility 
and comparative efficacy of these blocks in perioperative 
pain management.
Catheter Versus Single-Shot Techniques
Upper Extremity
Continuous interscalene blockade allows for a longer 
duration of action compared with single-shot techniques. 
This technique has increased utility with the posterior 
interscalene approach for moderate to severely painful 
shoulder surgeries. The continuous administration allows 
for increased pain relief, with minimal opioid supple-
mentation and increased patient satisfaction and sleep 
quality.68
V
Chapter 40 Perioperative Pain Management
729
Lower Extremity
Lower extremity orthopedic surgeries resulting in 
moderate to severe perioperative pain also benefit 
from long-acting regional techniques. Lower extremity 
perineural catheters are used for major joint surgery 
of the hip, knee, ankle, and foot. This type of catheter 
may decrease clinical signs of inflammation for some 
lower extremity procedures, although inflammation is 
not decreased at the cellular level. Epidural catheters 
are used to provide good analgesia for major joint 
surgeries of the lower extremities, but expose patients 
to neuraxial analgesia risks and generally have bilat-
eral effects (whereas surgery is typically limited to 
one extremity only). Lumbar plexus catheters have 
been used as part of a multimodal regimen, with bet-
ter pain scores at rest and with physical therapy than 
multimodal regimens that include PCA with or without 
femoral catheters for unilateral hip repairs.69 Patients 
undergoing major foot and ankle surgeries under con-
tinuous perineural blockade are not only potentially 
able to obtain pain relief comparable to single-shot 
and systemic analgesia but also are discharged from 
PACUs in a shorter period.70
TRANSVERSUS ABDOMINIS PLANE BLOCK
For many abdominal procedures, the use of neuraxial 
analgesia techniques has been replaced by the transver-
sus abdominis plane (TAP) block. Theoretical advantages 
of this technique over other modalities include avoid-
ance of both neuraxial involvement and lower extremity 
blockade, decreased urinary retention, and decreased 
systemic side effects. Compared with placebo blocks, TAP 
block provided increased analgesia and decreased sys-
temic medication requirements as part of a multimodal 
analgesic regimen for total abdominal hysterectomy, 
cesarean section, and laparoscopic cholecystectomy. 
Moreover, guidance by ultrasound has made this a more 
reliably efficacious treatment modality.71
REFERENCES
1. Buvanendran A, Fiala J, Patel KA, Gold-
en AD, Moric M, Kroin JS. The incidence 
and severity of postoperative pain fol-
lowing inpatient surgery. Pain Med. 
2015;16:2277–2283.
2. Apfelbaum JL, Chen C, Mehta SS, Gan TJ. 
Postoperative pain experience: Results 
from a national survey suggest postop-
erative pain continues to be underman-
aged. Anesth Analg. 2003;97:534–540.
3. Glare P, Aubrey KR, Myles PS. Transi-
tion from acute to chronic pain after 
surgery. Lancet. 2019;393:1537–1546.
4. Wanderer JP, Shi Y, Schildcrout JS, 
Ehrenfeld JM, Epstein RH. Supervising 
anesthesiologists cannot be effectively 
compared according to their patients' 
postanesthesia care unit admission pain 
scores. Anesth Analg. 2015;120:923–
932.
5. The Lancet. Best practice in man-
aging 
postoperative 
pain. 
Lancet. 
2019;393:1478.
6. Chou R, Gordon DB, de Leon-Casasola 
OA, etal. Management of postoperative 
pain: A clinical practice guideline from 
the American Pain Society, the Ameri-
can Society of Regional Anesthesia and 
Pain Medicine, and the American Soci-
ety of Anesthesiologists' Committee on 
Regional Anesthesia, Executive Commit-
tee, and Administrative Council. J Pain. 
2016;17:131–157.
7. Eisenach JC, Brennan TJ. Pain after sur-
gery. Pain. 2018;159:1010–1011.
8. Sceats LA, Ayakta N, Merrell SB, Kin C. 
Drivers, beliefs, and barriers surrounding 
surgical opioid prescribing: A qualita-
tive study of surgeons' opioid prescrib-
ing habits. J Surg Res. 2020;247:86–94.
9. Colvin LA, Bull F, Hales TG. Periop-
erative opioid analgesia-when is enough 
too much? A review of opioid-induced 
tolerance and hyperalgesia. Lancet. 
2019;393:1558–1568.
10. Scholz J, Yaksh TL. Preclinical research 
on persistent postsurgical pain: What we 
don't know, but should start studying. 
Anesthesiology. 2010;112:511–513.
11. Kent ML, Tighe PJ, Belfer I, etal. The 
ACTTION-APS-AAPM Pain Taxonomy 
(AAAPT) multidimensional approach to 
classifying acute pain conditions. J Pain. 
2017;18:479–489.
12. Katz J, McCartney CJ. Current status of 
preemptive analgesia. Curr Opin Anaes-
thesiol. 2002;15:435–441.
13. Kehlet H, Jensen TS, Woolf CJ. Persistent 
postsurgical pain: Risk factors and pre-
vention. Lancet. 2006;367:1618–1625.
14. Carr DB, Goudas LC. Acute pain. Lancet. 
1999;353:2051–2058.
15. Perkins FM, Kehlet H. Chronic pain 
as an outcome of surgery. A review 
of predictive factors. Anesthesiology. 
2000;93:1123–1133.
16. Merskey H. Pain and psychological 
medicine. In: Wall PD, Melzack R, eds. 
Textbook of Pain. 3rd ed. New York: 
Churchill Livingstone; 1994:903–920.
17. Treede RD, Rief W, Barke A, etal. 
Chronic pain as a symptom or a disease: 
The IASP Classification of Chronic Pain 
for the International Classification of 
Diseases (ICD-11). Pain. 2019;160:19–27.
18. Katz J, Weinrib A, Fashler SR, etal. 
The Toronto General Hospital Transi-
tional Pain Service: Development and 
implementation of a multidisciplinary 
program to prevent chronic postsurgical 
pain. J Pain Res. 2015;8:695–702.
19. Basbaum AI, Fields HL. Endogenous 
pain control systems: Brainstem spinal 
pathways and endorphin circuitry. Annu 
Rev Neurosci. 1984;7:309–338.
20. Julius D, Basbaum AI. Molecular mecha-
nisms of nociception. Nature. 2001; 
413:203–210.
21. Basbaum AI. Spinal mechanisms of 
acute and persistent pain. Reg Anesth 
Pain Med. 1999;24:59–67.
22. Besson JM. The neurobiology of pain. 
Lancet. 1999;353:1610–1615.
23. Kissin I. Preemptive analgesia. Anesthe-
siology. 2000;93:1138–1143.
24. Moiniche S, Kehlet H, Dahl JB. A 
qualitative and quantitative systematic 
review of preemptive analgesia for post-
operative pain relief: The role of timing 
of analgesia. Anesthesiology. 2002;96: 
725–741.
25. Dahl JB, Moiniche S. Pre-emptive anal-
gesia. Br Med Bull. 2004;71:13–27.
26. Ong CK, Lirk P, Seymour RA, Jenkins 
BJ. The efficacy of preemptive analgesia 
Section V THE RECOVERY PERIOD
730
for acute postoperative pain manage-
ment: A meta-analysis. Anesth Analg. 
2005;100:757–773.
27. Chidambaran V, Ashton M, Martin 
LJ, Jegga AG. Systems biology-based 
approaches to summarize and iden-
tify novel genes and pathways associ-
ated with acute and chronic postsurgical 
pain. J Clin Anesth. 2020;62:109738.
28. Beverly A, Kaye AD, Ljungqvist O, 
Urman RD. Essential elements of multi-
modal analgesia in Enhanced Recovery 
After Surgery (ERAS) guidelines. Anes-
thesiol Clin. 2017;35:e115–e143.
29. Gelman D, Gelmanas A, Urbanaitė D, 
etal. Role of multimodal analgesia in 
the evolving Enhanced Recovery After 
Surgery pathways. Medicina (Kaunas). 
2018;54:20.
30. Pogatzki-Zahn EM, Zahn PK. From 
preemptive to preventive analgesia. Curr 
Opin Anaesthesiol. 2006;19:551–555.
31. Kehlet H. Multimodal approach to 
control postoperative pathophysiol-
ogy and rehabilitation. Br J Anaesth. 
1997;78:606–617.
32. Block BM, Liu SS, Rowlingson AJ, Cow-
an AR, Cowan JA Jr., Wu CL. Efficacy 
of postoperative epidural analgesia: A 
meta-analysis. JAMA. 2003;290:2455–
2463.
33. Ben-David B, Swanson J, Nelson JB, 
Chelly JE. Multimodal analgesia for 
radical prostatectomy provides better 
analgesia and shortens hospital stay. J 
Clin Anesth. 2007;19:264–268.
34. Kehlet H, Wilmore DW. Multimodal 
strategies to improve surgical outcome. 
Am J Surg. 2002;183:630–641.
35. Joly V, Richebe P, Guignard B, etal. 
Remifentanil-induced 
postoperative 
hyperalgesia and its prevention with 
small-dose ketamine. Anesthesiology. 
2005;103:147–155.
36. Kharasch ED, Clark JD. Opioid-free 
anesthesia: Time to regain our balance. 
Anesthesiology. 2021;134:509–514.
37. Shanthanna H, Ladha KS, Kehlet H, Joshi 
GP. Perioperative opioid administration. 
Anesthesiology. 2021;134:645–659.
38. Verret M, Lauzier F, Zarychanski R, etal. 
Perioperative use of gabapentinoids for 
the management of postoperative acute 
pain: A systematic review and meta-
analysis. Anesthesiology. 2020;133:265–
279.
39. Schwenk ES, Viscusi ER, Buvanendran 
A, etal. Consensus Guidelines on the 
Use of Intravenous Ketamine Infusions 
for Acute Pain Management from the 
American Society of Regional Anesthe-
sia and Pain Medicine, the American 
Academy of Pain Medicine, and the 
American Society of Anesthesiologists. 
Reg Anesth Pain Med. 2018;43:456–466.
40. Egbert AM, Parks LH, Short LM, Bur-
nett ML. Randomized trial of postop-
erative patient-controlled analgesia vs 
intramuscular narcotics in frail elderly 
men. Arch Intern Med. 1990;150:1897–
1903.
41. Branton MW, Hopkins TJ, Nemec EC. 
Duloxetine for the reduction of opioid 
use in elective orthopedic surgery: A 
systematic review and meta-analysis. Int 
J Clin Pharm. 2021. doi:10.1007/s11096-
020-01216-9. Jan 18, In Press.
42. Chen S, Roffey DM, Dion C-A, Arab A, 
Wai EK. Effect of perioperative vita-
min C supplementation on postopera-
tive pain and the incidence of chronic 
regional pain syndrome. Clin J Pain. 
2016;32:179–185.
43. Kharasch ED, Clark JD, Kheterpal S. 
Perioperative gabapentinoids. Anesthe-
siology. 2020;133:251–254.
44. De Kock M, Lavand'homme P, Water-
loos H. “Balanced analgesia” in the 
perioperative period: Is there a place for 
ketamine? Pain. 2001;92:373–380.
45. Dunn LK, Durieux ME. Perioperative use 
of intravenous lidocaine. Anesthesiol-
ogy. 2017;126:729–737.
46. Jibril F, Sharaby S, Mohamed A, Wilby 
KJ. Intravenous versus oral acetami-
nophen for pain: Systematic review 
of current evidence to support clinical 
decision-making. Can J Hosp Pharm. 
2015;68:238–247.
47. Nielsen RV, Siegel H, Fomsgaard JS, 
etal. Preoperative dexamethasone 
reduces acute but not sustained pain 
after lumbar disk surgery: A rand-
omized, blinded, placebo-controlled 
trial. Pain. 2015;156:2538–2544.
48. De Oliveira GS Jr, Castro-Alves LJ, 
Khan JH, McCarthy RJ. Perioperative 
systemic magnesium to minimize post-
operative pain: A meta-analysis of rand-
omized controlled trials. Anesthesiology. 
2013;119:178–190.
49. Sritapan Y, Clifford S, Bautista A. Perio-
perative management of patients on 
buprenorphine and methadone: A narra-
tive review. Balkan Med J. 2020;37:247–
252.
50. Anderson TA, Quaye ANA, Ward EN, 
Wilens TE, Hilliard PE, Brummett CM. To 
stop or not, that is the question: Acute 
pain management for the patient on 
chronic buprenorphine. Anesthesiology. 
2017;126:1180–1186.
51. Lembke A, Ottestad E, Schmiesing C. 
Patients maintained on buprenorphine 
for opioid use disorder should continue 
buprenorphine through the perioperative 
period. Pain Med. 2019;20:425–428.
52. Wu CL, Fleisher LA. Outcomes research 
in regional anesthesia and analgesia. 
Anesth Analg. 2000;91:1232–1242.
53. Loper KA, Ready LB, Downey M, etal. 
Epidural and intravenous fentanyl infu-
sions are clinically equivalent after knee 
surgery. Anesth Analg. 1990;70:72–75.
54. Gulbahar G, Kocer B, Muratli SN, 
etal. A comparison of epidural and 
paravertebral catheterisation techniques 
in post-thoracotomy pain management. 
Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2010;37:467–
472.
55. Tryba M. Epidural regional anesthesia 
and low molecular heparin: Pro. Anas-
thesiol Intensivmed Notfallmed Schmer-
zther. 1993;28:179–181.
56. Horlocker TT, Wedel DJ, Rowlingson JC, 
etal. Regional anesthesia in the patient 
receiving antithrombotic or thrombolyt-
ic therapy: American Society of Regional 
Anesthesia and Pain Medicine Evidence-
Based Guidelines (Third Edition). Reg 
Anesth Pain Med. 2010;35:64–101.
57. Narouze S, Benzon HT, Provenzano D, 
etal. Interventional Spine and Pain 
Procedures in Patients on Antiplatelet 
and Anticoagulant Medications (Second 
Edition): Guidelines from the Ameri-
can Society of Regional Anesthesia and 
Pain Medicine, the European Society of 
Regional Anaesthesia and Pain Therapy, 
the American Academy of Pain Medi-
cine, the International Neuromodulation 
Society, the North American Neuro-
modulation Society, and the World Insti-
tute of Pain. Reg Anesth Pain Med. 
2018;43:225–262.
58. Horlocker TT, Wedel DJ. Neurologic 
complications of spinal and epidur-
al anesthesia. Reg Anesth Pain Med. 
2000;25:83–98.
59. Group TPW. PROSPECT (Procedure Spe-
cific Postoperative Pain Management). 
http://www.postoppain.org/. Published 
2015. Accessed October, 1, 2015.
60. Uskova A, O'Connor JE. Liposomal bupi-
vacaine for regional anesthesia. Curr 
Opin Anaesthesiol. 2015;28:593–597.
61. Busfield BT, Romero DM. Pain pump use 
after shoulder arthroscopy as a cause 
of glenohumeral chondrolysis. Arthros-
copy. 2009;25:647–652.
62. Vila H Jr, Liu J, Kavasmaneck D. Para-
vertebral block: New benefits from an 
old procedure. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol. 
2007;20:316–318.
63. Wardhan R. Update on paraverte-
bral blocks. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol. 
2015;28:588–592.
64. Fredrickson MJ, Ball CM, Dalgleish AJ, 
Stewart AW, Short TG. A prospective 
randomized comparison of ultrasound 
and neurostimulation as needle end 
points for interscalene catheter place-
ment. Anesth Analg. 2009;108:1695–
1700.
65. Prabhakar A, Lambert T, Kaye RJ, 
etal. Adjuvants in clinical regional 
anesthesia practice: A comprehensive 
review. Best Pract Res Clin Anaesthesiol. 
2019;33:415–423.
66. Neal JM, Gerancher JC, Hebl JR, etal. 
Upper extremity regional anesthe-
sia: essentials of our current under-
standing, 2008. Reg Anesth Pain Med. 
2009;34:134–170.
V
Chapter 40 Perioperative Pain Management
731
67. Fritsch G, Danninger T, Allerberger K, 
etal. Dexmedetomidine added to ropiv-
acaine extends the duration of intersca-
lene brachial plexus blocks for elective 
shoulder surgery when compared with 
ropivacaine alone: A single-center, pro-
spective, triple-blind, randomized con-
trolled trial. Reg Anesth Pain Med. 
2014;39:37–47.
68. Mariano ER, Afra R, Loland VJ, Sandhu 
NS, Bellars RH, Bishop ML, Cheng GS, 
Choy LP, Maldonado RC, Ilfeld BM. 
Continuous interscalene brachial plexus 
block via an ultrasound-guided posterior 
approach: A randomized, triple-masked, 
placebo-controlled study. Anesth Analg. 
2009 May;108(5):1688–1694.
69. Marino J, Russo J, Kenny M, etal. 
Continuous lumbar plexus block for 
postoperative pain control after total hip 
arthroplasty. A randomized controlled 
trial. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2009;91:29–
37.
70. Hunt KJ, Higgins TF, Carlston CV, Swen-
son JR, McEachern JE, Beals TC. Con-
tinuous peripheral nerve blockade as 
postoperative analgesia for open treat-
ment of calcaneal fractures. J Orthop 
Trauma. 2010;24:148–155.
71. El-Dawlatly AA, Turkistani A, Kettner 
SC, etal. Ultrasound-guided transversus 
abdominis plane block: Description of 
a new technique and comparison with 
conventional systemic analgesia dur-
ing laparoscopic cholecystectomy. Br J 
Anaesth. 2009;102:763–767.
Section
VI
CONSULTANT 
ANESTHETIC 
PRACTICE
Chapter 41
CRITICAL CARE MEDICINE, 735
Chapter 42
PERIOPERATIVE MEDICINE, 753
Chapter 43
ANESTHESIA FOR TRAUMA, 768
Chapter 44
CHRONIC PAIN MANAGEMENT, 794
Chapter 45
CARDIOPULMONARY RESUSCITATION, 
810
Chapter 46
QUALITY AND PATIENT SAFETY IN 
ANESTHESIA CARE, 829
Chapter 47
PALLIATIVE CARE, 839
Chapter 48
SLEEP MEDICINE AND ANESTHESIA, 855
Chapter 49
ANESTHESIA AND ENVIRONMENTAL 
HEALTH, 874
735
Chapter
ICU DEFINITIONS, INTERPROFESSIONAL 
CARE, AND PHYSICIAN STAFFING
Intensive care units (ICUs), as defined by The Joint 
Commission, are geographically separated nursing care 
areas that provide intensive observation, diagnosis, and 
therapeutic procedures for patients who are critically 
ill. Though the first modern ICU was started in 1953 to 
provide mechanical ventilation to patients with polio, 
they have since evolved to allow for monitoring and 
support of critically ill patients with a wide variety of 
life-threatening disease. Complexity of care has increased 
over time, as a result of both patient factors (i.e., patients 
living with more serious comorbidity) and the develop-
ment of more specialized therapies.
Provision of modern critical care medicine therefore 
relies on the collective expertise of providers from many 
health care professions working together toward a com-
mon goal, which is known as interprofessional care. A 
robust body of literature suggests that patient outcomes 
are improved when ICU care is provided by an interpro-
fessional team. Providers integral to the care of critically 
ill patients include (but are not limited to) nurses, phar-
macists, respiratory care practitioners, rehabilitation spe-
cialists, dieticians, spiritual care providers, case managers, 
social workers, advance practice providers, intensivist 
physicians, and nonintensivist physician consultants. 
Patients and family members are at the center of the care 
team and should be engaged as partners in their care.1
Physicians are an important part of this interprofes-
sional critical care team, but physician staffing in the 
ICU can vary between hospitals. Larger, primarily aca-
demic, centers may consistently staff critical care–trained 
intensivists who manage all aspects of a patient’s care 
24 hours a day, whereas at the other extreme smaller 
community hospitals may depend on nonintensivist 
physicians who would otherwise manage the patient on 
a general ward. Studies of the various physician models 
have shown that the involvement of an intensivist in 
ICU DEFINITIONS, INTERPROFESSIONAL 
CARE, AND PHYSICIAN STAFFING
ORGAN FAILURE AND SUPPORT
Neurologic: Encephalopathy and Delirium
Cardiovascular: Shock
Pulmonary: Respiratory Failure
Gastrointestinal: Nutrition
Renal: Acute Kidney Injury
Infectious Disease: Hospital-Acquired Infections
Endocrine: Glucose Management
Prophylaxis
A-F BUNDLE
A: Assess, Prevent, and Manage Pain
B: Both SAT and SBT
C: Choice of Sedation and Analgesia
D: Delirium: Assess, Prevent, and Manage
E: Early Mobility
F: Family Engagement and Empowerment
CRITICAL CARE 
MEDICINE
Ashish Agrawal, Anne L. Donovan
41
Section VI CONSULTANT ANESTHETIC PRACTICE
736
tool is recommended. The most commonly used tool is the 
Confusion Assessment Method for the ICU (CAM-ICU).3
Delirium can prevent patients from engaging in their 
care, and at its most extreme can lead to patient harm 
by interfering with important therapies or necessitating 
physical or chemical restraints. As such, the presence 
of delirium is associated with a threefold increase in 
6-month mortality and a twofold increase in length of 
hospital stay, as well as a higher risk of persistent cogni-
tive dysfunction at 1 year after discharge.4 Factors that 
predispose patients to delirium include both nonmodifi-
able (e.g., advanced age, preexisting cognitive dysfunc-
tion, multiorgan dysfunction, infection or sepsis, and 
mechanical ventilation) and modifiable (e.g., immobility, 
pain, sleep deprivation, dehydration, electrolyte abnor-
malities, and use of high-risk medications including ben-
zodiazepines and anticholinergics) risk factors.
Evidence-based treatment for delirium involves pri-
marily nonpharmacologic strategies, including frequent 
reorientation, restoring day/night and sleep cycles, pres-
ence of family members, physical therapy or activity 
out of bed, and use of appropriate sensory aids such as 
glasses and hearing aids, and avoiding known delirium 
triggers, such as benzodiazepines. Pharmacologic treat-
ment with melatonin may treat delirium and restore 
sleep,5 and haloperidol or atypical antipsychotics can 
help control symptoms of agitated delirium, though they 
do not shorten its course. No pharmacologic therapy has 
yet consistently prevented ICU delirium.
Cardiovascular: Shock
Shock is a state where there is insufficient delivery of 
oxygen to the body’s critical organs and tissues to main-
tain normal function. Though low blood pressure is often 
associated with shock, it is neither necessary nor suf-
ficient to diagnose a patient with shock. These patients 
must be treated for the underlying cause emergently, as 
untreated shock decompensates into multiorgan failure 
and death. Shock can be categorized based on its under-
lying cause: hypovolemic, cardiogenic, obstructive, and 
distributive (Table 41.1, Fig. 41.1).
a patient’s daily care can reduce mortality and length 
of stay,2 though the benefit of overnight or continuous 
intensivist staffing is still being evaluated.
ORGAN FAILURE AND SUPPORT
Although patients admitted to the ICU can vary in their 
diagnoses or severity of illness, most have some degree of 
organ dysfunction or failure. In complex patients a single 
diagnosis such as sepsis can lead to multiple organ fail-
ures, including shock, respiratory failure, and acute renal 
failure (ARF). Severity scores, such as the Sequential 
Organ Failure Assessment (SOFA), can predict increased 
mortality in patients with multiple organ involvement of 
their disease process. Diagnosing and treating the com-
mon problems that affect organ systems in the ICU, and 
understanding how they might interrelate, is an impor-
tant skill for a critical care provider.
Neurologic: Encephalopathy and Delirium
Encephalopathy, defined as a neurologic process that 
causes altered levels of consciousness or sensorium, is 
common in the ICU. Primary causes of encephalopathy 
can include neurologic injury from stroke, seizures, 
tumors, or traumatic brain injury. Secondary encephalop-
athy includes patients with altered mentation resulting 
from extracranial causes, such as metabolic derange-
ments, sepsis-associated encephalopathy, or ICU delirium.
ICU delirium affects greater than 30% of patients 
in the ICU and up to 80% of mechanically ventilated 
patients. It is diagnosed based on the acute onset of wax-
ing and waning mental status, inattention, disorganized 
thinking, and altered level of consciousness. Although it 
is most easily recognized in its hyperactive form mani-
festing as patient agitation and restlessness, the major-
ity of patients have a hypoactive or mixed syndrome 
reflected by flat affect and apathy along with cognitive 
dysfunction. Because of these varying presentations and 
the difficulty diagnosing patients with a hypoactive form 
of delirium, routine use of an objective delirium screening 
Shock Type
Cardiac 
Output
Systemic Vascular 
Resistance
Central Venous 
Pressure
Pulmonary Capillary 
Wedge Pressure
Mixed Venous 
Oxygen Saturation
Hypovolemic
↓
↑
↓
↓
↓
Cardiogenic
↓
↑
↑
↑*
↓
Obstructive
↓
↑
↑
↓**
↓
Distributive
↑ or even
↓
↓
↓
↑ or even
Table 41.1
Characteristics of Various Shock States
*Pulmonary capillary wedge pressure is normal to low in right ventricular failure.
**Pulmonary capillary wedge pressure is elevated in cardiac tamponade.
VI
Chapter 41 Critical Care Medicine
737
with mild to moderate hypovolemia, though hypotension 
is usually a delayed sign with severe hypovolemia.
Treatment
Adequate intravascular volume resuscitation and source 
control are key to the treatment of hypovolemic shock. 
Intravenous access must be obtained quickly, ideally 
with short, large-bore (16-gauge or greater) intravenous 
peripheral catheters, which can be used to administer 
intravenous fluid or blood. Central venous access or 
intraosseous catheters can be considered if peripheral 
access is challenging, though intraosseous catheters 
should be removed and replaced with intravenous access 
as soon as possible because of concerns about compart-
ment syndrome with extravasation.
The choice of resuscitation fluid should depend on 
the presumed cause of hypovolemia. Severe or ongoing 
bleeding caused by trauma or gastrointestinal hemor-
rhage should be replaced by blood products in a 1:1:1 
ratio of packed red blood cells, fresh frozen plasma, 
and platelets6 (also see Chapter 25). Massive transfu-
sion protocols should be activated for patients who are 
expected to receive 10 units of packed red blood cells 
in 24 hours or 4 units in 1 hour, and where available, 
rapid transfusion devices should be used. Replace-
ment of calcium and maintenance of normothermia in 
these patients will reduce ongoing coagulopathy, and 
tranexamic acid can reduce fibrinolysis and mortality 
for traumatically injured patients when given within 3 
hours of injury.7
Of note, in patients who present with massive bleeding 
resuscitation should be started based on clinical assess-
ments of the patient and should target a low-normal 
Hypovolemic Shock
Hypovolemic shock occurs when the body’s circulat-
ing blood volume is inadequate to return blood to the 
right side of the heart, resulting in a decrease in preload 
(left ventricular end-diastolic volume) and subsequently 
a decrease in cardiac output. Although compensatory 
mechanisms can offset small decreases in blood volume, 
large volume shifts will result in shock. Most causes of 
acute hypovolemic shock are caused by bleeding, often 
the result of trauma, surgery, or gastrointestinal hemor-
rhage. However, severe dehydration or fluid loss caused 
by diarrhea, vomiting, or profuse sweating can also lead 
to hypovolemic shock.
Clinical Manifestations
Acute blood loss, or hypovolemia, initially results in 
the translocation of interstitial fluid into the circulating 
blood volume to transiently restore cardiac output. The 
activation of the renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system 
results in sodium conservation by the kidneys and reduc-
tion of additional fluid loss. A decrease in circulating 
blood volume of 15% or more will trigger the barorecep-
tor reflex to increase heart rate and maintain cardiac 
output, and sympathetic stimulation and catecholamines 
will vasoconstrict blood vessels away from skin, skeletal 
muscle, and splanchnic circulation to maintain perfu-
sion to vital organs. Ongoing loss of circulating volume, 
which outstrips these compensation mechanisms, results 
in hypotension and shock.
Patients in hypovolemic shock can present with physi-
cal examination findings of dry mucous membranes and 
decreased skin turgor. As a result of vasoconstriction, their 
skin can be cold and clammy. They may be tachycardic 
Hypovolemic
Hemorrhage
Dehydraon
Cardiogenic
Obstrucve
Distribuve
Sepc
Anaphylacc
Neurogenic
Myocardial infarcon
Cardiomyopathy
Myocardis
Arrhythmia
Valvular rupture
Ventricular septal defect
Pulmonary embolism
amponade
ension pneumothora
Fig. 41.1 Categories and Etiologies of Shock. This figure suggests a semi anatomic framework to help 
conceptualize the four broad categories of shock. Hypovolemic shock occurs when insufficient preload 
is delivered to the heart to maintain adequate cardiac output. Cardiogenic shock occurs when the heart 
itself (represented by the inner oval) is unable to produce sufficient cardiac output because of ischemia, 
arrhythmia, valvular disease, or poor contractility. In obstructive shock something external to the heart 
(represented by the outer oval) presents a physical obstruction to ventricular ejection. Distributive shock
occurs as a result of vasodilation in the systemic arterial system. Examples of specific etiologies within each 
category are listed.
Section VI CONSULTANT ANESTHETIC PRACTICE
738
generally can compensate given time to remodel, the 
right ventricle is more susceptible to ischemia and has 
fewer adaptation mechanisms and thus can be the source 
of considerable morbidity and mortality.
The symptoms of cardiogenic shock can vary depend-
ing on which ventricle is primarily involved. In left 
ventricular failure end-diastolic volume rises, leading to 
overdistension of the ventricle, decreased cardiac output, 
and the development of pulmonary edema. In right ven-
tricular failure signs of inadequate forward flow of blood 
often include distended neck veins, peripheral edema, and 
hepatic congestion. Biventricular failure can result when 
the pulmonary congestion from left ventricular failure 
leads to pulmonary arterial hypertension and concomitant 
right ventricular failure. Both forms of heart failure can 
lead to cold and poorly perfused extremities caused by 
peripheral vasoconstriction and decreased cardiac output.
Treatment
Immediate interventions should be targeted toward 
improving cardiac output, decreasing cardiac filling pres-
sures, and restoring balance between myocardial oxygen 
supply and demand. Inotropes (e.g., dobutamine) may be 
used to improve cardiac output. In hypotensive patients 
a vasopressor such as norepinephrine may be needed 
to counteract the vasodilatory effect of dobutamine to 
maintain normotension. In hypertensive patients vaso-
dilators (e.g., nitroglycerin or nitroprusside) may help to 
decrease afterload and preload and improve forward flow. 
In fluid-overloaded patients careful diuresis may optimize 
cardiac filling pressures. Patients with isolated right heart 
failure can sometimes acutely decompensate as a result of 
hypoxia, hypercarbia, and positive-pressure ventilation. 
In select cases pulmonary vasodilators such as epopros-
tenol or inhaled nitric oxide may be appropriate.
Soon after initial stabilization, any reversible causes 
of cardiogenic shock should be identified and treated. For 
patients with cardiogenic shock complicating an acute 
myocardial infarction, early revascularization with angi-
ography or fibrinolytic therapy can improve mortality.8
Treating tachyarrhythmias can improve cardiac filling 
and forward flow. Other underlying contributors, such as 
systemic infection, should be treated rapidly.
Mechanical Circulatory Support
Despite optimal management of cardiogenic shock, there 
will be a subset of patients for whom there is insufficient 
cardiac function to maintain other end-organ functions. In 
these cases various forms of mechanical circulatory sup-
port can be considered. Although an in-depth discussion 
of these techniques is beyond the scope of this chapter, 
the following devices may be used in specialized centers.
Intraaortic Balloon Pump
An intraaortic balloon pump (IABP) is a percutaneously 
placed balloon inserted through the femoral artery and 
blood pressure until the source of bleeding has been 
controlled, a technique known as permissive hypotension. 
Initial hematocrit values may be misleading if compensa-
tory mechanisms or crystalloid resuscitation has not yet 
led to the dilution of remaining red blood cell mass. Lab-
oratory values therefore should not be used immediately 
on presentation as a sole guide for resuscitation, but can 
be used to target and guide later resuscitation.
For patients who are hypovolemic but not bleeding, 
resuscitation should be initiated with isotonic, balanced 
crystalloid such as Plasma-Lyte or lactated Ringer’s solu-
tion. Normal saline should be avoided because of the risk 
of iatrogenic hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis (also 
see Chapter 24). Vasopressors can be used as a tempo-
rizing measure in patients with hypovolemic shock but 
should never be used as a substitute for adequate fluid 
resuscitation.
Cardiogenic Shock
Cardiogenic shock results when either the left or the 
right ventricle is unable to fill with volume or contract 
effectively to generate an adequate stroke volume. These 
processes are referred to as heart failure with preserved 
ejection fraction (diastolic) or heart failure with reduced 
ejection fraction (systolic), respectively. Causes of car-
diogenic shock can include acute myocardial infarction, 
severe cardiomyopathy, myocarditis, arrhythmia, valvu-
lar rupture, or ventricular septal defect. Regardless of the 
initial cause, cardiogenic shock can occur on an acute, 
chronic, or acute-on-chronic basis classified by whether 
it occurs soon after an injury, chronically as the heart 
reaches its limits of adaptation, or because of an acute 
decompensation or exacerbation in an otherwise chroni-
cally compensated heart.
Clinical Manifestations
The development of cardiogenic shock depends on a 
complex interplay between myocardial work and oxygen 
demand. In a normal heart the ventricles pump blood to 
supply oxygen to both itself and to the rest of the body. 
Any process that decreases oxygen supply to the heart 
(e.g., acute coronary syndromes) or increases oxygen 
demand (e.g., tachycardia or hypertension) may result 
in a supply–demand mismatch interrupting this finely 
calibrated balance.
With mild disruption, the heart can compensate and 
adapt. By gradually thickening the left ventricular walls 
or by increasing its left ventricular end-diastolic volume, 
the heart can find a new balance on the Frank-Starling 
curve to increase its stroke volume and maintain cardiac 
output. However, these adaptations have a natural limit, 
as thicker walls and higher left ventricular end-diastolic 
pressure decrease perfusion to the endocardium, making 
the heart more susceptible to ischemia and increasing the 
risk of decompensation into acute heart failure and car-
diogenic shock. Furthermore, whereas the left ventricle 
VI
Chapter 41 Critical Care Medicine
739
Clinical Manifestations
In many ways patients with obstructive shock appear to 
have a form of cardiogenic shock. The obstructive process 
causes a decrease in left ventricular filling, resulting in 
decreased stroke volume and cardiac output. This results 
in compensatory tachycardia, peripheral vasoconstriction, 
and increased systemic vascular resistance (SVR). The 
resistance to forward flow can also lead to elevated cen-
tral venous pressures (CVPs) along with signs of venous 
congestion such as elevated jugular venous pressure and 
hepatomegaly.
Point-of-care ultrasound can be an important tech-
nique to diagnose obstructive shock (also see Chapter21). 
Pneumothorax may be visible on examination of the lung, 
and a pericardial effusion or tamponade may be evident 
on examination of the heart. Though a pulmonary embo-
lism can rarely be seen directly, associated signs such as 
right ventricular dysfunction or septal flattening from 
pressure overload can be suggestive of this diagnosis.
Treatment
Treatment of obstructive shock usually involves emer-
gent targeted treatment of the specific cause, along with 
measures to increase cardiac output. Massive pulmonary 
embolism can be treated with fibrinolytic therapy. Peri-
cardial tamponade is treated with pericardiocentesis or 
a surgical pericardial window. Tension pneumothorax is 
treated with emergent needle thoracostomy, usually fol-
lowed by chest tube placement.
Until definitive treatment can be completed, providers 
should be careful to avoid changing physiologic vari-
ables that compensate for the obstruction. Because these 
patients require adequate preload to maintain stroke vol-
ume, the change from spontaneous to positive-pressure 
ventilation can cause hemodynamic instability. Tachycar-
dia is another compensatory mechanism to maintain car-
diac output. Administration of medications that decrease 
heart rate, contractility, or preload (e.g., β-blockers, diu-
retics) may lead to cardiac arrest and death.
Distributive Shock
Distributive shock also called vasodilatory shock, results 
from profound dilation of the arterial vascular system 
leading to decreased SVR and hypotension. Distributive 
shock can be broken down into three main types: septic, 
anaphylactic, and neurogenic shock.
Sepsis and Septic Shock
Sepsis is the most common reason for admission to the 
ICU and is the leading cause of ICU mortality. It is defined 
as life-threatening organ dysfunction resulting from a 
dysregulated host response to infection.
Clinical Manifestations
Diagnostic criteria for sepsis were updated in 2016 to 
place greater emphasis on the organ dysfunction that 
positioned in the aorta. Using helium gas, it is quickly 
inflated during diastole and deflated during systole, 
thus augmenting diastolic blood pressure and cardiac 
perfusion while decreasing systolic pressure and left ven-
tricular afterload. An IABP is thought to improve cardiac 
perfusion while decreasing cardiac work and is usually 
considered for patients with myocardial ischemia for 
whom increased cardiac work is poorly tolerated. Despite 
the physiologic basis for utility in these patients, large 
randomized controlled trials have not shown mortality 
benefits for the use of IABP in cardiogenic shock.9
Extracorporeal Membrane Oxygenation
In patients for whom the heart is severely damaged a 
device that replaces the function of all or a part of the 
heart may be needed. Extracorporeal membrane oxy-
genation (ECMO) is a device that removes deoxygenated 
blood from a large vein, processes the blood through a 
pump and oxygenator, and returns it to either a large 
artery (venoarterial or VA-ECMO) or a large vein (veno-
venous or VV-ECMO). VA-ECMO can replace the func-
tion of both the heart and the lungs, whereas VV-ECMO 
replaces the function of the lung as an oxygenator but 
does not improve cardiac contractility.
Ventricular Assist Devices
A left ventricular assist device (LVAD), a surgically 
implanted pump to move blood from the left ventricle 
to the aorta, is an option for patients who require ongo-
ing assistance with ventricular function. These devices 
can allow patients to live outside the hospital while 
they await definitive treatment such as a heart trans-
plant (i.e., as a “bridge to transplant”). Alternatively, 
an LVAD can be implanted to improve quality of life in 
end-stage heart failure (i.e., as “destination therapy”). 
LVADs can strain damaged right ventricles, and patients 
may require continuous inotrope infusions or dual left- 
and right-sided VADs to support the function of both 
ventricles.
Impella
The Impella is a short-term, catheter-based, miniaturized 
VAD that can be percutaneously placed across the aortic 
valve to augment left ventricular flow. The most common 
indication is for short-term left ventricular support dur-
ing high-risk percutaneous coronary interventions. Fur-
ther study is needed to determine whether this device can 
improve outcomes in patients with cardiogenic shock.10
Obstructive Shock
Obstructive shock occurs when there is a physical 
obstruction to flow either within the heart or the large 
vessels of the pulmonary or systemic circulation. The 
most common causes of obstructive shock are massive 
pulmonary embolism, pericardial tamponade, and ten-
sion pneumothorax.
Section VI CONSULTANT ANESTHETIC PRACTICE
740
beyond what is needed can be harmful. In the Fluid 
and Catheter Treatment Trial (FACTT), which included 
patients with acute lung injury (mostly caused by pneu-
monia or sepsis), patients in the “conservative fluid” (i.e., 
minimal use of fluids) management group had improved 
lung function; improved central nervous system (CNS) 
function; and a decreased need for sedation, mechanical 
ventilation, and intensive care when compared with a 
liberal fluid group without increased complications such 
as organ failure or shock.14
Anaphylactic Shock
Clinical Manifestations
Anaphylactic shock is the most severe manifestation of 
anaphylaxis, which is a systemic, immediate hypersen-
sitivity reaction mediated by immunoglobulin E (IgE) 
that results in basophil and mast cell degranulation. 
Anaphylaxis involves multiple organ systems, inducing 
mucocutaneous symptoms (urticaria, pruritis, flushing, 
angioedema), respiratory symptoms (wheezing, stridor, 
upper airway obstruction), gastrointestinal symptoms 
(nausea, vomiting), or cardiovascular compromise (hypo-
tension and shock).15 These symptoms are mediated by 
histamine and other molecules released by mast cells and 
basophils that increase capillary leak and further amplify 
an inflammatory cascade. Capillary leak can lead to 
decreased intravascular volume, which compounds hypo-
tension because of arterial vasodilation and a decrease 
in SVR. To compensate, patients develop tachycardia, 
though this rarely maintains adequate cardiac output in 
serious cases.
Treatment
Patients with suspected anaphylactic shock should be 
treated immediately with epinephrine. The α-adrenergic 
effect of epinephrine helps reverse arterial vasodilation, 
and β2-adrenergic receptors can relax bronchospasm and 
respiratory symptoms of anaphylaxis. Other management 
priorities include addressing impending upper airway 
obstruction and discontinuing any suspected triggering 
agents.
Further treatment of hypotension should include 
intravenous fluids and repeated doses or infusions 
of epinephrine to maintain tissue perfusion. Adjunct 
therapy for anaphylaxis can include corticosteroids and 
antihistamines to reverse or neutralize the inflammatory 
response and albuterol or other bronchodilators for per-
sistent bronchospasm.
Neurogenic Shock
Clinical Manifestations
Neurogenic shock generally follows a traumatic injury 
to the brain or spinal cord, resulting in interruption to 
sympathetic outflow to the periphery and leading to 
unopposed parasympathetic tone. The pooling of blood in 
vascular beds from increased venous capacitance and low 
contributes to mortality. As such, the current definition 
requires the presence of an infection or suspected infec-
tion along with a 2-point increase in the SOFA score.11
However, because SOFA scores cannot be calculated 
quickly as a result of the instrument’s complexity, the 
quick SOFA (qSOFA) screening tool was developed to 
identify patients with infections who are at high risk of 
death or needing an ICU (Box 41.1).
Treatment
Despite extensive study of multiple therapeutics over 
many years (e.g., activated protein C, glucocorticoids), 
no definitive therapy exists to treat sepsis. In 2001 a 
landmark clinical trial showed improved mortality with 
early goal-directed therapy (EGDT), which focused on 
(1) intravascular fluid resuscitation, (2) vasopressors to 
achieve a mean arterial pressure goal, and (3) packed red 
blood cell transfusion or dobutamine infusion to improve 
central venous oxygen saturation (Scvo2).12 Whereas 
the first two components were adopted broadly, central 
venous catheters (CVCs), blood transfusions, and ino-
tropes remained controversial. To isolate the role of these 
more controversial components of EGDT, three subse-
quent multicenter randomized controlled trials compared 
EGDT with usual care or protocol-based standard care.13
All three trials showed no decrease in mortality rate from 
EGDT compared with modern management of sepsis, 
which did not mandate Scvo2 monitoring, blood transfu-
sions, or inotropes.
With these new data, optimal treatment of sepsis can 
be distilled to these fundamentals: early recognition, 
rapid fluid resuscitation, prompt antibiotic administra-
tion, and treatment of the infectious source. Monitoring 
of fluid resuscitation should rely on composite endpoints, 
which include the clinical examination, fluid responsive-
ness, and lactate clearance, rather than focusing on a 
single number such as CVP or Scvo2. Vasopressors should 
be used to support organ perfusion after intravascular 
volume repletion. Norepinephrine is considered to be 
the vasopressor of choice, followed by vasopressin or 
epinephrine. Dopamine, in particular, is associated with 
arrhythmias and poor outcomes. Central lines should not 
be inserted in all patients unless indicated clinically.
Finally, although goal-directed fluid administration 
during the acute phase of sepsis is an important core 
of treatment, some evidence suggests that excess fluid 
Box 41.1
qSOFA
Suspected infection + 2 out of 3 qSOFA criteria:
Altered mental status (GCS <15)
Respiratory rate ≥ 22
Systolic blood pressure ≤100
GCS, Glasgow Coma Scale.
VI
Chapter 41 Critical Care Medicine
741
saturation. This difference depends partially on cardiac 
output. A lower Scvo2 (i.e., <50%) indicates greater oxy-
gen extraction, usually because of lower cardiac output. 
Slower flow through the capillary beds in low cardiac 
output states allows more time for tissues to extract 
oxygen from the blood. In contrast, higher Scvo2 (i.e., 
>65%) would imply either higher cardiac output (e.g., 
distributive shock) or inability for tissues to extract oxy-
gen from the blood (e.g., mitochondrial dysfunction in 
sepsis). Scvo2 is subject to error for a number of reasons, 
and the data should only be one part of a global clinical 
assessment of the patient.
Pulmonary Artery Catheter
In the past PACs were commonly used in ICU patients to 
measure cardiac output and to estimate left ventricular 
preload. After multiple randomized clinical trials of PAC 
monitoring did not demonstrate a mortality benefit, 
their use has decreased markedly.19 In addition, place-
ment of PACs has significant risk of morbidity caused 
by arrhythmias or pulmonary artery injury, and they 
have higher rates of infection than other CVCs. There 
are rare patients for whom PACs may still be help-
ful, including ICU patients with dual cardiogenic and 
septic shock, though greater emphasis is being placed 
on noninvasive measures of cardiac output and fluid 
responsiveness.
Noninvasive Cardiac Output Monitors
Because of the risks of invasive monitors, several nonin-
vasive cardiac output monitors have been introduced to 
the ICU. These methods can include arterial pulse contour 
analysis, esophageal Doppler, bioimpedance, bioreac-
tance, pulse wave transit time, and analysis of an arte-
rial waveform using the volume clamp method or radial 
artery applanation tonometry. Research is still ongoing 
to determine the accuracy and clinical benefit for these 
tools in critically ill patients.20
Point-of-Care Ultrasonography
Point-of-care ultrasonography is a powerful tool in the 
ICU for both differentiation of the various causes of 
shock and monitoring the response to treatment. Though 
the accuracy of ultrasound is dependent on operator skill, 
it is now routinely taught in critical care fellowship pro-
grams. Its main benefits include the rapidity of a focused 
assessment to answer a specific clinical question and its 
ability to be repeated in real time as a patient’s clinical 
picture evolves (also see Chapter 21).
Pulmonary: Respiratory Failure
Respiratory failure remains a common indication for ICU 
admission. It can be categorized based on the acuity of 
the process (e.g., acute vs. chronic) and the physiologic 
perturbation present (e.g., hypercapnia vs. hypoxemia). 
SVR leads to hypotension and circulatory failure. Spinal 
cord injury above the fourth thoracic level may also be 
associated with bradycardia caused by interruption of 
cardiac accelerator fibers.
Treatment
Early neurosurgical intervention can improve outcomes 
after spinal cord injury. To prevent secondary ischemic 
injury, early treatment goals are to maintain blood flow 
and perfusion pressure to the brain and spinal cord by 
avoiding hypotension and, in many cases, targeting a 
higher-than-physiologic mean arterial pressure of >85 
mm Hg for 3 to 7 days.16 To achieve this, fluid resusci-
tation with a balanced crystalloid solution can replace 
some of the pooled volume in vascular beds, but some 
patients require supplementation with a vasopressor 
such as norepinephrine to improve SVR, inotropy, and 
chronotropy. Once out of the window for secondary 
neurologic injury, some patients will continue to need 
blood pressure support with an oral α-agonist such as 
midodrine.
Hemodynamic Monitoring
Given the complexity of patients in shock, appropriate 
monitoring plays a key role in treatment. Intensive care 
settings not only allow for more frequent monitoring but 
also for the placement of continuous invasive monitors 
(e.g., arterial, central, and pulmonary artery catheters 
[PACs]). This section will focus on use of these monitors 
in critically ill patients (also see Chapter 20).
Arterial Catheter
Arterial catheters are the most commonly inserted 
invasive monitors in the ICU. Besides obtaining beat-
to-beat information regarding arterial blood pressure, 
arterial waveform analysis has gained acceptance as 
a tool to predict a patient’s hemodynamic response to 
intravascular volume expansion. Parameters derived 
from the arterial line include systolic pressure variation 
(SPV) and pulse pressure variation (PPV). PPV is more 
accurate than measurements of cardiac filling pressures 
(CVP, pulmonary artery occlusion pressure [PAOP]) to 
predict intravascular fluid responsiveness17 (also see 
Chapter 24).
Central Venous Catheter
CVP, which is generally recorded at the junction of the 
superior vena cava and the right atrium, has traditionally 
been used to monitor preload and to guide fluid therapy. 
However, CVP is a poor predictor of fluid responsive-
ness, and thus CVP measurement alone is an insufficient 
reason to place a CVC.18 (Scvo2 measurement can be 
helpful in patients with unclear etiology of cardiogenic 
shock or as a means to track improvement in cardiac 
function. Oxygen uptake by the body can be estimated 
by the difference between Scvo2 and the arterial oxygen 
Section VI CONSULTANT ANESTHETIC PRACTICE
742
lung-protective (ARDSnet) ventilation to prevent ventila-
tor-associated lung injury (i.e., barotrauma, volutrauma, 
and atelectrauma). The central tenets of lung-protective 
ventilation include lower tidal volumes (i.e., 6 mL/kg of 
ideal body weight), limited plateau pressure (i.e., <30 
cmH2O), using higher positive end-expiratory pressure 
(PEEP), and accepting lower PaO2 and higher PaCO2
Such distinctions help to direct appropriate treatment and 
supportive care. However, multiple processes can occur 
simultaneously. For example, a patient may have acute-
on-chronic respiratory failure with the presence of both 
hypoxemia and hypercapnia.
Hypoxemic Respiratory Failure
Hypoxemic respiratory failure can be characterized by 
either pathophysiology or etiology. The former frame-
work often distinguishes between the presence or absence 
of a difference between alveolar (A) and arterial (a) oxy-
gen partial pressures, known as the A-a gradient. The 
presence of an A-a gradient indicates a problem with 
oxygen diffusion between the alveolus and arterial capil-
lary (e.g., from pulmonary edema or pulmonary fibrosis), 
ventilation/perfusion (V/Q) mismatch (e.g., from pulmo-
nary embolism), or shunting (e.g., from atelectasis). The 
absence of an A-a gradient in a patient with hypoxemia 
indicates normal oxygen movement across the alveolar 
membrane (e.g., from hypoventilation or inhalation of a 
hypoxic gas mixture). In clinical practice most patients 
with hypoxemia have an increased A-a gradient. Disease 
processes causing hypoxemia include acute respiratory 
distress syndrome (ARDS), sepsis, pneumonia, pulmonary 
embolism, cardiogenic or noncardiogenic pulmonary 
edema, trauma, and obstructive lung disease, among oth-
ers (also see Chapter 5).
ARDS
ARDS is an important cause of hypoxemic respiratory 
failure. It is caused by a diffuse, inflammatory injury 
of the lung, resulting in the development of noncardio-
genic pulmonary edema with resultant V/Q mismatch, 
hypoxemia, and decreased pulmonary compliance. ARDS 
is defined by the Berlin definition21 (Box 41.2). ARDS 
typically follows within 1 week of an inciting event that 
can lead to direct or indirect lung injury (Table 41.2). 
Our understanding of the triggers of ARDS is constantly 
evolving. For example, in late 2019 the severe acute 
respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) virus 
emerged as a new cause of ARDS, triggering a global 
pandemic responsible for millions of deaths worldwide in 
the first years after its detection.
Although the underlying cause of lung injury may 
predict outcome, patient-specific factors such as age, 
immunocompromised status, and organ dysfunction are 
stronger predictors for survival. In some patients ARDS 
resolves after the acute phase; however, others experi-
ence a chronic alveolitis leading to pulmonary fibrosis. 
Such patients often experience continued hypoxemia, 
increased physiologic dead space, and decreased compli-
ance with chronic ventilator dependence.
Treatment
In addition to treating the underlying cause of ARDS, 
management is largely supportive with a focus on 
Causes of Direct 
Lung Injury
Causes of Indirect 
Lung Injury
Pneumonia
Sepsis
Aspiration of gastric contents
Severe trauma
Pulmonary contusion
Cardiopulmonary bypass
Reperfusion pulmonary edema
Drug overdose
Amniotic fluid embolus
Acute pancreatitis
Inhalational injury
Near-drowning
Transfusion-related acute 
lung injury
Table 41.2
Triggers of Acute Respiratory Distress 
Syndrome
Data from Ware LB, Matthay MA. The acute respiratory distress 
syndrome. N Engl J Med. 2000;342:1334–1349.
Box 41.2
Berlin Definition of Acute Respiratory Distress 
Syndrome
Timing
Within 1 week of a known clinical insult or 
new or worsening respiratory symptoms
Oxygenation
Mild: Pao2/Fio2 >200 ≤300 mm Hg with 
PEEP or CPAP ≥5 cmH2O
Moderate: Pao2/Fio2 >100 ≤200 mm Hg 
with PEEP ≥5 cmH2O
Severe: Pao2/Fio2 ≤100 mm Hg with PEEP 
≥5 cmH2O
Chest 
Radiograph
Bilateral opacities not fully explained by 
effusions, lobar/lung collapse, or nodules
Edema
Respiratory failure not fully explained by 
cardiac failure or fluid overload
Risk Factor
If no risk factor for lung injury identified, 
then need objective assessment such as 
echocardiography to exclude hydrostatic 
edema
Adapted from Acute respiratory distress syndrome: The Berlin 
definition. JAMA. 2012;307(23). ARDS, Acute respiratory distress 
syndrome; CPAP, continuous positive airway pressure; Fio2, fraction 
of inspired oxygen; Pao2, arterial partial pressure of oxygen; PEEP, 
positive end-expiratory pressure.
Modified from Liu LL, Gropper MA: Critical care anesthesiology. Ch 101. 
In Miller RD (ed): Miller’s Anesthesia, 8e. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2015.
VI
Chapter 41 Critical Care Medicine
743
respiratory failure, patients treated with HFNC had 
reduced mortality compared with patients treated with 
standard oxygen therapy or noninvasive ventilation, 
although there was no difference in the rate of tracheal 
intubation.23
Noninvasive Positive-Pressure Ventilation
NIPPV, which includes both continuous positive airway 
pressure (CPAP) and bilevel positive airway pressure 
(BiPAP), delivers positive-pressure breaths via a face-
mask, nasal pillows, or helmet without an endotracheal 
tube (ETT) present. For patients with COPD and acute 
hypercapnic respiratory failure, appropriate use of NIPPV 
can reduce mortality rate, avoid endotracheal intuba-
tion, improve dyspnea, and reduce hospital length of 
stay. Other established indications for NIPPV include 
acute cardiogenic pulmonary edema, postoperative res-
piratory failure, and hypoxemic respiratory failure in 
immunocompromised patients (e.g., organ and bone 
marrow transplant recipients). NIPPV is most beneficial 
in patients who have a potentially rapidly reversible 
pulmonary process that requires some ventilator support. 
Potential drawbacks to using NIPPV include the potential 
for aspiration, the inability to control tidal volume and 
airway pressure in patients with ARDS, and potential 
delays in endotracheal intubation, which can lead to 
less controlled circumstances if an emergent procedure 
is required. Contraindications for using NIPPV are listed 
in Box 41.3
Mechanical Ventilation
Though respiratory support can be delivered through non-
invasive means, mechanical ventilation typically refers to 
positive-pressure ventilation delivered through an inva-
sive approach (i.e., via ETT or tracheotomy). The goals of 
mechanical ventilation include (1) decreasing the work of 
breathing, (2) improving oxygen delivery, (3)facilitating 
carbon dioxide removal, and (4) minimizing ventilator-
associated lung injury. Modern ICU ventilators are con-
trolled by microprocessors that allow for high flow rates, 
values (“permissive” hypoxemia and hypercapnia). In the 
landmark ARDSnet trial use of this ventilation strategy 
resulted in a mortality reduction from 40% to 31% when 
compared with usual care at the time.22 Other evidence-
based supportive care strategies for patients with ARDS 
include restrictive fluid management, neuromuscular 
blockade (in carefully selected patients), and prone posi-
tioning. Many additional therapies, including inhaled 
pulmonary vasodilators and ECMO, have been trialed in 
ARDS without clear mortality benefit but may be used on 
a case-by-case basis as rescue therapies for patients with 
refractory hypoxemia.
Hypercapnic Respiratory Failure
Causes of hypercapnic respiratory failure include 
hypoventilation (e.g., from drug intoxication or neu-
romuscular weakness) or increased dead space (e.g., 
from chronic obstructive pulmonary disease [COPD] or 
asthma). Hypercapnia may also be present in severe 
forms of an infiltrative pulmonary process such as ARDS.
Respiratory Support
Both hypercapnic and hypoxemic respiratory failure 
may require respiratory support, which can be provided 
through noninvasive or invasive means. Decision mak-
ing around ventilatory support requires knowledge of the 
underlying pathophysiology of the patient’s diagnosis 
and the indications and contraindications for specific 
supportive modalities.
Supplemental Oxygen
Supplemental oxygen can be provided by low-flow (e.g., 
nasal cannula, simple facemask, nonrebreather mask) or 
high-flow (e.g., high-flow nasal cannula [HFNC]) devices. 
For low-flow devices, the maximum fraction of inspired 
oxygen (FiO2) provided depends on both the location 
and flow rate at which the oxygen is delivered and also, 
importantly, on the patient’s respiratory effort. Deliv-
ery of oxygen through these devices creates an oxygen 
reservoir in the patient’s nasopharynx. Patients who 
are breathing quietly will inspire higher oxygen con-
centrations from the nasopharyngeal reservoir, whereas 
patients who are tachypneic and/or breathing at a higher 
peak inspiratory flow rate will entrain more room air and 
inspire a lower oxygen concentration with each breath.
HFNC uses heated and humidified oxygen that is 
delivered at high flow rates through a nasal cannula, 
which provides a functionally larger nasopharyngeal res-
ervoir and more consistent delivery of inspired oxygen. 
At very high flow rates, HFNC provides a small amount 
of positive airway pressure and reduces dead space by 
flushing expired carbon dioxide from the upper air-
ways. Most patients find HFNC to be more comfortable 
than noninvasive positive-pressure ventilation (NIPPV) 
via a facemask. In a multicenter trial comparing out-
comes in patients with acute hypoxemic, nonhypercarbic 
Box 41.3
Contraindications for Noninvasive Positive-
Pressure Ventilation
Impaired neurologic state (coma, seizures, encephalopathy)
Respiratory arrest or upper airway obstruction
Shock or severe cardiovascular instability
Severe upper gastrointestinal bleeding
Recent gastroesophageal surgery
Vomiting
Excessive airway secretions
Facial lesions that prevent proper fit of nasal or facial masks
Section VI CONSULTANT ANESTHETIC PRACTICE
744
breath. If the ventilator is set to target a particular tidal 
volume, the type of support is termed volume control ven-
tilation (VCV) whereas if the ventilator is set to deliver 
a specific airway pressure, it is termed pressure control 
ventilation (PCV). What triggers (or starts) the breath and 
what cycles (or stops) the breath may vary in each type 
of support (Table 41.3).
In each mode some parameters are set by the pro-
vider, whereas other parameters vary (see Table 41.3). 
The physical concept of lung compliance (Box 41.4), 
which describes how much volume enters the lung when 
a specific amount of pressure is applied, enables better 
understanding of these modes. When providers specify 
a tidal volume to be delivered by the ventilator in VCV, 
the airway pressure needed to provide that volume varies 
according to the patient’s lung compliance. The inverse 
is also true; in PCV when the ventilator delivers a breath 
targeted to achieve a specific airway pressure, the tidal 
volume of that breath varies depending on the patient’s 
lung compliance (and may even vary breath to breath in 
the same patient). Because minute ventilation equals tidal 
volume times respiratory rate, a patient’s minute ventila-
tion is also variable in PCV. In addition to the ventilator 
target, providers must specify other parameters for each 
carefully controlled tidal volumes and airway pressures, 
fine control over flow characteristics, hybrid ventilation 
modes, and advanced monitoring that facilitates delivery 
of protective ventilation to severely diseased lungs.
In the most basic sense mechanical ventilation is 
delivered in one of three modes: continuous mandatory 
ventilation (CMV), intermittent mandatory ventilation 
(IMV), and spontaneous. These modes are defined by 
whether the ventilator (CMV) or the patient (spontane-
ous) initiates the breath or whether a combination of 
the two (IMV) occurs. Assist control (AC) is a commonly 
used type of CMV in which every breath, including 
those occurring at a set rate and those initiated by the 
patient, is fully supported by the ventilator. Synchronized 
intermittent mandatory ventilation (SIMV) is the most 
commonly used form of IMV, in which the ventilator 
provides volume- or pressure-targeted breaths at a rate 
set by providers but also allows the patient to breathe 
spontaneously in between ventilator-delivered breaths. 
The ventilator synchronizes its controlled breaths with 
the patient’s spontaneous breaths if they occur within 
a short window of time before a scheduled controlled 
breath. Spontaneous breaths in SIMV may be either sup-
ported (with pressure or volume support) or unsupported. 
Pressure support ventilation (PSV) is the most common 
type of spontaneous mode, in which the ventilator deliv-
ers a set pressure only when the patient initiates a breath.
The type of support the ventilator provides in each 
mode is defined by the target set by providers for the 
Box 41.4
Formula for Lung Compliance
Compliance = ΔVolume/ΔPressure
CMV (AC)
IMV (SIMV)
Spontaneous
Name
AC-VC
AC-PC
SIMV-VC
SIMV-PC
PSV
Target
Volume
Pressure
Volumea
Pressurea
Pressure
Parameters
Set
- VT
- Flow 
rate
- f
- PEEP
- FiO2
- PIP
- I:E ratio
or I-time
- f
- PEEP
- FiO2
- VT
- Flow rate
- f
- PEEP
- FiO2
- Spont 
breath 
support
- PIP
- I:E ratio or 
I-time
- f
- PEEP
- FiO2
- Spont 
breath 
support
- Driving P (PIP and 
PEEP)
- FiO2
- Flow or pressure trigger
Variable
PIP
VT, VE
PIP
VT, VE
VT, VE
Trigger
Time
Time
Time
Time
Flow or pressure
Cycle
Volume
Time
Volume
Time
Flow
Limit
Volume and 
pressure
Pressure
Volume
Pressure
Pressure
aTarget for controlled breaths delivered by ventilator. Spontaneous breaths may be either unsupported or supported by pressure support or 
volume support.
AC, assist control; CMV, controlled mandatory ventilation; f, respiratory rate (frequency); FiO2, fraction of inspired oxygen; I:E, inspiratory:expiratory; 
IMV, intermittent mandatory ventilation; I-time, inspiratory time; PC, pressure control; PEEP, positive endexpiratory pressure; PIP, peak inspiratory 
pressure; PSV, pressure support ventilation; SIMV, synchronized intermittent mandatory ventilation; Spont, spontaneous; VC, volume control; 
VT, tidal volume; VE, minute ventilation.
Table 41.3
Modes of Mechanical Ventilation
VI
Chapter 41 Critical Care Medicine
745
type of ventilation, which may include PEEP, respiratory 
rate (f), FiO2, flow rate, inspiratory:expiratory ratio, and 
limit/alarm settings (Table 41.4).
Hybrid modes of mechanical ventilation, which allow 
for control of more than one parameter at the same time, 
also exist. These modes are typically given proprietary 
names by ventilator manufacturers. A combined mode 
that targets both pressure and volume (known as pres-
sure-regulated volume control [PRVC] or pressure control 
ventilation-volume guaranteed [PCV-VG] by different 
manufacturers) is a general example. In this type of 
mode the provider specifies both tidal volume and airway 
pressure targets. The ventilator automatically adjusts the 
amount of pressure delivered on a breath-by-breath basis 
to achieve the desired tidal volume without exceeding 
the pressure limit. This allows a minute ventilation to be 
achieved in a pressure-targeted mode, which cannot be 
done using classic PCV.
Weaning From Mechanical Ventilation
Weaning may account for more than 40% of the patient’s 
time on mechanical ventilation. Initiation of an efficient, 
standardized weaning process as soon as a patient recov-
ers from the initial cause of respiratory failure should 
decrease the duration of mechanical ventilation and the 
risk of complications such as ventilator-associated pneu-
monia (VAP). No single algorithm can accurately predict 
successful tracheal extubation in all cases, but reasonable 
criteria are listed here. The average rate of failed tracheal 
extubation (i.e., inadequate ventilation after extubation 
of the trachea) in surgical ICUs is 5% to 8%, whereas in 
medical and neurologic ICUs, the rate is 17%.
Criteria for Weaning Trial
Oxygenation The patient should have adequate oxy-
genation, usually defined as PaO2/FiO2 more than 150 
mm Hg with PEEP less than 8 cm H2O. This amount of 
oxygen is chosen because this level can be reliably deliv-
ered via facemask or nasal cannula. These numbers are 
general guidelines, and the ultimate decision for an indi-
vidual patient requires clinical judgment and experience.
Ventilation Patients should be able to adequately 
eliminate carbon dioxide without the help of mechanical 
ventilation. A VT greater than 5 to 6 cc/kg (with spon-
taneous breathing or minimal ventilatory support) and a 
minute ventilation less than 10 L/min are commonly used 
criteria for extubation readiness.
Respiratory Mechanics
Rapid shallow breathing index (RSBI): RSBI, the ratio 
of respiratory rate (breaths/min) to tidal volume (in 
liters), is the most extensively studied and commonly 
used predictor of extubation success. Though an 
RSBI less than 105 breaths/min/L is somewhat 
associated with weaning success, an RSBI more 
Example
Ventilator Orders 
Written
Additional Settings 
That Can Be Ordered
Explanation
Example 1:
Assist control–volume 
control (AC-VC)
Mode AC/VC
Rate 10
VT 500 mL
PEEP 5 cmH2O
Fio2 1.0
Flow rate: typically 60 L/
min
Trigger: flow or pressure
Ventilator will deliver the preset tidal volume 
of 500 mL 10 times a minute; if the patient’s 
respiratory rate is greater than 10, each 
breath will also be 500 mL
Example 2:
Assist control–
pressure control 
(AC-PC)
Mode AC/PC
Rate 10
PIP 20 cmH2O
PEEP 5 cmH2O
Fio2 1.0
I:E ratio: typically 1:2
Inspiratory time
Trigger: flow or pressure
Ventilator will deliver 10 breaths per minute; 
each breath will reach a peak pressure of 20 
cmH2O; if the patient’s respiratory rate is 
greater than 10, each breath will also reach a 
peak pressure of 20 cmH2O
Example 3:
Synchronized 
intermittent 
mandatory 
ventilation–volume 
control (SIMV-VC)
Mode SIMV-VC
Rate 10
VT 500 mL
Pressure support 5 cmH2O
PEEP 5 cmH2O
Fio2 0.5
Flow rate: typically 60 L/
min
Trigger: flow or pressure 
(this applies to all the 
breaths, SIMV, or pressure 
support)
Ventilator will deliver 10 breaths per minute 
with tidal volume 500 mL; if the patient’s 
respiratory rate is greater than 10, those 
nonmandatory breaths will receive inspiratory 
pressure support to peak pressure 5 cmH2O 
above the PEEP of 5 cmH2O
Example 4:
Pressure support 
ventilation (PSV)
Mode PSV
Driving pressure 8 cmH2O
PEEP 5 cmH2O
Fio2 0.5
Trigger: flow or pressure
Patient must be breathing spontaneously; 
each breath will receive inspiratory pressure 
support to peak pressure 8 cmH2O above the 
PEEP of 5 cmH2O
Table 41.4
Mechanical Ventilator Orders
Fio2, Fraction of inspired oxygen; I:E, inspiratory to expiratory ratio; PEEP, positive end-expiratory pressure; PIP, peak inspiratory pressure; VT, 
tidal volume.
Section VI CONSULTANT ANESTHETIC PRACTICE
746
than 105 breaths/min/L is likely better at identifying 
patients who will fail.
Maximum inspiratory force (MIF): Patients must 
have the respiratory muscle strength to generate an 
adequate tidal volume. Although an MIF more negative 
than −20 cmH2O (normal: −100 cmH2O) indicates little 
or no increase in the probability of weaning success, 
an MIF less negative than −20 cmH2O predicts a small 
increase in the probability of weaning failure. The 
challenge of obtaining an accurate measurement in a 
spontaneously breathing patient is one reason for the 
poor predictive ability of the MIF. MIF is not routinely 
measured before weaning from ventilation in most 
ICUs, though if a patient is not progressing in the 
weaning process, measurement of an MIF may suggest 
a cause such as muscle weakness or deconditioning.
Other Criteria Other factors that may affect the 
success of weaning from mechanical ventilation are 
described in Box 41.5
Weaning Strategies
All mechanically ventilated patients should undergo a 
daily assessment of extubation readiness.24 If the patient 
is deemed ready, a spontaneous breathing trial (SBT) is 
performed. If the factors described previously (e.g., res-
piratory mechanics, mental status, hemodynamics) remain 
adequate throughout the SBT, a decision for tracheal extu-
bation can be made. Protocol-based weaning by nurses 
and respiratory therapists allows more rapid tracheal 
extubation compared with physician-directed weaning. 
The SBT can be conducted with different ventilation 
modes, including PSV or T-piece trial. No specific ventila-
tion mode has yet been shown to be superior to others.25
However, for an individual patient, a specific mode may 
have clinical advantages. For example, in patients with 
heart failure and reduced left ventricular ejection fraction 
the change from positive-pressure ventilation to negative-
pressure ventilation can increase left ventricular afterload 
and worsen cardiovascular strain. This patient may benefit 
from a T-piece trial for the SBT, because even low levels of 
positive pressure and PEEP may provide afterload reduc-
tion. If the patient does not develop signs of pulmonary 
edema during the T-piece trial, the decision for tracheal 
extubation can proceed.
The optimal duration of an SBT is unknown, but most 
range from 30 minutes to 2 hours. Longer periods may be 
required for patients with chronic respiratory failure or for 
patients who fail their initial SBT. In select patients wean-
ing strategies that include NIPPV can reduce the rate of 
mortality, VAP, and weaning failure without increasing the 
risk of tracheal reintubation.26 This approach may be con-
sidered in patients who do not have difficult-to-manage 
airways, excessive secretions, or an impaired mental status 
and should be coupled with an early decision regarding 
tracheal reintubation if the patient remains tachypneic or 
in distress. Tracheal reintubation, especially if delayed, is 
associated with increased mortality rate, longer hospital 
stay, and lower likelihood of returning home.
Tracheotomies
A small proportion of patients may require prolonged 
mechanical ventilation during their critical illness. A 
tracheotomy may facilitate rehabilitation and allow for 
weaning of sedation. The timing of tracheotomy remains 
a controversial topic. Early tracheotomy (≤4 days) does 
not result in decreased mortality or ICU length of stay 
when compared with late tracheotomy (≥10 days).27
Physicians are poor at predicting those patients requir-
ing prolonged mechanical ventilation. Only 45% of the 
patients who were predicted to require more than 7 days 
of mechanical ventilation actually required a trache-
otomy; the remaining 55% were successfully extubated. 
Because of this, tracheotomies are often deferred until 10 
to 14 days after tracheal intubation.
Placement of tracheotomies can lead to the loss of 
mean airway pressure and derecruitment of alveolar units, 
Box 41.5
Factors Affecting Weaning From Mechanical 
Ventilation
•Secretions: The nature and amount of airway secretions 
and the ability to clear secretions, which involves the gag 
reflex and cough strength.
•Upper airway patency:
The presence of upper airway edema can lead to airway 
obstruction and hypoxemia after tracheal extubation. 
The degree of airway edema can be measured with the 
cuff leak test. Both volume and pressure approaches 
for measuring cuff leak have been described.
In the volume approach the leak is defined as the 
difference between the expired tidal volume in 
volume control mode with the cuff inflated and 
with the cuff deflated, as a percentage of set tidal 
volume. A leak of greater than 15% is predictive of 
successful extubation.
In the pressure approach the ETT cuff is deflated 
and positive pressure is delivered through the ETT 
until an air leak is heard. A leak pressure of less 
than 10 cmH2O suggests the absence of airway 
edema, whereas a leak pressure greater than 
20 cmH2O may indicate significant airway edema.
Ongoing anatomic obstructions such as upper airway 
masses may play a role in determining whether to 
remove an ETT.
•Mental status: Patients should have an adequate level of 
consciousness to protect their airway from aspiration of 
gastric contents.
•Hemodynamic stability: Patients should be hemodynamically 
stable, because discontinuation of positive-pressure 
ventilation can lead to increased work of breathing and 
alter left ventricular preload and afterload.
•Clinical course: Resolution or improvement of the process 
for which the patient was intubated should be considered.
ETT, endotracheal tube.
VI
Chapter 41 Critical Care Medicine
747
concerns for critically ill patients fed via a feeding tube. 
In the past feedings were often reduced or held for mini-
mal gastric residual volume, leading patients to receive 
only a small portion of their estimated caloric require-
ment over time. Current literature does not support this 
practice, so significantly larger residual volumes are now 
accepted (500 mL or more).29
Patients undergoing frequent surgeries (like burn 
debridements) may end up malnourished from frequent 
nutritional holds that start at midnight or 8 hours before 
surgery.30 With increased emphasis on continuing enteral 
nutrition, there has been a shift toward decreasing or 
eliminating fasting times for critically ill patients having 
surgical procedures. At some institutions all enteral feed-
ing in intubated patients can be continued until transport 
to the operating room, whereas others enforce longer 
fasting intervals for gastric feeding tubes versus post-
pyloric or jejunal feeding tubes. Some providers recom-
mend aspiration of any residual gastric contents before 
transfer. Most institutions continue to recommend 6 to 8 
hours fasting before procedures involving manipulation 
of the ETT (such as tracheostomies or laryngectomies). No 
definitive data exist to guide practice, and ultimately the 
decision is based on a hospital’s practice and the clinical 
discretion of the anesthesia provider.
Renal: Acute Kidney Injury
Epidemiology
The incidence of acute kidney injury (AKI) in the ICU is as 
high as 35%. Despite improvements in renal replacement 
technology, ARF requiring dialysis in the ICU is associated 
with in-hospital mortality of more than 50%.
Diagnosis
Multiple criteria exist in the literature to define AKI.31
The Acute Dialysis Quality Initiative (ADQI) group, an 
alliance of experts consisting of nephrologists and inten-
sivists, proposed the RIFLE criteria (Table 41.6), which 
stands for risk, injury, failure, and two outcome classes 
(loss and end-stage kidney disease).32 For each increasing 
RIFLE class, there is a stepwise increase in mortality rate 
independent of other comorbidities. Therefore strategies 
to prevent even mild AKI may improve survival.
ARF is normally categorized by prerenal, renal, and 
postrenal causes (Box 41.6). The workup should include 
careful physical examination and assessment of intravas-
cular volume status in order to differentiate hypovolemia 
leading to prerenal azotemia versus hypervolemia from 
oliguria. Laboratory evaluations should include serum 
and urine electrolytes, urinalysis, and examination of 
urinary sediment. Urine sodium concentration and frac-
tional excretion of sodium can help identify prerenal 
azotemia. In patients who have received a diuretic the 
fractional excretion of urea may be a more sensitive test 
than fractional excretion of sodium.
so the procedure should be deferred in unstable patients 
and those with high PEEP and oxygen requirements. 
Inadvertent dislodgement of the tracheostomy tube dur-
ing the first 7 days after placement is a potentially life-
threatening problem. In this circumstance blind trache-
otomy tube advancement may result in passage through 
a false subcutaneous tract rather than into the trachea. 
When feasible, orotracheal intubation should be the first 
maneuver to obtain a secure airway. Otherwise, a pediatric 
laryngoscope blade or a fiber-optic scope may be inserted 
into the stoma, and a new tracheotomy tube or ETT can be 
inserted under direct visual identification of tracheal rings.
Gastrointestinal: Nutrition
The goal of nutrition in the ICU is to preserve lean body 
mass and avoid malnourishment, which can lead to 
increased mortality rate, prolonged hospital stays, poor 
wound healing, and increased risk for infection. However, 
there are no reliable laboratory markers to determine the 
patients at risk, because of fluctuating volume status 
and impaired protein synthesis associated with critical 
illness and multiorgan failure. Therefore identification 
of patients at risk requires careful history taking and a 
targeted nutritional physical examination.
Estimates of daily caloric requirements can be calcu-
lated from various equations. The Harris Benedict equa-
tion estimates basal energy expenditure based on weight, 
height, age, and sex. An additional adjustment must then 
be made for the increased metabolism associated with 
underlying disease processes such as infections, multi-
system organ dysfunction, trauma, and burns. A quick 
method to estimate whether the patient is receiving enough 
calories based on weight and level of stress or illness is 
described in Table 41.5. Sometimes, a simple nutritional 
plan can be started based on these estimates, and then fur-
ther tests (e.g., nitrogen balance study) can be obtained to 
assess the adequacy of the protein-based calories.
Enteral nutrition is always preferred to parenteral 
nutrition in order to maintain gut integrity and reduce 
the risk of gastrointestinal bleeding. However, achieving 
goal rate or goal calories is not urgent, at least for the 
first week in otherwise well-nourished patients.28 Vomit-
ing and aspiration of gastric contents have long been 
Level of Illness/Stress
Estimated Caloric Need
Maintenance or minimal
25–30 kcal/kg/day
Moderate
30–35 kcal/kg/day
Severe
35–40 kcal/kg/day
Table 41.5
Quick Estimate of Caloric Needs
The nutritional intake composition should be 1.2–2 g/kg/day 
protein, 15%–30% of calories should be from lipids, and the 
remainder of the calories should be from carbohydrates (30%–70%).
Section VI CONSULTANT ANESTHETIC PRACTICE
748
medication dose adjustments for creatinine clearance, 
and electrolyte and acid–base monitoring. Platelet dys-
function may occur as a result of uremia and require 
desmopressin (DDAVP) for support if bleeding is prob-
lematic. Pharmacologic approaches to improve renal 
function such as low-dose dopamine, diuretics, and 
N-acetylcysteine have not shown benefit.
Dialysis
Dialysis is often required in patients with advanced 
renal failure to help with excessive intravascular volume 
and electrolyte disturbances. In the ICU dialysis can be 
offered as intermittent hemodialysis (iHD) or continuous 
renal replacement therapy (CRRT), which is itself divided 
into versions that rely on hemodialysis (CVVHD) or 
hemofiltration (CVVH). Although CRRT has several theo-
retical advantages over iHD in hemodynamically unsta-
ble patients or those at risk of injury with rapid fluid or 
electrolyte shifts, randomized trials have not supported 
its superiority.33
Fluid Status Assessment
Management of critically ill patients often involves 
assessment of fluid status. Whether a patient is hypov-
olemic or hypervolemic can alter management in many 
disease processes, including AKI and hyponatremia. 
Because no single data point can accurately predict vol-
ume status, a global assessment of the patient is needed. 
This can include physical examination findings (mucous 
membranes, peripheral edema), ultrasound (inferior vena 
cava [IVC] examination), static measurements (CVP, pul-
monary capillary wedge pressure), and dynamic measure-
ments (SPV on arterial lines, straight-leg raise)17 (also see 
Chapter 24).
Infectious Disease: Hospital-Acquired 
Infections
While community-acquired infections are far more preva-
lent in ICU patients than hospital-acquired infections 
(HAIs), some HAIs can be reduced or prevented by the 
introduction of evidence-based bundles of care. Suc-
cessfully reducing these infections can improve patient 
outcomes by reducing complications and reduce cost for 
the hospital, which does not receive reimbursement for 
treatment provided for HAIs. The most common HAIs in 
ICUs are urinary tract infections (31%), followed by pneu-
monia (27%), and primary bloodstream infections (19%).
Catheter-Associated Urinary Tract Infection
No single strategy prevents catheter-associated urinary 
tract infections (CAUTIs). The only recommendations 
have been to use aseptic techniques for placement and 
to limit the duration of indwelling urinary catheters by 
assessing for daily need. Asymptomatic bacteriuria is 
often confused for a CAUTI, so urine cultures are only 
Treatment
Supportive care should be focused on maintenance of 
euvolemia, avoidance of nephrotoxic drugs such as non-
steroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) or contrast, 
RIFLE 
Category
GFR Criteria
UO Criteria
OR Hospital 
Mortality
Risk
Cr 
increased × 1.5 
or GFR decreased 
>25%
<0.5 mL/kg/
hr × 6 hr
2.2 (95% CI 
2.17–2.3)
Injury
Cr increased × 2 
or GFR decreased 
>50%
<0.5 mL/kg/
hr × 12 hr
6.1 (95% CI 
5.74–6.44)
Failure
Cr increased × 3 
or GFR decreased 
>75% or Cr >4 
mg/dL
<0.3 mL/kg/
hr × 24 hr or 
Anuria × 12 
hr
8.6 (95% CI 
8.07–9.15)
Loss
Complete loss of 
renal function for 
>4 weeks
ESRD
End-stage renal 
disease
Table 41.6
The RIFLE Criteria
Cr, Creatinine; ESRD, end-stage renal disease; GFR, glomerular 
filtration rate; OR, odds ratio; UO, urine output.
Data modified from KDI Global, OKAKIW Group. Kidney Disease 
Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) clinical practice guideline for 
acute kidney injury. Kidney Int. 2012;(Suppl 2):1–138.
Box 41.6
Causes of Acute Renal Failure
Prerenal
Hypovolemia
Low effective circulating volume (e.g., from 
decompensated heart failure or liver disease)
Renal
Glomerulonephritis
Toxins (e.g., NSAIDs, cisplatin, aminoglycosides, contrast 
agent, myoglobin, hemoglobin)
Vasculitis (e.g., TTP/HUS)
AIN (e.g., from PCN, cephalosporins, cimetidine, SLE, 
sarcoidosis)
Tubular disease (e.g., ATN, tumor lysis syndrome)
Postrenal
Obstructive nephropathy
AIN, Acute interstitial nephritis; ATN, acute tubular necrosis; NSAIDs, 
nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs; PCN, penicillin; SLE, systemic 
lupus erythematosus; TTP/HUS, thrombotic thrombocytopenic 
purpura/hemolytic uremic syndrome.
VI
Chapter 41 Critical Care Medicine
749
with moderate risk for VTE, whereas high-risk patients, 
such as trauma and orthopedic patients, should receive 
LMWH. In patients at increased risk for bleeding compli-
cations mechanical thromboprophylaxis (e.g., graduated 
compression stockings, intermittent pneumatic compres-
sion devices) provides some level of protection against 
VTE, but it is less effective than chemoprophylaxis and is 
generally ineffective as dual therapy in patients already 
receiving chemoprophylaxis.40
Gastrointestinal Prophylaxis
Gastrointestinal stress ulcers occur in critically ill patients 
because of an increase in gastric acid production in 
conjunction with a functionally impaired mucosal bar-
rier. Gastrointestinal bleeding occurs more frequently in 
patients who are mechanically ventilated for more than 
48 hours and in those with a coagulopathy (Box 41.7), 
especially in patients unable to tolerate enteral feed-
ing. Prophylaxis with a proton pump inhibitor or an H2
blocker can reduce rates of gastrointestinal bleeding in 
these high-risk patients, with the data somewhat favor-
ing proton pump inhibitors; however, neither reduce 
mortality.41 Patients who receive gastrointestinal prophy-
laxis may have increased risks of developing hospital-
associated pneumonia or Clostridium difficile infection 
because of an increased gastric pH. Thus prophylaxis 
should be discontinued as soon as patients are no longer 
at high risk of gastrointestinal bleeding or once they tol-
erate any enteral nutrition.42
A-F BUNDLE
There is a well-established connection between com-
mon critical care diagnoses (such as sepsis or delirium) 
and long-term impairment in cognition and/or physi-
cal function in survivors of critical illness. The term 
recommended when symptoms or a urinalysis suggest 
infection or inflammation.
Ventilator-Associated Pneumonia
Evidence-based bundles to reduce the incidence of VAP 
include elevation of the head of the bed to 30 degrees, 
use of ETTs with subglottic suctioning, and daily use of 
spontaneous awakening trials (SATs) and SBTs to assess 
ongoing need for mechanical ventilation. Excessive use 
of medications for stress ulcer prophylaxis increases gas-
tric pH and the risk for VAP, so they should be discon-
tinued when patients lack an indication for their use.34
Catheter-Related Bloodstream Infection
Catheter-related bloodstream infections (CRBSIs) are usu-
ally associated with central venous access. Bundles that 
ensure sterile placement of these central lines along with 
daily assessment of their ongoing need can reduce rates 
of CRBSIs. These bundles include skin preparation with 
chlorhexidine, chlorhexidine sponge for site dressing, 
antimicrobial-impregnated central lines, maximal sterile 
barrier use during line placement, and hand hygiene dur-
ing line placement.35
Endocrine: Glucose Management
Based on a landmark 2001 study, intensive insulin 
therapy to achieve a blood glucose level between 80 and 
110mg/dL was previously thought to be essential for 
improving survival in the ICU.36 However, more recent 
data have shown that intensive insulin therapy does 
not improve survival and actually increases the risks 
of hypoglycemia and mortality.37 38 Given these find-
ings, current ICU management goals include minimizing 
severe hypoglycemia (less than 40 mg/dL) and hypergly-
cemia (more than 200mg/dL) by targeting a moderate 
glucose range between 140 and 180 mg/dL. The optimal 
glucose target for an individual patient may vary from 
this range based on the patient’s baseline blood glucose 
or unique clinical situation.
Prophylaxis
Venous Thromboembolism
Critically ill patients are at increased risk for venous 
thromboembolisms (VTEs), including deep vein throm-
bosis (DVT) and pulmonary embolism. Along with risk 
factors for the general population such as immobility, 
independent risk factors specific to critically ill patients 
include mechanical ventilation, central venous catheteri-
zation, and vasopressor administration.
Randomized controlled trials reveal that chemopro-
phylaxis with unfractionated heparin (UFH) or low-
molecular-weight heparin (LMWH) significantly reduces 
the occurrence of DVTs.39 The American College of Chest 
Physicians recommends either UFH or LMWH in patients 
Box 41.7
Indications for Stress Ulcer Prophylaxis
History of GI bleed within last year
Mechanical ventilation >48 hours
Coagulopathy not from pharmacologic anticoagulation 
(platelet count <50 × 10^9/L, INR >1.5, or PTT 
>2 × control)
Trauma
Spinal cord injury
Severe traumatic brain injury
Extensive thermal injury or burns
High-dose steroids in patients with severe sepsis or septic 
shock
GI, Gastrointestinal; INR, international normalized ratio; PTT, partial 
thromboplastin time.
Section VI CONSULTANT ANESTHETIC PRACTICE
750
Drug
Elimination Half-Time
Peak Effecta
Suggested Dose
Bolus
Infusion
Morphine
2–4 hr
30 min
1–4 mg
1–10 mg/hr
Fentanyl
2–5 hr
4 min
25–100 μg
25–200 μg/hr
Hydromorphone
2–4 hr
20 min
0.2–1 mg
0.2–5 mg/hr
Ketamine
2–3 hr
30–60 s
1–5 μg/kg/min
Midazolam
3–5 hr
2–5 min
1–2 mg
0.5–10 mg/hr
Lorazepam
10–20 hr
2–20 min
1–2 mg
0.5–10 mg/hr
Propofol
20–30 hr
90 s
25–100 μg/kg/min
Dexmedetomidine
2 hr
1–2 min
0.2–0.7 μg/kg/hr
Table 41.7
Sedatives and Analgesics
aWith intravenous administration.
duration of mechanical ventilation.46 An SAT should 
not be performed in patients with contraindications to 
stopping continuous sedation, including neuromuscu-
lar blockade, alcohol withdrawal, seizures, or elevated 
intracranial pressure. During an SAT, continuous sedative 
infusions are paused, and the patient’s pain and agitation 
levels are assessed. A validated sedation scale such as the 
Richmond Agitation-Sedation Scale (RASS) should be 
used for assessment. If the patient remains calm, continu-
ous sedation should not be restarted, and pain should be 
treated, as noted earlier. If the patient becomes agitated, 
continuous sedation should be restarted at the lowest 
dose necessary to achieve a calm, cooperative patient. 
This sedation strategy focuses on providing the lightest 
possible sedation level necessary to facilitate mechanical 
ventilation. Light sedation can help diminish long-term 
psychological consequences of ICU admission, such as 
posttraumatic stress disorder.47 Protocolized management 
of SAT and SBT by non physicians has been shown to 
decrease time to extubation.48
C: Choice of Sedation and Analgesia
Before starting continuous sedation, pain should be 
controlled aggressively, usually with intermittent intra-
venous opioids. If pain has been optimally controlled and 
the patient remains agitated or has delirium, these issues 
should be targeted next. Propofol or dexmedetomidine 
are the preferred agents for continuous sedative infusions 
when they are needed. Light sedation levels (i.e., RASS 
0 or -1) should be targeted in most patients. Because 
benzodiazepine sedation in the ICU is associated with 
increased mortality and duration of mechanical ventila-
tion, continuous infusions of these medications should 
generally be avoided when other options are available.49
Common sedative and analgesic agents are listed in 
Table41.7
“post–intensive care syndrome” (PICS) has been devel-
oped to describe a constellation of physical, cognitive, 
or psychological symptoms that persist in critically ill 
patients or their family members after an ICU stay.43
The A-F bundle44 is a care strategy that was developed 
to help prevent or ameliorate the long-term cognitive, 
physical, and psychological impairments associated with 
PICS. Successful bundle implementation requires collab-
oration among members of the interprofessional ICU care 
team and application of many of the concepts previously 
discussed in this chapter. Hospitals that have imple-
mented this bundle report increased hospital survival and 
increased delirium-free and coma-free days.45 Elements 
of the bundle include the following components.
A: Assess, Prevent, and Manage Pain
Pain affects nearly all ICU patients whether they are 
capable of communicating it or not. Therefore regular 
pain assessment using a validated assessment tool is 
critical. Scales relying on self-reporting of pain are pre-
ferred (i.e., Numeric Rating Scale), but validated tools 
also exist for those who are unable to communicate (i.e., 
Behavioral Pain Scale or Critical Care Pain Observation 
Tool). Opioid pain medications are recommended as 
first-line agents to treat pain in ICU patients, but nono-
pioid adjuncts and nonpharmacologic techniques such 
as relaxation and music should also be considered when 
appropriate. Pain should be controlled preemptively if an 
upcoming procedure is expected to cause discomfort (also 
see Chapter 40).
B: Both SAT and SBT
Reducing the amount of time a patient receives mechani-
cal ventilation is an important goal. Performing a daily 
coordinated SAT together with an SBT reduces the 
VI
Chapter 41 Critical Care Medicine
751
the importance of patient and family values and prefer-
ences in shared medical decision making. Many structures 
have been proposed to facilitate patient- and family-
centered care. A few examples include patient and fam-
ily inclusion on rounds, extended visiting hours, and 
family presence during procedures. Patients report many 
benefits from this type of care, including decreased anxi-
ety, confusion, and agitation and increased satisfaction.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The editors and publisher would like to thank Drs. 
John Turnbull and Linda Liu for contributing to this 
chapter in the previous edition of this work. It has served 
as the foundation for the current chapter.
D: Delirium: Assess, Prevent, and Manage
Delirium affects up to 80% of mechanically ventilated 
patients in the ICU and can lead to a number of long-
term consequences. Methods to assess, prevent, and 
manage delirium are discussed earlier in this chapter.
E: Early Mobility
Patients in the ICU experience rapid deterioration of 
muscle strength and function. Early mobility is safe in 
mechanically ventilated patients and in those with inva-
sive lines and monitors and has been associated with 
improved outcomes, including increased ventilator-free 
days, reduced duration of delirium, and improved func-
tional status at the time of discharge.50
F: Family Engagement and Empowerment
Providing patient- and family-centered care is increas-
ingly a quality focus in the ICU. These terms acknowledge 
REFERENCES
1. Donovan AL, Aldrich JM, Gross 
AK, etal. Interprofessional care and 
teamwork in the ICU. Crit Care Med. 
2018;46(6):980–990.
2. Pronovost PJ, Angus DC, Dorman T, 
Robinson KA, Dremsizov TT, Young 
TL. Physician staffing patterns and 
clinical outcomes in critically ill 
patients: A systematic review. JAMA. 
2002;288(17):2151–2162.
3. Ely EW, Inouye SK, Bernard GR, etal. 
Delirium in mechanically ventilated 
patients: Validity and reliability of the 
Confusion Assessment Method for the 
Intensive Care Unit (CAM-ICU). JAMA. 
2001;286(21):2703–2710.
4. Ely EW, Shintani A, Truman B, etal. 
Delirium as a predictor of mortali-
ty in mechanically ventilated patients 
in the intensive care unit. JAMA. 
2004;291(14):1753–1762.
5. Hatta K, Kishi Y, Wada K, etal. Preven-
tive effects of ramelteon on delirium: 
A randomized placebo-controlled trial. 
JAMA Psychiatry. 2014;71(4):397–403.
6. Holcomb JB, Tilley BC, Baraniuk S, etal. 
Transfusion of plasma, platelets, and red 
blood cells in a 1:1:1 vs a 1:1:2 ratio and 
mortality in patients with severe trauma: 
The PROPPR randomized clinical trial. 
JAMA. 2015;313(5):471–482.
7. Shakur H, Roberts I, etal. CRASH-2 
Trial Collaborators Effects of tranexam-
ic acid on death, vascular occlusive 
events, and blood transfusion in trauma 
patients with significant haemorrhage 
(CRASH-2): A randomised, placebo-con-
trolled trial. Lancet. 2010;376(9734):23–
32.
8. Hochman JS, Sleeper LA, Webb JG, 
etal. Early revascularization in acute 
myocardial infarction complicated by 
cardiogenic shock. SHOCK Investigators. 
Should We Emergently Revascularize 
Occluded Coronaries for Cardiogenic 
Shock. N Engl J Med. 1999;341(9):625–
634.
9. Thiele H, Zeymer U, Neumann F-J, etal. 
Intraaortic balloon support for myocar-
dial infarction with cardiogenic shock. N 
Engl J Med. 2012;367(14):1287–1296.
10. Schrage B, Ibrahim K, Loehn T, etal. 
Impella support for acute myocardial 
infarction complicated by cardiogenic 
shock. Circulation. 2019;139(10):1249–
1258.
11. Cecconi M, Evans L, Levy M, Rhodes 
A. Sepsis and septic shock. Lancet. 
2018;392(10141):75–87.
12. Rivers E, Nguyen B, Havstad S, etal. 
Early goal-directed therapy in the treat-
ment of severe sepsis and septic shock. 
N Engl J Med. 2001;345(19):1368–1377.
13. PRISM InvestigatorsRowan KM, Angus 
DC, etal. Early, goal-directed therapy for 
septic shock—A patient-level meta-anal-
ysis. N Engl J Med. 2017;376(23):2223–
2234.
14. National Heart, Lung, and Blood Insti-
tute Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome 
(ARDS) Clinical Trials NetworkWiede-
mann HP, Wheeler AP, etal. Compari-
son of two fluid-management strategies 
in acute lung injury. N Engl J Med. 
2006;354(24):2564–2575.
15. LoVerde D, Iweala OI, Eginli A, Krish-
naswamy 
G. 
Anaphylaxis. 
Chest. 
2018;153(2):528–543.
16. Hadley MN, Walters BC, Grabb PA, 
etal. Blood pressure management after 
acute spinal cord injury. Neurosurgery. 
2002;50(3 Suppl):S58–S62.
17. Bentzer P, Griesdale DE, Boyd J, MacLean 
K, Sirounis D, Ayas NT. Will this hemo-
dynamically unstable patient respond to 
a bolus of intravenous fluids?. JAMA. 
2016;316(12):1298–1309.
18. Marik PE, Baram M, Vahid B. Does 
central venous pressure predict fluid 
responsiveness? A systematic review 
of the literature and the tale of seven 
mares. Chest. 2008;134(1):172–178.
19. Rajaram SS, Desai NK, Kalra A, etal. 
Pulmonary artery catheters for adult 
patients in intensive care. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev. 2013(2):CD003408.
20. Teboul J-L, Saugel B, Cecconi M, etal. 
Less invasive hemodynamic monitoring 
in critically ill patients. Intensive Care 
Med. 2016;42(9):1350–1359.
21. Acute respiratory distress syndrome: The 
Berlin definition. JAMA. 2012;307(23).
22. RG Brower, Matthay MA, etal. Acute 
Respiratory Distress Syndrome Network 
Ventilation with lower tidal volumes as 
compared with traditional tidal volumes 
for acute lung injury and the acute res-
piratory distress syndrome. N Engl J Med. 
2000;342(18):1301–1308.
23. Frat J-P, Thille AW, Mercat A, etal. High-
flow oxygen through nasal cannula in 
acute hypoxemic respiratory failure. N 
Engl J Med. 2015;372(23):2185–2196.
24. McConville JF, Kress JP. Weaning 
patients from the ventilator. N Engl J 
Med. 2012;367(23):2233–2239.
Section VI CONSULTANT ANESTHETIC PRACTICE
752
25. Ladeira MT, Vital FMR, Andriolo RB, 
Andriolo BNG, Atallah AN, Peccin MS. 
Pressure support versus T-tube for 
weaning from mechanical ventilation 
in adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2014(5):CD006056.
26. Burns KEA, Meade MO, Premji A, Adhi-
kari NKJ. Noninvasive positive-pres-
sure ventilation as a weaning strategy 
for intubated adults with respiratory 
failure. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2013(12):CD004127.
27. Young D, Harrison DA, Cuthbertson 
BH, Rowan K, Collaborators Trac-
Man. Effect of early vs late tracheos-
tomy placement on survival in patients 
receiving mechanical ventilation: The 
TracMan randomized trial. JAMA. 
2013;309(20):2121–2129.
28. Rice TW, Wheeler AP, etal. National 
Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute Acute 
Respiratory Distress Syndrome (ARDS) 
Clinical Trials Network Initial trophic 
vs full enteral feeding in patients with 
acute lung injury: The EDEN randomized 
trial. JAMA. 2012;307(8):795–803.
29. Casaer MP, Van den Berghe G. Nutrition 
in the acute phase of critical illness.
N Engl J Med. 2014;370(13):1227–1236.
30. Pham CH, Collier ZJ, Webb AB, Garner 
WL, Gillenwater TJ. How long are burn 
patients really NPO in the perioperative 
period and can we effectively correct the 
caloric deficit using an enteral feeding 
“Catch-up” protocol?. Burns J Int Soc 
Burn Inj. 2018;44(8):2006–2010.
31. Palevsky PM, Liu KD, Brophy PD, etal. 
KDOQI US commentary on the 2012 KDI-
GO Clinical Practice Guideline for Acute 
Kidney Injury. Am J Kidney Dis Off J 
Natl Kidney Found. 2013;61(5):649–672.
32. Bellomo R, Kellum JA, Ronco C. Defin-
ing and classifying acute renal failure: 
From advocacy to consensus and valida-
tion of the RIFLE criteria. Intensive Care 
Med. 2007;33(3):409–413.
33. Vinsonneau C, Camus C, Combes 
A, etal. Continuous venovenous 
haemodiafiltration versus intermittent 
haemodialysis for acute renal failure in 
patients with multiple-organ dysfunction 
syndrome: A multicentre randomised 
trial. Lancet. 2006;368(9533):379–385.
34. Hellyer TP, Ewan V, Wilson P, Simpson 
AJ. The Intensive Care Society recom-
mended bundle of interventions for 
the prevention of ventilator-associat-
ed pneumonia. J Intensive Care Soc. 
2016;17(3):238–243.
35. Pronovost PJ, Goeschel CA, Colantuoni 
E, etal. Sustaining reductions in cath-
eter related bloodstream infections in 
Michigan intensive care units: Observa-
tional study. BMJ. 2010;340:c309.
36. van den Berghe G, Wouters P, Week-
ers F, etal. Intensive insulin therapy 
in critically ill patients. N Engl J Med. 
2001;345(19):1359–1367.
37. NICE-SUGAR Study InvestigatorsFinfer 
S, Chittock DR, etal. Intensive ver-
sus conventional glucose control in 
critically ill patients. N Engl J Med. 
2009;360(13):1283–1297.
38. Annane D, Cariou A, etal. COIITSS 
Study Investigators Corticosteroid treat-
ment and intensive insulin therapy for 
septic shock in adults: A randomized 
controlled trial. JAMA. 2010;303(4):341–
348.
39. Minet C, Potton L, Bonadona A, etal. 
Venous 
thromboembolism 
in 
the 
ICU: Main characteristics, diagnosis 
and thromboprophylaxis. Crit Care. 
2015;19:287.
40. Arabi YM, Al-Hameed F, Burns KEA, 
etal. Adjunctive Intermittent Pneu-
matic 
Compression 
for 
Venous 
Thromboprophylaxis. N Engl J Med. 
2019;380(14):1305–1315.
41. Krag M, Marker S, Perner A, etal. Pan-
toprazole in patients at risk for gastro-
intestinal bleeding in the ICU. N Engl J 
Med. 2018;379(23):2199–2208.
42. Huang H-B, Jiang W, Wang C-Y, 
Qin H-Y, Du B. Stress ulcer prophy-
laxis in intensive care unit patients 
receiving enteral nutrition: A system-
atic review and meta-analysis. Crit Care. 
2018;22(1):20.
43. Needham DM, Davidson J, Cohen H, 
etal. Improving long-term outcomes 
after discharge from intensive care unit: 
Report from a stakeholders’ conference. 
Crit Care Med. 2012;40(2):502–509.
44. Ely EW. The ABCDEF Bundle: Science 
and Philosophy of How ICU Liberation 
Serves Patients and Families. Crit Care 
Med. 2017;45(2):321–330.
45. Barnes-Daly MA, Phillips G, Ely EW. 
Improving hospital survival and reduc-
ing brain dysfunction at seven Califor-
nia community hospitals: Implementing 
PAD Guidelines via the ABCDEF Bun-
dle in 6,064 patients. Crit Care Med. 
2017;45(2):171–178.
46. Girard TD, Kress JP, Fuchs BD, etal. Effi-
cacy and safety of a paired sedation and 
ventilator weaning protocol for mechan-
ically ventilated patients in intensive 
care (awakening and breathing con-
trolled trial): A randomised controlled 
trial. Lancet. 2008;371(9607):126–134.
47. Treggiari MM, Romand J-A, Yanez ND, 
etal. Randomized trial of light ver-
sus deep sedation on mental health 
after critical illness. Crit Care Med. 
2009;37(9):2527–2534.
48. Ely EW, Baker AM, Dunagan DP, etal. 
Effect on the duration of mechanical 
ventilation of identifying patients capa-
ble of breathing spontaneously. N Engl J 
Med. 1996;335(25):1864–1869.
49. Jakob SM, Ruokonen E, Grounds RM, 
etal. Dexmedetomidine vs midazolam 
or propofol for sedation during pro-
longed mechanical ventilation: Two 
randomized controlled trials. JAMA. 
2012;307(11):1151–1160.
50. Schweickert WD, Pohlman MC, Pohl-
man AS, etal. Early physical and 
occupational therapy in mechani-
cally ventilated, critically ill patients: 
A randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 
2009;373(9678):1874–1882.
753
INTRODUCTION
The practice of anesthesiology historically focused 
on the care of an individual patient undergoing sur-
gery. The specialty has an impressive track record for 
improving quality and safety in patient care (also see 
Chapter 46). Although anesthesia practice continues to 
evolve, patients undergoing major surgery still expe-
rience adverse outcomes related to their physiologic 
reserve and the metabolic and inflammatory response 
to the surgical intervention. The focus on the nonopera-
tive care of patients undergoing major surgery has led 
to the concept of perioperative medicine. Two leaders in 
the field have stated that “Perioperative Medicine is the 
future of anesthesia, if our specialty is to thrive.”1 Others 
acknowledge the importance of perioperative medicine as 
a means to promote value-based, patient-centered care.2 3
The evolution of perioperative medicine has come a 
long way, and yet is still in its infancy. Other medical 
specialties have also experienced exponential growth and 
a distinct area of focus, including the evolution of inter-
ventional radiology within radiology and hospital-based 
medicine in internal medicine.
One estimate of the average number of operations 
that an average American will undergo in an 85-year 
lifetime is nine procedures.4 Of these, three were non–
operating room procedures (e.g., colonoscopy), three 
were outpatient procedures (e.g., cataracts, minor ortho-
pedic surgery), and three were inpatient procedures. 
The most common operating room procedures in men 
were coronary angioplasty (percutaneous transluminal 
coronary angioplasty [PTCA]), wound debridement, and 
groin hernia; for women, the most common operating 
room procedures were cesarean section, cholecystec-
tomy, and lens and cataract procedures. As such, the 
preoperative, intraoperative, and postoperative anes-
thesia and surgical management is a major health con-
cern. This chapter will describe the emerging domain 
INTRODUCTION
THE PERIOPERATIVE MEDICINE 
CONSULTANT
IMPROVING PERIOPERATIVE OUTCOMES 
AND OPERATIONALIZING PERIOPERATIVE 
MEDICINE
VALUE-ADDED PREOPERATIVE SCREENING 
AND TESTING
MEDICAL MANAGEMENT OF THE MOST 
COMMON COMORBIDITIES
Anemia
Nutritional Optimization
Smoking Cessation
Glycemic Control
Obstructive Sleep Apnea and Chronic 
Obstructive Pulmonary Disease
Prehabilitation
Physical Exercise Regimen
PSYCHOLOGICAL STATE: ASSESSMENT AND 
INTERVENTIONS
COGNITIVE SCREENING AND 
INTERVENTIONS
HEALTH LITERACY AND SHARED DECISION 
MAKING
OTHER OPPORTUNITIES TO IMPROVE 
PERIOPERATIVE OUTCOMES
FUTURE DIRECTIONS IN PERIOPERATIVE 
MEDICINE: SOCIAL DETERMINANTS OF 
HEALTH
PERIOPERATIVE 
MEDICINE
Matthew D. McEvoy, Jeanna D. Blitz, 
Emilee Borgmeier
42
Chapter
Section VI CONSULTANT ANESTHETIC PRACTICE
754
of perioperative medicine, which spans the period 
beginning with preoperative assessment and nonsurgi-
cal patient optimization, the surgical procedure itself, 
and subsequent care until the patient returns to their 
primary care and other longitudinal providers after 
recovery from surgery.
THE PERIOPERATIVE MEDICINE 
CONSULTANT
The perioperative medicine consultant, who may some-
day be called a “perioperativist”, is a physician spe-
cifically trained to optimize patient health in order to 
improve postoperative outcomes. Although there is 
overlap with many medical subspecialties, perioperative 
medicine is a distinct medical discipline with a unique 
focus on preparing patients for the stress of surgery, 
anesthesia, and recovery throughout the postoperative 
period.2 5 Although it is possible that physicians from 
surgical or medical disciplines could provide this care, 
the anesthesiologist is uniquely suited for this role 
(Box 42.1). The core training focuses on the immediate 
perioperative period; however, the expansion of anes-
thesia care to include optimization of patient care for 
long-term outcome improvement represents a natural 
extension of the specialty.6
IMPROVING PERIOPERATIVE OUTCOMES 
AND OPERATIONALIZING PERIOPERATIVE 
MEDICINE
For many decades, the immediate perioperative period 
was the focus for improving patient safety and out-
comes. As safety vastly improved in the intraoperative 
and immediate postoperative period, the focus widened 
to include in-hospital complications and then the first 
30 days after surgery.7 Most recently, clinical advances 
have afforded the ability to focus even further to include 
outcomes at 1 year after surgery and beyond.8 Those 
advances have enabled perioperative care teams to study 
and focus more and more on the patient from a holistic 
perspective, including functional capacity, social interac-
tions, pain interference, sleep disturbances, and more.9
This expanded focus involves three distinct phases of 
care: prehabilitation, immediate perioperative care, and 
recovery/rehabilitation.
When considering the work of the perioperative 
medicine consultant, one metaphor relates the perio-
perative period to traversing a dangerous mountain. 
The novice traveler, the patient in this metaphor, 
has a better chance of safe passage (good outcome) 
if assisted by someone more familiar with the trail, 
the perioperative consultant (Fig. 42.1). The ascent is 
focused on prehabilitation and medical optimization 
for surgery, as the current focus of perioperative medi-
cine is largely on the preoperative period. However, the 
descent (postoperative period) is more dangerous, as 
the most serious outcomes, including death, are more 
likely to occur in this phase of care. Future studies will 
need to focus on helping vulnerable patients safely 
descend from the stressful summit of surgery and 
anesthesia. A timeline of the perioperative manage-
ment of the conditions discussed here will be provided 
at the end of this chapter.
VALUE-ADDED PREOPERATIVE SCREENING 
AND TESTING
Indications for preoperative testing are evolving. Cam-
paigns such as the American Board of Internal Medicine 
(ABIM) Foundation’s Choosing Wisely10 and the United 
Kingdom’s National Institute for Health and Care Excel-
lence (NICE) guidelines11 emphasize selection of testing 
that is evidence based and that supports a value-based 
care paradigm. Risk prediction tools have become more 
readily accessible, refined, and patient-specific. This has 
resulted in a shift away from routine preoperative testing 
toward a balanced, systems-based approach targeting the 
identification of modifiable factors.12 The current Ameri-
can Society of Anesthesiologists Practice Advisory for 
the preanesthesia evaluation recommends that preopera-
tive testing be based on patient risk factors and surgical 
severity, as opposed to the provision of routine screen-
ing in the absence of clinical indications.12 Examples of 
routine testing to be avoided include electrocardiograms 
(ECGs) in asymptomatic patients simply based on age 
or medical history (e.g., hypertension), chest x-rays in 
asymptomatic patients with normal physical examina-
tion, and urinalysis.12
Box 42.1
The Anesthesiologist as Perioperative 
Physician
The skills, experience, and training of anesthesiologists are 
suitable for the perioperative medicine role, including the 
following perspectives:
•Unique understanding of the physiologic and
psychological stress of surgery and anesthesia
•Expertise in acute care medicine related to the
perioperative period, with training in the postanesthesia 
care unit (PACU) and intensive care unit
•Training in residency to focus on the nonsurgical aspects
of patient care, including preanesthesia assessment, 
and an understanding of how optimization of medical 
comorbidities can be accomplished in conjunction with 
surgical planning
•Understanding of how chronic medical conditions
interface with the resource constraints of an ambulatory 
surgery center (ASC) and criteria for candidacy for surgery 
at an ASC.
VI
Chapter 42 Perioperative Medicine
755
Instead, a history and physical examination that is 
focused through the lens of the perioperative special-
ist serves as the basis of the preoperative evaluation. 
Those foundational elements are enhanced when used 
alongside validated screening tools to identify relevant, 
potentially modifiable clinical conditions such as the 
STOP-BANG for obstructive sleep apnea, preoperative 
nutrition screening (PONS) for malnutrition, or a clinical 
frailty scale.13 14 Results generated by this multifaceted 
examination can direct necessary preoperative testing, 
focused upon identification and diagnosis of modifiable 
medical conditions that affect perioperative outcomes.12
The result is an appropriate use of preoperative testing 
in a select population, including tests such as cardiac 
biomarkers, hemoglobin A1C, and studies to determine the 
etiology of anemia.
This increase in optimization-focused testing is coun-
terbalanced by a reduction in ubiquitous testing in all 
patients where no such opportunity to affect outcomes 
or change perioperative management is likely to occur 
(also see Chapter 13).
MEDICAL MANAGEMENT OF THE MOST 
COMMON COMORBIDITIES
Anemia
Preoperative anemia, defined in Table 42.1, is common, 
and any degree of anemia should be evaluated and cor-
rected before elective surgery. The prevalence of preop-
erative anemia is highest in the orthopedic, gynecologic, 
and colorectal surgical populations, affecting >50% 
of surgical patients.15 This is of profound importance 
because anemia increases overall perioperative risk, spe-
cifically a 16-fold increased mortality risk and doubled 
risk of perioperative complications like acute kidney 
injury, major adverse cardiac events, and length of hos-
pitalization.16
The most common cause of preoperative anemia is 
iron deficiency. Diagnosis of iron deficiency anemia 
(IDA) is made by the presence of transferrin saturation 
<30%, a ferritin level of <100 µg/L, and/or reticulocyte 
hemoglobin content <30%, although these numbers are 
Fig. 42.1 Optimizing Patients for the Perioperative Journey—The Ascent.
*Multidimensional syndromes are those that span multiple domains that affect perioperative and long-
term health outcomes, including physical, physiologic, psychological, cognitive, financial, and social. 
The interventions and resources required are very patient dependent, and the perioperative plan of care 
is often made on a case-by-case basis. Proposed timelines are based on the amount of time typically 
needed to fully assess and manage a new diagnosis or finding of poor control of the specific condition 
in the optimization clinic, but these must be balanced with the time-sensitive nature of surgery. CAD,
Coronary artery disease; CHF, congestive heart failure; COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; 
GFR, glomerular filtration rate; HTN, hypertension; mod, moderate; OSA, obstructive sleep apnea; SDM,
shared decision making.
Section VI CONSULTANT ANESTHETIC PRACTICE
756
not absolute, and clinical context is important for inter-
pretation.17 Absolute iron deficiency may still contribute 
to the etiology of anemia in cases of functional iron 
deficiency (e.g., anemia of inflammation, also called ane-
mia of chronic disease) for which the diagnosis is made 
when the transferrin saturation is >20% and serum fer-
ritin level is 100 to 400 µg/L in the presence of normal 
or elevated values for folate, B12, reticulocyte count, and 
renal function.18 In these cases intravenous (IV) iron is 
most effective when combined with an erythropoiesis-
stimulating agent (ESA) such as epoetin alpha.19
The goal of iron repletion therapy is correction of 
preoperative anemia in order to improve postoperative 
outcomes. The total iron deficit is calculated using the 
Ganzoni equation (Box 42.2) and is used to determine 
the repletion dose.20 Iron repletion may be given either 
orally or intravenously, depending on factors such as 
time to surgery, patient preference, the degree of ane-
mia, and the presence of chronic inflammation.17 Oral 
replacement therapy is inexpensive, readily accessible, 
and safe; it may be effective in cases of mild anemia if 
initiated 4 to 8 weeks before surgery. Current dosing rec-
ommendations are 80 to 100 mg of oral iron every other 
day. The addition of vitamins C and D is recommended 
to increase absorption. Major limitations of oral iron 
therapy include lack of compliance because of gastro-
intestinal (GI) side effects (in >70% of patients), lack of 
absorption in patients with GI diseases or inflammation 
(because of hepcidin dysregulation), and the need for at 
least a 1-month interval before surgery for effectiveness. 
Alternatively, IV iron therapy has demonstrated increased 
efficacy, efficiency, and reduction of GI side effects 
when compared with oral replacement strategies, with 
recent improvements in the safety profile and variety of 
formulations. Response to IV iron begins within 1 week 
(50% response) after dosing, with maximum response 3 
to 4 weeks after infusion.21 The rate and magnitude of 
response depend on the patient’s bone marrow functional 
reserve and use of an ESA.19
Numerous retrospective or pre/postintervention stud-
ies have shown a significant benefit to implementing 
standardized patient blood management programs.22 23
However, a prospective randomized controlled trial 
(PREVENTT) demonstrated that administration of a sin-
gle, standardized preoperative dose of IV iron to anemic 
patients but without confirmation of iron deficiency and 
within 2 weeks of surgery does not effectively correct 
anemia or reduce transfusions and postoperative compli-
cations. But this study did show that correction of iron 
deficiency may lead to a reduction in readmission after 
surgery.24 Another trial that evaluated the implementa-
tion of a preoperative anemia clinic concluded that the 
implementation of preoperative anemia and iron screen-
ing and treatment were associated with a 50% reduc-
tion in transfusion, reduced length of stay by 15%, and 
reduced hospital costs for colorectal surgery patients.25
Current evidence suggests that preoperative screening for 
and treatment of IDA should be pursued.26
When considering ESAs and the indications and 
contraindications for their use, several points are worth 
noting. First, many guidelines propose that ESAs should 
not be used in the setting of active cancer when chemo-
therapy is not being used and when the intention of 
oncologic treatment is curative.27 However, in the pre-
operative period some institutions report using short 
courses of ESAs (one to two doses) even in the setting of 
cancer. There is also some concern for use in the setting 
of cardiac or vascular surgery, although this is debated. 
ESAs have also been associated with an increased risk 
of thromboembolism, although a recent meta analysis 
demonstrated no increased risk of thromboembolic com-
plications with use in the preoperative period.19 Throm-
boprophylaxis recommendations are based on patient 
history, and dosing strategies need to be adjusted based 
on renal function.
ESAs can be used in the setting of anemia for which 
there has been a lack of response to or no indication 
for iron, folate, and vitamin B12. A recommended dos-
ing schedule of epoetin alfa-epbx (Retacrit) is 40,000u 
subcutaneously every week for 2 to 4 weeks with a 
hemoglobin check before each dose. In summary, admin-
istering an ESA within 4 weeks of surgery can improve 
hemoglobin and may increase the efficacy of IV iron if 
used concomitantly.
Nutritional Optimization
Malnutrition is common in the adult presurgical popu-
lation, affecting at least 50% of patients presenting for 
major surgery, with the highest rates in patients pre-
senting for GI surgery.13 If left untreated, malnutrition 
is associated with poor postoperative outcomes such as 
Box 42.2
Ganzoni Equation for Calculating Iron Deficit
Total Iron Deficit = Weight (kg) × (Target Hgb – Actual Hgb) × 
2.4 + Iron Stores (mg)
Note: Iron Stores = 500 mg, If Weight >35 kg
Mild
Moderate
Severe
Male
11–13 g/dL
8–11 g/dL
<8 g/dL
Female
11–12 g/dL
8–11 g/dL
<8 g/dL
Table 42.1
World Health Organization (WHO) Anemia 
Threshold
The World Health Organization definition of anemia differs by 
biologic sex and is commonly used in perioperative management 
protocols.
From https://www.who.int/vmnis/indicators/haemoglobin.pdf. 
Accessed November 10, 2021.
VI
Chapter 42 Perioperative Medicine
757
wound infection, prolonged hospitalization, and mortal-
ity. Yet in the absence of a formalized screening initia-
tive less than 10% are identified and provided with an 
appropriate nutritional intervention before surgery.28
Thus all patients should be screened for risk of malnu-
trition preoperatively, especially those with frailty syn-
drome, where malnutrition is both prevalent and highly 
detrimental.29
The diagnosis of malnutrition is made by the Global 
Leadership Initiative on Malnutrition (GLIM) criteria, 
which includes the presence of subnormal body mass 
index (BMI), weight loss, reduced muscle mass, decreased 
food intake, and disease burden.30 The goal of preopera-
tive nutritional therapy with oral nutritional supplemen-
tation (ONS) and immunonutrition (IMN) is to ensure 
adequate protein intake to achieve anabolism. Both high-
protein ONS and IMN are available without a prescrip-
tion; however, barriers to implementation of nutritional 
supplementation include lack of knowledge and cost.
The PONS29 (Box 42.3) and the Malnutrition Uni-
versal Screening Tool (MUST)28 (Table 42.2) are simple, 
validated tools used to screen for risk of malnutrition in 
the preoperative population. An abbreviated form of the 
MUST, known as the Malnutrition Screening Tool (MST),
is also available (Table 42.3).31
Current recommendations suggest that all “at-risk” 
patients be offered a preoperative regimen of high-
protein ONS plus IMN.13 Guidance on dietary choices to 
ensure adequate protein intake of >1.5 g/kg/day should 
be provided and combined with high-protein ONS when 
indicated. Patient-oriented educational materials on 
protein intake are available from the Academy of Nutri-
tion and Dietetics.32 High-protein ONS is most effective 
when initiated at least 2 to 4 weeks before surgery.13
IMN supplements include a combination of arginine, 
omega-3 fatty acids, glutamine, and nucleotides. Current 
guidelines recommend 7 days of IMN before surgery; 
however, benefits from as few as 3 days have been dem-
onstrated in patients with malnutrition and GI cancer.33
Further evaluation of the patient’s nutritional status and 
consultation with a registered dietitian for a diagnosis of 
malnutrition may be indicated.
An important consideration when assessing a patient’s 
preoperative nutritional status includes evaluation for spe-
cific vitamin deficiencies. Nutritional deficiencies are com-
monly seen in patients who are frail, who are chronically 
ill, who do not have access to fresh food sources, and who 
Box 42.3
Perioperative Nutrition Screen (PONS)
The PONS score is based on four commonly used malnutrition 
criteria:
Screening question 1: Have you lost ≥10% of body weight in 
the last 6 months without trying?
Screening question 2: Have you been eating <50% of your 
normal diet in the preceding week?
Measurement: Is body mass index (BMI) <18.5 (or <20 if age 
>65 years)?
Laboratory test: Is albumin <3 g/dL?
Each question is assigned 1 point for a “yes” answer. A 
PONS score of ≥1 is considered “at risk” for malnutrition.
From Williams DGA, Villalta E, Aronson S, et al. Tutorial: Development 
and implementation of a multidisciplinary preoperative nutrition 
optimization clinic. J Parenter Enteral Nutr. 2020;44(7):1185–1196.
Body Mass Index 
(BMI) Score
Weight Loss 
Score
Acute Disease 
Effect Score
BMI >20 kg/m2 = 
0 points
Weight loss 
<5% = 0 points
If patient has been 
or is likely to have 
no nutritional 
intake for > 
5 days = 2 points
BMI 18.5 kg/m2
to 20 kg/m2 = 1 
point
Weight loss 
5%–10% =
1 point
BMI <18.5 kg/m2 = 
2 points
Weight loss 
>10% = 2 points
Table 42.2
Malnutrition Universal Screening Tool (MUST)
The MUST is specifically validated for use in the geriatric population 
and those patients who reside in long-term care facilities. A score ≥2 is 
considered “at risk” of malnutrition.
From Stratton RJ, Hackston A, Longmore D, et al. Malnutrition in 
hospital outpatients and inpatients: Prevalence, concurrent validity and 
ease of use of the “malnutrition universal screening tool” (“MUST”) for 
adults. Br J Nutr. 2004;92(5):799–808.
Question
Points
Have you lost weight recently without trying?
No
Unsure
0
2
If yes, how much weight (kilograms) have you lost?
1–5
6–10
11–15
>15
Unsure
1
2
3
4
2
Have you been eating poorly because of a 
decreased appetite?
No
Yes
0
1
Table 42.3
Malnutrition Screening Tool (MST)
The Malnutrition Screening Tool was developed in an adult acute 
care hospital. A score of 2 or more points indicates a patient at risk 
of malnutrition.
From Ferguson M, Capra S, Bauer J, et al, Development of a valid and 
reliable malnutrition screening tool for adult acute hospital patients. 
Nutrition. 1999;15(6):458–434.
Section VI CONSULTANT ANESTHETIC PRACTICE
758
are current smokers. Because malnutrition and vitamin 
deficiencies often coexist, patients at risk for vitamin defi-
ciencies may be effectively screened for using malnutrition 
screening tools or by specific laboratory evaluation. This 
chapter will focus on vitamins C and D.
Vitamin D has several key intracellular roles and has 
been implicated in worsened all-cause mortality after 
hospital admission, with improvement in mortality if 
supplementation is provided to those who are deficient.34
A single study of admitted patients who screened posi-
tive for malnutrition had laboratory values consistent 
with vitamin D deficiency in 58% of patients, with 22% 
demonstrating severe deficiency. Likewise, vitamin C 
plays a vital role in cellular protection from reactive 
oxygen species and synthesis of endogenous pressors 
and is implicated in the maintenance of endothelial 
barriers in the presence of oxidative stress.35 Vitamin 
C is quickly depleted even during brief periods of poor 
dietary intake and may play a role in decreasing length 
and severity of critical illness, although research to date 
is inconclusive.
Vitamin C supplementation may improve outcomes in 
the critically ill,36 but so far there is no evidence that the 
same benefits occur in the perioperative patient. Supple-
mentation of vitamins C and D is inexpensive, is easily 
accessible, and can generally be recommended without 
significant risk to the patient.
Smoking Cessation
Cigarette smoking is a modifiable risk factor, and ces-
sation may improve short- and long-term patient out-
comes. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
(CDC) estimates that approximately 14% of the adult 
population in the United States is currently smoking 
cigarettes37 (Box 42.4). From a general medicine perspec-
tive, patients who smoke have increased rates of chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), pneumonia, 
stroke, diabetes, cataracts, obstetric complications (e.g., 
preterm labor, stillbirth), and cancer. Overall, more than 
two-thirds of all deaths among current smokers over the 
age of 45 to 55 years are associated with smoking.38 39
Patients who are current smokers at the time of surgery 
are at a 20% increased risk for perioperative mortal-
ity and 40% increased risk of postoperative complica-
tions, including wound infection, pneumonia, prolonged 
intubation (>48 hours), stroke, pulmonary embolism, 
sepsis, septic shock, myocardial infarction, and cardiac 
arrest.40 41
Despite this remarkable increase in risk and the known 
benefits of smoking cessation, many perioperative health 
care providers, including preoperative assessment clinics 
managed by anesthesiologists, do not routinely provide 
smoking cessation interventions. This should be of par-
ticular interest to anesthesia providers because, much 
Organ System
Impact of Smoking 
Cessation
Time Course
Wound healing, 
bone healing
Improvement in 
inflammatory cell 
migration and killing of 
oxidative bacteria
4 weeks
Improved proliferative 
phase of wound healing
>3 months
Cardiovasculara
Reduced nicotine levels
Half-life: 1 hour
Reduced carbon 
monoxide levels
Half-life: 
4 hours
Respiratoryb
Decreased postoperative 
pulmonary 
complications (e.g., 
pneumonia, unplanned 
reintubation, prolonged 
mechanical ventilation)
4 weeks, 
though 
abstinence 
of 8 weeks 
provides 
greater risk 
reduction
Table 42.4
Impact of Smoking Cessation on Specific 
Organ Systems
Cigarette smoke contains many toxic chemicals, including nicotine, 
carbon monoxide, hydrogen cyanide, and nitric oxide. For some 
perioperative complications, the duration of smoking cessation 
required to demonstrate benefit is unknown.
aLimited data do not show significant differences in postoperative 
cardiovascular complications in patients who are current smokers 
compared with former smokers with less than 8 weeks abstinence or 
never smokers.
bThere is no evidence of increased postoperative pulmonary 
complications with smoking abstinence durations of less than 4 weeks.
From Yousefzadeh A, Chung F, Wong DT, et al. Smoking cessation: The 
role of the anesthesiologist. Anesth Analg. 2016;122(5):1311–1320.
Box 42.4
Current Cigarette Smoking in U.S. Adults
The following groups were more likely to be current cigarette 
smokers in 2019:
Education level of general education development (GED) 
certificate—35% (vs. 7% of adults with undergraduate 
degree or 4% of adults with a graduate degree)
Severe generalized anxiety disorder—35% (vs. 12% of adults 
with no or minimal anxiety)
Lack of health insurance—23% or Medicaid—25% (vs. 9% of 
adults with Medicare only)
Annual household income <$35,000—21% (vs. 7% of adults 
with annual income >$100,000)
Lesbian/gay/bisexual orientation—19% (vs. 14% of 
heterosexual/straight orientation)
Geographic location in Midwest—16% (region with lowest 
current smoking rate is West, at 10%)
Men—15% (vs. 12% of women)
According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
(CDC), 14% of the U.S. adult population is smoking cigarettes 
in 2019, a decline from 21% in 2005.
From Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Current Cigarette 
Smoking Among Adults in the United States. https://www.cdc.gov/
tobacco/data_statistics/fact_sheets/adult_data/cig_smoking/index.
htm. Accessed November 11, 2021.
VI
Chapter 42 Perioperative Medicine
759
like anemia and malnutrition, this is a modifiable risk 
factor that can have a major impact in the perioperative 
period and in personal and population health. However, 
achieving abstinence is difficult, and simply advising a 
patient to stop smoking is not effective. Rates of absti-
nence in the general population vary according to the 
intensity of the intervention: self-directed (<5%), pro-
vider advice/treatment (10%), hotline/quitline counseling 
(15%), specialized treatment including nicotine replace-
ment therapy (NRT), cognitive behavioral counseling 
(CBC), and other pharmacologic agents (e.g., varenicline 
and bupropion) (40%–50%).42
When smoking cessation is achieved, multiple smoking-
induced pathologic changes begin to improve41 (see Table 
42.4). Considering these benefits, several consensus guide-
lines have been published with almost identical recommen-
dations40-42 (Box 42.5). Although the evidence for increased 
risk with smoking is clear and there are numerous barriers 
to implementing routine screening and treatment, con-
tinued research is needed to identify the best strategies 
to achieve large-scale implementation. Additionally, there 
is insufficient evidence to determine whether e-cigarettes 
should be used for perioperative smoking cessation.
Glycemic Control (also see Chapter 29)
Although the underlying mechanisms relating hyper-
glycemia to poor outcomes are not completely under-
stood, it seems clear that physiologic changes in the 
hyperglycemic state are indeed associated with worse 
outcomes.43 Hyperglycemia is known to alter neu-
trophil function while also increasing the production 
of inflammatory mediators (cytokines/chemokines by 
macrophages), reactive oxygen species, and free fatty 
acids. These pathophysiologic changes contribute to 
impaired immune function (i.e., increasing risk of 
infection) and also cause direct cellular damage and 
vascular dysfunctions.
A large and growing body of literature demonstrates 
a clear association between perioperative hyperglycemia 
and adverse clinical outcomes.43 44 Long-term glycemic 
control (i.e., A1C level) is associated with an increased 
risk for perioperative mortality and postoperative com-
plications, including hyperglycemia (as ≥180 mg/dL) on 
admission and during the hospital stay.44 The periopera-
tive complications most associated with hyperglycemia 
are wound infection and poor wound healing.
In the preoperative setting assessment for and man-
agement of diabetes mellitus (DM, A1C ≥6.5) and impaired 
fasting glucose (A1C >5.7 and <6.5) are both very 
important. Guidelines have been published for assessing 
patients for diabetes before surgery and for managing 
medications for DM,44 which is a field that is constantly 
evolving. However, routine use of testing in preoperative 
assessment clinics is rare. Yet as with smoking cessa-
tion, this screening represents an important target for 
assessing and modifying the risk of patients, especially 
before major surgery. At one of the author’s institutions, 
a hemoglobin A1C is obtained on patients presenting for 
major inpatient surgery who have any of the follow-
ing risk factors: BMI >25 kg/m2, age >45 years, history 
of gestational diabetes, certain ethnic groups (African 
American, Hispanic), family history of DM, or history 
of DM type 1 or 2 without an A1C level in the past 3 
months. If a new diagnosis of DM is made and the A1C is 
<8, the patient is recommended for an inpatient consult 
from the Glucose Management Service after surgery. If 
the A1C is ≥8, the patient is either referred back to their 
endocrinologist for improved glycemic control or, if they 
had no prior established care with an endocrinologist, a 
referral is made to a specialized outpatient diabetes clinic 
for preoperative optimization.
In the perioperative setting correction of hyper-
glycemia with insulin administration reduces hospital 
complications and decreases mortality in both cardiac 
and general surgery patients. Although optimal glucose 
management during the perioperative period is widely 
debated, it is clear that frequent glucose checks and 
structured sliding-scale or infusion protocols to achieve a 
moderate glucose level (e.g., 140–180 mg/dL or 120–160 
mg/dL) are associated with better outcomes while avoid-
ing episodes of severe hypoglycemia. Additionally, opti-
mization of preoperative glycemic control may have the 
potential to decrease same-day cancellations because of 
severe hyperglycemia.
Box 42.5
Recommendations for Perioperative Smoking 
Cessation
Smoking cessation should be attempted at any time before 
surgery
Proven models should be used routinely in preoperative 
clinics: for example, AARa (ask, advise, refer) or 5 A’s† (ask, 
advise, assess, assist, arrange)
High-intensity interventions (including NRT, CBC, and 
varenicline) reduce risk of postoperative complications 
and increase long-term postoperative abstinence rates
Data from Pierre S, Rivera C, Le Maitre B, et al. Guidelines on smoking 
management during the perioperative period. Anaesth Crit Care Pain 
Med. 2017;36(3):195–200; Yousefzadeh A, Chung F, Wong DT, et al. 
Smoking cessation: The role of the anesthesiologist. Anesth Analg. 
2016;122(5):1311–1320; and Wong J, An D, Urman RD, et al. Society 
for Perioperative Assessment and Quality Improvement (SPAQI) 
consensus statement on perioperative smoking cessation. Anesth 
Analg. 2020;131(3):955–968.
CBC, Cognitive behavioral counseling; NRT, nicotine replacement therapy.
aAAR: Ask to identify all tobacco users at every visit; Advise tobacco 
users briefly to quit and offer cessation assistance via the quitline; 
Refer tobacco users to quitline-delivered counseling and provide 
them with quitline numbers.
†Five A’s: Ask to identify all tobacco users at every visit; Advise
tobacco users in a clear and personalized manner to quit at every 
visit; Assess their willingness to make a quit attempt; Assist them 
through offering medications and providing counseling; Arrange for 
follow-up meeting beginning the first week after the quit date.
Section VI CONSULTANT ANESTHETIC PRACTICE
760
Obstructive Sleep Apnea and Chronic Obstructive 
Pulmonary Disease (also see Chapters 48 and 27)
Preventing postoperative pulmonary complications (PPCs) 
is an important goal in the perioperative period. PPCs are 
dangerous to the patient and costly to the health system, 
adding an average of $25,000+ per episode for significant 
complications (e.g., pneumonia, pleural effusion, reintu-
bation, prolonged intubation).45 Several calculators can 
estimate the perioperative risk of PPC for a given patient, 
and use of these can inform discussions with the surgeon 
concerning perioperative case planning.46-48 Only one 
of the calculators includes the presence of COPD as a 
risk factor, and neither of the major PPC risk calculators 
includes obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) as a risk factor. 
However, as these conditions are highly prevalent and are 
often undiagnosed, patients should routinely be assessed 
for both of these conditions before surgery as part of a 
comprehensive assessment of pulmonary health.14 49
COPD is more likely in patients with a smoking his-
tory ≥40 pack-years and age ≥45 years. COPD should be 
suspected in patients with risk factors (primarily a history 
of smoking) who report dyspnea at rest or with exertion, 
chronic cough with or without sputum production, or 
a history of wheezing. COPD may be suspected based 
on findings from the history and physical examination. 
However, spirometry (to detect airflow obstruction) is 
required to establish the diagnosis. Patients who present 
for major surgery with pulmonary symptoms and a clear 
smoking history may require pharmacotherapy for COPD 
and an intervention to promote smoking cessation, as 
described earlier.
In the medical management of COPD guidelines rec-
ommend starting monotherapy (inhaled bronchodilator 
or antimuscarinic agent) and advancing to combination 
therapy as needed.50 At the recommendation of pulmo-
nologists at the authors’ institution, because time before 
surgery is often <1 month, we routinely start combina-
tion therapy for patients who are newly diagnosed as 
GOLD III/IV (Box 42.6) or who are GOLD B, C, or D 
according to the most recent guidelines.
Another modifiable risk factor for PPCs is OSA. OSA 
is defined as repeated partial or complete obstruction 
of the upper airway during sleep, which is terminated 
by cortical arousals or awakenings. Numerous adverse 
cardiovascular, pulmonary, and metabolic sequelae can 
result. It is estimated that 80% to 90% of moderate to 
severe OSA may be undiagnosed and untreated. That 
degree of severity is known to increase perioperative 
risk for poor cardiac and respiratory outcomes, such as 
postoperative desaturation, respiratory failure, cardiac 
events, and intensive care unit (ICU) transfer.51 As such, 
screening for OSA is important, and simple tools such 
as the STOP-BANG are able to guide perioperative risk 
assessment, planning, and ordering of formal polysom-
nography (PSG) in select individuals.52
Patients with a known diagnosis of OSA who use a 
continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) device at 
home should be advised to bring their device to the 
hospital on the day of surgery. Patients with a known 
diagnosis of OSA who have declined to use CPAP can 
proceed to surgery but should be placed on a monitored 
ward for at least the first 24 to 48 hours after anesthesia, 
as the risk of postoperative hypoxemia and other com-
plications related to OSA is greatest during that period. 
Patients with a STOP-BANG ≥5 or STOP-BANG ≥3 and 
serum bicarbonate ≥28 should be referred for PSG unless 
the surgery is time-sensitive. If PSG cannot occur, they 
should be treated as high risk of OSA, recovered in a 
monitored unit, and initiation of perioperative CPAP 
should be recommended for any episodes of hypoxemia 
or observed apnea.53
Prehabilitation
The specific combination of nutritional optimization, 
physical exercise, and psychological preparation is com-
monly referred to as prehabilitation. The major aim of pre-
habilitation is to improve the patient’s ability to withstand 
the stress of the perioperative period from both a physi-
ologic and psychological perspective.54 Emerging evi-
dence suggests that multidimensional syndromes such as 
frailty are best addressed via patient-specific, multimodal 
preoperative interventions, such as physical exercise, 
psychological intervention (e.g., anxiety reduction), and 
nutrition supplementation.54 55 Prehabilitation interven-
tions are often resource- and time-intensive, and further 
research on optimal timing, duration, and combination of 
interventions is warranted. To date, the data are mixed on 
the efficacy of prehabilitation programs for all surgical 
Box 42.6
Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive 
Lung Disease (GOLD) Classification of Airflow Limitation 
Severity in COPD
GOLD 1: Mild, FEV1 ≥80% predicted
GOLD 2: Moderate, 50% ≤FEV1 <80% predicted
GOLD 3: Severe, 30% ≤FEV1 <50% predicted
GOLD 4: Very Severe, FEV1 <30% predicted
This classification of airflow limitation severity is based 
on specific spirometry cut-points and should be assessed 
after an adequate dose of at least one short-acting inhaled 
bronchodilator. It applies to patients with an FEV1/FVC <0.70. 
In the 2011 GOLD update the ABCD assessment tool was 
created to incorporate patient-reported symptoms, including 
dyspnea (e.g., MRC Dyspnea Scale), health status impairment 
(COPD Assessment Test [CAT]), and outcomes such as 
exacerbations and hospital admissions.
From Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease. Global 
Strategy for the Diagnosis, Management, and Prevention of Chronic 
Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (2021 Report). https://goldcopd.
org/wp-content/uploads/2020/11/GOLD-REPORT-2021-v1.1-
25Nov20_WMV.pdf. Accessed November 11, 2021.
VI
Chapter 42 Perioperative Medicine
761
patients because of a wide variety in the heterogeneity of 
possible interventions.56,57 However, patients in specific 
surgical populations such as colorectal,58,59 esophageal, 
prostate,60 and some orthopedic surgeries may benefit. 
Ongoing trials may indicate whether prehabilitation has 
definitive benefit in high-risk surgical patients.
Physical Exercise Regimen
The patient’s mobility may be assessed in the preoperative 
period using a timed up and go (TUG) test and 6-minute 
walk test (6MWT). TUG requires a patient to rise from a 
seated position in an armchair, walk to a line 10 feet away, 
turn, and return to sitting. Patients who require >12 sec-
onds to complete the test are considered at risk for impaired 
mobility and falls. A 6MWT is performed by asking the 
patient to ambulate a 15-meter stretch of level ground for 
6 minutes at a tiring pace. Distance traveled is compared 
with the average score for patients of the same age and 
gender. 6MWT is used as an assessment of functional exer-
cise capacity; this test strongly correlates with maximal 
oxygen consumption on cardiopulmonary exercise testing 
(CPET).61 Weak grip strength is commonly measured using 
a handheld dynamometer and is used as an estimate of 
overall muscle function and changes in body composi-
tion.62 The 1-minute sit to stand test (1-MSTST) can also be 
used to assess mobility and functional capacity.63 Patients 
are asked to rise from a seated position and return to a 
seated position as many times as possible within 1 minute.
Patients with slow gait speed, poor grip strength, 
and/or decreased balance may benefit from preoperative 
home-based or supervised exercise regimens depending 
on their baseline function.61,64 The primary components 
of a prehabilitation-focused exercise regimen include 
aerobic activity for 30 minutes per day, strength training 
(1–2 sets, 8–15 repetitions per set), and exercises to pro-
mote balance and flexibility. Deep breathing exercises or 
formal inspiratory muscle training may be recommended 
for patients at high risk of PPCs. Inspiratory muscle train-
ing is associated with decreased pulmonary complica-
tions if initiated within 6 weeks of surgery.55
Although an exercise regimen may not definitively 
decrease perioperative complications, the evaluation of 
a patient’s physical abilities compared with age-group 
norms (e.g., with the 6MWT and TUG) provides valuable 
information about baseline functional status. Based on 
this information, concrete recommendations for targeted 
activities may lead to improved aerobic capacity and 
strength before surgery.
PSYCHOLOGICAL STATE: ASSESSMENT AND 
INTERVENTIONS
Anxiety and depression are common in patients fac-
ing a new diagnosis and preparing for surgery. These 
conditions are prevalent and undertreated in the general 
population, especially among the elderly. When left 
untreated, anxiety and depression represent barriers 
to successful engagement in preoperative optimiza-
tion. Patients with psychiatric comorbidities may avoid 
seeking care because of fear of stigmatization or prior 
negative experiences in a health care setting. Other 
medical comorbidities may then go unidentified or be 
poorly managed.65 The presence of anxiety, depression, 
posttraumatic stress disorder, or another psychiatric 
comorbidity in the preoperative period is associated with 
postoperative complications ranging from increased and 
prolonged pain and opioid use, longer hospitalization, 
and increased risk of in-hospital mortality.65
Examples of screening tools for preoperative psycho-
logical distress include the Hospital Anxiety and Depres-
sion (HADS) Score and the Patient Health Questionnaire 
(PHQ).65,66 The 14-question HADS tool screens for both 
anxiety and depression, whereas the PHQ is specific to 
depression and exists in both two- and nine-question 
variations. In high-risk patients, such as those with opi-
oid use disorder and a psychiatric condition, preoperative 
consultation with a pain management specialist may be 
required in order to formulate an individualized periop-
erative optimization plan65,67 (also see Chapter 40).
Psychological preparation describes strategies aimed 
at modifying a patient’s thoughts and perceptions of 
an experience.68 The most effective strategies for psy-
chological preparation are nonpharmacologic, low-cost, 
and tailored to the individual patient.68,69 Providing 
patient-centered procedural information (what, when, 
and how events will occur) and sensory information 
(expected sensations, sounds, and smells) are effective 
strategies for decreasing preoperative anxiety related to 
uncertainty. Procedural and sensory information, when 
combined, are associated with the greatest improvement 
in patient-reported outcomes.68 Relaxation-based inter-
ventions demonstrate the greatest reduction in postop-
erative pain, as compared with other anxiety reduction 
techniques such as procedural and sensory information. 
A well-studied relaxation technique is the use of music 
therapy. Music activates the limbic system; reduces heart 
rate; and can decrease sympathetic output via regulation 
of endogenous opioids, oxytocin, cortisol, and catecho-
lamines.70 The impact of music therapy is greatest when 
the patient selects the playlist and uses it throughout the 
preoperative, intraoperative, and postoperative period 
(postanesthesia care unit [PACU]).71
Participation in cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) 
for 4 to 8 weeks before surgery is associated with faster 
recovery and improved postoperative pain control.65,66
CBT is also a common component of smoking cessation 
therapy. CBT interventions to address the behavioral 
aspect of tobacco dependence aim to assist the patient 
with developing a new approach to stress manage-
ment. Despite demonstrating positive results, CBT is 
Section VI CONSULTANT ANESTHETIC PRACTICE
762
time-intensive and requires specially trained providers, 
which has implications for cost and scalability of a CBT 
program for patients.65
COGNITIVE 
SCREENING 
AND 
INTER-
VENTIONS (ALSO SEE CHAPTER 35)
The primary goal of preoperative cognitive screening 
is to identify patients at increased risk of postoperative 
delirium. A common instrument used in the preoperative 
evaluation clinic is the Mini-Cog, derived from the Mon-
treal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA). Benefits of this tool 
include brevity and established reliability.72-74 The Mini-
Cog involves three-word recall and a clock-drawing test. 
Scores of 0, 1, and 2 designate patients at high risk for 
postoperative delirium. It can be administered in <5 min-
utes, making it more feasible to use in the preoperative 
clinic than the more extensive and time-consuming 
MoCA or mini-mental status exams (MMSEs).
Patients identified as high risk for delirium should 
receive information regarding signs and symptoms of 
delirium and have a discussion with family members who 
will be present during the hospital stay regarding poten-
tial prevention and mitigation strategies. Deliriogenic 
medications should be weaned preoperatively whenever 
possible.75 Benzodiazepines, anticholinergics, medica-
tions to prevent muscle spasms, sleep aids, opioids, 
and multiple psychotropic medications may negatively 
affect cognition and increase the risk of postoperative 
delirium.75 Deprescribing should be done in a stepwise 
fashion, using a validated framework in consultation 
with, or with expert opinion from, a geriatrician.76
Positive screening test results or a diagnosis of 
postoperative delirium should be communicated to the 
patient’s primary care physician or geriatrician to ensure 
longitudinal follow-up.
HEALTH LITERACY AND SHARED DECISION 
MAKING
Patients at highest risk for surgical complications often 
have a poor understanding of their health status and 
overestimate their ability to manage their medical condi-
tions. Low health literacy level is a risk factor indepen-
dently associated with longer hospitalization after major 
surgery.77 78 A key pillar of the Geriatric Surgical Verifica-
tion program is improved communication with patients 
and their families through goals-of-care conversations 
and shared decision making.79 Shared decision making is 
most effective when the patient has a clear understanding 
of both the benefits and risks of the proposed surgery, 
procedure, and/or anesthetic and the risks and benefits 
of alternatives to the proposed therapy, including forego-
ing further treatment. Health literacy occurs when health 
information and services match the patient’s ability to 
understand and use them.
The four-question version of the Brief Health Literacy 
Screen (BHLS) is commonly used, although consensus 
regarding the best preoperative screening tool has not 
been established. Responses are scored on a Likert scale 
from 1 (always) to 5 (never) and correlated with basic 
health literacy. The use of a single question, “How confi-
dent are you in filling out medical forms?” has also been 
validated for reliability.80
Patients with lower health literacy levels often benefit 
from face-to-face discussions, repeated oral instructions, 
and preoperative information that is presented via video 
or infographics.81 Use of the “teach-back method” method 
is another proven strategy to enhance retention and 
to identify existing gaps in understanding.82 Although 
screening for health literacy remains controversial in 
the context of perioperative optimization, the goal is to 
ensure adequate communication, patient engagement, 
and equitable care delivery.
Creation of a standardized discussion template to 
facilitate the shared decision-making process during the 
preoperative evaluation clinic visit is valuable, even in 
the absence of a formal assessment of health literacy 
level. Key elements include asking permission and intro-
ducing the topic, ascertaining the patient’s understanding 
of his or her illness, exploring goals of care and fears, 
and identifying an alternative decisionmaker.72
OTHER OPPORTUNITIES TO IMPROVE 
PERIOPERATIVE OUTCOMES
Table 42.5 summarizes the perioperative management of 
the conditions discussed earlier. Many other important 
comorbidities should be assessed in the perioperative 
period, including cardiac, thyroid, and renal dysfunction 
(also see Chapters 13 and 26). However, screening for 
elevations of cardiac biomarkers (troponin and B-type 
natriuretic peptide [BNP/NT-proBNP]) and derangements 
in thyroid function (low or high thyroid-stimulating 
hormone [TSH]) have utility in selected, high-risk patient 
populations, as alterations in these hormones are associ-
ated with worse perioperative outcomes.83,84 Also, assess-
ing renal function and perioperative risk of acute kidney 
injury is important when creating a perioperative care 
plan for high-risk patients85,86 (also see Chapter 28).
FUTURE DIRECTIONS IN PERIOPERATIVE 
MEDICINE: SOCIAL DETERMINANTS OF 
HEALTH
Recent population-based studies of health in the United 
States have catalyzed an increased awareness of social 
and economic factors that contribute to poor health 
VI
Chapter 42 Perioperative Medicine
763
Modifiable Condition
Screening and Diagnostic Tools
Interventions: Time Frame/Phase of Care
Malnutrition, nutritional 
deficiency
PONS, MST, MUST scores
Preop: Immunonutrition (IMN) and oral nutrition 
supplementation
(ONS) × ≥1 week
In-hospital: Continuation of IMN and ONS, early feeding, 
total parental nutrition (TPN) when indicated
Anemia
TSAT, ferritin, folate, B12, GFR, CHr
Preop: PO or IV iron depending on time frame and patient 
factors, epoetin alfa, folate, B12 × 2–4 weeks
In-hospital: TXA, Cell-saver, postoperative IV iron, 
epoetin-alfa
Frailty phenotype:
Slow gait speed, 
decreased functional 
status, weak grip strength
6-minute walk test (6MWT), timed up 
and go test (TUG), chair sit to stands, 
cardiopulmonary exercise testing 
(CPET), hand grip strength
Preop: Prehabilitation regimen (cardio training, strength 
training,
mobility, and balance exercises) × 4–6 weeks
In-hospital: Early mobility, physical therapy
Postoperative 
delirium, postoperative 
neurocognitive disorders
Mini Cog, Montreal Cognitive 
Assessment (MoCA), St Louis 
University Mental Status Exam 
(SLUMS), Mini-Mental Status Exam 
(MMSE), Telephone Interview for 
Cognitive Status (TICS)
Preop: Patient and family counseling about delirium, 
wean deliriogenic medications, tailor anesthetic plan, 
establish care with geriatrician
In-hospital: Tailor anesthetic plan, multimodal analgesia, 
glasses/hearing aids, reorientation, clock, sleep hygiene, 
bowel regimen, mobility, blood pressure within target, 
geriatric comanagement
Anxiety/depression/poor 
coping skills
Self-reported, Hospital Anxiety and 
Depression Scale (HADS), Patient 
Health Questionnaire (PHQ-2/9), Pain 
Catastrophizing Scale (PCS), Patient 
Reported Outcome Measures (PROMS)
Preop: Provision of patient-specific procedural and 
sensory information (≥1 day before), relaxation-based 
techniques (music therapy, guided positive imagery 1 
day to 2 weeks), motivational interviewing, cognitive 
behavioral therapy (CBT) × 4–8 weeks
In hospital: Music therapy, relaxation techniques
Health literacy
BRIEF tool
Preop: Face-to-face education with diagrams,
teach-back method, videos
Social determinants of 
health
Social history of electronic health 
record
Preop: Proactive case management, nurse navigator 
support
In-hospital: Case management, social work referral, 
referral to community aid organizations
Tobacco dependence
Self-reported, “5 A’s,” serum cotinine 
level
Preop physiologic dependence: Varenicline, Wellbutrin, 
nicotine replacement therapy (NRT) × 1–4 weeks
Preop psychological dependence: CBT, “quit for a bit,” 
smokers quitline × 1 day to 4 weeks
In-hospital: Referral to smoking cessation services 
postdischarge, NRT, pharmacotherapy, CBT
Obstructive sleep apnea 
(OSA)
STOP-BANG
Preop: CPAP adherence, sleep study (can be done at 
home × 1 day to 4 weeks), change CPAP mask
In-hospital: Multimodal analgesia, postoperative 
monitoring/CPAP, optimization of other comorbidities
Diabetes mellitus, poor 
glycemic control
Spot serum glucose, A1C, fructosamine 
(if anemic)
Preop: Treatment initiation or adjustment, dietary 
changes, fast-track referral to endocrinology: 1–4 weeks
In-hospital: Initiation or titration of insulin
Chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD)
Pulmonary function testing (PFT), 
patient-reported history
Preop: Diagnosis, medication initiation or adjustment, 
inspiratory muscle training, smoking cessation: 1 day to 4 
weeks
In-hospital: Lung-protective ventilation, tailoring 
anesthetic plan, incentive spirometry use
Table 42.5
Perioperative Management of Selected Conditions
Section VI CONSULTANT ANESTHETIC PRACTICE
764
outcomes.87 88 Vulnerability to perioperative stress is now 
understood to result from the confluence of physical, 
physiologic, psychological, and social factors.89
Causes of health disparities have not been completely 
elucidated but are likely multifactorial. Patients from 
historically marginalized populations may avoid health 
care because of prior experiences of discrimination by 
health care providers.81 Racial discordance between the 
patient and physician is a commonly cited contributing 
factor. Patients from historically marginalized popula-
tions report both overt discrimination and more subtle 
mistreatment such as low expectations for adherence 
with recommendations and less empathy from providers. 
These experiences are thought to result in disengagement 
by the patient and deferral of necessary therapies.90
Provider-facing initiatives that result in an aware-
ness of implicit bias and a deeper understanding of 
the impact of race, gender, and socioeconomic factors 
on perioperative outcomes may result in greater health 
equity.90 Health disparities in individuals who have 
experienced incarceration are well documented. Poorly 
controlled chronic diseases, mental health conditions, 
substance use disorders, and social isolation are prevalent 
among the incarcerated patient population. The effects of 
incarceration on an individual are far-reaching, and pre-
viously incarcerated individuals often lack an established 
relationship with a primary care physician.91 92 Addition-
ally, incarceration serves as a risk multiplier for elderly 
and frail individuals.93
Further research is needed to identify interventions 
that mitigate perioperative risk related to severe deficits 
in the patient’s social, economic, and physical environ-
ment. Achievement of optimal outcomes in vulnerable 
patient populations will likely require an emphasis on 
early and frequent care coordination initiatives across the 
entire perioperative continuum.
The COVID-19 pandemic catalyzed a period of rapid 
evolution within perioperative medicine. The need for 
social distancing, implementation of preoperative COVID 
testing, and a pause on all but critical surgeries required 
immediate changes to our care delivery framework. 
Although changes in health care initiated by the pan-
demic may have been rapid and painful, there is 
increased attention on caring for vulnerable populations 
in a manner that is less burdensome and costly. Virtual 
optimization visits via telemedicine may allow expansion 
of prehabilitation and perioperative medicine initiatives 
that previously required in-person care.
REFERENCES
1. Grocott MP, Pearse RM. Periopera-
tive medicine: The future of anaes-
thesia? Br J Anaesth. 2012;108(5):
723–726.
2. Vetter TR, Bader AM. Continued evolu-
tion of perioperative medicine: Real-
izing its full potential.. Anesth Analg. 
2020;130(4):804–807.
3. Beutler S, McEvoy MD, Ferrari L, Vetter 
TR, Bader AM. The future of anesthesia 
education: Developing frameworks for 
perioperative medicine and population 
health. Anesth Analg. 2020;130(4):1103–
1108.
4. Lee PH, Gawande AA. The number of 
surgical procedures in an American 
lifetime in 3 states. J Am Coll Surg. 
2008;207(3):S75.
5. King AB, McEvoy MD, Fowler LC, 
Wanderer JP, Geiger TM, Furman WR, 
etal. Disruptive education: Train-
ing the future generation of perio-
perative physicians. Anesthesiology. 
2016;125(2):266–268.
6. McEvoy MD, Lien CA. Education in 
anesthesiology: Is it time to expand 
the focus? A A Case Rep. 2016;6(12):
380–382.
7. Li G, Warner M, Lang BH, Huang L, 
Sun LS. Epidemiology of anesthesia-
related mortality in the United States, 
1999-2005. Anesthesiology. 2009;110(4):
759–765.
8. Myles PS. Measuring quality of recov-
ery in perioperative clinical trials. 
Curr Opin Anaesthesiol. 2018;31(4):
396–401.
9. Abola RE, Bennett-Guerrero E, Kent ML, 
Feldman LS, Fiore Jr JF, Shaw AD, etal. 
American Society for Enhanced Recov-
ery and Perioperative Quality Initiative 
Joint Consensus Statement on Patient-
Reported Outcomes in an Enhanced 
Recovery Pathway. Anesth Analg. 
2018;126(6):1874–1882.
10. Choosing Wisely. An Initiative of the 
ABIM Foundation. https://www.nice.org.
uk/guidance/ng180 Accessed November 
2021
11. Perioperative care in adults. NICE guide-
line [NG180]: https://www.nice.org.uk/
guidance/ng180 (accessed November 
2021)
12. Committee on Standards and Practice 
ParametersApfelbaum JL, Connis RT, 
Nickinovich DGAmerican Society of 
Anesthesiologists Task Force on Prean-
esthesia Evaluation, Pasternak LR, Arens 
JF, Caplan RA, Connis RT, Fleisher LA, 
Flowerdew R, Gold BS, Mayhew JF, Nick-
inovich DG, Rice LJ, Roizen MF, Twersky 
RS. Practice advisory for preanesthesia 
evaluation: An updated report by the 
American Society of Anesthesiologists 
Task Force on Preanesthesia Evaluation. 
Anesthesiology. 2012;116(3):522–538. 
doi:10.1097/ALN.0b013e31823c1067. 
MarPMID: 22273990.
13. Wischmeyer PE, Carli F, Evans DC, 
Guilbert S, Kozar R, Pryor A, etal. 
Association of STOP-Bang Question-
naire as a Screening Tool for Sleep 
Apnea and Postoperative Complica-
tions: A systematic review and Bayesian 
meta-analysis of prospective and retro-
spective cohort studies. Anesth Analg. 
2018;126(6):1883–1895.
14. Nagappa M, Patra J, Wong J, Sub-
ramani Y, Singh M, Ho G, etal. Asso-
ciation of STOP-Bang Questionnaire 
as a Screening Tool for Sleep Apnea 
and Postoperative Complications: A 
Systematic Review and Bayesian Meta-
analysis of Prospective and Retrospec-
tive Cohort Studies. Anesth Analg. 
2017;125(4):1301–1308.
15. Shander A. Preoperative anemia and 
its management. Transfus Apher Sci. 
2014;50(1):13–15.
16. Musallam KM, Tamim HM, Richards 
T, Spahn DR, Rosendaal FR, Habbal 
A, etal. Preoperative anaemia and 
postoperative outcomes in non-cardiac 
surgery: A retrospective cohort study. 
Lancet. 2011;378(9800):1396–1407.
17. Warner MA, Shore-Lesserson L, Shander 
A, Patel SY, Perelman SI, Guinn NR. 
Perioperative anemia: Prevention, diag-
nosis, and management throughout the 
VI
Chapter 42 Perioperative Medicine
765
spectrum of perioperative care. Anesth 
Analg. 2020;130(5):1364–1380.
18. Kansagra AJ, Stefan MS. Preopera-
tive anemia: Evaluation and treatment. 
Anesthesiol Clin. 2016;34(1):127–141.
19. Cho BC, Serini J, Zorrilla-Vaca A, 
Scott MJ, Gehrie EA, Frank SM, etal. 
Impact of preoperative erythropoietin 
on allogeneic blood transfusions in sur-
gical patients: Results from a system-
atic review and meta-analysis. Anesth 
Analg. 2019;128(5):981–992.
20. Koch TA, Myers J, Goodnough LT. Intra-
venous iron therapy in patients with 
iron deficiency anemia: Dosing consid-
erations.. Anemia. 2015;2015:763576.
21. Peters F, Ellermann I, Steinbicker AU. 
Intravenous iron for treatment of anemia 
in the 3 perisurgical phases: A review 
and analysis of the current literature.. 
Anesth Analg. 2018;126(4):1268–1282.
22. Heller LB, Shander A. Preoperative ane-
mia management: Value-based care for 
orthopedic surgery. Techniques in Ortho-
paedics. 2020;35(1):7–14.
23. Gani F, Cerullo M, Ejaz A, Gupta PB, 
Demario VM, Johnston FM, etal. Imple-
mentation of a blood management pro-
gram at a tertiary care hospital: Effect 
on transfusion practices and clinical 
outcomes among patients undergoing 
surgery. Ann Surg. 2019;269(6):1073–
1079.
24. Richards T, Baikady RR, Clevenger 
B, Butcher A, Abeysiri S, Chau M, 
etal. Preoperative intravenous iron to 
treat anaemia before major abdomi-
nal surgery (PREVENTT): A randomised, 
double-blind, controlled trial. Lancet. 
2020;396(10259):1353–1361.
25. Trentino KM, Mace H, Symons K, San-
filippo FM, Leahy MF, Farmer SL, etal. 
Associations of a Preoperative Anemia 
and Suboptimal Iron Stores Screening 
and Management Clinic in Colorec-
tal Surgery With Hospital Cost, Reim-
bursement, and Length of Stay: A net 
cost analysis. Anesthesia & Analgesia. 
2021;132(2):344–352.
26. Warner MA, Goobie SM. Preoperative 
anemia screening and treatment: Is it 
worth the return on investment? Anesth 
Analg. 2021;132(2):341–343.
27. Bohlius J, Bohlke K, Castelli R, Djul-
begovic B, Lustberg MB, Martino M, 
etal. Management of cancer-associated 
anemia with erythropoiesis-stimulat-
ing agents: ASCO/ASH clinical prac-
tice guideline update. J Clin Oncol. 
2019;37(15):1336–1351.
28. Williams DGA, Villalta E, Aronson S, 
Murray S, Blitz J, Kosmos V, etal. 
Tutorial: Development and implemen-
tation of a multidisciplinary preop-
erative nutrition optimization clinic: 
Development and Implementation of a 
Multidisciplinary Preoperative Nutrition 
Optimization Clinic. JPEN J Parenter 
Enteral Nutr. 2020;44(7):1185–1196.
29. Stratton RJ, Hackston A, Longmore 
D, Dixon R, Price S, Stroud M, etal. 
Malnutrition in hospital outpatients and 
inpatients: Prevalence, concurrent valid-
ity and ease of use of the “malnutrition 
universal screening tool” (“MUST”) for 
adults. Br J Nutr. 2004;92(5):799–808.
30. Cederholm T, Jensen GL, Correia M, 
Gonzalez MC, Fukushima R, Higashi-
guchi T, etal. GLIM criteria for the 
diagnosis of malnutrition—A consensus 
report from the global clinical nutrition 
community. J Cachexia Sarcopenia Mus-
cle. 2019;10(1):207–217.
31. Ferguson M, Capra S, Bauer J, Banks 
M. Development of a valid and reli-
able malnutrition screening tool for 
adult acute hospital patients. Nutrition. 
1999;15(6): 458-434.
32. Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics. 
How Much Protein Should I Eat? htt-
ps://www.eatright.org/food/nutrition/
dietary-guidelines-and-myplate/how-
much-protein-should-i-eat 
Accessed 
November 10, 2021.
33. Adiamah A, Skorepa P, Weimann A, 
Lobo DN. The impact of preoperative 
immune modulating nutrition on out-
comes in patients undergoing surgery 
for gastrointestinal cancer: A systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Ann Surg. 
2019;270(2):247–256.
34. Merker M, Amsler A, Pereira R, Bolliger 
R, Tribolet P, Braun N, etal. Vitamin 
D deficiency is highly prevalent in 
malnourished inpatients and associ-
ated with higher mortality: A prospec-
tive cohort study. Medicine (Baltimore). 
2019;98(48):e18113.
35. Hill A, Wendt S, Benstoem C, Neubauer 
C, Meybohm P, Langlois P, etal. Vitamin 
C to improve organ dysfunction in car-
diac surgery patients-Review and prag-
matic approach. Nutrients. 2018;10(8).
36. Langlois PL LF. Vitamin C for the criti-
cally ill: Is the evidence strong enough? 
Nutrition. 2019:60.
37. Centers for Disease Control and Preven-
tion. Current Cigarette Smoking Among 
Adults in the United States. https://
www.cdc.gov/tobacco/data_statistics/
fact_sheets/adult_data/cig_smoking/
index.htm Accessed November 11, 2021.
38. Banks E, Joshy G, Weber MF, Liu B, 
Grenfell R, Egger S, etal. Tobacco smok-
ing and all-cause mortality in a large 
Australian cohort study: Findings from a 
mature epidemic with current low smok-
ing prevalence.. BMC Med. 2015;13:38.
39. Thun MJ, Carter BD, Feskanich D, etal. 
50-year trends in smoking-related mor-
tality in the United States. N Engl J Med. 
2013;368(4):351–364.
40. Pierre S, Rivera C, Le Maitre B, Ruppert 
AM, Bouaziz H, Wirth N, etal. Guide-
lines on smoking management during 
the perioperative period. Anaesth Crit 
Care Pain Med. 2017;36(3):195–200.
41. Yousefzadeh A, Chung F, Wong DT, 
Warner DO, Wong J. Smoking cessation: 
The role of the anesthesiologist. Anesth 
Analg. 2016;122(5):1311–1320.
42. Wong J, An D, Urman RD, Warner DO, 
Tonnesen H, Raveendran R, etal. Soci-
ety for Perioperative Assessment and 
Quality Improvement (SPAQI) consensus 
statement on perioperative smoking ces-
sation. Anesth Analg. 2020;131(3):955–
968.
43. Duggan EW, Klopman MA, Berry AJ, 
Umpierrez G. The Emory University 
perioperative algorithm for the manage-
ment of hyperglycemia and diabetes in 
non-cardiac surgery patients. Curr Diab 
Rep. 2016;16(3):34.
44. Duggan EW, Carlson K, Umpierrez GE. 
Perioperative 
hyperglycemia 
man-
agement: An update. Anesthesiology. 
2017;126(3):547–560.
45. Fleisher LA, Linde-Zwirble WT. Inci-
dence, 
outcome, 
and 
attributable 
resource use associated with pulmonary 
and cardiac complications after major 
small and large bowel procedures. Perio-
per Med (Lond). 2014;3:7.
46. Canet J, Sabate S, Mazo V, Gallart L, de 
Abreu MG, Belda J, etal. Development 
and validation of a score to predict post-
operative respiratory failure in a multi-
centre European cohort: A prospective, 
observational study. Eur J Anaesthesiol. 
2015;32(7):458–470.
47. Canet J, Gallart L, Gomar C, Paluzie G, 
Valles J, Castillo J, etal. Prediction of 
postoperative pulmonary complications 
in a population-based surgical cohort. 
Anesthesiology. 2010;113(6):1338–1350.
48. Gupta H, Gupta PK, Fang X, Miller WJ, 
Cemaj S, Forse RA, etal. Development 
and validation of a risk calculator pre-
dicting postoperative respiratory failure. 
Chest. 2011;140(5):1207–1215.
49. Nagappa M, Wong J, Singh M, Wong 
DT, Chung F. An update on the various 
practical applications of the STOP-Bang 
questionnaire in anesthesia, surgery, 
and perioperative medicine. Curr Opin 
Anaesthesiol. 2017;30(1):118–125.
50. Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive 
Lung Disease. Global Strategy for the 
Diagnosis, Management, and Preven-
tion of Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary 
Disease (2021 Report). https://goldcopd.
org/wp-content/uploads/2020/11/GOLD-
REPORT-2021-v1.1-25Nov20_WMV.pdf
Accessed November 11, 2021.
51. Kaw R, Chung F, Pasupuleti V, Mehta J, 
Gay PC, Hernandez AV. Meta-analysis 
of the association between obstructive 
Section VI CONSULTANT ANESTHETIC PRACTICE
766
sleep apnoea and postoperative out-
come. Br J Anaesth. 2012;109(6):
897–906.
52. Chung F, Yang Y, Brown R, Liao P. 
Alternative scoring models of STOP-
bang questionnaire improve specificity 
to detect undiagnosed obstructive sleep 
apnea. J Clin Sleep Med. 2014;10(9):951–
958.
53. Fernandez-Bustamante A, Bartels K, 
Clavijo C, Scott BK, Kacmar R, Bul-
lard K, etal. Preoperatively screened 
obstructive sleep apnea is associated 
with worse postoperative outcomes 
than previously diagnosed obstructive 
sleep apnea. Anesth Analg. 2017;125(2):
593–602.
54. Carli 
F. 
Prehabilitation 
for 
the 
anesthesiologist. 
Anesthesiology. 
2020;133(3):645–652.
55. Norris CM, Close JCT. Prehabilitation 
for the frailty syndrome: Improving 
outcomes for our most vulnerable 
patients. Anesth Analg. 2020;130(6):
1524–1533.
56. Carli F, Bousquet-Dion G, Awasthi R, 
Elsherbini N, Liberman S, Boutros M, 
etal. Effect of multimodal prehabili-
tation vs postoperative rehabilitation 
on 30-day postoperative complications 
for frail patients undergoing resection 
of colorectal cancer: A randomized 
clinical trial. JAMA Surg. 2020;155(3):
233–242.
57. Cabilan CJ, Hines S, Munday J. The 
effectiveness of prehabilitation or pre-
operative exercise for surgical patients: 
A systematic review. JBI Database Sys-
tem Rev Implement Rep. 2015;13(1):
146–187.
58. Trepanier M, Minnella EM, Paradis T, 
Awasthi R, Kaneva P, Schwartzman K, 
etal. Improved disease-free survival 
after prehabilitation for colorectal can-
cer surgery. Ann Surg. 2019;270(3):
493–501.
59. Gillis C, Buhler K, Bresee L, Carli F, 
Gramlich L, Culos-Reed N, etal. Effects 
of nutritional prehabilitation, with 
and without exercise, on outcomes of 
patients who undergo colorectal surgery: 
A systematic review and meta-analysis. 
Gastroenterology. 2018;155(2):391–410 
e4.
60. Santa Mina D, Hilton WJ, Matthew AG, 
Awasthi R, Bousquet-Dion G, Alibhai 
SMH, etal. Prehabilitation for radi-
cal prostatectomy: A multicentre ran-
domized controlled trial. Surg Oncol. 
2018;27(2):289–298.
61. Kow AW. Prehabilitation and its role in 
geriatric surgery. Ann Acad Med Singap. 
2019;48(11):386–392.
62. Kilgour RD, Vigano A, Trutschnigg B, 
Lucar E, Borod M, Morais JA. Hand-
grip strength predicts survival and is 
associated with markers of clinical 
and functional outcomes in advanced 
cancer patients. Support Care Cancer. 
2013;21(12):3261–3270.
63. Bohannon RW, Crouch R. 1-Minute Sit-
to-Stand Test: Systematic review of pro-
cedures, performance, and clinimetric 
properties. J Cardiopulm Rehabil Prev. 
2019;39(1):2–8.
64. Tew GA, Ayyash R, Durrand J, Danjoux 
GR. Clinical guideline and recommenda-
tions on pre-operative exercise training 
in patients awaiting major non-car-
diac surgery. Anaesthesia. 2018;73(6):
750–768.
65. Doan LV, Blitz J. Preoperative assess-
ment and management of patients with 
pain and anxiety disorders. Curr Anes-
thesiol Rep. 2020;10(1):28–34.
66. Ohkura Y, Shindoh J, Ichikura K, Uda-
gawa H, Ueno M, Matsushima E. Perio-
perative risk factors of psychological 
distress in patients undergoing treat-
ment for esophageal cancer. World J 
Surg Oncol. 2020;18(1):326.
67. Edwards DA, Hedrick TL, Jayaram J, 
Argoff C, Gulur P, Holubar SD, etal. 
American Society for Enhanced Recov-
ery and Perioperative Quality Initiative 
Joint Consensus Statement on Periop-
erative Management of Patients on Pre-
operative Opioid Therapy. Anesth Analg. 
2019;129(2):553–566.
68. Freeman SC, Scott NW, Powell R, John-
ston M, Sutton AJ, Cooper NJ. Compo-
nent network meta-analysis identifies 
the most effective components of psy-
chological preparation for adults under-
going surgery under general anesthesia. 
J Clin Epidemiol. 2018;98:105–116.
69. Powell R, Scott NW, Manyande A, Bruce 
J, Vogele C, Byrne-Davis LM, etal. Psy-
chological preparation and postoperative 
outcomes for adults undergoing surgery 
under general anaesthesia. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev. 2016(5):CD008646.
70. Wu PY, Huang ML, Lee WP, Wang 
C, Shih WM. Effects of music lis-
tening on anxiety and physiologi-
cal responses in patients undergoing 
awake craniotomy. Complement Ther 
Med. 2017;32:56–60.
71. Carter JE, Pyati S, Kanach FA, Max-
well AMW, Belden CM, Shea CM, etal. 
Implementation of perioperative music 
using the consolidated framework for 
implementation research. Anesth Analg. 
2018;127(3):623–631.
72. Cooper L, Abbett SK, Feng A, Ber-
nacki RE, Cooper Z, Urman RD, etal. 
Launching a geriatric surgery center: 
Recommendations from the Society for 
Perioperative Assessment and Qual-
ity Improvement. J Am Geriatr Soc. 
2020;68(9):1941–1946.
73. Culley DJ, Flaherty D, Fahey MC, 
Rudolph JL, Javedan H, Huang CC, 
etal. Poor performance on a preop-
erative cognitive screening test predicts 
postoperative complications in older 
orthopedic surgical patients. Anesthesi-
ology. 2017;127(5):765–774.
74. O’Reilly-Shah VN, Hemani S, Davari P, 
Glowka L, Gebhardt E, Hill L, etal. A 
preoperative cognitive screening test 
predicts increased length of stay in a frail 
population: A retrospective case-control 
study. Anesth Analg. 2019;129(5):1283–
1290.
75. By the 2019 American Geriatrics Soci-
ety Beers Criteria® Update Expert Panel. 
American Geriatrics Society 2019 
Updated AGS Beers Criteria® for Poten-
tially Inappropriate Medication Use in 
Older Adults. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2019 
Apr;67(4):674-694.
76. Scott IA, Hilmer SN, Reeve E, Potter K, 
Le Couteur D, Rigby D, etal. Reducing 
inappropriate polypharmacy: The pro-
cess of deprescribing. JAMA Intern Med. 
2015;175(5):827–834.
77. Chew LD, Bradley KA, Flum DR, Cornia 
PB, Koepsell TD. The impact of low 
health literacy on surgical practice. Am 
J Surg. 2004;188(3):250–253.
78. Halleberg Nyman M, Nilsson U, Dahl-
berg K, Jaensson M. Association 
between functional health literacy and 
postoperative recovery, health care 
contacts, and health-related quality of 
life among patients undergoing day 
surgery: Secondary analysis of a ran-
domized clinical trial. JAMA Surg. 
2018;153(8):738–745.
79. American College of Surgeons Geriatric 
Surgery Verification Program. https://
www.facs.org/Quality-Programs/geriat-
ric-surgery Accessed November 11, 2021.
80. Chew LD, Bradley KA, Boyko EJ. Brief 
questions to identify patients with 
inadequate health literacy. Fam Med. 
2004;36(8):588–594.
81. Blitz J, Swisher J, Sweitzer B. Special 
considerations related to race, sex, gen-
der, and socioeconomic status in the 
preoperative evaluation: Part 1: Race, 
history of incarceration, and health lit-
eracy. Anesthesiol Clin. 2020;38(2):247–
261.
82. Ha Dinh TT, Bonner A, Clark R, Rams-
botham J, Hines S. The effectiveness of 
the teach-back method on adherence 
and self-management in health educa-
tion for people with chronic disease: A 
systematic review. JBI Database System 
Rev Implement Rep. 2016;14(1):210–
247.
83. Vacante M, Biondi A, Basile F, Ciuni R, 
Luca S, Di Saverio S, etal. Hypothyroid-
ism as a Predictor of Surgical Outcomes 
in the Elderly. Front Endocrinol (Laus-
anne). 2019;10:258.
84. Ruetzler K, Khanna AK, Sessler DI. 
Myocardial injury after noncardiac 
surgery: Preoperative, intraoperative, 
and postoperative aspects, implica-
tions, and directions. Anesth Analg. 
2020;131(1):173–186.
VI
Chapter 42 Perioperative Medicine
767
85. Weiss R, Meersch M, Pavenstadt HJ, 
Zarbock A. Acute kidney injury: A 
frequently underestimated problem in 
perioperative medicine. Dtsch Arztebl 
Int. 2019;116(49):833–842.
86. Meersch M, Schmidt C, Zarbock A. 
Perioperative acute kidney injury: An 
under-recognized 
problem. 
Anesth 
Analg. 2017;125(4):1223–1232.
87. Jerath A, Austin PC, Ko DT, Wijey-
sundera HC, Fremes S, McCormack D, 
etal. Socioeconomic status and days 
alive and out of hospital after major 
elective noncardiac surgery: A popula-
tion-based cohort study. Anesthesiology. 
2020;132(4):713–722.
88. Qi AC, Peacock K, Luke AA, Bark-
er A, Olsen MA, Joynt Maddox KE. 
Associations between social risk fac-
tors and surgical site infections after 
colectomy and abdominal hysterectomy. 
JAMA Netw Open. 2019;2(10):e1912339.
89. McIsaac DI, MacDonald DB, Aucoin 
SD. Frailty for perioperative clinicians: 
A narrative review. Anesth Analg. 
2020;130(6):1450–1460.
90. Nelson A. Unequal treatment: Confront-
ing racial and ethnic disparities in health 
care. J Natl Med Assoc. 2002;94(8):
666–668.
91. Trotter RT 2nd, Lininger MR, Camplain 
R, Fofanov VY, Camplain C, Baldwin 
JA. A survey of health disparities, social 
determinants of health, and converg-
ing morbidities in a county jail: A 
cultural-ecological assessment of health 
conditions in jail populations. Int J Envi-
ron Res Public Health. 2018;15(11):2500.
92. Bai JR, Befus M, Mukherjee DV, Lowy 
FD, Larson EL. Prevalence and predic-
tors of chronic health conditions of 
inmates newly admitted to maximum 
security prisons. J Correct Health Care. 
2015;21(3):255–264.
93. Williams BA, Lindquist K, Sudore RL, 
Strupp HM, Willmott DJ, Walter LC. 
Being old and doing time: Functional 
impairment and adverse experiences of 
geriatric female prisoners. J Am Geriatr 
Soc. 2006;54(4):702–707.
Chapter
768
INTRODUCTION
Background
Injury is the leading cause of fatality worldwide, causing 
more than 5 million deaths—9% of the world's deaths—
each year.1 According to the Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention (CDC), trauma accounted for nearly 
230,000 U.S. deaths in 2018, costing over $400 billion 
in health care and lost productivity. Trauma is the most 
frequent cause of fatality in those aged 1 to 44 years, 
accounting for 54% of deaths in age group 1 to 9 years, 
85% in the age group 10 to 24 years, and 57% in the 
age group 25 to 44 years.2 The disease of trauma dis-
proportionately affects younger age groups, with trauma 
responsible for over 36% of potential years of life lost in 
people younger than 65 years old.3
During the past decades, mortality trends have con-
tinued to decrease as care for the severely injured patient 
has improved. Emergent care for the severely injured 
is aggregated at designated trauma centers, which are 
independently verified by strict criteria stipulated by 
the American College of Surgeons. The most special-
ized trauma centers, designated as Level I, have the 
ability to deliver 24-hour specialized multidisciplinary 
care. Trauma care delivered at Level I trauma centers 
decreases overall mortality risk by 25% when compared 
with nontrauma centers.4 Anesthesia providers, in par-
ticular, play a vital role in the acute resuscitation and 
early management of severely injured patients. In this 
chapter, the basics of trauma care for anesthesia provid-
ers will be discussed.
Physiology in Trauma
Physiologic derangements in patients who have suf-
fered trauma-induced injuries depend on the mechanism 
and severity of injury. Most commonly, hypotension in 
trauma is the result of severe blood loss or hemorrhagic 
INTRODUCTION
Background
Physiology in Trauma
INITIAL MANAGEMENT
Prearrival Preparation
Trauma Bay
Adjuncts and Investigations
Definitive Care and Transport
Decision Making in Trauma
INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
Phase 1: Uncontrolled Hemorrhage
Phase 2: Controlled Hemorrhage
Phase 3: Restoration of Physiology
SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS
Traumatic Brain Injury
Spinal Cord Injury
Burns
Extremes of Age
Trauma in Pregnancy
Care for Trauma Patients in Non-OR Settings
ANESTHESIA FOR 
TRAUMA
Marc P. Steurer, Benn Lancman
43
VI
Chapter 43 Anesthesia for Trauma
769
shock, which is the main cause of fatality in critically 
injured patients. After sources of hemorrhagic shock are 
investigated, the following causes of shock must also 
be considered when encountering hypotension in the 
trauma setting: relative hypovolemia from obstructed 
venous return (e.g., from tension pneumothorax or 
cardiac tamponade), cardiogenic shock, and neurogenic 
shock.
The initial presenting arterial blood pressure values 
of a trauma patient may be misleading in early hem-
orrhage. The degree of hemorrhage can be masked by 
compensatory reflexes via the sympathetic nervous 
system, carotid sinus and aortic arch baroreceptors, 
and other low-pressure receptors. The renin–angioten-
sin system and vasopressin secretion from the pitui-
tary play a later compensatory role. These responses 
allow sympathetic vasoconstriction of the arterioles to 
increase total peripheral resistance, venoconstriction 
to increase venous return, and an increase in heart 
rate. With extreme hypoxia and acidosis, the central 
nervous system also provides additional sympathetic 
stimulation.
Hemorrhagic shock can generally be divided into 
a compensated and progressive phase. Each phase has 
different characteristics depending on the acuity and 
volume of blood lost (Table 43.1).
In compensated hemorrhage, physiologic compen-
satory mechanisms that are intact may be adequate 
to sustain systemic perfusion without clinical inter-
vention. About 10% to 15% of blood loss may be 
adequately compensated for by physiology alone. As 
blood loss continues, hemorrhagic shock progresses. If 
inadequate perfusion persists, generalized tissue and 
cellular necrosis, cardiac dysfunction, and metabolic 
acidosis occur. This can ultimately lead to multiorgan 
failure.
Decreased mycardial performance
Hypothermia
Coagulopathy
Metabolic
acidosis
Halt coagulation cascade
Lactic acidosis 
Fig. 43.1 Lethal triad.
Class I
Class II
Class III
Class IV
Blood lossa (mL)
Up to 750
750–1500
1500–2000
>2000
Blood loss (% blood volume)
Up to 15%
15%–30%
30%–40%
>40%
Pulse rate (BPM)
<100
100–120
120–140
>140
Systolic BP
Normal
Normal
Decreased
Decreased
Pulse pressure
Normal or increased
Decreased
Decreased
Decreased
Respiratory rate
14–20
20–30
30–40
>35
Urine output (mL/h)
>30
20–30
5–15
Negligible
CNS/mental status
Slightly anxious
Mildly anxious
Anxious, confused
Confused, lethargic
aFor 70-kg adult.
Modified from the Advanced Trauma Life Support (ATLS) program.
BP, Blood pressure; BPM, beats per minute; CNS, central nervous system.
Table 43.1
Classes of Hemorrhagic Shock in Adults
Hemorrhagic shock and tissue hypoperfusion subse-
quently lead to complex interactions between inflam-
matory factors, intrinsic anticoagulants, and other cel-
lular dysfunctions that can cause an acute traumatic 
coagulopathy after injury. This coagulopathy is attributed 
to factor deficiency, hyperfibrinolysis, and platelet dys-
function. Iatrogenic factors of resuscitation can further 
disrupt the coagulation process. These factors include 
hemodilution, hypocalcemia, hypothermia, and acidosis. 
This is known as trauma-induced coagulopathy. All of 
these processes lead to a positive feedback loop that 
eventually ends in death. Hypothermia, coagulopathy, 
and acidosis are commonly termed the triad of death or 
lethal triad (Fig. 43.1). Hemorrhagic shock may cross a 
threshold at which it becomes irreparable despite blood 
transfusions and other therapies owing to severe, irre-
versible multiorgan failure.
Section VI CONSULTANT ANESTHETIC PRACTICE
770
INITIAL MANAGEMENT
Successfully managing a patient who has suffered a 
major trauma requires a coordinated systematic approach 
to history, mechanism, examination, diagnosis, and 
treatment. Furthermore, these processes must run swiftly 
and in parallel. Often initial management is commenced 
before a definitive diagnosis has been established.
Each patient has a unique constellation of injuries and 
mechanisms, and when combined with their premorbid 
status, there are an immeasurable number of potential 
presentations. To prepare for the unpredictability of 
trauma, many of the initial assessment and management 
processes are standardized, and clinicians must be famil-
iar with their local institution's policies and guidelines.
This section will focus on the initial management of 
a major trauma patient, focusing primarily on the time 
in the emergency department. The initial management 
can significantly influence intraoperative care. The com-
ponents of a mature trauma system can be divided into 
prearrival, the trauma bay, adjuncts, and definitive care.
Prearrival Preparation
Preparation for the arrival of an intensely injured patient 
enables the trauma team to deliver rapid, effective care, 
which is essential for a positive outcome to occur. This 
involves more than just confirming that essential equip-
ment is present and functioning. Although these checks 
are very important, organizational and patient-specific 
preparations also need to be considered.
Universal Organization/Preparation
Caring for a major trauma patient requires the mobi-
lization and deployment of a large and diverse range 
of health care resources to a single point. Preparations 
include considering the following questions: (1) Is there 
a designated trauma bay in the emergency department? 
(2)Who attends the trauma call, and how are they noti-
fied? (3) What are the policies and protocols for activation 
of emergency radiology services, emergency operating 
room (OR) use, massive blood transfusion, and patient 
transport? (4) What are the referral pathways to internal 
and external providers?
These issues should be addressed before the arrival 
of a critically ill patient. Because of the unpredictable 
nature of trauma, a novel set of circumstances can over-
whelm or bypass an organization's existing preparation. 
In these situations, the clinicians involved—as members 
of a learning organization—must notify and alert the 
individuals who can provide the required resources.
Patient-Specific Preparation
This should occur immediately before the arrival of an 
individual major trauma patient. Information regarding 
the patient's injury and status should be provided to 
Box 43.1
IMIST—Paramedic Handover Tool
Identification of the patient
Age
Gender
Name (if known)
Mechanism/medical 
complaint
What happened?
Injuries/information relative to 
the complaint
Known/suspected injuries
Signs (vital signs and Glasgow 
Coma Scale score)
Presence of breath sounds
Tracheal deviation
Treatment and trends/
response to treatment
Vital signs
Drugs
Fluids
Splints
emergency department staff by the ambulance service to 
facilitate resource mobilization.
Most ambulance services around the world use a standard-
ized handover tool to provide essential information in a suc-
cinct and efficient manner. An example of this tool is IMIST, 
a mnemonic for Identification of the patient, Mechanism/
medical complaint, Injuries/information relative to the com-
plaint, Signs (including vital signs and Glasgow Coma Scale 
[GCS] score), and Treatment and trends/response to treatment 
(Box 43.1).5 With this information, the health care team can 
anticipate the patient's clinical needs and prepare accordingly.
 Prearrival Briefing
The purpose of this briefing is to optimize team effi-
ciency and performance. This enables all members of the 
team to introduce themselves, develop group situational 
awareness about the known condition of the patient, and 
assign appropriate team roles.
Trauma Bay
Primary Survey
Once the patient arrives, the focus of the team shifts to 
rapid and simultaneous diagnosis and treatment of life-
threatening conditions.
The Advanced Trauma Life Support (ATLS) approach 
was developed by the American College of Surgeons 
Committee on Trauma. ATLS was first introduced in 1980 
and has since been widely adopted throughout the world. 
It is structured into primary, secondary, and tertiary sur-
veys. This chapter will only address the primary survey. 
The ATLS course is highly recommended as an introduc-
tion to trauma management. Most importantly, it provides 
a common language and framework to organize thinking 
required for optimal individual and team performance.
The purpose of the primary survey is to identify and 
treat immediately life-threatening injuries. It is organized 
into the ABCDE mnemonic (Box 43.2).
VI
Chapter 43 Anesthesia for Trauma
771
Box 43.2
Primary Survey
A
Airway and cervical spine control
B
Breathing and oxygenation
C
Circulation and hemorrhage control
D
Disability
E
Exposure
Modified from the Advanced Trauma Life Support (ATLS) program.
Box 43.3
Trauma Patients Who May Require 
Endotracheal Intubation
•Maxillofacial trauma
•Major hemodynamic instability
•Low SaO2
•Burns
•Head injury
•Intoxicated/behavioral/safety issues
•Transport (radiology/OR/ICU/external)
ICU, Intensive care unit; OR, operating room.
Airway and Oxygenation (Also See Chapter 16)
Establishment of a patent airway is of paramount impor-
tance to ensure a positive outcome for the patient. Rapid 
assessment is most easily achieved by asking the patient 
some simple questions. If the patient can speak, then the 
airway at the time of assessment is usually patent. Inter-
vention may still be required, but there is time to plan the 
safest treatment.
Management of the Airway and Trauma
The trauma patient may require a definitive patent airway 
(a cuffed endotracheal tube) for many reasons (Box 43.3). 
Induction of anesthesia before tracheal intubation may 
be a high-risk and dangerous procedure. The top priority 
is always to maintain adequate tissue oxygenation. If a 
patent airway is maintained with simple airway maneu-
vers, then there is time to optimize the patient's physiol-
ogy and properly prepare for the intubation attempt. If 
the clinical situation allows, performing a focused neuro-
logic assessment before anesthesia induction can provide 
invaluable information that would be difficult to obtain 
in the sedated, endotracheally intubated patient.
There are several differences in the approach to intubat-
ing the trachea in a trauma patient in the emergency depart-
ment as compared with an elective surgical patient in the OR.
Preoxygenation (Administration of Oxygen Before 
Induction of Anesthesia)
Preoxygenation in the patient who has injuries from 
trauma can be challenging. The objective of preoxygena-
tion is to “denitrogenate” the lung, thus providing a reser-
voir of oxygen in the patient's functional residual capacity 
(FRC) to prevent desaturation (hypoxemia) during the 
apneic phase of tracheal intubation. However, many inju-
ries sustained by trauma patients prevent this process from 
being effective. Specifically, any injury that reduces FRC or 
creates a shunt (lung units that are perfused but not ven-
tilated) will increase the likelihood of desaturation despite 
technically adequate preoxygenation. Examples of such 
injuries include direct lung parenchymal injury, hemotho-
rax or pneumothorax, pulmonary aspiration of blood or 
gastric contents, intraabdominal bleeding, diaphragmatic 
injury, and rib fractures. Addition of an alternative oxygen 
source to provide apneic oxygenation throughout the peri-
intubation period has been evaluated in the emergency 
department literature.6 Despite a theoretical benefit, as 
a result of all the issues with preoxygenation in trauma 
patients, no benefit has been demonstrated in experienced 
laryngoscopists' hands.7 The best defense against desatura-
tion is reducing total apneic time.
Fasting
All trauma patients should be assumed to have a “full 
stomach” even when many hours have elapsed since 
their last oral intake. As such, a rapid-sequence induction 
(RSI) is considered standard practice. The use of cricoid 
pressure is common clinical practice but may worsen the 
view at laryngoscopy. A review of the evidence is pre-
sented in Chapter 16.
Altered Physiology
Major trauma patients who require emergent tracheal 
intubation are often the most critically ill patients in the 
hospital. The justification for endotracheal intubation and 
the impact of that physiologic insult on their response to 
laryngoscopy must be clearly defined. For example, if the 
reason for endotracheal intubation is respiratory distress 
from a major lung injury, then optimal preoxygenation 
may still result in rapid desaturation after apnea occurs.
Hemodynamic Status
The hemodynamic response to anesthetics given to 
induce anesthesia is often exaggerated for two main rea-
sons. First, acute intravascular volume loss from bleeding 
results in an inability to maintain arterial blood pressure 
and cardiac output in the face of the vasodilatory effects 
of anesthetic drugs. Second, sympathetic stimulation 
caused by pain and distress can mask the true intravas-
cular volume state; if so, induction of anesthesia can 
cause marked hemodynamic instability. This can usually 
be anticipated by the appropriate intravascular adminis-
tration of fluids (i.e., crystalloids, blood, colloids) and the 
availability of vasopressors.
Anesthetic Drug Choices
The choice of drugs to induce anesthesia in the criti-
cally ill patient is an area of much controversy (also 
see Chapter 8). Propofol and etomidate are often the 
primary choice, with some opting for ketamine in certain 
Section VI CONSULTANT ANESTHETIC PRACTICE
772
situations. The hemodynamic impact and stability are 
more a reflection of drug dosing rather than the choice 
of agent. Most important is for the clinician to be very 
familiar with the anesthetic drugs they plan to use rather 
than using a new, unfamiliar drug. In general, the dose 
of anesthetic drug should be decreased because of a 
relatively reduced volume of distribution of drugs in a 
very ill or hypovolemic patient. Preferential perfusion to 
essential organs, such as the brain, heart, and kidneys, 
occurs in such patients. A vasopressor should be imme-
diately available to manage any transient hypotension 
caused by the anesthetic drugs.
Manual In-Line Stabilization
The process of laryngoscopy can produce an unaccepta-
ble amount of force through the cervical spine. Attempts 
should always be made to reduce this force. Any patient 
with a suspected spinal injury should be placed in a hard 
collar. The front of the collar should be opened at the 
time of laryngoscopy and the head and neck stabilized 
by an additional clinician. Ideally, the manual in-line 
stabilization (MILS) of the neck is performed by a sec-
ond provider standing at the patient's torso, so as to not 
interfere with the laryngoscopist (Fig. 43.2). When the 
intubation and laryngoscopy are done in the OR with the 
patient prepped and draped, MILS needs to be performed 
with the person stabilizing the neck standing (or squat-
ting) directly next to the laryngoscopist (Fig. 43.3). In 
this case, the person attempts to stabilize the neck while 
allowing the optimal position for the laryngoscopist. The 
objective is to minimize movement of the cervical spine 
during laryngoscopy. A pragmatic approach is required 
during MILS because a failed endotracheal intubation 
attempt presents a much greater immediate risk to the 
patient (i.e., hypoxia) than the risk of small neck move-
ments. In the event of poor visualization of the glottic 
structures, consideration should be given to relaxing 
MILS to facilitate endotracheal intubation before replac-
ing the hard cervical collar. The use of video laryngos-
copy may facilitate adequate intubating conditions while 
minimizing unnecessary neck movement and should be 
considered as a first-line device in these patients where 
available.
Choice of Laryngoscope
Video laryngoscopy has transformed the way airways 
are managed in the emergency department and OR. The 
advantages of video laryngoscopy include the follow-
ing: (1) gives an adequate tracheal intubating view with 
reduced pressure and force; (2) provides group situational 
awareness of progress and difficulty of laryngoscopy; 
(3) improves visualization of the larynx in more difficult 
Fig. 43.2 Manual in-line stabilization of the neck from below.
VI
Chapter 43 Anesthesia for Trauma
773
patients without the need to change equipment; and 
(4) allows supervisors and trainers to provide dynamic 
feedback throughout the laryngoscopy.
Failed Endotracheal Intubation Drills
Failed endotracheal intubations are rare. Nevertheless, 
management of the unanticipated difficult airway is more 
likely in the trauma patient. Several factors contribute to 
the increased difficulty of airway management: cervical 
spine precautions, blood or foreign body in the airway, 
and the stress experienced by the person performing the 
intubation. Plans for failed intubation must be made 
explicit, such as what equipment will be needed, its loca-
tion, and the immediate availability of staff who are assist-
ing with intubation before induction of anesthesia. Staff 
who work outside the OR environment may not be familiar 
with airway equipment such as laryngeal masks or surgi-
cal airway kits, and their comfort with using this type of 
equipment should be known in advance.
Posttracheal Intubation Care
Endotracheal intubation is a mechanism for providing phys-
iologic support—it is not therapeutic treatment itself. The 
focus of the emergency department team needs to remain on 
the patient's transition to definitive care. Several issues need 
to be managed immediately after intubation (Box 43.4).
Fig. 43.3 Manual in-line stabilization of the neck from above.
Box 43.4
Postintubation Issues in the Trauma Patient
•Ongoing sedation—postintubation hypertension is
common and should be avoided because of its effect on 
uncontrolled bleeding and intracerebral physiology
•Ventilator and settings
•Disposition—where is the patient going next? To the
computed tomography (CT) scanner, the operating room 
(OR), or the intensive care unit (ICU)?
•Additional intravenous or arterial access, or both—these
procedures should not delay any movement to definitive 
care
Special Groups
Several special circumstances need to be considered 
when making a decision on the management of the 
trauma patient's airway:
1. Airway burns: Patients with airway burns require 
expedited management of their airway. Within a 
very short time, they can progress from minimal 
or no respiratory distress to a completely occluded 
airway because of edema expansion. Warning signs 
of potential airway burns include facial burns, soot in 
mouth/nose, carbonaceous sputum, explosive injuries 
to the upper body, and stridor.
2. Oral trauma: Blood is often found in the upper airway 
of trauma patients. Bleeding can range from a minor 
nuisance to a life-threatening hemorrhage. It is 
important to recognize this situation (i.e., blood in the 
airway) because induction of anesthesia can result in 
the rapid loss of a patent airway. Video laryngoscopes 
and fiber-optic scopes do not perform well when 
blood obscures the field of view. An additional suction 
source is mandatory, and a surgical airway team 
should be immediately available.
3. Direct airway injury: Although uncommon, tracheal 
trauma should be suspected in any patient with direct 
penetrating or blunt trauma to the neck. Warning 
signs such as stridor and subcutaneous emphysema 
may be present. These airways should be managed 
only by experienced clinicians with early involvement 
of a head and neck surgeon. Advancing the cuff of the 
endotracheal tube past a confirmed or suspected lesion 
is a critical concept in these scenarios.
Circulation and Hemorrhage
Adequate circulation and perfusion need to be reestab-
lished to ensure sufficient oxygen delivery to essential 
organs. The first priority is to stop any bleeding. This 
can be achieved through a combination of interventions 
performed in the emergency department (direct pressure, 
suturing wounds), surgical intervention, or angioembo-
lization. Simultaneously, the anesthesia provider must 
ensure adequate oxygen delivery to essential organs 
such as the brain and heart. Damage control resuscitation 
Section VI CONSULTANT ANESTHETIC PRACTICE
774
(DCR) is the term given to a resuscitative strategy that 
provides circulatory support sufficient to prevent per-
manent end-organ damage while avoiding the pitfalls 
of excessive resuscitation. Hypothermia, acidosis, and 
hypocalcemia represent additional clinical issues that 
often arise in managing the hypotensive trauma patient.
Disability
The assessment of the neurologic system should iden-
tify potentially catastrophic injuries that require prompt 
management. This rapid assessment is based on the GCS 
score, pupillary response, and gross limb function. Intu-
bation is usually required for patients with a GCS score 
less than 8 (Box 43.5).
Exposure
To avoid missing major injuries that are not visible, 
the patient must be exposed and inspected on all sides, 
including the back, for other injuries. However, pro-
longed patient exposure for many minutes contributes 
to hypothermia, which adversely affects coagulation, 
oxygen consumption, and mortality risk.
Adjuncts and Investigations
Any tests or investigations that are ordered should have 
an impact on diagnosis and management. Because clini-
cal events can change rapidly and dramatically in trauma 
Box 43.5
The Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) Scorea
Eyes (E)
4—Open spontaneously
3—Open to voice
2—Open to pain
1—Do not open
Verbal (V)
5—Oriented
4—Confused
3—Inappropriate words
2—Incomprehensible sounds
1—No sounds
Motor (M)
6—Obeys commands
5—Localizes to pain
4—Withdraws to pain
3—Abnormal flexion to pain
2—Abnormal extension to pain
1—No response
Total score = best responses for eyes, verbal, and motor
E = 4
V = 5
M = 6
Total GCS score = 15
The Glasgow Coma Scale score is the sum of the best scores in each 
of the three categories: eye opening, verbal response, and motor 
response. The 15-point scale is the predominant one in use.
aBest response used.
patients, timely access to information can be a consider-
able challenge. Results that are especially useful have a 
rapid turnaround time, are performed serially to follow 
trends, and correlate with possible treatments that can 
improve outcome (Box 43.6).
Definitive Care and Transport
Definitive care is the process of fixing the underlying 
physiologic problem. Examples include stopping a bleed-
ing source, plating a fracture, or removing a ruptured 
spleen. Some components of definitive care should 
be performed emergently, whereas others can wait for 
the patient's condition to improve. Depending on the 
patient's injuries and the capabilities of individual insti-
tutions, definitive care may require transfer to another 
health care facility. Either way, the patient will need to 
transfer out of the emergency department.
Setting Priorities: What Is Next?
Conflict often arises when trying to decide the most 
appropriate location to treat the patient. Depending on 
the injuries sustained, there can be disagreement about 
the most clinically urgent injury, and thus the most 
appropriate location for treatment. The logistical barriers 
to treatment can make it impossible to do everything the 
patient needs in a single location.
An example is a patient who sustains major pelvic 
and neurosurgical trauma. The most appropriate place 
for management of neurosurgical trauma is the OR; how-
ever, current guidelines for pelvic trauma recommend 
angioembolization. The decision about which injury to 
prioritize is a difficult one and should be made on the 
clinical nuances of that individual patient. Many Level I 
trauma centers now have hybrid ORs where both angio-
graphic and operative interventions can be performed; 
thus the treatment comes to the patient rather than vice 
versa.
Box 43.6
Initial Investigations
Minimum “standard” major trauma investigations:
Complete blood count
Electrolytes/BUN
Blood gas (preferably arterial)
Chest radiograph
Pelvis radiograph
Coagulation testing—ideally viscoelastic testing (ROTEM/TEG)
Blood group and antibody screen
Additional investigations to consider:
ECG
CT scan
General radiograph
BUN, Blood urea nitrogen; CT, computed tomography; ECG,
electrocardiogram; ROTEM, rotational thromboelastometry; TEG,
thromboelastography.
VI
Chapter 43 Anesthesia for Trauma
775
A reasonable alternative for many conditions is con-
servative management during the acute phase. This allows 
time for restoration of normal physiology, clarification of 
medical history, and a more complete assessment of the 
extent of injuries. Providing intensive-care-level obser-
vation and a regular review of conditions is an extremely 
appropriate and responsible course of action.
Local Care Versus Transfer
Once a patient's clinical needs exceed the services pro-
vided by the institution, the process for timely transfer 
begins. A key management principle is to seek help from 
the accepting hospital early in the process. Moving a 
critically ill patient takes time, and timely communica-
tion with the accepting hospital enables the required 
resources to be mobilized. Regardless of the ultimate 
destination, the patient's clinical status can be optimized 
by regular reassessment via ATLS primary and second-
ary surveys. When transporting critically ill patients, the 
level of care received at the hospital should be continued 
during transfer to the new facility. Specific equipment, 
staff skill mix, routes, and oxygen supplies should all be 
considered before initiating a transfer.
Decision Making in Trauma
Mature and complex systems such as health care and 
trauma require multiple individuals with different and 
complementary skill sets to work together toward the 
common goal of achieving the best patient outcomes. 
Some simple strategies can be employed to optimize team 
performance and bring order to the potential chaos of a 
major trauma (Box 43.7).
Leadership and Followership
Traditional medical teaching reinforces the need for 
a clearly defined leader to ensure that any resuscita-
tion runs smoothly. The role of the leader is to act as 
a central point for information and decision making 
(Box 43.8). Conversely, what makes a good follower is 
less often discussed. Although each team will have only 
one leader at any time, there will be several followers. 
The qualities of a good follower support the leader in the 
ability to make the right decisions at any given point in 
time (Box 43.9).
Box 43.7
Questions to Ask Locally to Be an Effective 
Part of a Trauma Team
•How do we alert a major trauma?
•How do we define a major trauma?
•Who responds to trauma calls?
•What is our massive transfusion protocol?
•How do we get more help if we need it?
•What are the limits of what we can deal with locally?
Box 43.8
Leadership
Qualities of a good leader:
Listens to the team
Provides clear direction and expectations for patient care
Shares uncertainty
Delegates appropriately
Stands back and maintains “big picture” situational 
awareness
Good leaders do NOT need to:
Know the most
Be the most experienced clinician
Always be right
Box 43.9
Followership
Qualities of a good follower:
Uses closed-loop communication (e.g., clarify 
instructions, report back when task is complete)
Offers suggestions (e.g., would you like me to …)
Alerts the leader to changes in clinical status of patient 
(e.g., hypotension)
Provides feedback on personal limitations, skills, 
experience
Uses communication techniques such as graded 
assertiveness (see Box 43.10)
Box 43.10
Graded Assertiveness—PACE
Probe
“I thought our goal was to keep the arterial blood pressure 
higher than 90 mm Hg.”
Alert
“Did you realize the arterial blood pressure is low? Would you 
like me to give some blood?”
Challenge
“Is there a reason you are tolerating hypotension in this 
patient?”
Emergency action
“The arterial blood pressure is dangerously low. I am going to 
treat it now.”
Graded Assertiveness
Graded assertiveness is one technique for communicating 
personal concerns about decision making or priorities 
to the team leader in a way that maintains constructive 
group performance. It assumes that poor decision making 
is based on incorrect or insufficient information. Follow-
ers are able to see the situation from a unique perspective 
and can communicate their concerns. They can then use 
the Probe, Alert, Challenge, and Emergency action (PACE) 
technique (described in Box 43.10) to communicate their 
concerns in a constructive manner.8 The team leader is 
very important and is usually aware of information that 
the follower may not be, and as such those concerns may 
not be the priority at that point in time.
Section VI CONSULTANT ANESTHETIC PRACTICE
776
INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
The spectrum of patients who need to go to the OR for 
surgical or interventional procedures because of trauma 
is vast. It encompasses injuries of all levels of magnitude 
in all organs and structures of the human body. Some 
are very minor and simple, and others involve specific 
organs with explicit consequences and treatment. The 
latter group consists of life-threatening injury to one or 
multiple organs and is the main focus of this section. All 
current concepts that should be applied to the severely 
injured and bleeding patient can be applied to the lesser 
injured to varying degrees.
The severely injured and massively bleeding patient 
usually presents in hemodynamic shock and is in need of 
lifesaving interventions. The differential diagnosis of a 
trauma patient in shock consists of massive hemorrhage, 
tension pneumothorax, cardiac tamponade, severe car-
diac contusion, and neurogenic shock. Underlying medi-
cal conditions can lead to exaggeration of the degree of 
shock (Table 43.2).
The management of severely injured patients with 
massive hemorrhage can be divided into three discrete 
phases. This distinction is based on different physiologic 
aspects, a varying approach, and management principles. 
Early in the first phase, patients suffer from uncontrolled 
hemorrhage. The second phase begins when at least par-
tial control of the hemorrhage has been achieved. The 
third and last phase is reached when the patient's physi-
ology starts to normalize (e.g., arterial blood pressure). 
The breakdown into these three phases takes into account 
the different treatment goals for each phase plus the 
varying angle and pragmatism of the approach. It allows 
the provider to appreciate the specific goals for the given 
phase. These three phases exist in a continuum, and the 
borders are very fluid (Table 43.3).
Medical Condition
Investigation Modalities
Massive hemorrhage
Clinical examination
Bedside TTE—assess volume 
status
FAST scan—abdominal source
Tension pneumothorax
Clinical examination 
(percussion/trachea)
Lung ultrasound
Cardiac tamponade
TTE (subcostal view best)
Severe cardiac contusion
TTE
Table 43.2
Differential Diagnosis of Shock in the Trauma 
Patient
FAST, Focused assessment with sonography for trauma; TTE,
transthoracic echocardiogram.
Phase 1: Uncontrolled Hemorrhage
The medical team has one goal only for trauma patients 
with massive hemorrhage that warrants emergent surgi-
cal procedures in the OR—to stop the bleeding as soon 
as possible. Everyone involved facilitates that aim by all 
means. There is no time to wait for study results, to order 
additional tests, or for consultation with other specialists. 
The anesthesia team's role is to facilitate achievement 
of hemostasis as quickly as possible. Massively bleed-
ing patients who come to the OR for resuscitation and 
hemostasis present a challenge to the anesthesia providers, 
who are faced with a very hectic and dynamic situation. 
Additional personnel can be very helpful but have to be 
managed, ideally in a standardized fashion. Having too 
many team members can be a hindrance and may prevent 
the team from functioning efficiently. The airway has to 
be secured and the patient should be ventilated with 100% 
oxygen. Details and consideration of airway management 
can be found in the section, “Initial Management,” earlier 
in this chapter and in Chapter 16. The use of high frac-
tion of inspired oxygen (Fio2) restores the oxygen delivery 
to a certain extent by compensating for lost Hb via an 
increase of the dissolved oxygen fraction. Another impor-
tant institutional protocol to have in place is the massive 
transfusion protocol (MTP) (also see Chapter 25). The MTP 
facilitates communication, optimizes the response time 
of the blood bank, and minimizes errors. Although these 
procedures are essential to taking care of such patients, 
the absolute mainstay of this phase is the hemostatic 
resuscitation of the patient. As prehospital care systems 
have matured and evolved, there has been an increas-
ing opportunity to transport critically unstable patients 
directly from the ambulance into the OR. This direct-to-
OR pathway has demonstrated improved survival in major 
penetrating trauma and should be explored within the 
constraints of local resources.9
Historically, the anesthesia provider would deploy 
large volumes of crystalloids early in order to aggres-
sively restore the circulating volume and restore normal 
arterial blood pressure values. This can lead to a direct 
escalation in the bleeding rate by increasing cardiac out-
put in addition to both the arterial and venous pressures. 
This abandoned practice would also lead to a dilution of 
coagulation factors and hypothermia, further increasing 
the bleeding. Over the past 10 to 15 years, the initial 
resuscitation has been revolutionized and the concept 
entirely changed.10 The main goal of the initial resusci-
tation is on bridging the patient for as long as possible 
until the bleeding can be stopped. DCR is the term used 
to describe the new concept11 (Box 43.11).
Damage Control Resuscitation
Permissive hypotension, limited use of crystalloids and 
colloids, and early use of blood products represent the 
cornerstones of DCR.11
AL GRAWANY
VI
Chapter 43 Anesthesia for Trauma
777
Box 43.11
Principles of Damage Control Resuscitation 
(DCR)
Permissive hypotension
Stop bleeding early—pressure, angiography, operating room
Early use of hemostatic products
Minimize crystalloid use
Phase 1
Phase 2
Phase 3
Clinical status
Life-threatening uncontrolled 
hemorrhage
Ongoing hemorrhage—not 
immediately life threatening—
partial surgical control
Hemorrhage controlled
Clinical priorities
•STOP THE BLEEDING
•Call for HELP
•Control airway, F O2 100%
•Damage control resuscitation
(DCR)
-
SBP <100 mm Hg
-
MAP 50–60 mm Hg
-
Consider modifications if TBI, 
carotid stenosis, CAD
•TAILORED RESUSCITATION
•Place supportive lines
(arterial/CVC)
•Prevent hypothermia
-
Esophageal temperature 
probe
-
Warmed fluids
-
Warming blankets 
(upper and lower body)
-
Increase room 
temperature
•RESTORE PHYSIOLOGY
•Rapid intravascular filling
•Stepwise deepening of
anesthesia
-
Fentanyl boluses
-
Increased volatile 
anesthetics
-
Additional lines 
(urinary catheter, 
nasogastric tube)
-
Communicate with all 
team members and 
ICU
Blood products
•Activate massive transfusion
protocol (MTP)
•Consider emergency (unmatched)
blood products
•Early use
•Empiric 1:1:1 transfusion ratio
•TEG/ROTEM to guide
coagulation products
•ABG to guide red blood cell
transfusion
•Only as required on testing
•Deactivate MTP when
appropriate
Crystalloids/colloids
•Cautious use
•Use for hypovolemia with
normal coagulation/Hb
•Use serial lactate/BE to
guide fluid requirements
•Attempt to normalize BE/
lactate
Special points
•Consider CaCl2 1 g for every three 
blood products
•Large bore IV access (>16 g) or CVC
•Rapid infusing system (e.g.,
Belmont)
•Avoid vasoconstrictors
•Consider cell salvage
•Aim to repeat TEG/ROTEM/
ABG every 30 min
•Consider TEE for difficult
cases
•Consider vasoactive
infusions if necessary
ABG, Arterial blood gas; BE, base excess; CAD, coronary artery disease; CVC, central venous catheter; ICU, intensive care unit; IV, intravenous; 
MAP, mean arterial pressure; MTP, massive transfusion protocol; ROTEM, rotational thromboelastometry; SBP, systolic blood pressure; TBI,
traumatic brain injury; TEE, transesophageal echocardiography; TEG, thromboelastography.
Table 43.3
Phases of Major Traumatic Resuscitation
Permissive hypotension aims to use the body's physi-
ologic response to hemorrhage. The resulting low venous 
and arterial blood pressures and the decrease in cardiac 
output lead to a reduction in the driving force behind 
the bleeding. At the same time, the providers can take 
advantage of the normal response to blood loss: vasocon-
striction in nonvital regions and redirection of the blood 
flow to the most important organs. The ultimate goal is to 
benefit from this compensatory mechanism for as long as 
possible. Unfortunately, there are no direct and accurate 
measures of when this mechanism is at its limits and the 
oxygenation of vital organs is starting to be impaired. 
Systolic blood pressure (SBP, invasive or noninvasive) 
continues to serve as a very basic surrogate variable, 
even though there is no reliable correlation between SBP 
and organ microcirculation. Animal models of shock 
demonstrate that resuscitation to 60% of the baseline 
mean arterial pressure (MAP) does not reduce the regional 
organ perfusion compared with normotensive resuscita-
tion, but the less aggressive resuscitation does lead to a 
decreased blood loss. At the same time, brain perfusion 
was not different between the two groups. Consequently, 
there is some expert consensus to tolerate SBP around 
80 to 90 mm Hg in actively hemorrhaging patients until 
Section VI CONSULTANT ANESTHETIC PRACTICE
778
hemostasis is achieved with adjustment to the patient's 
age, preexisting medical conditions, and injury pattern. 
For example, on one extreme, there is the young and 
healthy patient with a massive abdominal bleed. In that 
case, SBP in the 60 mm Hg range can be tolerated for a 
short duration. On the other end of the spectrum, keep-
ing SBP well above 100 mm Hg for elderly patients with 
multiple medical conditions and multisystem trauma 
involving the brain should be considered. These measures 
are only temporarily in place until hemostasis is achieved 
or the patient's condition further deteriorates. In the lat-
ter case, the intravascular volume has to be replenished.
At the point when the patient needs additional 
intravascular fluids, crystalloids and colloids should be 
avoided in this early phase.12 Otherwise, the cardiac 
output and intravascular pressures will increase, as will 
the rate of bleeding; coagulation factors will continually 
be consumed in an effort to clot the bleeding sites; and 
their plasma levels will rapidly decline. All of these con-
ditions will negatively affect a patient's ability to survive 
a disastrous bleeding episode. Restoring vital signs to 
normal values will bring a short period of better physiol-
ogy before the disastrous combination of an increased 
bleeding rate and rapid deterioration of the patient's 
coagulation capability significantly worsen the overall 
situation. In addition, large volumes of crystalloids will 
worsen reperfusion injury and augment inflammatory 
response. Administration of synthetic colloids will even 
further increase coagulopathy by impairing both fibrino-
gen polymerization and platelet function.
As a result, the use of crystalloids and colloids has been 
restricted in the setting of severe hemorrhage. Instead, 
blood products are the fluids of choice for the resuscita-
tion of massively bleeding patients (also see Chapter 25). 
Packed red blood cells (PRBCs), fresh frozen plasma (FFP), 
and platelets are the mainstays for the initial resuscitation. 
Evidence is emerging that demonstrates the pragmatic 
and early use of these blood products in a fixed ratio 
(i.e., 1:1:1, PRBC:FFP:platelets).13 The benefit of using 
this approach is that the oxygen-carrying capacity is 
maintained or restored with the PRBCs, and the patient's 
ability to form clots is supported with the plasma fac-
tors in the FFP and platelet infusions. When transfusing 
large amounts of this combination of blood products, one 
should consider the additional supplementation of fibrino-
gen in the form of cryoprecipitate, as fibrinogen is one of 
the key components of hemostasis. Fig. 43.4 provides an 
example of blood products provided as part of a MTP. Cry-
oprecipitate is consumed much faster than can be resyn-
thesized by the liver under such circumstances, and as a 
result, tranexamic acid, an antifibrinolytic, is given for 
preventing coagulopathy in severely injured hypotensive 
patients early in their course.14 15 In recent years, the use 
of whole blood early in the context of expected massive 
transfusion has gained momentum in both the prehospital 
and intrahospital contexts. Conceptually, the use of whole 
blood not only simplifies the approach, but it also offers 
less dilution of red blood cells, platelets, and coagulation 
factors compared with component therapy.16 See Fig 43.5. 
The use of whole blood has been established as safe, and it 
may even be associated with improved outcomes, at least 
in military settings.17
As an alternative, or in addition, to fractionated prod-
ucts, fibrinogen concentrate or prothrombin complex con-
centrate (PCC) can be administered. These also have the 
advantage of not requiring crossmatching and are shelf 
stable. There is some early evidence that combined use of 
four-factor PCC combined with FFP can reduce total trans-
fusion volume and improve coagulation laboratory val-
ues.18 A persisting concern is the potential for an increased 
risk of clinically significant thrombosis. Although this has 
not been born out in the literature at this stage, the authors 
recommend pairing their use with viscoelastic hemostatic 
assays (VHAs) to ensure their administration is tailored to 
the patient's needs. The role of vasopressors for hemody-
namic support in this phase remains largely controversial. 
They should generally be avoided, because in an already 
severely hypovolemic state further vasoconstriction may 
compromise the blood flow to vital organs.
Access for Intravascular Resuscitation
To deploy adequate resuscitation in a severely bleeding 
patient, proper access to the patient's vascular system 
needs to be obtained. Every patient with significant 
trauma or mechanism of trauma should have two large-
bore peripheral intravenous (PIV) lines placed. They 
should be 16-gauge or larger and preferably inserted 
in the upper extremities. The integrity and the time to 
meaningful venous access are of equal importance. It 
is better to quickly obtain a well-functioning 18-gauge 
PIV than to waste valuable time on obtaining an elusive 
14-gauge PIV.
Fig. 43.4 Example of a massive transfusion protocol.
VI
Chapter 43 Anesthesia for Trauma
779
Prolonged or significant massive transfusions usually 
benefit from large-bore central access. Classically, a large-
bore (e.g., 8.5 Fr) catheter introducer sheath is placed in 
either the femoral, internal jugular, or subclavian vein. 
If the circumstances permit, this is performed with ultra-
sound guidance.
Intraosseous (IO) access is suitable as a first-line access 
if PIV access is poor or delayed. Although an IO line can-
not be used for rapid volume resuscitation, it can serve 
as a line to administer medications. With better overall 
flow rates and the proximity to the heart, the humeral 
approach is the preferable location for an IO line in 
adults.
The use of a modern rapid infuser system is of para-
mount importance. The rapid infuser provides the anes-
thesia team with the capability to deliver large amounts 
of warmed blood products very quickly and safely. Rapid 
infuser systems are highly capable, and the patient and 
the clinical situation should be closely monitored to 
avoid excessive resuscitation (Fig. 43.6).
When all the aforementioned measures and tech-
niques are properly deployed, the anesthesia team can 
provide the patient and surgical team with the valuable 
extra time needed until hemostasis can be achieved. 
Once the bleeding is mostly under control, the priorities 
and speed of approach change and phase 2 of resuscita-
tion begins.
Fig. 43.5 Dilution and storage loss reduce the effectiveness of component blood product therapy 
compared with fresh whole blood. (Redrawn from Dutton R. Haemostatic resuscitation. Br J Anaesth. 
2012;109[Suppl 1]:i39–i46.) FFP, Fresh frozen plasma; PRBC, packed red blood cells.
Phase 2: Controlled Hemorrhage
In phase 2 after the major aspects of the bleeding source 
have been controlled, the anesthesia team should 
focus on a more individualized, tailored approach. 
Depending on the dynamics of a given case and the 
number and experience of anesthesia providers avail-
able, phase 2 items can happen earlier and in parallel
with phase 1.
Invasive monitoring should begin at this point. The 
insertion should never delay or distract from the massive 
transfusion, the placement of intravenous lines, and the 
surgical hemostasis. Additionally, it is technically much 
easier to place an arterial line in a properly resuscitated 
patient.
In phase 2 the dynamics of the case slow down, 
the process becomes less blind, and the patient's needs 
should be reanalyzed. A mainstay during phase 2 is the 
utilization of point-of-care testing (POCT) to guide the 
resuscitation.19 To do so, one has to reflect on the main 
physiologic goals of resuscitation: guaranteeing adequate 
oxygen delivery and coagulation function. Oxygen deliv-
ery depends mostly on the oxygen-carrying capacity and 
normal intravascular filling. The first is measured via 
hemoglobin (Hb) concentration or the hematocrit (Hct) 
in the patient's blood. Depending on the patient's age, 
comorbid conditions, and injuries, Hct values between 
Section VI CONSULTANT ANESTHETIC PRACTICE
780
18% and 28% are targeted. The intravascular volume 
status can be assessed by a combination of a multitude 
of clinical clues, such as vital signs, urine output, and, 
if applicable, direct observation of the patient's heart 
and major vessels. In more challenging cases (e.g., sus-
pected cardiac comorbid conditions, cardiac contusions, 
arrhythmias), a transesophageal echocardiogram (TEE) 
can further quantify the intravascular volume.
Fig. 43.6 The Belmont rapid infuser. (Courtesy of Belmont 
Instrument Corporation, Billerica, MA.)
To best assess the coagulation status of a patient, the 
clinician must collect information from the four main pil-
lars of perioperative coagulation monitoring: the patient's 
medical history, clinical presentation, standard laboratory 
coagulation tests, and point-of-care coagulation tests. If 
obtainable, the patient's medical history can provide infor-
mation on medications and medical conditions relevant 
to the coagulation system. The clinical presentation of 
the phenotype of bleeding is a simple but critical tool for 
the existence and differential diagnosis of coagulopathy. 
Any abnormal coagulation test needs to be correlated to 
the clinical presentation. Without any clinically relevant 
diffuse bleeding, no procoagulant therapy should be initi-
ated solely based on isolated laboratory values, as it will 
increase the risk of any complications (i.e., thrombosis). The 
clinical picture can also help differentiate between a surgi-
cal versus nonsurgical origin of the bleeding. Nonsurgical 
bleeding presents itself with a diffuse and more widespread 
pattern and must be addressed by correcting the coagula-
tion abnormalities. In contrast, surgical bleeding must be 
controlled via mechanical hemostasis. The standard labo-
ratory coagulation tests consist of prothrombin time and 
international normalized ratio (PT/INR), activated partial 
thromboplastin time (aPTT), platelet count, and fibrinogen 
concentration. These tests come with significant limitations 
such as sensitivity, specificity, validity, and timeliness that 
render them virtually useless early in dynamic massive 
transfusion scenarios (also see Chapter 23).
Viscoelastic Testing
Over the past decade, viscoelastic point-of-care coagula-
tion tests have become a mainstay for timely assessment 
of the situations previously described. The thromboe-
lastograph (TEG) and rotational thromboelastometry 
(ROTEM) are standard tools to assess the magnitude and 
nature of the coagulation disturbance and help guide 
interventions (Fig. 43.7). Both devices provide the clini-
cian with a graphical output that can guide the proco-
agulant interventions. The readout of TEG/ROTEM can 
be divided into parts: (1) preclot formation phase, (2) clot 
formation phase, and (3) clot stability phase (Fig. 43.8). 
The first phase, preclot formation, starts with the addition 
of reagents that trigger the plasma coagulation cascade 
and activate the platelets. This phase lasts less than 5 
minutes and can inform the anesthesia provider about 
the coagulation cascade. If there are deficiencies in this 
phase, PCC and FFP can be given. The second phase 
starts with the beginning of the clot formation and ends 
when the maximum clot firmness is reached. This phase 
reflects the functional platelet mass and the availability 
of fibrinogen. Defects in the second phase can be cor-
rected with the transfusion of cryoprecipitate, fibrinogen 
concentrate, or platelet concentrates. The third and last 
phase reflects the stability of the clot, allowing fibrinoly-
sis to be detected and quantified. When identified, it can 
be effectively treated with an antifibrinolytic drug.
VI
Chapter 43 Anesthesia for Trauma
781
TEG 5000, Haemoneics Corp.
B
ROTEM Delta, TEM Systems
Fig. 43.7 Tools for viscoelastic point-of-care coagulation testing. Left, Thromboelastograph (TEG). 
Right, Rotational thromboelastometry (ROTEM).
Section VI CONSULTANT ANESTHETIC PRACTICE
782
With the information from the four pillars of coagu-
lation monitoring, the treatment can be tailored using 
a goal-directed approach and predefined algorithms. 
This approach also must consider that any procoagulant 
therapy always has to be used with caution. A coagu-
lopathy should never be excessively corrected; otherwise, 
the risk for serious thromboembolic events can increase 
(Fig. 43.9).
After hemorrhage has been controlled, frequent analysis 
of POCT (Hb/Hct, arterial blood gases, electrolytes) should 
be obtained because they help guide PRBC transfusions and 
adjustments in ventilation to the patient's needs. Addition-
ally, electrolyte disturbances (e.g., hypocalcemia and hyper-
kalemia) frequently occur and warrant consideration.
During resuscitation, hypothermia should be pre-
vented. This is mainly achieved by only administering 
warmed fluids, increasing the room temperature, and the 
use of forced air warmers. The insertion of an esophageal 
temperature probe helps the clinician to monitor the suc-
cess of these interventions and serves as a reminder to try 
to achieve normothermia.
Phase 1
Phase 2
Phase 3
Fig. 43.8 Three phases of viscoelastic tests: phase 1 (preclot), phase 2 (formation), and phase 
3 (stability). TEG tracing in top panel and ROTEM tracing in bottom panel. ROTEM, Rotational 
thromboelastometry; TEG, thromboelastograph.
Phase 3: Restoration of Physiology
The third and final resuscitation phase includes the fine-tuning 
and restoration of the patient's physiology. This should occur 
once the surgical hemostasis is complete and the dynamic 
of the resuscitation is under control. The DCR principles no 
longer apply, as the potential for harm likely outweighs the 
benefits. The intravascular volume is replenished during this 
phase. Additional cardiac output monitoring devices can help 
guide the process. If not already achieved, the anesthetic 
should be incrementally increased to a level near 1 MAC. 
Low-dose vasoactive infusions can be considered to counter-
act anesthesia-induced vasodilation but should not be used 
to compensate for inadequate intravascular volume resuscita-
tion. Continued serial POCT (i.e., arterial blood gas analysis, 
thromboelastometry) is useful in determining the success of 
the resuscitation. Normalizing serum lactate and base deficit 
levels are excellent indicators for this achievement.
Anesthetics
For patients with life-threatening uncontrolled hemor-
rhage, the administration of even low-dose anesthetics 
VI
Chapter 43 Anesthesia for Trauma
783
may contribute to worsening hypotension. Once blood 
and fluid resuscitation begin to restore intravascular vol-
ume and tissue blood flow, administration of additional 
anesthetics is appropriate. A stepwise approach to restor-
ing adequate anesthetic levels uses arterial blood pressure 
values as a guide to increasing anesthetic depth. Thus slow 
administration of anesthetics should be started in phase 2. 
The stepwise deepening of the anesthetic can be achieved 
by either repeated boluses of opioids or increasing inhaled 
anesthetic concentrations in an incremental manner.20
SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS
Traumatic Brain Injury
Traumatic brain injury (TBI) is defined as injury to the head 
that disrupts normal brain function (also see Chapter 30). 
In the United States, over 15 million people are seen in 
emergency departments for TBI each year, and TBI con-
tributes to 30% of trauma deaths.21 Long-term effects of 
TBI may lead to cognitive and functional impairment, dis-
ability, and an overall reduction in quality of life.
Primary neurologic injury is irreversible, occurring at 
the moment of injury and causing immediate neuronal 
damage. The magnitude of the primary injury is a sig-
nificant prognostic factor of TBI. Secondary injury is the 
subsequent injury to the brain after the primary injury 
occurs. Common causes of secondary injury include 
intracranial hypertension, arterial hypotension, hypoxia, 
hyperthermia, coagulopathy, hyperglycemia or hypogly-
cemia, and acidosis. The focus of TBI management for 
the anesthesia provider is to optimize patient physiology 
and limit secondary injury in the perioperative period to 
achieve the best possible neurologic outcome.
Neurologic manifestations of TBI largely depend on 
the mechanism, severity, and type of injury that have 
occurred. Types of injuries include skull fractures; 
intracerebral, subdural, and epidural hematomas; hem-
orrhagic contusions; and diffuse axonal injuries. These 
injuries may be focal or diffuse. The GCS is commonly 
used to initially assess and classify TBI patients, though 
iatrogenic intoxication (e.g., sedatives or analgesics 
administered prior to evaluation) and other factors may 
sometimes lead to misclassification. GCS score should be 
reported for each of the three components (eye, verbal, 
motor) separately. Untestable components of GCS should 
be documented. Early computed tomography (CT) scan is 
critical in delineating the type and extent of injury.
Like other trauma patients, the initial evaluation 
begins with ATLS. An early definitive airway should be 
established in a TBI patient who does not have the abil-
ity to maintain a patent airway owing to loss of reflexes 
and inadequate oxygenation or ventilation. These factors 
SFGH ROTEM guideline
FFP
Cryoprecipitate
Platelets
Aminocaproic
acid
MCF exTEM < 45 mm
and
MCF fibTEM > 10 mm
MCF fibTEM < 8 mm
CT inTEM > 230 sec
Diffuse bleeding
Normal  results
Pathologic results
ROTEM
Consider limitations
of ROTEM
Surgical hemostasis
ML exTEM > 15%
Fig. 43.9 An example of a rotational thromboelastometry (ROTEM) treatment algorithm for use in 
trauma. (Courtesy of San Francisco General Hospital and Trauma Center.)
Section VI CONSULTANT ANESTHETIC PRACTICE
784
are usually related to a deteriorating GCS score—usually 
8 or less—or other concurrent injuries. Nasal airways 
(and nasogastric tubes) should be avoided if possible in 
TBI patients with facial or suspected skull base fractures 
because of the risk of intracranial insertion. Other indi-
cations for intubating the trachea of TBI patients include 
signs of intracranial hypertension or uncontrollable 
seizure activity. Securing the airway should always be 
considered before transport if the patient's mental status 
and GCS score are worsening.
Many of the same considerations must be taken when 
intubating the trachea of a TBI patient as for other 
trauma patients, such as inadequate fasting, hypoxia, 
uncertain intravascular volume status, and presumed 
cervical spine injury in blunt trauma. Approximately 
4% to 8% of moderate to severe TBI patients have con-
current cervical spine injury, with greater risk for high 
cervical injuries and mechanically unstable injuries.22
Of particular attention to the anesthesia provider should 
be the integrity of the cervical spine. Cervical collars 
should be opened and mechanical in-line stabilization 
should be held by experienced personnel during RSI of 
anesthesia and tracheal intubation. Additional factors 
such as increased intracranial pressure (ICP) or pending 
herniation, concurrent airway injuries, uncooperative 
patients, and combativeness should also be considered. 
It is not clear whether video laryngoscopy is superior 
to intubation with conventional laryngoscopy. Video 
laryngoscopy may produce slightly less cervical spine 
motion and obtain better glottis visualization, but at the 
cost of a slightly longer time to endotracheal intubation 
in an experienced laryngoscopist's hands.23 24 Selection 
of the intubation method should be based on speed of 
establishing a definitive airway and experience of the 
laryngoscopist, but video laryngoscopy is quickly, and 
appropriately, establishing itself as the first-line choice 
in high-acuity situations.
The use of anesthetics should focus on hemody-
namic stability to maintain cerebral perfusion pressure 
(CPP). Propofol and etomidate are commonly selected 
as induction agents for their reduction in cerebral blood 
flow (CBF), which is coupled to a reduction in cerebral 
metabolic rate of oxygen (CMRO2) requirement (also see 
Chapter 8). Although once considered controversial, use 
of ketamine in this population has not led to increases in 
ICP or worsened outcomes.25 Nondepolarizing neuromus-
cular blocking drugs have no significant effect on cer-
ebral hemodynamics. Succinylcholine may theoretically 
increase ICP, but this effect has not been demonstrated 
to be clinically significant and may be attenuated with a 
defasciculating dose of a nondepolarizing drug (also see 
Chapter 11).
Emergent neurosurgical management may sometimes 
be indicated. Volatile anesthetics may increase CBF while 
decreasing CMRO2, known as “uncoupling” (also see 
Chapter 7). Increased CBF does not generally occur below 
0.5 MAC, or below 1 MAC for sevoflurane specifically. 
If volatile anesthetics are used, less than 1 MAC should 
be administered, with a preference for sevoflurane. Total 
intravenous anesthesia (TIVA) may be preferred because 
it decreases ICP but is generally less titratable during sud-
den, profound hypotension that may occur during dural 
decompression. Although volatile anesthetics and TIVA 
have different effects on cerebral hemodynamics, there is 
no definitive prospective outcome study demonstrating 
superiority of one approach to anesthetic maintenance. In 
addition, a retrospective study in combat-related TBI did 
not show significant difference between neurologic out-
comes at discharge when comparing the two anesthetic 
strategies.26,27
The anesthesia management principles for a patient 
with TBI requiring a neurosurgical procedure are listed in 
Table 43.4. Brain Trauma Foundation guidelines should 
be followed throughout the perioperative period.28 Most 
importantly, close communication with the operative 
team must be maintained before decompression and 
dural opening.
Systemically, high ICP may trigger intense sympa-
thetic activity to maintain CPP. This is known as the 
Cushing reflex. The catecholamine release and increased 
systemic vascular resistance may mask intravascular 
volume depletion. Sudden, profound hypotension may 
sometimes occur after decompression and normalization 
of ICP, especially in patients who are not adequately vol-
ume resuscitated. It is hence critical to restore euvolemia 
before dural decompression. Additionally, anesthetic 
drugs should be gradually decreased and vasopressors 
and inotropes should be available for administration 
before major decompression.
The decision for postoperative intubation vs. imme-
diate tracheal extubation should be discussed with the 
surgeon. Many TBI patients remain tracheally intubated 
owing to the risks of postoperative hypoventilation, 
hypoxia, depressed level of consciousness, other concur-
rent injuries, and the need for further diagnostic studies 
or therapies. These patients should be transported with 
full monitoring. Sedation and a transport ventilator are 
usually necessary if the patient remains intubated. Before 
transporting TBI patients, a small-dose muscle relaxant 
may be considered to reduce episodes of agitation, buck-
ing, or coughing. The use of large-dose muscle relaxa-
tion at the end of the procedure or for transport may 
delay postoperative neurologic examination and is not 
recommended. TBI guidelines mentioned earlier should 
continue to be followed throughout the immediate perio-
perative period.28
Spinal Cord Injury
Spinal cord injury (SCI) occurs when acute trauma dis-
rupts normal sensory, motor, or autonomic function. In 
the United States, 12,500 new patients sustain an SCI per 
VI
Chapter 43 Anesthesia for Trauma
785
year, and over 200,000 people currently live with SCI.29
The most common causes of injury are motor vehicle 
accidents, falls, and assault.
The presentation of SCI depends largely on the extent, 
severity, and level at which injury occurs. An injury may 
be described as “complete” if the patient has no motor 
or sensory function below the level of injury. Incomplete 
SCIs describe partial injury to the cord that results in 
varying degrees of residual sensory and motor function. 
The American Spinal Injury Association (ASIA) clas-
sification is the preferred impairment scale to describe 
findings of neurologic examinations. The ASIA scale 
uses muscle function and sensation of light touch and 
pin prick at multiple body locations to generate a grade 
of A (complete injury), B (sensory incomplete), C (motor 
incomplete), D (motor incomplete), or E (normal).30
Spinal cord precautions should be immediately under-
taken when suspecting an injury, including a cervical 
collar and strict logroll precautions whenever transport-
ing or moving patients. Adequacy of ventilation and 
oxygenation should be quickly evaluated. Cervical spine 
injuries, especially those with complete injuries, may 
result in diaphragm impairment and weakness. This leads 
to decreased vital capacity and the inability to cough 
and clear secretions. Concurrent lung injury associated 
with trauma or chronic lung disease may exacerbate 
the patient's ability to ventilate and oxygenate. Signs 
of inadequate ventilation may include rapid, shallow 
breathing; increased work of breathing; and paradoxi-
cal abdominal movement. These signs may appear with 
thoracic and high lumbar injuries affecting intercostal 
and abdominal muscles. The airway should be secured 
with an endotracheal tube in a similar fashion as with 
TBI patients. Up to 16% of patients admitted with SCI are 
diagnosed with concurrent TBI. In this population with 
concurrent diagnoses, the cervical spine was most fre-
quently injured.31 Succinylcholine may be used to safely 
provide neuromuscular blockade in an SCI patient within 
the first 24 hours of injury. However, it should be avoided 
after 48 hours of injury because of the risk of severe 
hyperkalemia that may result with administration. Exag-
gerated bradycardic response and hypotension have been 
reported with direct laryngoscopy and intubation of the 
trachea of patients with cervical or high thoracic injuries.
During the acute phase, high thoracic (usually T4 and 
above) and cervical SCIs may result in significant brad-
yarrhythmia and atrioventricular block (AV block) owing 
to disruption of sympathetic cardiac accelerator fibers 
leading to unopposed parasympathetic innervation. Sym-
pathetic blockade may also lead to systemic vasodilation 
Organ System/
Issue
Management Principle
Comments
Patient position
Patient is usually placed in reverse Trendelenburg or head of 
bed elevated to 30 degrees.
Facilitates cerebral venous drainage.
Monitoring/lines
Large-bore intravenous access is necessary for intraoperative 
fluid administration. An arterial line should be inserted for 
continuous arterial blood pressure monitoring and withdrawal 
of blood for serial laboratory analysis.
Fluid/blood
Blood should be checked for availability of transfusion. 
Intravascular fluid administration/resuscitation is usually 
required to achieve euvolemia, especially after administration 
of mannitol. Isotonic crystalloid is usually preferred. The use 
of albumin may increase mortality risk in the resuscitation of 
ICU brain-injured patients when compared with crystalloid.27
Surgery for compound depressed skull 
fractures near venous sinuses are at 
particularly intense risk for massive 
hemorrhage. Coagulopathy should be 
ruled out with viscoelastometric testing 
and traditional laboratory coagulation 
panel. Blood should be immediately 
available for sudden, abrupt bleeding.
Cardiovascular
Hypotension should be promptly treated to maintain a 
cerebral perfusion pressure (CPP) of at least 50–70 mm Hg.
Respiratory
Hypoxemia should be avoided. Attention should be paid to 
peak inspiratory pressure and positive end-expiratory pressure 
to avoid obstruction of cerebral venous drainage.
Hyperventilation is not recommended 
within the first 24 hours of injury unless 
treating impending herniation.
Seizure prophylaxis
Prophylactic administration of mannitol and antiseizure 
administration is recommended.
Metabolic
Glucose should be monitored regularly. Hyperglycemia and 
hypoglycemia should be treated to avoid exacerbation of 
secondary injury.
General recommendations are to treat 
blood glucose levels above 180 mg/dL.
Table 43.4
Anesthesia Management Principles for TBI Patients Requiring Neurosurgical Procedures
Section VI CONSULTANT ANESTHETIC PRACTICE
786
and result in severe hypotension. In addition to the motor 
and sensory findings below the level of injury, this physi-
ologic constellation has been referred to as “neurogenic 
shock.” Treatment is supportive and includes administra-
tion of isotonic fluid, vasopressors, and inotropes.
MAP should be kept at 85 to 90 mm Hg for patients 
with SCI to maintain adequate spinal cord perfusion, 
unless otherwise contraindicated by concurrent injuries. 
Administration of methylprednisolone is no longer rec-
ommended by the American Association of Neurological 
Surgeons, as there is evidence that large-dose steroids 
are associated with mostly negative effects, including 
death.32
Burns
Major burns can occur in isolation or in combination 
with other forms of traumatic injury. Patients with 
major burns can decline rapidly and require systematic 
advanced trauma management. This section will focus on 
special considerations in the immediate management of a 
major acute burn patient.
Burn Severity
Burns are categorized based on their severity as superfi-
cial, partial-thickness, or full-thickness burns (Table 43.5).
Estimating Burn Surface Area
The patient's clinical management, including the decision 
to transfer to a tertiary center, is based on the percent-
age of body surface area (BSA) affected by burns. One 
approach to estimating the affected BSA is the “rule of 
nines” (Fig. 43.10).
Types of Burns: Thermal, Chemical, and Electrical
The first priority in managing the burn is to halt the 
burning process. Remove any clothing that can be 
removed easily. The subsequent approach depends on the 
type of burn, as detailed further in Table 43.6
Fluid Management
Fluid management is an important cornerstone of 
modern burn management; however, controversy still 
exists about the correct amount of fluid to give and 
the appropriate endpoints to be monitoring. There is 
increasing recognition of the adverse effects of excessive 
intravenous fluid resuscitation and the increased risk of 
precipitating acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) 
3 to 5 days after injury.
Multiple formulas can be used for estimating fluid resus-
citation requirements. Most were developed over 30 years 
ago. One of the most common is the modified Parkland 
formula: 4 mL/kg/% burn (adults) over the first 24 hours 
after burn injury.
Only crystalloid fluid is used for the first 24 hours, as 
the amount of protein leak into the interstitial space is 
thought to be greatest during this period, thus rendering 
colloids ineffective. The most commonly used fluid is 
a balanced salt solution such as lactated Ringer's solu-
tion or PlasmaLyte. These formulas should be taken as a 
guide only, and current best practice is to tailor the exact 
fluid administered to the patient's physiologic response. 
Hourly urine output measured via a Foley catheter is 
considered the most helpful metric of adequacy of fluid 
resuscitation. Other values that are often trended include 
Hct, cardiac output, osmolarity, electrolytes, albumin, 
calcium, and glucose.34
Airway (Also See Chapter 16)
Burns are characterized by erythema and the rapid onset 
of edema in affected tissues. When this happens in the 
upper airway, the swelling can result in total airway 
obstruction and death. Clinicians must anticipate this 
possibility for patients with burns affecting the airway 
and prepare for tracheal intubation early—before swelling 
makes it impossible. Some warning signs are presented in 
Box 43.12. Consider inserting an endotracheal tube 0.5 to 
1 mm internal diameter smaller than usual to allow for 
the expected tissue swelling.
Burn Type
Comment
Superficial
This burn affects the epidermis only (e.g., sunburn). It does not require any specific treatment other than 
first aid. Superficial burns are not included in the calculation of percentage body surface area (%BSA) 
affected.
Partial thickness
This burn involves all of the epidermis and part of the dermis. It can further be divided into superficial 
dermal, mid-dermal, and deep dermal. These burns change in appearance as the burn destroys more of 
the dermis and vasculature; the pain ranges from minimal to extreme; color can be red to pale/white; 
and exudates can be high fluid to relatively dry. Blisters are often present. They may require surgical 
management.
Full thickness
This burn involves complete destruction of all of the epidermis and dermis. It is white, insensate, and has a 
waxy or leathery appearance. This type of skin is called an eschar.
Table 43.5
Burn Severity
VI
Chapter 43 Anesthesia for Trauma
787
Pain (Also See Chapter 40)
Depending on the severity of the burn, pain can be a major 
issue. Analgesia should be provided for all patients as 
required. A regimen based on opiates, with the addition of 
ketamine if necessary, usually provides sufficient relief for 
the majority of patients. Because of the prolonged nature 
and significant amount of pain associated with the treat-
ment of burns, these patients are at notably greater risk of 
developing opiate tolerance. Consultation from a specialist 
pain service should be sought early in their recovery.
Inhalation
In addition to the actual burn injury, the products of 
combustion can produce gases that are toxic to the 
human body. The most common is carbon monoxide 
(CO). CO has a much higher binding affinity for Hb 
compared with oxygen. Thus CO-poisoning can result in 
a significant reduction in the oxygen-carrying capacity 
of the blood. The only way to detect CO poisoning is 
through CO-oximetry performed on a blood gas sample. 
Standard pulse oximetry monitors are unable to detect 
CO poisoning and will read a normal value even in the 
presence of profound tissue hypoxemia. The applica-
tion of high-concentration oxygen significantly reduces 
the half-life of CO in the blood, and any patient with 
suspected CO inhalation should be provided with high-
concentration oxygen as an initial measure.
Infection
Infection is a major cause of delayed morbidity and 
death. Although empiric antibiotics addressing skin flora 
are sufficient for the immediate management, coverage 
41/2
%
41/2
%
18%
1%
9%
9%
41/2%
41/2
%
41/2
%
18%
9%
9%
41/2%
Anterior
Posterior
Fig. 43.10 The rule of nines—used to calculate percentage of body surface area (BSA) burns. This 
rule is most useful for patients with localized burns to a particular body part. However, this rule 
overestimates the percentage of BSA in a patient with morbid obesity. Another approach is to use the 
patient's palmar surface area, which represents approximately 1% of total BSA.
Section VI CONSULTANT ANESTHETIC PRACTICE
788
Box 43.12
Signs of Potential Airway Burns
•Carbonaceous sputum
•Stridor
•Voice changes
•Facial burns
•Explosive injuries involving upper torso/head
•Prolonged entrapment in fire
Burn Type
Special Considerations
Thermal burns
Remove source of heat as soon as possible (e.g., burning clothing). Continue prolonged irrigation with 
cold fluid, but beware of causing hypothermia. Be suspicious for associated injuries (inhalational, other 
forms of trauma).
Chemical burns
Irrigate the area thoroughly with running water. Prevent irrigation fluid from running across unaffected 
skin. Continue irrigation until skin pH or fluid pH is neutral (use litmus paper). Adequate irrigation may 
take several hours with some chemical burns. DO NOT use water for elemental metal burns (lithium, 
magnesium, potassium, sodium), as they react with water, worsening the burn; use mineral oil instead in 
this setting.
Electrical burns
Look for entry and exit points because injury has occurred along that trajectory. Beware of underlying 
muscle damage; there is the risk of compartment syndrome and rhabdomyolysis. There is a slightly 
increased fluid requirement. Beware of arryhthmias caused by the electric current, because ventricular 
fibrillation is the most common cause of death after an electrical shock.33
Table 43.6
Special Considerations of Specific Burn Types
of the burn surface with sterile dressings is essential to 
reestablish the external barrier to organisms. Overresus-
citation with fluids is also associated with increased risk 
of infectious complications.
Escharotomies
The eschar of full-thickness burns significantly reduces 
the compliance of body tissues. If the eschars are 
circumferential around any part, it can result in a 
compartment-like syndrome. This is particularly con-
cerning around the torso, where ventilation can be 
impeded. If this occurs, escharotomies may need to be 
performed. The preferred location for incisions is out-
lined in Fig. 43.11
Transfer of Burn Patients
In general, most regions have a burn center or unit that 
provides specialized treatment of burn patients; expert 
care in these centers is associated with improved out-
comes. The decision to transfer to a dedicated burn center 
requires consideration of other associated injuries and 
where these can best be managed. Sometimes it may be 
appropriate to stabilize the major visceral injuries at the 
trauma center before transferring care to the burn unit at 
a later stage. Commonly used transfer criteria are listed 
in Box 43.13
Extremes of Age
Pediatric Trauma (Also See Chapter 34)
Trauma is the most common cause of major morbidity 
and fatality in the pediatric population (Box 43.14). The 
presentation of an injured child to a hospital is usually 
a source of anxiety for most clinicians. By delivering 
high-quality advanced trauma care, the burden of the 
child's injury can be lessened and an improved outcome 
attained.
This section will present a brief overview of some 
of the issues that are unique to trauma in the pediatric 
patient. The fundamental principles of ATLS form the 
basis of management in this patient population.
Special Considerations
Nonaccidental injury
This differential diagnosis should always be considered 
in pediatric injury. The majority of jurisdictions have 
mandatory reporting for child abuse. Warning signs are 
listed in Box 43.15.
Pediatric physiology
Children are able to mask significant hemodynamic com-
promise because of their robust physiology. There are 
also confounders for signs such as tachycardia, pain, and 
a fear or stress response. Beware of rapid deterioration 
once a compensatory threshold is reached.
Vascular access
Pediatric venous cannulation can present a challenge 
even in a well-hydrated patient. In the presence of 
hemorrhagic shock, intravenous catheter placement can 
be almost impossible. The priority should be restoring 
circulating intravascular volume, and early IO access is 
advocated. A rule of thumb used by some institutions is 
two attempts at a PIV line in two locations before you 
transition to the IO approach.
VI
Chapter 43 Anesthesia for Trauma
789
Fig. 43.11 Locations for escharotomy incisions.
Box 43.15
Warning Signs of Child Abuse
•Injury pattern inconsistent with developmental
milestones (e.g., a 2-month-old rolling off the diaper 
changing table)
•Multiple injuries (especially if these appear to have been
inflicted over time)
•Frequent presentations
•Inconsistent history of incident
Box 43.16
Blood Volume Estimations
•Preterm neonate—95 mL/kg
•Full-term neonate—85 mL/kg
•Infant—80 mL/kg
•Adult (male)—75 mL/kg
•Adult (female)—65 mL/kg
Box 43.13
Criteria for Transfer of Patients to a Tertiary 
Burn Center (American Burn Association)
•>10% total BSA partial-thickness burns
•Full-thickness burns in any age group
•Burns involving sensitive areas (hands, feet, perineum,
face, genitals, major joints)
•Inhalation injuries
•Electrical/lightning burns
•Circumferential burns to limbs or torso
•Significant chemical burn risking cosmetic or functional
outcome
•Major preexisting comorbid conditions
BSA, Body surface area.
Box 43.14
Common Injuries in Pediatrics
•Simple fractures—falls from height/play equipment,
sports
•Pedestrian versus car—more chest/head injuries—
especially with SUVs
•More major visceral injury without overlying fractures
SUVs, Sport-utility vehicles.
Drug dosing
Because the majority of drug doses and fluids are weight 
based, it is essential to get an accurate estimation of 
the child's weight. The clinician's choices are to ask a 
caregiver or parent or to use a tool such as the Broselow 
Pediatric Emergency Tape to get an estimate. Visual aids 
and age-stratified charts can serve as excellent tools to 
help with choosing the right-sized equipment and admin-
istering appropriate drug doses. The considerations for 
dose reduction of some drugs in the trauma patient still 
apply to pediatrics.
Behavior
Health care visits of any kind can be emotionally and 
psychologically traumatic for pediatric patients. Thus 
a child's openness and compliance with diagnosis and 
treatment will vary depending on their age and clini-
cal circumstances. There should be consideration for 
the appropriateness of diagnostic tests such as CT and 
the requirement for the child to be still. Anesthesia and 
tracheal intubation may be required to facilitate the diag-
nostic and treatment process.
Blood administration and dosing (Box 43.16)
Small children have a substantially reduced circulating 
blood volume, and a small amount of blood loss can be 
significant. In a 20-kg 4-year-old child the estimated cir-
culating blood volume is only 1600 mL. Loss of 375 mL 
(equivalent to a 12-oz can of soft drink) represents over 
20% of the total circulating volume. It is important to 
be vigilant for occult sources of bleeding and intervene 
early. Transfusing red blood cells will increase Hb by 2 to 
2.5 g/dL for every 10 mL/kg administered.
Geriatric Trauma (Also See Chapter 35)
As with pediatrics the elderly trauma patient also requires 
some unique considerations for management. Although 
trauma is not a major contributor to morbidity and 
Section VI CONSULTANT ANESTHETIC PRACTICE
790
mortality in the geriatric population, their physiologic 
age, coexisting diseases, and chronic medications make 
this group more susceptible to poor outcomes if their 
care is not of the highest standards. The principles of 
advanced trauma management remain paramount and 
the basis of all interventions. This section will briefly 
outline some of the unique considerations for the trauma 
patient of advanced age.
Special Considerations
Preexisting illness and physiologic reserve
With advancing age comes the potential for a variety of 
medical conditions that may affect a patient's ability to 
survive a major trauma. This combines with the decline 
in physiologic reserve that occurs with healthy aging, 
placing these patients at serious risk of major morbidity 
or mortality.
Medications
Medications, such as antihypertensives, for relatively 
minor and well-controlled conditions can exacerbate 
hemodynamic instability after a trauma. β-Adrenergic 
blocking drugs can mask the tachycardia associated with 
blood loss.
Minimal impact trauma
Relatively minor mechanisms can result in significant 
injuries. Geriatric patients are more prone to fractures 
and head injuries. Subdural hematomas are particularly 
common.
Elder abuse
An increasingly recognized cause of injury to the geriat-
ric population in long-term care facilities is abuse. This 
should be considered and explored, especially in patients 
who are in care facilities and have reduced mobility or 
cognitive function.
End-of-life care
It is important to consider what is appropriate when 
providing an intervention to a patient. When possible, 
determine the patient's wishes and any preexisting limi-
tation of treatment orders. Remain focused on interven-
tions that can return the patient to a level of function 
that she or he would find fulfilling. This can be very 
difficult in the chaos of a major trauma, but when there 
is an opportunity, discuss this with the patient, or the 
family, or both.
Trauma in Pregnancy
Fundamentally, the management of a pregnant patient 
is the same as that of any other trauma victim. A focus 
on delivering advanced trauma management will opti-
mize the outcomes for both the mother and the fetus. 
Still some specific issues need to be considered when 
managing a pregnant trauma patient. This section 
will focus on clinical aspects of managing a pregnant 
trauma patient.
Causes of Trauma
Pregnant women suffer the same types of trauma as 
nonpregnant women, yet they can be more vulnerable to 
injury. There are a few special situations worth considering. 
For example, intimate partner violence increases during 
pregnancy and should always be actively considered. In 
addition, pregnant women are at risk of improper seatbelt 
use, which can significantly reduce the effectiveness of this 
countermeasure and result in a different injury pattern.
Anatomy of Injury
As the fetus develops during the pregnancy, the nature of 
maternal and fetal injury changes.
First trimester (0 to 13 weeks' gestational age)
The uterus remains an intrapelvic organ; thus it is well 
protected from blunt force trauma. There are the “usual” 
adult injuries to abdominal viscera. The embryo is nonvi-
able; vaginal bleeding is a poor prognostic sign.
Second trimester (14 to 26 weeks' gestational age)
The uterus moves into an extrapelvic position. There 
is a progressive, increased risk of direct fetal injury. The 
maternal organs gradually become more shielded.
Third trimester (27 to 40 weeks' gestational age)
The maternal organs are relatively protected from 
injury by the uterus and fetus. Exception—the bladder 
is at increased risk. There is an increased likelihood of 
precipitating early labor.
Special Considerations
Maternal Physiology
Maternal physiology undergoes significant change to 
accommodate the growing fetus (also see Chapter 33). The 
following physiologic changes have the greatest impact on 
treatment: (1) increased circulating blood volume that can 
mask significant blood loss; (2) compensated respiratory 
alkalosis with normal carbon dioxide partial pressure (Pco2) 
of about 30 mm Hg; and (3) increased clotting factors or 
hypercoagulable state toward the end of pregnancy (e.g., at 
term, a fibrinogen of 300 mg/dL would be abnormally low).
Aortocaval Compression
Starting at approximately 20 weeks gestational age, 
the increasing mass of the uterus and fetus can apply 
compression to the inferior vena cava and abdominal 
aorta, causing a drop in cardiac output of up to 30%. To 
prevent this phenomenon, a wedge can be placed under 
the right hip to achieve a left tilt of approximately 15 to 
30 degrees. Or a spine board can be used to rotate the 
patient an appropriate amount (Fig. 43.12). An alterna-
tive approach during a resuscitation is to have an assis-
tant manually displace the uterus to the patient's left.
Maternal Airway
Difficult tracheal intubation is more likely in a pregnant 
patient (also see Chapter 33). This is caused by the following 
VI
Chapter 43 Anesthesia for Trauma
791
changes in anatomy and biomechanics: (1) increased gen-
eralized soft tissue edema that affects pharyngeal/laryngeal 
structures; (2) increased breast size affecting chest compli-
ance and positioning in the supine position and spatial 
interference with laryngoscopy; (3) reduced FRC, resulting 
in relatively rapid desaturation; and (4) lower esophageal 
sphincter incompetence, resulting in higher risk of aspira-
tion. Because of these factors, the approach to the maternal 
airway requires increased attention in the trauma setting. As 
with nonpregnant patients, airway considerations include 
potential spinal immobilization and availability of equip-
ment such as video laryngoscopy.
Anti-D Immunoglobulin
For women with Rh (rhesus)-negative blood type, there is 
a risk of isoimmunization with fetal Rh-positive antigen. 
Pregnant patients with major trauma, and particularly any 
with injuries that involve the abdomen, should be consid-
ered at risk of contact between maternal and fetal circula-
tions. To prevent longer-term impact on future pregnancies, 
an Rh-negative mother should be given anti-D immuno-
globulin. This can be given any time after maternal blood 
group is determined but should be less than 72 hours after 
the trauma.
Radiation Exposure
Understandably, great effort is made to reduce radiation 
exposure to pregnant women. In the context of a major 
trauma, the insult most likely to cause morbidity or fatal-
ity to the patient and her fetus is delayed diagnosis of 
major life-threatening conditions. If a diagnostic modal-
ity is immediately available that uses less radiation (e.g., 
ultrasound), then it is appropriate to use it. The objective 
is to minimize the use of ionizing radiation but ensure 
the diagnosis is not delayed.
30˚
Fig. 43.12 Left tilt of pregnant patient on spine board.
Fetal Monitoring
Fetal monitoring should not be commenced until maternal 
stability has been achieved. Monitoring should be performed 
by those with appropriate skills and training to interpret the 
information. Continuous fetal monitoring is usually not rec-
ommended for a fetus younger than 24 weeks unless there 
are plans to offer full resuscitation and neonatal intensive 
care support. The duration of monitoring is controversial, 
but most authorities recommend an initial 2 to 4 hours. The 
perfusion to the uteroplacental unit is not autoregulated. 
As such, any reduction in maternal cardiac output, even if 
asymptomatic, can cause a significant reduction in perfu-
sion to the fetus. Any deterioration in fetal condition should 
prompt reassessment of maternal hemodynamics.
Delivery
It may be necessary to expedite delivery of the fetus to 
optimize maternal or fetal survival. Delivery of the fetus 
may be the only way to control massive uterine or pla-
cental bleeding and ensure a successful resuscitation. Con-
sultation with obstetric and pediatric colleagues should be 
sought before undertaking any operative delivery. In the 
event of sustained cardiac arrest, a perimortem cesarean 
section should be considered if 5 minutes have elapsed 
without return of spontaneous circulation.35
Specific Differential Diagnoses (Also See Chapter 33)
The following diagnoses are unique to the pregnant 
patient and should always be considered in addition to 
standard differential diagnoses: (1) Amniotic fluid embo-
lus can cause potentially life-threatening hemodynamic 
collapse. (2) Placental abruption is the process of inap-
propriate separation of the placenta from the uterine 
wall. The effect on the mother and fetus depends on the 
size and location of the disruption. Large disruptions 
can result in massive hemorrhage and fetal hypoxia. 
(3) Uterine rupture can result from major trauma with 
loss of containment of the fetus in the uterine cavity. 
This results in fetal parts being in the mother's abdomi-
nal cavity—a life-threatening obstetric emergency for 
both mother and fetus. Women who have had previous 
cesarean sections are at greater risk. (4) Eclampsia is a 
rare disorder but should be considered in any pregnant 
woman with an altered level of consciousness. It is usu-
ally associated with hypertension (i.e., arterial blood 
pressure more than 140/90 mm Hg) and proteinuria.
Care for Trauma Patients in Non-OR Settings
Many procedures that are performed on trauma patients 
outside the OR require anesthesia care (also see Chapter 38). 
These procedures occur at varying stages of resuscitation. 
Care in the non-OR environment can present unique chal-
lenges because of the unfamiliarity with surroundings, 
equipment, and staff. Patients are often evaluated in the 
CT scanner before further triage. Other locations of care 
Section VI CONSULTANT ANESTHETIC PRACTICE
792
may include radiologic suites, such as magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI) or interventional radiology (IR), or the ICU.
Equipment considerations at non-OR locations include 
availability of emergency airway equipment along with med-
ications for anesthetic induction and hemodynamic support. 
Suction should also be available in each location, particu-
larly if thoracostomy tubes have been placed. Interventions 
performed in IR that require the presence of an anesthesia 
provider should have an anesthesia machine available, in 
addition to a standard OR cart with basic equipment and 
medications. If the patient is still in the acute phase of care 
while undergoing a procedure outside the OR, the anesthesia 
provider must be ready for active cardiopulmonary resus-
citation, which may require the availability of blood, fluid 
warmers, large-bore intravenous access, rapid transfusion 
machines, and invasive monitoring. The patient's tempera-
ture should be monitored and normothermia maintained.
A handoff from one anesthesia provider to another is 
likely as the patient moves from one location to another. 
Importantly, a full accounting of the mechanism of 
trauma in addition to known information of past medical 
history, injuries, laboratory values, interventions already 
performed, and the planned procedure should be gathered 
as time allows. The focus of the anesthesia provider should 
remain on airway patency and the hemodynamic stability 
of the patient. Adequate patient monitoring throughout 
the transport and procedure must be maintained.
Communication among the trauma care team must be 
maintained as the patient location and status change. For 
example, trauma surgeons should be notified immediately 
of any acute or unexpected changes in the patient's status 
that may require urgent procedural intervention. If the 
patient requires any additional airway interventions or 
has a preexisting airway in place, respiratory therapists 
may be needed for additional support. Because of the 
remoteness of some locations, additional help from anes-
thesia technicians, nurses, and other ancillary staff may 
be critical.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The editors and publisher would like to thank Dr. Tony 
Chang for contributing to this chapter in the previous 
edition of this work. It has served as a foundation for the 
current chapter.
REFERENCES
1. World Health Organization. Injuries 
and Violence: The Facts 2014. Geneva: 
World Health Organization; 2014.
2. Heron M. Deaths: Leading causes for 
2011. Natl Vital Stat Rep. 2015;64(7):1–96.
3. Centers for Disease Control and Preven-
tion. Injury Prevention & Control: Data & 
Statistics (WISQARS). Atlanta, GA: Centers 
for Disease Control and Prevention; 2015.
4. MacKenzie E, Rivara F, Jurkovich G. A 
national evaluation of the effect of trauma-
center care on mortality. N Engl J Med. 
2006;354:366–378.
5. Dawson S, King L, Grantham H. Improv-
ing the hospital clinical handover between 
paramedics and emergency department 
staff in the deteriorating patient. Emerg 
Med Aust. 2013(25):393–405.
6. Weingart S, Levitan R. Preoxygenation 
and prevention of desaturation during 
emergency airway management. Ann 
Emerg Med. 2012;59(3):165–175.
7. Vourch M, Asfar P, Volteau C. High-flow 
nasal cannula oxygen during endotra-
cheal intubation in hypoxemic patients: A 
randomized controlled clinical trial. Inten-
sive Care Med. 2015;41(9):1538–1548.
8. Lancman B, Jorm C. Taking the heat in 
critical situations: Being aware, assertive 
and heard. In: Iedema R, Piper D, Man-
idis M, eds. Communicating Quality and 
Safety in Healthcare. Cambridge, Eng-
land: Cambridge University Press; 2015.
9. Martin, etal. A decade of experience 
with a selective policy for direct to oper-
ating room trauma resuscitations. Amer 
J Surg. 2012;204(2).
10. Spahn D. Management of bleeding and 
coagulopathy following major trauma: 
An updated European guideline. Crit 
Care. 2013;17(2):R76.
11. Duchesne JC, McSwain JrNE, Cotton BA, 
etal. Damage control resuscitation: the 
new face of damage control. J Trauma. 
2010;69(4):976–990.
12. Feinman M, Cotton B, Haut E. Opti-
mal fluid resuscitation in trauma: Type, 
timing, and total. Curr Opin Crit Care. 
2014;20(4):366–372.
13. Study Group PROPPR, Holcomb JB, Tilley 
BC, Baraniuk S, etal. Transfusion of plasma, 
platelets, and red blood cells in a 1:1:1 vs 
a 1:1:2 ratio and mortality in patients with 
severe trauma: The PROPPR randomized 
clinical trial. JAMA. 2015;313(5):471–482.
14. Roberts I, Shakur H, Coats T, etal. The 
CRASH-2 trial: A randomised controlled 
trial and economic evaluation of the 
effects of tranexamic acid on death, vas-
cular occlusive events and transfusion 
requirement in bleeding trauma patients. 
Health Technol Assess. 2013;17(10):1–79.
15. Morrison J, Dubose JJ, Rasmussen TE, 
etal. Military Application of Tranexamic 
Acid in Trauma Emergency Resusci-
tation (MATTERs) study. Arch Surg. 
2012;147(2):113–119.
16. Armand R, Hess JR. Treating coagulopa-
thy in trauma patients. Transfus Med 
Rev. 2003 Jul;17(3):223–231.
17. Black JA, etal. The evolution of blood 
transfusion in the trauma patient: 
Whole blood has come full circle. Semin 
Thromb Hemost. 2020;46:215–220.
18. Jehan F, Aziz H, OʼKeeffe T, Khan M, 
Zakaria ER, Hamidi M, Zeeshan M, Kul-
vatunyou N, Joseph B. The role of four-
factor prothrombin complex concentrate 
in coagulopathy of trauma: A propensity 
matched analysis. J Trauma Acute Care 
Surg. 2018 Jul;85(1):18–24. doi:10.1097/
TA.0000000000001938 PMID: 29664892.
19. Steurer M, Ganter M. Trauma and mas-
sive blood transfusions. Curr Anesthe-
siol Rep. 2014;4:200–208.
20. Dutton R. Haemostatic resuscitation. Br 
J Anaesth. 2012;109(suppl 1):i39–i46.
21. Frieden T, Houry D, Baldwin G. Report to 
Congress on Traumatic Brain Injury in the 
United States: Epidemiology and Rehabil-
itation. Atlanta, GA: National Center for 
Injury Prevention and Control, Division 
of Unintentional Injury Prevention; 2014.
22. Holly LT, Kelly DF, Counelis GJ, etal. 
Cervical spine trauma associated with 
moderate and severe head injury: Inci-
dence, risk factors, and injury charac-
teristics. J Neurosurg. 2002;96(3 suppl):
285–291.
23. Robitaille A, Williams SR, Tremblay 
MH, etal. Cervical spine motion during 
tracheal intubation with manual in-line 
stabilization: Direct laryngoscopy versus 
GlideScope videolaryngoscopy. Anesth 
Analg. 2008;106(3):935–941.
24. Turkstra T, Craen RA, Pelz DM, Gelb AW. 
Cervical spine motion: A fluoroscopic 
comparison during intubation with light-
ed stylet, GlideScope, and Macintosh 
laryngoscope. Anesth Analg. 2005;101(3):
910–915.
VI
Chapter 43 Anesthesia for Trauma
793
25. Zeiler F, Teitelbaum J, West M, Gill-
man LM. The ketamine effect on ICP in 
traumatic brain injury. Neurocrit Care. 
2014;21(1):163–173.
26. Grathwohl K, Black I, Spinella P. Total 
intravenous anesthesia including keta-
mine versus volatile gas anesthesia for 
combat-related operative traumatic brain 
injury. Anesthesiology. 2008;109:44.
27. The SAFE Study Investigators; Australian 
and New Zealand Intensive Care Society 
Clinical Trials GroupAustralian Red Cross 
Blood Service; George Institute for Interna-
tional HealthMyburgh J, Cooper DJ, Finfer 
S, etal. Saline or albumin for fluid resus-
citation in patients with traumatic brain 
injury. N Engl J Med. 2007;357(9):874–884.
28. Carney N, Totten AM, O'Reilly C, Ullman 
JS, Hawryluk GW, Bell MJ, Bratton SL, 
Chesnut R, Harris OA, Kissoon N, Rubiano 
AM, Shutter L, Tasker RC, Vavilala MS, 
Wilberger J, Wright DW, Ghajar J. Guide-
lines for the Management of Severe 
Traumatic Brain Injury, Fourth Edition. 
Neurosurgery. 2017 Jan 1;80(1):6–15. 
doi: 10.1227/NEU.0000000000001432. 
PMID: 27654000
29. National Spinal Cord Injury Statistical Cent-
er. Facts and Figures at a Glance. Birming-
ham, AL: University of Alabama; 2013.
30. International Standards for Neurological 
Classification of Spinal Cord Injury 
(ISNCSCI) (Revised 2019). American Spinal 
Injury Association. https://asia-spinalinjury.
org/product/international-standards-for-
neurological-classification-of-spinal-cord-
injury-isncsci-revised-2019/.
31. Ghobrial G, Amenta P, Maltenfort M. 
Longitudinal incidence and concurrence 
rates for traumatic brain injury and spine 
injury—a twenty year analysis. Clin Neu-
rol Neurosurg. 2014;123:174–180.
32. Walters B, Hadley M, Hurlbert R. Guidelines 
for the management of acute cervical spine 
and spinal cord injuries: 2013 update. Neu-
rosurgery. 2013;60(suppl 1):82–91.
33. Pilecky D, Vamos M, Bogyi P, etal. Risk 
of cardiac arrhythmias after electrical 
accident: A single-center study of 480 
patients. Clin Res Cardiol. 2019;108:901–
908. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00392-
019-01420-2.
34. Haberal 
M, 
Sakallioglu 
Aba-
li AE, Karakayali H. Fluid manage-
ment in major burn injuries. Indian 
J Plast Surg. 2010;43(Suppl):S29–S36. 
doi:10.4103/0970-0358.70715.
35. Enlav S, Sela H, Weiniger C. Management 
and outcomes of trauma during pregnan-
cy. Anesthesiol Clin. 2013;31(1):141–156.
Chapter
794
INTRODUCTION
Expertise in pain management is a core element of anes-
thetic care, and from this expertise there has emerged 
a distinct distinct medical specialty: pain medicine. 
Regardless of chronicity, the practice of this medical 
specialty is inherently multifaceted and multidisciplinary. 
There are multiple certification pathways for pain medi-
cine. The American Board of Medical Specialties (ABMS) 
recognizes pain medicine as a distinct medical specialty. 
The American Board of Anesthesiology (ABA) is respon-
sible for development, administration, and scoring of the 
certification exam in pain medicine, and physicians with 
primary training in anesthesiology represent over 80% of 
board-certified specialists in pain medicine.1 Other medi-
cal specialties are recognized by ABMS for cosponsorship 
of the certification in pain medicine, and an increas-
ing number of nonanesthesiologists are specializing in 
this field. These other specialties include the American 
Board of Psychiatry and Neurology, the American Board 
of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, the American 
Board of Emergency Medicine, and the American Board 
of Radiology. The American Board of Family Medicine 
also offers a certificate in pain medicine, after completion 
of an ACGME-accredited pain medicine fellowship and 
passing of the ABA-administered examination. Each of 
the above medical boards credentials its own candidates, 
with completion of a fellowship and the ABA-admin-
istered examination being among the requirements for 
certification. This array of physicians pursuing a career 
in pain medicine reflects the multidisciplinary nature of 
the specialty.
The following chapter covers key points for a physi-
cian trainee rotating in a pain clinic.
INTRODUCTION
CHRONIC PAIN FOUNDATIONS
Terminology
Epidemiology
Pathophysiology
PAINFUL CONDITIONS: SPINE
Lower Back Pain: An Overview
Lumbosacral Spine Pain: Axial Pain Generators
Lumbosacral Radiculopathy
Lumbar Spinal Stenosis
PAINFUL CONDITIONS: NEUROPATHIC PAIN
Peripheral Neuropathy
Complex Regional Pain Syndrome
PAINFUL CONDITIONS: CHRONIC 
POSTSURGICAL PAIN
PAIN CONDITIONS: ADDITIONAL 
GENERATORS
PSYCHOLOGICAL TREATMENT PILLAR: 
CATASTROPHIZING
PHYSICAL MEDICINE TREATMENT PILLAR
PHARMACOLOGIC TREATMENT PILLAR
Nonopioid Analgesics
Opioid Analgesics
PROCEDURAL TREATMENT PILLAR
Epidural Steroid Injections
Facet Injections
Sympathetic Blockade
NEUROMODULATION: ADVANCED 
INTERVENTIONAL PAIN MEDICINE
SUMMARY
CHRONIC PAIN 
MANAGEMENT
Christopher R. Abrecht
44
VI
Chapter 44 Chronic Pain Management
795
CHRONIC PAIN FOUNDATIONS
Terminology
The International Association for the Study of Pain defi-
nition of pain is “an unpleasant sensory and emotional 
experience associated with, or resembling that associated 
with, actual or potential tissue damage.” Pain is thus pos-
sible even without evidence of tissue damage. Also noted 
by this task force was that individuals through their life 
experiences learn the concept of pain and that the per-
sonal experience of pain is influenced to varying degrees 
by biologic and psychological factors.2 For pain to be 
chronic, a period of 3 months is often cited.3
Epidemiology
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), 
citing data from a 2016 survey, has estimated that 20% 
(50 million) of U.S. adults had chronic pain and 8% (19.6 
million) had “high-impact chronic pain,” defined as pain 
that on most days limits life or work activities. This sur-
vey also noted that chronic pain and high-impact chronic 
pain were more common among females, older adults, 
unemployed adults who previously were employed, and 
impoverished adults.4
Pathophysiology
In a simplified framework nociceptive pain signals are 
transmitted from the periphery to the brain in a three-
neuron pathway. A first-order neuron with a cell body 
in the dorsal root ganglion (DRG) receives distal input 
from a nociceptor, which is a sensory receptor for painful 
stimuli. This input is transmitted to a second-order neu-
ron in the spinal cord. From there, input is transmitted to 
the thalamus. A third-order neuron in the thalamus then 
transmits to the cortex, creating a pain perception. The 
thalamus is the key processing center for pain.
In reality, the system is much more complex. The 
thalamus connects with the somatosensory cortex, which 
is responsible for the sensory and discriminative compo-
nent of pain (e.g., location and intensity of pain). This 
pathway is often referred to as the lateral pathway.
The thalamus also has indirect and direct connections 
with the amygdala, hippocampus, anterior cingulate 
cortex, and prefrontal cortex, which are responsible for 
the emotional or affective component of pain (e.g., the 
unpleasantness of pain). This pathway is often referred to 
as the medial pathway. These connections are the under-
pinnings of the biopsychosocial model of pain.
Peripheral sensitization is increased sensitivity to 
nociceptive input at the terminal ends of first-order neu-
rons (i.e., primary hyperalgesia). Inflammatory molecules 
released by tissue damage are a driver of this process. Cen-
tral sensitization is enhanced transmission of pain signals, 
or transmission of pain signals even in the absence of 
nociceptive input, at the level of the spinal cord and brain. 
This process also may involve the expansion of sensory 
neuron receptor fields, such that nonpainful stimuli result 
in pain (i.e., allodynia). Ongoing pain, opioid therapy, and 
other factors may drive this process.5
Neuropathic pain is caused by damage to nerve tissue. 
Typically, damage to the nervous system results in a loss 
of function, such as numbness or weakness. Neuropathic 
pain, in contrast, is a maladaptive, pathologic “gain of 
function” (i.e., pain) response to nervous system damage.6
PAINFUL CONDITIONS: SPINE
Lower Back Pain: An Overview
Lower back pain (LBP) is a nonspecific term that could 
stem from a variety of distinct pain generators. At any 
given time, the global prevalence of LBP may be 7.8%, 
meaning that over 500 million people may be experi-
encing it at any moment. It is the top global cause of 
disability. In the United States over $100 billion is spent 
annually on this condition. Noted risk factors for the 
development of this symptom are obesity, decondition-
ing, smoking, repetitive bending/twisting/lifting, and 
depression.7
A functional spinal unit is two adjacent vertebrae, 
the intervertebral disc, facet joints, and spinal liga-
ments (Fig. 44.1). Approximately, 70% of compression 
is transmitted by the vertebral body, with the remainder 
transmitted through the facet joints. In the prone position 
the L4–L5 intradiscal pressure is about 100 kPA, approxi-
mately, the same as a maximumly inflated soccer ball. 
When standing upright, the pressure in the L4–L5 disc 
increases to about 500 kPA; when standing and forward 
flexing the lumbar spine, the pressure increases to about 
1300 kPA.8 Degenerative changes may be the result of 
mechanical microinsults over time or macroinsults such 
as trauma, surgery, or inflammatory processes.
Degenerative changes, sometimes also called “age-
related changes,” are very common on magnetic reso-
nance imaging (MRI) but are nonspecific. In a systematic 
review of asymptomatic adults undergoing lumbar spine 
MRI or computed tomography (CT) facet joint degenera-
tion was present in 9% of adults in their thirties and in 
83% of adults in their eighties. Disc degeneration was 
present in 52% of adults in their thirties and in 96% of 
adults in their eighties.9 Thus abnormal spine imaging 
does not necessarily mean a pain generator has been 
identified, although a pain physician must be intimately 
familiar with spinal imaging terminology. Important 
terms to understand include the difference between spon-
dylosis, spondylolysis, and anterolisthesis (Table 44.1). 
The ability to and practice of personally interpreting 
spinal imaging is also paramount.
Section VI CONSULTANT ANESTHETIC PRACTICE
796
By the time most patients have been referred to a pain 
physician, they have already undergone advanced imag-
ing, such as MRI. Both in the primary care clinic and in the 
specialty pain clinic setting, imaging should be considered 
if a patient develops LBP with “red flag” symptoms. Symp-
toms of new urinary retention, bowel incontinence, and 
saddle anesthesia could reflect cauda equina syndrome 
and should prompt imaging. Unintended weight loss in 
a patient with a history of malignancy, in particular, a 
malignancy with proclivity for bone metastases, could 
reflect recurrence or progression of cancer in the spine. 
Fever, especially in a patient who is immunocompromised 
or with a history of injection drug use, could reflect an 
epidural abscess, osteomyelitis, or other spinal infection. 
Recent trauma, another “red flag,” can lead to various 
neurologic deficits if anatomic stability is not properly 
assessed.10
Lumbosacral Spine Pain: Axial Pain Generators
Potential pain generators for axial LBP include myofascial 
pain, facet arthropathy, sacroiliac joint (SIJ) dysfunction, 
discogenic pain, and lumbar spinal stenosis (Table 44.2). 
Myofascial pain is a common musculoskeletal pain condition 
Fig. 44.1 Spinal Anatomy. The functional spinal unit is two adjacent vertebral bodies, the 
intervertebral disc, the facet joints, and spinal ligaments. Depicted is the lumbar spinal region. (A) An 
internal disc disrption or degenerative disc disease (DDD) is a common early change in the lumbar 
spine, sometimes causing axial lumbosacral pain. (B) A herniated nucleus pulposus or disc herniation 
may cause nerve root irritation. (C) A combination of degenerative changes, of the disc, the facets, 
and the spinal ligaments may contribute to foraminal stenosis, causing nerve root irritation, and canal 
stenosis, causing neurogenic claudication.
VI
Chapter 44 Chronic Pain Management
797
Condition
Signs and Symptoms
Examination Maneuver
Possible Procedural 
Intervention
Myofascial 
pain
Trigger points, which are taut 
bands of muscle and fascia, 
are palpated on examination. 
These are also common 
outside of the lumbar spine, 
such as in the periscapular 
region and neck.
Trigger points are palpated along the piriformis 
muscle.
Trigger point injection
Lumbar facet 
arthropathy
Tenderness to paraspinal 
palpation, worse with lumbar 
extension and lateral rotation, 
sometimes with posterior 
referral patterns, but usually 
not past the knee.
Lumbar extension and lateral rotation.
Facet joint injection 
or medial branch 
block followed by 
radiofrequency ablation
Term
Definition
Spondylosis
General term for arthritis of the spine.
Spondylolysis
Fracture in the pars interarticularis, which is the junction of the vertebral body and the posterior elements.
Anterolisthesis
Anterior displacement of a vertebral relative to the one below
Retrolisthesis
Posterior displacement of a vertebral body relative to the one below.
Spondylolisthesis
Anterolisthesis secondary to spondylolysis.
Spinal stenosis
Narrowing of the vertebral canal, as by pathology of a disc, facet, or ligamentum flavum.
Scoliosis
Lateral curvature of the spine in the coronal plane, with direction determined by the convexity.
Lordosis
The normal inward curvature of the lumbar and cervical spine. Excessive lordotic curving results in buttocks 
prominence (swayback).
Kyphosis
The normal outward curvature of the thoracic spine. Excessive kyphotic curving results in hunched shoulders 
(Scheuermann disease).
Table 44.1
Common Radiologic Spine Findings Defined
From Fardon DF, Williams AL, Dohring EJ, et al. Lumbar disc nomenclature: Version 2.0: Recommendations of the combined task forces of the 
North American Spine Society, the American Society of Spine Radiology and the American Society of Neuroradiology. Spine J. 2014;14:2525
Table 44.2
Common Pain Generators for Axial Lower Back and Leg Pain
Section VI CONSULTANT ANESTHETIC PRACTICE
798
Condition
Signs and Symptoms
Examination Maneuver
Possible Procedural 
Intervention
Sacroiliac 
joint 
dysfunction
Buttocks and “hip” pain, worse 
with sitting, more common 
in women; examination 
maneuvers include focal pain 
with palpation at the posterior 
superior iliac spine.
FABER: Flexion, abduction, and external rotation. 
Also called Patrick test.
Sacroiliac joint injection
Discogenic 
pain
Worse with sitting (with 
inability to find “comfortable” 
position), worse with coughing, 
sneezing, and forward flexion. 
Is somewhat controversial, 
thought to stem from disc 
itself, rather than damage to 
adjacent neural structures.
Bending forward, in particular, when improperly 
curving the lower back and not engaging the hips.
Lumbar epidural steroid 
injection, although 
efficacy is debated
Lumbar 
radiculopathy
Irritation to the nerve roots, as 
from a disc herniation, results 
in pain and possibly loss of 
deep tendon reflexes and 
weakness in the distribution 
of a particular nerve root. A 
straight leg raise may elicit 
symptoms.
Straight leg raise is positive if “sciatica,” not just 
hamstring “tightness,” is elicited.
Lumbar epidural steroid 
injection
Lumbar 
spinal 
stenosis
Buttocks, low back, and 
possibly leg pain, worse 
with standing and walking, 
improved with sitting and 
forward flexion of lumbar spine 
(the “shopping cart” sign). 
Neurologic examination may 
be normal; clinical history and 
imaging findings are useful in 
coming to this diagnosis.
Pain is relief with forward flexion of lumbar spine, 
as with favored use of a shopping cart.
Decompressive 
techniques likely provide 
more lasting benefit than 
lumbar epidural steroid 
injections
Table 44.2
Common Pain Generators for Axial Lower Back and Leg Pain—cont'd
VI
Chapter 44 Chronic Pain Management
799
sometimes marked by the presence of taut bands of fascia 
and muscle, called trigger points (TPs). When palpated or 
injected, these points may result in a “twitch response,” 
wherein the associated muscles contract; when perturbed, 
these points may also result in a referred pain pattern, usu-
ally in the direction of the affected muscles. Often, TPs and 
myofascial pain exist along with other pathology, such as 
deeper spondylosis or major joint arthritis. TPs may also 
stem from overuse and psychological stress.11 12
The facet joint, also called the zygapophyseal joint,
is considered a possible pain generator in a patient with 
axial pain, tenderness to paraspinal palpation, and with 
increased severity of symptoms upon loading of the 
facet joint via standing or maneuvers such as lumbar 
extension and lateral rotation. Although facet pain is 
predominantly axial, it can exhibit radiation patterns, 
usually along the back and posterior thighs but rarely 
past the knee.13 14
The SIJ exists at the junction of the sacrum with the 
ilium of the pelvis. Forces from the spine are transmit-
ted to this joint, which is also part of the pelvic girdle, 
with an array of ligamentous attachments such as the 
lumbosacral ligaments and the sacrospinous ligaments.15
In some cases dysfunction of the SIJ is related to pathol-
ogy of the lumbar spine, sometimes called hip-spine 
syndrome.16 Pain from the SIJ is thought to manifest 
as lower back, buttocks, or “hip” pain; worse with sit-
ting; and with a higher incidence in women. A variety 
of physical examination maneuvers might indicate SIJ 
pathology, although the weight of the existing evidence 
is that a number of these findings must be present to 
reasonably assume the patient has SIJ dysfunction. SIJ 
pain provocation tests include the following: worse pain 
with palpation at the posterior superior iliac spine (the 
Fortin finger test, as the patient indicates pain is located 
in a focal point); worse pain with femoral abduction and 
external rotation (the FABER or Patrick test); and worse 
pain when the patient is in the lateral decubitus position 
and pressure is applied downward on the lateral iliac 
crest (the compression test). By some studies, at least 
three positive tests must be present in order to relatively 
confidently state a patient has SIJ dysfunction, if making 
that basis on physical examination alone.17
The intervertebral disc consists of an inner nucleus 
pulposus, which is a gelatinous structure made of proteo-
glycans and water, and a surrounding annulus fibrosis. 
When there is a herniation of disc material toward the 
spinal canal or nerve roots, an intense inflammatory 
response ensues, with the usual result being lumbosacral 
radicular pain or neurogenic claudication. In a related 
but distinct process pathologic changes of the annulus 
fibrosis itself may induce pain, separate from any effect it 
might have on the spinal cord or nerve roots.18 This latter 
element of “discogenic pain” may manifest as axial lum-
bosacral pain. It is more common in younger patients; 
worse with sitting (often with a classic inability to find a 
comfortable position); and worse with coughing, sneez-
ing, and lumbar flexion. The latter is a trigger, as it raises 
the pressure within the intervertebral disc, as discussed in 
the prior section.19
Lumbosacral Radiculopathy
A disc herniation is the presence of disc material outside of 
the usual margins of the disc space; the herniated contents 
can be of the central nucleus pulposus, the surrounding 
annulus fibrosis, or both. Pain from a disc herniation 
involves both mechanical and biochemical processes; the 
contact of a nerve root by herniated disc material results 
in an inflammatory response, which induces pain. Lum-
bar spondylosis and other processes may also result in a 
lumbar radiculopathy, which is nerve root disease causing 
pain, loss of sensation, weakness, and/or other neurologic 
symptoms20 (Table 44.3). A time-honored physical exami-
nation maneuver in the evaluation of lumbosacral radicu-
lopathy is the straight leg raise. This maneuver, which 
creates dural tension in the low lumbar and upper sacral 
area, reproduces radicular pain. Pain should be reproduced 
with elevation between 30 and 70 degrees in this test, 
which has greater sensitivity than specificity.21
There is ongoing debate about the best treatment for 
lumbar radiculopathy. Generally, if the lumbar radicu-
lopathy is acute (within 6 weeks of onset) and without a 
prominent motor deficit, there is general agreement to first 
explore nonsurgical treatment. For lumbar radiculopathy 
existing past 6 weeks, however, there is more debate. Stud-
ies have compared surgical and nonsurgical management 
of patients with image-confirmed lumbar radiculopathy 
present for at least 6 weeks. Surgical management gener-
ally results in faster resolution of the lumbar radiculopa-
thy, but patients in both surgical and nonsurgical groups 
noted substantial improvement over greater than a 2-year 
period.22,23 Even in cases where a lumbar radiculopathy 
present for 6 to 12 weeks involves a motor deficit, surgi-
cal treatment results in faster resolution of symptoms but 
compared with nonsurgical management results in similar 
outcomes at the 1-year mark.24 Thus for a patient with a 
chronic lumbar radiculopathy, a reasonable approach based 
on the available data is to educate the patient on surgical 
and nonsurgical treatment pathways, with the trajectory 
based in part on the patient's preference, and of course also 
the physician's assessment of the patient's comorbidities. 
If there has been substantial improvement with conserva-
tive management and there is no severe neurologic deficit 
present, then most physicians will make a stronger recom-
mendation for continued nonsurgical care.25
Lumbar Spinal Stenosis
Lumbar spinal stenosis (LSS) is a reduction in the 
cross-sectional area of the spinal canal. Lumbar disc 
herniation, facet hypertrophy, epidural lipomatosis, and 
Section VI CONSULTANT ANESTHETIC PRACTICE
800
ligamentum flavum hypertrophy are among the causes 
of this condition, which most commonly affects elderly 
patients. Symptoms of neurogenic intermittent claudica-
tion (NIC) include pain in the buttocks, lower back, and 
legs present with standing or walking and improved 
with forward flexion of the spine or sitting down. When 
leaning forward, as when ambulating with a walker or 
using a shopping cart (sometimes called the “shopping 
cart sign”), there is an increase in the interlaminar and 
intra-canal space, such that symptoms are less severe. 
The mechanism behind NIC is thought to be occlusion 
of the subarachnoid space resulting in a combination of 
direct mechanical compression of neural components and 
downstream epidural venous congestion, resulting in a 
transient compartment syndrome of the cauda equina.26
Lumbar epidural steroid injections are commonly per-
formed to treat this condition, although studies suggest 
they do not provide much long-term benefit.27 As such, 
decompressive techniques may be explored.
PAINFUL CONDITIONS: NEUROPATHIC PAIN
Peripheral Neuropathy
The term peripheral neuropathy is often used synony-
mously with polyneuropathy, referring to a generalized 
Nerve Root
L4
L5
S1
Pain dermatomal 
distribution
Motor deficit
Quadriceps knee extension 
impaired
Dorsiflexion impaired
Plantarflexion impaired
Examination
Squatting and rising impaired
Walking on heels impaired
Walking on toes impaired
Reflexes
Knee jerk (patellar) impaired
None reliable
Ankle jerk (Achilles) impaired
Table 44.3
Presentation of Common Lumbosacral Radiculopathies
disorder affecting multiple peripheral nerves, whose distal 
ends are most prominently affected. Causes of peripheral 
neuropathy include toxic (e.g., alcohol use disorder) and 
infectious (e.g., HIV). A typical presentation is bilateral, 
distal loss of sensation, often with burning sensations, in 
a “glove and stocking” distribution. The most common 
peripheral neuropathy is diabetic peripheral neuropathy 
(DPN), which affects about half of adults with diabetes 
mellitus.28 Chemotherapy-induced peripheral neuropathy 
is another common cause, in particular, as the life expec-
tancy increases for patients with cancer. Some studies 
estimate that up to one-third of all chemotherapy patients 
may develop neuropathy symptoms within 6 months of 
treatment.29 In all cases treatment of the underlying dis-
ease process is a key element of management.
Complex Regional Pain Syndrome
Sympathetically mediated pain is a type of neuropathic 
pain in which the sympathetic nervous system amplifies 
pain. Anxiety, stress, and other types of emotional dis-
tress, all of which activate the sympathetic nervous sys-
tem, are thus intimately connected with sympathetically 
mediated pain. By the same reasoning, the treatment of 
these conditions must be multidisciplinary, including not 
just pharmacologic and procedural arms but intense psy-
chological care targeting the sympathetic nervous system.
VI
Chapter 44 Chronic Pain Management
801
The archetypal chronic pain syndrome thought to 
have an element of sympathetically mediated pain is 
complex regional pain syndrome (CRPS). This condition 
usually manifests with pain disproportionate to any incit-
ing event in a distal extremity, usually after trauma or 
prolonged immobilization, such as from the use of a cast 
after orthopedic surgery. Females are more commonly 
affected, with at least a 2:1 prominence, and at younger 
ages, with some studies noting peaks in the early twen-
ties and in the mid-thirties. CRPS type 1, representing 
about 90% of all cases, is present when there is no clear 
peripheral nerve injury. CRPS type 2, also called causal-
gia, is present when a peripheral nerve injury is identi-
fied. Further subtypes include a “warm” CRPS, in which 
there is a marked increase in skin temperature, perhaps 
suggesting a prominent inflammatory component, and 
“cold” CRPS, where there is decreased skin temperature. 
The condition is usually isolated to one limb, but when 
severe, it can spread to adjacent limbs.30 The Budapest 
Criteria describe the elements required for diagnosis: 
sensory, vasomotor, sudomotor, and motor (Box 44.1). 
Treatments for this condition are varied. Commonly used 
medications include neuropathic analgesics (discussed 
later); bisphosphonates and ketamine may also provide 
benefit. Guided motor imagery and mirror therapy are 
often explored. Procedurally, sympathetic blocks and 
spinal cord stimulation are the techniques of choice. The 
purpose of these interventions is to reduce pain to a level 
that allows the patient to engage in physical therapy, 
Box 44.1
Budapest Diagnostic Criteria for Complex 
Regional Pain Syndrome
Continuing pain, which is disproportionate to any inciting event
Must report at least one symptom in three of the four
following categories:
Sensory: reports of hyperesthesia or allodynia
Vasomotor: reports of temperature asymmetry or skin 
color changes or skin color asymmetry
Sudomotor/edema: reports of edema or sweating changes 
or sweating asymmetry
Motor/trophic: reports of decreased range of motion or 
motor dysfunction (weakness, tremor, dystonia) or 
trophic changes (hair, nail, skin)
Must display at least one sign at time of evaluation in two or 
more of the following categories:
Sensory: evidence of hyperalgesia (to pinprick) or allodynia (to 
light touch or deep somatic pressure or joint movement)
Vasomotor: evidence of temperature asymmetry or skin 
color changes or asymmetry
Sudomotor/edema: evidence of edema or sweating 
changes or sweating asymmetry
Motor/trophic: evidence of decreased range of motion or 
motor dysfunction (weakness, tremor, dystonia) or 
trophic changes (hair, nail, skin)
No other diagnosis better explains the signs and symptoms
which even more so than other chronic pain syndromes, 
is essential to treat CRPS.31
PAINFUL CONDITIONS: CHRONIC 
POSTSURGICAL PAIN
Chronic postsurgical pain (CPSP) is pain that develops 
after a surgical procedure and exists past the usual heal-
ing process, often cited as at least 3 months postopera-
tively.32 CPSP can occur after any surgical procedure, 
but is noted particularly after thoracotomy, mastectomy, 
inguinal herniorrhaphy, knee arthroplasty, and limb 
amputation. In all of these conditions the incidence 
of CPSP that is severe, with a numeric pain score of 
greater than five or causing a pain disability, is about 
5% to 10%. CPSP may be multifaceted. In amputation, 
for instance, a patient may develop residual limb pain 
from mechanical factors or from neuroma; phantom 
limb pain, which is a central pain syndrome, may also 
be present. Noted risk factors for the development of 
CPSP include young age, female gender, preoperative 
chronic pain, preoperative opioid use, poorly controlled 
postoperative pain, and surgical factors (e.g., invasive-
ness of surgery, presence of nerve damage).33 Among 
the strongest predictors of CPSP are the severity of pre-
operative pain, regardless of whether it is related to the 
planned surgery, and the severity of postoperative pain. 
As a result, there is an increasing movement toward the 
development of a transitional pain service, whereby a 
physician board-certified in pain medicine oversees a 
multidisciplinary team to optimize modifiable patient 
factors preoperatively, oversee perioperative pain plans, 
and then ensure continued high-level pain care post-
discharge.34
PAIN CONDITIONS: ADDITIONAL 
GENERATORS
Given the limited scope of this chapter, only a selection 
of chronic pain syndromes will be discussed in detail. 
Other pain conditions include central pain from dysfunc-
tion of the central nervous system (CNS), poststroke pain, 
multiple sclerosis, and postherpetic neuralgia. Headache 
conditions, including migraine, trigeminal neuralgia, and 
others, are another common entity. Fibromyalgia, a pain 
syndrome marked by widespread pain in multiple points 
throughout the body with associated somatic symptoms 
such as fatigue and cognitive blunting, is also commonly 
seen. Chronic pelvic pain, whether from pelvic floor 
muscle dysfunction, endometriosis, or other etiologies, is 
another chronic pain syndrome. Cancer pain is common, 
often with mixed nociceptive and neuropathic elements, 
and may be amenable to a variety of interventional pain 
techniques discussed later.
Section VI CONSULTANT ANESTHETIC PRACTICE
802
PSYCHOLOGICAL TREATMENT PILLAR: 
CATASTROPHIZING
In the biopsychosocial model of chronic pain psycho-
logical factors are considered not a reaction to pain, 
but part of a “bidirectional link.” Indeed, anxiety, mood 
disorders, and negative cognitive processes such as 
catastrophizing are noted to be among the strongest 
predictors of “chronification” of pain, that is, of chronic 
pain vulnerability.35 Pain catastrophizing is a negative 
cognitive process described as an “exaggerated negative 
mental set brought to bear during actual or anticipated 
painful experience.” The Pain Catastrophizing Scale 
introduced in 1995 assesses for key components, such 
as excessive worry, rumination, and negative expecta-
tions. Some of the questions on this survey are whether 
a patient thinks: “It's terrible and I think it's never going 
to get any better,” “I become afraid that the pain will get 
worse,” and “I keep thinking about how badly I want the 
pain to stop.” A psychological intervention employed 
in the management of pain catastrophizing is cognitive 
behavioral therapy (CBT). This therapy is relatively active 
and structured, somewhat more so than other modalities 
such as mindfulness-based stress reduction and open-
ended supportive psychological care; CBT focuses on how 
cognition (distorted thoughts) affects behaviors (actions) 
and develops an action plan to address both of these 
elements.36
PHYSICAL MEDICINE TREATMENT PILLAR
Almost universally in chronic pain syndromes, there 
exists a fear, or at least a concern, that particular move-
ments will result in worsening of pain. Thus in addi-
tion to receiving psychological care, most patients with 
chronic pain will benefit from a structured physical 
therapy program to address fear avoidance and associ-
ated deconditioning. Physical therapy is also a treat-
ment in its own right for a variety of musculoskeletal 
and mixed neuropathic conditions such as fibromyalgia. 
The particular therapy will vary from patient to patient, 
although in general any nudge toward movement is gen-
erally thought to be beneficial. Structure exercises, yoga, 
and progressive relaxation are all reasonable exercises.37
In the same vein many patients will also benefit from 
integrative medicine or complementary and alternative 
medicine (CAM). In CAM practices not yet fully embraced 
in mainstream medical practice (“standard of care") are 
included in a patient's care plan. These may include 
acupuncture, transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation, 
biofeedback, meditation, massage therapy, and dietary 
changes. Increasingly, CAM practices are becoming more 
mainstream, in particular as there is rising interest in 
nonopioid and cost-effective treatment modalities, and 
evidence to support their efficacy.
PHARMACOLOGIC TREATMENT PILLAR
Nonopioid Analgesics
In pain medicine there is no overall best pharmacologic 
treatment, as therapy must be personalized for each 
patient's particular chronic pain syndrome, medical 
comorbidities, and other medications. However, some 
general principles are helpful to consider. In particu-
lar, for predominantly nociceptive chronic pain, as 
from osteoarthritis, acetaminophen and nonsteroidal 
antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) may be useful. The 
mechanism of action of acetaminophen remains unclear; 
NSAIDs inhibit the enzyme cyclooxygenase, thereby 
reducing prostaglandins, which mediate inflammation 
and pain. Muscle relaxants (e.g., baclofen) are sometimes 
employed for long-term management of a variety of 
chronic pain syndromes, although the data are lacking 
for most applications, and these agents may cause CNS 
depression, in particular, when used in combination with 
other sedating analgesics. In the presence of actual mus-
cular spasticity, such as may occur from multiple sclero-
sis or other neurologic conditions, muscle relaxants such 
as baclofen or tizanidine may be of use.
For neuropathic pain, a variety of medications 
are available. First-line therapy includes antiepileptic 
gabapentinoids and antidepressant serotonin-norep-
inephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs) and tricyclic 
antidepressants (TCAs). Side effects of gabapentin and 
pregabalin include dizziness, CNS depression, weight 
gain, and possible respiratory depression when used in 
combination with opioids. The effective dose of gabap-
entin is usually 1200 to 3600 mg/day; the effective dose 
of pregabalin is usually 300 to 600 mg/day. The number 
needed to treat (NNT) to achieve 50% pain relief is 6.3 
for gabapentin and 7.7 for pregabalin. SNRI side effects 
include nausea and headache but are comparatively 
well tolerated. The effective dose of duloxetine is usu-
ally 60 mg/day, although it sometimes may be up to 
120 mg/day; the effective dose of venlafaxine is usually 
75 to 225 mg a day. The NNT is about 6.4. TCA side 
effects include potent anticholinergic effects such as dry 
mouth, constipation, urinary retention, and lighthead-
edness. TCAs may not be well tolerated, particularly 
in elderly patients. Nortriptyline (at the usual effective 
dose 25–100 mg/day) generally has a more favorable 
side effect profile than amitriptyline. The NNT is 3.6. 
Second-line medications for neuropathic pain manage-
ment include topical lidocaine and capsaicin, which is 
a substance derived from chili peppers that depletes 
substance P from the primary afferent neurons with 
repeated application. Medications further down the line 
for neuropathic pain include subcutaneous botulinum 
toxin and tramadol.38
There is increased interest in the role of cannabis 
and cannabinoids in the pharmacologic management of 
VI
Chapter 44 Chronic Pain Management
803
chronic pain. Currently, partly because of their varied 
legal status, there has not been sufficiently robust clinical 
research on the efficacy of cannabis and cannabinoids 
in the management of chronic, noncancer pain. Existing 
studies looking at a variety of patient populations and a 
variety of drug formulations have shown mixed results; 
the long-term effects of these substances also remain 
unclear.39
Other pharmacologic treatment modalities include 
infusion therapy. Ketamine, an N-methyl-D-aspartate 
(NMDA) antagonist increasingly explored for the man-
agement of depression, is often considered for the 
management of CRPS and other refractory chronic pain 
conditions, in particular, if there appears to be a promi-
nent neuropathic element. The data on ketamine infu-
sions in the management of chronic pain remain mixed, 
with the suggestion that higher doses and longer therapy 
may result in relief lasting weeks to months.40 Lidocaine, 
offered as an outpatient infusion, has also shown some 
benefit for a heterogenous population of chronic pain 
syndromes, mostly those with a prominent neuropathic 
element. As with ketamine therapy, the optimal patient 
population, dosing, and treatment frequency require 
additional study.41
Opioid Analgesics (Also See Chapter 9)
The opioid epidemic, most notable in the United States 
but also relevant globally, refers to the rapid increase of 
opioid prescriptions and opioid-related complications 
such as overdose and opioid use disorder. There are 
essentially no data showing that opioids are effective in 
the management of chronic, noncancer pain, but there 
is a wealth of data showing that they result in myriad 
side effects. Among the side effects are depression of the 
CNS and the gastrointestinal, immunologic, and endo-
crinologic systems. The CDC published a guideline for 
the prescription of opioids for chronic, noncancer pain. 
Among the recommendations from this guideline were 
that the lowest possible dose be used, ideally below 50 
morphine milligram equivalents or more per day; prefer-
ence for short-acting instead of long-acting formula-
tions; and avoidance of coprescription of an opioid with 
a benzodiazepine. It was also noted that for patients with 
opioid use disorder, medication-assisted treatment with 
buprenorphine or methadone should be offered.42 As a 
result of these guidelines, many patients on long-term 
opioid therapy for noncancer pain, and their prescribers, 
found themselves uncertain how to get to an “acceptable” 
regimen. In response, the CDC subsequently published a 
clarification, noting that opioid therapy should not be 
abruptly discontinued. Tapering, when deemed appropri-
ate, may need to be very slow, as little as a 10% decrease 
per month, and may take months to years to achieve a 
given goal. There is no hard limit on what dose a patient 
should be prescribed. At higher doses, pain specialist 
consultation may be sought.43 Ideally, patients on chronic 
opioid therapy should be assessed for continued analge-
sia, improved activities of daily living, lack of adverse 
side effects, lack of aberrant drug behaviors, adherence 
(e.g., via prescription drug monitoring program review, 
intermittent urine drug toxicology), a signed opioid 
agreement, and assessment of misuse and potential for 
adverse reaction (e.g., validated risk assessment surveys, 
naloxone coprescription, avoidance of concurrent ben-
zodiazepine prescription). Some patients may benefit 
from switching to buprenorphine-based therapy for their 
chronic pain, in part because of the generally superior 
safety profile of buprenorphine (a partial mu receptor 
agonist) compared with full agonist opioids.
When managing chronic opioid therapy, several related 
entities must be understood. Opioid tolerance occurs when 
with repeated exposure to opioids, a decreased therapeutic 
effect is noted (i.e., higher doses are needed to achieve 
the same benefit). In this scenario if the opioid dose is 
increased, the pain will improve temporarily. Opioid-
induced hyperalgesia occurs when with repeated exposure 
to opioids, a paradoxical increase in pain is noted, along 
with allodynia and hyperalgesia, usually beyond the initial 
pain area. In this scenario if the opioid dose is increased, 
the pain will worsen. Physiologic dependence is a natural 
consequence of opioid therapy. For patients receiving 
chronic opioid therapy, cessation or reduction of the opi-
oid dose will result in withdrawal symptoms. Opioid addic-
tion, more appropriately referred to as opioid use disorder,
is a neurobiologic condition wherein patients take opioids 
in larger amounts and over a longer period than intended, 
resulting in a persistent desire or unsuccessful attempt to 
cut down opioid use. In these patients cravings are present 
and opioid use continues despite adverse consequences.44
For a patient on chronic opioid therapy, there is also 
always the possibility of progression of their underlying 
pain generator. Thus when encountering a patient with 
“worse pain,” a clinician must therefore be able to tease 
out a variety of related but distinct pain entities.
PROCEDURAL TREATMENT PILLAR
Epidural Steroid Injections
Epidural steroid injections are among the most commonly 
performed injections in pain medicine. Typically, these 
are performed to reduce neuraxial inflammation causing 
pain, such as from a herniated intervertebral disc. The 
two main techniques are an interlaminar approach and a 
transforaminal approach. In the interlaminar approach a 
loss-of-resistance needle is advanced under fluoroscopic 
guidance between the lamina and a modest volume of 
medication administered. In the transforaminal approach 
a spinal needle is directed in an oblique trajectory toward 
the intervertebral foramen and a generally smaller 
Section VI CONSULTANT ANESTHETIC PRACTICE
804
volume of medication administered (Fig. 44.2). This 
approach may also be employed not just for therapeutic 
purposes but also more often for diagnostic purposes, 
such as for presurgical planning. Epidural steroid injec-
tions, in particular, when performed in the cervical spine, 
are associated with a rare risk of catastrophic neurologic 
injury. Possible complications include epidural hematoma 
or neurovascular compromise from direct vascular injury 
or steroid embolism. Thus particulate steroids should be 
avoided in cervical transforaminal injections and used 
with caution in the lumbar spine. Whether to choose an 
interlaminar or transforaminal approach is the ultimate 
decision of the treating physician, balancing the patient-
specific risks and benefits for a given approach.45
Facet Injections
The facet joint, which is the articulating bridge between 
adjacent vertebral bodies, receives innervation via two 
medial branch nerves from corresponding dorsal rami, 
one from the spinal nerve above and one from the spinal 
nerve blow the joint. To perform a single facet block, 
one must therefore block two nerves. If such a block 
results in considerable pain relief, then a radiofrequency 
ablation (RFA) may be attempted (Fig. 44.3). The RFA 
procedure includes use of a specialized, insulated needle 
directed to the location of the medial branch nerve and 
subsequent coagulation at the desired location. Tradi-
tional RFA consists of tissue coagulation via heating at 
80°C for 2 minutes. An alternative technique is a facet 
joint injection, in which local anesthetic and steroid are 
administered directly into the joint. There is ongoing 
debate about the preferred treatment approach and the 
best technique for the RFA procedure.46 For analogous 
pain generators such as the SIJ, similar approaches are 
available, including both intraarticular and denervation 
techniques.
Sympathetic Blockade
The sympathetic nervous system derives from the T1–L2 
spinal levels and clusters in various ganglia on its path 
to distal organs (also see Chapter 6). Blockade at sympa-
thetic ganglia may be employed for a variety of chronic 
pain syndromes, in particular, if there is a sympatheti-
cally mediated element as in CRPS. Starting cranially, 
Fig. 44.2 Lumbar Epidural Steroid Injection, the Transforaminal Approach. Axial view is shown. 
(From Rathmell JP. Atlas of Image-Guided Intervention in Regional Anesthesia and Pain Medicine.
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2006:58.)
VI
Chapter 44 Chronic Pain Management
805
the stellate ganglion is the fusion of the inferior cervical 
ganglion and, when present, the first thoracic ganglion. 
This ganglion is the transmission point for sympathetic 
input to the head, neck, and upper extremity. A typical 
indication for stellate ganglion block is CRPS affecting 
the upper extremity or other conditions, such as Raynaud 
disease or vascular disease. The stellate ganglion can be 
blocked at the level of C6, at the anterior tubercle of the 
transverse process of C6 (Chassaignac tubercle), adjacent 
to which the vertebral artery is usually contained. The 
block may also be performed at C7, although there is 
a slightly higher chance of pneumothorax at this level, 
given the proximity to the dome of the lung. Although a 
landmark-based technique is possible, an image-guided 
approach is now preferred, typically either with fluoros-
copy or ultrasound, with the given technique depending 
on the experience of the physician. With ultrasound 
guidance, direct visualization of medication administra-
tion superficial to the longus colli muscle is the desired 
outcome (Fig. 44.4). A successful block should result 
in a Horner syndrome of miosis, ptosis, enophthalmos 
(sunken appearance of eye), and anhidrosis. With the 
block, there should also be unilateral nasal congestion, 
venodilation, and increase in temperature in the affected 
limb of 2°C. Spread of local anesthetic may also affect 
the recurrent laryngeal nerve, resulting in hoarseness or 
coughing, and the phrenic nerve, resulting in shortness 
of breath. Complications of this block include vascular 
injury causing hematoma or stroke or inadvertent intra-
vascular injection causing seizure.
The next sympathetic plexus farther caudad is the 
celiac plexus, which is located along the anterolateral 
surface of the aorta at the T12–L1 level. The greater, 
lesser, and least splanchnic nerves coalesce at this level, 
receiving input from T5 to T12 and affecting the alimen-
tary tract from the stomach to the transverse colon in 
addition to the pancreas, liver, and kidneys. Abdominal 
visceral nociceptive afferents accompany sympathetic 
efferents, and thus the celiac ganglion allows block-
ade of painful nociceptive input, as might occur from 
pancreatic cancer. Numerous approaches have been 
described for celiac plexus blockade: fluoroscopic, CT, 
Fig. 44.3 Lumbar Medial Branch Block and Radiofrequency Ablation. Axial view is seen. Note that 
the needle used for radiofrequency is deeper, so that coagulation is performed along the length of the 
medial branch nerve. (From Rathmell JP. Atlas of Image-Guided Intervention in Regional Anesthesia and 
Pain Medicine. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2006:89.)
Section VI CONSULTANT ANESTHETIC PRACTICE
806
and an endoscopic approach with ultrasound. No one 
technique has been shown consistently to be the most 
effective or safe. Rather, it depends on the anatomic 
and medical considerations of a given patient and the 
comfort of the procedural physician. The fluoroscopic 
technique alone has a few approaches. A celiac plexus 
block using a transcrural approach administers local 
anesthetic directly on the celiac ganglion; passage of 
the needle through the aorta may be an element of this 
approach. For splanchnic nerve block, the needles are 
posterior to the diaphragmatic crura in close proximity 
to the T12 vertebral body; in this case the splanchnic 
nerves are targeted before they coalesce into the plexus 
(Fig. 44.5). The splanchnic technique may be more 
appropriate in the case of extensive intraabdominal 
tumor burden; the celiac technique is considered by 
some physicians to be less likely to spread medica-
tion toward the spinal nerve roots. In either case with 
blockade of the celiac plexus, the sympathectomy and 
unopposed parasympathetic activity may result in 
orthostatic hypotension and diarrhea. A neurolytic tech-
nique may also be employed, using alcohol or phenol; 
this approach is most often performed for patients with 
pancreatic cancer. A rare but devastating complication 
from celiac plexus neurolysis is paraplegia from spread 
of medication toward the spinal segmental arteries, 
including possibly the artery of Adamkiewicz. Direct 
injury to the aorta is also possible. In part for those 
Fig. 44.5 Celiac plexus and splanchnic nerve block, relevant 
anatomy. (From Rathmell JP. Atlas of Image-Guided Intervention in 
Regional Anesthesia and Pain Medicine. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott 
Williams & Wilkins; 2006:124.)
12
11
10
T9
Aorta
Splanchnic
nerves
Celiac
plexus
Diaphragm
Splanchnic nerve block
Celiac plexus block
T10
T11
T12
L1
9
Fig. 44.4 Stellate Ganglion, Relevant Anatomy. The red Xs 
mark the locations where this procedure is typically performed. 
Not shown is the longus colli muscle; injection should be 
lateral and superficial to this structure. (From Rathmell JP. 
Atlas of Image-Guided Intervention in Regional Anesthesia and 
Pain Medicine. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 
2006:116.)
reasons this neurolytic technique is often reserved for 
cancer-related pain.
The lumbar sympathetic chain coalesces into paired 
ganglia that lie over the anterolateral surface of the 
L2–L4 vertebral bodies. Blockade at this point is often 
performed for CRPS affecting the lower extremity. Other 
sympathetic ganglia of relevance in pain medicine 
include the superior hypogastric plexus (located anterior 
to the L5 vertebral body and the sacral promontory), 
which may be relevant to management of pelvic pain, 
and the ganglion impar (located anterior to the anterior 
surface of the sacrococcygeal junction), which may be 
intervened upon in the management of tailbone or per-
ineal pain.
NEUROMODULATION: ADVANCED 
INTERVENTIONAL PAIN MEDICINE
Advanced interventional pain techniques, sometimes 
called “surgical pain” interventions, include spinal cord 
stimulation (SCS), intrathecal drug delivery systems 
(IDDSs), and decompressive procedures. To become facile 
in these approaches, a pain physician should complete a 
fellowship with a robust neuromodulation program and 
start their practice working closely with an experienced 
colleague. This rapidly advancing area of pain medicine 
has great potential for the reduction of pain disability. 
Complications of SCS and IDDS are not uncommon and 
may be biologic (e.g., surgical site infection, hematoma, 
seroma, wound dehiscence) or device related (e.g., lead 
migration or break, catheter leak, device failure). Proper 
VI
Chapter 44 Chronic Pain Management
807
training in neuromodulation is key to minimize compli-
cations.47
SCS is, in essence, the administration of electrical 
impulses in lieu of pharmacology in the management of 
pain. There are likely multiple mechanisms, but one is 
thought to be the interruption of ascending pain input 
by the activation of nonpainful signals. Traditional SCS 
refers to the placement of electrodes in the dorsal epidural 
space, either by a percutaneous or a surgical paddle lead 
approach. Implantation of the electrodes along with an 
implantable pulse generator (IPG) is typically preceded by a 
trial in which electrodes alone are inserted for several days 
to determine whether pain relief occurs. The most com-
mon indications for SCS are failed back surgery syndrome 
(postlaminectomy pain syndrome) or CRPS, although it is 
in practice used for an increasing number of indications. A 
variety of stimulation programs have also been developed, 
beyond the traditional paresthesia-based system. Newer 
programs include high-frequency stimulation at 10,000 
Hz and burst stimulation, which consists of bursts of five 
pulses. Other developments in neurostimulation include 
the use of DRG stimulation for neuropathic pain centered 
around a particular dermatome and the use of peripheral 
nerve stimulation for neuropathic pain centered around a 
particular peripheral nerve. New stimulation programs and 
systems are rapidly appearing on the market.48
IDDS allow the administration of analgesics from an 
implanted reservoir directly into the cerebrospinal fluid. 
This therapy is usually reserved for patients who note 
benefit from systemic analgesics but are limited by side 
effects. A common scenario is a patient with spasticity 
that is improved with baclofen but who cannot tolerate 
higher doses. Usually, oral baclofen doses greater than 
80 mg/day cannot be tolerated, whereas the intrathecal 
daily dose of baclofen is in the microgram range. IDDS is 
generally appropriate for patients with intractable pain 
not responsive to other treatment modalities, in particu-
lar, for patients with cancer. The three Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA) approved medications for intrathe-
cal use are baclofen, morphine, and ziconotide. In prac-
tice, a combination of medications is often administered 
concurrently; the additional medications include bupiv-
acaine, hydromorphone, clonidine, and others.49
The minimally invasive lumbar decompression 
(MILD) procedure is a decompressive technique whereby 
hypertrophied ligamentum flavum is resected. This percu-
taneous, fluoroscopically guided technique is performed 
using a 6 gauge port and is typically performed as an out-
patient procedure with local anesthesia alone. Most patients 
resume normal activity within a day. The MILD procedure 
is FDA-approved for the treatment of symptomatic LSS 
Multiple level 1 randomized controlled trials (RCTs) have 
shown a safety profile similar to that of lumbar epidural 
steroid injection. The benefit from the MILD procedure is 
also more substantial: at 1 year after MILD, the average 
walking distance increased from 246 feet to 3956 feet and 
the average standing time increased from 8 minutes to 56 
minutes.50 The MILD procedure reflects the growing arma-
mentarium of an appropriately trained pain physician.
There are also many other “advanced” procedures in 
interventional pain medicine, but given the scope of this 
introductory chapter, they will not be disused at this time.
SUMMARY
In providing an overview of the breadth of knowledge 
and expertise needed to practice as a pain physician, 
this chapter hopefully has succeeded in conveying pain 
medicine as a distinct career. Pain care is not truly pain 
care unless it is comprehensive and multidisciplinary. 
Similarly, pain specialists are not really pain specialists 
unless they understand the neurobiology of pain; the 
biopsychological model of pain; and the full spectrum of 
pharmacologic, rehabilitative, integrative, and procedural 
modalities available. Pain, that “sensory and emotional 
experience”, is an entity that will touch every person at 
some point in their lives. It also remains an incompletely 
understood entity. From my perspective, as someone who 
went into medicine to better understand and improve the 
human condition, there can be no more exciting field of 
medicine to enter.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The editors and publisher would like to thank Drs. Omar 
Hyder and James Rathmell for contributing to this chap-
ter in the previous edition of this work. It has served as a 
foundation for the current chapter.
REFERENCES
1. Owens W, Abram S. The genesis of pain 
medicine as a subspecialty in anes-
thesiology. J Anesth Hist. 2020;6(1):
13–16.
2. Raja SN, Carr DB, Cohen M, Finnerup 
NB, Flor H, Gibson S, Keefe FJ, Mogil 
JS, Ringkamp M, Sluka KA, Song XJ, 
Stevens B, Sullivan MD, Tutelman PR, 
Ushida T, Vader K. The revised Interna-
tional Association for the Study of Pain 
definition of pain: concepts, challenges, 
and compromises. Pain. 2020 May 23.
3. Treede RD, Rief W, Barke A, Aziz Q, Ben-
nett MI, Benoliel R, Cohen M, Evers S, 
Finnerup NB, First MB, Giamberardino 
MA, Kaasa S, Kosek E, Lavandʼhomme 
P, Nicholas M, Perrot S, Scholz J, Schug 
S, Smith BH, Svensson P, Vlaeyen JW, 
Wang SJ. A classification of chronic pain 
for ICD-11. Pain. 2015;156(6):1003–1007.
4. Dahlhamer J, Lucas J, Zelaya C. Preva-
lence of chronic pain and high-impact 
chronic pain among adults—Unite 
States, 2016. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly 
Rep. 2018;67:1001–1006.
5. Pak D, Yong R, Kaye A, Urman R. 
Chronification of pain: Mechanisms, 
current understanding, and clinical 
implications. Curr Pain Headache Rep. 
2018;22(9):1–6.
Section VI CONSULTANT ANESTHETIC PRACTICE
808
6. Colloca L, Ludman T, Bouhassira D, 
Baron R, Dickenson AH, Yarnitsky D, 
Freeman R, Truini A, Attal N, Finnerup 
NB, Eccleston C, Kalso E, Bennett DL, 
Dworkin RH, Raja SN. Neuropathic pain. 
Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2017;16(3):17002.
7. Buchbinder R, Underwood M, Hart-
vigsen J, Maher C. The Lancet series 
call to action to reduce low value care 
for low back pain: An update. Pain. 
2020;161(1):S57–S64.
8. Kushchayev S, Glushko T, Jarraya M, 
etal. ABCs of the degenerative spine. 
Insights Imaging. 2018;9:253–274.
9. Brinjiki W, Leutmer PH, Comstock, etal. 
Systematic literature review of imag-
ing features of spinal degeneration in 
asymptomatic populations. Am J Neuro-
radiol. 2015;35(4):811.
10. Chou R, Qaseem A, Owens DK, etal. 
Diagnostic imaging for low back pain: 
Advice for high-value health care from 
the American College of Physicians. Ann 
Intern Med. 2011;154:181.
11. Travell JG, Simons DG. Myofascial Pain 
and DysfunctionThe Trigger Point Man-
ual: Upper Half of Body. 2nd ed. Balti-
more: Lippincott, Williams & Wilkins; 
1988.
12. Galasso A, Urits I, An D, Nguyen D, Bor-
chart M, Yazdi C, Manchikanti L, Kaye 
RJ, Kaye AD, Mancuso KF, Viswanath 
O. A comprehensive review of the treat-
ment and management of myofascial 
pain syndrome. Curr Pain Headache 
Rep. 2020;24(8):43.
13. Cohen S, Raja S. Pathogenesis, diagno-
sis, and treatment of lumbar zygapophy-
sial (facet) joint pain. Anesthesiology. 
2017;106:591–614.
14. Perolat R, Kastler A, Nicot B. Facet joint 
syndrome: From diagnosis to interven-
tional management. Insights Imaging. 
2018;9(5):773–789.
15. Poilliot A, Zwirner J, Doyle T, Hammer 
N. A systematic review of the normal 
sacroiliac joint anatomy and adjacent 
tissues for pain physicians. Pain Physi-
cian. 2019;22(4):E247.
16. Schneider B, Rosati R, Zheng P, McCor-
mick Z. Challenges in diagnosing sac-
roiliac joint pain: A narrative review. 
PM&R. 2019;11(1):S40–S45.
17. Lasleet M, April CN, McDonald B, Young 
SB. Diagnosis of sacroiliac joint pain: 
Validity of individual provocation test 
and composites of tests. Man Ther. 
2005;10(3):207–218.
18. Bogduk N, Aprill C, Derby R. Lumbar 
discogenic pain: State-of-the-art review. 
Pain Med. 2013;14(6):813–836.
19. ManchikantiL Hirsch J. An update on the 
management of chronic lumbar disco-
genic pain. Pain Manag. 2015;5(5):373–
386.
20. Deyo R, Mirza S. Herniated lum-
bar 
intervertebral 
disk. 
NEJM. 
2016;354:1763–1772.
21. Awm van der WIndt D, Simmons E, 
Riphagen I, etal. Physical examina-
tion for lumbar radiculopathy due to 
disc herniation in patients with low-
back pain. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2010;17(2).
22. Weinstein JN, Tosteson TD, Lurie JD, 
Tosteson AN, Hanscom B, Skinner JS, 
Abdu WA, Hilibrand AS, Boden SD, 
Deyo RA. Surgical vs nonoperative 
treatment for lumbar disk herniation: 
The Spine Patient Outcomes Research 
Trial (SPORT): A randomized trial. 
JAMA. 2006;296(20):2441–2450.
23. Lurie JD, Tosteson TD, Tosteson AN, 
Zhao W, Morgan TS, Abdu WA, Herkow-
itz H, Weinstein JN. Surgical versus 
nonoperative treatment for lumbar disc 
herniation: Eight-year results for the 
spine patient outcomes research trial. 
Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 2014;39(1):3–16.
24. Overdevest GM, Vleggeert-Lankamp CL, 
Jacobs WC, Brand R, Koes BW, Peul WC. 
Recovery of motor deficit accompany-
ing sciatica—Subgroup analysis of a 
randomized controlled trial. Spine J. 
2014;14:1817–1824.
25. Schoenfeld AJ, Kang JD. Decision mak-
ing for treatment of persistent sciatica. N 
Engl J Med. 2020;382(12):1161–1162.
26. Sandella DE, Haig AJ, Tomkins-Lane 
C, Yamakawa KS. Defining the clinical 
syndrome of lumbar spinal stenosis: A 
recursive specialist survey process. PM 
R. 2013;5(6):491–495.
27. Friedly JL, Comstock BA, Turner JA, 
etal. A randomized trial of epidural glu-
cocorticoid injections for spinal stenosis. 
N Engl J Med. 2014;371(1):11–21.
28. Hicks CW, Selvin E. Epidemiology 
of peripheral neuropathy and lower 
extremity disease in diabetes. Curr Diab 
Rep. 2019;19(10):86.
29. Seretny M, Currie GL, Sena ES, Ram-
narine S, Grant R, MacLeod MR, Colvin 
LA, Fallon M. Incidence, prevalence, 
and predictors of chemotherapy-induced 
peripheral neuropathy: A system-
atic review and meta-analysis. Pain. 
2014;155(12):2461–2470.
30. Ott S, Maihöfner C. Signs and symptoms 
in 1,043 patients with complex regional 
pain syndrome. J Pain. 2018;19(6):599–
611.
31. Duong S, Bravo D, Todd KJ, Finlay-
son RJ, Tran Q. Treatment of complex 
regional pain syndrome: An updated 
systematic review and narrative synthe-
sis. Can J Anaesth. 2018;65(6):658–684.
32. Treede RD, Rief W, Barke A, Aziz Q, Ben-
nett MI, Benoliel R, Cohen M, Evers S, 
Finnerup NB, First MB, Giamberardino 
MA, Kaasa S, Kosek E, Lavand'homme 
P, Nicholas M, Perrot S, Scholz J, Schug 
S, Smith BH, Svensson P, Vlaeyen JW, 
Wang SJ. A classification of chronic 
pain for ICD-11. Pain. 2015;156:1003–
1007.
33. Schug SA, Bruce J. Risk stratification for 
the development of chronic postsurgical 
pain. Pain Rep. 2017;2(6):e627.
34. Katz J, Weinrib A, Fashler SR, Katzn-
elzon R, Shah BR, Ladak SS, Jiang 
J, Li Q, McMillan K, Santa Mina D, 
Wentlandt K, McRae K, Tamir D, Lyn 
S, de Perrot M, Rao V, Grant D, Roche-
Nagle G, Cleary SP, Hofer SO, Gilbert R, 
Wijeysundera D, Ritvo P, Janmohamed 
T, O'Leary G, Clarke H. The Toronto Gen-
eral Hospital Transitional Pain Service: 
Development and implementation of a 
multidisciplinary program to prevent 
chronic postsurgical pain. J Pain Res. 
2015;8:695–702.
35. Edwards RR, Dworkin RH, Sullivan MD, 
Turk DC, Wasan AD. The role of psycho-
social processes in the development and 
maintenance of chronic pain. J Pain. 
2016;17:T70–T92.
36. Gatchel RJ, Neblett R. Pain catastrophiz-
ing: What clinicians need to know. Prac 
Pain Manag. 2017;15(6).
37. Chou R, Deyo R, Friedly J, Skelly A, 
Hashimoto R, Weimer M, Fu R, Dana 
T, Kraegel P, Griffin J, Grusing S, Brodt 
ED. Nonpharmacologic therapies for low 
back pain: A systematic review for an 
American College of Physicians clini-
cal practice guideline. Ann Intern Med. 
2017;166(7):493–505.
38. Finnerup NB, Attal N, Haroutounian 
S, etal. Pharmacotherapy for neuro-
pathic pain in adults: A systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Lancet Neu-
rol. 2015;14(2):162–173.
39. Stockings E, Campbell G, Hall WD, 
Nielsen S, Zagic D, Rahman R, Murni-
on B, Farrell M, Weier M, Degenhardt 
L. Cannabis and cannabinoids for 
the treatment of people with chronic 
noncancer pain conditions: A system-
atic review and meta-analysis of con-
trolled and observational studies. Pain. 
2018;159(10):1932–1954.
40. Cohen SP, Bhatia A, Buvanendran A, 
Schwenk ES, Wasan AD, Hurley RW, 
Viscusi ER, Narouze S, Davis FN, Ritchie 
EC, Lubenow TR, Hooten WM. Consensus 
guidelines on the use of intravenous keta-
mine infusions for chronic pain from the 
American Society of Regional Anesthesia 
and Pain Medicine, the American Acad-
emy of Pain Medicine, and the American 
Society of Anesthesiologists. Reg Anesth 
Pain Med. 2018;43(5):521–546.
41. Iacob E, Hagn EE, Sindt J, Brogan S, 
Tadler SC, Kennington KS, Hare BD, 
Bokat CE, Donaldson GW, Okifuji A, 
Junkins SR. Tertiary care clinical expe-
rience with intravenous lidocaine infu-
sions for the treatment of chronic pain. 
Pain Med. 2018;19(6):1245–1253.
42. Dowell D, Haegerich TM, Chou R. CDC 
Guideline for Prescribing Opioids for 
Chronic Pain–United States, 2016. 
JAMA. 2016;315(15):1624–1645.
VI
Chapter 44 Chronic Pain Management
809
43. Dowell D, Haegerich T, Chou R. No 
shortcuts to safer opioid prescribing. N 
Engl J Med. 2019;380(24):2285–2287.
44. Velayudhan A, Bellingham G, Morley-
Forster P. Opioid-induced hyperalgesia. 
Br J Anaesth. 2014;4(3):125–129.
45. Rathmell James P, Benzon Honorio T, 
Dreyfuss Paul, Huntoon Marc, Wallace 
Mark, Baker Ray, Riew KDaniel, Rosen-
quist Richard W, Aprill Charles, Rost 
Natalia S, Buvanendran Asokumar, Scott 
Kreiner D, Bogduk Nikolai, Fourney 
Daryl R, Fraifeld Eduardo, Horn Scott, 
Stone Jeffrey, Vorenkamp Kevin, Lawler 
Gregory, Summers Jeffrey, Kloth David, 
O'Brien David, Tutton Sean. Safeguards 
to prevent neurologic complications 
after epidural steroid injections: Con-
sensus opinions from a multidisciplinary 
working group and national organi-
zations. Anesthesiology. 2015;122:974–
984.
46. Cohen SP, Bhaskar A, Bhatia A, 
Buvanendran A, Deer T, Garg S, Hooten 
WM, Hurley RW, Kennedy DJ, McLean 
BC, Moon JY, Narouze S, Pangarkar S, 
Provenzano DA, Rauck R, Sitzman BT, 
Smuck M, van Zundert J, Vorenkamp K, 
Wallace MS, Zhao Z. Consensus practice 
guidelines on interventions for lumbar 
facet joint pain from a multispecialty, 
international working group. Reg Anesth 
Pain Med. 2020;45(6):424–467.
47. Abd-Elsayed A, Abdallah R, Falowski 
S, Chaiban G, Burkey A, Slavin K, 
Guirguis M, Raslan AM. Development 
of an educational curriculum for spi-
nal cord stimulation. Neuromodulation. 
2020;23(5):555–561.
48. Deer TR, Pope JE, Hayek SM, Bux A, 
Buchser E, Eldabe S, De Andrés JA, Erdek 
M, Patin D, Grider JS, Doleys DM, Jacobs 
MS, Yaksh TL, Poree L, Wallace MS, 
Prager J, Rauck R, DeLeon O, Diwan S, 
Falowski SM, Gazelka HM, Kim P, Leong 
M, Levy RM, McDowell II G, McRoberts P, 
Naidu R, Narouze S, Perruchoud C, Rosen 
SM, Rosenberg WS, Saulino M, Staats P, 
Stearns LJ, Willis D, Krames E, Huntoon 
M, Mekhail N. The Polyanalgesic Consen-
sus Conference (PACC): Recommendations 
on intrathecal drug infusion systems best 
practices and guidelines. Neuromodula-
tion. 2017 Feb;20(2):96–132. doi:10.1111/
ner.12538 Epub 2017 Jan 2. Erratum in: 
Neuromodulation. 2017 Jun;20(4):405–
406. PMID: 28042904.
49. Deer TR, Pope JE, Hayek SM, Bux A, 
Buchser E, Eldabe S, De Andrés JA, Erdek 
M, Patin D, Grider JS, Doleys DM, Jacobs 
MS, Yaksh TL, Poree L, Wallace MS, 
Prager J, Rauck R, DeLeon O, Diwan S, 
Falowski SM, Gazelka HM, Kim P, Leong 
M, Levy RM, McDowell II G, McRoberts P, 
Naidu R, Narouze S, Perruchoud C, Rosen 
SM, Rosenberg WS, Saulino M, Staats P, 
Stearns LJ, Willis D, Krames E, Huntoon 
M, Mekhail N. The Polyanalgesic Con-
sensus Conference (PACC): Recommen-
dations on Intrathecal Drug Infusion 
Systems Best Practices and Guidelines. 
Neuromodulation.. 2017;20(4):405–406.
50. Jain S, Deer T, Sayed D, Chopra P, Wahe-
zi S, Jassal N, Weisbein J, Jameson J, 
Malinowski M, Golovac S. Minimally inva-
sive lumbar decompression: A review of 
indications, techniques, efficacy and safety. 
Pain Manag. 2020;10(5):331–348.
Chapter
810
INTRODUCTION
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) was initially defined 
over 50 years ago as the administration of mouth-to-mouth 
ventilation and closed chest cardiac compressions in a 
pulseless patient. Since that time, significant advances 
in CPR and cardiovascular life support have been made. 
Today, the early descriptions of CPR are termed basic life 
support (BLS), whereas adult advanced cardiovascular 
life support (ACLS) and pediatric advanced cardiovascu-
lar life support (PALS) include additional invasive tech-
niques by experienced practitioners.
Out-of-hospital resuscitation is well described. Histor-
ically, in-hospital resuscitation and life support were less 
commonly studied. However, in-hospital cardiac arrests 
(IHCAs) are common and associated with high mortality 
rates indicating a need for more research. An estimated 
290,000 IHCAs arrests occur in the United States annu-
ally. Although IHCAs continue to have poor outcomes, 
recent data suggest improvement over the past 2 decades, 
which may be the result of increased awareness of the 
influence of evidence-based clinical management.1 Car-
diac arrest in the perioperative period is unique in that it 
can frequently be anticipated, and health care providers 
and resources are immediately available.
EVIDENCE BASED
The American Heart Association (AHA), in conjunction 
with the International Liaison Committee on Resuscita-
tion (ILCOR), published updated guidelines for the perfor-
mance of CPR and emergency cardiovascular care (ECC) 
in 2020. These guidelines, revised from the 2015 version, 
include added emphasis on enhanced algorithms and vis-
ual aids to provide easy-to-remember guidance for BLS 
and ACLS resuscitation scenarios; the importance of early 
initiation of CPR by lay rescuers; early administration of 
epinephrine; optimal post–cardiac arrest care, including 
INTRODUCTION
EVIDENCE BASED
PRINCIPLES OF MANAGEMENT
Basic Life Support
Adult Advanced Cardiovascular Life Support
Pediatric Advanced Life Support
Post-Resuscitation Care and 
Neuroprognostication
Special Perioperative Considerations
Debriefing
Systems of Care
CARDIOPULMONARY 
RESUSCITATION
Joyce Chang, David Shimabukuro
45
VI
Chapter 45 Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation
811
neuroprognostication; and debriefing and follow-up for 
emotional support for lay rescuers, emergency medical 
services (EMS) providers, and hospital-based health care 
workers.2 The 2015 guidelines had added emphasis on 
systems of care in the prehospital, in-hospital, and post-
resuscitation settings and on the continued education of 
CPR techniques to providers. Going forward, the AHA 
will continually update new evidence, revise guidelines, 
and distribute online to providers as needed instead of 
issuing 5-year overall updates.3,4
PRINCIPLES OF MANAGEMENT
Basic Life Support
BLS includes a number of key measures, including recog-
nition of unresponsiveness and cardiac arrest, activation 
of an emergency response system, early administration of 
CPR, and early defibrillation if indicated. In the hospital 
setting a health care provider will perform the following 
sequence of steps (some steps may be performed by oth-
ers), as described by the AHA algorithm: (1) verify scene 
safety; (2) check for responsiveness; (3) activate resus-
citation team; (4) retrieve defibrillator (with or without 
automatic external defibrillation [AED] function) and 
emergency equipment and code cart; (5) simultaneously 
check for adequate breathing and pulse; (6) begin CPR; 
(7) use defibrillator as soon as it is available; and (8) 
provide two-person CPR as help arrives5 (Fig. 45.1).
Recognition
Rapid recognition of cardiac arrest is essential in a suc-
cessful resuscitation. The recognition and management of 
cardiac arrest in an unresponsive patient differ between 
laypersons and health care providers. The AHA guide-
lines recognize this distinction and include increased 
flexibility in emergency response activation either before 
or after breathing and pulse assessment for health care 
providers. Dispatcher-assisted CPR continues to play a 
large role for laypersons in treating out-of-hospital car-
diac arrest (OHCA). It is recommended for laypersons to 
initiate CPR for presumed cardiac arrest, as the risk of 
harm is low if the patient is not in cardiac arrest.2
Health care providers should check for a pulse while 
simultaneously evaluating for the adequacy of ventila-
tion. The pulse should be assessed at either the carotid 
or femoral artery, and the time elapsed for assessment 
should not exceed 10 seconds to minimize time to start 
chest compressions. When monitoring respirations, occa-
sional agonal gasps should not be mistaken for normal 
breathing.
Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation
High-quality chest compressions are important for opti-
mizing outcomes from cardiac arrest. When initiating 
chest compressions, the heel of the hand is placed lon-
gitudinally in the center of the chest on the lower half 
of the sternum with the other hand atop the first hand. 
Goals of optimal chest compressions include (1) main-
tain a rate of 100 to 120 compressions per minute; 
(2) compress the chest at least 5 cm (2 inches) but no 
more than 6 cm (2.5 inches); (3) allow for complete 
chest recoil between compressions; and (4) minimize 
the frequency and number of interruptions. Rates of 
compression over 120 per minute can lead to a decrease 
in the depth of compressions.6 Excessive compressions 
over 6 cm have been associated with an increased rate of 
thoracic injury. Complete chest recoil allows for venous 
return and is important for effective CPR. Additionally, 
the AHA recommends performing manual chest compres-
sions on a firm surface when possible. The pattern is 30 
compressions to 2 breaths (30:2 equals 1 cycle of CPR), 
regardless of whether one or two rescuers are present.
Since 2010, the importance of definitive airway 
management has taken a secondary role to chest com-
pressions. The old mnemonic ABCD (airway, breath-
ing, circulation, and defibrillation) has given way to 
CAB (compression, airway, breathing). This is because 
the early initiation of high-quality chest compressions 
improves the likelihood of a return of spontaneous circu-
lation (ROSC). Airway maneuvers are still attempted, but 
they should occur quickly, efficiently, and with minimal 
interruptions in chest compressions. Opening the airway 
can be achieved by a simple head tilt–chin lift technique 
(Fig. 45.2). A jaw thrust maneuver can be used in patients 
with suspected cervical spine injury. If necessary to 
relieve obstruction, properly sized simple airway devices, 
such as nasal or oral airways, can be inserted to displace 
the tongue from the posterior oropharynx.
Although several large out-of-hospital studies have 
demonstrated that chest compression–alone CPR is not 
inferior to traditional compression–ventilation CPR, 
health care providers are still expected to provide assisted 
ventilation.7,8 Care should be taken to avoid rapid or 
forceful breaths in addition to excessive positive-pressure 
ventilation, as this can reduce preload and cardiac out-
put.9 Complications may also occur from gastric insuf-
flation and subsequent aspiration of gastric contents. 
Maximum oxygen concentration is administered in order 
to provide optimally saturated arterial hemoglobin con-
centrations. Optimal ventilation includes providing only 
enough tidal volume to observe chest rise (∼400–600 mL), 
giving each ventilation over 1 second, with a rate of 1 
breath every 6 seconds. Hyperventilation is detrimental 
for neurologic recovery. The decreased minute ventilation 
is also appropriate because cardiac output is much lower 
than normal during resuscitation.
Defibrillation
A defibrillator should be attached to the patient as soon 
as possible. Optimal electrode placement on the chest 
Section VI CONSULTANT ANESTHETIC PRACTICE
812
Fig. 45.1 BLS Health Care Provider Adult Cardiac Arrest Algorithm—2020 Update. (From 2020 AHA 
Guidelines for CPR and ECC: Adult Basic & Advanced Life Support. © 2020 American Heart Association.)
VI
Chapter 45 Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation
813
Fig. 45.3 Schematic depiction of the proper placement of 
paddle electrodes in an adult.
Fig. 45.2 The head tilt–jaw thrust maneuver provides a patent 
upper airway by tensing the muscles attached to the tongue, 
thus pulling the tongue away from the posterior pharynx. 
Forward displacement of the mandible is accomplished by 
grasping the angles of the mandible and lifting with both hands, 
which serves to displace the mandible forward while tilting the 
head backward.
wall is right of the upper sternal border below the clavicle 
and to the left of the nipple with the center in the midax-
illary line (Fig. 45.3). Most electrode pads now come 
with diagrams showing their correct positioning. Alter-
native locations include anterior-posterior, anterior-left 
infrascapular, and anterior-right infrascapular regions. 
Right anterior axillary-left anterior axillary is not recom-
mended unless there are no other options available.
The amount of energy (joules [J]) delivered is depend-
ent on the type of defibrillator used. Two major defibril-
lator types, monophasic (less common) and biphasic 
(more common), are available. Monophasic waveform 
defibrillators deliver a unidirectional energy charge, 
whereas biphasic waveform defibrillators deliver an in-
series bidirectional energy charge. Based on evidence 
from implantable defibrillators, bidirectional energy 
delivery is more successful in terminating ventricular 
tachycardia (VT) and ventricular fibrillation (VF). In addi-
tion, biphasic waveform shocks require less energy than 
traditional monophasic waveform shocks (120–200 J vs. 
360 J, respectively) and may therefore cause less myo-
cardial damage.
The time until defibrillation is critical to survival, 
especially because most adults who can be saved from 
cardiac arrest are in VT/VF. Defibrillation should occur as 
soon as possible when it is recognized as a VT/VF arrest. 
CPR should be initiated while emergency equipment is 
being retrieved. In one study of IHCAs 30% of patients 
received delayed defibrillation. Patients receiving delayed 
defibrillation have lower rates of ROSC, lower survival to 
hospital discharge, and worse long-term survival rates. 
Furthermore, each additional minute of delay was associ-
ated with worse outcomes.10,11 Chest compressions should 
be resumed immediately after defibrillation.
Alternative Techniques and Ancillary Devices
The 2015 AHA CPR and ECC committee reviewed the 
evidence for ancillary devices used during CPR and 
found insufficient support to recommend any of the fol-
lowing: impedance threshold device, active compression-
decompression CPR with impedance threshold device, 
mechanical piston device for chest compressions, and 
load-distributing band devices.
In 2019 the AHA published a focused update stat-
ing there were insufficient available studies to recom-
mend extracorporeal CPR (venoarterial extracorporeal 
membrane oxygenation [ECMO]) for patients in cardiac 
arrest, consistent with the 2015 AHA guidelines. How-
ever, it can be considered for carefully selected patients 
who suffer from witnessed IHCA secondary to revers-
ible causes when conventional CPR efforts are failing. 
It should only be instituted in settings in which it can 
be expeditiously implemented and supported by skilled 
providers.12
Section VI CONSULTANT ANESTHETIC PRACTICE
814
be useful as a marker of CPR quality. Data from the AHA 
Get With the Guidelines Resuscitation registry show a 
higher likelihood of ROSC when CPR quality is moni-
tored using either Petco2 or diastolic blood pressure.2
A prolonged reduction in Petco2 should not be used in 
isolation for prognostication, and it should certainly be 
used with caution in patients without an endotracheal 
tube. Bedside cardiac ultrasound can also be considered 
when managing cardiac arrest, but its use is not routinely 
recommended. If it is used, an experienced sonographer 
should perform the ultrasound, and interruptions in chest 
compressions should be minimized.15
Airway Management
The 2019 AHA focused update guidelines state that the 
use of either a bag-mask or advanced airway device 
(endotracheal tube or supraglottic airway) for providing 
oxygenation and ventilation during CPR is acceptable.12
The choice of airway management depends on the skill 
of the provider. Establishing an advanced airway during 
an IHCA results in fewer interruptions to chest compres-
sions during CPR.16 Chest compressions should not be 
interrupted for longer than 10 seconds during advanced 
airway placement. Once an endotracheal tube is placed, 
care should be taken to avoid excessive ventilation, as 
generation of elevated intrathoracic pressure can lead 
to reduced preload and reduced cardiac output. If an 
advanced airway is used, placement should be performed 
by expert providers trained in these procedures. Frequent 
experience or frequent retraining is recommended; how-
ever, there is insufficient evidence about the ideal fre-
quency of retraining.12 Insertion of an advanced airway 
can be deferred until after the patient fails to respond 
to several cycles of CPR and defibrillation. However, the 
clinical course of the arrest should be considered. For 
example, a patient with severe pulmonary edema may 
benefit from endotracheal intubation sooner rather than 
later. There are no formal recommendations for the tim-
ing of advanced airway placement.
Continuous waveform capnography is recommended 
as the measurement of choice for the assessment of 
advanced airway placement. Clinical evaluation should 
also occur, including auscultation of bilateral breath 
sounds and visualization of bilateral chest rise. If cap-
nography is not available, alternative methods include 
esophageal detector device, non waveform capnography, 
and ultrasound. Once the endotracheal tube is confirmed 
to be in the trachea, it is secured in place. One breath is 
delivered every 6 seconds (10 breaths/min) and does not 
require synchronization with compressions.
Management of Specific Arrhythmias
The additional components of ACLS and specific arrhyth-
mia management will be discussed here. As there were no 
updates to the bradycardia and tachycardia algorithms, 
they will not be reviewed in detail.
Adult Advanced Cardiovascular Life Support
Adult ACLS includes several interventions besides BLS in 
order to manage cardiac arrest. These interventions can 
include airway manipulation, medication administra-
tion, arrhythmia management, and transition to post-
resuscitation care. However, the key element of ACLS is 
high-quality CPR, which includes correctly performed 
chest compressions, minimal compression interruptions, 
and early cardiac defibrillation.
Resuscitation Team Management
The resuscitation of a sudden cardiac arrest by its nature 
is a chaotic event. AHA ACLS training emphasizes effec-
tive, high-performance team dynamics for a successful 
resuscitation. Employing the principles of crisis resource 
management (CRM), adapted by the aviation industry 
to medical care by anesthesiologists, can decrease dis-
organization and improve patient outcomes.13 A key 
benefit of CRM is to access the collective knowledge 
and experience of the entire team rather than rely on a 
single individual. Two important components of CRM are 
leadership and communication. Resuscitation teams are 
often composed of health care providers from different 
disciplines, who may or may not have worked together 
before. Role clarity is important, yet can be challenging 
in this environment. It is imperative to establish a team 
leader who can take on assigning roles and assuming 
global management of the resuscitation. Communica-
tion during a resuscitation can also be challenging. Two 
important components are to have closed loop com-
munications and for there to be a single point for all 
communication (i.e., the team leader). Practically, closed 
loop communication consists of the following (1) the 
team leader gives a clear message, order, or assignment 
to a team member; (2) the team member gives a clear 
response and eye contact to confirm that they have heard 
and understood the message; and (3) the team member 
tells the team leader when the task has been completed. 
While most decisions will come from the team leader, a 
good team leader will enlist the collective knowledge and 
experience of the entire team.
Monitoring Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation
A number of physiologic variables can be used to monitor 
CPR. Continuous monitoring of end-tidal carbon dioxide 
(Petco2) with waveform capnography can be beneficial 
during the resuscitation. In addition to confirmation of 
advanced airway placement, Petco2 can guide the rescu-
ers in the adequacy of chest compressions.14 Targeting 
compressions to Petco2 value at 10 mm Hg or greater 
may be useful as a marker of CPR quality. Alternative 
physiologic measures during CPR include arterial relaxa-
tion diastolic pressure, arterial pressure monitoring, and 
central venous oxygen saturation. Targeting an arterial 
relaxation diastolic pressure of 20 mm Hg or greater may 
VI
Chapter 45 Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation
815
Fig. 45.4 Resuscitation algorithm for bradycardia with a pulse—2020 update. (From 2020 AHA 
Guidelines for CPR and ECC: Adult Basic & Advanced Life Support. © 2020 American Heart Association.)
Bradycardia
Bradycardia is defined as a heart rate <60 beats per 
minute. However, when bradycardia is the cause of 
symptoms, the heart rate is usually <50 beats per min-
ute. A slow heart rate may be physiologically normal 
for some individuals. The AHA bradycardia algorithm 
focuses on the management of clinically significant (i.e., 
symptomatic) bradycardia.17 Fig. 45.4 summarizes the 
management of a patient with bradycardia.
Tachycardia
Tachycardia is defined as a heart rate >100 beats per 
minute. However, clinically significant (i.e., sympto-
matic) tachycardia tends to occur with a heart rate >120 
to 150 beats per minute, depending on if it is atrial or 
ventricular in nature. A rapid heart rate is an appropri-
ate response to a physiologic stress or other underly-
ing conditions. Therefore it is important to determine 
whether the tachycardia is the cause of the presenting 
Section VI CONSULTANT ANESTHETIC PRACTICE
816
symptom or secondary to an underlying condition.17
Fig. 45.5 summarizes the management of a patient with 
tachycardia.
Pulseless Arrest
Cardiac dysrhythmias that produce pulseless cardiac 
arrest are (1) VF, (2) VT, (3) pulseless electrical activ-
ity (PEA), and (4) asystole (Fig. 45.6). During pulseless 
cardiac arrest, the primary goals are to provide effec-
tive chest compressions and quick defibrillation if the 
rhythm is VF or VT. Drug administration is of secondary 
importance and may be administered after initial defibril-
lation attempts have failed. In the cardiac arrest patient 
with a non shockable rhythm it is reasonable to adminis-
ter epinephrine as soon as feasible.2 After initiating CPR 
and defibrillation (when there is a shockable rhythm), 
rescuers can then establish intravenous access, obtain 
a more definitive airway, and consider drug therapy 
(Table 45.1), all while providing continued chest com-
pressions and ventilation. In addition, while performing 
CPR–defibrillation cycles, the team needs to consider 
potential inciting causes (Table 45.2).
Fig. 45.5 Resuscitation algorithm for tachycardia with a pulse—2020 update. (From 2020 AHA 
Guidelines for CPR and ECC: Adult Basic & Advanced Life Support. © 2020 American Heart Association.)
VI
Chapter 45 Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation
817
Fig. 45.6 Adult cardiac arrest algorithm—2020 update. (From 2020 AHA Guidelines for CPR and ECC: 
Adult Basic & Advanced Life Support. © 2020 American Heart Association.)
Section VI CONSULTANT ANESTHETIC PRACTICE
818
Ventricular Fibrillation/Ventricular Tachycardia
VF and pulseless VT are nonperfusing rhythms originat-
ing from the ventricles. The key management steps to 
achieving ROSC are high-quality CPR and rapid defibril-
lation. When sudden cardiac arrest is recognized, imme-
diately start chest compressions while a defibrillator is 
attached. Once the defibrillator is attached, immediately 
evaluate to determine if the rhythm is shockable. If the 
rhythm is VF or VT, resume chest compressions while the 
defibrillator is charging to the appropriate energy level. 
Once charged, deliver a shock, then resume CPR immedi-
ately and continue for five cycles or 2 minutes, followed 
by re evaluation of the cardiac rhythm. Repeat defibril-
lation if they remain in cardiac arrest with a shockable 
Drug Name
Dose
Indication
Adenosine
6 mg IV/IO
May repeat 12 mg IV/IO
(Cut dose in half if using central line)
For stable narrow QRS tachycardia or monomorphic 
VT (contraindicated with pre-excitation syndrome)
Amiodarone
300 mg IV/IO
May repeat 150 mg IV/IO
150 mg IV/IO over 10-min
Maintenance infusion of 1 mg/min for 6 hr, then
0.5 mg/min
Maximum total dose of 2.2 g/24 hr
For pulseless VT/VF
For stable VT or uncertain wide QRS tachycardia and 
narrow QRS tachycardias
Atropine
0.5–1 mg IV/IO
May repeat every 3–5 min Maximum total dose of
3 mg
For bradycardia
Diltiazem
15–20 mg (0.25 mg/kg) IV/IO over 2-min
May repeat in 15 min at 20–25 mg (0.35 mg/kg)
Maintenance infusion of 5–15 mg/hr
For stable narrow QRS tachycardia (contraindicated 
with pre-excitation syndrome)
Dopamine
2–10 mcg/kg/min by infusion
For bradycardia instead of a pacer, while awaiting a 
pacer, or if a pacer is ineffective or not tolerated
Epinephrine
1 mg IV/IO
Repeat every 3–5 min
2–10 mcg/min by infusion
For pulseless cardiac arrest
For bradycardia instead of a pacer, while awaiting a 
pacer, or if a pacer is ineffective or not tolerated
Esmolol
0.5 mg/kg IV/IO
May repeat 0.5 mg/kg IV/IOMaintenance infusion of 
0.05–0.3 mg/kg/min
For stable narrow QRS tachycardias (contraindicated 
with pre excitation syndrome)
Lidocaine
1–1.5 mg/kg IV/IO
May repeat 0.5–0.75 mg/kg
Maximum total of 3 doses or 3 mg/kg
For pulseless VT/VF
Magnesium
1–2 g IV/IO
For torsades de pointes
Metoprolol
5 mg IV/IO
May repeat every 5 min
Maximum total dose of 15 mg
For stable narrow QRS tachycardias (contraindicated 
with pre excitation syndrome)
Procainamide
20–50 mg/min IV/IO until arrhythmia suppressed
Maintenance infusion of 1–4 mg/min
Maximum total dose of 17 mg/kg
For stable wide QRS tachycardia
Sotalol
100 mg (1.5 mg/kg) IV/IO over 5 min
For stable wide QRS tachycardia
Verapamil
2.5–5 mg IV/IO over 2-min
May repeat 5–10 mg over a 15- to 30-minute period
Maximum total dose of 20 mg
For stable narrow QRS tachycardia (contraindicated 
with pre excitation syndrome)
Table 45.1 Drugs Used During Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation
VI
Chapter 45 Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation
819
8 Hs
8 Ts
Hypovolemia
Toxins (anaphylaxis/
anesthesia)
Hypoxia
Tamponade
Hydrogen ions (acidosis)
Tension pneumothorax
Hyperkalemia/hypokalemia
Thrombosis in coronary 
artery
Hypoglycemia
Thrombus in pulmonary 
artery
Hypothermia
Trauma
Malignant hyperthermia
QT interval prolongation
Hypervagal response
Pulmonary hypertension
Table 45.2 Major Causes of Cardiovascular Collapse in the 
Perioperative Period
rhythm (see Fig. 45.6). A biphasic defibrillator is pre-
ferred over monophasic, and a single shock is preferred 
over sequential (stacked) shocks. If VF or VT persists 
after at least one CPR–defibrillation cycle, a vasopressor 
is given. Epinephrine 1 mg intravenously (IV) may be 
administered every 3 to 5 minutes. Amiodarone and/or 
lidocaine can be administered to improve the likelihood 
of restoring and maintaining ROSC. Although the role 
of antiarrhythmics in improving survival after VF/VT is 
not completely clear, it is recommended by current ACLS 
guidelines and may be most useful in witnessed cardiac 
arrests. Magnesium sulfate may be considered if torsade 
de pointes is suspected.18
Asystole/Pulseless Electrical Activity
Asystole is the absence of any electrical or mechani-
cal cardiac activity; PEA is defined as electrical cardiac 
activity without sufficient mechanical cardiac activity 
to generate a palpable pulse. These two cardiac rhythms 
have been combined as the second part of the pulseless 
arrest algorithm because of similarities in their manage-
ment (see Fig. 45.6). These are nonperfusing rhythms 
and therefore require excellent CPR. Neither will benefit 
from defibrillation; instead, administer epinephrine as 
soon as feasible. Epinephrine 1 mg IV is given every 3 
to 5 minutes. The primary interventions for successful 
ROSC include effective CPR with minimal interruptions, 
identifying and treating reversible causes, and establish-
ing an advanced airway. The administration of high-
quality chest compressions can be monitored by Petco2, 
diastolic blood pressure, or central venous saturation, if 
available. If an organized cardiac rhythm is present, the 
rescuer checks for a pulse. If there is no pulse, CPR should 
be continued. If there is a pulse, the rescuer identifies 
the rhythm, and vital signs are obtained while starting 
post-resuscitation care as described further below. A 
bedside cardiac ultrasound may provide valuable infor-
mation regarding the cause of arrest. Additionally, the 
absence of ventricular wall motion on ultrasound por-
tends an unlikely ROSC.19
Medication Administration
Establishing intravenous access is important for drug 
administration but should not interfere with CPR or 
defibrillation. A single, large peripheral intravenous cath-
eter is preferred and is sufficient for resuscitating most 
pulseless patients. If unable to obtain intravenous access, 
intraosseous (IO) access can be considered. If neither 
intravenous nor IO access is feasible, certain medica-
tions (epinephrine, lidocaine, atropine, naloxone) can be 
given via the endotracheal tube. The endotracheal dose 
is 2 to 10 times the recommended intravenous dose, and 
the drug is diluted in 5 to 10 mL of sterile water before 
instillation down the endotracheal tube.
Epinephrine and amiodarone are among the most 
commonly used drugs in the ACLS algorithm and deserve 
special attention. Epinephrine is a combined direct α- and 
β-adrenergic receptor agonist. Several randomized con-
trolled trials demonstrated increased survival to hospital 
discharge and ROSC.12 Epinephrine can increase diastolic 
blood pressure and thereby restore coronary perfu-
sion pressure and blood flow back to the myocardium. 
However, epinephrine also increases myocardial oxygen 
consumption by increasing heart rate and afterload.
Amiodarone was initially developed as an antianginal 
drug in the 1950s but was abandoned because of its side 
effects. Because it has effects on cardiac sodium and 
potassium channels, in addition to α- and β-receptors, 
amiodarone was reinvestigated for its antiarrhythmic 
effects. In this regard, amiodarone prolongs repolariza-
tion and refractoriness in the sinoatrial node, the atrial 
and ventricular myocardium, the atrioventricular node, 
and the His–Purkinje cardiac conduction system. Ami-
odarone can exacerbate or induce arrhythmias, especially 
torsade de pointes. This drug may interact with volatile 
anesthetics to produce heart block, profound vasodila-
tion, myocardial depression, and severe hypotension. 
Amiodarone has many drug interactions and can prolong 
the effects of oral anticoagulants, phenytoin, digoxin, 
and diltiazem. Despite its multiple disadvantages, admin-
istration of amiodarone improves survival to hospital 
admission in adults with out-of-hospital VF/VT arrest 
when compared with placebo.12 The recommended dose 
of amiodarone for VF/VT is 300 mg IV. An additional 
bolus dose of 150 mg IV may be given for persistent 
pulseless VF/VT.
The routine administration of lidocaine, an antiar-
rhythmic that blocks sodium channels, was removed from 
the ACLS algorithm in the 2010 ACLS guideline update. 
However, in the 2018 AHA focused update lidocaine was 
reinstated as a drug therapy to consider in refractory 
Section VI CONSULTANT ANESTHETIC PRACTICE
820
VF/VT. A study of OHCA patients showed favorable 
results with the administration of lidocaine compared 
with placebo, but not amiodarone.12 Vasopressin, a non-
adrenergic vasopressor, was removed from the 2015 ACLS 
guidelines because of a lack of demonstrated benefit 
when compared with epinephrine.20 Drugs used for ACLS 
are associated with ROSC but not with improved survival 
to hospital discharge or neurologic recovery. Administra-
tion of steroids along with vasoactive drugs may improve 
the likelihood of survival and favorable neurologic out-
comes for IHCA; however, there is no recommendation 
for their routine use.21 In patients with cardiac arrest 
secondary to opioid overdose administration of naloxone 
should be considered.
Pediatric Advanced Life Support
CPR of infants and children follows the same basic prin-
ciples as those for adults. The AHA offers two courses 
for health care providers who require resuscitation-
related training for pediatric patients: PALS and Pediatric 
Emergency Assessment, Recognition and Stabilization 
(PEARS). This section will highlight salient differences 
in management for these patients. Most pediatric cardiac 
events are triggered by respiratory deterioration. There-
fore airway management and ventilation management 
are critical to a successful pediatric resuscitation. In con-
trast, adults tend to experience cardiac arrest as a result 
of VT or VF secondary to myocardial ischemia. Regard-
less, pediatric BLS and ACLS follow the similar algorithm 
of CAB. Naturally, there are several specific differences 
between adult and pediatric patients. Infants are defined 
as younger than 1 year in age, whereas children are 
between the age of 1 year and adolescence. Adult resus-
citation guidelines can be used for adolescent children. 
The elements of high-quality CPR in pediatrics remain 
unchanged from adults and include (1) adequate chest 
compression rate, (2) adequate chest compression depth, 
(3) adequate recoil between chest compressions, (4) mini-
mal interruption to chest compressions, and (5) avoidance 
of excess ventilation. Key differences include (1) CPR 
quality: depth > one-third anteroposterior diameter of 
chest and compression–ventilation ratio of 30:2 (one 
rescuer) or 15:2 (two rescuers) if there is no advanced 
airway and one breath every 2 to 3 seconds if there is an 
advanced airway; (2) shock energy for defibrillation: first 
shock at 2 J/kg, second shock at 4 J/kg, and subsequent 
shocks >4 J/kg with a maximum of 10 J/kg or adult dose; 
and (3) drug therapy dosing that is weight based. Refer to 
Fig. 45.7 for the AHA pediatric cardiac arrest algorithm.22
Circulation
In a child the heel of one or both hands should be 
placed on the lower half of the sternum, between the 
nipples, while keeping the fingers off the ribcage and 
staying above the xiphoid process. In an infant chest 
compressions are delivered via the two-finger technique 
(Fig. 45.8) or two-thumb encircling hands technique 
(Fig. 45.9). Fingers should be placed over the lower half 
of the sternum just below the intermammary line while 
keeping above the xiphoid process. For both infants and 
children, the sternum should be depressed at least one-
third to one-half the anteroposterior diameter of the chest 
(4 cm in infants, 5 cm in children) at a rate of 100 to 120 
compressions per minute.
Pulse checks and closed chest compressions are per-
formed slightly differently, depending on whether the 
patient is a child or an infant. In children the pulse is pal-
pated at the carotid or femoral artery, similar to adults. 
In infants the pulse is checked at the brachial or femoral 
artery. As with adults, Petco2 can be used to evaluate the 
quality of CPR. If invasive monitoring, such as an arte-
rial catheter, is already in place, it may also be used to 
evaluate and guide CPR.
ECMO can be considered in all pediatric cardiac arrest 
patients who are refractory to standard conventional 
therapies. It is most beneficial in the ICHA setting with 
existing ECMO protocols, expertise, and equipment. 
There is insufficient evidence for its use in the OHCA 
setting.23
Airway and Ventilation Management
The airway of pediatric patients is slightly different from 
that of an adult, but head tilt–chin lift is still the tech-
nique of choice to open the airway (also see Chapter 16). 
Children tend to have a larger tongue and epiglottis in 
relation to the mouth and larynx. In addition, they have 
a larger head in relation to the body. Overextension or 
excessive flexion of the head can lead to difficulty visu-
alizing the glottic opening during direct laryngoscopy. 
Straight laryngoscope blades may be preferred over 
curved blades to lift the epiglottis anteriorly and away 
from the glottic opening in young children.
Given the likely causes of pediatric cardiopulmonary 
arrest, conventional CPR (compressions and ventilation) 
is recommended over compression-only resuscitation. 
The pattern should be 30 compressions to 2 breaths if 
there is a single rescuer and 15 compressions to 2 breaths 
if there are two rescuers.
Defibrillation
In children defibrillation should be performed when a 
pulseless shockable rhythm (VT, VF) is present. An ini-
tial energy of 2 to 4 J/kg should be attempted, regard-
less of the waveform type. Subsequent defibrillations 
should be at least 4 J/kg but should not exceed 10 J/kg. 
Biphasic AEDs can be used in children older than 1 year 
outside the hospital setting. AHA guidelines recom-
mend the use of a pediatric-dose attenuator system that 
will decrease the amount of delivered energy. If one is 
not available, a standard external defibrillator can be 
substituted.
VI
Chapter 45 Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation
821
Fig. 45.7 Pediatric cardiac arrest algorithm—2020 update. (From 2020 AHA Guidelines for CPR and 
ECC: Adult Basic & Advanced Life Support. © 2020 American Heart Association.)
Section VI CONSULTANT ANESTHETIC PRACTICE
822
Medications
Most medication dosages are calculated by using current 
known weight or ideal body weight based on height. 
Most pediatric units have resuscitation carts divided by 
weight to facilitate drug administration in an emergency 
so that calculations do not need to be performed and 
valuable time is not wasted. As with adults, epinephrine 
has been associated with an increased rate of ROSC 
and can be used in cardiac arrest. For refractory VT 
or pulseless VT, either amiodarone or lidocaine can be 
administered.
Fig. 45.8 Pediatric chest compressions via two-finger technique. (From Berg MD, Schexnayder SM, 
Chameides L et al. 2010 American Heart Association guidelines for cardiopulmonary resuscitation and 
emergency cardiovascular care. Part 13: Pediatric basic life support. 2010;122[18/Suppl 3]:S862–
S875.)
Fig. 45.9 Pediatric chest compressions via two-thumb encircling hands technique. (From 2005 
American Heart Association [AHA] guidelines for cardiopulmonary resuscitation [CPR] and emergency 
cardiovascular care (ECC) of pediatric and neonatal patients: Pediatric advanced life support. Pediatrics.
2006:117[5]:e1005–e1028.)
Post-resuscitation Care and 
Neuroprognostication
After successful resuscitation with ROSC, patients are 
admitted to a critical care unit for further definitive 
management and supportive treatment (Fig. 45.10). Post–
cardiac arrest care must include optimization of cardio-
pulmonary function to ensure adequate organ perfusion. 
It should be consistent, integrated, and multidisciplinary. 
If arrest occurs at a center that is not equipped to manage 
elements of post-resuscitation care, transfer to a larger 
regional center should be considered.24
VI
Chapter 45 Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation
823
Fig. 45.10 Post–cardiac arrest algorithm—2020 update. (From 2020 AHA Guidelines for CPR and ECC: 
Adult Basic & Advanced Life Support. © 2020 American Heart Association.)
Section VI CONSULTANT ANESTHETIC PRACTICE
824
When possible, therapies are administered concur-
rently. Specifically, percutaneous coronary interven-
tions (PCIs) should not be delayed to institute targeted-
temperature management (TTM), and the institution 
of TTM should not delay PCI. Often, vasopressors and 
inotropes need to be administered during the immediate 
post-resuscitation period because of the presence of myo-
cardial stunning and hemodynamic instability. Central 
venous access for drug administration may be necessary, 
along with an arterial catheter to facilitate hemodynamic 
monitoring.
Acute Coronary Syndrome
An electrocardiogram is obtained as soon as possible after 
ROSC in order to evaluate for ST-segment elevation myo-
cardial infarction (STEMI). If acute ST-segment elevation 
is noted, the patient should be taken for emergent angi-
ography. Some patients with non-ST-segment elevation 
may also benefit from emergent angiography.25 These 
evaluations are made regardless of neurologic status.
Pulmonary and Hemodynamic Goals
After a ROSC, oxygenation and ventilation should be 
evaluated and optimized. Advanced airway placement 
may be needed, and hyperventilation is avoided. The goal 
for oxygenation is a pulse oximetry saturation between 
92% and 98%, and for ventilation the goal is a Paco2 of 
35 to 45 mm Hg. Hypotension, defined as systolic arterial 
blood pressure less than 90 mm Hg or mean arterial blood 
pressure less than 65 mm Hg, should be aggressively 
treated. This can be achieved with a combined administra-
tion of IV fluids and/or vasoactive/inotropic medications. 
No specific hemodynamic variables, including arterial 
blood pressure, cardiac output, venous oxygen satura-
tion, or urine output, have been recommended, as these 
likely vary widely between individual patients. Reversible 
causes for cardiac arrest are again assessed. An electrocar-
diogram, echocardiogram, and serial cardiac enzymes are 
obtained. When applicable, serum or whole-blood lactate 
and central venous or mixed-venous oxygen saturation 
are monitored to assess for adequate tissue perfusion.
Neurologic Monitoring
In addition to cardiac recovery, neurologic recovery is of 
vital importance. The 2020 AHA ACLS guidelines contain 
significant new clinical data concerning optimal care in 
the days after cardiac arrest. Refer to Fig. 45.11 for the 
new multimodal approach to neuroprognostication. To be 
reliable, neuroprognostication should not be performed 
until 72 hours after return to normothermia.
Targeted Temperature Management
Temperature should be monitored closely, and hyperther-
mia is avoided at all times, as this can worsen ischemic 
brain injury. An advisory statement from the AHA strongly 
recommends TTM of 32 to 36°C, which is a change from 
the previous recommendation of 32 to 34°C.26 Although 
the evidence is stronger for TTM for OHCA, it is still 
recommended for IHCA. Complications of therapeutic 
hypothermia occur at the lower targeted temperature and 
can include impaired coagulation, hypokalemia, hyper-
glycemia, worsening of arrhythmias, and an increased 
risk of infection. Thus patient factors should be taken into 
consideration when selecting the targeted temperature.
Blood Glucose Control
Increased blood glucose concentrations after resuscita-
tion from cardiac arrest are associated with poor neuro-
logic outcome. Yet tight control of serum glucose has not 
been shown to improve neurologic outcome. Regardless, 
glucose levels after resuscitation should be monitored 
closely to avoid significant hypoglycemia, hyperglyce-
mia, and swings in individual blood glucose values.
Special Perioperative Considerations
The incidence of intraoperative cardiac arrest (ICA) has 
been reported to be 7.22 in 10,000 surgeries. Intraopera-
tive blood loss, as indicated by the amount of transfusions 
received by the patient, was the most important predic-
tor of ICA, but anaphylaxis has also been consistently 
implicated.27,28 Cardiac arrest during anesthesia is distinct 
from cardiac arrest in other settings because of anesthetic 
medication–related alterations to their physiology. In 
addition, ICA during an anesthesia encounter is usually 
witnessed and frequently anticipated. The cause is often 
related to the surgical intervention and may be more easily 
reversible. Because of this, perioperative cardiac arrests are 
associated with a higher survival rate and better neuro-
logic outcomes than other in-hospital arrests.29 The tradi-
tional CPR and ECC guidelines do not necessarily translate 
well into the perioperative setting. In 2008 the American 
Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) Committee on Critical 
Care Medicine published a monograph specific to ACLS 
for anesthesia providers. In a follow-up publication the 
authors described common causes of perioperative cardiac 
arrest, including the following categories and factors30:
1. Medications: anesthetic overdose, high neuraxial 
blockade, local anesthetic toxicity, drug administration 
errors
2. Respiratory: hypoxemia, auto–positive end-expiratory 
pressure (PEEP), acute bronchospasm
3. Cardiovascular: vasovagal, hypovolemic/hemorrhagic 
shock, distributive shock, obstructive shock, right 
ventricular failure, left ventricular failure, arrhythmia, 
acute coronary syndrome
The authors suggest several initial interventions 
when performing resuscitation in the operating room 
(Box 45.1). Five clinical circumstances that are unique to 
the intraoperative setting are detailed next.
VI
Chapter 45 Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation
825
Box 45.1
Initial Interventions During Intraoperative 
Cardiac Arrest
1. Initiate chest compressions
2. Call for help
3. Discontinue anesthetic
4. Check surgical field; hold surgery
5. Retrieve emergency equipment, including defibrillator
6. Increase fraction of inspired oxygen (FiO2) to 100%
7. Manually ventilate the lungs
8. Open all intravenous lines
9. Use capnography to assess CPR
Anaphylaxis
Minor drug reactions, such as a rash, are a common 
occurrence in the operating room. Major reactions, such 
as anaphylactic shock, occur much less often. Common 
drugs associated with anaphylaxis are latex, β-lactam 
Fig. 45.11 Approach to multimodal neuroprognostication in adults after cardiac arrest. (From 2020 
AHA Guidelines for CPR and ECC: Adult Basic & Advanced Life Support. © 2020 American Heart 
Association.)
antibiotics, succinylcholine, all muscle relaxants, and 
intravenous contrast material. The treatment of anaphy-
laxis involves the administration of epinephrine to inter-
rupt the cascade of profound vasodilation and significant 
vascular leak. If possible, the offending drug should be 
removed and discontinued. Epinephrine and vasopres-
sin can be used to support arterial blood pressure, and 
steroids and antihistamines are administered to further 
attenuate the response. Intravenous fluid administration 
is essential secondary to the vascular leak. CPR and ACLS 
should be immediately instituted if there is no palpable 
pulse. In the event of complete cardiovascular collapse 
larger doses of epinephrine may be required.
Gas Embolism
Although a very rare event, the incidence of gas embo-
lism has the potential to increase in parallel with the 
worldwide increase in laparoscopic surgical procedures, 
Section VI CONSULTANT ANESTHETIC PRACTICE
826
posterior spine surgery, and endobronchial laser pro-
cedures. The initial management includes cessation of 
the offending cause (i.e., halt insufflation), occlusion of 
open veins, and flooding of the surgical field with saline. 
Patients should be placed in the Trendelenburg posi-
tion with the left side down to keep the gas in the apex 
of the right ventricle and allow for filling with blood. 
Complete circulatory collapse should be treated with CPR 
and ACLS.
Local Anesthetic Systemic Toxicity (LAST) 
(Also See Chapter 10)
Local anesthetics affect sodium channels throughout 
the body, including the brain and the heart. In general, 
toxicity occurs in a dose-dependent fashion, with cardio-
vascular collapse occurring at the end of the spectrum. 
In non-anesthetized patients central nervous system 
symptoms are vital to recognize, as they tend to precede 
cardiac manifestations. The cardiac rhythm can range 
from premature ventricular contractions to asystole. If 
possible, the administration of the local anesthetic should 
be stopped. Intralipid should be given for cardiovascular 
toxicity. Good neurologic recovery in these patients can 
occur despite a prolonged resuscitation. Treatment rec-
ommendations include the following: (1) stop the local 
anesthetic; (2) CPR/ACLS if pulseless; (3) 20% intralipid 
IV with a load of 1.5 mL/kg followed by an infusion of 
0.25 ml/kg/hr if less than 70 kg; (3) sodium bicarbonate 
to maintain pH >7.25; and (4) consider transcutaneous or 
transvenous pacing for bradycardic rhythms. Vasopres-
sin should be avoided, and epinephrine doses should be 
decreased (<1 mcg/kg) (Fig. 45.12).
Cardiovascular Collapse From Neuraxial Anesthesia
Cardiovascular collapse from neuraxial anesthesia has 
been described but is inadequately understood.31 It seems 
to occur in younger, otherwise healthy patients undergo-
ing routine surgical procedures with neuraxial anesthesia. 
Proposed mechanisms causing the cardiac arrest include 
a shift in autonomic balance toward the parasympathetic 
system, a decrease in venous return from pooling in the 
splanchnic circulation, and activation of baroreceptors 
that stimulate a paradoxical Bezold–Jarisch response. 
A high level of spinal anesthesia seems to be the most 
frequent culprit. Regardless, treatment follows standard 
CPR and ACLS recommendations, including immediate 
administration of IV epinephrine.
Cardiac Arrest in Pregnancy
The best outcome for mother and fetus is successful mater-
nal resuscitation. Priorities should be high-quality CPR 
and relief of aortocaval compression. Newly emphasized 
in the 2020 AHA ACLS guidelines is the importance and 
prioritization of oxygenation and airway management 
because of the fact that pregnant patients are more prone 
to hypoxia. If a pregnant patient with a fundus height at 
or above the umbilicus has not achieved ROSC with usual 
resuscitative measures and manual left lateral uterine dis-
placement, it is advised to prepare for perimortem cesar-
ean delivery (PMCD), ideally within 5 minutes after the 
time of arrest. TTM is recommended for post-resuscitation 
care with the addition of continuous fetal monitoring.2
Debriefing
A new recommendation in the 2020 AHA ACLS guide-
lines is care for the rescuers. Debriefings and referral for 
emotional support for lay rescuers, EMS providers, and 
hospital-based health care providers after a cardiac arrest 
can be beneficial. Rescuers have been shown to experi-
ence anxiety and posttraumatic stress after providing BLS 
and/or ACLS care. In addition, team debriefing may allow 
for review of team performance and subsequent improve-
ments in care delivery.2
Systems of Care
Health care delivery systems differ significantly between 
OHCA and IHCA. The AHA discusses both of these dis-
tinct systems. A patient at risk of cardiac arrest while 
in the hospital depends on appropriate surveillance and 
prevention, prompt recognition and response by a mul-
tidisciplinary team, high-quality CPR, prompt defibril-
lation, and ACLS as needed.32 The ACLS 2020 updates 
emphasize post-resuscitation care after ROSC in addition 
to debriefing and continuous quality improvement.33
Though recovery from IHCA has improved over the last 
few decades, there remains considerable variability and 
room for improvement.
The AHA guidelines recommend the establishment 
of rapid response teams or medical emergency teams in 
order to reduce the incidence of cardiac arrest in patients 
who are at increased risk. These patients should be trans-
ferred to a higher-acuity setting, such as an intensive 
care unit. Discussions with the patient or family mem-
bers regarding preference for aggressive resuscitation 
should ideally be conducted before an actual cardiac 
arrest event. CRM techniques should be used in order to 
optimize the dynamics among resuscitation team mem-
bers. These include a designated resuscitation team with 
predetermined roles and communication strategies and a 
plan for debriefing after an event.
In 2015 the National Academy of Medicine (formerly the 
Institute of Medicine) released a report titled “Strategies to 
Improve Cardiac Arrest Survival: A Time to Act.” This report 
noted the significant morbidity associated with cardiac 
arrest and the need to improve outcomes.34,35 The report 
introduced eight recommendations to improve resuscitative 
practices: (1) robust data collection and dissemination, (2) 
improved public response, (3) enhanced EMS capability, (4) 
updated national accreditation standards, (5) continuous 
quality improvement, (6) increased research funding in 
VI
Chapter 45 Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation
827
REFERENCES
1. Andersen LW, Holmberg MJ, Berg 
KM, Donnino MW, Granfeldt A. In-
Hospital cardiac arrest: A review. JAMA. 
2019;321:1200–1210.
2. Merchant RM, Topjian AA, Panchal AR, 
etal. Adult Basic and Advanced Life 
Support, Pediatric Basic and Advanced 
Life Support, Neonatal Life Support, 
Resuscitation Education Science, and 
Systems of Care Writing Groups: Part 1:
Executive summary: 2020 American 
Heart Association Guidelines for Car-
diopulmonary Resuscitation and Emer-
gency Cardiovascular Care. Circulation. 
2020;142:S337–S357.
3. Neumar RW, Shuster M, Callaway 
CW, etal. Part 1: Executive summa-
ry: 2015 American Heart Association 
guidelines update for cardiopulmonary 
resuscitation and emergency cardio-
vascular care. Circulation. 2015;132:
S315–S367.
4. American Heart Association. CPR ECC 
Guidelines. http://eccguidelines.heart.org
5. Olasveengen TM, Mancini ME, Per-
kins GD, etal. Adult Basic Life Sup-
port Collaborators: Adult Basic Life 
Support: 2020 International Consen-
sus on Cardiopulmonary Resuscita-
tion and Emergency Cardiovascular 
Care Science With Treatment Recom-
mendations. Circulation. 2020;142:
S41–S91.
resuscitative science, (7) increased speed in adopting exist-
ing strategies, and (8) establishment of a new nationwide 
cardiac arrest collaborative. The AHA has responded to 
Fig. 45.12 American Society of Regional Anesthesia and Pain Medicine Local Anesthetic Systemic 
Toxicity Checklist: 2020 version. (Copyright 2020 by the American Society of Regional Anesthesia and 
Pain Medicine.)
this call to action by announcing commitments to improve 
systems of care, resuscitative research, and creation of a 
national cardiac arrest collaborative.36
Section VI CONSULTANT ANESTHETIC PRACTICE
828
6. Idris AH, Guffey D, Pepe PE, Brown SP, 
etal. Resuscitation Outcomes Consor-
tium Investigators: Chest compression 
rates and survival following out-of-
hospital cardiac arrest. Crit Care Med. 
2015;43:840–848.
7. Rea TD, Fahrenbruch C, Culley L, etal. 
CPR with chest compression alone or 
with rescue breathing. N Engl J Med. 
2010;363:423–433.
8. Dumas F, Rea TD, Fahrenbruch C, etal. 
Chest compression alone cardiopulmo-
nary resuscitation is associated with 
better long-term survival compared with 
standard cardiopulmonary resuscitation. 
Circulation. 2013;127:435–441.
9. Aufderheide TP, Sigurdsson G, Pirrallo RG, 
etal. Hyperventilation-induced hypoten-
sion during cardiopulmonary resuscita-
tion. Circulation. 2004;109:1960–1965.
10. Patel KK, Spertus JA, Khariton Y, Tang 
Y, Curtis LH, Chan PS. American Heart 
Association’s Get With the Guidelines–
Resuscitation Investigators: Associa-
tion between prompt defibrillation and 
epinephrine treatment with long-term 
survival after in-hospital cardiac arrest. 
Circulation. 2018;137:2041–2051.
11. Chan PS, Krumholz HM, Nichol G, 
Nallamothu BK. American Heart Asso-
ciation National Registry of Cardio-
pulmonary Resuscitation Investigators: 
Delayed time to defibrillation after in-
hospital cardiac arrest. N Engl J Med. 
2008;358:9–17.
12. Panchal AR, Berg KM, Hirsch KG, 
etal. 2019 American Heart Association 
Focused Update on Advanced Cardio-
vascular Life Support: Use of advanced 
airways, vasopressors, and extracorpor-
eal cardiopulmonary resuscitation dur-
ing cardiac arrest: An update to the 
American Heart Association Guidelines 
for Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation and 
Emergency Cardiovascular Care. Circu-
lation. 2019;140:e881–e894.
13. Murray WB, Foster PA. Crisis resource 
management among strangers: Princi-
ples of organizing a multidisciplinary 
group for crisis resource management. 
J Clin Anesth. 2000;12:633–638.
14. Sheak KR, Wiebe DJ, Leary M, etal. 
Quantitative 
relationship 
between 
end-tidal carbon dioxide and CPR 
quality during both in-hospital and out-
of-hospital cardiac arrest. Resuscitation. 
2015;89:149–154.
15. Link MS, Berkow LC, Kudenchuk PJ, et al. 
Part 7: Adult advanced cardiovascular life 
support. Circulation. 2015;132:S444–S464.
16. Yeung J, Chilwan M, Field R, Davies R, 
Gao F, Perkins GD. The impact of airway 
management on quality of cardiopul-
monary resuscitation: An observational 
study in patients during cardiac arrest. 
Resuscitation. 2014;85:898–904.
17. Neumar RW, Otto CW, Link MS, et al. 
Part 8: Adult advanced cardiovascular 
life support. Circulation. 2010;122:S729–
S767.
18. Panchal AR, Berg KM, Kudenchuk PJ, 
etal. 2018 American Heart Association 
Focused Update on advanced cardiovas-
cular life support use of antiarrhythmic 
drugs during and immediately after car-
diac arrest: An update to the American 
Heart Association Guidelines for Car-
diopulmonary Resuscitation and Emer-
gency Cardiovascular Care. Circulation. 
2018;138:e740–e749.
19. Blyth L, Atkinson P, Gadd K, Lang E. 
Bedside focused echocardiography as 
predictor of survival in cardiac arrest 
patients: A systematic review. Acad 
Emerg Med. 2012;19:1119–1126.
20. Mukoyama T, Kinoshita K, Nagao 
K, Tanjoh K. Reduced effectiveness 
of vasopressin in repeated doses for 
patients undergoing prolonged cardio-
pulmonary resuscitation. Resuscitation. 
2009;80:755–761.
21. Mentzelopoulos SD, Malachias S, Cha-
mos C, etal. Vasopressin, steroids, and 
epinephrine and neurologically favora-
ble survival after in-hospital cardiac 
arrest: A randomized clinical trial. 
JAMA. 2013;310:270–279.
22. Topjian AA, Raymond TT, Atkins D, 
etal. Pediatric Basic and Advanced Life 
Support Collaborators: Part 4: Pediatric 
basic and advanced life support: 2020 
American Heart Association Guidelines 
for Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation and 
Emergency Cardiovascular Care. Circu-
lation. 2020;142:S469–S523.
23. Duff JP, Topjian AA, Berg MD, etal. 
2019 American Heart Association 
Focused Update on Pediatric Advanced 
Life Support: An update to the American 
Heart Association Guidelines for Car-
diopulmonary Resuscitation and Emer-
gency Cardiovascular Care. Circulation. 
2019;140:e904–e914.
24. Tagami T, Tosa R, Omura M, Yokota H, 
Hirama H. Implementation of the fifth 
link of the Chain of Survival concept for 
out-of-hospital cardiac arrest. Crit Care. 
2012;16:P266.
25. Callaway CW, Donnino MW, Fink EL, 
etal. Part 8: Post–cardiac arrest care. 
Circulation. 2015;132:S465–S482.
26. Donnino MW, Andersen LW, Berg KM, 
etal. Temperature management after car-
diac arrest. Circulation. 2015;132:2448–
2456.
27. Goswami S, Brady JE, Jordan DA, Li G. 
Intraoperative cardiac arrests in adults 
undergoing noncardiac surgery: Inci-
dence, risk factors, and survival outcome. 
Anesthesiology. 2012;117:1018–1026.
28. Constant A-L, Montlahuc C, Grimaldi D, 
etal. Predictors of functional outcome 
after intraoperative cardiac arrest. Anes-
thesiology. 2014;121:482–491.
29. Ramachandran SK, Mhyre J, Kheterpal 
S, etal. American Heart Association’s 
Get With The Guidelines-Resuscitation 
Investigators: Predictors of survival 
from perioperative cardiopulmonary 
arrests: A retrospective analysis of 2,524 
events from the Get With The Guide-
lines-Resuscitation Registry. Anesthesi-
ology. 2013;119:1322–1339.
30. Moitra VK, Gabrielli A, Maccioli GA, 
O'Connor MF. Anesthesia advanced circu-
latory life support. Can J Anaesth. 2012;
59(6):586–603. doi:10.1007/s12630-012-
9699-3.
31. Kopp SL, Horlocker TT, Warner ME, 
etal. Cardiac arrest during neuraxial 
anesthesia: Frequency and predisposing 
factors associated with survival. Anesth 
Analg. 2005;100:855–865.
32. Kronick SL, Kurz MC, Lin S, etal. 
Welsford Michelle: Part 4: Systems of care 
and continuous quality improvement. 
Circulation. 2015;132:S397–S413.
33. 2020 American Heart Association 
Guidelines for Cardiopulmonary Resus-
citation and Emergency Cardiovascular 
Care. Part 7: Systems of care. https://
cpr.heart.org/en/resuscitation-science/
cpr-and-ecc-guidelines/systems-of-care.
34. NASEM. Treatment of Cardiac Arrest: 
National Academy Press; 2015.
35. Becker LB, Aufderheide TP, Graham R. 
Strategies to improve survival from car-
diac arrest: A report from the Institute of 
Medicine. JAMA. 2015;314:223–224.
36. Neumar RW, Eigel B, Callaway CW, etal. 
American Heart Association: American 
Heart Association response to the 2015 
Institute of Medicine Report on Strate-
gies to Improve Cardiac Arrest Survival. 
Circulation. 2015;132:1049–1070.
829
Chapter
INTRODUCTION
Clinical anesthesia practice is often considered a model 
for quality and safety in medicine. In 1999 the Insti-
tute of Medicine report, “To Err Is Human” specifically 
identified anesthesia as “an area in which very impres-
sive improvements in safety have been made.”1 Such 
attention to a specialty comprising approximately 5% 
of U.S. physicians highlights the many contributions 
to perioperative quality and safety generated by the 
specialty of anesthesia. Although unadjusted anesthesia-
specific mortality has remained relatively constant for 
the last several decades,2 anesthesia providers are also 
able to care for increasingly older patients with more 
comorbidities than previously. The principles by which 
anesthesiologists transformed the inherently dangerous 
task of blunting human responses to pain and control-
ling vital life-support functions into a safe and almost 
routine occurrence are important elements of the anes-
thesia toolbox and should be familiar to all practicing 
anesthesia providers.
This chapter reviews the history of anesthesia quality 
and safety, identifies key approaches and strategies for 
improvement not only in anesthesia but also in medical 
specialties, and examines current and future challenges 
in anesthesia-related quality and safety.
DEFINITIONS: QUALITY VERSUS SAFETY
Quality and safety are related but not identical terms. 
Safety refers to a lack of harm and focuses on avoid-
ing adverse events. If patient injury is avoided, then 
the process can be considered safe regardless of other 
considerations. In contrast, quality refers to the optimal 
performance of a task, which is multidimensional and 
may refer to outcome, efficiency, cost, satisfaction, or 
some other metric of performance in addition to avoid-
ing injury.
INTRODUCTION
DEFINITIONS: QUALITY VERSUS SAFETY
SPECIFIC APPROACHES TO ANESTHESIA 
SAFETY
Learning From Experience
Adoption of Specialty-Wide Standards
Patient Safety–Focused Programs
FROM SAFETY TO QUALITY: MAKING 
ANESTHESIA BOTH SAFER AND BETTER
Process Measures
Structural Measures
Outcome Measures
TOOLS FOR IMPROVING LOCAL OUTCOMES
Structured Quality Improvement Approaches: 
FADE, PDSA, and DMAIC
Multidisciplinary Process Improvement: Root 
Cause Analysis, “Never Events,” and Failure 
Mode Effects Analysis
SUMMARY
QUALITY AND PATIENT 
SAFETY IN ANESTHESIA 
CARE
Avery Tung
46
Section VI CONSULTANT ANESTHETIC PRACTICE
830
It is easy to see how quality and safety do not always 
overlap. As an example, a process can always be made 
incrementally safer by installing an additional check 
or adding extra equipment. In anesthesia practice, for 
example, an anesthesia provider is arguably not fully 
safe unless a fiber-optic scope is present in the operating 
room to facilitate difficult airway management. Another 
extreme example is having a second (or third) anesthesia 
provider in the room for the entire case. Clearly, these 
approaches make anesthesia safer but do not necessarily 
represent more quality because of their poor risk/reward 
balance. In contrast, higher-quality care involves an 
“optimization” element. If a process is changed to pro-
duce faster room turnaround, better patient satisfaction, 
or a shorter length of stay, for example, it may represent 
higher quality but not necessarily better safety.
In anesthesia practice an example of a strategy that 
improves both quality and safety is the use of ultrasound 
to place central lines. By reducing the incidence of 
carotid puncture,3 ultrasound clearly improves safety. By 
reducing the time to successful insertion (and the number 
of misses), most would agree that ultrasound improves 
quality as well (some might argue that the additional cost 
of ultrasound technology mitigates that improvement). 
Historically, advances in anesthesia performance have 
affected both quality and safety.
SPECIFIC APPROACHES TO ANESTHESIA 
SAFETY
Learning From Experience
Because the mechanisms by which most anesthetics 
exert their effects are not fully understood, and because 
many intraoperative states (one-lung ventilation, mus-
cle relaxation, cardiopulmonary bypass) are not part of 
normal human activity, a large component of anesthesia 
safety is derived from a history of empiric observation 
and experience. Driven by the goal of reducing periop-
erative and anesthesia-specific mortality during the early 
years of anesthesia practice, anesthesia providers have, 
over time systematically, accumulated an experience 
base of adverse events. Emery Rovenstine's case series of 
nine cardiac arrests, published in 1951,4 is an example of 
this empiric approach to safety. Although he offered no 
definitive solutions, practical observations (diagnosing 
shock versus cardiac standstill can be difficult) allowed 
anesthesia providers to incrementally and empirically 
improve anesthesia safety.
Beecher and Todd's exhaustive 1954 study of anesthe-
sia-associated deaths in 10 centers over 4 years is another 
example of the empiric approach to anesthesia safety.5
Beecher and Todd tracked the outcomes of 599,548 anes-
thetics and identified 7977 deaths (more than 1 in 100) 
and cataloged the causes as from patient disease, surgical 
error, or anesthesia. Their observation that patients who 
received neuromuscular blocking drugs during their 
anesthetic were more likely to have an adverse event 
remains true today.6
Other examples of empirically derived anesthesia 
safety observations include the surprising difficulty in 
detecting esophageal intubation (or arterial desatura-
tion), the tendency of some anesthetics (e.g., desflurane) 
to trigger hypertension and tachycardia,7 the dangers 
of circuit disconnection, and the potential for delivery 
of a hypoxic gas mixture. In all of these the anesthesia 
approach has been to identify and describe the events, 
determine how they might occur in clinical practice, 
develop and test countermeasures, and disseminate the 
results through technical improvements or education. 
Taken together, observations such as these have led to 
reductions in anesthesia-related mortality, with current 
estimates ranging from 1:250,000 for healthy patients8 to 
1:1500 for those with complex medical problems.2
In addition to empiric observations about how best 
to prevent adverse events related to anesthesia admin-
istration, anesthesiologists have evaluated safety issues 
related to provider performance and how humans 
interact with the anesthesia delivery system. As in avia-
tion, the human–anesthesia machine interface has been 
designed specifically to reduce inadvertent errors. In the 
same way that levers in an airplane for landing gear 
and flap control have a knob shaped like a wheel and 
a flap, for example, the knob on an anesthesia machine 
for oxygen gas flow is shaped differently from knobs 
controlling air and nitrous oxide and are always located 
on the right. Interestingly, some newer-generation 
anesthesia workstations do not have separate physical 
knobs for controlling individual gases; instead, they 
allow direct input of total gas flow and inspired oxy-
gen concentration (also see Chapter 15). Similarly, the 
potentially dangerous delivery of hypoxic gas mixtures 
is prevented by “linking” the oxygen and nitrous oxide 
flow controls so that oxygen is always present in fresh 
gas flow. Nonuniversal connectors to ensure that oxy-
gen is being delivered through the oxygen flowmeter 
and an oxygen analyzer to serve as a final check on 
the delivered gas mixture are other examples of safety 
mechanisms designed to avoid the inadvertent delivery 
of a hypoxic gas mixture.
Even though adverse events resulting from failure 
of mechanical ventilation or inadvertent hypoxic gas 
delivery have almost been eradicated in anesthesia, this 
process of empiric observation, event detection, risk 
recognition, and countermeasure development continues 
today. More recent examples of events recognized from 
empiric observation include the dangers of anemia dur-
ing spine surgery (also see Chapter 32),9 hypotension in 
the sitting position (also see Chapter 19),10 or the role of 
fibrinogen in coagulopathy during maternal hemorrhage 
(also see Chapter 33).11
VI
Chapter 46 Quality and Patient Safety in Anesthesia Care
831
Adoption of Specialty-Wide Standards
Because anesthesia is normally administered in conjunc-
tion with therapeutic or diagnostic procedures, identi-
fying adverse outcomes attributable specifically to the 
anesthesia component is challenging. An explicit goal 
of Beecher and Todd was to define “the extent of the 
responsibility which must be borne by anesthesia for fail-
ure in the care of the surgical patient.”5 Because adverse 
events clearly attributed to anesthesia are rare, promul-
gating appropriate countermeasures across the specialty 
is difficult. Nevertheless, anesthesia was the first medical 
specialty to embrace universally applicable standards, 
developing and disseminating a set of monitoring recom-
mendations with the goal of reducing anesthesia-related 
adverse events.12 These standards were developed from 
a database of adverse events and included continuous 
anesthesiologist presence and vital sign monitoring, 
including blood pressure, heart rate, electrocardiogram 
(ECG), and breathing system oxygen concentration12
(Box 46.1).
Although not evidence-based at the time, this moni-
toring paradigm was declared an intraoperative monitor-
ing standard by the American Society of Anesthesiolo-
gists (ASA) 2 months later and has remained one of only 
three practice standards endorsed by the ASA (the other 
two being standards for preoperative and postoperative 
care: https://www.asahq.org/standards-and-guidelines). 
Since their adoption in 1987, conclusive evidence for 
the efficacy of these standards has remained elusive, but 
retrospective observations and clinical experience have 
suggested benefit. In a 1989 follow-up study the authors 
of the monitoring standards published a case series of 
11 major intraoperative accidents attributable to anesthe-
sia from 1976 to 1988 but found that only one occurred 
Box 46.1
Anesthesia Monitoring Standards Proposed 
in 1986
•An anesthesiologist should be present in the operating
room
•Arterial blood pressure and heart rate should be
monitored at least every 5 minutes where not clinically 
impractical
•Electrocardiogram shall be continuously displayed during
anesthesia
•Ventilation and circulation shall be continuously
monitored during anesthesia
•A method for monitoring breathing system disconnect
shall be used in every general anesthetic
•The oxygen concentration in the breathing circuit should
be measured with an oxygen analyzer
•During every administration of general anesthesia,
temperature should be measured
From Eichhorn JH, Cooper JB, Cullen DJ, et al. Standards for patient 
monitoring during anesthesia at Harvard Medical School. JAMA. 
1986;256:1017–1020.
after universal adoption of the monitoring standards.13
Observations from the ASA Closed Claims Project data-
base also suggest a reduction in the number of claims for 
death or permanent brain damage during that period.14
Whether monitoring standards, better anesthesia train-
ing, or (possibly) new technology were responsible for a 
perceived reduction in adverse events, the willingness of 
anesthesia providers as a group to adopt practice stand-
ards remains an approach almost unique to anesthesiol-
ogy and an example of the priority anesthesia providers 
place on eliminating perioperative adverse events.
Patient Safety–Focused Programs
A third element characteristic of the anesthesia approach 
to patient safety is the formation of patient safety–
focused societies. Existing only for the promulgation of 
safety, these societies play an important role in identify-
ing and disseminating quality and safety lessons to the 
anesthesia community.
One example is the Anesthesia Patient Safety Founda-
tion (APSF), an independent nonprofit corporation begun 
in 1985 with the vision “that no patient shall be harmed 
by anesthesia.” Supported by the ASA and corporate spon-
sors, APSF members include anesthesiologists, nurse anes-
thetists, manufacturers of equipment and drugs, engineers, 
and insurers.
The clinical impact of the APSF has been immense. 
The APSF newsletter, published four times a year (http://
apsf.org/resources.php), is dedicated solely to safety and 
has become one of the most widely circulated anesthesia 
publications in the world. Identifying aspects of anesthe-
sia practice with potential for adverse events, the APSF 
newsletter has highlighted diverse issues such as the 
anesthesia machine checkout, opioid-induced respiratory 
depression, residual neuromuscular blockade, postopera-
tive visual loss, and emergency manual use. Instructional 
videos, research grants, and other special conferences are 
also part of the APSF effort to promote safety.
A second entity with a unique approach to safety is 
the ASA Closed Claims Project.14 Operating in coopera-
tion with malpractice lawyers, the Closed Claims Project 
group reviews data from settled anesthesia lawsuits to 
identify anesthesia safety concerns that may be amenable 
to targeted efforts. In a series of academic publications 
since 1988 and continuing into the present the Closed 
Claims Project has investigated a wide range of topics 
(Table 46.1) and focused on rare events difficult to study 
systematically. Although such analyses cannot estimate 
incidences, they provide a wealth of descriptive informa-
tion that has helped anesthesia providers address patient 
safety issues.13,15–19 Among these are the recognition that 
listening to the chest may not be a reliable method of 
detecting esophageal intubation14 and that a common 
factor in adverse outcomes caused by massive hemor-
rhage is late recognition.16
Section VI CONSULTANT ANESTHETIC PRACTICE
832
Year
Title
No. of Claims Notable Finding(s)
1988
Cardiac arrest during 
spinal anesthesia17
14
•Bradycardia was the most common presenting symptom with
hypotension as the second
•Epinephrine was not given until 8 minutes (mean) after onset of
asystole
1990
Adverse respiratory 
events in anesthesia15
522
•Death/brain damage occurred in 85% of cases
•In 48% of esophageal intubations auscultation of breath sounds was
performed and documented
1999
Nerve injury associated 
with anesthesia18
670
•Ulnar nerve injuries were most frequent, were associated with general
anesthesia, and were predominantly in men
2006
Injury associated with 
monitored anesthesia 
care19
121
•Monitored anesthesia care claims involved older and sicker patients
than general anesthesia claims
•Respiratory depression caused by sedative/opioid administration was
the most common mechanism of damage (21%)
•Electrocautery and oxygen was a recognized mechanism in 17%
2014
Massive hemorrhage16
3211
•30% of claims involved obstetrics, and thoracic/lumbar spine
procedures were also overrepresented
•Recognition and initiation of transfusion therapy were commonly
delayed
2015
Postoperative opioid-
induced respiratory 
depression20
357
•88% of events occurred within 24 hr of surgery, and somnolence was
noted in 62% before the event
2017
Situational awareness 
errors21
266
•Anesthesiologist situational awareness errors contributed to 74% of
death/brain damage claims
•Respiratory system events were more likely to have situational issues
(56%)
2019
Difficult tracheal 
intubation20 22
195
•Preoperative predictors were present in 76% of cases, inappropriate
airway management occurred in 73%, and surgical airway access was 
delayed in 39%
Table 46.1
Noteworthy Closed Claims Project Observations
The Anesthesia Quality Institute (AQI) is a third patient 
safety–focused group (www.aqihq.org). Begun in 2008 
and sponsored by the ASA, the goal of the AQI was “to be 
the primary source of information for quality improve-
ment in the clinical practice of anesthesiology.” AQI 
administers and supports an Anesthesia Incident Report-
ing System (AIRS) and the National Anesthesia Clinical 
Outcomes Registry (NACOR), which works to identify 
relevant quality metrics and allows anesthesiologists to 
report quality metrics as part of merit-based incentive 
systems. The Multicenter Perioperative Outcomes Group 
(MPOG) serves a similar function, receiving electronic 
health systems information from more than 75 hospitals 
and generating provider-level feedback on both process 
and outcome metrics (an example of the former is admin-
istration of two antiemetics for high-risk patients, and 
an example of the latter is postoperative acute kidney 
injury).
FROM SAFETY TO QUALITY: MAKING 
ANESTHESIA BOTH SAFER AND BETTER
Although most observers believe anesthesia care to be 
safer today than 50 years ago, whether the quality of 
anesthesia care has also improved is less clear. Anesthe-
sia quality involves optimization of multiple parameters, 
including (but not limited to) safety, efficiency, cost, 
patient comfort, and satisfaction. Technically, first-case 
start and turnover times can thus represent quality.
Aspects of anesthesia quality related to clinical care 
delivery can be surprisingly difficult to measure. Because 
perioperative care is inherently multidisciplinary, iden-
tifying the contribution of anesthesia care relative to 
surgical or perioperative nursing care is challenging. If 
a patient goes home a day sooner after a colectomy, for 
example, determining whether that improvement is the 
result of anesthesia, surgery, or hospital care is difficult. 
VI
Chapter 46 Quality and Patient Safety in Anesthesia Care
833
More than likely, this type of improvement is a result of 
all disciplines working together.
Process Measures
A major obstacle to anesthesia quality is a clear under-
standing of how anesthetic interventions affect patient 
outcomes. Because much of the patient's postoperative 
course lies outside the operating room, understanding 
how a patient's clinical course is affected by alterations 
in anesthesia care has been historically challenging. Early 
attempts to improve anesthesia quality thus focused on 
perioperative processes (such as intraoperative glucose 
levels) rather than outcomes (such as surgical site infec-
tions). The United States Surgical Care Improvement 
Project (SCIP) was conducted by the Centers for Medicare 
& Medicaid Services from 2006 to 2015 as a national test 
of this approach. By incentivizing the public reporting of 
hospital performance on measures such as administering 
antibiotics in a timely fashion and perioperative admin-
istration of perioperative β-adrenergic blockers, policy- 
makers hoped to improve care quality. Unfortunately, 
although performance on nearly all SCIP process measures 
improved over the project duration, outcomes23 24 failed 
to improve. In addition, some process measures such as 
preoperative β-adrenergic blockers were recognized as 
harmful,25 and several others were rescinded because of 
concern for adverse outcomes. Among these were how 
often β-adrenergic blockers were given to patients within 
24 hours of admission for myocardial infarction (increases 
hypotension)26 and verifying that antibiotics were given 
within 4 hours of an emergency room visit for pneumonia 
(leads to inappropriate antibiotic use).27
Why implementation of a suite of process measures, 
all with literature support, did not clearly improve patient 
outcomes remains a mystery. Clearly, improving quality by 
mandating specific processes of care is not straightforward 
and has led quality experts to be reluctant to embrace pro-
cess measures alone as a method of assessing clinical care.
Structural Measures
The quality of care can also be estimated by the presence or 
absence of structural elements relevant to quality care. Struc-
ture refers to specific organizational features considered to be 
integral to the provision of high-quality care. If present, such 
features then suggest that the clinical care is of high quality.
Examples of structural elements that fit this definition 
include the ready availability of diagnostic radiologic 
testing, having physicians on call for emergencies, imple-
menting an electronic medical record, and mandating a 
dedicated intensivist for all critical care units. The presence 
of an active quality improvement program is also consid-
ered a structural feature of high-quality care. Although 
structural quality is relatively invisible to trainees, other 
structural examples include hospital rules governing 
nurse–patient ratios, timely availability of obstetric anes-
thesia specialists, protocols for hand hygiene, and avail-
ability of personal protective equipment.
Although structural measures are generally easy to 
measure, the link between structure and improved outcomes 
is often difficult to discern. The availability of in-house 
critical care attendings at night, for example, is intuitively 
reasonable and would be an easy structural metric to meas-
ure. However, more than one study28,29 suggests that hos-
pitals that have implemented an in-house night-call system 
might not clearly see improvements in outcomes.
Outcome Measures
One logical consequence of an inability to identify 
clinically relevant process measures is to focus instead on 
outcomes. Logically, the considerable practice variability 
in anesthesia practice30,31 should translate into some 
variability in perioperative outcomes. In principle, by 
identifying “bright spot” institutions that have better out-
comes, the corresponding best practices can be identified 
and disseminated. Although NACOR is not yet mature 
enough to allow outcome analysis, surgical databases 
are approaching that goal. The Society of Thoracic Sur-
geons (STS) Adult Cardiac Surgery Database is perhaps 
the best example, capturing data from more than 90% of 
all cardiac procedures in the United States.32 Other data-
bases include the National Surgical Quality Improvement 
Program (NSQIP) and National Inpatient Sample (NIS). 
Because sufficiently complete data for outcome reporting 
have historically not been available, few hospitals have 
routinely made outcome data available to their clinical 
care staff. In addition, outcome reporting for anesthesia 
providers can be challenging because different anesthesia 
subspecialties may have different rates of adverse out-
comes such as acute kidney injury or reintubation.
Difficulties in collecting and analyzing intraoperative 
data are likely to diminish as health care records move to 
electronic form. In particular, the increasing use of elec-
tronic health records for intraoperative management has 
improved the ability of anesthesia providers to track their 
performance on process measures accessible to electronic 
analysis. An example is the Multispecialty Periopera-
tive Outcomes Group (MPOG). MPOG is a privately run 
consortium of >80 institutions that defines, collects, and 
analyzes intraoperative (and selected postoperative) out-
comes. MPOG members receive monthly feedback reports 
on metrics selected by their individual practices (Fig. 46.1
provides an example). Examples of process metrics 
include train-of-four measurement after neuromuscular 
blockade reversal and treatment for glucose levels >200 
mg/dL. Outcome measures include postoperative acute 
kidney injury and postoperative nausea and vomiting. 
MPOG reports not only provide information but also a 
Section VI CONSULTANT ANESTHETIC PRACTICE
834
comparison to other practitioners and a link to allow the 
provider to review specific cases that passed or failed the 
measure. This last aspect is particularly important, as it 
allows providers to better integrate measure performance 
into their daily workflow and counters arguments that 
collected data are not accurate.
Outcome reporting initially seems straightforward 
and gives individuals or institutions a benchmark for 
measuring future performance. But accurately comparing 
outcomes between individuals or institutions requires 
some way to adjust for patient conditions unrelated to 
the anesthesia or surgical (or hospital) care. This “risk 
adjustment” can be extremely difficult, as different 
adjustment algorithms may produce different results,33
algorithms may be vulnerable to “gaming” via favora-
ble patient selection or inclusion of comorbidities,34 the 
Fig. 46.1 Example of a feedback report generated by the MPOG data registry.
VI
Chapter 46 Quality and Patient Safety in Anesthesia Care
835
accuracy of data may be suspect,3 and the adjustment 
algorithm itself may not be consistent from year to year.
Current evidence is mixed with regard to whether 
outcome reporting improves outcomes. Two recent stud-
ies35 36 suggest that knowing one's outcomes may not by 
itself drive improvement. In addition, should a “bright 
spot” institution with unusually good outcomes be rec-
ognized, identifying and disseminating lessons from that 
institution would likely involve developing a set of pro-
cess measures, which (as the SCIP program demonstrates) 
may only have limited effectiveness if not properly 
contextualized. Nevertheless, the use of both process and 
outcome measures is key to quality improvement. Without 
some method for measuring the incidence of targeted pro-
cesses or outcomes, it is difficult to know whether inter-
ventions are effective. Yet as SCIP and other large-scale 
quality reporting programs suggest, measurement alone 
is inadequate. Current experience indicates that neither 
process nor outcome measurement automatically leads to 
improved quality and that truly improving performance 
in any domain requires sustained, focused effort.
TOOLS FOR IMPROVING LOCAL 
OUTCOMES
In addition to empiric observation and large database 
approaches, improvements in quality and safety at the 
individual hospital level occur continuously and may 
be driven by individuals, departments, or hospitals. This 
section discusses tools used at the organizational level for 
quality improvement.
Structured Quality Improvement Approaches: 
FADE, PDSA, and DMAIC
Because clinical care can be extremely complex and 
multifaceted, knowing where or how to begin a qual-
ity improvement project can be difficult. The acronyms 
FADE, PDSA, and DMAIC refer to commonly used blue-
prints for initiating and executing a quality improvement 
project. Although the letters are different, all three apply 
the same basic model: evaluate, implement, measure.
FADE stands for focus/analyze/develop/execute-evalu-
ate. As the words suggest, one should first focus on the pro-
cess to be improved, analyze data to establish root causes 
and baseline performance, use the data to develop an 
action plan, then execute the plan and evaluate the result.
PDSA stands for plan/do/study/act. As one might 
imagine, the general gist of a PDSA is similar to FADE. 
DMAIC stands for define/measure/analyze/improve/
control, which has a similar meaning.
Because identifying, intervening, and assessing the 
outcome are core aspects of the anesthesia skill set, anes-
thesiologists are likely familiar with the general structure 
of a FADE or PDSA quality improvement program. After 
all, the everyday act of titrating an anesthetic requires 
that a situational assessment be made, the anesthetic level 
be adjusted, and the outcome reviewed. However, creat-
ing lasting change can be difficult. A common trap in 
developing a quality improvement program is to identify 
an imperfect step and apply a remedy to that specific 
step without understanding or addressing how that step 
came to be imperfect. A plan to improve delivery of blood 
products to the operating room, for example, may be 
ineffective if the process for ordering blood is not also 
addressed (also see Chapter 25). Another often-missed 
aspect of quality improvement is the implementation of a 
change without measuring the result of that change. If an 
intraoperative handoff tool is implemented, for example, 
but no improvement in handoff errors results, the reason 
for that discrepancy should be identified. Attention to 
such details will help optimize the results of any quality 
improvement project.
Regardless of the specific blueprint used to address 
a clinical performance issue, some method is needed to 
track performance over time to determine whether inter-
ventions are successful. A run chart is the most widely 
used method for doing so. Run charts depict performance 
on a specific metric (usually on the Y axis) and time (usu-
ally on the X axis) to graphically represent performance 
over time. Such charts are useful to identify patterns or 
trends in performance. A run chart might be used, for 
example, to better understand whether dental injuries 
during anesthesia are more likely in months when new 
anesthesia residents start clinical training. Control charts 
are run charts that include upper and lower performance 
limits/targets and can be helpful for visually estimating 
whether a process is “in control” or whether it needs 
adjustment. An example of a run chart is shown in 
Fig. 46.2. For anesthesia providers, an important addi-
tion to the run chart should be links to specific cases 
that passed or failed the measure, as merely knowing the 
trend in performance without understanding why that 
trend exists will not lead to improvement.
Multidisciplinary Process Improvement: Root 
Cause Analysis, “Never Events,” and Failure 
Mode Effects Analysis
Root cause analysis (RCA) was developed by manu-
facturers in the 1950s to better understand industrial 
events. The goal is, as the title suggests, to identify the 
primary, or “root,” cause of the problem under analysis. 
One of the first users of this technique was Toyota, who 
famously used the “5 whys” technique. By continually 
asking “why” during the investigation of a breakdown or 
undesired event, quality personnel can drill down layer 
by layer to hopefully uncover progressively more funda-
mental causes.
When applied in medicine, the root cause process 
begins with a multidisciplinary group assembled to 
Section VI CONSULTANT ANESTHETIC PRACTICE
836
evaluate every step of the process that resulted in the 
event in question. Attention is focused strictly on sys-
tem processes and not on individual provider behavior. 
A causal factor chart is often created in skeleton form, 
with details added as each specialty adds its expertise. 
Fig. 46.3 depicts a sample factor chart for an intraopera-
tive transfusion reaction37 (also see Chapter 25).
Although such charts are usually read from left to 
right, they may often be created from right to left, start-
ing with the event and using logic and time information 
to add relevant causal factors. Note also that the blood 
bank, hospital engineering, preoperative nursing, anes-
thesia, and surgery are all involved in this particular 
event, underscoring the multidisciplinary nature of prop-
erly performed RCAs.
An RCA is mandated by The Joint Commission, a 
U.S.-based nonprofit organization that accredits health 
care organizations, whenever an accredited hospital expe-
riences one of several prespecified types of adverse 
events. Such events are called “sentinel” because they 
expose a dangerous “gap” in care and signal the need for 
immediate investigation and response. A list of all Joint 
Time pressure
Malfunctioning
tube station
Lost ordering
slip
Delay in getting
blood from bank
Missing blood
band
Transfusion
reaction
Fig. 46.3 Sample causal factor chart. (From Tung A. Sentinel 
events and how to learn from them. Int Anesthesiol Clin. 
2014;52:53–68.)
Fig. 46.2 Example of a run chart. The performance measure on the Y axis is compliance with timing 
of preoperative antibiotics. The X axis represents time in months. Arrows indicate the time of two 
interventions that were performed. (Figure from Varughese AM, Buck DW, Lane-Fall MB, et al. Quality 
improvement in anesthesia practice and patient safety. In Gropper M, ed. Miller's anesthesia, 9th ed. 
Elsevier, 2020: Figure 5.2, Amsterdam, NL.)
Commission–designated events can be accessed at their 
website (https://www.jointcommission.org/sentinel_event.
aspx). Sentinel events relevant to the perioperative period 
are listed in Box 46.2
The Joint Commission also explicitly defines events that 
do NOT require focused reporting and review. These include 
any near-miss, medication errors that do NOT result in 
death or functional loss, minor hemolysis, or death or func-
tional loss after leaving against medical advice.
The Joint Commission requires (as a condition of 
accreditation) that hospitals respond to such events 
within 45 days by reporting them to the Joint Commis-
sion, performing an RCA, and developing an action plan 
to identify strategies the hospital intends to implement to 
reduce the risk of similar events in the future. Such a plan 
must include the action to be taken, who will implement, 
a timeline for implementation, and strategies for meas-
uring the result and sustaining the changes. Although 
reporting to The Joint Commission is voluntary, identify-
ing and responding to such events is a key component of 
accreditation visits.
Other patient safety organizations have suggested 
modifications to The Joint Commission list. The National 
Quality Forum (NQF), for example, endorses a large list 
Box 46.2
Sentinel Events Related to the Perioperative 
Period as Defined by The Joint Commission, 2015
•Hemolytic transfusion reaction
•Invasive procedure on the wrong patient, wrong site, or
wrong procedure
•Prolonged fluoroscopy >1500 RADs
•Fire; flame; or unanticipated smoke, heat, or flashes
during an episode of patient care
•Any intrapartum maternal death or severe morbidity
RADS, Radiation absorbed dose units.
VI
Chapter 46 Quality and Patient Safety in Anesthesia Care
837
of “serious reportable events” (NQF: Serious Reportable 
Events: qualityforum.org). In addition to The Joint Com-
mission events, the NQF list adds “intraoperative death 
in an ASA class I patient,” death/disability from the 
irretrievable loss of an irreplaceable biologic specimen, 
or death from electric shock.
Although intuitively reasonable, the real-world effec-
tiveness of RCA can be variable.38 Adverse events and 
their investigations are often emotionally charged, and 
meetings to determine the cause can be limited by blame-
oriented analysis (which leads to relatively weak “blame 
and train” remedies). Studies of action plans and imple-
mentations suggest that relatively few of these actively 
target true “root” causes.39 Inadequate RCA may result 
from lack of time, inadequate resources, and even disa-
greement among reviewers with respect to “root” causes.40
Even when appropriate action plans are created, insuf-
ficient resources may prevent effective implementation.
Nevertheless, when done properly, RCA can be tre-
mendously useful in reducing the likelihood of adverse 
events. In addition to being a vehicle for local practice 
changes, The Joint Commission Sentinel Event program 
generates a series of sentinel event bulletins that warn 
clinicians of potential issues (https://www.jointcommis-
sion.org/resources/patient-safety-topics/sentinel-event/
sentinel-event-alert-newsletters/). To date, this program 
has resulted in more than 50 events, including several 
relevant to anesthesia such as deaths resulting from 
concentrated potassium chloride solutions, ventilator-
related deaths, medical gas mix-ups, transfusion errors, 
disruptive behavior, and magnetic resonance imaging 
accidents. These well-researched reports include case 
descriptions and analysis, including the Manufacturer 
and User Facility Device Experience (MAUDE) database 
(https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cdrh/cfdocs/
cfmaude/search.cfm).
A major drawback to the RCA process is its retrospec-
tive nature. By definition, process flaws in care delivery 
are not addressed until the event actually occurs and 
a patient is harmed. To prospectively identify process 
flaws, the failure mode effects analysis (FMEA) process 
has been adapted from industry to prospectively identify 
and neutralize areas of vulnerability.
An FMEA is a resource-intensive, comprehensive 
analysis of a specific process, with the goal of identifying 
all the potential ways that it can fail. A process to identify 
and record patient allergies, for example, might fail if the 
interviewer is unable to accurately identify allergies, if the 
documentation form is difficult to read or inaccessible, 
or if medications sound alike. Other sources for potential 
failure modes include sentinel event alerts, Institute for 
Safe Medication Practices information, and Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA) databases and advisories.
It is easy to see that an FMEA analysis of even a 
straightforward process can be extremely time consuming. 
In addition, once the relevant failure modes are identified, 
quality champions may struggle to implement effective 
change, in part because no bad event has yet occurred. 
As a result, FMEA analyses should be reserved for large-
volume, high-risk processes for which the risk of cata-
strophic failure is clear.
SUMMARY
Anesthesia providers should routinely strive for the saf-
est and highest-quality care they can deliver. Although 
safety and quality are related concepts, safety is easier to 
measure and target because it focuses on adverse events. 
In contrast, quality is multidimensional and thus more dif-
ficult to measure and optimize, as many different outcomes 
may represent “quality.” Because procedures and anesthetic 
strategies both evolve to meet changing needs, quality and 
safety in anesthesia are, by definition, a moving target.
Historically, anesthesiologists have led in patient 
safety by embracing pragmatic approaches to reducing 
adverse events. Among these are the empiric cataloging 
and describing of events to identify incidents and risk 
factors, a recognition that man–machine interface errors 
can contribute to adverse events, adoption of strategies 
from other similarly technical fields such as pin indexing 
to prevent gas source switch errors, and early specialty-
wide agreement with respect to practice standards. 
Organized patient safety–focused organizations within 
the specialty have also contributed considerably to anes-
thesia safety by cataloguing, analyzing, and disseminat-
ing lessons learned from adverse events. These include 
the APSF and the ASA Closed Claims Project.
Although anesthesiologists have been focused on 
patient safety for decades, the tools to focus on care qual-
ity have only recently been developed. The availability of 
specialty registries, such as the STS Adult Cardiac Surgery 
Database, and of large surgical databases, such as NACOR 
and NSQIP, have allowed anesthesiologists to better 
explore how structural, process, and outcome measures are 
linked. Newer computerized databases such as MPOG offer 
greater case detail and provider-level feedback. Although 
no “magic bullet” strategy to quality improvement has yet 
emerged, process, structure, and outcome are all key ele-
ments in any comprehensive quality program.
Finally, multiple tools exist at the departmental 
and institutional levels for quality improvement. These 
include blueprints for local quality projects, nationally 
promulgated sentinel event programs, root cause, and 
failure mode analyses for adverse events.
Taken together, a wealth of quality and safety tools and 
approaches are available to anesthesia teams interested in 
patient safety. With the growth and maturation of large 
perioperative databases and the potential of electronic intra-
operative records to shed light into the perioperative period, 
even more options will become available to improve both 
the safety and quality of anesthesia practice.41
Section VI CONSULTANT ANESTHETIC PRACTICE
838
REFERENCES
1. Kohn KT, Corrigan JM, Donaldson MS. 
Committee on Quality Health Care in 
America. Washington, DC: Institute of 
Medicine: National Academy Press; 
1999.
2. Lagasse RS. Anesthesia safety: Model or 
myth? A review of the published litera-
ture and analysis of current original data. 
Anesthesiology. 2002;97:1609–1617.
3. Brass P, Hellmich M, Kolodziej L, etal. 
Ultrasound guidance versus anatomi-
cal landmarks for internal jugular vein 
catheterization. Cochrane Database Syst 
Rev. 2015 Jan 9;1:CD006962.
4. Ament R, Papper EM, Rovenstine EA. 
Cardiac arrest during anesthesia; a review 
of cases. Ann Surg. 1951;134:220–227.
5. Beecher HK, Todd DP. A study of the 
deaths associated with anesthesia and 
surgery: Based on a study of 599, 548 
anesthesias in ten institutions 1948-1952, 
inclusive. Ann Surg. 1954;140:2–35.
6. Kirmeier E, Eriksson LI, Lewald H, et 
al., POPULAR Contributors. Post-anaes-
thesia pulmonary complications after 
use of muscle relaxants (POPULAR): 
A multicentre, prospective observation-
al study. Lancet Respir Med. 2019;7:
129–140.
7. Ebert TJ, Muzi M. Sympathetic hyperactiv-
ity during desflurane anesthesia in healthy 
volunteers. A comparison with isoflurane. 
Anesthesiology. 1993;79:444–453.
8. Lienhart A, Auroy Y, Péquignot F etal. Sur-
vey of anesthesia-related mortality in France 
Anesthesiology. 2006;105:1087-1097.
9. Postoperative Visual Loss Study Group. 
Risk factors associated with ischemic 
optic neuropathy after spinal fusion sur-
gery. Anesthesiology. 2012;116:15–24.
10. Pohl A, Cullen DJ. Cerebral ischemia 
during shoulder surgery in the upright 
position: A case series. J Clin Anesth. 
2005;17:463–469.
11. Butwick AJ. Postpartum hemorrhage 
and low fibrinogen levels: The past, 
present and future. Int J Obstet Anesth. 
2013;22:87–91.
12. Eichhorn JH, Cooper JB, Cullen DJ, etal. 
Standards for patient monitoring during 
anesthesia at Harvard Medical School. 
JAMA. 1986;256:1017–1020.
13. Eichhorn JH. Prevention of intraop-
erative anesthesia accidents and related 
severe injury through safety monitoring. 
Anesthesiology. 1989;70:572–577.
14. Lee LA, Domino KB. The Closed Claims 
Project. Has it influenced anesthetic 
practice and outcome?. Anesthesiol Clin 
North America. 2002;20:485–501.
15. Caplan RA, Posner KL, Ward RJ, etal. 
Adverse respiratory events in anesthesia: 
A Closed Claims analysis. Anesthesiol-
ogy. 1990;72:828–833.
16. Dutton RP, Lee LA, Stephens LS, etal. 
Massive hemorrhage: A report from the 
anesthesia Closed Claims Project. Anes-
thesiology. 2014;121:450–458.
17. Caplan RA, Ward RJ, Posner K, etal. Unex-
pected cardiac arrest during spinal anesthe-
sia: A Closed Claims analysis of predisposing 
factors. Anesthesiology. 1988;68:5–11.
18. Cheney FW, Domino KB, Caplan RA, 
etal. Nerve injury associated with anes-
thesia: A Closed Claims analysis. Anes-
thesiology. 1999;90:1062–1069.
19. Bhananker SM, Posner KL, Cheney 
FW, etal. Injury and liability associ-
ated with monitored anesthesia care: A 
Closed Claims analysis. Anesthesiology. 
2006;104:228–234.
20. Lee LA, Caplan RA, Stephens LS, etal. 
Postoperative opioid-induced respiratory 
depression: A Closed Claims analysis. 
Anesthesiology. 2015;122:659–665.
21. Schulz CM, Burden A, Posner KL, 
Mincer SL, Steadman R, Wagner KJ, 
Domino KB. Frequency and Type of Situ-
ational Awareness Errors Contributing 
to Death and Brain Damage: A Closed 
Claims Analysis. Anesthesiology. 2017 
Aug;127;2:326-337
22. Joffe AM, Aziz MF, Posner KL, Duggan 
LV, Mincer SL, Domino KB. Management 
of Difficult Tracheal Intubation: A Closed 
Claims Analysis. Anesthesiology. 2019 
Oct;131;4:818-829.
23. Hawn MT, Vick CC, Richman J, etal. Sur-
gical site infection prevention: Time to 
move beyond the Surgical Care Improve-
ment Program. Ann Surg. 2011;254:
494–499.
24. Hawn MT, Richman JS, Vick CC, etal. 
Timing of surgical antibiotic prophylax-
is and the risk of surgical site infection. 
JAMA Surg. 2013;148:649–657.
25. POISE Study GroupDevereaux PJ, Yang 
H, Yusuf S, etal. Effects of extended-
release metoprolol succinate in patients 
undergoing non-cardiac surgery (POISE 
trial): A randomised controlled trial. 
Lancet. 2008;371:1839–1847.
26. Chen ZM, Pan HC, Chen YP. Early intra-
venous then oral metoprolol in 45,852 
patients with acute myocardial infarc-
tion: Randomised placebo-controlled 
trial. Lancet. 2005;366:1622–1632.
27. Wachter RM, Flanders SA, Fee C, etal. 
Public reporting of antibiotic timing in 
patients with pneumonia: Lessons from 
a flawed performance measure. Ann 
Intern Med. 2008;149:29–32.
28. Kerlin MP, Small DS, Cooney E, etal. A 
randomized trial of nighttime physician 
staffing in an intensive care unit. N Engl 
J Med. 2013;368:2201–2209.
29. Wallace DJ, Angus DC, Barnato AE, 
etal. Nighttime intensivist staffing and 
mortality among critically ill patients. N 
Engl J Med. 2012;366:2093–2101.
30. Lilot M, Ehrenfeld JM, Lee C3, Har-
rington B, etal. Variability in practice 
and factors predictive of total crystalloid 
administration during abdominal sur-
gery: Retrospective two-centre analysis. 
Br J Anaesth. 2015;114:767–776.
31. Fleischut PM, Eskreis-Winkler JM, 
Gaber-Baylis LK, etal. Variability in 
anesthetic care for total knee arthroplas-
ty: An analysis from the Anesthesia Qual-
ity Institute. Am J Med Qual. 2015;30:
172–179.
32. Jacobs JP, Shahian DM, Prager RL, etal. 
Introduction to the STS National Data-
base Series: Outcomes analysis, quality 
improvement, and patient safety. Ann 
Thorac Surg. 2015 Oct 31 [epub].
33. Shahian DM, Wolf RE, Iezzoni LI, etal. 
Variability in the measurement of hospi-
tal-wide mortality rates. N Engl J Med. 
2010;363:2530–2539.
34. Cooper AL, Trivedi AN. Fitness member-
ships and favorable selection in Medi-
care Advantage plans. N Engl J Med. 
2012;366:150–157.
35. Etzioni DA, Wasif N, Dueck AC, etal. 
Association of hospital participation in 
a surgical outcomes monitoring program 
with inpatient complications and mor-
tality. JAMA. 2015;313:505–511.
36. Osborne NH, Nicholas LH, Ryan AM, 
etal. Association of hospital participa-
tion in a quality reporting program 
with surgical outcomes and expendi-
tures for Medicare beneficiaries. JAMA. 
2015;313:496–504.
37. Tung A. Sentinel events and how to 
learn from them. Int Anesthesiol Clin. 
2014;52:53–68.
38. Wu AW, Lipshutz AK, Pronovost PJ. 
Effectiveness and efficiency of root 
cause analysis in medicine. JAMA. 
2008;299:685–687.
39. Wallace LM, Spurgeon P, Adams S, 
etal. Survey evaluation of the National 
Patient Safety Agency's Root Cause 
Analysis training programme in Eng-
land and Wales: Knowledge, beliefs and 
reported practices. Qual Saf Health Care. 
2009;18:288–291.
40. Smits M, Janssen J, de Vet R, etal. Anal-
ysis of unintended events in hospitals: 
Inter-rater reliability of constructing 
causal trees and classifying root causes. 
Int J Qual Health Care. 2009;21:292–
300.
41. Methangkool E, Cole DJ, Cannesson 
M. Progress in patient safety in anes-
thesia. JAMA. 2020;324(24):2485–2486. 
doi:10.1001/jama.2020.23205.
839
Chapter
INTRODUCTION
Patients with serious illnesses often have an intense bur-
den of symptoms that are poorly treated, such as pain, 
dyspnea, anxiety, and depression.1 These patients also 
have frequent but often unsatisfying interactions with 
the health care team, often as a result of poor commu-
nication.2 Palliative care is “an approach that improves 
the quality of life of patients and their families facing the 
problems associated with life-threatening illness, through 
the prevention and relief of suffering by means of early 
identification and impeccable assessment and treatment 
of pain and other problems, physical, psychosocial and 
spiritual.”3 Palliative medicine refers to the medical 
expertise provided within a palliative care team. Pallia-
tive care, with its emphasis on goal setting and symptom 
management, attempts to improve care for these patients 
and their families. Many palliative care skills can be used 
in a variety of settings, and concepts such as shared deci-
sion making and a biopsychosocial-spiritual approach 
should not be reserved only for seriously ill patients.
Modern palliative care started with the hospice move-
ment in the 1960s and has spread to many health systems 
worldwide. In the United States at least two-thirds of 
hospitals have palliative care teams,4 and hospice services 
are widely available. Despite their common roots, hospice 
and palliative care are not necessarily interchangeable 
terms. The meaning of hospice and the services offered 
vary by country, though hospices generally focus on 
later-stage illnesses. In the United States hospice refers to 
an insurance benefit for patients with a life expectancy of 
less than 6 months. Palliative care is a more inclusive term 
that is appropriate “at any age and any stage in a serious 
illness, and can be provided together with curative treat-
ment.”5 In the past there was a perceived binary choice 
between aggressive curative treatment and then going 
onto hospice when those treatments failed. Palliative care 
now provides a more nuanced picture of the time before 
hospice, with patients receiving concurrent palliative and 
INTRODUCTION
What Is Hospice?
Hospice and Palliative Medicine Subspecialty
Anesthesiologists’ Contribution to Palliative 
Care
WHAT DO PALLIATIVE CARE TEAMS DO?
Palliative Care in the Intensive Care Unit
Withdrawal of Life Support
Spirituality in Serious Illness
PALLIATIVE CARE AND PAIN
Use of Opioids at the End of Life
Cancer Pain
Noncancer Pain
CHALLENGES IN THE PALLIATIVE CARE 
PATIENT
Identifying Palliative Care and Hospice Patients
Prognosis
Communication
PERIOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT OF THE 
PALLIATIVE CARE PATIENT
Advance Directives
Decision-Making Capacity
Surrogate Decision Makers
How to Approach Perioperative DNR 
Conversations
CONCLUSION
PALLIATIVE CARE
Ann Cai Shah, Sarah Gebauer
47
Section VI CONSULTANT ANESTHETIC PRACTICE
840
of life, even though many people say they do not want to 
die in a hospital. In 2017 benefits to the most costly 5% 
of members accounted for 41% of Medicare spending.7
Not only is the care expensive, but patients and families 
often describe distressing symptoms, psychosocial needs 
that go unrecognized, and overall poor care.8 Hospital 
costs decrease with palliative care consult services. For 
example, one study showed an average decrease in cost 
of $15,000 per patient, with similar duration of survival.9
Cost reduction is not a primary goal of palliative care. 
Rather, patients who receive palliative care desire fewer 
interventions and resources. Importantly, palliative care 
teams do not increase in-hospital mortality rate.10 In 
some situations palliative care may even increase sur-
vival. Patients with lung cancer, for example, lived at 
least 2 months longer compared with those receiving 
standard care in several studies.11 The American Society 
of Clinical Oncology now recommends that patients with 
advanced cancer receive palliative care services early in 
the course of the illness.
What Is Hospice?
In the United States anesthesiologists should work 
closely with surgeon hospice generally refers to a set of 
benefits from Medicare or private insurers. More than 
50% of all Medicare patient deaths in the United States 
occur on hospice.12 13 Hospice care decreases patient 
symptom burden, increases patient and family satisfac-
tion, and is associated with cost savings, especially for 
patients with longer durations of hospice use.14 Hospice 
provides patients and families with the most help they 
can receive when caring for a person at home, including 
the services listed in Fig. 47.2. Contrary to some patients’ 
curative treatment with increasing palliative care sup-
port if the illness progresses, until hospice services are 
appropriate (Fig. 47.1).6 For the purposes of this chapter, 
palliative care will encompass both palliative and hospice 
care unless otherwise specified.
Palliative care does not mean giving up, or even pro-
viding less aggressive care. It means talking to patients 
and families, eliciting their values and goals, and making 
medical recommendations and decisions based on those 
values and goals. This approach is sometimes referred 
to as shared decision making. It is not uncommon for 
the palliative care team to advocate for more aggressive 
treatment, either because it is in line with a patient's 
wishes and is reasonable medically or because aggressive 
treatment of specific medical problems can decrease a 
patient's symptom burden.
Palliative care teams generally approach symptom 
management by evaluating multiple aspects of a patient's 
condition, involving both physical and emotional pain. 
This concept acknowledges that part of the pain a patient 
feels may be, in part, the result of existential or spiritual 
suffering. This may take the form of a belief that the per-
son's upcoming death is punishment from a higher power 
or that the person did not contribute enough to the world. 
Palliative care specialists attempt to determine what phys-
ical or psychosocial factors may be contributing to pain 
and use medications or the expertise of other team mem-
bers such as chaplains, social workers, or art therapists to 
help alleviate a patient's symptoms in a broad sense.
Inpatient palliative care teams reduce costs while 
improving patient care. Medical advances and an aging 
population have led to an increase in the number of 
patients with serious illnesses. The beneficiaries using 
the most Medicare dollars include those in the last year 
Therapy to modify disease
Therapy to relieve suffering
and/or improve quality of life
Advanced
Life-threatening
End-of-life care
chronic
Acute
Presentation/
diagnosis
Time
Focus
of care
Illness
Patient's
death
Bereavement
Hospice palliative care
Fig. 47.1 The role of hospice and palliative care during illness and bereavement. (Redrawn from Ferris FD, 
Balfour HM, Bowen K, et al. A model to guide patient and family care: Based on nationally accepted principles 
and norms of practice. J Pain Symptom Manage. 2002;24:106–123.)
VI
Chapter 47 Palliative Care
841
because of specific intractable symptoms such as pain 
or vomiting, but usually not for the entire time they are 
receiving hospice (Fig. 47.3).
Hospice and Palliative Medicine Subspecialty
Hospice and palliative medicine is a board-certified sub-
specialty that requires a 1-year fellowship for certification. 
Physicians from 10 medical specialties, including anesthe-
siology, are eligible, and more than 120 anesthesiologists 
beliefs, most hospice services are provided at home, and 
hospice does not pay for caregivers. The hospice nurses 
and staff teach and support the family in caring for a 
seriously ill, dying patient, but the families provide the 
bulk of the care. Some families may opt to have hospice 
services provided in a nursing home, though the “cus-
todial care,” or care of daily needs such as eating and 
bathing, provided by the nursing home will often not 
be covered by the patient's insurance. A few patients 
will qualify for services at an inpatient hospice facility 
Medicare
Hospice Benefits
Personnel:
• Physician of patient's choice
• Nurse
• Aide
• Social worker
• Spiritual counselor
• Volunteers
Goods and services:
• Nursing support available on-call 24/7
• Access to short-term inpatient or continuous
in-home care
• Bereavement support for 1 year after the
patient's death
• Medical equipment (bed, walker, etc.)
• Medical supplies (bandages, catheters, etc.)
Not covered:
• Custodial care
• Some treatments at
the discretion of the hospice
• Medications, hospitalizations, and
treatments not related to the hospice diagnosis
Fig. 47.2 Aspects of the Medicare hospice benefits.
Palliative Care and Hospice
Continuous features
Early Palliative Care
• Appropriate at any stage
of serious illness
• Often provided in hospitals
or outpatient clinics
• Can be used in conjunction
with "aggressive" care
• Fee-for-service model
Hospice
• Prognosis <6 months
(can be renewed every 60 days)
• Focus on home-based care
• Patient usually agrees to focus
on comfort rather than life-
prolonging treatment
• Through Medicare, billed on a
per-diem rate
• Multidisciplinary team
• Symptom management:
pain, dyspnea, psychosocial
• Focus on quality-oriented care
• Family support
• Attempts to minimize suffering
Fig. 47.3 Features of palliative care and hospice in the United States.
Section VI CONSULTANT ANESTHETIC PRACTICE
842
Palliative care teams assess and treat the patient's 
symptoms, discuss goals of care, and assess and treat the 
patient's and family's psychosocial issues. The palliative 
care team takes a biopsychosocial-spiritual approach to 
management and recognizes the interplay between these 
factors in improving overall patient care. Palliative care 
teams can either focus on a specific issue of concern to 
the team or perform a comprehensive assessment.
Consultations generally fall into two broad catego-
ries: goals-of-care consults and symptom management 
consults. For goals-of-care consults, palliative care spe-
cialists share information, get a sense of what a patient's 
goals and values are, and make medical recommenda-
tions based on those goals and values. For example, one 
patient's goal might be to stay out of the hospital and 
spend time with his or her dogs, and another's might be 
to live until the birth of a grandchild. Others may have 
goals like making amends with family members or being 
able to walk around the house without pain. Palliative 
care teams also perform an in-depth psychosocial assess-
ment, with questions like those listed in Box 47.1. Talking 
with patients and families about their understanding of 
the medical issues, how they want to receive informa-
tion, and how their home and spiritual lives contribute 
to their thinking about the medical situation can pro-
vide the primary teams with invaluable guidance. These 
conversations often include shared decision making and 
helping the patient and family determine a reasonable 
plan given the many complex factors in every patient's 
care. Including the patient and family in decision making 
does not mean offering or agreeing to a plan of care that 
the medical team believes is harmful or increases suffer-
ing, but rather helps create a shared treatment plan that 
incorporates meaningful goals of care.
Consultations for management of symptoms often 
focus on making the patient more comfortable and fre-
quently involve management of pain or intractable nau-
sea and vomiting. Symptoms that palliative care teams 
commonly address are listed in Box 47.2. A number of 
these symptoms require a sophisticated understanding of 
the patient's underlying pathophysiology. For example, 
patients with vomiting may have an abdominal tumor, 
medication effect, or opioid-induced constipation. Patients 
determined to have intraabdominal disease affecting the 
intestinal tract would need to be evaluated for ongo-
ing versus intermittent obstruction and considered for 
are board certified in hospice and palliative medicine.15
Board-certified physicians provide specialist palliative 
care, which includes refractory symptom management and 
difficult family meetings.16 Although most anesthesiolo-
gists will not go on to be palliative care physicians, all 
anesthesiologists should have a familiarity with primary 
palliative care. This includes goals-of-care conversations 
and perioperative advance directives, in addition to skills 
in symptom management for seriously ill patients related 
to issues commonly seen in anesthesiology practice.17
These skills are important, as anesthesiologists may be 
the first provider to have these conversations, whether in 
an intensive care unit (ICU), perioperative arena, or pain 
management clinic.
Anesthesiologists’ Contribution to Palliative 
Care
Anesthesiologists offer specific skills in the care of seri-
ously ill patients in addition to standard perioperative 
care. Many elderly (also see Chapter 35) and seriously ill 
people have surgery,18 pain issues (also see Chapter 44), 
or critical illness (also see Chapter 41). Anesthesiologists 
may interact with palliative and hospice care patients 
in these settings. Anesthesiologists have expertise in 
the management of symptoms such as pain and nausea, 
which are frequent complaints of palliative care patients. 
Crucially, they also possess insight about the risks to 
the patient for the entire perioperative course and can 
add valuable information to conversations with patients 
and families about goals of care. Pain medicine (also see 
Chapter 44) and critical care anesthesiologists (also see 
Chapter 41) offer advanced skills and knowledge that can 
be invaluable in a palliative care patient's care.
WHAT DO PALLIATIVE CARE TEAMS DO?
Palliative care is an interdisciplinary field involving mul-
tiple professionals, including physicians, nurses, social 
workers, chaplains, and others. Palliative care physicians 
are experts in symptom management and communication 
for seriously ill patients and their families. Palliative care 
nurses, including nurses who provide hospice care, prac-
tice symptom management, advanced communication 
skills, and assessment of the psychosocial and spiritual 
needs of a patient and family.19 Social workers address 
the psychosocial needs of patients and families and 
may assist with complex discharge needs.20 Chaplains 
assist patients and families in identifying and addressing 
spiritual distress related to serious illness and provide or 
facilitate appropriate spiritual or religious rituals.21 Anes-
thesia pain experts may be involved in advanced pain 
(also see Chapters 40 and 44) management techniques, 
and anesthesia critical care specialists are often involved 
in complex goals-of-care discussions.
Box 47.1
Common Psychosocial Questions During 
Palliative Care Consults
“What role, if any, does religion or spirituality play in your 
life?”
“Where do you live? With whom?”
“What values are important in your life?”
“How do you cope with the changes that are happening?”
“What are your greatest concerns right now?”
VI
Chapter 47 Palliative Care
843
exaggerated sense of accountability for the patient's out-
come,” can further complicate the prognosis and make 
it difficult for all parties to agree on what constitutes 
a “good” outcome.22 Though traditional surgical think-
ing viewed palliative care as being at odds with surgical 
goals, the current statement by the American College 
of Surgeons encourages integration of palliative care of 
surgical patients who have a range of conditions, not just 
those at the end of life.22 Thus anesthesiologists should 
work closely with surgeons and palliative care specialists 
to ensure optimal care during periods of critical illness.
Withdrawal of Life Support
Many anesthesiologists may be involved in the with-
drawal of life support for patients with poor prognoses 
whose families do not believe continued life-sustaining 
treatment is compatible with the patients’ goals. For these 
patients, withdrawing life support is the ethical decision. It 
is important to note and clarify the distinction that family 
members may perceive when health care personnel discuss 
withdrawing life support (discontinuing a machine that 
keeps a patient alive artificially) and withdrawing care 
(discontinuing all concern about the patient's comfort and 
well-being). High-quality care and symptom management 
should be of utmost concern for all patients regardless of 
the treatment plan, and families should be reassured that 
the team will continue to care for the patient.
An important example arises in the context of with-
drawing ventilator support. Many family members will 
prefer that the endotracheal tube be removed in addi-
tion to the ventilator being discontinued. It is crucial to 
prepare family members for the process of extubation of 
the trachea, including the expected coughing and secre-
tions, and to have opioids and sedatives readily available 
to decrease any perceived discomfort during or after the 
extubation, such as shortness of breath. Anesthesiologists 
are experts in the rapid titration of fentanyl and mida-
zolam, which are the most commonly used medications 
for withdrawal of mechanical ventilator support. A nurse 
or physician comfortable with administering these medi-
cations should be present during ventilator withdrawal 
in order to decrease signs of distress. Patients should 
not be paralyzed before ventilator withdrawal, as this 
would make it difficult or impossible to assess for proper 
titration of opioids and sedatives. Physicians overseeing 
withdrawal of life support should discontinue any unnec-
essary tubes and lines, contact the hospital chaplain for 
help accommodating spiritual care and religious rituals, 
and ensure family support.
Spirituality in Serious Illness
Serious illness and possible death often bring up spiritual 
issues like questioning the meaning of life or beliefs 
about what happens after death. Many patients say that 
treatment with octreotide or dexamethasone, and possibly 
a venting gastrotomy tube. Other symptoms close to the 
end of life, like terminal delirium, may require treatment 
with large doses of benzodiazepines or even phenobar-
bital. For patients whose symptoms do not respond to 
standard approaches, a palliative care consultation should 
be obtained.
Palliative Care in the Intensive Care Unit
Patients in the surgical ICU who stay more than 7 days 
have a mortality rate of more than 35%22 and should 
receive a palliative care consultation.23 Although some 
patients routinely stay in the ICU for specific nursing or 
monitoring needs after surgery, a significant proportion 
are treated for a worsening in their condition, and patients 
and families need to make difficult decisions about the 
treatment plan. Palliative care providers help patients and 
families determine goals of care, help resolve conflicts, 
and provide symptom management to patients in critical 
care units (Box 47.3).24 Despite palliative care's perceived 
emphasis on comfort over cure, there is no increased mor-
tality rate in patients in the ICU when palliative care teams 
are introduced (also see Chapter 41).
Communication among patients, families, and provid-
ers can be especially difficult in the surgical ICU. The 
common use of an “open-model” ICU in the surgical 
setting can make it difficult for providers and families 
to form a cohesive plan.22 Additionally, what some 
authors have described as a “surgical covenant” between 
the surgeon and patient, in which the surgeon has “an 
Box 47.2
Commonly Assessed Symptoms During 
a Palliative Care Visit
Insomnia
Dyspnea
Fatigue
Pain
Anxiety
Depression
Nausea and vomiting
Constipation
Box 47.3
Benefits Associated With Palliative 
Care in the ICU
•Decreased Time in the ICU
•Decreased hospital length of stay
•No increase in mortality rate
•Decreased family member PTSD and anxiety
•Decreased disagreements between families and providers
•Decreased disagreements among providers 
ICU, Intensive care unit; PTSD, posttraumatic stress disorder.
From Aslakson R, Cheng J, Vollenweider D, et al. Evidence-based 
palliative care in the intensive care unit: A systematic review of 
interventions. J Palliat Med. 2014;17:219–235.
Section VI CONSULTANT ANESTHETIC PRACTICE
844
require the expertise of a pain medicine specialist. A 
variety of techniques to control cancer pain are avail-
able (see Chapter 44). Important factors to consider in 
cancer pain are the cause of the pain (such as tumor- or 
chemotherapy-related) and the natural history of cancer 
pain, which generally gets worse instead of better. The 
cause of cancer pain is often complex and can be caused 
by the tumor itself; edema around a tumor; or metasta-
ses in tissue, nerve, or bone; or it may be related to the 
cancer treatment itself, such as peripheral neuropathy 
or radiation-induced brachial plexopathy.29 Treatment 
should be targeted to the cause of the pain when possible, 
and many patients may have pain from multiple sources. 
Given the complexities of cancer pain, adjunct medica-
tions are an important option (Table 47.1).
For some patients, chemotherapy, radiotherapy, or even 
surgery that aims to decrease the tumor burden may be 
pursued to decrease pain even when there is no antici-
pated increase in life expectancy.29 Anesthesiologists may 
be asked to evaluate patients for techniques such as a 
celiac plexus block, which decreases pain scores but has 
mixed data regarding changes in opioid doses or the qual-
ity of life.30 Bony pain may be caused by osteoblastic or 
osteolytic components, and approaches such as intrathe-
cal catheters, hormonal therapy, bone-modifying agents, 
or radiotherapy may be helpful. There may also be psy-
chological aspects related to grief, anxiety, or depression 
that exacerbate a patient's cancer pain. Addressing those 
issues often enhances the effects of treatments that tar-
get physical pain. Similarly, patients with pain that does 
not respond to traditional pain medications should be 
screened for spiritual or emotional pain, and these patients 
should be provided with resources and support to address 
their distress. Treatment of spiritual pain may involve 
social work, psychiatry, psychology, chaplaincy, integra-
tive medicine, or other fields. With the increasing number 
of cancer survivors, physicians should be more aware of 
issues of long-term opioid dependence and addiction.
Noncancer Pain
Noncancer pain, or pain in patients without cancer, is 
a major and yet insufficiently studied issue for patients 
with serious illnesses. Patients with diagnoses other than 
cancer may have more difficulty achieving pain control 
because of lack of physician awareness that pain is asso-
ciated with the patient's illness. Because anesthesiologists 
often provide much of the pain management expertise in 
a hospital, they should be aware of and knowledgeable 
about pain management in these seriously ill patients. 
Most patients with dementia have pain at the end of life, 
though the exact cause of the pain, such as ulcers or 
musculoskeletal pain, is unknown. Patients with chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) often have pain, 
though it is often not treated aggressively, possibly 
because of anesthesia providers being hesitant to provide 
religion is important in helping them adjust to, and cope 
with, the diagnosis of a terminal illness. Most physicians 
do not ask patients about their religious beliefs, though 
many patients and families describe their religion as 
being an important factor in their decisions about medi-
cal treatment and say they want to talk about this topic 
with their doctor.25 A simple question like, “What role, if 
any, do religion or spirituality play in your life?” can help 
identify patients with unmet needs. There may also be 
religious rituals, such as the way a patient's body should 
be handled after death, that are important for the health 
care team to know. In addition to social workers, nurses, 
and physicians, chaplains may be particularly helpful in 
providing spiritual services to help cope with serious or 
terminal illnesses and are a critical part of the palliative 
care team.
PALLIATIVE CARE AND PAIN
Pain management is often an important aspect in the 
quality of a seriously ill person's life. As experts in pain 
management, anesthesiologists possess unique skills to 
contribute to this area. Many seriously ill patients have 
surgery and may have resulting acute-on-chronic pain 
(also see Chapter 44).
Use of Opioids at the End of Life
Opioids are commonly used to treat both pain and air 
hunger at the end of life and are an important component 
of symptom management. However, some health care 
professionals may have concerns about the effect of opi-
oids on a patient's time to death and have apprehensions 
that the medications given are “killing” the patient. The 
ethical principle of double effect states that a physician 
can treat symptoms that may hasten death as a secondary 
effect, as long as the doctor's intention is to have a good 
outcome, like decreased pain and distress, rather than 
a bad outcome, like death.26 Opioids should be admin-
istered to these patients in response to signs of pain or 
discomfort, rather than arbitrarily increased. Opioids do 
not shorten, and may even increase, the time to death 
in dying patients.26 Thus the appropriate use of opioids 
at the end of life is indicated from both a medical and 
ethical standpoint. If, after discussion, a member of the 
health care team feels significant moral distress in such 
a situation, another team member should be assigned to 
the patient.
Cancer Pain
Cancer pain is the most recognized type of pain for 
patients with life-threatening illnesses. Most patients 
with cancer pain can be managed via the World Health 
Organization's Cancer Pain Stepladder,27,28 but some will 
VI
Chapter 47 Palliative Care
845
Category
Examples
Comment
Multipurpose Analgesics
Glucocorticoids
Dexamethasone, prednisone Bone pain, neuropathic pain, lymphoedema pain, headache, bowel 
obstruction
Antidepressants
Tricyclics
Desipramine, amitriptyline
Used for opioid-refractory neuropathic pain, first if comorbid 
depression; secondary amine compounds (e.g., desipramine) have 
fewer side effects and might be preferred
SNRIs
Duloxetine, milnacipran
Good evidence in some conditions, but overall less than for tricyclics; 
better side effect profile than tricyclics, however, and often tried first
SSRIs
Paroxetine, citalopram
Very scarce evidence, and if pain is the target, other subclasses are 
preferred
Other
Bupropion
Little evidence for effectiveness, but less sedating than other 
antidepressants, and often tried early when fatigue or somnolence 
is a problem
α2-Adrenergic agonists
Tizanidine, clonidine
Seldom used systemically because of side effects, but tizanidine is 
preferred for a trial; clonidine is used in neuraxial analgesia
Cannabinoid
THC/cannabidiol, nabilone, 
THC
Good evidence in cancer pain for THC/cannabidiol; scarce evidence 
for other commercially available compounds
Topical Agents
Anesthetic
Lidocaine patch, local 
anesthetic creams
Capsaicin
8% patch; 0.25%, 0.75% 
creams
High-concentration patch indicated for postherpetic neuralgia
NSAIDs
Diclofenac and others
Evidence in focal musculoskeletal pains
Tricyclics
Doxepin cream
Used for itch; can be tried for pain
Others
Compounded creams with varied drugs tried empirically, but no evidence
Used for Neuropathic Pain
Multipurpose drugs
As noted earlier
As noted earlier
Anticonvulsants
Gabapentinoids
Gabapentin, pregabalin
Used first for opioid-refractory neuropathic pain unless comorbid 
depression; may be multipurpose in view of evidence in postsurgical 
pain; both drugs act at N-type calcium channel in CNS, but 
individuals vary in response to one or the other
Others
Oxcarbazepine, lamotrigine, 
topiramate, lacosamide, 
valproate, carbamazepine, 
phenytoin
Little evidence for all drugs listed; newer drugs preferred because of 
reduced side effect liability, but individual variation is great; all drugs 
considered for opioid-refractory neuropathic pain if antidepressants 
and gabapentinoids are ineffective
Sodium Channel Drugs
Sodium channel blockers
Mexiletine, intravenous 
lidocaine
Good evidence for intravenous lidocaine
Sodium channel modulator
Lacosamide
New anticonvulsant with very scarce evidence of analgesic effects
GABA Agonists
GABAA agonist
Clonazepam
Very scarce evidence, but used for neuropathic pain with anxiety
GABAB agonist
Baclofen
Evidence in trigeminal neuralgia is the basis for trials in other types 
of neuropathic pain
Table 47.1
Adjuvant Analgesic Agents in the Management of Cancer Pain by Conventional Use Category
(Continued)
Section VI CONSULTANT ANESTHETIC PRACTICE
846
opioids to this patient population. However, opioids are 
considered an accepted part of the treatment of dyspnea 
for advanced lung disease, per the American College of 
Chest Physicians.31 In this situation the COPD patient's 
pain may go untreated because of the physician's con-
cern about respiratory depression, despite the evidence 
in favor of opioids in this patient population. As with all 
pain, ideally the cause of the pain should be identified, 
and the treatment should be matched with the cause.
CHALLENGES IN THE PALLIATIVE CARE 
PATIENT
Identifying Palliative Care and Hospice Patients
Knowing which patients are appropriate for palliative 
care or hospice consultation can be difficult and may 
depend on hospital or community norms. Seriously ill 
patients without clear treatment preferences or decision 
makers should have a palliative care consultation, as 
should patients whose care causes a conflict among staff 
members and those with refractory symptoms.23
Inpatient Palliative Care Consults
In general, patients with life-threatening diseases (i.e., meta-
static cancer, cirrhosis, or chronic renal failure) or illnesses 
with a likely probability of death (i.e., multiorgan failure, 
major trauma, or sepsis) should be considered for a palliative 
Category
Examples
Comment
N-methyl-D-aspartate 
inhibitors
Ketamine, memantine, 
others
Evidence scarce for ketamine, but positive experience with 
intravenous use in advanced illness or pain crisis; little evidence for 
oral drugs
Used for Bone Pain
Bisphosphonates
Pamidronate, ibandronate, 
clodronate
Good evidence; like the NSAIDs or glucocorticoids, usually 
considered first-line treatment; also reduces other adverse skeletal-
related events; concern about osteonecrosis of the jaw and renal 
insufficiency might restrict use
Calcitonin
Scarce evidence, but usually well tolerated
Radiopharmaceuticals
Strontium-89, 
samarium-153
Good evidence, but restricted use because of bone-marrow effects 
and need for expertise
Used for Bowel Obstruction
Anticholinergic drugs
Hyoscine compounds, 
glycopyrronium (aka 
glycopyrrolate)
Along with a glucocorticoid, considered first-line adjuvant treatment 
for nonsurgical bowel obstruction
Somatostatin analog
Octreotide
Along with a glucocorticoid, considered first-line adjuvant treatment 
for nonsurgical bowel obstruction
Table 47.1
Adjuvant Analgesic Agents in the Management of Cancer Pain by Conventional Use Category—Cont’d
CNS, Central nervous system; GABA, γ-aminobutyric acid; NSAID, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug; SNRI, selective noradrenaline reuptake 
inhibitor; SSRI, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor; THC, tetrahydrocannabinol.
From Portenoy RK. Treatment of cancer pain. Lancet. 2011;377:2236–2247.
care consultation.23 Patients who are likely to die in the next 
year are good candidates for advance care planning. Also, 
patients with difficult-to-manage symptoms, like pain or 
nausea, or complex psychosocial or family issues often ben-
efit from palliative care's interdisciplinary approach.
Hospice Consults
Hospice consultations should be sought for patients with 
a life expectancy of 6 months or less who are interested 
in focusing on symptom-related treatments rather than 
treatment with curative intent. Hospice services were 
initially designed primarily for cancer patients, who have 
relatively predictable courses in the last 6 months of life. 
However, cancer patients now make up less than half of 
hospice patients. Deciding which patients should receive 
hospice is more difficult for dementia, COPD, and con-
gestive heart failure (CHF), which in combination com-
pose the majority of hospice diagnoses, as these diseases 
lack good prognostic criteria.12 Hospice referrals are often 
made very late in the course of illness, and the median 
time on hospice was only 18 days in 2018.12 This means 
that a significant number of patients did not receive hos-
pice services while they were eligible.
Hospice eligibility determinations are often straight-
forward, but at times can be a challenge even for hospice 
medical directors. Therefore there is room for medical 
interpretation in determining hospice eligibility, and 
some patients may qualify for enrollment with one hos-
pice service but not with another.
VI
Chapter 47 Palliative Care
847
factor of five, with estimates being worse the longer the 
physician knows the patient.33 However, ICU physicians 
tend to be overly pessimistic about their patients’ sur-
vival.34 Nurses and physicians often disagree about the 
likelihood of a patient's survival and quality of life, with 
nurses tending to be more pessimistic.35 One proposed 
approach is that of the “surprise question.” A physician 
answering “no” to the question, “Would you be surprised 
if the patient died within the next 12 months?” is a 
relatively good predictor of patients who are likely to do 
so.23 Although this question does not make the future 
easy to predict or provide clinicians with specifics about 
how long the patient will live, it can help frame some 
decisions, such as surgeries or treatments, and can help 
give families a better sense of what the health care team 
is thinking.
Disease Trajectories
It can be helpful for physicians to have and convey a 
concept of the patient's likely disease trajectory. Patients 
with most cancers follow a relatively predictable course, 
whereas those with COPD, for example, tend to have a 
long course of repeated hospitalizations and associated 
decline before death. These disease trajectories can be 
useful starting points for discussions with patients and 
families about what the future is likely to hold (Fig. 47.4).
Outpatient Palliative Care Consults
No clear criteria for outpatient palliative care referral 
exist. However, patients with complex symptoms, psy-
chosocial issues, or advance care planning needs who 
are not eligible for hospice are often good candidates.32
Outpatient palliative care clinics can help patients with 
advance care planning, such as creating advance direc-
tives, and serve as consultants for patients with difficult-
to-manage symptoms like pain or nausea.
Prognosis
Inherent in many of the discussions about appropriate-
ness of palliative care and hospice consultations, and the 
ability of anesthesiologists to discuss goals of care, is the 
concept of prognosis. Anesthesiologists need to have a 
general idea of prognosis in order to make appropriate 
medical recommendations.
Physician Estimate
Many clinical decisions are influenced by perceived prog-
nosis, such as whether to withdraw ventilator support, 
give chemotherapy, and proceed with surgery. Despite 
its importance, prognosis continues to be extremely dif-
ficult to determine. Prognostic accuracy tends to be poor, 
and most physicians tend to overestimate prognosis by a 
High
Less
Function
High
Less
Function
High
Less
Function
High
Less
Function
Time
Time
Time
Time
Death
Sudden death
Organ failure
Frailty
Terminal illness
Death
Death
Death
Fig. 47.4 Trajectories of dying. (Redrawn from Lunney JR, Lynn J, Hogan C. Profiles of older Medicare 
decedents. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2002;50:1108–1112.)
Section VI CONSULTANT ANESTHETIC PRACTICE
848
specialty taking care of the patient, in addition to the 
patient or patient's surrogate and other family members 
requested by the patient or surrogate. Although it can be 
challenging to find a time for everyone in a patient's care 
team to meet, this investment generally leads to a more 
cohesive, thoughtful care plan for the patient.
Many physicians struggle with how to begin family 
meetings. Commonsense approaches include introducing 
the family and team members, giving a short explanation 
for the goals of the meeting, sitting down with the patient 
and family, and displaying empathy. A short meeting 
beforehand with the health care team members can be 
helpful. Sharing specialty-specific insights and getting a 
better sense of the decisions that will need to be made 
during the meeting are also helpful. Nurses, chaplains, 
social workers, and other professionals should be invited 
to attend as appropriate.
Occasionally, members of the health care team will 
disagree about a patient's prognosis, treatment plan, or a 
variety of other issues. This is expected35 and should be 
addressed promptly and professionally and to the extent 
possible before the family meeting. Disagreements that 
are glossed over can quickly become adversarial and lead 
to poor patient care and confusion for the family. Many 
of the same skills in conflict resolution, negotiation, and 
facilitation that palliative care physicians use in family 
meetings can also be helpful in the setting of provider 
disagreement. By helping resolve any team conflicts, 
palliative care consultations can also help formulate a 
cohesive care plan and provide the best care possible.
Physician Tendencies in Addressing Difficult Topics
Most physicians never receive any training in how to 
discuss difficult topics with patients, yet they are expected 
to do so routinely. As a result, physicians at all levels of 
training often feel uncomfortable discussing difficult top-
ics with patients. Recordings of physicians show that they 
tend to focus on technical detail, avoid emotional topics, 
and dominate conversations.38 There are many possible 
reasons for this approach, including a lack of training and 
the fact that these behaviors are likely to be coping mecha-
nisms. Physicians should be aware of these tendencies and 
make efforts to overcome them by using words that are 
understandable, acknowledging emotion, and allowing 
patients and families to speak. Ideally, patients and families 
should be speaking for at least half of the conversation.
Patient and Family Wishes About Communicating 
Prognosis
Because of the difficulty involved with accurately pre-
dicting an individual patient's survival, many physicians 
avoid giving any kind of estimate to avoid being wrong.39
However, in one study 87% of surrogate decision mak-
ers wanted the physician to give a prognosis, even if it 
was uncertain.40 When given a prognosis, though, surro-
gates tend to be overly optimistic, especially with worse 
Prognostic Tools
Multiple prognostic tools have been developed, particu-
larly for critically ill patients,36 and for patients with 
other specific conditions. These tools can synthesize 
broad information about the severity of a patient's dis-
ease into a single number or percentile that is easier for 
caregivers, patients, and families to understand. They can 
therefore be very useful but may not take into account 
all of a patient's comorbid conditions. In addition, these 
tools cannot predict which individual patients will live or 
die, which is the information that patients and families 
really want. Despite these limitations, prognostic calcula-
tors can be helpful in framing discussions with families 
about the patient's likely course.
Functional Status
Performance status generally correlates quite well with 
prognosis,37 with a bedbound patient likely to have a 
much shorter life span than someone who is ambulatory. 
For example, a patient who is bedbound and recently 
stopped eating would likely have days to weeks, whereas 
a patient with a similar diagnosis who is up in a chair 
most of the day but needs help with bathing and dressing 
might have weeks to months.
Communication
An essential part of discussing medical issues with 
patients and families is ensuring understanding of a 
patient's medical issues. Although the medical team may 
take it for granted that a patient starting dialysis has 
failing kidneys, the patient and family may not automati-
cally associate those two pieces of information. Addition-
ally, different members of the health care team may give 
patients and families different messages. For example, a 
cardiologist may inform the family that a patient's heart 
is improving after a myocardial infarction, whereas the 
intensivist tells the family that he is becoming worse 
because of worsening pneumonia and sepsis. Querying 
patients about how much they want to know and how 
they prefer to receive information (i.e., broad overview or 
specific details) helps to guide these conversations. Some 
patients may not want to know anything about their 
illness and can designate a surrogate to receive medical 
information and make decisions on their behalf.
Asking what the patient and family have been told 
about the patient's condition can give the clinician an 
idea about what issues need to be discussed in more 
detail. “Checking in” with the patient and family about 
how they are reacting to this information by asking ques-
tions such as, “Is this a surprise for you?” can give them a 
chance to express their emotions related to new informa-
tion. Patients and families should have an opportunity to 
ask questions, and a plan should be made for the patient's 
care and future meetings, if needed. When possible, fam-
ily meetings should involve a representative from each 
VI
Chapter 47 Palliative Care
849
an important part of a patient's decision regarding code 
status in the perioperative period.
Time-Limited Trials
A time-limited trial is “an agreement between clinicians 
and a patient/family to use certain medical therapies 
over a defined period to see if the patient improves or 
deteriorates according to agreed-on clinical outcomes.”46
A time-limited trial is a method of dealing with prog-
nostic uncertainty and is a useful tool in family discus-
sions. For example, the family of a patient with a COPD 
exacerbation and a do not resuscitate (DNR) order may 
desire a trial of bilevel positive airway pressure (BiPAP) 
for several days to evaluate whether the patient tolerates 
the intervention and has improved symptoms.46 Before 
starting a time-limited trial of therapy, the medical team 
should take the following steps: (1) clarify the patient's 
medical issues and the risks and benefits of any proposed 
treatments, (2) decide on and discuss with the family a 
reasonable time frame for improvement and reevalua-
tion, (3) implement the trial, and (4) reassess the patient 
at the end of the agreed-upon time frame. Time-limited 
trials will not work for every patient, especially those 
with rapid changes in their clinical conditions, but they 
can help patients, families, and providers determine a 
consensus plan when uncertainty or disagreement exists.
Identifying the Imminently Dying Patient
Anesthesiologists may care for dying patients in the ICU, 
and patients whose death process has not been identi-
fied may occasionally present to the operating room. 
Thus anesthesiologists should be able to recognize signs 
of the dying process in order to provide appropriate 
care for these patients. Additionally, anesthesiologists 
should be able to provide information for interested fam-
ily members about what the dying process looks like. 
Unfortunately, there are few signs that are both sensitive 
and specific for impending death. Change of conscious-
ness, dysphagia, and decreased oral intake are sensitive 
but not specific, for example.47 Mandibular movement 
with breathing, peripheral cyanosis, and Cheyne-Stokes 
breathing are reasonably specific for patient death within 
3 days but occur in less than 60% of patients.47
PERIOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT OF THE 
PALLIATIVE CARE PATIENT
A list of perioperative considerations is provided in 
Box 47.5 48
Advance Directives
Advance directives encompass a variety of legal docu-
ments such as living wills, Five Wishes, or state-specific 
advance directives, which describe a patient's wishes for 
prognoses.41 Many practitioners choose to state clearly 
that any estimate is a guess and use ranges such as hours 
to days, days to weeks, or weeks to months to convey a 
general idea of the patient's life expectancy.
Frameworks for Communicating Difficult Information
Anesthesiologists in the ICU frequently need to com-
municate sensitive or difficult information about prog-
nosis to patients and families, and it is often necessary 
in the perioperative or pain settings as well. Ensuring 
that patients understand their condition is an important 
part of informed consent for anesthesia. Most of the 
time, physicians will speak with families because many 
critically ill patients are unable to participate. Family–
clinician communication in the ICU is often inadequate. 
In one study only half of families had an adequate 
understanding of the patient's prognosis, treatments, or 
diagnoses after a discussion with ICU physicians.42
There are several formal frameworks for communi-
cating prognosis to patients and families. The SPIKES 
protocol43 (Box 47.4), which includes asking for the 
patient's or family member's current understanding of the 
medical issues, responding with empathy, and agreeing 
on a follow-up plan, was originally described for break-
ing bad news, but the concepts apply in many instances.
Discussing Code Status
The palliative care framework functions in the setting 
of discussions about resuscitation orders as well. Ide-
ally, discussions about code status should take place in 
the context of a larger conversation about a patient's 
overall condition and goals. For example, between 1 
in 1400 and 1 in 1800 patients experiences a cardiac 
arrest in the operating room.44 The survival rate in the 
immediate perioperative period for these patients is 
about 42%.44 This survival rate is markedly better than 
that among cardiac arrests for all-hospital adult patients 
(26%) or out-of-hospital adults (10%),45 which may be 
Box 47.4
A Framework for Breaking Bad News
Setting: Arrange for a quiet, private space large enough for 
all participants.
Perception: Assess understanding: “What have the doctors 
told you about your wife's illness?”
Invitation: Ask how much information is desired: “Some 
people like all the details, others just like the big picture. 
What would you like?”
Knowledge: Tell what you know. Use language that is easy 
to understand and avoid using complex medical phrases.
Empathy: Acknowledge emotions: “I wish things were 
different.”
Sequelae: Agree on next steps: “Let's meet tomorrow 
afternoon so I can update you on her condition.”
From Baile WF, Buckman R, Lenzi R, et al. SPIKES—A six-step protocol 
for delivering bad news: Application to the patient with cancer. 
Oncologist. 2000;5:302–311.
Section VI CONSULTANT ANESTHETIC PRACTICE
850
Box 47.5
Perioperative Considerations for Palliative Care Patients
Preoperative Considerations
Look in chart for advance directive or documentation of code 
status
Determine whether the patient needs a surrogate and, if so, 
who that person is
If DNR or other limits on treatment are listed, clarify the 
patient's desires based on ASA guidelines:46
•Full attempt at resuscitation
•Limited attempt at resuscitation defined with regard to
specific procedures
•Patient or surrogate should be informed about which
procedures are essential to providing anesthesia (i.e., 
an endotracheal tube) and which are not (i.e., chest 
compressions)
•Example: Patient with extensive rib metastases declines 
chest compressions but desires other medications and 
procedures as appropriate
•Limited attempt at resuscitation defined with regard to the
patient’s goals and values
•Patient or surrogate allows the medical team to decide
which procedures are appropriate
•Example: Patient wants to have issues that seem easily 
reversibly treated (i.e., respiratory depression in the PACU 
after accidental narcotic overdose) but does not want 
treatment that may lead to neurologic compromise (i.e., 
does not want prolonged CPR)
Document any changes in treatment limitation clearly in the 
chart:
•Include the people present during the discussion
•When the original advance directive will be reinstated
•Per ASA guidelines, “when the patient leaves the PACU
or when the patient has recovered from the acute effects of 
anesthesia and surgery”
Discuss any changes in treatment limitation with the surgeon, 
nurse, or other appropriate parties
Ensure that the patient receives any scheduled pain 
medications preoperatively
Consider involving spiritual care to perform appropriate rituals 
if there is a high risk of death
Review past medications for agents like Adriamycin and 
bleomycin
Review records for sites of metastases, including lung or brain, 
that may affect physiology
Assess decision-making ability of patients with brain 
metastases or suspected cognitive impairment
Consider preoperative epidural placement for appropriate 
patients
Assess baseline functional status and general prognosis
Intraoperative Considerations
Take special care in positioning cachectic patients and those 
with poor skin integrity
Consider PONV prophylaxis for at-risk patients
Communicate any limitations in treatment to oncoming 
providers
Postoperative Considerations
Consider possibly increased postoperative pain requirements in 
context of baseline opioid use
Ensure availability of rescue antiemetic for at-risk patients
Communicate any limitations in treatment to PACU providers
ASA, American Society of Anesthesiologists; CPR, cardiopulmonary resuscitation; DNR, do not resuscitate; PACU, postanesthesia care unit; PONV,
postoperative nausea and vomiting.
medical care. Many of these describe options such as arti-
ficial hydration and nutrition or life support if the patient 
has no hope of recovery. Although these documents can 
be useful as a guide, they rarely offer unambiguous guid-
ance for the entirety of the wide range of clinical sce-
narios.49 Many clinicians advocate for patients’ naming 
a surrogate and for discussions about values and goals 
among the patient, surrogate, and health care team.49
Patients who prepare advance directives are more likely 
to receive care that aligns with their preferences,50 and 
many advance directives include the naming of a sur-
rogate decision maker as part of the form.
Decision-Making Capacity
Many patients who are in the perioperative period or in 
the ICU may not have decision-making capacity because 
of an inability to communicate, medical issues, or medica-
tions.51 Determining whether a patient has the capacity to 
make medical decisions can be difficult. In fact, identifying 
patient decision-making capacity51 can change over time, 
so physicians must be cognizant that a patient who was 
previously able to make decisions may have become deliri-
ous and unable to understand the risks of a procedure. The 
criteria used to decide whether a person has capacity are 
“the ability to communicate a choice, to understand the rel-
evant information, to appreciate the medical consequences 
of the situation, and to reason about treatment choices.”51
Asking questions like, “Can you tell me what surgery we 
are doing and why?” and “Can you tell me the risks of the 
procedure?” can help clarify whether a patient has deci-
sion-making capacity. If the physician is uncertain whether 
a patient has decision-making capacity, a psychiatric con-
sult may be appropriate. Deciding whether a patient has 
decisional capacity is a crucial step in the perioperative 
evaluation. Patients without decisional capacity cannot 
give informed consent for anesthesia, and a surrogate must 
be identified for the patient in most cases.
Surrogate Decision Makers
A surrogate decision maker is a person who makes medi-
cal decisions on the patient's behalf. Patients may name 
surrogate decision makers at any point. Patients with 
VI
Chapter 47 Palliative Care
851
patients with a DNR order who present for surgery (Table 
47.2). Importantly, a DNR order may be continued, com-
pletely suspended, or partially suspended in defined ways 
to meet patient preferences. An essential part of the ASA 
guidelines includes discussion and documentation regard-
ing whether, and when, the original DNR order will be rein-
stated. According to the ASA, “this occurs when the patient 
leaves the postanesthesia care unit or when the patient has 
recovered from the side effects of anesthesia/procedure.”55
These discussions should always be clearly documented.
Recommendations From the American College of 
Surgeons and the Association of periOperative Registered 
Nurses
The similarities in recommendations among professional 
societies of anesthesiologists, surgeons, and nurses are strik-
ing (Table 47.3).56 57 As with the ASA, they recommend a 
more tailored approach rather than automatic suspension. 
Despite this, 30% of physicians believe DNR orders should 
be automatically suspended during surgery, and a large 
majority of patients want to discuss perioperative changes 
in DNR orders with their physicians.58 A study in 2012 
demonstrated that only half of the surgeons discuss advance 
directives before surgery, and half would not take a patient 
to the operating room with limitations on treatment.59
Hospice Patients Who Present for Surgery
Hospice patients may decline hospice services at any point. 
There are cases in which surgery can reduce suffering, such 
as the surgical repair of an open fracture after trauma. Sur-
gery for hospice patients should prompt a discussion of the 
risks and benefits of the procedure, in addition to the status 
of any orders for limitations on perioperative treatment.
decisional capacity may either continue to make their own 
decisions or defer decisions to their surrogate. Some states 
have lists that order the priority of surrogates for patients 
who have not designated one. Surrogates’ wishes may not 
always match those of the patient,52 so communication 
about goals and values is crucial. Surrogates should make 
decisions in the patient's best interest and that are the 
surrogate's best guess as to what the patient would want, 
which is not necessarily what the surrogate would choose. 
Clarifying this distinction with questions like, “What do 
you think your father would say if he were able to sit 
with us and understand this information?” can be helpful.
How to Approach Perioperative DNR 
Conversations
Recommendations From the American 
Society of Anesthesiologists
About 15% of patients who present for surgery have a DNR 
order,53 so all anesthesia providers should be well versed in 
discussing these important issues with patients and families. 
Additionally, almost 25% of surgical patients with DNR 
orders die within 30 days of surgery.54 The American Soci-
ety of Anesthesiologists (ASA) has published guidelines for 
care of patients with DNR orders and limitations on treat-
ment.55 For the purposes of this section, DNR will refer to 
both DNR orders and other limitations on treatment found 
in documents such as advance directives. The guidelines 
emphasize that the automatic and complete suspension of 
DNR orders (or other advance directives) may violate the 
patient's right to self-determination and that a discussion 
with the patient or surrogate before the procedure is essen-
tial. The ASA describes three outcomes for discussions for 
Full Attempt at Resuscitation
Limited Attempt at Resuscitation 
Defined With Regard to Specific 
Procedures
Limited Attempt at Resuscitation Defined 
With Regard to the Patient’s Goals and 
Values
Full suspension of existing DNR. 
Any procedures may be used.
Specific procedures, for example, chest 
compressions, may not be used.
Anesthesiologist may use clinical judgment to 
determine which resuscitation procedures are 
appropriate.
The anesthesiologist should inform the 
patient which procedures can, or cannot, 
reasonably be refused during an anesthetic.
Full resuscitation may be desired for events 
that are likely to be easily reversible, but not 
those likely to lead to an unwanted outcome.
A woman who was recently 
diagnosed with breast cancer 
decides to suspend her DNR 
during the surgery, saying, “I have 
two kids at home, and I want to 
live as long as I can for them.”
A woman with breast cancer with extensive 
metastases to her ribs agrees to all 
interventions except chest compressions, 
saying, “Even if it worked, I don't want to be 
on a ventilator with shattered ribs.”
A woman with breast cancer whose greatest 
fear is being unable to recognize her children 
says, “If you think you can fix the problem and 
I'll go back to being myself, please do that. If 
my brain is unlikely to recover, then please 
don't pursue more aggressive measures.”
DNR, Do not resuscitate.
From American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA). Ethical Guidelines for the Anesthesia Care of Patients with Do-Not-Resuscitate Orders 
or Other Directives That Limit Treatment. https://www.asahq.org/standards-and-guidelines/ethical-guidelines-for-the-anesthesia-care-of-
patients-with-do-not-resuscitate-orders-or-other-directives-that-limit-treatment. Accessed May 26, 2021.
Table 47.2
Scenarios for Patients With Perioperative Limitations on Treatment per the ASA
Section VI CONSULTANT ANESTHETIC PRACTICE
852
the care of the critically ill. Palliative care should not be 
reserved only for dying patients. Anesthesiologists should 
have a working knowledge of what palliative care and 
hospice offer, how the anesthetic care fits into the patient's 
overall course, and the legal and ethical issues surrounding 
perioperative limitations on treatment.
CONCLUSION
Palliative care is a new field that focuses on the relief of 
suffering in patients with life-limiting conditions. Anesthe-
siologists have many skills to offer palliative care patients, 
including skills in pain and symptom management and 
Topic
American Society of 
Anesthesiologists
American College of Surgeons
Association of periOperative 
Registered Nurses
Statement 
regarding automatic 
suspension of DNR 
orders for surgery
“Policies automatically suspending 
DNR orders or other directives that 
limit treatment prior to procedures 
involving anesthetic care may not 
sufficiently address a patient's 
rights to self-determination in a 
responsible and ethical manner”
“Policies that lead to either the 
automatic enforcement of all 
DNR orders or to disregarding 
or automatically cancelling 
such orders do not sufficiently 
support a patient's right to self-
determination”
“Reconsideration of do-not-
resuscitate or allow-natural-death 
orders is required and is an 
integral component of the care 
of patients undergoing surgery or 
other invasive procedures”
Guidelines for the 
care of surgical 
patients with DNR 
orders
“Prior to procedures requiring 
anesthetic care, any existing 
directives to limit the use of 
resuscitation procedures … should, 
when possible, be reviewed 
with the patient or designated 
surrogate”55
“The best approach for these 
patients is a policy of ‘required 
reconsideration’ of the existing 
DNR orders … [with] the patient 
or designated surrogate and the 
physicians who will be responsible 
for the patient's care”
“Health care providers should 
have a discussion with the patient 
or patient's surrogate about the 
risks, benefits, implications, and 
potential outcomes of anesthesia 
and surgery in relation to the 
do-not-resuscitate or allow-
natural-death orders before 
initiating anesthesia, surgery, or 
other invasive procedures”
Table 47.3
Comparison of Professional Society Statements Regarding Surgical Patients With DNR Orders
DNR, Do not resuscitate.
Data from the American Society of Anesthesiologists,55 American College of Surgeons,56 and Association of periOperative Registered Nurses.57
REFERENCES
1. Robinson J, Gott M, Ingleton C. Patient 
and family experiences of palliative 
care in hospital: What do we know? 
An integrative review. Palliat Med. 
2014;28(1):18–33.
2. Nelson JE, Puntillo KA, Pronovost PJ, 
etal. In their own words: Patients and 
families define high-quality palliative 
care in the intensive care unit. Crit Care 
Med. 2010;38:808–818.
3. World Health Organization. Definition of 
Palliative Care. http://www.who.int/can-
cer/palliative/definition/en/. Accessed 
May 26, 2021.
4. Kelley AS, Morrison RS. Palliative care 
for the seriously ill. N Engl J Med. 
2015;373(8):747–755. 
doi:10.1056/
NEJMra1404684.
5. Center to Advance Palliative Care. About 
Palliative Care. http://www.capc.org/about/
palliative-care/. Accessed May 26, 2021.
6. Ferris FD, Balfour HM, Bowen K, etal. A 
model to guide patient and family care: 
Based on nationally accepted principles 
and norms of practice. J Pain Symptom 
Manage. 2002;24:106–123.
7. Medicare Payment Advisory Commission. 
A Data Book: Health Care Spending and 
the Medicare Program. www.medpac.gov.
8. Meier DE. Increased access to palliative 
care and hospice services: Opportunities 
to improve value in health care. Milbank 
Q. 2011;89(3):343–380.
9. Jackman DM, Zhang Y, Dalby C, etal. 
Cost and survival analysis before and 
after implementation of Dana-Farber 
clinical pathways for patients with 
stage IV non-small-cell lung cancer. 
J Oncol Pract. 2017;13(4):e346–e352. 
doi:10.1200/JOP.2017.021741.
10. Scheunemann LP, McDevitt M, Carson 
SS, Hanson LC. Randomized, controlled 
trials of interventions to improve com-
munication in intensive care: A system-
atic review. Chest. 2011;139:543–554.
11. Ambroggi M, Biasini C, Toscani I, etal. 
Can early palliative care with anticancer 
treatment improve overall survival and 
patient-related outcomes in advanced 
lung cancer patients? A review of the 
literature [published correction appears 
in Support Care Cancer. 2018 Jun 11]. 
Support Care Cancer. 2018;26(9):2945–
2953. doi:10.1007/s00520-018-4184-3.
12. Rothenberg LR, Doberman D, Simon LE, 
etal. Patients surviving six months in 
hospice care: Who are they? J Palliat 
Med. 2014;17:899–905.
13. National Hospice and Palliative Care 
Organization (NHPCO). Facts and Fig-
ures: Hospice Care in America. Published 
August 20, 2020. https://www.nhpco.
org/wp-content/uploads/NHPCO-Facts-
Figures-2020-edition.pdf. Accessed May 
26, 2021.
14. Kelley AS, Deb P, Du Q, etal. Hospice 
enrollment saves money for Medicare 
and improves care quality across a num-
ber of different lengths-of-stay. Health 
Aff. 2013;32:552–561.
15. American Board of Internal Medicine. 
Hospice and Palliative Medicine Policies. 
http://www.abim.org/certification/policies/
imss/hospice.aspx. Accessed May 26, 2021.
16. Quill TE, Abernethy AP. Generalist plus 
specialist palliative care—Creating a 
more sustainable model. N Engl J Med. 
2013;368:1173–1175.
VI
Chapter 47 Palliative Care
853
17. Gebauer SL, Fine PG. Palliative medicine 
competencies for anesthesiologists. J 
Clin Anesth. 2014;26:429–431.
18. Kwok AC, Semel ME, Lipsitz SR, etal. 
The intensity and variation of surgical 
care at the end of life: A retrospective 
cohort study. Lancet. 2011;378:1408–
1413.
19. Value of the Professional Nurse in Pallia-
tive Care. Hospice and Palliative Nurses 
Association. https://advancingexpertcare.
org/position-statements. Accessed May 
26, 2021.
20. National Association of Social Workers. 
The Certified Hospice and Palliative Social 
Worker. https://www.socialworkers.org/
Careers/Credentials-Certifications/Apply-
for-NASW-Social-Work-Credentials/
Certified-Hospice-and-Palliative-Social-
Worker. Accessed May 26, 2021.
21. Board of Chaplaincy Certification, Inc. 
Palliative Care Specialty Certification 
Competencies. http://bcci.professional-
chaplains.org/content.asp?admin=Y&
pl=45&sl=42&contentid=49. Accessed 
May 26, 2021.
22. Mosenthal AC, Weissman DE, Curtis JR, 
etal. Integrating palliative care in the 
surgical and trauma intensive care unit: 
A report from the Improving Palliative 
Care in the Intensive Care Unit (IPAL-
ICU) Project Advisory Board and the 
Center to Advance Palliative Care. Crit 
Care Med. 2012;40:1199–1206.
23. Weissman DE, Meier DE. Identifying 
patients in need of a palliative care 
assessment in the hospital setting: A 
consensus report from the Center to 
Advance Palliative Care. J Palliat Med. 
2011;14:17–23.
24. Aslakson R, Cheng J, Vollenweider D, 
etal. Evidence-based palliative care in 
the intensive care unit: A systematic 
review of interventions. J Palliat Med. 
2014;17:219–235.
25. Phelps AC, Maciejewski PK, Nilsson M, 
etal. Religious coping and use of inten-
sive life-prolonging care near death in 
patients with advanced cancer. JAMA. 
2009;301:1140–1147.
26. Mazer MA, Alligood CM, Wu Q. The 
infusion of opioids during terminal 
withdrawal of mechanical ventilation in 
the medical intensive care unit. J Pain 
Symptom Manage. 2011;42:44–51.
27. Zech DF, Grond S, Lynch J, etal. Valida-
tion of World Health Organization Guide-
lines for cancer pain relief: A 10-year 
prospective study. Pain. 1995;63:65–76.
28. WHO Guidelines for the pharmacologi-
cal and radiotherapeutic management of 
cancer pain in adults and adolescents. 
https://www.who.int/ncds/management/
palliative-care/cancer-pain-guidelines/
en/. Accessed May 26, 2021.
29. Portenoy RK. Treatment of cancer pain. 
Lancet. 2011;377:2236–2247.
30. Wong GY, Schroeder DR, Carns PE, etal. 
Effect of neurolytic celiac plexus block 
on pain relief, quality of life, and sur-
vival in patients with unresectable pan-
creatic cancer: A randomized controlled 
trial. JAMA. 2004;291:1092–1099.
31. Mahler DA, Selecky PA, Harrod CG, etal. 
American College of Chest Physicians 
consensus statement on the management 
of dyspnea in patients with advanced lung 
or heart disease. Chest. 2010;137(3):674–
691. doi:10.1378/chest.09-1543.
32. Smith AK, Thai JN, Bakitas MA, etal. The 
diverse landscape of palliative care clinics. 
J Palliat Med. 2013;16(6):661–668.
33. Christakis NA, Lamont EB. Extent and 
determinants of error in doctors’ progno-
ses in terminally ill patients: Prospective 
cohort study. BMJ. 2000;320:469–472.
34. Rocker G, Cook D, Sjokvist P, etal. Cli-
nician predictions of intensive care unit 
mortality. Crit Care Med. 2004;32:1149–
1154.
35. Frick 
S, 
Uehlinger 
DE, 
Zuercher 
Zenklusen RM. Medical futility: Pre-
dicting outcome of intensive care unit 
patients by nurses and doctors—A pro-
spective comparative study. Crit Care 
Med. 2003;31(2):456–461.
36. Vincent JL, Moreno R. Clinical review: 
Scoring systems in the critically ill. Crit 
Care. 2010;14:207.
37. Olajide O, Hanson L, Usher BM, etal. 
Validation of the palliative performance 
scale in the acute tertiary care hospital 
setting. J Palliat Med. 2007;10:111–117.
38. Fine E, Reid MC, Shengelia R, Adelman 
RD. Directly observed patient-physician 
discussions in palliative and end-of-life 
care: A systematic review of the litera-
ture. J Palliat Med. 2010;13:595–603.
39. Ridley S, Fisher M. Uncertainty in 
end-of-life care. Curr Opin Crit Care. 
2013;19:642–647.
40. Evans LR, Boyd EA, Malvar G, etal. 
Surrogate decision-makers’ perspectives 
on discussing prognosis in the face of 
uncertainty. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 
2009;179:48–53.
41. Zier LS, Sottile PD, Hong SY, etal. 
Surrogate decision makers’ interpre-
tation of prognostic information: A 
mixed-methods study. Ann Intern Med. 
2012;156:360–366.
42. Curtis JR, White DB. Practical guidance 
for evidence-based ICU family confer-
ences. Chest. 2008;134:835–843.
43. Baile WF, Buckman R, Lenzi R, etal. 
SPIKES—A six-step protocol for delivering 
bad news: Application to the patient with 
cancer. Oncologist. 2000;5(4):302–311.
44. Nunnally ME, O'Connor MF, Kor-
dylewski H, etal. The incidence and risk 
factors for perioperative cardiac arrest 
observed in the national anesthesia clin-
ical outcomes registry. Anesth Analg. 
2015;120:364–370.
45. Benjamin EJ, Muntner P, Alonso A, 
etal. Heart disease and stroke statis-
tics—2019 update: A report from the 
American Heart Association. Circula-
tion. 2019;139(10):e56–e528. Originally 
published January 31, 2019. https://doi.
org/10.1161/CIR.0000000000000659.
46. Quill TE, Holloway R. Time-limited trials 
near the end of life. JAMA. 2011;306:
1483–1484.
47. Hui D, dos Santos R, Chisholm G, etal. 
Clinical signs of impending death in can-
cer patients. Oncologist. 2014;19:681–687.
48. Ethical Guidelines for the Anesthesia 
Care of Patients with Do-Not-Resus-
citate Orders or Other Directives That 
Limit Treatment. https://www.asahq.
org/standards-and-guidelines/ethical-
guidelines-for-the-anesthesia-care-of-
patients-with-do-not-resuscitate-orders-
or-other-directives-that-limit-treatment. 
Accessed May 26, 2021.
49. Sudore RL, Fried TR. Redefining the 
“planning” in advance care planning: 
Preparing for end-of-life decision mak-
ing. Ann Intern Med. 2010;153:256–261.
50. Silveira MJ, Kim SY, Langa KM. Advance 
directives and outcomes of surrogate 
decision making before death. N Engl J 
Med. 2010;362:1211–1218.
51. Appelbaum 
PS. 
Clinical 
practice. 
Assessment of patients’ competence to 
consent to treatment. N Engl J Med. 
2007;357:1834–1840.
52. Shalowitz DI, Garrett-Mayer E, Wendler 
D. The accuracy of surrogate deci-
sion makers: A systematic review. Arch 
Intern Med. 2006;166:493–497.
53. Scott TH, Gavrin JR. Palliative surgery 
in the do-not-resuscitate patient: Ethics 
and practical suggestions for manage-
ment. Anesthesiol Clin. 2012;30:1–12.
54. Kazaure H, Roman S, Sosa JA. High 
mortality in surgical patients with do-
not-resuscitate orders: Analysis of 8256 
patients. Arch Surg. 2011;146:922–928.
55. American Society of Anesthesiologists. 
Ethical Guidelines for the Anesthesia Care 
of Patients with Do-Not-Resuscitate Orders 
or Other Directives that Limit Treatment. 
Amended on October 16, 2013. http://
www.asahq.org/223C/media/sites/asahq/
files/public/resources/standards-guidelines/
ethical-guidelines-for-the-anesthesia-care-
of-patients.pdf/. Accessed May 26, 2021.
56. American College of Surgeons. State-
ment on Advance Directives by Patients. 
“Do Not Resuscitate” in the Operating 
Room. https://www.facs.org/about-acs/
statements/19-advance-directives; 2014. 
Accessed May 26, 2021.
Section VI CONSULTANT ANESTHETIC PRACTICE
854
57. Association of periOperative Registered 
Nurses. AORN Position Statement on 
Perioperative Care of Patients with Do-
Not-Resuscitate or Allow-Natural-Death 
Orders. http://www.aorn.org/guidelines/
clinical-resources/position-statements; 
2014. Accessed May 26, 2021.
58. Burkle CM, Swetz KM, Armstrong MH, 
Keegan MT. Patient and doctor attitudes 
and beliefs concerning perioperative do 
not resuscitate orders: Anesthesiologists’ 
growing compliance with patient auton-
omy and self determination guidelines. 
BMC Anesthesiol. 2013;13:2.
59. Redmann AJ, Brasel KJ, Alexander 
CG, Schwarze ML. Use of advance 
directives for high-risk operations: A 
national survey of surgeons. Ann Surg. 
2012;255:418–423.
855
Chapter
INTRODUCTION
Human interest in sleep is as old as humanity itself, but 
the specialty of sleep medicine is less than 50 years old.1
The characterization of sleep into periods based on elec-
troencephalography (EEG) and the presence or absence 
of rapid eye movements (REMs) did not occur until the 
1950s. Early developments in the field included the 
original description of sleep apnea and the development 
of all-night sleep studies incorporating EEG, respiratory, 
and cardiac measurements, known as polysomnography 
(PSG).1 More recently, additional research has elucidated 
the neurophysiologic mechanisms governing sleep and 
wakefulness. Anesthetic drugs modulate key compo-
nents of sleep–wake neuronal circuits. This chapter will 
review basic sleep physiology, the differences between 
sleep and anesthesia states, functional neuroanatomy of 
sleep and arousal, and sleep-disordered breathing (SDB). 
The pathophysiology and perioperative management of 
obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) will be highlighted.
BASIC SLEEP PHYSIOLOGY
Sleep is defined as a state of decreased arousal that 
is actively generated by nuclei in the hypothalamus, 
brainstem, and basal forebrain. It is crucial for the 
maintenance of health.2 3 Humans spend approximately 
one-third of their lives in sleep. Sleep is described to 
be under the control of two processes: a circadian clock 
(the circadian drive) that regulates the appropriate tim-
ing of sleep and wakefulness across the 24-hour day 
and a homeostatic process (the homoeostatic drive) that 
regulates sleep need and intensity according to the time 
spent awake or asleep.4 The daily drive to sleep is modu-
lated by the hypothalamic suprachiasmatic nuclei that 
coordinate circadian (24-hour) rhythm. The perceived 
sensation of sleepiness is the result of a circadian drive, 
process C(people tend to get sleepy according to their 
INTRODUCTION
BASIC SLEEP PHYSIOLOGY
GENERAL ANESTHESIA
OTHER AROUSAL STATES
SLEEP AND ANESTHESIA STATES
FUNCTIONAL NEUROANATOMY OF SLEEP 
AND AROUSAL PATHWAYS
SLEEP-DISORDERED BREATHING OR SLEEP-
RELATED BREATHING DISORDERS
OBSTRUCTIVE SLEEP APNEA
Pathophysiology of Upper Airway Collapse in 
Obstructive Sleep Apnea
Clinical Diagnostic Criteria
Polysomnography and Portable Devices
Prevalence of OSA in the General and Surgical 
Populations
OSA and Comorbid Conditions
Surgery and OSA Severity
OSA and Perioperative Complications
Clinical Pathways and Principles of 
Perioperative Management
Preoperative Assessment
Perioperative Risk Mitigation Strategies
Postoperative Disposition of OSA Patients
CONCLUSION
SLEEP MEDICINE AND 
ANESTHESIA
Joanna Bouez, Frances Chung, Mandeep Singh
48
Section VI CONSULTANT ANESTHETIC PRACTICE
856
accustomed sleep times during a 24-hour cycle), along 
with a homeostatic drive, process S (sleep deprivation 
leads to increasing sleepiness).5 These two sleep drives are 
additive, and temporal organization must be preserved to 
obtain a subjective experience of being refreshed and 
restful.6 For example, patients with chronic insomnia 
often have difficulties because the two sleep drives are 
not aligned with each other (e.g., frequent afternoon naps 
would delay sleep onset later in the night).
Normal sleep exhibits a dynamic architecture and is 
a nonhomogeneous state that can be divided into non–
rapid eye movement (NREM) and rapid eye movement 
(REM) sleep. These two states cycle at an ultradian (less 
than 24 hours) rhythm of approximately 90- to 120-min-
ute intervals, consolidated in bouts of 6 to 8 hours.3 6
The American Academy of Sleep Medicine (AASM) has 
classified wakefulness and sleep into various stages based 
on characteristic EEG patterns.7 8 Wakefulness, or Stage 
W, is characterized by beta activity with eyes open (low 
amplitude, 12–40 Hz) and alpha activity with eyes closed 
(low amplitude, 8–13 Hz). Non-REM sleep has three dis-
tinct stages, based on characteristic patterns on the EEG 
(Fig. 48.1). Stage N1 sleep is characterized by attenuation 
of alpha activity during wakefulness to a low-amplitude, 
mixed-frequency signal (4–7 Hz) and vertex sharp waves 
(prominent sharp waves lasting <0.5 second and maximal 
over the central EEG region). Stage N2 sleep is character-
ized by the presence of K-complexes (well-delineated, 
negative, sharp waves followed by a positive deflection, 
lasting 0.5 second) and sleep spindles (high-frequency 
bursts of 11 to 16 Hz, with tapering ends, distinct from the 
background rhythm and lasting ≥0.5 second). Stage N3 
sleep is characterized by the presence of higher-amplitude 
(75 microvolts), lower-frequency (0.5–2 Hz) rhythms, 
also known as delta waves, accompanied by waxing and 
waning muscle tone, decreased body temperature, and 
Awake
A
B
Awake with eyes open (minimally conscious state)
Awake with eyes closed (minimally conscious state)
General Anesthesia
Paradoxical excitation (minimally conscious state) 
REM
Non-REM stage 1
Non-REM stage 2 (vegetative state)
Non-REM stage 3, or slow-wave (vegetative state, coma)
Phase 1
Phase 2 (vegetative state, coma)
Phase 3: Burst suppression (coma)
Phase 4: Isoelectric (coma, brain death)
C
Sleep
Fig. 48.1 Electroencephalographic patterns during awake state, general anesthesia, and sleep.
Panel A shows the EEG patterns when the patient is awake, with eyes open (left) and the alpha rhythm 
(10 Hz) with eyes closed (right). Panel B shows the EEG patterns during the states of general anesthesia: 
paradoxical excitation, phases 1 and 2, burst suppression, and isoelectric tracing. Panel C shows the 
EEG patterns during the stages of sleep: rapid eye movement (REM) sleep, stage 1 non-REM sleep, stage 
2 non-REM sleep, and stage 3 non-REM (slow wave) sleep. (EEG tracings during sleep from Watson C, 
Bagdoyan H, Lydic R. A neurochemical perspective on states of consciousness. In Hudetz AG, Pearce 
RA, eds. Suppressing the Mind: Anesthetic Modulation of Memory and Consciousness, New York, Springer/
Humana Press; 2010:33–80. Figure from Brown EN, Lydic R, Schiff ND. General anesthesia, sleep, and 
coma. N Engl J Med. 2010;363[27]:2638–2650.)
VI
Chapter 48 Sleep Medicine and Anesthesia
857
decreased heart rate.3 Stage R, or REM sleep, is character-
ized by REMs, dreaming, irregular breathing and heart 
rate, and skeletal-muscle hypotonia.2 In REM sleep the 
EEG shows active high-frequency, low-amplitude rhythms 
(see Fig. 48.1). This activated EEG pattern has given rise 
to descriptions of REM sleep as “active” or “paradoxical” 
sleep and to the NREM phase of sleep as “quiet” sleep.9
Cognitive changes and vivid dreaming are well known to 
occur during REM sleep.10
GENERAL ANESTHESIA
General anesthesia could be described as a reversible 
drug-induced coma. Nevertheless, anesthesia providers 
refer to it as “sleep” to avoid disquieting patients when 
referring to unconsciousness induced by anesthetic drugs. 
The EEG patterns of general anesthesia–induced con-
sciousness are described in three periods (see Fig. 48.1).
Before induction, the patient has a normal, active EEG 
with prominent alpha activity (10 Hz) when the eyes are 
closed. Small doses of hypnotic agents acting on the 
γ-aminobutyric acid type A (GABAA) receptors induce a 
state of sedation in which the patient is calm and easily 
arousable, with the eyes generally closed. This is followed 
by a brief period of paradoxical excitation, characterized 
by an increase in beta activity on the EEG (13–25 Hz).
During the maintenance period, four distinct phases 
have been described.11 Phase 1, a light state of general 
anesthesia, is characterized by a decrease in EEG beta 
activity (13–30 Hz) and an increase in EEG alpha activity 
(8–12 Hz) and delta activity (0–4 Hz). During phase 2,
the intermediate state, beta activity decreases and alpha 
and delta activity increase, with so-called anterioriza-
tion—that is, an increase in alpha and delta activity in 
the anterior EEG leads relative to the posterior leads. The 
EEG in phase 2 resembles that seen in stage 3, non-REM 
(or slow wave) sleep. Phase 3 is a deeper state, in which 
the EEG is characterized by flat periods interspersed with 
periods of alpha and beta activity (burst suppression). As 
this state of general anesthesia deepens, the time between 
the periods of alpha activity lengthens, and the ampli-
tudes of the alpha and beta activity decrease. Surgery is 
usually performed during phases 2 and 3. In phase 4 the 
most profound state of general anesthesia, the EEG is iso-
electric (completely flat), indicated in conditions such as 
induced coma or neuroprotection during neurosurgery11
(also see Chapter 30).
During emergence from general anesthesia, the EEG 
patterns proceed in approximately reverse order from 
phases 2 and 3 of the maintenance period to an active 
EEG that is consistent with a fully awake state. Anesthetic 
drugs induce unconsciousness by altering neurotrans-
mission at multiple sites in the cerebral cortex, brain-
stem, and thalamus. Recent advances in spectral EEG 
analysis have allowed spatiotemporal characterization 
of the effects of various intravenous and inhalational 
anesthetics12 (Figs. 48.2A and B).
OTHER AROUSAL STATES
Coma is characterized by a state of profound unrespon-
siveness, which could be drug-induced or a result of 
brain injury. EEG activity in comatose patients is variable 
and resembles the high-amplitude, low-frequency activ-
ity seen in patients under general anesthesia. The EEG 
patterns are also dependent on the severity and extent of 
brain suppression or injury (see Fig. 48.1).3 The EEG pat-
terns during recovery from coma—coma, vegetative state, 
and minimally conscious state—resemble the patterns 
during general anesthesia, sleep, and the awake state.11
SLEEP AND ANESTHESIA STATES
It is important to understand the similarities and differ-
ences between sleep and anesthesia states.13 Sleep is a 
natural state of decreased arousal controlled by circadian 
and homeostatic drives. Anesthesia is a drug-induced state 
that is independent of these intrinsic rhythms. Sleep states 
are amenable to disruptive influences such as psychologi-
cal and environmental factors. Anesthesia is immune to 
such influences. Sleep is a characteristically nonhomo-
geneous state with distinct stages, periodic arousals, and 
variable body postures, occurring in a cyclical pattern. 
Anesthesia is a more or less homogeneous state, the depth 
and duration of which are directly dependent on drug 
pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics. In the presence 
of significant sensory stimulation the sleep state becomes 
disrupted and the subject arouses. On the other hand, anes-
thesia results from suppression of arousals, rendering the 
subject insensate to bodily injury during surgery. Whereas 
sleep state reversal occurs spontaneously after restorative 
functions are completed, anesthesia state reversal requires 
voluntary stoppage of drug administration and effective 
drug elimination.
FUNCTIONAL NEUROANATOMY OF SLEEP 
AND AROUSAL PATHWAYS
Common neurophysiologic mechanisms and neural path-
ways engaged in sleep are activated by anesthetic drugs. 
This knowledge has provided new insights into the 
mechanisms of sedation and anesthesia.11,14 Sedative 
drug requirements appear to decrease with both sleep 
deprivation and circadian rhythm disruption. In an ani-
mal model propofol anesthesia, in the absence of surgical 
stimulation, has been observed to have sleep-like restora-
tive properties after a period of sleep deprivation.15,16
However, isoflurane anesthesia did not demonstrate this 
Section VI CONSULTANT ANESTHETIC PRACTICE
858
Fig. 48.2 Distinct EEG patterns during sleep and general anesthesia. (A-Sleep) Distinct EEG patterns during different sleep 
stages. Sleep stages have distinct EEG signatures that result from differences in the neural circuits that are involved in their generation 
and maintenance. The spectrogram, which is the decomposition of the EEG signal by frequency as a function of time, makes these 
differences clear. These signatures are also visible in the raw EEG signal (black traces represent the first 10 seconds of data shown in 
the spectrogram). (a) EEG slowing and the loss of the awake-state alpha oscillations are distinguishing features of N1 sleep. (b) Slow 
delta (0.1–4 Hz) oscillations, K-complexes (black arrow on spectrogram and raw EEG), and spindle oscillations (12–16 Hz, red arrow on 
spectrogram and raw EEG) are distinguishing features of N2 sleep. (c) The predominance of slow-delta oscillations is a distinguishing 
feature of N3 sleep. (d) Activated “saw-tooth” EEG without the awake-state alpha oscillations are distinguishing features of REM sleep. 
(B-General Anesthesia) Distinct EEG patterns during general anesthesia. Each anesthetic drug has a different EEG signature that results 
from differences in the neural circuits that are involved in state generation and maintenance. (a) Slow-delta (0.1–4 Hz) and alpha (8–12 Hz) 
oscillations are the predominant EEG signatures of propofol-general. This finding is consistent with the EEG signatures of other intravenous 
GABAA receptor anesthetics (e.g., benzodiazepines, etomidate) during general anesthesia. (b) Slow-delta oscillations, theta (4–8 Hz), and 
alpha oscillations are the predominant EEG signatures of sevoflurane-general anesthesia. This finding is consistent with the EEG signatures 
of other modern day derivatives of ether during general anesthesia (desflurane, isoflurane). The close similarities between the EEG signatures 
of propofol and modern derivatives of ether anesthesia have been suggested to result from enhancement of GABAA receptor spontaneous 
inhibitory inputs (IPSCs). (c) Isoelectricity is observed when high doses of anesthetics such as sevoflurane or propofol are administered. 
Significantly enhancement of IPSCs in cortical circuits is a mechanism to explain isoelectricity. (d) Gamma oscillations (30–45 Hz) that are 
interspersed with slow-delta (black arrow on spectrogram and raw EEG) oscillations are the predominant EEG signatures of general anesthesia 
maintained with the NMDA receptor antagonist ketamine. (From Akeju O, Brown EN. Neural oscillations demonstrate that general anesthesia 
and sedative states are neurophysiologically distinct from sleep. Curr Opin Neurobiol. 2017;44:178–185. Figs. 1 and 2.)
A
B
VI
Chapter 48 Sleep Medicine and Anesthesia
859
effect, suggesting differences in the neurophysiologic 
interface between sleep and anesthesia for inhaled anes-
thetics.17
Anesthesia-induced loss of consciousness results from 
interactions of anesthetics with the neural circuits regu-
lating sleep and wakefulness states. Ascending activation 
of the cerebral cortex by subcortical center activity is 
important in the maintenance of wakefulness. Deactiva-
tion of thalamus activity has been observed in imaging 
studies for both the sleep and anesthesia states, sug-
gesting that thalamic and extrathalamic pathways are 
involved in sleep state modulation.18
Sleep state modulation is regulated by two groups 
of neural centers: those that promote wakefulness and 
those that promote sleep19 20 (Fig. 48.3). The wakefulness-
promoting centers are the locus coeruleus (LC), dorsal 
raphe (DR), and tuberomammillary nucleus (TMN). The 
sleep-promoting center is primarily the hypothalamic 
ventrolateral preoptic nucleus (VLPO).19 20 The preoptic 
area of the hypothalamus contains neurons active in both 
sleep and thermoregulation.21 Discrete neurochemical 
mediators are involved in the sleep–wake transition19 (see 
Fig. 48.3). The mutual inhibition between VLPO and LC 
acts to produce switchlike, bistable states of wakefulness 
Fig. 48.3 Simplified NREM sleep-promoting pathway. During wakefulness, the LC is active and 
exerts an inhibitory influence on the hypothalamic VLPO. An inhibition of noradrenergic neurons in 
the LC, which accompanies endogenous NREM sleep, releases a tonic noradrenergic inhibition of 
the VLPO. The activated VLPO is believed to release GABA into the TMN, which inhibits its release 
of arousal-promoting histamine into the cortex and thus induces loss of consciousness. A number 
of pathways are involved in NREM sleep. The sleep-active VLPO projects to all the ascending 
monoaminergic, cholinergic, and orexinergic arousal nuclei (TMN, LC, DR, PPTg, LDTg, PeF), which 
project to the cortex, where they release arousal-promoting neurotransmitters to promote wakefulness. 
Therefore the activated VLPO exerts an inhibitory influence on key brainstem and thalamic centers, 
inhibiting the ascent of arousal-promoting pathways to the cortex through them. 5-HT, serotonin; Ach,
acetylcholine; DR, dorsal raphe nuclei; GABA, gamma-aminobutyric acid; Gal, galanin; His, histamine; 
LC, locus coeruleus; LDTg, laterodorsal tegmental nuclei; NE, norepinephrine; NREM, non–rapid eye 
movement; OX, orexin (hypocretin); PeF, perifornical area; PPTg, pedunculopontine tegmental nuclei; 
TMN, tuberomammillary nucleus; VLPO, ventrolateral preoptic nucleus. (From Nelson LE, Guo TZ, Lu J, 
et al. The sedative component of anesthesia is mediated by GABA(A) receptors in an endogenous sleep 
pathway. Nat Neurosci, 5[10]:979–984; with permission.)
Section VI CONSULTANT ANESTHETIC PRACTICE
860
and sleep at a certain threshold.20 This effect is also seen 
with the use of anesthetic agents such as propofol and 
benzodiazepines acting on the same target receptors and 
neural pathways integral to sleep and wakefulness.
SLEEP-DISORDERED BREATHING OR 
SLEEP-RELATED BREATHING DISORDERS
SDB is characterized by abnormalities of respiratory pat-
terns during sleep. The abnormal patterns of breathing 
are broadly grouped into OSA disorders, central sleep 
apnea (CSA) disorders, sleep-related hypoventilation 
disorders, and sleep-related hypoxemia disorder.22 OSA 
disorders are characterized by complete or incomplete 
upper airway (UA) closure during sleep in the presence of 
respiratory effort during some portion of the event. CSA 
disorders are characterized by reduction (hypopnea) or 
cessation (apnea) of airflow caused by absent or reduced 
respiratory effort. Central apnea or hypopnea may occur 
in a cyclical, intermittent, or irregular (ataxic) fashion. 
We will primarily focus on OSA, as this is the most com-
mon entity encountered perioperatively.
OBSTRUCTIVE SLEEP APNEA
OSA is characterized by episodes of apnea or hypopnea 
during sleep, resulting in varying severity of hypoxemia 
and/or hypercapnia. The obstructive apnea or hypopnea 
is caused by repeated episodes of complete or partial 
closure of the pharynx, accompanied by hypoventilation 
and hypoxemia and terminated by EEG arousal.23 24
Pathophysiology of Upper Airway Collapse in 
Obstructive Sleep Apnea
UA collapsibility and patency are dependent on a con-
tinuous balance between collapsing and expanding 
forces influenced by sleep–wake arousal. Using poly-
somnographic data of important physiologic variables, 
important characteristic features of an obstructive apnea 
can be studied.25 During wakefulness, the UA stability 
and patency are achieved by increased genioglossus 
muscle tone, which pulls the tongue forward.24 During 
sleep, patients with OSA develop UA collapse because 
of a complex interaction of multiple factors such as 
loss of UA dilating muscle tone, impaired response to 
mechanoreceptors sensing intrapharyngeal pressures, 
ventilatory overshoot (high loop gain of the respiratory 
control system), and an increased arousal threshold.24
Moreover, patients with OSA have a UA that is predis-
posed to collapse because of the presence of a smaller 
UA cross-sectional area and higher critical closure pres-
sures than patients without OSA.26 During NREM sleep 
and anesthesia, several factors contribute to UA collapse 
and hypoventilation: reduction of wakeful cortical influ-
ences, reflex gain, and ventilatory drive.13 These effects 
are greater during anesthesia, as the decrease in tonic 
and phasic muscle activity is profound and abolition 
of protective arousal response predisposes to prolonged 
obstruction and more severe oxygen desaturation.
Clinical Diagnostic Criteria
Classically, the gold standard for the definitive diagno-
sis of OSA requires an overnight PSG or sleep study. A 
laboratory-based sleep study is set up and analyzed by a 
registered sleep technologist using standard criteria.8 All 
studies are performed using a uniform montage, including 
central, occipital, and frontal EEG; bilateral electro-ocu-
logram (EOG), chin electromyogram (EMG), electrocar-
diogram (ECG), and bilateral anterior tibialis muscle EMG. 
Thoracoabdominal motion is usually monitored by res-
piratory inductance plethysmography (RIP), and airflow is 
monitored using either a nasal pressure transducer or nasal 
thermistor. Arterial oxygen saturation (Sao2) is monitored 
by pulse oximetry. Body position and snoring are recorded 
manually. Fig. 48.4 provides an example of polysomno-
graphic recording in a patient with OSA.
Based on the AASM recommendations, apneas and 
hypopneas are defined as a reduction in airflow from 
intranasal pressure of at least 90%, or between 50% and 
90%, respectively, for at least 10 seconds accompanied by 
either a 3% to 4% drop in oxygen saturation or an EEG 
arousal.7 Hypopneas are classified as obstructive if thora-
coabdominal motion is out of phase or if airflow limita-
tion is observed on the nasal pressure signal, whereas 
central hypopneas are classified where thoracoabdominal 
motion is in phase and there is no evidence of airflow 
limitation on the nasal pressure signal.27 Mixed apneas 
are classified as events that begin as central for at least 
10 seconds and end as obstructive, with a minimum of 
three obstructive efforts. Wherever applicable, ataxic 
breathing or Cheyne-Stokes type of respiration is also 
reported.27–29
The Apnea-Hypopnea Index (AHI) is defined as the 
average number of abnormal breathing events per hour 
of sleep. The criteria for OSA diagnosis, and its severity, 
is listed in Box 48.1.
Polysomnography and Portable Devices
Home sleep testing may be a viable alternative to stand-
ard PSG for the diagnosis of OSA in certain subsets of 
patients.31,32
The Portable Monitoring Task Force of the AASM 
has classified level 2 (full unattended PSG with seven or 
more channels), level 3 (devices limited to four to seven 
channels), and level 4 (one to two channels, including 
nocturnal oximetry) devices.31 In particular, the level 
2 portable PSG has been shown to have a diagnostic 
VI
Chapter 48 Sleep Medicine and Anesthesia
861
Arousal
100
80
200
200
120
80
150
100
100
EEG (µV)
EMG (µV)
SaO2
(%)
Rib
Cage
(mL)
Abdomen
(mL)
Sonogram
Heart
Rate
(b.min-1)
Blood
Pressure
(mm Hg)
15 sec
50
Arousal
Sleep
Fig. 48.4 Polysomnographic recordings of obstructive apnea in a patient with obstructive sleep 
apnea. Note that during the hypopnea, ribcage and abdominal motion are out of phase (i.e., moving 
in opposite directions), indicating upper airway obstruction. Upper airway obstruction leads to a drop 
in O2 saturation. The ineffective breathing attempts continue until the patient awakes, as seen by the 
EEG arousal and pharyngeal obstruction is relieved. The resuscitative breath now leads to normalization 
of the oxygen saturation until the next obstructive event ensues. The surge in heart rate and blood 
pressure occurs along with the arousal, highlighting the activation of sympathetic stimulation in these 
patients and placing them at higher risk of long-term cardiovascular complications. The arrows indicate 
arousals from sleep and sleep onset as determined from the EEG and EMG traces. The sonogram 
indicates breathing sounds caused by snoring. EEG, Electroencephalogram; EKG, electrocardiogram; 
EMG, submental electromyogram; Sao2 arterial oxygen saturation. (Modified with permission from 
Thompson SR, Ackermann U, Horner RL. Sleep as a teaching tool for integrating respiratory physiology 
and motor control. Adv Physiol Educ, 2001;25:101–116.)
accuracy similar to that of standard PSG,33 whereas over-
night oximetry is both sensitive and specific for detecting 
OSA in high-risk surgical patients.34
Preoperative overnight oximetry may be used as a 
screening test. The following findings predict postopera-
tive adverse events: mean preoperative overnight satura-
tion <93%, oxygen desaturation index >29 events per 
hour, and overnight duration of oxygen saturation <90% 
for >7% of total sleep time.35 Portable devices may be 
considered when there is high pretest likelihood for mod-
erate to severe OSA without other substantial comorbidi-
ties.31 Proper standards must be followed for conducting 
the test and interpreting the results.36
Prevalence of OSA in the General and Surgical 
Populations
There is a wide variation in the reported prevalence of 
OSA because of substantial methodological heterogene-
ity(e.g., populations examined, periods of assessment, 
and how breathing events of OSA are defined).37 The 
overall population prevalence of mild OSA ranged from 
9% to 38%. OSA prevalence increases with advancing 
age and, in some elderly groups, was as high as 90% in 
men and 78% in women. The prevalence of moderate 
to severe OSA (AHI ≥15 events/hr) in the adult popula-
tion ranges from 6% to 17%, being as high as 49% with 
increasing age and body mass index.38 The risk factors 
Section VI CONSULTANT ANESTHETIC PRACTICE
862
Box 48.1
Obstructive Sleep Apnea Diagnosis and 
Severity Based on Apnea-Hypopnea Index (AHI)
•Mild: 5–15 events per hour
•Moderate: ≥15–30 events per hour
•Severe ≥30 events per hour
AHI is defined as the average number of abnormal breathing 
events per hour of sleep. The clinical diagnosis of OSA requires 
either an AHI of 15 or more or AHI greater than or equal to 
5, with symptoms such as excessive daytime sleepiness, 
unintentional sleep during wakefulness, unrefreshing sleep, loud 
snoring reported by a partner, or observed obstruction during 
sleep.22 30 32
for OSA are male sex, higher body mass index, and 
increasing age.37 Nearly 80% of men and 93% of women 
with moderate to severe sleep apnea are undiagnosed in 
the community.39 In one large case series 60% of surgi-
cal patients had undiagnosed moderate to severe OSA.40
OSA and Comorbid Conditions
OSA is associated with long-term cardiovascular morbid-
ity, including myocardial ischemia, heart failure, hyper-
tension, arrhythmias, cerebrovascular disease, metabolic 
syndrome, insulin resistance, gastroesophageal reflux, 
and obesity (Box 48.2).41 Craniofacial deformities (e.g., 
macroglossia, retrognathia, midfacial hypoplasia), endo-
crine disorders (e.g., hypothyroidism, Cushing disease), 
demographic (male, age above 50 years), and lifestyle 
factors (e.g., smoking, alcohol consumption) are closely 
associated with OSA.41 Anesthesia providers should be 
aware of the possible coexistence of these medical con-
ditions where further optimization and risk stratification 
may be indicated at the time of surgery. The symptoms 
and clinical features of OSA are listed in Box 48.2
Surgery and OSA Severity
Several factors contribute to postoperative worsening 
of OSA. A prospective observational study evaluated 
patients undergoing elective surgery with portable PSG 
preoperatively and on postoperative nights 1 and 3.37 38
Compared with the preoperative baseline, the AHI sig-
nificantly increased on the first night, with peak increase 
occurring on the third night.37 38 Preoperative AHI, age, 
and opioid dosage were significant predictors of postop-
erative AHI.38 These findings are clinically significant for 
surgical patients, as they are not monitored as closely 
during the second and third postoperative days compared 
with the more frequent monitoring in the postanesthesia 
care unit (PACU) setting.
Box 48.2
Symptoms and Clinical Features of Obstructive Sleep Apnea (OSA)
Symptoms
Comorbid Conditions
Daytime sleepiness
Obesity
Loud snoring
Large neck circumference
Nonrestorative sleep
Craniofacial deformities (retrognathia, midfacial hypoplasia)
Witnessed apneas by bed partner
Crowded pharynx
Awakening with choking
Systemic hypertension
Insomnia with frequent brief nocturnal awakenings
Hypercapnia or high serum bicarbonate
Lack of concentration
Cardiovascular disease
Cognitive deficits
Cerebrovascular disease
Changes in mood
Cardiac dysrhythmia
Morning headaches
Metabolic syndrome
Sleep walking, confusional arousals (arousals from NREM sleep)
Pulmonary hypertension
Vivid, strange, or threatening dreams (arousals from REM sleep)
Obesity hypoventilation syndrome
Gastroesophageal reflux
Cor pulmonale
Nocturia
Polycythemia
Drowsy driving, and motor vehicle accidents
Floppy eyelid syndrome
Modified from Olson E, Chung F, Seet E. Surgical risk and the preoperative evaluation and management of adults with obstructive sleep apnea. In: 
Post TW, ed. UpToDate. https://www.uptodate.com/contents/surgical-risk-and-the-preoperative-evaluation-and-management-of-adults-with-
obstructive-sleep-apnea. Accessed October 2021.
NREM, Non–rapid eye movement; REM, rapid eye movement
VI
Chapter 48 Sleep Medicine and Anesthesia
863
Another approach to analyzing life-threatening issues 
in patients with OSA is creation and analysis of a data-
base of OSA-related critical events. The Society of Anes-
thesia and Sleep Medicine (SASM) partnered with the 
Anesthesia Closed Claims Project of the American Society 
of Anesthesiologists (ASA) to create an international reg-
istry of unexpected critical events in patients with OSA.42
Over 60 patients with known or suspected OSA met 
inclusion criteria (adults, OSA diagnosed or suspected, 
event occurring within 30 days postoperatively). Most of 
the critical events occurred on the ward, and the major-
ity occurred within 24 hours of anesthesia.42 About 97% 
of patients received opioids within the 24 hours before 
the event, and two-thirds also received sedatives.42 Death 
and brain damage were more likely to occur when the 
events were unwitnessed, with no supplemental oxygen, 
lack of respiratory monitoring, and coadministration of 
opioids and sedatives.
OSA and Perioperative Complications
OSA is a predictor of difficult intubation and impossible 
mask ventilation.43 44 Difficult airway management is 
related to changes in UA anatomy with augmented col-
lapsibility, impaired capability of UA dilator muscles to 
respond to airway obstruction, disparities in hypoxemia 
and hypercarbia arousal thresholds (waking up too eas-
ily to minor airway narrowing), and unstable ventilatory 
control.45 46
Patients with OSA are more likely to develop postop-
erative complications, especially those with undiagnosed 
OSA.47 48 Respiratory complications include emergent 
reintubation, with absolute increases of 3% to 5% reported 
across a variety of surgery types.49 A retrospective 
matched cohort analysis evaluated postoperative pulmo-
nary and cardiovascular outcomes in over 4000 patients 
with OSA.47 The risk of respiratory complications was 
approximately twofold higher for patients with diagnosed 
or undiagnosed OSA, with greatest risk in patients with 
severe OSA.47 Another cohort study of over 50 hospitals 
in Michigan evaluated the impact of untreated OSA on 
cardiopulmonary complications after general and vascular 
surgery.50 Patients with untreated OSA had more cardio-
pulmonary complications, including unplanned reintuba-
tions and myocardial infarction.50 A large database review 
of patients who underwent orthopedic or general surgery 
identified over 100,000 patients with OSA and compared 
their perioperative pulmonary outcomes with a matched 
cohort without OSA.51 Patients with OSA experienced a 
fivefold increase in intubation and mechanical ventilation 
after orthopedic surgery and a twofold increase after gen-
eral surgery compared with controls.51 Other pulmonary 
complications that were more likely in the OSA group 
included aspiration, acute respiratory distress syndrome 
(ARDS), and pulmonary embolism (only after orthopedic 
but not general surgical procedures).51
OSA is an independent risk factor for cardiovascular 
morbidity and mortality in the general population not 
undergoing surgery.52–55 Several studies have clarified 
the impact of OSA on perioperative cardiovascular com-
plications. OSA was independently associated with atrial 
fibrillation in a variety of elective surgeries.49,56 A pro-
spective study of over 1000 patients with unrecognized 
OSA undergoing major noncardiac surgery revealed sig-
nificantly increased risk of postoperative cardiovascular 
events (a composite of myocardial injury, cardiac death, 
congestive heart failure, thromboembolism, atrial fibril-
lation and stroke) in those patients with severe OSA.48 A 
retrospective matched cohort analysis evaluated postop-
erative cardiovascular outcomes in over 4000 patients 
with OSA. Patients with undiagnosed OSA were found to 
have a threefold higher risk of cardiovascular complica-
tions, primarily cardiac arrest and shock, compared with 
diagnosed OSA patients with a prescription of continuous 
positive airway pressure (CPAP) therapy.47
Clinical Pathways and Principles of 
Perioperative Management
Several authors have published recommendations for the 
perioperative management of patients with OSA.57-59 As 
more studies in the field were conducted, specialty socie-
ties began issuing guidelines of their own. The Society 
for Ambulatory Anesthesia guidelines focused on patient 
selection for ambulatory surgery.60 The ASA issued 
guidelines in 2006 and updated them in 2014.61,62 In 2016 
the SASM published guidelines for preoperative screening 
and assessment of adult patients with OSA.63 (Box 48.3
provides an executive summary of these guidelines.)
Preoperative Assessment (Also See Chapter 13)
The following sections will follow the approach of the 
SASM guidelines on preoperative screening and assess-
ment, which categorized patients into three groups: diag-
nosed and treated OSA; diagnosed OSA, partially treated, 
or untreated; and suspected OSA.
Patients With Diagnosed OSA
Fig. 48.5B provides an overview of the preoperative eval-
uation of a patient with OSA. The history and physical 
examination should focus on the nature and severity of 
OSA symptoms. Previous consultation with a sleep phy-
sician and sleep reports should be reviewed, if possible.
Patients with long-standing OSA may present with 
significant comorbidities, including morbid obesity, met-
abolic syndrome, uncontrolled or resistant hypertension, 
arrhythmias, cerebrovascular disease, and heart failure.64
Preoperative assessment should rule out the presence 
of significant nocturnal hypoxemia, hypercarbia, poly-
cythemia, and cor pulmonale. Obesity hypoventilation 
syndrome (OHS) and pulmonary hypertension should 
Section VI CONSULTANT ANESTHETIC PRACTICE
864
be ruled out in OSA patients.65 66 The likelihood of res-
piratory failure after surgery was more than 10-fold in 
patients with OHS with OSA compared with patients with 
OSA alone.67 Serum bicarbonate level of 28 mmol/L or 
more can indicate metabolic compensation for chronic 
hypercapnia and is a useful screening tool for OHS.68
A preoperative transthoracic echocardiography may be 
considered in patients suspected to have severe pul-
monary hypertension, especially if intraoperative acute 
elevations in pulmonary arterial pressures are anticipated 
(e.g., high-risk or long-duration surgery).69
Patients with OSA may be using positive airway pres-
sure (PAP) devices for treatment, such as CPAP, bilevel 
positive airway pressure (BPAP), and auto-titrating positive 
airway pressure (APAP) devices. APAP devices provide UA 
stability based on airflow measurements, fluctuations in 
pressure, or airway resistance based on internal algorithms. 
This approach has the potential to account for night-to-
night variability of OSA severity.70 It may be meaningful 
to review sleep study and compliance data from the PAP 
devices. Improvement in the AHI may indicate successful 
treatment of respiratory events at the current PAP set-
ting.63 For patients with known OSA who are nonadherent 
Box 48.3
Executive Summary of the Society of Anesthesia and Sleep Medicine (SASM) Guidelines on Preoperative 
Screening and Assessment of Adult Patients With OSA
•Patients with obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) undergoing
procedures under anesthesia are at increased risk for 
perioperative complications compared with patients without 
the disease diagnosis. Identifying patients at high risk for 
OSA before surgery for targeted perioperative precautions 
and interventions may help to reduce perioperative patient 
complications.
•Screening tools help to risk-stratify patients with
suspected OSA with reasonable accuracy. Practice groups 
should consider making OSA screening part of standard 
preanesthetic evaluation.
•There is insufficient evidence in the current literature to
support canceling or delaying surgery for a formal diagnosis 
(laboratory or home polysomnography) in patients with 
suspected OSA unless there is evidence of an associated 
significant or uncontrolled systemic disease or additional 
problems with ventilation or gas exchange.
•The patient and the health care team should be aware that
both diagnosed OSA (whether treated, partially treated, 
or untreated) and suspected OSA may be associated with 
increased postoperative morbidity.
•If available, consideration should be given to obtaining
results of the sleep study and, where applicable, the 
patient’s recommended positive airway pressure (PAP) 
setting before surgery.
•If resources allow, facilities should consider having PAP
equipment for perioperative use or have patients bring their 
own PAP equipment with them to the surgical facility.
•Additional evaluation to allow preoperative cardiopulmonary
optimization should be considered in patients with 
diagnosed, partially treated/untreated, and suspected OSA 
where there is indication of an associated significant or 
uncontrolled systemic disease or additional problems with 
ventilation or gas exchange such as (1) hypoventilation 
syndromes, (2) severe pulmonary hypertension, 
and (3) resting hypoxemia in the absence of other 
cardiopulmonary disease.
•Where management of comorbid conditions has been
optimized, patients with diagnosed, partially treated/
untreated OSA, or suspected OSA may proceed to surgery, 
provided strategies for mitigation of postoperative 
complications are implemented.
•The risks and benefits of the decision to proceed with or
delay surgery include consultation and discussion with the 
surgeon and the patient.
•The use of PAP therapy in previously undiagnosed but
suspected OSA patients should be considered case by case. 
Because of the lack of evidence from randomized controlled 
trials, we cannot recommend its routine use.
•Continued use of PAP therapy at previously prescribed
settings is recommended during periods of sleep while 
hospitalized, both preoperatively and postoperatively. 
Adjustments may need to be made to the settings to 
account for perioperative changes such as facial swelling, 
upper airway edema, fluid shifts, pharmacotherapy, and 
respiratory function.
From Chung F, Memtsoudis SG, Ramachandran SK, et al. Society of Anesthesia and Sleep Medicine guidelines on preoperative screening and 
assessment of adult patients with obstructive sleep apnea. Anesth Analg. 2016;123(2):452–473.
or poorly adherent to PAP therapy, additional preopera-
tive cardiopulmonary evaluation should be considered for 
uncontrolled systemic conditions or difficulty with ventila-
tion or gas exchange. These conditions include hypoven-
tilation syndromes, severe pulmonary hypertension, and 
resting hypoxemia not attributable to other cardiopulmo-
nary disease.63 The impact of CPAP on the postoperative 
course of patients with OSA is an active area of investiga-
tion. A 2015 metaanalysis of six studies and 904 patients 
found that perioperative CPAP significantly reduced the 
postoperative AHI from baseline preoperative AHI, along 
with a modest reduction in hospital length of stay.71 A 
2021 review identified 21 randomized controlled trials 
of perioperative CPAP, 4 of which involved patients with 
PSG-diagnosed OSA or a high suspicion of OSA.72 Post-
operative use of CPAP improves oxygenation and reduces 
the need for reintubation and mechanical ventilation.72
However, none of the trials investigated the effect of CPAP 
exclusively in patients with experience of its use at home 
before surgery. The SASM guidelines strongly recommend 
that patients with OSA bring their PAP machine to the 
hospital and continue to wear it at appropriate times dur-
ing their stay, both preoperatively and postoperatively.63
VI
Chapter 48 Sleep Medicine and Anesthesia
865
Suspected OSA
STOP-Bang questionnaire
High risk
STOP-Bang 5-8
Intermediate risk
STOP-Bang 3-4
Low risk
STOP-Bang 0-2
• Major elective surgery
• Comorbid conditionsa
STOP score 
2 +
• Male
• BMI > 35 kg/m2
• ↑NC cut-offc
STOP-Bang 
3 +
HCO3
28 mmol/L
Consider:
• Further cardiopulmonary
evaluation, and/or 
• Sleep study and/or
• PAP therapyb
• Perioperative risk-mitigation
Routine
perioperative
management
No
No
A
Yes
Yes
Diagnosed OSA
History or sleep study
Moderate to severe OSA
AHI > 15 events/h
• Major elective surgery
• Significant comorbiditiesa
Consider further
cardiopulmonary
evaluation
• Continue PAP therapyc
• Perioperative risk-
mitigation 
Perioperative risk
mitigation
Mild OSA
AHI  5-15 events/h
No
B
Yes
Fig. 48.5 Preoperative evaluation of a patient with known or suspected obstructive sleep apnea in the 
preadmission clinic. (A) Suspected OSA and (B) diagnosed OSA.
(A) aPer the 2016 SASM guidelines, further cardiopulmonary evaluation may be indicated in patients with 
uncontrolled systemic disease or additional problems with ventilation or gas exchange, such as hypoventilation 
syndromes, severe pulmonary hypertension, and resting hypoxemia in the absence of other cardiopulmonary 
disease. bPositive airway pressure (PAP) therapy includes continuous PAP, bilevel PAP, and auto-titrating PAP. 
cNeck circumference (NC) cut-offs 17 inches/43 cm in male, 16 inches/41 cm in female. (From Vasu TS, 
Doghramji K, Cavallazzi R, et al. Obstructive sleep apnea syndrome and postoperative complications: Clinical 
use of the STOP-BANG questionnaire. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2010;136:1020–1024]. STOP-
Bang—STOP-Bang questionnaire cut-off values. (B) aSignificant comorbidities: heart failure, arrhythmias, 
uncontrolled hypertension, cerebrovascular disease, metabolic syndrome, obesity (body mass index >35 
kg/m2), obesity hypoventilation syndrome, pulmonary hypertension. cPositive airway pressure (PAP) therapy: 
includes continuous PAP, bilevel PAP, and autotitrating PAP.
Section VI CONSULTANT ANESTHETIC PRACTICE
866
Patients who are noncompliant with PAP therapy 
should be counseled to resume therapy preoperatively.73
Moreover, patients with significant comorbidities, an 
elevated serum bicarbonate (indicating chronic hyper-
capnia), and preoperative hypoxemia in the absence of 
respiratory disease are candidates for preoperative evalu-
ation and initiation of PAP therapy.73
Patients With Suspected OSA
An overnight PSG is the gold-standard diagnostic test for 
OSA. However, routine screening with PSG can be costly 
and resource intensive. As a result, simple, economical, 
and sensitive screening tests have been developed to 
detect patients with suspected OSA.
Preoperatively, the use of sensitive clinical criteria can 
identify and risk-stratify potential patients with OSA. The 
2014 ASA Guidelines recommend using a comprehensive 
checklist comprising physical characteristics, symptoms, 
and complaints related to OSA.61 62 The patient’s periop-
erative risk is predicted by a scoring system based on OSA 
severity, invasiveness of the procedure, and expected post-
operative opioid requirement.62 Other screening tools that 
have been validated in surgical patients include the STOP-
Bang questionnaire,74 the Berlin Questionnaire,75 and the 
Perioperative Sleep Apnea Prediction (P-SAP) score.76
The STOP-Bang questionnaire is a concise and easy-
to-use screening tool for OSA consisting of eight easily 
administered questions (Box 48.4).74 77 It is a self-admin-
istered screening tool that includes four “yes/no” ques-
tions and demographic data. Patients are deemed to be 
at low risk with scores of 0 to 2, intermediate risk with 
3 to 4, and high risk of OSA with scores of 5 to 8.74 77-
79 The STOP-Bang questionnaire has a high sensitivity 
and a high negative predictive value for patients with 
moderate to severe OSA74 (see Box 48.4). As the STOP-
Bang score increases from 0–2 to 7–8, the probability of 
moderate to severe OSA increases from 18% to 60% and 
the probability of severe OSA rises from 4% to 38%.80 The 
STOP-Bang questionnaire has been validated across dif-
ferent geographic regions in the world,81 in patients with 
cardiovascular risk,80 and in the general population.82
Fig. 48.5A provides an overview of the preoperative 
evaluation of a patient suspected of having OSA. The 
clinical evaluation should focus on pertinent symptoms 
and signs of OSA (see Box 48.2). History from the bed 
partner in the preoperative clinic is useful in the assess-
ment of loud snoring and observed apneic episodes 
while asleep. In emergency situations the patient should 
proceed for surgery. Perioperative risk-mitigation strate-
gies should be taken based on the clinical suspicion of 
OSA.58 83
For elective surgery, the 2016 SASM guidelines state 
that insufficient evidence exists to support canceling 
or delaying surgery to formally diagnose OSA in those 
patients identified as being at high risk of OSA pre-
operatively, unless there is evidence of uncontrolled 
systemic disease or additional problems with ventilation 
or gas exchange such as hypoventilation syndromes, 
severe pulmonary hypertension, and resting hypoxemia 
in the absence of other cardiopulmonary disease63 (see 
Box 48.3). In these patients additional cardiopulmonary 
evaluation is recommended to allow for optimization 
of the medical conditions and perioperative manage-
ment61,62 (also see Chapter 13).
After comorbid conditions have been optimized, 
patients may proceed to surgery after considering strate-
gies to mitigate postoperative risk (described later). The 
preoperative risk/benefit discussion, which includes tim-
ing of surgery, should involve the patient, surgeon, and 
anesthesia provider63 (see Box 48.3). If thepatient’s perio-
perative course suggests a higher likelihood of OSA (e.g., 
difficult airway management,84 recurrent postoperative 
respiratory events such as desaturation, hypoventilation, 
or apnea85), postoperative referral to a sleep physician 
may be useful for long-term follow-up.
Table 48.1 provides a summary of the SASM 2016 
guidelines on preoperative screening and assessment for 
adult patients with known or suspected OSA in the pre-
admission clinic setting, including levels of evidence for 
each recommendation.
Perioperative Risk Mitigation Strategies
Table 48.2 provides a summary of SASM guidelines for 
intraoperative management of adults with OSA. Preop-
erative sedative premedication in an unmonitored setting 
should be avoided. If the surgical procedure is appro-
priate, the use of regional anesthesia is preferred over 
general anesthesia to avoid manipulation of the airway 
and reduce the postoperative requirement for sedating 
analgesic medication86 (also see Chapter 14). Patients 
previously on PAP therapy at home may continue using 
their PAP devices during procedures under mild to mod-
erate sedation.87 A secured airway is preferred to an 
unprotected one for procedures requiring deep sedation.62
For a general anesthetic, the anesthesia provider 
should anticipate a greater likelihood of difficult air-
way management, including difficult mask ventilation, 
laryngoscopy, and intubation.88,89 Data on the placement 
of supraglottic airway devices are scarce, but available 
evidence does not suggest a difference between patients 
with and without OSA.86 The ASA difficult airway man-
agement guidelines recommend the presence of skilled 
personnel and advanced airway equipment at the time of 
airway management.90 Adequate preoxygenation; head 
elevated body position; and measures to decrease the risk 
of aspiration of gastric acid, such as preoperative proton 
pump inhibitors, antacids, and rapid-sequence induction 
with cricoid pressure, should be considered.
Pulmonary hypertension is a known complication of 
OSA and is more likely in patients with evidence of right 
heart failure and reduced exercise tolerance. For these 
VI
Chapter 48 Sleep Medicine and Anesthesia
867
Box 48.4
STOP-Bang Questionnaire
Snoring?
Do you Snore Loudly (loud enough to be heard through closed doors or your bed partner elbows you for snoring 
at night)?
Tired?
Do you often feel Tired, Fatigued, or Sleepy during the daytime (such as falling asleep during driving)?
Observed?
Has anyone Observed you Stop Breathing or Choking/Gasping during your sleep?
Pressure?
Do you have or are being treated for High Blood Pressure?
Body mass index more than 35 kg/m2?
Age older than 50 years old?
Neck size large (measured around Adams apple)? More than 40 cm?
Gender = Male?
Scoring criteria for general population
Low risk of OSA: Yes to 0–2 questions
Intermediate risk of OSA: Yes to 3–4 questions
High risk of OSA: Yes to 5–8 questions
The sensitivity of the STOP-Bang score ≥3 to detect moderate to severe OSA (AHI >15) and severe OSA (AHI >30) is 93% and 100%, respectively. 
The corresponding negative predictive values are 90% and 100%.
Proprietary to University Health Network, www.stopbang.ca
Recommendations
Level of 
Evidence
Grade of 
Recommendation
3.1
Surgical patients with OSA who are adherent to PAP therapy
3.1.1
The patient and the health care team should be aware that a diagnosis of OSA 
may be associated with increased postoperative morbidity.
Low
Strong
3.1.2
Consideration should be given to obtaining the results of the sleep study and the 
recommended PAP setting before surgery.
Low
Weak
3.1.3
Facilities should consider having PAP equipment available for perioperative use or 
have the patient bring their own PAP equipment to the surgical facility.
Low
Strong
3.1.4
Patients should continue to wear their PAP device at appropriate times during 
their stay in the hospital, both preoperatively and postoperatively.
Moderate
Strong
3.2
Surgical patients with OSA but who decline or are poorly adherent with PAP therapy
3.2.1
The patient and the health care team should be aware that untreated OSA may be 
associated with increased postoperative morbidity.
Low
Strong
3.2.2
Consideration should be given to obtaining the results of the sleep study and the 
recommended PAP setting before surgery.
Low
Weak
3.2.3
Facilities should have PAP equipment for perioperative use or have the patient 
bring their own PAP equipment with them to the surgical facility.
Low
Strong
3.2.4
Additional evaluation for preoperative cardiopulmonary optimization should be 
considered in patients with known OSA who are nonadherent or poorly adherent 
with PAP therapy and have uncontrolled systemic conditions or additional 
problems with ventilation or gas exchange such as (1) hypoventilation syndromes, 
(2) severe pulmonary hypertension, and (3) resting hypoxemia in the absence of 
other cardiopulmonary disease.
Low
Weak
3.2.5
Untreated OSA patients with optimized comorbid conditions may proceed to 
surgery, provided strategies for mitigation of postoperative complications are 
implemented. The risks and benefits of the decision should include consultation 
with the surgeon and the patient.
Low
Weak
3.2.6
Patients should be encouraged to wear their PAP device at appropriate times 
during their stay in the hospital, both preoperatively and postoperatively.
Moderate
Strong
Table 48.1
Preoperative Evaluation of a Patient With Known or Suspected OSA in the Preadmission Clinic
(Continued)
Section VI CONSULTANT ANESTHETIC PRACTICE
868
Recommendations
Level of 
Evidence
Grade of 
Recommendation
1
Airway management
1.1
Known or suspected OSA should be considered an independent risk factor 
for difficult intubation, difficult mask ventilation, or a combination of both. 
Adequate difficult airway management precautions should be taken.
Moderate
Strong
2
Anesthetic medication in OSA
2.1
Neuromuscular blocking agents
2.1.1
Patients with OSA who received neuromuscular blocking agents may 
be at increased risk of effects of postoperative residual neuromuscular 
blockade, hypoxemia, or respiratory failure.
Low
Weak
2.1.2
Currently, there is insufficient evidence to suggest the preference 
of any neuromuscular blocking reversal agent to reduce the risks of 
postoperative respiratory complications in patients with OSA.
Low
NA
2.2
Opioids
2.2.1
Patients with OSA may be at increased risk for adverse respiratory events 
from the use of opioid medication.
Low
Weak
2.2.2
The possibility of altered pain perception in patients with OSA should be 
considered.
Low
Weak
2.3
Propofol
2.3.1
Patients with OSA may be at increased risk for adverse respiratory events 
from the use of propofol for procedural sedation.
Moderate
Strong
2.4
Inhalational agents
2.4.1
There is a lack of evidence to assess residual effects of inhalational 
anesthetic agents in the population with OSA.
Moderate
No 
recommendation
Recommendations
Level of 
Evidence
Grade of 
Recommendation
3.3
Surgical patients who have a high probability for OSA
3.3.1
The patient and the health care team should be aware that a high probability of 
OSA may increase postoperative morbidity.
Low
Strong
3.3.2
Additional evaluation for preoperative cardiopulmonary optimization should 
be considered in patients who have a high probability of having OSA and have 
uncontrolled systemic conditions or additional problems with ventilation or gas 
exchange such as (1) hypoventilation syndromes, (2) severe pulmonary hypertension, 
and (3) resting hypoxemia in the absence of other cardiopulmonary disease.
Low
Weak
3.3.3
Patients who have a high probability of having OSA may proceed to surgery in 
the same manner as those with a confirmed diagnosis, provided strategies for 
mitigation of postoperative complications are implemented. Alternatively, they 
may be referred for further evaluation and treatment. The risks and benefits of the 
decision should include consultation with the surgeon and the patient.
Low
Weak
3.3.4
Patients should be advised to notify their primary medical provider that they were 
found to have a high probability of having OSA, thus allowing for appropriate 
referral for further evaluation.
Low
Weak
From Chung F, Memtsoudis SG, Ramachandran SK, et al. Society of Anesthesia and Sleep Medicine guidelines on preoperative screening and 
assessment of adult patients with obstructive sleep apnea. Anesth Analg. 2016;123(2):452–473, Table 9.
OSA, Obstructive sleep apnea; PAP, positive airway pressure.
Table 48.2
Society of Anesthesia and Sleep Medicine Guidelines on Intraoperative Management of Adult Patients With 
Obstructive Sleep Apnea
Table 48.1
Preoperative Evaluation of a Patient With Known or Suspected OSA in the Preadmission Clinic—Cont’d
VI
Chapter 48 Sleep Medicine and Anesthesia
869
Recommendations
Level of 
Evidence
Grade of 
Recommendation
2.5
Ketamine
2.5.1
There is a lack of evidence to assess residual effects of ketamine in the 
population with OSA.
Very low
No 
recommendation
2.6
Benzodiazepines
2.6.1
Patients with OSA may be at increased risk for adverse respiratory events 
from intravenous benzodiazepine sedation. Intravenous benzodiazepine 
sedation should be used with caution.
Moderate
Weak
2.7
Alpha-2 agonists
2.7.1
There is a lack of evidence to assess adverse effects of alpha-2 agonists 
in the population with OSA.
Low
No 
recommendation
3
Anesthesia technique
3.1
When applicable, regional anesthesia is preferable over general anesthesia 
in patients with OSA.
Moderate
Strong
From Memtsoudis SG, Cozowicz C, Nagappa M, et al. Society of Anesthesia and Sleep Medicine guideline on intraoperative management of adult 
patients with obstructive sleep apnea. Anesth Analg. 2018;127(4):967–987, Table 48.2
GRADE, Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, Development, and Evaluation; OSA, obstructive sleep apnea.
Table 48.2
Society of Anesthesia and Sleep Medicine Guidelines on Intraoperative Management of Adult Patients With 
Obstructive Sleep Apnea—Cont’d
patients, care should be taken to prevent elevation of 
pulmonary artery pressures (e.g., avoiding hypercarbia, 
hypoxemia, hypothermia, and acidosis.)
For anesthetic drug choice, short-acting agents such 
as propofol and remifentanil should be used, and long-
acting agents should be minimized. However, propofol 
has a relatively steep dose-response curve compared 
with other sedative/hypnotics; thus careful monitoring 
and titration are required to achieve the desired effect. 
Despite the lack of data on ketamine in the patient popu-
lation with OSA, the potential advantages of ketamine 
over other sedatives include better preservation of UA 
and ventilatory function.86 Intravenous benzodiazepine 
sedation may be associated with airway compromise in 
patients with OSA and should be used with caution.86
For postoperative analgesia, use of regional anesthesia 
techniques and multimodal analgesia are both strongly 
recommended to reduce opioid use and perioperative 
complications.86 Opioid-induced respiratory depression 
includes alveolar hypoventilation, decreased level of 
consciousness, and UA obstruction.91 Important com-
ponents of OSA—sleep fragmentation and intermittent 
hypoxia—modulate pain behavior and increase sensitivity 
to opioid analgesics.91Nonopioid analgesics that can be 
used for multimodal analgesia include acetaminophen, 
nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs, partial opioid anal-
gesics such as tramadol, anticonvulsants (pregabalin 
or gabapentin), corticosteroids such as dexamethasone, 
N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor antagonists, ket-
amine,92 and the alpha-2 agonists clonidine and dexme-
detomidine.93
Residual neuromuscular blockade is associated with 
significant postoperative respiratory complications.86 It 
is unclear whether patients with OSA have a greater risk 
for postoperative respiratory complications caused by 
postoperative residual neuromuscular blockade compared 
with patients without OSA. Moreover, it is uncertain 
whether the type of reversal agent affects the risk of post-
operative complications in patients with OSA.86 However, 
even small degrees of residual neuromuscular blockade 
impair UA dilator muscle function. The following actions 
can minimize this risk in patients with OSA: minimize the 
use and dose of neuromuscular blocking agent (NMBA), 
monitor the level of neuromuscular blockade, and com-
pletely reverse NMBA before extubation.86 Although 
neuromuscular blocking reversal agents can decrease 
postoperative residual paralysis and respiratory com-
plications, current evidence does not favor any specific 
neuromuscular reversal agent with regard to outcome in 
patients with OSA86 (also see Chapter 11).
Extubation should be performed in an awake, fully 
conscious patient with no neuromuscular blockade, who 
is able to obey commands and maintain a patent airway. 
Immediately after extubation, patients should be recov-
ered in a semi-upright or lateral position instead of the 
supine position.62
Postoperative Disposition of OSA Patients
The postoperative disposition of the patient with OSA 
depends on the nature of the surgery, OSA severity, and 
requirement for postoperative parenteral opioids (Fig. 48.6). 
Section VI CONSULTANT ANESTHETIC PRACTICE
870
A patient with severe OSA who underwent a major sur-
gery and is receiving high-dose intravenous opioids is 
more likely to require continuous monitoring than another 
patient with suspected OSA undergoing a superficial cata-
ract surgery under a local anesthetic with minimal opioid 
analgesic requirements. The anesthesia provider is respon-
sible for the final decision, taking into account all patient-
related, logistic, and circumstantial factors.
Based on the SASM guidelines and expert opin-
ion58 63 94 for perioperativemanagement of patients with 
OSA, all patients with known or suspected OSA who have 
received general anesthesia should have extended moni-
toring in the PACU with continuous pulse oximetry. There 
are currently no evidence-based guidelines addressing 
the optimal length of monitoring required in the PACU, 
and some recommendations are difficult to adhere to, 
especially in the context of cost and resource manage-
ment.87 It is reasonable to observe a suspected or docu-
mented patient with OSA in the PACU for an additional 
60 minutes in a quiet environment after the modified 
Aldrete criteria for discharge have been met58(also see 
Chapter 39).
The occurrence of recurrent respiratory events inthe 
PACU is another indication of continuous postoperative 
monitoring in a setting with continuous pulse oximetry 
and capability for early intervention (e.g., intensive care 
unit, step-down unit, or ward with pulse oximeter telem-
etry).85 Recurrent PACU respiratory events are defined as 
(1) episodes of apnea for 10 seconds or more, (2) bradyp-
nea fewer than 8 breaths perminute, (3) pain–sedation 
mismatch, or (4) repeated oxygen desaturation to less 
than 90%. Patients with suspected OSA (i.e., scored as 
high risk on screening questionnaires) and who develop 
recurrent PACU respiratory events postoperatively are 
at increased risk ofpostoperative respiratory complica-
tions.85 Postoperative PAP therapy may be initiated on 
an empiric basis to abolish recurrent obstructive events 
associated with significant hypoxemia.87 Patients with 
known OSA who are already on PAP devices should con-
tinue PAP therapy postoperatively.73
PACU monitoring > 60 min after modified Aldrete score criteria met
• Recurrent PACU resp. eventsa
• Postoperative parenteral opioidsb
• Moderate to severe OSA
• Significant comorbiditiesc
• Noncompliant to PAP therapyd
• Discharge, if:
  - Minor surgery
  - No or minimal oral
  opioids
• Postoperative monitored bedf
  and/or
• PAP therapyd
• Discharge, if:
  - Minor surgery
  - No or minimal oral
  opioids
No
Yes
No
Yes
• High-risk OSA or intermediate-risk
OSA wih specific indicatorse; and 
• Recurrent PACU resp. eventsa
• Postoperative parenteral opioidsb
Diagnosed OSA
Suspected OSA
Fig. 48.6 Postoperative management of the patient with known or suspected obstructive sleep apnea 
after general anesthesia.
aRecurrent postanesthesia care unit (PACU) respiratory event: repeated occurrence of oxygen saturation 
less than 90%, or bradypnea less than 8 breaths/min, or apnea 10 seconds and longer, or pain–
sedation mismatch (high pain and sedation scores concurrently).
bPostoperative parenteral opioid requirement more than the usual standard of care such as multiple 
routes, long-acting preparations, or high-dose infusions.
cPer the 2016 SASM guidelines, uncontrolled systemic disease or additional problems with ventilation 
or gas exchange such as hypoventilation syndromes, severe pulmonary hypertension, and resting 
hypoxemia in the absence of other cardiopulmonary disease.
dPositive airway pressure (PAP) therapy: includes continuous PAP, bilevel PAP, or auto-titrating PAP.
eIntermediate-risk and specific indicators include STOP score ≥2 + male or BMI >35 kg/m2 or ↑NC 
cutoff (where NC: neck circumference cut-offs 17 inches/43 cm in male, 16 inches/41 cm in female) 
and STOP-Bang ≥3 + HCO3 ≥28 mmol/L.
fMonitored bed: environment with continuous oximetry and the possibility of early medical intervention 
(e.g., intensive care unit, step-down unit, or remote pulse oximetry with telemetry in surgical ward).
VI
Chapter 48 Sleep Medicine and Anesthesia
871
CONCLUSION
Understanding the similarities and differences between 
sleep and anesthesia has enhanced our learning of the 
neural pathways modulating arousal and their interac-
tions with anesthetic medications. Common sleep disor-
ders such as OSA are associated with multiple comorbid 
conditions and increased perioperative risk. Knowledge 
of appropriate diagnostic approaches, treatment options, 
and perioperative precautions is necessary for optimal 
patient care. Management guidelines from multiple 
specialty societies continue to evolve based on clinical 
research and expert opinion.
REFERENCES
1. Pelayo R, Dement WC. History of sleep 
physiology and medicine. In: Kryger 
MH, Roth T, Dement WC, eds., Principles 
and Practice of Sleep Medicine. Phila-
delphia: Elsevier, Inc; 2017. 6th ed.
2. McCarley RW. Neurobiology of REM and 
NREM sleep. Sleep Med. 2007;8(4):302–
330.
3. Lydic R, Baghdoyan HA. Sleep, anes-
thesiology, and the neurobiology of 
arousal state control. Anesthesiology. 
2005;103(6):1268–1295.
4. Borbély AA, Achermann P. Sleep home-
ostasis and models of sleep regulation. J 
Biol Rhythms. 1999;14(6):557–568.
5. Borbély AA. A two process model 
of sleep regulation. Hum Neurobiol. 
1982;1(3):195–204.
6. Carskadon MA, Dement WC. Normal 
human sleep: An Overview. In: Kryger 
MH, Roth T, Dement WC, eds., Principles 
and Practice of Sleep Medicine. 6th ed. 
Philadelphia: Elsevier, Inc; 2017.
7. Berry RB, Budhiraja R, Gottlieb DJ, etal. 
Rules for scoring respiratory events in 
sleep: Update of the 2007 AASM Manual 
for the Scoring of Sleep and Associated 
Events. J Clin Sleep Med. 2012;8(5):597–
619.
8. Iber C, Cheeson A, Quan S.F. AS. The 
AASM Manual for the Scoring of Sleep 
and Associated Events, Rules, Terminol-
ogy and Techical Specifications. 2007.
9. Nofzinger EA. Functional neuroimag-
ing of sleep disorders. Curr Pharm Des. 
2008;14(32):3417–3429.
10. Stickgold R, Hobson JA, Fosse R, Fosse 
M. Sleep, learning, and dreams: Off-
line memory reprocessing. Science. 
2001;294(5544):1052–1057.
11. Brown EN, Lydic R, Schiff ND. General 
anesthesia, sleep, and coma. N Engl J 
Med. 2010;363(27):2638–2650.
12. Purdon PL, Sampson A, Pavone KJ, 
Brown EN. Clinical electroencepha-
lography for anesthesiologists: Part I: 
Background and basic signatures. Anes-
thesiology. 2015;123(4):937–960.
13. Hillman DR, Eastwood PR. Upper airway, 
obstructive sleep apnea, and anesthesia. 
Sleep Med Clin. 2015;8(1):23–28.
14. Allada R. An emerging link between gen-
eral anesthesia and sleep. Proc Natl Acad 
Sci U S A. 2008;105(7):2257–2258.
15. Tung A, Lynch JP, Mendelson WB. 
Prolonged sedation with propofol in the 
rat does not result in sleep deprivation. 
Anesth Analg. 2001;92(5):1232–1236.
16. Tung 
A, 
Bergmann 
BM, 
Herrera 
S, Cao D, Mendelson WB. Recovery 
from sleep deprivation occurs during 
propofol anesthesia. Anesthesiology. 
2004;100(6):1419–1426.
17. Mashour GA, Lipinski WJ, Matlen LB, 
et al. Isoflurane anesthesia does not sat-
isfy the homeostatic need for rapid eye 
movement sleep. Anesth Analg. 2010 
May 1;110(5):1283–1289. doi:10.1213/
ANE.0b013e3181d3e861 
PMID: 
20418293; PMCID: PMC3767968.
18. Saper CB, Scammell TE, Lu J. Hypotha-
lamic regulation of sleep and circadian 
rhythms. Nature. 2005;437(7063):1257–
1263.
19. Vacas S, Kurien P, Maze M. Sleep and 
anesthesia—Common mechanisms of 
action. Sleep Med Clin. 2013 Mar;8(1):1–
9. doi:10.1016/j.jsmc.2012.11.009 PMID: 
28747855; PMCID: PMC5524381.
20. Harrison 
NL. 
General 
anesthesia 
research: Aroused from a deep sleep? 
Nat Neurosci. 2002;5(10):928–929.
21. Rothhaas R, Chung S. Role of the preop-
tic area in sleep and thermoregulation. 
Front Neurosci. 2021 Jul 1;15:664781. 
doi: 10.3389/fnins.2021.664781. PMID: 
34276287; PMCID: PMC8280336.
22. American Academy of Sleep Medicine 
(AASM) 2014. The International Clas-
sification of Sleep Disorders—Third Edi-
tion (ICSD-3). www.aasmnet.org. Online 
version. Accessed on: May 30, 2015.
23. Subramani Y, Singh M, Wong J, Kushida 
CA, Malhotra A, Chung F. Understand-
ing phenotypes of obstructive sleep 
apnea: Applications in anesthesia, sur-
gery, and perioperative medicine. Anesth 
Analg. 2017;124(1):179–191.
24. Eckert DJ, White DP, Jordan AS, Mal-
hotra A, Wellman A. Defining pheno-
typic causes of obstructive sleep apnea. 
Identification of novel therapeutic 
targets. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 
2013;188(8):996–1004.
25. Thompson SR, Ackermann U, Horner 
RL. Sleep as a teaching tool for integrat-
ing respiratory physiology and motor 
control. Adv Physiol Educ. 2001;25(1-
4):101–116.
26. Isono S, Remmers JE, Tanaka A, Sho Y, 
Sato J, Nishino T. Anatomy of pharynx 
in patients with obstructive sleep apnea 
and in normal subjects. J Appl Physiol. 
1997;82:1319–1326.
27. Yumino D, Bradley TD. Central sleep 
apnea and Cheyne-Stokes respiration. 
Proc Am Thorac Soc. 2008;5(2):226–236.
28. Farney RJ, Walker JM, Cloward TV, 
Rhondeau S. Sleep-disordered breath-
ing associated with long-term opioid 
therapy. Chest. 2003;123(United States 
PT-Case Reports PT-Journal Article LG-
English):632–639.
29. Berry RB, Brooks R, Garnaldo CE, Hard-
ing SM, Marcus CL and Vaughn BV for 
the American Academy of Sleep Medi-
cine. The AASM Manual for the Scoring 
of Sleep and Associated Events: Rules, 
Terminology and Technical Specifiation, 
Version 2.0. www.aasmnet.org, Darien, IL: 
American Academy of Sleep Medicine.
30. Fleetham J, Ayas N, Bradley D, etal. 
Canadian Thoracic Society 2011 guide-
line update: Diagnosis and treatment of 
sleep disordered breathing. Can Respir J. 
2011;18(1):25–47.
31. Collop NA, Anderson WM, Boehlecke 
B, etal. Clinical guidelines for the use 
of unattended portable monitors in the 
diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea 
in adult patients. Portable Monitoring 
Task Force of the American Academy 
of Sleep Medicine. J Clin Sleep Med. 
2007;3(1550-9389 (Print) LA-eng PT-
Journal Article PT-Practice Guideline 
PT-Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov’t 
SB-IM):737–747.
32. Collop NA. Home sleep testing: It is not 
about the test. Chest. 2010;138(2):245–
246.
33. Chung F, Liao P, Sun Y, etal. Periop-
erative practical experiences in using a 
level 2 portable polysomnography. Sleep 
Breath. 2011;15(3):367–375.
34. Chung F, Liao P, Elsaid H, Islam S, Sha-
piro CM, Sun Y. Oxygen desaturation 
index from nocturnal oximetry: A sen-
sitive and specific tool to detect sleep-
disordered breathing in surgical patients. 
Anesth Analg. 2012;114(5):993–1000.
35. Chung F, Zhou L, Liao P. Parameters 
from preoperative overnight oximetry 
predict postoperative adverse events. 
Minerva 
Anestesiol. 
2014;80(Octo-
ber):1084–1095.
36. Fleetham J, Ayas N, Bradley D, etal. 
Canadian Thoracic Society 2011 guide-
line update: Diagnosis and treatment of 
Section VI CONSULTANT ANESTHETIC PRACTICE
872
sleep disordered breathing. Can Respir J. 
2011;18(1):25–47.
37. Chung F, Liao P, Yegneswaran B, 
Shapiro CM, Kang W. Postoperative 
changes in sleep-disordered breathing 
and sleep architecture in patients with 
obstructive sleep apnea. Anesthesiology. 
2014;120(2):287–298.
38. Chung F, Liao P, Elsaid H, Shapiro 
CM, Kang W. Factors associated with 
postoperative exacerbation of sleep-
disordered breathing. Anesthesiology. 
2014;120(2):299–311.
39. Young T, Evans L, Finn L, Palta M. 
Estimation of the clinically diagnosed 
proportion of sleep apnea syndrome in 
middle-aged men and women. Sleep. 
1997;20(9):705–706.
40. Singh M, Liao P, Kobah S, Wijeysun-
dera DN, Shapiro C, Chung F. Proportion 
of surgical patients with undiagnosed 
obstructive sleep apnoea. Br J Anaesth. 
2013;110(4):629–636.
41. Olson E, Chung F, Seet E. Surgical risk 
and the preoperative evaluation and 
management of adults with obstructive 
sleep apnea. In: Post TW, ed., UpToDate, 
Waltham: UpToDate. MA. (Accessed on 
October 01, 2015.).
42. Bolden N, Posner KL, Domino KB, 
etal. Postoperative critical events asso-
ciated with obstructive sleep apnea: 
Results From the Society of Anesthe-
sia and Sleep Medicine Obstructive 
Sleep Apnea Registry. Anesth Analg. 
2020;131(4):1032–1041.
43. Seet E, Chung F, Wang CY, etal. Asso-
ciation of obstructive sleep apnea with 
difficult intubation: Prospective mul-
ticenter observational cohort study. 
Anesth Analg. 2021;133(1):196–204.
44. Seet E, Nagappa M, Wong DT. Airway 
management in surgical patients with 
obstructive sleep apnea. Anesth Analg. 
2021;132(5):1321–1327.
45. Cozowicz C, Memtsoudis SG. Perioperative 
management of the patient with obstruc-
tive sleep apnea: A narrative review. 
Anesth Analg. 2021;132(5):1231–1243.
46. Altree TJ, Chung F, Chan MT V, Eckert 
DJ. Vulnerability to postoperative com-
plications in obstructive sleep apnea: 
Importance of phenotypes. Anesth 
Analg. 2021;132(5):1328–1337.
47. Mutter TC, Chateau D, Moffatt M, Ram-
sey C, Roos LL, Kryger M. A matched 
cohort study of postoperative outcomes 
in obstructive sleep apnea: Could pre-
operative diagnosis and treatment pre-
vent complications? Anesthesiology. 
2014;121(4):707–718.
48. Chan MTV, Wang CY, Seet E, etal. 
Association of unrecognized obstructive 
sleep apnea with postoperative car-
diovascular events in patients undergo-
ing major noncardiac surgery. JAMA. 
2019;321(18):1788–1798.
49. Mokhlesi B, Hovda MD, Vekhter B, 
Arora VM, Chung F, Meltzer DO. Sleep-
disordered breathing and postoperative 
outcomes after elective surgery: Analy-
sis of the nationwide inpatient sample. 
Chest. 2013;144(3):903–914.
50. Abdelsattar ZM, Hendren S, Wong SL, 
Campbell DA, Ramachandran SK. The 
impact of untreated obstructive sleep apnea 
on cardiopulmonary complications in gen-
eral and vascular surgery: A cohort study. 
Sleep. 2015;38(8):1205–1210.
51. Memtsoudis S, Liu SS, Ma Y, etal. Perio-
perative pulmonary outcomes in patients 
with sleep apnea after noncardiac sur-
gery. Anesth Analg. 2011;112(1):113–121.
52. Sánchez-de-la-Torre 
M, 
Campos-
Rodriguez F, Barbé F. Obstructive sleep 
apnoea and cardiovascular disease. Lan-
cet Respir Med. 2013;1(1):61–72.
53. Marshall NS, Wong KKH, Liu PY, Cullen 
SRJ, Knuiman MW, Grunstein RR. Sleep 
apnea as an independent risk factor for 
all-cause mortality: The Busselton Health 
Study. Sleep. 2008;31(8):1079–1085.
54. Gami AS, Olson EJ, Shen WK, etal. 
Obstructive sleep apnea and the risk of 
sudden cardiac death: A longitudinal 
study of 10,701 adults. J Am Coll Car-
diol. 2013;62(7):610–616.
55. Marin JM, Carrizo SJ, Vicente E, Agusti 
AGN. Long-term cardiovascular out-
comes in men with obstructive sleep 
apnoea-hypopnoea with or without 
treatment with continuous positive air-
way pressure: An observational study. 
Lancet. 2005;365(9464):1046–1053.
56. van Oosten EM, Hamilton A, Petsi-
kas D, etal. Effect of preoperative 
obstructive sleep apnea on the frequen-
cy of atrial fibrillation after coronary 
artery bypass grafting. Am J Cardiol. 
2014;113(6):919–923.
57. Adesanya AO, Lee W, Greilich NB, 
Joshi GP. Perioperative management 
of obstructive sleep apnea. Chest. 
2010;138(6):1489–1498.
58. Seet E, Chung F. Management of sleep 
apnea in adults—Functional algorithms 
for the perioperative period: Continu-
ing Professional Development. Can J 
Anaesth. 2010;57(9):849–864.
59. Porhomayon J, El-Solh A, Chhangani S, 
Nader ND. The management of surgical 
patients with obstructive sleep apnea. 
Lung. 2011;189(5):359–367.
60. Joshi GP, Ankichetty SP, Gan TJ, Chung 
F. Society for ambulatory anesthesia 
consensus statement on preopera-
tive selection of adult patients with 
obstructive sleep apnea scheduled for 
ambulatory surgery. Anesth Analg. 
2012;115(5):1060–1068.
61. Gross JB, Bachenberg KL, Benumof JL, 
etal. Practice guidelines for the perio-
perative management of patients with 
obstructive sleep apnea: A report by the 
American Society of Anesthesiologists 
Task Force on Perioperative Management 
of patients with obstructive sleep apnea. 
Anesthesiology. 2006;104(5):1081–1093 
quiz 1117-1118.
62. American Society of Anesthesiologists 
Task Force on Perioperative Manage-
ment of Patients With Obstructive Sleep 
Apnea. Practice guidelines for the perio-
perative management of patients with 
obstructive sleep apnea: An updated 
report by the American Society of 
Anesthesiologists Task Force on Perio-
perative Management of patients with 
obstructive sleep apnea. Anesthesiology. 
2014;120(2):268–286.
63. Chung F, Memtsoudis SG, Ramachan-
dran SK, etal. Society of Anesthesia and 
Sleep Medicine guidelines on preopera-
tive screening and assessment of adult 
patients with obstructive sleep apnea. 
Anesth Analg. 2016;123(2):452–473.
64. Bradley TD, Floras JS. Obstructive sleep 
apnoea and its cardiovascular conse-
quences. Lancet. 2009;373(9657):82–93.
65. Chau EH, Lam D, Wong J, Mokhlesi 
B, Chung F. Obesity hypoventila-
tion syndrome: A review of epide-
miology, 
pathophysiology, 
and 
perioperative considerations. Anesthesi-
ology. 2012;117(1):188–205.
66. Bady E, Achkar A, Pascal S, Orvoen-Frija 
E, Laaban JP. Pulmonary arterial hyper-
tension in patients with sleep apnoea 
syndrome. Thorax. 2000;55(11):934–939.
67. Kaw R, Bhateja P, Paz Y, Mar H, etal. 
Postoperative complications in patients 
with unrecognized obesity hypoventila-
tion syndrome undergoing elective non-
cardiac surgery. Chest. 2015.
68. Balachandran JS, Masa JFC, Mokhlesi 
B. Obesity hypoventilation syndrome: 
Epidemiology and diagnosis. Sleep Med 
Clin. 2014;9(3):341–347.
69. Adesanya AO, Lee W, Greilich NB, 
Joshi GP. Perioperative management 
of obstructive sleep apnea. Chest. 
2010;138(6):1489–1498.
70. Liao P, Luo Q, Elsaid H, Kang W, Shapiro 
CM, Chung F. Perioperative auto-titrat-
ed continuous positive airway pres-
sure treatment in surgical patients with 
obstructive sleep apnea. Anesthesiology. 
2013;119(4):837–847.
71. Nagappa M, Mokhlesi B, Wong J, Wong 
DT, Kaw R, Chung F. The effects of 
continuous positive airway pressure on 
postoperative outcomes in obstructive 
sleep apnea patients undergoing sur-
gery. Anesth Analg. 2015;120(5):1013–
1023.
72. Jonsson Fagerlund M, Franklin KA. 
Perioperative continuous positive air-
way pressure therapy: A review with the 
emphasis on randomized controlled tri-
als and obstructive sleep apnea. Anesth 
Analg. 2021;132(5):1306–1313.
VI
Chapter 48 Sleep Medicine and Anesthesia
873
73. Chung F, Nagappa M, Singh M, Mokhlesi 
B. CPAP in the perioperative setting: 
Evidence of support. Chest. 2015.
74. Chung F, Yegneswaran B, Liao P, etal. 
STOP questionnaire: A tool to screen 
patients for obstructive sleep apnea. 
Anesthesiology. 2008;108(5):812–821.
75. Netzer NC, Hoegel JJ, Loube D, etal. 
Prevalence of symptoms and risk of 
sleep apnea in primary care. Chest. 
2003;124(4):1406–1414.
76. Ramachandran SK, Kheterpal S, Con-
sens F, etal. Derivation and valida-
tion of a simple perioperative sleep 
apnea prediction score. Anesth Analg. 
2010;110(4):1007–1015.
77. Chung F, Subramanyam R, Liao P, Sasaki 
E, Shapiro C, Sun Y. High STOP-Bang 
score indicates a high probability of 
obstructive sleep apnoea. Br J Anaesth. 
2012;108(5):768–775.
78. Chung F, Abdullah HR, Liao P. STOP-
Bang Questionnaire: A practical approach 
to screen for obstructive sleep apnea. 
Chest. September 2015.
79. Chung F, Yang Y, Brown R, Liao P. 
Alternative scoring models of STOP-Bang 
questionnaire improve specificity to detect 
undiagnosed obstructive sleep apnea. J 
Clin Sleep Med. 2014;10(9):951–958.
80. Hwang M, Zhang K, Nagappa M, Saripel-
la A, Englesakis M, Chung F. Valida-
tion of the STOP-Bang questionnaire as 
a screening tool for obstructive sleep 
apnoea in patients with cardiovascular 
risk factors: a systematic review and 
meta-analysis. BMJ Open Respir Res. 
2021;8(1):e000848.
81. Pivetta B, Chen L, Nagappa M, etal. 
Use and performance of the STOP-Bang 
Questionnaire for obstructive sleep apnea 
screening across geographic regions. 
JAMA Netw Open. 2021;4(3):e211009.
82. Chen L, Pivetta B, Nagappa M, etal. Vali-
dation of the STOP-Bang questionnaire 
for screening of obstructive sleep apnea 
in the general population and commercial 
drivers: A systematic review and meta-
analysis. Sleep Breath. Jan 2021.
83. Olson E, Chung F, Seet E. Intraoperative 
management of adults with obstructive 
sleep apnea. In: Post TW, ed., UpToDate, 
Waltham: UpToDate, MA. (Accessed on 
October 01, 2015.).
84. Chung F, Yegneswaran B, Herrera F, 
Shenderey A, Shapiro CM. Patients with 
difficult intubation may need refer-
ral to sleep clinics. Anesth Analg. 
2008 Sep;107(3):915–920. doi:10.1213/
ane.0b013e31817bd36f PMID: 18713905.
85. Gali B, Whalen FX, Schroeder DR, 
Gay PC, Plevak DJ. Identification 
of patients at risk for postoperative 
respiratory complications using a 
preoperative obstructive sleep apnea 
screening 
tool 
and 
postanesthe-
sia care assessment. Anesthesiology. 
2009;110(4):869–877.
86. Memtsoudis SG, Cozowicz C, Nagappa 
M, etal. Society of Anesthesia and 
Sleep Medicine guideline on intraopera-
tive management of adult patients with 
obstructive sleep apnea. Anesth Analg. 
2018;127(4):967–987.
87. Sundar E, Chang J, Smetana GW. Perio-
perative screening for and management 
of patients with obstructive sleep apnea. 
J Clin Outcomes Manag. 2011;18(9):399–
411.
88. Kheterpal S, Martin L, Shanks AM, 
Tremper KK. Prediction and outcomes of 
impossible mask ventilation: A review 
of 50,000 anesthetics. Anesthesiology. 
2009;110(4):891–897.
89. Siyam MA, Benhamou D. Difficult 
endotracheal intubation in patients with 
sleep apnea syndrome. Anesth Analg. 
2002;95:1098–1102.
90. Apfelbaum JL, Hagberg CA, Connis 
RT, et al. 2022 American Society of 
Anesthesiologists Practice guidelines 
for management of the difficult airway. 
Anesthesiology. 2022 Jan 1;136(1):31–81. 
doi:10.1097/ALN.0000000000004002 
PMID: 34762729.
91. Lam KK, Kunder S, Wong J, Doufas AG, 
Chung F. Obstructive sleep apnea, pain, 
and opioids: Is the riddle solved? Curr 
Opin Anaesthesiol. 2015.
92. Eikermann M, Grosse-Sundrup M, 
Zaremba S, etal. Ketamine activates 
breathing and abolishes the coupling 
between loss of consciousness and 
upper airway dilator muscle dysfunc-
tion. Anesthesiology. 2012;116(1):35–46.
93. Ankichetty S, Wong J, Chung F. A sys-
tematic review of the effects of sedatives 
and anesthetics in patients with obstruc-
tive sleep apnea. J Anaesthesiol Clin 
Pharmacol. 2011;27(4):447–458.
94. Seet E, Han TL, Chung F. Periopera-
tive clinical pathways to manage sleep-
disordered breathing. Sleep Med Clin. 
2013;8(1):105–120.
874
HEALTH, HEALTH CARE, AND CLIMATE 
CHANGE
Climate change represents a defining challenge of our 
times, and tackling climate change could be the great-
est global health opportunity of this century.1 Climate 
change poses clear environmental, technologic, and eco-
nomic challenges that affect food, water, and habitation, 
and therefore the health of the world’s population.2–4
Table 49.1 lists health issues related to climate change.
Although health care systems have responded to the 
growing health care needs and the catastrophes posed 
by climate change, health care itself is polluting and 
contributes to global warming. Health care is a large, 
socioeconomically vital sector that contributes signifi-
cantly to national greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, both 
directly from health care facilities and to a much greater 
extent indirectly from the production of energy, medical 
goods, and pharmaceuticals that support these facilities. 
A 2009 report estimated that U.S. health care contrib-
uted to 8% of the national GHG emissions.5 Although 
many industries have taken actions to reduce emission 
of GHGs, for example, by producing less-polluting motor 
vehicles and using less-polluting fuels to produce heat 
and electricity, health care has been slow to respond. 
In 2013 an economic input-output life cycle assessment 
model showed a worsening trend and estimated that 10% 
of U.S. GHG emissions were attributable to health care.6
Other national-level studies have shown significant con-
tributions of health-care-sector GHG emissions compared 
with total GHG emissions: 7% in Australia,7 5% in the 
United Kingdom,8 and 4% in Canada.9
The United States is the second-largest emitter of GHG 
globally, with 13% of global GHG emissions. China con-
tributes the most, at 26% of global GHG emissions, and 
the European Union contributes the third most, at 7.5% 
of global GHG emissions.10 If the U.S. health care sector 
were itself a country, it would rank 13th in the world for 
GHG emissions, ahead of the entire United Kingdom.6
HEALTH, HEALTH CARE, AND CLIMATE 
CHANGE
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT OF ANESTHESIA 
GASES
OCCUPATIONAL HAZARDS OF INHALED 
ANESTHETICS
LOW-FLOW ANESTHESIA
CLOSED-CIRCUIT ANESTHESIA
CO2 ABSORBENTS
WASTE ANESTHETIC GAS SCAVENGING 
SYSTEMS
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT OF PROPOFOL
DRUG WASTE
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT OF OPERATING 
ROOM PRACTICES
Waste
Reusable versus Single-Use Equipment
Reusable versus Single-Use Textiles
Reusable Breathing Circuits
Energy Efficiency
SUMMARY
ANESTHESIA AND 
ENVIRONMENTAL 
HEALTH
Hemra Cil, Seema Gandhi
49
VI
Chapter 49 Anesthesia and Environmental Health
875
compounds other than halothane have similar radiative 
efficiencies, their GWPs depend primarily on their atmos-
pheric lifetimes, which depends on how rapidly molecular 
bonds can be broken down by OH radicals. Table 49.2
lists the atmospheric lifetimes for inhaled anesthetics, in 
addition to their GWP100, and a comparison to the GHG 
emission of driving a car.
A 2017 study analyzed the carbon footprint of the 
operating room (OR) across three health care systems in 
three different countries. Anesthetic gases and energy use 
were the largest sources of GHG emissions. In addition, 
preferential use of desflurane accounted for a 10-fold 
difference in carbon emissions from anesthesia gases 
between these hospitals14 (Fig. 49.1).
N2O is the third most significant GHG after CO2 and 
methane.11 It has the longest atmospheric lifetime of 
all inhaled anesthetics and a relatively high GWP100
15
Atmospheric N2O originates primarily from agriculture, 
fuel combustion, wastewater management, and industrial 
processes. Anesthetic use is estimated to be responsible 
for 3% of global N2O emissions.12 However, this relatively 
small contribution should not be ignored, as it remains a 
significant source of ozone depletion caused by anesthe-
sia.16 17 Inhaled N2O is still highly popular for labor anal-
gesia outside the United States because it is inexpensive, 
easy to administer, and has a favorable safety profile for 
mother and child18 (also see Chapter 33).
Even though the global amount of GHGs released each 
year from inhaled anesthetic administration is compara-
tively small (approximately 0.01% of total GHG emissions 
from fossil fuel combustion),16 direct release of inhaled 
anesthetics is a major contributor to the environmental 
impact of anesthesia.19 For individual anesthesia provid-
ers, the most effective climate change mitigation strate-
gies are to avoid desflurane and N2O, adopt low-flow and 
closed-circuit anesthesia, and familiarize themselves with 
techniques using regional and total intravenous anesthe-
sia (TIVA).
OCCUPATIONAL HAZARDS OF INHALED 
ANESTHETICS
In addition to their environmental effects, inhaled anes-
thetic agents cause OR pollution and can increase health 
risks for providers in the OR. During induction of general 
anesthesia and before tracheal intubation, high fresh gas 
flow (FGF) rates are often used. This period represents the 
highest risk for spillage of waste anesthetic gases directly 
into the OR instead of the anesthesia workstation scav-
enging system (also see Chapter 15).
The potential health hazards of occupational exposure 
to waste anesthetic gases, including increased risk of 
spontaneous abortion, genetic damage, and cancer, were 
first noted in survey-based studies from the 1970s, an 
era in which scavenging of inhaled anesthetics was poor 
Climate Change
Health Risks
Increased frequency and 
intensity of extreme heat 
conditions
Increased risk of morbidity 
and mortality during heat 
waves, especially in urban 
settings and for manual 
workers outdoors
Increased variability in 
precipitation, increasing 
temperatures
Climate-induced reduction 
in local crop yields; food 
insecurity and undernutrition, 
especially in children
Water- and vector-borne 
disease (e.g., malaria, 
dengue) more likely
Increased variability in 
precipitation; increased 
flood, fire, and drought risk
Greater risk of injury, disease, 
death
Likely increase in diarrheal 
disease, with greater impact 
in children
Increased air pollution, 
reduced air quality
Increased risk of respiratory 
illnesses, cardiovascular 
disease
Table 49.1
Global Health Issues Related to Climate 
Change
Health issues are more likely to affect vulnerable populations and 
increase the risk of social inequities.
Careful attention should be given to the current prac-
tice of health care, as it offers significant opportunities 
for environmental efficiency improvements that could 
decrease cost and resource utilization without compro-
mising patient care.
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT OF ANESTHESIA 
GASES
Fifty percent of incoming solar energy is absorbed by the 
earth; the remainder is absorbed by the atmosphere and 
clouds or is reflected to space. GHGs, defined as gases 
that trap heat in the atmosphere,11 contribute to global 
warming by absorbing the reflected heat and radiating it 
back to the earth’s surface.12 Anesthesia gases produce 
5% of hospital GHG emissions.13 The commonly used 
volatile anesthetics sevoflurane, desflurane, and isoflu-
rane and the nonvolatile gas nitrous oxide (N2O) are 
potent GHGs with high global warming potential (GWP). 
GWP is a measure of how much a given mass of GHG 
contributes to global warming over a specified time (typi-
cally 20 or 100 years, i.e., GWP20 or GWP100); by defini-
tion, carbon dioxide (CO2) has a GWP of 1.
The GWP of a GHG is primarily determined by two 
factors: (1) its atmospheric lifetime and (2) its radia-
tive efficiency.11 Because most halogenated anesthetic 
Section VI CONSULTANT ANESTHETIC PRACTICE
876
Fig. 49.1 Relative contributions of anesthetic gases, energy use, the supply chain, and waste disposal 
to the carbon footprint of operating rooms at (A) Vancouver General Hospital, (B) the University of 
Minnesota Medical Center, and (C) John Radcliffe Hospital, UK. (Adapted from MacNeill et al.,14 with 
permission from Elsevier Ltd.)
meet recommended guidelines for waste anesthetic gas 
exposure.
LOW-FLOW ANESTHESIA
Because inhaled anesthetics undergo very little in vivo 
metabolism, they are exhaled, scavenged, and vented 
into the atmosphere, largely unchanged, as medical 
waste gases.21 Thus the ecologic impact is largely deter-
mined by the gas used and the FGF rate at which it is 
administered. Although there is no universal definition, 
Gas
Lifetime15 16
(years)
GWP100
15 52 c
Driving Equivalent (miles/
hr)21 53 d at Fresh Gas Flow
0.5 L/mina
1.0 L/mina
2 L/mina
5 L/mina
N2O
114–121
265–298
29
57
112
282
Sevoflurane
1.1–2.2
130–216
–
4
8
19
Desflurane
10.8–14
1790–2540
93
190
378
939
Isoflurane
3.2–3.5
491–510
4
8
15
38
Halothaneb
1.0
41
Table 49.2 Atmospheric Lifetime, Global Warming Potential (GWP), and Driving Equivalent of Inhaled Anesthetic Agents
a0.6 MAC-hour for N2O and 1 MAC-hour for sevoflurane, desflurane, and isoflurane.
bHalothane is no longer commercially available in the United States but is available globally.
cGWP100 is the global warming potential of a greenhouse gas over a 100-year period compared with CO2. Desflurane has a GWP100 of 2540, 
indicating that 1 kg of desflurane has the same global warming effect as 2540 kg of CO2. The technical groups routinely reevaluate gases of 
concern in the context of changing atmospheric chemistry, a process that can take up to 5 years.
dThe driving equivalent analogy provides a practical comparison to driving a typical passenger automobile, which emits approximately 400 g 
of CO2 per mile. For example, administering desflurane at fresh gas flow of 1 L/min for 1 hour at 1 MAC produces the same GHG emission as 
driving a car for 190 miles.
by today’s standards.19 In 1977 the National Institute for 
Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) issued recom-
mended exposure limits for both N2O and halogenated 
agents, in addition to guidance on scavenging systems 
for waste anesthetic gases and ventilation system capac-
ity in ORs and recovery rooms.20 After implementation of 
waste anesthetic gas regulations from NIOSH (and similar 
regulations in other countries), more recent studies have 
found little to no increase in adverse effects associated 
with waste anesthesia gases when they are scavenged 
effectively.19 However, these risks may remain for indi-
viduals chronically exposed to workplaces that do not 
AL GRAWANY
VI
Chapter 49 Anesthesia and Environmental Health
877
low-flow anesthesia is most commonly defined as FGF 
<1 L/min and minimal flow anesthesia as FGF <0.5 L/
min.22 23 Essentially any technique in which the FGF is 
less than alveolar ventilation can be considered low-flow 
anesthesia.24
Table 49.3 lists advantages and disadvantages of low-
flow anesthesia. The clinical use of low-flow anesthesia 
has been facilitated by newer anesthesia workstations, 
gas analyzers (for inspired/exhaled O2, CO2, and anes-
thetic agent), and CO2 absorbents that do not produce 
compound A (also see Chapter 15).
The maintenance phase of anesthesia presents the best 
opportunity to reduce flows, but attention should also be 
given to the induction and emergence phases to mini-
mize environmental contamination and decrease waste. 
Recommendations for low FGF management for all three 
phases of anesthesia are listed in Box 49.1 25
Some newer anesthesia workstations facilitate low-
flow anesthesia by using automated gas controls and 
proprietary software algorithms to guide the administra-
tion of anesthetic agents and carrier gas.25 An additional 
strategy to reduce waste of inhaled anesthetics is real-
time decision support for intraoperative notification of 
excessive FGF.26 Since 2018, the authors’ institution 
(University of California San Francisco [UCSF]) has 
adopted this approach with their anesthesia information 
management system (Epic Systems, Verona, WI). This 
tool prompts providers to use lower FGF rates during the 
maintenance phase of general anesthesia; the set target 
for FGF is 1 L/min for sevoflurane and 0.7 L/min for des-
flurane or isoflurane. This best-practice advisory led to 
lower FGF rates, significantly reducing carbon emission 
and cost per case (Fig. 49.2).
CLOSED-CIRCUIT ANESTHESIA
The most extreme form of low-flow anesthesia is closed-
circuit anesthesia. The first commercial closed anesthesia 
circuit was manufactured in 1925, after CO2 absorbents 
were introduced into anesthesia practice; however, 
closed-circuit anesthesia was considered unsafe by many 
anesthesia providers because of the inability to measure 
inspired oxygen and inhalation agent concentrations.27
Closed-circuit anesthesia is based on two key principles: 
(1) no gases are allowed to escape from the circuit and 
all exhaled gases are returned to the patient after elimi-
nation of CO2, and (2) inhalational agents and carrier 
Box 49.1
Recommendations for Managing Low Fresh 
Gas Flow (FGF) During Anesthesia25
INDUCTION
1. Set FGF close to minute ventilation during mask ventilation
2. Increase FGF if measured Fio2 and gas concentration lower 
than set level
3. During intubation, turn off the FGF, leave the vaporizer at 
its set point
4. Set FGF to half of the minute ventilation after intubation
5. Then watch measured anesthetic concentration after 
intubation
Reduce FGF progressively based on gas concentration
If needed, increase/decrease vaporizer setting to maintain 
desired concentration
6. Move to anesthesia maintenance management if there 
is no significant difference between exhaled and inspired 
anesthetic gas concentration
Maintenance
1. First, set total oxygen flow (mL/min):
Patient’s estimated oxygen consumption (5 mL/kg/min)
Add 200 mL/min if sidestream gas analyzer sample gas 
does not return to the circuit
Add 100 mL/min for potential leaks
2. Decrease total oxygen flow in 50-mL/min increments until 
Fio2 begins to decrease
3. Monitor exhaled anesthetic gas concentration to maintain 
desired MAC level
4. Monitor Fio2
Emergence
1. Maintain low FGF until the vaporizer is off
FiO2 Fraction of inspired oxygen.
Advantages
Disadvantages
Environmental
Slower inhaled anesthesia 
induction
Decreased anesthetic gas 
consumption
Slower emergence from 
inhaled anesthesia
Decrease in waste 
anesthetic gas (greenhouse 
gases)
Reduced ability to rapidly 
change inspired anesthetic 
concentration
Decrease in operating room 
pollution
Economic
Increased CO2 absorbent 
consumption
Decreased cost of volatile 
anesthetic agents
Risk of hypercarbia (with 
exhausted CO2 absorbent)
Physiologic
Reduced respiratory heat 
loss
Requires ongoing adjustment 
of inspired oxygen 
concentration to prevent 
hypoxic gas mixture
Preservation of humidity 
of inspired gas, (helps 
to maintain mucociliary 
function)
Table 49.3
Advantages and Disadvantages of Low-Flow 
Anesthesia
Section VI CONSULTANT ANESTHETIC PRACTICE
878
gases (O2 and N2O or air) are added to the circuit only in 
amounts equal to those eliminated and consumed.28
Closed-circuit anesthesia can be accomplished in 
different ways. Traditionally, a liquid form of inhaled 
anesthetic is infused or injected, rather than vaporized, 
according to a prescribed algorithm. Because the vapor-
izer concentration is not high enough for rapid deepening 
of anesthesia during induction, many providers preferred 
to inject liquid inhalation agents into the expiratory limb 
of the circuit with a syringe pump at prescribed intervals 
according to Lowe’s square-root-of-time model.29 Some 
providers monitor and maintain inspired or expired anes-
thetic tensions with a gas monitor that returns analyzed 
gas to the breathing circuit.28 30 In an alternative closed-
circuit anesthesia technique anesthesia is induced with 
inhalation agents at a higher FGF rate. Once a steady 
state has been established, the minimal FGF can be set 
at 250 mL/min based on the patient’s predicted oxygen 
consumption (243 mL for a 70-kg patient).28 During 
emergence from anesthesia, the injection or vaporization 
of liquid inhalation agents is stopped and the breathing 
circuit is flushed with oxygen.28
Because closed-circuit anesthesia is a form of low-
flow anesthesia, the advantages and disadvantages are 
the same (see Table 49.3). Although closed-circuit anes-
thesia increases the use of CO2 absorbents, it lowers the 
overall cost per case.29 31 Although rarely used in the 
United States, closed-circuit anesthesia is attracting more 
interest because of its environmental and cost benefits. 
Outside of the United States, some companies provide 
automated closed-circuit anesthesia workstations, and 
regulatory approval is proceeding in the United States.28
Fig. 49.2 Interrupted time series analysis showing the monthly mean FGF rates for sevoflurane and 
desflurane at University of California San Francisco. Horizontal dashed lines indicate the target FGF 
levels for each agent set by the Best Practice Advisory (BPA) (≤1.0 L/min for sevoflurane and ≤0.7 L/min 
for desflurane) using a real-time decision support tool into the anesthesia information management 
system. The decrease in FGF at the beginning of the intervention period was statistically significant 
(P <0.0001). Bars indicate 95% confidence intervals.
VI
Chapter 49 Anesthesia and Environmental Health
879
CO2 ABSORBENTS
CO2 absorbents have been used in anesthesia practice 
since they were introduced in 1924. Traditional soda lime 
absorbent consists of 95% calcium hydroxide [Ca(OH)2] 
and 5% sodium hydroxide and potassium hydroxide; the 
latter degrades sevoflurane to the nephrotoxic compound 
A, and the desiccated soda lime degrades desflurane, 
enflurane, and isoflurane to carbon monoxide (CO).32
New-generation CO2 absorbents such as the lithium 
hydroxide–based absorbent Litholyme and strong alkali-
free absorbent AMSORB Plus do not contain strong 
bases (calcium hydroxide or potassium hydroxide). These 
absorbents do not interact chemically with sevoflurane, 
isoflurane, or desflurane and thus cannot produce com-
pound A (also see Chapter 15).
Typically, the decision to replace the CO2 absorbent 
canister is based on a change in indicator dye color (to 
purple) reflecting decreased pH and reduced capacity for 
CO2 absorption. However, to maximize absorbent utiliza-
tion and decrease cost, the anesthesia provider can wait 
until the inspired CO2 reaches 5 mm Hg and then replace 
the absorbent canister.25 29 Because new CO2 absorbents 
are made of nonhazardous materials, they are suitable for 
landfill waste, and their use is consistent with a sustain-
able anesthesia strategy.
WASTE ANESTHETIC GAS SCAVENGING 
SYSTEMS
Waste anesthetic gas scavenging systems eliminate 
vented anesthetic gases, thereby decreasing OR pollution, 
but these gases are emitted to the atmosphere largely 
unmetabolized and unregulated, causing environmental 
pollution. Newer waste anesthetic gas scavenging sys-
tems can mitigate the environmental impact by using 
technologies that capture, recycle/reuse, or destroy anes-
thetic gases. Some commercially available new technolo-
gies are described next.
N2O is a commonly used anesthetic during labor. In 
Sweden a special double mask for use in maternity wards 
allows delivery of N2O and removal of the exhaled gas. 
The exhaled N2O is subsequently destroyed by oxidation, 
catalytic reduction, or catalytic splitting.18
Anesthesia scavenging systems continuously entrain 
large air volumes and thereby dilute waste gases. Often, 
a large continuously operating vacuum pump is used 
to generate the necessary vacuum. One novel approach 
uses a low-flow scavenger interface with a one-way on-
demand valve that reduces air entrainment and further 
reduces both energy consumption and cost by reducing 
the vacuum pump’s duty cycle.33
A Canadian manufacturer produces two types of port-
able canisters to capture (adsorb) anesthetic gases. They 
can be installed in-line with the anesthesia workstation 
exhaust in the OR or integrated into a central waste gas 
scavenging system. Used canisters are processed in the 
company’s facility to recycle the captured waste gases. 
The canisters are approved for use with its branded des-
flurane in Canada but are not yet available in the United 
States.34
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT OF PROPOFOL
Total intravenous anesthesia (TIVA) refers to the admin-
istration of intravenous agents, most frequently propo-
fol, to induce and maintain general anesthesia without 
inhaled anesthetics. The environmental impact of propo-
fol can be determined by a life cycle assessment analyz-
ing its entire production chain, including drug synthesis; 
transportation to the hospital; plastic syringes, tubing, 
and intravenous pumps for administration; and incin-
eration of unused drug. The GHG impact of propofol is 
smaller than that of inhaled anesthetics and stems mainly 
from the electricity required for the syringe pump and 
not from drug production or direct release to the environ-
ment.35 Using anesthetic techniques that avoid inhalation 
anesthesia, such as intravenous anesthesia, neuraxial, or 
peripheral nerve blocks, causes the least harm to the cli-
mate. Nevertheless, propofol is not biodegradable; even 
a small amount can cause long-term environmental con-
tamination from improper disposal in landfills, dumping 
into wastewater drains, or human excretion.35
DRUG WASTE
Drug waste has been linked to unnecessary health care 
costs and negative environmental impact.36,37 The cost 
of anesthetic drugs accounts for 5% to 15% of a hos-
pital’s pharmacy budget and approximately 4% of the 
cost of a single surgical procedure.38 Although propofol 
has a lesser impact on GHG emissions than inhalation 
agents, up to 50% of propofol in an operating suite 
can go unused, making it the costliest among the com-
monly wasted drugs.36 Because propofol is nonbiode-
gradable and accumulates in fat, it should be disposed 
of by incineration at >1000°C for more than 2 seconds. 
Improper disposal can have deleterious effects on aquatic 
wildlife and terrestrial ecosystems.37 Propofol waste can 
be reduced by using smaller vials (20 mL instead of 50 
to 100 mL).36
Drugs prepared in anticipation of emergencies go 
unused 50% of the time, and neuromuscular blocking 
drugs prepared by the anesthesia provider are unused in 
30% of cases.39 In a 2016 study preventable drug waste 
was calculated for the 10 most commonly used anesthetic 
drugs (excluding propofol): succinylcholine, vecuronium, 
rocuronium, ephedrine, phenylephrine, atropine, glyco-
pyrrolate, lidocaine, ondansetron, and dexamethasone. 
Section VI CONSULTANT ANESTHETIC PRACTICE
880
The preventable waste of these noncontrolled medications 
was $3.90 per case.40 Although this cost may seem trivial 
compared with that of a surgical procedure, it would 
amount to hundreds of thousands of dollars per year at a 
single medical center with a large surgical volume.
Several measures can be established to avoid drug 
waste, such as leaving emergency drugs/equipment 
unopened but easily available, drawing the minimal 
number of drugs, choosing smaller vials whenever pos-
sible, and having prefilled syringes available in the OR.41
Prefilled syringes are safe, accurate, and often pre-
pared by a pharmacy or drug companies in accordance 
with U.S. Pharmacopeia (USP) guidelines. The use of 
prefilled syringes may reduce drug and dosing errors 
and decrease drug costs.40 The most commonly available 
prefilled syringes include epinephrine, atropine, gly-
copyrrolate, phenylephrine, lidocaine, succinylcholine, 
rocuronium, and calcium.
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT OF OPERATING 
ROOM PRACTICES
Waste
The OR generates 20% to 30% of total hospital waste,42
and anesthesia generates 25% of total OR waste, of 
which 60% could be recycled.43 There are two types of 
waste: (1) noncontaminated solid waste and (2) regulated 
medical waste, such as infectious material, sharps, and 
certain medications. The treatment and decontamination 
of regulated medical waste to enable safe handling and 
disposal are energy-intensive and expensive. Appropri-
ate classification of waste in the OR and recycling of 
paper, glass, and several types of plastics may reduce the 
requirement for this energy-intensive process.42 There-
fore, failure to segregate regulated medical waste from 
other types of waste increases environmental impact and 
costs.42
Reusable versus Single-Use Equipment
Environmental impact must also be considered in the 
selection and purchasing of medical equipment. The 
environmental benefits of reusable medical equipment, 
compared with single-use equipment, have been repeat-
edly demonstrated. Life cycle assessments of the laryn-
goscope and laryngeal mask airway (LMA; a supraglottic 
airway device that is available in reusable and single-use 
versions) have shown that reusables have a lesser envi-
ronmental impact than single-use items.44 45 For laryn-
goscopes, a single-use blade generates 5 to 6 times more 
CO2 and a single-use handle 16 to 18 times more CO2
than the reusable alternative.44 The life cycle assessment 
of single-use versus reusable LMAs strongly favors reus-
able devices. Single-use LMAs have a greater negative 
environmental impact because of the production of 
polymers, packaging, and waste management. A disad-
vantage of a reusable LMA is that more labor is required 
for washing and sterilization.45
Reprocessing allows for safe reuse of certain single-
use devices to decrease waste, costs, and emissions while 
adhering to infection control guidelines.46 This Food and 
Drug Administration (FDA)–approved process involves 
collecting, testing, packaging, and sterilizing single-use 
devices to meet the same standards as the original equip-
ment manufacturer. Currently, many medical devices are 
approved for reprocessing, including invasive devices 
such as surgical trocars, staplers, and angiography cath-
eters, and noninvasive devices, such as blood pressure 
cuffs, sequential compression device sleeves, and patient 
transfer mattresses.
Reusable versus Single-Use Textiles
The costs of reusable and single-use surgical textiles are 
similar.47 However, single-use textiles consume 200% to 
300% more energy and 250% to 330% more water and 
generate 200% to 300% more CO2 and sevenfold more 
waste than reusable textiles, despite the environmental 
costs, including greater water use for cleaning, disinfec-
tion, and sterilization. Selection of reusable rather than 
single-use gowns reduces energy consumption by 64%, 
GHG emission by 66%, water consumption by 83%, and 
solid waste generation by 84%.48
Reusable Breathing Circuits
Reusable anesthesia breathing circuits with single-use 
airway filters can be safely used for up to 7 days without 
increasing bacterial/viral contamination risk, resulting in 
lower costs and less energy and water use. However, the 
recommended frequency of anesthesia breathing circuit 
change varies from country to country: from daily in the 
U.K., to weekly in Germany, and after each patient in the 
United States.49,50 For example, in a U.S. center where 
50 patients undergo surgery every weekday, anesthesia 
circuits are changed between every case, which leads to 
use and disposal of approximately 13,000 plastic anes-
thesia breathing circuits annually in landfills. Using reus-
able breathing circuits with single-use airway filters may 
decrease this waste, in addition to the carbon footprint 
and cost of circuits.
Energy Efficiency
Health care facilities provide round-the-clock care 
requiring energy-intensive equipment and systems. In 
the United States health care facilities use more energy 
than any sector besides food service.51 Energy consump-
tion is the second-largest source of GHG in the OR and is 
3 to 6 times higher per square foot than in the hospital 
VI
Chapter 49 Anesthesia and Environmental Health
881
as a whole.14 Heating, ventilation, and air conditioning 
(HVAC) are responsible for 90% to 99% of OR energy 
consumption.14 However, effective, energy-efficient tech-
nologies and practices may reduce OR energy consump-
tion without affecting patient care (Table 49.4).
SUMMARY
Climate change is a health issue. Health professionals 
worldwide, including anesthesia providers, must show 
strong leadership in tackling climate change. This lead-
ership should include education and advocacy starting 
at institutional and local levels. At a personal level, 
anesthesia providers can update their practices to reflect 
current evidence. Strategies for mitigating the environ-
mental impact of anesthesia practice and incorporat-
ing the topics discussed in this chapter are shown in 
Fig. 49.3. Resources for sustainable anesthesia practice 
are listed in Table 49.5
Strategy
Description
HVAC occupancy-based 
approach
Reduce unnecessary airflow to unused space14 (e.g., by reducing the frequency of room air 
exchanges in an empty OR from the normal setting of 20 times per hour to a lower number to 
maintain positive pressure).
HVAC maintenance
HVAC systems should be regularly maintained and inspected for seal leaks.
HVAC system choice
Ensure that HVAC systems are of the proper size; upgrade current systems to energy-efficient 
motors, optimizing airflow, and avoiding excessive air conditioning.
Energy use
Turn off energy-intensive systems and equipment such as lights, anesthesia machine scavenging, 
computers, surgical equipment, and fluoroscopy machines when they are not in use.
Energy source
Change medical center energy sources from coal and natural gas to renewables such as wind and 
solar power to decrease the carbon footprint.54
Lighting
Use LED bulbs to decrease energy consumption and generate less heat, which will reduce the 
amount of energy required for cooling.
OR waste
Recycle and appropriately classify waste in the OR to reduce medical waste that requires energy-
intensive processing for safe handling and disposal.
Table 49.4 Strategies to Reduce Energy Waste in the Operating Room
HVAC, Heating, ventilation, air conditioning; LED, light-emitting diode; OR, operating room.
Resource
Description
Dartmouth-Hitchcock 
Eco-Health Footprint 
Calculator55
Tool designed for health 
care institutions to 
comprehensively measure 
GHG production from their 
activities.
U.S. Environmental 
Protection Agency (EPA)56
Overview of greenhouse 
gases, including sources 
of GHG emissions, and 
carbon footprint and GHG 
equivalency calculators.
American Society of 
Anesthesiologists Greening 
the Operating Room 
and Perioperative Arena: 
Environmental Sustainability 
for Anesthesia Practice57
Document produced by 
the American Society of 
Anesthesiologists Task 
Force on Environmental 
Sustainability Committee on 
Equipment and Facilities. 
Revised January 2017. 
Addresses many issues 
related to environmental 
sustainability and anesthesia 
practice.
U.K. National Health 
Services—Greener NHS58
Description of the U.K. 
National Health Service 
program to reduce the 
impact of climate change 
on public health and the 
environment.
Yale Gassing Greener App59
For anesthesia providers to 
build sustainable practices.
Table 49.5
Resources for Sustainable Anesthesia 
Practice
Section VI CONSULTANT ANESTHETIC PRACTICE
882
RECYCLE
REPROCESS
REDUCE
REFUSE
RETHINK
Regional vs. general anesthesia 
Inhalation anesthesia vs. total intravenous anesthesia 
Use more sustainable inhalation agents 
Minimize the number of drugs need to be drawn 
Use reusable equipment 
Avoid unnecessary blood draws 
Teleconference, telehealth
Single-use laryngoscope, LMA, bronchoscopes 
Single-use OR hats, shoe covers 
Use of desflurane and N2O
Low-flow or closed-circuit anesthesia
Regular maintanence to reduce gas leaks 
Reusable items
Occupancy-based HVAC
Turn off all equipment (if not in use) 
Energy-efficient OR theater
Air-assisted patient 
transfer mats 
Pulse oximeter, blood 
pressure cuffs 
Sequential compression 
devices (SCD)
Surgical blue wrap 
Batteries 
Paper
Glass 
Fig. 49.3 Toolkit for individual anesthesia providers to mitigate the environmental impact of 
anesthesia practices.
VI
Chapter 49 Anesthesia and Environmental Health
883
REFERENCES
1. Wang H, Horton R. Tackling climate 
change: The greatest opportunity for 
global health. Lancet. 2015;386:1798–
1799.
2. Roa L, Velin L, Tudravu J, etal. Cli-
mate change: Challenges and opportuni-
ties to scale up surgical, obstetric, and 
anaesthesia care globally. Lancet Planet 
Health. 2020;4:e538–e543.
3. IPCC. Climate Change 2014: Impacts, 
Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Summa-
ries, Frequently Asked Questions, and 
Cross-Chapter Boxes. A Contribution of 
Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment 
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel 
on Climate Change. In: Field CB, Barros 
VR, Dokken DJ, et al.  eds. World Mete-
orological Organization. Geneva; 2014.
4. UNICEF: Unless we act now: The impact 
of climate change on children. https://
sustainabledevelopment.un.org/content/
documents/2161unicef.pdf. 
Accessed 
January 23, 2021.
5. Chung JW, Meltzer DO. Estimate of the 
carbon footprint of the US health care 
sector. JAMA. 2009;302:1970–1972.
6. Eckelman MJ, Sherman J. Environmen-
tal impacts of the U.S. health care sys-
tem and effects on public health. PLoS 
One. 2016;11:e0157014.
7. Malik A, Lenzen M, McAlister S, 
etal. The carbon footprint of Austral-
ian health care. Lancet Planet Health. 
2018;2:e27–e35.
8. National Health Service (NHS). https://
www.england.nhs.uk/2020/01/greener-
nhs-campaign-to-tackle-climate-health-
emergency/ Accessed March 5, 2021.
9. Eckelman MJ, Sherman JD, MacNeill 
AJ. Life cycle environmental emissions 
and health damages from the Cana-
dian healthcare system: An economic-
environmental-epidemiological analysis. 
PLOS Med. 2018;15:e1002623.
10. World Resources Institute. The world’s top 
10 emitters. https://www.wri.org/insights/
interactive-chart-shows-changes
-worlds-top-10-emitters Accessed Sep-
tember 30, 2021. Based on 2018 data 
from https://www.climatewatchdata.org/.
11. U.S. Environmental Health Agency. 
Greenhouse gas emissions. https://www.
epa.gov/ghgemissions. Accessed Decem-
ber 30, 2020.
12. Ishizawa Y. Special article: General 
anesthetic gases and the global environ-
ment. Anesth Analg. 2011;112:213–217.
13. Charlesworth M, Swinton F. Anaes-
thetic gases, climate change, and sus-
tainable practice. Lancet Planet Health. 
2017;1:e216–e217.
14. MacNeill AJ, Lillywhite R, Brown CJ. 
The impact of surgery on global climate: 
A carbon footprinting study of operating 
theatres in three health systems. Lancet 
Planet Health. 2017;1:e381–e388.
15. Myhre G, Shindell D, Bréon FM, et al. 
Anthropogenic and natural radiative 
forcing. Climate Change 2013: The 
Physical Science Basis. Contribution of 
Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment 
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel 
on Climate Change. Cambridge and New 
York: Cambridge University Press; 2013.
16. Sulbaek Andersen MP, Nielsen OJ, Wal-
lington TJ, etal. Medical intelligence 
article: Assessing the impact on global 
climate from general anesthetic gases. 
Anesth Analg. 2012;114:1081–1085.
17. Ravishankara AR, Daniel JS, Portmann 
RW. Nitrous oxide (N2O): The dominant 
ozone-depleting substance emitted in 
the 21st century. Science. 2009;326:123–
125.
18. Ek M, Tjus K. Destruction of medical 
N2O in Sweden. In: Liu G, ed. Green-
house Gases. Capturing, Utilization and 
Reduction. London: IntechOpen; 2012.
19. Varughese S, Ahmed R. Environmen-
tal and occupational considerations 
of anesthesia: A narrative review and 
update. Anesth Analg. 2021;133(4):826–
835.
20. National Institute for Occupational Safety 
and Health (NIOSH) Publication No 2007-
151: Waste Anesthetic Gases, Occupa-
tional Hazards in Hospitals. https://www.
cdc.gov/niosh/docs/2007-151/pdfs/2007-
151.pdf?id=10.26616/NIOSHPUB2007151. 
Accessed December 9, 2020.
21. Ryan SM, Nielsen CJ. Global warming 
potential of inhaled anesthetics: Appli-
cation to clinical use. Anesth Analg. 
2010;11:92–98.
22. Baxter AD. Low and minimal flow 
inhalational anaesthesia. Can J Anaesth. 
1997;44:643–652.
23. Baum JA. Low Flow Anaesthesia: The 
Theory and Practice of Low Flow, Mini-
mal Flow and Closed System Anaes-
thesia. Oxford: Butterworth-Heinemann; 
2001. 2nd ed.
24. Baker AB. Back to basics—A simpli-
fied non-mathematical approach to low 
flow techniques in anaesthesia. Anaesth 
Intensive Care. 1994;22:394–395.
25. Feldman JM. Managing fresh gas flow 
to reduce environmental contamination. 
Anesth Analg. 2012;114:1093–1101.
26. Nair BG, Peterson GN, Neradilek MB, 
Newman SF, Huang EY, Schwid HA. 
Reducing wastage of inhalation anes-
thetics using real-time decision support 
to notify of excessive fresh gas flow. 
Anesthesiology. 2013;118(4):874–884. 
doi:10.1097/ALN.0b013e3182829de0.
27. Schober P, Loer SA. Closed system 
anaesthesia—Historical 
aspects 
and 
recent developments. Eur J Anaesthe-
siol. 2006;23:914–920.
28. Philip JH. Closed-circuit anesthesia. In: 
Ehrenwerth J, Eisenkraft J, Berry J, 
eds. Anesthesia Equipment: Principles 
and Applications. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 
2020. 3rd ed.
29. Feldman JM, Lo C, Hendrickx J. Esti-
mating the impact of carbon dioxide 
absorbent performance differences on 
absorbent cost during low-flow anesthe-
sia. Anesth Analg. 2020;13:374–381.
30. Lowe HJ, Ernst EA. The Quantitative 
Practice of Anesthesia: Use of Closed 
Circuit: Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins; 
1981.
31. Feldman JM, Hendrickx J, Kennedy 
RR. Carbon dioxide absorption during 
inhalation anesthesia: A modern prac-
tice. Anesth Analg. 2020. doi:10.1213/
ANE.0000000000005137.
32. Neumann MA, Laster MJ, Weiskopf RB, 
Gong DH, Dudziak R, Förster Eger E. 
The elimination of sodium and potas-
sium hydroxides from desiccated soda 
lime diminishes degradation of desflu-
rane to carbon monoxide and sevo-
flurane to compound A but does not 
compromise carbon dioxide absorp-
tion. Anesth Analg. 1999;89:768–773. 
doi:10.1213/00000539-199909000-00046.
33. Barwise JA, Lancaster LJ, Michaels D, 
etal. An initial evaluation of a novel 
anesthetic scavenging interface. Anesth 
Analg. 2011;113:1064–1067.
34. Blue Zone Technology, Toronto, ON, 
Canada. Deltasorb and Centralsorb 
Anesthetic Collection Service. https://
www.blue-zone.ca. Accessed November 
21, 2020.
35. Sherman J, Le C, Lamers V, etal. 
Life cycle greenhouse gas emissions 
of anesthetic drugs. Anesth Analg. 
2012;114:1086–1090.
36. Mankes RF. Propofol wastage in anes-
thesia. Anesth Analg. 2012;114:1091–
1092.
37. Gilbert N. Drug waste harms fish. Nature. 
2011;476:265.
38. Allan BTW, Smith I. Cost considerations 
in the use of anaesthetic drugs. Curr 
Opinion Anesthesiol. 2002;15:227–232.
39. Dee H. Drug and material wastage in 
anesthesia care. J Health Sci. 2012;6:4–8.
40. Atcheson CL, Spivack J, Williams R, 
etal. Preventable drug waste among 
anesthesia providers: opportunities for 
efficiency. J Clin Anesth. 2016;30:24–
32.
41. Sherman J, McGain F. Environmen-
tal sustainability in anesthesia: Pollu-
tion prevention and patient safety. Adv 
Anesthes. 2016;34:47–61.
42. Aggarwal S, Axelrod D, Bell C, etal. 
Greening the operating room and perio-
perative arena: Environmental sustain-
ability for anesthesia practice. American 
Society of Anesthesiologists. https://
www.asahq.org/about-asa/governance-
and-committees/asa-committees/com-
Section VI CONSULTANT ANESTHETIC PRACTICE
884
mittee-on-equipment-and-facilities/
environmental-sustainability/greening-
the-operating-room#appendB. Accessed 
December 1, 2020.
43. McGain E, Hendel SA, Story DA. An 
audit of potentially recyclable waste 
from anaesthetic practice. Anaesth 
Intensive Care. 2009;37:820–823.
44. Sherman JD, LAt Raibley, Eckelman 
MJ. Life cycle assessment and cost-
ing methods for device procurement: 
comparing reusable and single-use dis-
posable laryngoscopes. Anesth Analg. 
2018;127:434–443.
45. Eckelman M, Mosher M, Gonzalez A, 
etal. Comparative life cycle assess-
ment of disposable and reusable laryn-
geal mask airways. Anesth Analg. 
2012;114:1067–1072.
46. Kwakye G, Pronovost PJ, Makary MA. 
Commentary: A call to go green in 
health care by reprocessing medical 
equipment. Acad Med. 2010;85:398–
400.
47. Overcash M. A comparison of reusable 
and disposable perioperative textiles: 
Sustainability state-of-the-art 2012. 
Anesth Analg. 2012;114:1055–1066.
48. Vozzola E, Overcash M. Griffing E: An 
environmental analysis of reusable and 
disposable surgical gowns. AORN J. 
2020;111:315–325.
49. McGain F, Algie CM, O’Toole J, etal. 
The microbiological and sustainability 
effects of washing anaesthesia breath-
ing circuits less frequently. Anaesthesia. 
2014;69:337–342.
50. Dubler S, Zimmermann S, Fischer M, 
etal. Bacterial and viral contamination 
of breathing circuits after extended use—
An aspect of patient safety? Acta Anaes-
thesiol Scand. 2016;60:1251–1260.
51. Energy Information Administration: 
2012 Commercial Buildings Energy Con-
sumption Survey: Energy Usage Sum-
mary. http://www.eia.gov/consumption/
commercial/reports/2012/energyusage. 
Accessed January 21, 2021.
52. Sulbaek Andersen MP, Nielsen OJ, 
Karpichev B, etal. Atmospheric chem-
istry of isoflurane, desflurane, and sevo-
flurane: Kinetics and mechanisms of 
reactions with chlorine atoms and OH 
radicals and global warming potentials. 
J Phys Chem A. 2012;116:5806–5820.
53. Sherman JD, Berkow L. Scaling up 
Inhaled anesthetic practice improvement: 
The role of environmental sustainability 
metrics. Anesth Analg. 2019;128:1060–
1062.
54. Watts N, Amann M, Arnell N, etal. The 
2019 report of The Lancet Countdown 
on health and climate change: Ensuring 
that the health of a child born today 
is not defined by a changing climate. 
Lancet. 2019;394:1836–1878.
55. Dartmouth-Hitchcock Eco-Health Foot-
print Calculator. https://sites.google.
com/site/dhmccalculator/home 
Last 
Accessed October 3, 2021.
56. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
(EPA). https://www.epa.gov/ghgemis-
sions/overview-greenhouse-gases Last 
Accessed October 3, 2021.
57. American Society of Anesthesiologists 
Greening the Operating Room and 
Perioperative 
Arena. 
https://www.
asahq.org/about-asa/governance-
and-committees/asa-committees/com-
mittee-on-equipment-and-facilities/
environmental-sustainability/greening-
the-operating-room-complete. 
Last 
Accessed October 3, 2021.
58. UK National Health Services (NHS)—
Greener NHS. https://www.england.nhs.
uk/greenernhs/Last Accessed October 3, 
2021.
59. Yale Gassing Greener App. https://apps.
apple.com/us/app/yale-gassing-greener/
id1152700062 Accessed October 3, 2021.
885
Acute lung injury (ALI), 
transfusion-related, 452
Acute pain, 655, 717
analgesia for, 77
Acute respiratory distress syndrome 
(ARDS), 742
Berlin denition of, 742b
treatment for, 742
triggers of, 742t
ventilatory management, low tidal 
volumes/permissive hypercapnia 
for, 407
Acute tubular necrosis, 663–664
oliguria (preoperative differential 
diagnosis), 504t
Adductor canal block, 329, 329f
Adenine, for blood storage, 448
Adenoidectomy, 554
Adenosine diphosphatase, 415
Adenosine diphosphate (ADP), 415, 421
Adenosine, in cardiopulmonary 
resuscitation, 818t
Adenosine triphosphate (ATP), 71
Adjuncts, trauma and, 774
Adjustable pressure-limiting (APL) 
valve, 240
ADLs. See Activities of daily living 
(ADLs)
Adrenal cortex dysfunction, 526
Adrenal crisis, 527
Adrenal insufciency, 526
α1-Adrenergic agonists, 76
α2-Adrenergic agonists, 76
β-Adrenergic antagonists, 78
β-Adrenergic blockade, adverse effects 
of, 78
β-Adrenergic blockers, 78
specic, 79
β2-Adrenergic receptor agonists, 77
Adrenergic pharmacology, 72
α-Adrenergic receptor antagonists, 77
Adrenergic receptors, effects of, 71
β-Adrenoceptor antagonists, 528
Adult advanced cardiovascular life 
support, 814
airway management, 814
alternative techniques, 813
amiodarone, 819
Acid-base diagnosis, steps for, 408f
Acid-base disorders
compensation, determining, 409b
diagnosis of, 408–409
Acid-base disturbances, differential 
diagnosis, 404
Acidemia
adverse responses to, 404
denition of, 400
Acidosis, denition of, 400
Acids, 400
ACLS. See Advanced cardiac life 
support (ACLS)
Acoustic impendence, 384
Acquired bleeding disorders, 419
cardiopulmonary bypass-associated 
coagulopathy, 420
disseminated intravascular 
coagulation, 420, 421t
drug induced, 419
liver disease, 420
renal disease, 420
trauma-induced coagulopathy, 421
vitamin K deciency, 419
Acquired coagulopathy, 419
Acquired thrombotic disorders, 422
antiphospholipid syndrome, 422
heparin-induced thrombocytopenia, 
423
Acromegaly, 528
Activated clotting time (ACT), 426
Activated partial thromboplastin time 
(aPTT), 418, 425
Activated protein C (APC), 418
“Active” sleep, 857
Activities of daily living (ADLs), 652b
Acute blood loss, 448–449
Acute coronary syndrome, 
post-resuscitation care, 824
Acute glaucoma, 552
Acute kidney injury (AKI), 95, 441, 504
causes of, 748b
diagnosis, 747
dialysis, 748
epidemiology, 747
uid status assessment, 748
treatment of, 748
Acute liver failure (ALF), 665
A
A wave, 372f
AASM. See American Academy of 
Sleep Medicine (AASM)
ABA. See American Board of 
Anesthesiology (ABA)
Abciximab, 428–429
Abdominal ultrasound, 393
FAST examination, 393
left upper quadrant view, 394, 
396f
pelvic view, 395, 397f
right upper quadrant view, 394, 
396f
Abdominal viscera, displacement of, 
339–340
Abdominal wall, defects of, 626
ABGs. See Arterial blood gases (ABGs)
ABMS. See American Board of Medical 
Specialties (ABMS)
Abnormal coagulation, 503
Abnormal presentations, 596
Abruptio placentae, 599
Absorption, 31–32
AC power, anesthesia workstation, 250
Acceleromyography (AMG), 174–177
Accidental esophageal intubation, 277
Accreditation Council for Graduate 
Medical Education (ACGME), 
Outcome Project of, 11–12
Acetaminophen, aging, 651
Acetylcholine (ACh), 71
actions of, 160
chemical structure of, 164f
prejunctional receptors and release 
of, 162
SCh mimics, 165
α-subunits and, 163
Acetylsalicylic acid (ASA), 432
ACGME. See Accreditation Council for 
Graduate Medical Education 
(ACGME)
ACh. See Acetylcholine (ACh)
Acid-base abnormalities, calculation 
of, 409f
Acid-base balance, 400
denitions in, 400
disorder, diagnosis of, 408–409
Note: Page numbers followed by “b,” “f,” and “t” indicate boxes, figures, and tables, respectively.
INDEX
Index
886
ancillary devices, 813
epinephrine, 819
management of specic arrhythmias, 
814
medications, 819
resuscitation team management, 814
vasopressin, 820
Adults
airway of, versus infant, 279b
neuromuscular junction of, 162f
resuscitation techniques, drugs used 
during, 818t
Advance directives, in palliative care, 
849
Advanced cardiac life support (ACLS), 
814
Advanced Trauma Life Support (ATLS), 
770
Adverse cardiac events, risk scores and 
calculators, 201t
Adverse reactions, to contrast 
materials, 680
Aerobic metabolism, 57–58
A-F bundle, 749
AFE. See Amniotic uid embolism 
(AFE)
Afterload, 54, 55f
Age, increasing, effect on anesthetic 
drug pharmacology, 48
Agent-specic vaporizer, 236
Aging
body composition in, 649f
physiologic changes of, 643
cardiovascular system, 643
gastrointestinal system, 648
hematologic system, 648
nervous system, 648
pulmonary system, 646
renal system, 647
physiologic effects of, 645t
of U.S. population, 643f
α2-Agonists
anesthetic, experience as, 77
as epidural additive, 307
operative setting, analgesia, 77
for spinal anesthesia, 302
Agonists, receptors and, 42
μ-Agonists opioids, 130
drowsiness by, 130
AHI. See Apnea-hypopnea index (AHI)
AIDN. See Anesthetic-induced 
developmental neurotoxicity 
(AIDN)
Aintree intubation catheter, 272
Air embolism monitoring, TEE (usage), 
344
usage, air embolism monitoring, 
344
Air, epidural anesthesia and, 308
Air-Q intubating laryngeal airways, for 
children and infants, 264t, 281
Air-Q masked laryngeal airways, 266, 
266f
AIRS. See Anesthesia Incident 
Reporting System (AIRS)
Airway
anatomy of, 487, 489f
anesthesia of, 273
anesthesia workstation, 249
assessment of, 256, 620
history and anatomic 
examination, 256
burns, trauma and, 786
cervical spine changes and, 559
edema, 700
equipment for, 281
evaluation of, in obstructive sleep 
apnea, 482
res, 553
foreign body in, 555
of infant, 279
versus adult, 279b
management techniques, 620, 620t
obstruction of
in mediastinal masses, 496t
pediatric advanced cardiovascular 
life support, 820
pressure
increased, 63
resistance, 64–65
determinants of, 64b
trauma bay
management of, 771b, 771
oxygenation and, 771
in zones of lung, 57
Airway burns, 773
Airway exchange catheters, 272
Airway management, 253
in ACLS, 814
anatomy and physiology, 254
complications in, 277
for difcult airway, 267, 674
guidelines in, 254f
in infants and children, 284
history and anatomic examination, 
256
in infants and children, 278
differences in, 278
of normal airway, 279
larynx, 254
nasal cavity, 254
oral cavity and pharynx, 254, 256f
pathologic states inuencing, 258t
physical examination for, 256, 259t
techniques, 226, 261
trachea, 256
Airway pressures, 355–356
AKI. See Acute kidney injury (AKI)
Albumin, 441
Albuterol (Proventil, Ventolin), 77
Aldosterone antagonists, 502
AlertWatch, 378, 379f–380f
ALF. See Acute liver failure (ALF)
Alfentanil, 135
ALI. See Acute lung injury (ALI)
Alkalemia
adverse responses to, 404
severe, 405
Allergic reactions, to blood transfusion, 
454
Alpha stat, 404
Altered physiology, trauma bay and, 
771
Alternative payment models (APMs), 8
Alveolar-arterial (A-a) gradient, 410
calculation of, 410f, 410
Alveolar dead space, 356–358, 360f
Alveolar gas equation, 60f, 410, 410f
Alveolar hypoventilation, 701b, 701
Alveolar oxygen partial pressure, 
determinants of, 60f
Alveolar partial pressure, decrease, 702
Alveolar patterns, evolution of, 391, 
393b, 395f
Alveolar ventilation, 63
Alvimopan, opioids and, 132
Alzheimer-related neuropathology, 
anesthetic-induced 
developmental neurotoxicity 
(AIDN) and, 187
Ambulatory anesthesia, 671
settings, 671, 672f
American Academy of Sleep Medicine 
(AASM), 856–857
American Board of Anesthesiology 
(ABA)
chronic pain, 794
denition of anesthesiology, 
3–4, 4b
American Board of Medical Specialties 
(ABMS), 3–4, 794
American College of Surgeons, 
perioperative DNR orders, 851, 
852t
American Medical Association (AMA), 
20
American Society of Anesthesiologists 
(ASA), 4, 21–22, 222, 568
ambulatory anesthesia, 671
anesthetic monitoring, 351
Closed Claims Project, 831, 832t
gastrointestinal changes, 581
perioperative DNR orders, 852t
guidelines for, 851, 851t
American Society of Regional 
Anesthesia and Pain Medicine 
(ASRA), 727
American Spinal Injury Association 
(ASIA), 785
Amino amide, local anesthetic, 154
Amino esters, 143, 144f–145f, 153
Adult advanced cardiovascular life 
support (Continued)
Index
887
γ-Aminobutyric acid A (GABAA) 
receptors, 66
γ-Aminobutyric acid type-A receptors 
(GABAARs), 99, 109, 109f
Aminosteroid compounds, 165
Amiodarone
adult advanced cardiovascular life 
support, 819
in cardiopulmonary resuscitation, 
818t
Amnesia increase, dexmedetomidine, 
77
Amniotic uid embolism (AFE), 601
Analgesia
increase, dexmedetomidine, 77
patient-controlled analgesia, 721
Analgesics, sedatives and, 750t
Anaphylactic shock
clinical manifestations of, 740
treatment of, 740
Anaphylaxis, 825
Anatomic dead space, 356–358, 360f
Anemia, 67, 503, 662, 755
iron decit, 756b, 756
World Health Organization (WHO) 
Anemia Threshold, 756t
Anesthesia, 19–20
in asthma, 479, 480b, 480t
for cesarean delivery, 591
conduct of, 491, 493t
depth of, 225–226
effects of, 66
and environmental health, 874
anesthesia gases, 875, 876f, 876t
closed-circuit anesthesia, 877
CO2 absorbents, 879
drug waste, 879
health, health care, and climate 
change, 874, 875t
low-ow anesthesia, 876, 877t, 
878f
occupational hazards of inhaled 
anesthetics, 875
operating room practices, 880
propofol, 879
waste anesthetic gas scavenging 
systems, 879
for former premature infant, 636
informed consent for, 215
inhaled induction of, 224, 617
performing, 280
intravenous induction of, 224–225
learning, 11
for lung resection, 485
maintenance
ketamine, usage, 119
for neurosurgery, 538
anticoagulant management, 541
blood product administration, 541
induction of, 539
maintenance of, 539
monitoring, 538
positioning, 539
postoperative care, 541
preoperative assessment, 538b, 
538
for noninvasive imaging procedures, 
682
physiologic monitoring, 682
nonoperating room anesthesia, 672
in obstructive sleep apnea, 482, 483t
onset of, 334
ophthalmic procedures, 550
otolaryngology procedures, 553
plan, creating, 13, 14b
practice, scope of, 3
during pregnancy, 603
for procedures, in nonoperating 
room locations, 678
in pulmonary hypertension, 484
remifentanil role in, 136
for remote locations, 638
services, 679t
sleep and, 857
for trauma, 768
types of, 221
workforce, 4
workstation, 229
functional anatomy of, 230
functions of, 230t
preanesthesia checkout procedure, 
248, 249t
Anesthesia assistants (AAs), 4–6
Anesthesia care, 4
cognitive load, 17
competencies, 11–12, 12t
future of, 10
learning strategies in, 15, 16b
milestones in, 11, 12t
provider, involved, 349
quality, 829
versus safety, 829
quality and safety, 829
improving local outcomes in, 835
multidisciplinary process 
improvement in, 835, 836f
outcome measures in, 833
process measures in, 833
structural measures in, 833
structured quality improvement 
programs in, 835, 836f
safety
approaches to, 830
learning from experience, 830
patient safety-focused programs, 
831
quality versus, 829
specialty-wide standards, 831b, 
831
structured approach to, 12, 13b
creating anesthesia plan in, 13, 14b
managing intraoperative 
anesthetic in, 13, 15f, 16t
patient follow-up in, 15
preoperative evaluation in, 12, 13t
preparing operating room in, 13
Anesthesia delivery systems, 229, 250
Anesthesia gases, environmental 
impact of, 875, 876f, 876t
Anesthesia Incident Reporting System 
(AIRS), 832
Anesthesia-induced unconsciousness, 
92
Anesthesia induction, 280
barbiturates, usage, 115
benzodiazepines, usage, 117
ketamine, usage, 119
preanesthetic medication and 
parental presence during, 280
Anesthesia management
patients with aortic regurgitation, 465
patients with aortic stenosis, 465b, 
465
patients with CAD, 462, 463b, 463t
patients with cardiac tamponade, 471
patients with HCM, 470
patients with heart failure, 469
patients with mitral regurgitation, 
464b, 464
patients with mitral stenosis, 464b, 
464
patients with pulmonary 
hypertension, 470
Anesthesia Patient Safety Foundation 
(APSF), 7–8, 831
Anesthesia Quality Institute (AQI), 832
Anesthesia reservoir bag, or “breathing 
bag,” 240
Anesthesia ventilators, anesthesia 
workstation, 245
bellows ventilators, 245, 245f–246f
fresh gas ow compensation and 
fresh gas decoupling, 247
mechanically driven piston 
ventilators, 246
target-controlled inhalational 
anesthesia, 247
Anesthesia ventilator systems, 246
Anesthesiologists
contribution, in palliative care, 842
as perioperative physician, 754b
Anesthesiology, 10, 753
denition of, 3–4, 4b
Entrustable Professional Activity 
(EPA) in, 12b
as multidisciplinary specialty, 3
perioperative patient care, 4
professional societies, 4, 5t
quality and safety, 7, 8b
training and certication in, 7
value-based care, 8, 9f, 9t
Anesthesia (Continued)
Anesthesia care (Continued)
Index
888
Anesthetic breathing circuits, 238
circle breathing systems, 239, 239f
circle system function, 242
Mapleson breathing systems, 243, 
243f
Anesthetic breathing circuits, 
anesthesia workstation, 238
Anesthetic circuit, inhaled anesthetics, 
85
Anesthetic drugs
choices, trauma bay and, 771
increasing age and, 48
interactions, 42, 43f–45f
intraocular pressure and, 547
neurodegeneration and, 186
age-dependent vulnerability of, 
186
durations and concentrations of, 
188
sedative drugs and, 188
obesity and, 45, 46f, 46t
Anesthetic-induced developmental 
neurotoxicity (AIDN), 186
aberrant glial development of, 187
alleviation of, 188
altered dendritic development and, 
187
Alzheimer-related neuropathology 
and, 187
characterization of, 186, 187t
impeded neurogenesis and, 187
neurocognitive function and, 187
neuroinammation and, 187
pathologic apoptosis and, 186
spinal cord and, 187
Anesthetic monitoring, 351, 352f, 354f
adverse conditions, 377
central nervous system, 374
circulatory system, 362, 363t
magnetic resonance imaging, 377
multifunction displays and decision 
support, 378
respiratory system, 353
temperature, 377, 378t
Anesthetic neurotoxicity, 185, 639
clinical evidence for, 188
intraoperative course for, 189, 190t
neurocognitive outcomes of, 189, 
190t
neurodegeneration and long-term 
neurocognitive decits and, 186
Anesthetic practice, β-blockers (usage), 
78
Anesthetic technique
appropriate, 222b, 222, 223f–224f, 
225t
choice of, 221
practical aspects, 224
types of anesthesia, 221
for fractured hip, 569
spine surgery, 564
Anesthetic vaporizers, anesthesia 
workstation, 234
modern vaporizer types, 236
cassette vaporizer, 238
desurane dual-gas blender, 237, 
238f
injection-type vaporizers, 238
variable bypass vaporizers, 236, 
237f
physics, 234
Anesthetics, trauma and, 782
Aneurysms of the aorta, 471
Angina, grading of, 460b
Angina pectoris, 464–465
Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) 
inhibitors, 202, 462
Angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs), 
202, 462
Angulated blades, for video 
laryngoscopy, 270
Anion gap, 406
calculation of, 406f
Ankle block, 330
cross-sectional anatomy, 333f
Ankylosing spondylitis, 563
Anoxia, anesthetic neurotoxicity and, 
190
ANS. See Autonomic nervous system 
(ANS)
Antagonism, of residual neuromuscular 
block, 178, 179f
Anticholinergics, intramuscular 
administration (comparative 
effects), 80t
Anticholinesterases, 166, 178
adverse effects, 179
determinants of speed and adequacy 
of recovery, 179, 180b
dosing, 180
neostigmine as, 178–179
pharmacodynamics, 180
pharmacokinetics, 180
Anticoagulant therapy, 202, 204–205
Anticoagulants, 429, 726
direct oral anticoagulants, 430
direct thrombin inhibitors, 429
emergent reversal of, 433, 434t
fondaparinux, 429
low-molecular-weight heparin, 429
unfractionated heparin, 429
vitamin K antagonists, 429
Anticoagulation, 432, 433t, 685
Anticoagulation bridging, algorithm 
for, 204–205, 206f
Antifactor Xa activity, 425
Antibrinolytic therapy, 422
Antibrinolytics, 431, 619
Antihypertensives, for preeclampsia, 
598
Antiphospholipid antibodies (aPLs), 
423
Antiphospholipid syndrome (APS), 422, 
423
α2-Antiplasmin, 417
Antiplatelet agents, 204–205, 427, 
432
cyclooxygenase inhibitors, 427
glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors, 428
P2Y12 receptor antagonists, 428
Antiplatelet drugs, 419
Antiplatelet therapy, 204–205, 207b, 
207f, 463–464
Antithrombotic therapy
neuraxial anesthesia 
contraindication, 297
perioperative management of, 432
antiplatelet agents, 432
emergent reversal of 
anticoagulants, 433, 434t
heparins, 432
neuraxial anesthesia and 
anticoagulation, 432, 433t
vitamin K antagonists, 432, 432t
Aortic arch, baroreceptors in, 55
Aortic regurgitation, 465
management of anesthesia, 465
Aortic stenosis, 464
management of anesthesia, 465b, 
465
neuraxial anesthesia 
contraindication, 296
Aortic valve replacement (AVR), 465
Aortocaval compression, 579, 579f
Apical four-chamber view
cardiac ultrasound, 387
image appearance and structures 
visualized, 387, 388f
image interpretation, 387, 390b
patient positioning, 387
probe position and manipulation, 
387f, 387
APMs. See Alternative payment models 
(APMs)
Apnea, 60, 860
denition of, 482
Apnea-hypopnea index (AHI), 482, 
860, 862b
Apneic threshold, 66, 131
Apoptosis, pathologic, anesthetic 
induced developmental 
neurotoxicity (AIDN) and, 186
Apparatus dead space, 356–358, 360f
APSF. See Anesthesia Patient Safety 
Foundation (APSF)
Aqueous solubility, of inhaled 
anesthetics, 85–86
Arachnoid mater, 290–291
ARBs. See Angiotensin receptor 
blockers (ARBs)
ARDS. See Acute respiratory distress 
syndrome (ARDS)
Argatroban, 429–430
Index
889
Arginine vasopressin (AVP), 500
as antidiuretic hormone, 500
effects of, modulate, 499–500
Arm (exsanguination), Esmarch 
bandage (usage), 334f
Arousal pathways, sleep medicine and, 
857, 859f
Arrhythmia, as thoracotomy 
complication, 493t
Arterial blood
oxygen levels in, 58
percutaneously obtained, 403
Arterial blood gases (ABGs)
analysis of, 402
oxygenation of, 404
sampling of, 403
temperature correction of, 403
Arterial blood pressure, 51
anesthetic neurotoxicity and, 190
increase, ephedrine, 76
maintenance of, 684
management of, 684
monitoring, invasive, 368, 369t
Arterial carbon dioxide partial pressure
determinants of, 62
differential diagnosis of, 64
increases in, 131
Arterial carbon dioxide tension 
(PaCO2), 356, 361f
Arterial catheter, 741
Arterial hypoxemia, 57–58
hypoventilation and, 701b
Arterial oxygen content, 58, 59f
mixed venous oxygen content, 
difference of, 412
Arteriolar thickening, 57
Arteriovenous (AV) difference, 412
Arteriovenous malformations (AVMs), 
543
incidence of, 543–544
Articaine
epidural use, 306
for spinal anesthesia, 300
ASA. See American Society of 
Anesthesiologists (ASA)
ASA Physical Status classication, 211, 
214t–215t
Ascites, 508
Aseptic technique, spinal anesthesia 
and, 302
Aspiration, risk of, increase in, 505
Association of American Medical 
Colleges (AAMC), 6
Association of periOperative Registered 
Nurses, perioperative DNR 
orders, 851, 851t–852t
Asthma, 478
anesthesia for, management of, 479
clinical presentation of, 478
perioperative management of, 
principles of, 480b
preoperative assessment for, 480t
treatment of, stepwise therapy for, 
479b
Asystole, 819
Atlantoaxial subluxation, 561
Atlanto-occipital extension/cervical 
spine mobility, 260
ATLS. See Advanced Trauma Life 
Support (ATLS)
Atracurium
chemical structure of, 164f
histamine release and, 172
as intermediate-acting 
nondepolarizing neuromuscular 
blocking drug, 172
Atria, innervation of, 55
Atropine, 80
in cardiopulmonary resuscitation, 818t
tertiary structure of, 80
Attenuation, 384
Atypical plasma cholinesterase, 166
Autologous blood transfusions, 454
Autonomic nervous system (ANS), 55, 
69
anatomy of, 69
responsibility of, 69
schematic representation of, 70f
Auxiliary e-cylinder inlet, 231, 232f
Auxiliary oxygen cylinder, anesthesia 
workstation, 249
Auxiliary oxygen owmeters, 233
AVMs. See Arteriovenous 
malformations (AVMs)
Avon Longitudinal Study of Parents 
and Children, 189
AVP. See Arginine vasopressin (AVP)
Awake beroptic endotracheal 
intubation, 273
patient preparation in, 273
airway anesthesia, 273
larynx and trachea, 274
nose and nasopharynx, 274
superior laryngeal nerve block 
and, 274
tongue and oropharynx, 274
transtracheal block and, 274
technique for, 274
Awake-regional anesthesia in infancy, 
100
Awareness, spine surgery, 564
Axillary block, 325
advantages/complications, 325
arm, abduction, 325
Axillary roll, 341f, 341
B
B-mode, 384
Backache
as neuraxial anesthesia complication, 
314
occurrence of, 339
Back-end kinetics, 32b, 39, 39f–40f
Bad news, breaking, 849b
Bag-mask ventilation, 814
Balanced anesthesia, 108, 226
Balanced crystalloid solutions, 439
Barbiturates, 113
anesthesia induction, 115
cardiovascular system, 114
central nervous system, 114
chemical structure of, 114f
clinical uses, 115
dose-dependent CNS depression, 
114
intraarterial injection, result, 115
neuroprotection, 115
pharmacodynamics, 114
pharmacokinetics, 114
respiratory system, 114
side effects, 115
Barbituric acid, structure and 
derivatives of, 114f
Barbotage, spinal anesthesia and, 300
Bariatric surgery, 517
Baricity, spinal block height and, 297
Barometric pressure, low, 60
Baroreceptors, 55
Base excess (BE), denition of, 401
Bases, 400
Basic life support (BLS), 811
healthcare provider adult cardiac 
arrest algorithm, 812f
BE. See Base excess (BE)
Beach chair position, 344
Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome, 282
Beer’s law, 353
Bellows ventilators, 245, 245f–246f
Belmont rapid infuser, 780f
Benzocaine, for airway anesthesia, 
274
Benzodiazepines, 115, 536
aging, 650
allergic reactions to, 117
amnestic/anxiolytic effects, 117
anesthesia induction, 117
cardiovascular system, impact, 117
central nervous system, impact, 116
chemical structure of, 116f
clinical uses, 117
pharmacodynamics, 115
pharmacokinetics, 115
preoperative medication, 117
respiratory system, 117
sedation, 117
effects, 117
seizure activity, suppression, 118
side effects, 115
spectrum of effects, 116
synergistic effects, 117
Bias, 23
Biased μ-receptor agonists, 138, 139f
Asthma (Continued)
Index
890
Bicarbonate
buffer system, 401
as epidural additive, 307
Bier, August, 333–334
Bier block, 333
Biliary system, opioids and, 132
Biliary tract, disease of, 512
anesthesia, management of, 512
bile metabolism and secretion, 512
laparoscopic cholecystectomy in, 513
pathophysiology of, 512
Biophase, 32b, 39, 41f
Biphasic waveform debrillators, 813
Bite injuries, 346
Bivalirudin, 429–430
Biventricular pacemakers, 466
Bleeding, 418–419
Bleeding disorders, 418
acquired, 419
cardiopulmonary bypass-
associated coagulopathy, 420
disseminated intravascular 
coagulation, 420, 421t
drug induced, 419
liver disease, 420
renal disease, 420
trauma-induced coagulopathy, 421
vitamin K deciency, 419
inherited, 418
factor deciencies, 418
hemophilias, 418
von Willebrand disease, 418, 419t
treatment of, 421
disseminated intravascular 
coagulation, 421
hemophilia, 421
platelet disorders, 422
von Willebrand disease, 421
Bleeding time, 425
Blind method, for left-sided 
double-lumen tube, 490f
β-Blocking drugs, overdose of, 78–79
Blood
antibody screen, 447
banking, 446
blood storage, 448
donor-recipient compatibility, 446
massive transfusion/emergency 
release protocols, 447, 447t
whole-blood processing, 446, 446f
components of, 448, 448t
crossmatch of, 447
ejection of, resistance to, 54
glucose, control (requirement), 522
metabolic abnormalities of, 452
therapy, 445
complications of, 451
transmission of infectious diseases 
n, 451
type, 446
Blood–brain barrier, 533
Blood ow, 362
Blood gas, information on, 409
Blood gas analysis, 400
denitions in, 400
heparinized, bubble-free, fresh blood 
sample, 403
Blood groups, 446t
Blood loss, monitoring for, 450
Blood pressure, 362
arterial, invasive monitoring, 368, 
369t
measurement of, 369t
noninvasive, 366, 369t
Blood products, transfusion of, 
210–211, 619
Blood storage, 448
Blood transfusion
allergic reactions to, 454
autologous, 454
decision to transfuse, 449
febrile reactions to, 453
hemolytic reactions to, 454
treatment of, 454
indicators, monitoring for, 450
infection transmitted by, 451t
noninfectious hazards of, 452
Blood urea nitrogen (BUN), 501
concentrations
GFR, changes in, 501
increased, 501
BLS. See Basic life support (BLS)
Body, habitus, 260
Body interventional radiology, 684
evaluation and management of, 685
Body mass index, 515, 757
Body temperature
in anesthetic monitoring, 377, 378t
anesthetic neurotoxicity and, 191
management, postresuscitation care, 
824
Bohr equation, 63
Boiling point of liquid, 235
Bolus front-end kinetics, 127–128
Bonls FPS, 275, 276f
Bowman capsule, 500f
Brachial plexus, 347
axillary block, 325
block, 322
techniques for, 324t
infraclavicular block, 325
injury, 347
interscalene block, 322
roots, 323f
supraclavicular block, 324
Bradyarrhythmias, 707
Bradycardia, 52–53, 815
fentanyl congeners and, 131
as neuraxial anesthesia complication, 
313
occurrence of, 78–79
resuscitation algorithm for, 815f
Brain:blood partition coefcient, 86–87
Brain relaxation, 536
Brainstem, central “integratory” system 
in, 55
Breathing
“awake” drive to, 66
control of, 65
patterns of, 613
periodic, 67
Breathing circuit pressure sensors, 242
Breathing system pressure, anesthesia 
workstation, 251
Breech presentation, 596
Brief Health Literacy Screen (BHLS), 762
Bronchial blocker
advantages of, 564
depiction of, 564f
for lung isolation, 488t
positioning of, 489, 491f
Bronchodilators, 95
Bronchospasm, 359f
asthma and, 478
as thoracotomy complication, 493t
Brutality of surgery, 3
Buffer
denition of, 401
systems, 401
Bullae, in COPD, 480
Bumetanide (loop diuretic), 502
BUN. See Blood urea nitrogen (BUN)
Bupivacaine
avoidance, 334
chemical structures of, 145f
local anesthetic, 154
plain, baricity and, 297
for spinal anesthesia, 301, 306
Buprenorphine, 136, 724, 725t
Burnout, 18, 19t, 24
Burns, trauma and, 786
airway and, 773, 786
escharotomies and, 788
uid management, 786
infection and, 787
inhalation and, 787
pain and, 787
patient transfer in, 788, 789b
severity of, 786, 786t
surface area, estimation of, 786, 787f
types of, 786, 788t
C
C-MAC, 270, 271f
C-MAC video laryngoscope, 283
C wave, 372f
CAAs. See Certied anesthesiologist 
assistants (CAAs)
CAD. See Coronary artery disease 
(CAD)
Calcium channel blockers, 57
Calibration of oxygen monitor, 
anesthesia workstation, 251
Index
891
Caloric needs, estimate of, 747t
CAM-ICU. See Confusion Assessment 
Method for the ICU (CAM-ICU)
Cancer, recurrence and morbidity, 100
Cancer pain, palliative care for, 844, 
845t–846t
Cannula-based ophthalmic regional 
anesthesia, 550, 551f
Capillaries, recruitment of, 56
Capillary hydrostatic pressure, 437
Capnography, 356, 360f–361f
Carbaminohemoglobin, 401–402
Carbon dioxide (CO2)
brainstem response to, 66
hydration of, 401
production, increased, 62, 63b
in pulmonary gas exchange, 61
retention, in COPD, 480
Carbon dioxide absorbents, 879
anesthesia workstation, 251
circle breathing system, 240b, 240
inhaled anesthetics reactions, 101, 
101t, 102f
Carbon emissions, 875
Carbon monoxide (CO), 101
Carbonation, epidural additives and, 
307
Carboxyhemoglobin (COHb), 59, 
353–355
Carcinoid tumors, 529
Cardiac arrest, in pregnancy, 826
Cardiac arrhythmias, 706
bradyarrhythmias, 707
factors, 707b
tachyarrhythmias, 706
treatment of, 707
Cardiac conduction and rhythm 
abnormalities, 466, 467t–468t
cardiac implantable electronic 
devices, 466, 468f
heart block, 466
Cardiac dysrhythmias, NMBDs and, 166
Cardiac implantable electronic devices 
(CIEDs), 466, 468f, 689
Cardiac ischemia, 405
Cardiac output (CO), 52, 373
aging, 644
calculation of, via Fick equation, 
411f
estimates, 412
xed, neuraxial anesthesia 
contraindication, 296
increase, 578–579
measurement of, 373
neuraxial anesthesia and, 295
Cardiac reexes, 55
blunt, 55
Cardiac tamponade, 471b, 471
management of anesthesia, 471
Cardiac ultrasound, 385
apical four-chamber view, 387
parasternal long-axis view, 385
parasternal short-axis view, 386
subcostal and inferior vena cava 
views, 388
Cardiogenic shock, 705
clinical manifestations of, 738
mechanical circulatory support, 738
treatment of, 738
Cardiology procedures, catheter-based, 
687
adult cardiac catheterization, 687
challenges and complications of, 690
electrophysiology studies, 688
heart disease intervention, structural, 
689
pediatric studies, 689
Cardiopulmonary bypass-associated 
coagulopathy, 420
Cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) circuit, 
472
cannula insertion sites, 473f
discontinuation of, 475t
initiation of, 474t
pH stat versus alpha stat 
management, 474b
schematic diagram of, 472f
Cardiopulmonary interaction, 486
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR), 
465, 606, 810
ABCD, 811
debrieng, 826
early, 811
monitoring, 814
perioperative considerations, 824
systems of care, 826
Cardiovascular collapse
causes of, 819t
intravenous dose for, 72–73
in mediastinal masses, 496t
from neuraxial anesthesia, 826
Cardiovascular disease, 459, 503
aneurysms of the aorta, 471
cardiac tamponade, 471b, 471
cardiopulmonary bypass, 472
coronary artery disease, 459
disturbances of cardiac conduction 
and rhythm, 466, 467t–468t
heart failure, 466, 469t
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, 469, 
470b
preoperative evaluation, 198
pulmonary hypertension, 470
valvular heart disease, 463
Cardiovascular effects, of neuraxial 
anesthesia, 295
Cardiovascular physiology, alteration 
of, opioids and, 131
Cardiovascular Risk Index (CVRI), 200
Cardiovascular system
aging, 643
aortocaval compression, 579, 579f
barbiturates, impact, 114
benzodiazepines, impact, 117
cardiac output, 578
compensatory responses and risks, 
579, 580f
dexmedetomidine, impact, 122
echocardiography changes, 579
etomidate, impact, 120
evaluation of, in obstructive sleep 
apnea, 482
fetal circulation, 613
inhaled anesthetics, 94, 94f
intravascular uid/hematology, 578
ketamine, impact, 119
local anesthetic toxicity, 152
propofol, impact, 111
systemic vascular resistance, 579
Cardioversion, 689
“Care team” model, 6
Carotid arteries, bifurcation of, 402
Carotid bodies, peripheral 
chemoreceptors and, 65
Carotid disease, 544b, 544
Carotid sinus, baroreceptors and, 55
Cassette vaporizer systems, 238
Catastrophic APS, 422–423
Catecholamines, pharmacologic effects/
therapeutic doses, 76t
Catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT), 
metabolism of, 71
Catheter-based ablation, 688
Catheter-related bloodstream infections 
(CRBSIs), 749
Cauda equina syndrome, 290f
Caudal anesthesia, 289
anatomy and, 290
complications in, 311
evidence, 290
indications for, 296
mechanism of action of, 293
pharmacology of, 310
physiologic effects of, 295
practice of, 290
principles of, 289
technique for, 310, 311f
Causal factor chart, 836f, 836
CBF. See Cerebral blood ow (CBF)
CC. See Closing capacity (CC)
CDC. See Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention (CDC)
Cellular immunity, depression of, 
opioids and, 132
Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention (CDC), 758
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid 
Services (CMS), hospice 
consultations, 846
Central chemoreceptors, 65
Central diabetes insipidus, 529
Cardiac ultrasound (Continued)
Cardiovascular system (Continued)
Index
892
Central gas supply source, anesthesia 
workstation, 233
Central integration, 65
Central nervous system (CNS)
in anesthetic monitoring, 374
barbiturates, impact, 114
benzodiazepines, 116
dexmedetomidine, impact, 122
etomidate, impact, 120
inhaled anesthetics, 92, 93f
irritability, 405
local anesthetic toxicity, 151
neuraxial anesthesia effects on, 
295
ketamine, impact, 119
propofol, impact, 111
Central nervous system (CNS) disease, 
532
anesthesia
induction of, 539
maintenance of, 539
cerebral autoregulation, 534
impairment, 544
cerebral blood ow, regulation of, 
534
cerebral perfusion pressure (CPP), 
autoregulation, 534
clinical cases, 542
monitoring, 538
neuroanatomy, 532
neurophysiologic monitoring, 538
neurophysiology, 534
neuroprotection, 537
neurosurgery, anesthesia for, 538
monitoring, 538
positioning, 539
postoperative care, 541
preoperative assessment, 538b, 
538
transesophageal echocardiography, 
541
venous air embolism, 541
ventilation adjustment, 540
Central neuraxial blocks, 289
Central retinal artery occlusion (CRAO), 
568
Central sleep apnea (CSA), 860
Central venous catheter (CVC), 665, 
741
Central venous monitoring, 371–372, 
372t
Central venous pressure (CVP), 52, 
371–372, 372f, 442, 663
placement, 372–373
Cerebral autoregulation, 94, 534, 535f
impairment, 544
Cerebral blood ow (CBF), 94
anesthetics on, effects of, 535
decrease, 111
PaCO2 and PaO2 (impact), 534
regulation of, 534
Cerebral edema, 665
Cerebral metabolic rate, 534
Cerebral metabolic rate for oxygen 
(CMRO2), 534
decrease, 111
Cerebral or systemic arterial pressures, 
94
Cerebral oximetry, 375
Cerebral perfusion pressure (CPP), 
autoregulation, 534
Cerebral vasculature, 533, 533f
Cerebrospinal uid (CSF), 290–291
hydrogen ion concentration in, 
elevation of, 402
volume, spinal anesthesia and, 297
Cerebrovascular PaCO2 and PaO2
reactivity, 534, 535f
Certication, in anesthesiology, 7
Certied anesthesiologist assistants 
(CAAs), 7
Certied registered nurse anesthetists 
(CRNAs), 4, 6, 23
Cervical plexus block, 322, 322f
Cervical roots, cutaneous distribution, 
323f
Cervical spine
changes in, 559
excessive exion of, 344
extension, radiograph of, 562f
exion, radiograph of, 562f
RA involvement, sites of, 560f
Cesarean delivery
anesthesia for, 591
maintenance of, 595
combined spinal epidural anesthesia, 
592
epidural anesthesia, 592
general anesthesia, 592, 593f, 594b
spinal anesthesia, 591
Channeling, 241
CHD. See Congenital heart disease 
(CHD)
Checkout procedures, anesthesia 
workstation, 251
Chemical burns, 786
Chemical properties, of inhaled 
anesthetics, 83
Chemical sympathectomy 
(preoperative establishment), 
phenoxybenzamine for, 77
Chemoreceptors
central, 65
peripheral, 65
stimulation of, 55
Chest and abdomen nerve blocks, 330
Chest imaging, in chronic pulmonary 
disease, 478
Chest wall
compliance curve of, 64
respiratory muscles and, 613
Child abuse, 789b
Children
airway equipment for, 281
airway management in, 278
history, 279
physical examination, 279
anesthesia for
emergence of, 623
inhaled induction of, shunt and, 
617
maintenance of, 623
pain management in, 624
perioperative considerations, 623
postanesthesia care unit, 624
premedication and, 622
preoperative evaluation and 
preparation, 621
preoperative fasting guidelines, 
622
routes of induction of, 623
upper respiratory tract infection 
and, 622
antibrinolytics, 619
blood products in, transfusion of, 
619
breathing patterns of, 613
developmental physiology of, 612
cardiovascular system in, 613
hematologic system in, 616
renal system in, 616
respiratory system in, 612
difcult airway management in, 284
difcult intubation in, extubation 
after, 286
direct laryngoscopy for, 280
endotracheal intubation for, 280
endotracheal tubes for, 282
expected difcult airway in, 285
beroptic bronchoscopes for, 283
uids and electrolytes in, 617
glucose administration in, 618
heart of, autonomic innervation of, 
615
hepatic metabolism in, 617
inhaled anesthetic for, pharmacology 
of, 617
intraoperative uid administration, 
617
laryngeal mask airways, 269f, 281
laryngoscopes for, 282
laryngospasm in, 286
maximum allowable blood loss, 618
nasal and oral airways for, 281
neurotoxicity in, 188–189
obstructive sleep apnea in, 286
parental presence during induction 
of anesthesia, 280
pharmacokinetics in, 616
pharmacologic differences in, 616
postextubation stridor in, 286
preanesthetic medication, 280
recombinant factor VIIa, 619
Index
893
renal excretion of, 617
resuscitation, 820
supraglottic airway devices, 281
thermoregulation in, 623
tracheal extubation in, 285
transfusion therapy for, 618
unexpected difcult airway in, 284, 
284f
video laryngoscopes for, 271t, 283
Chlorhexidine, alcohol and, in spinal 
anesthesia, 302
Chloroprocaine
chemical structures of, 145f
local anesthetic, 153
for spinal anesthesia, 300, 306
Chlorthalidone, 502
Cholesterol metabolism, 507
Cholinergic pharmacology, 79
Cholinergic receptors, effects of, 71
Cholinesterase inhibitors, 80
Chronic anticoagulation, 463–464
Chronic kidney disease, outpatient 
anesthesia for, 674
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD), 480
clinical presentation of, 480
perioperative management of, 481
perioperative medicine, 760
Chronic occupational stress, 19
Chronic pain (persistent pain), 717, 794
analgesia for, 77
chronic postsurgical pain, 801
in elderly, 656
epidemiology, 795
generators, 801
neuromodulation, 806
neuropathic pain, 800
complex regional pain syndrome, 
800
peripheral neuropathy, 800
pathophysiology, 795
pharmacologic treatment, 802
nonopioid analgesics, 802
opioid analgesics, 803
physical medicine treatment, 802
procedural treatment, 803
epidural steroid injections, 803
facet injections, 804
sympathetic blockade, 804
psychological treatment, 802
spine, 795
lower back pain, 795
lumbar spinal stenosis, 799
lumbosacral radiculopathy, 799
lumbosacral spine pain, 796
terminology, 795
Chronic (persistent) pain medicine 
service, 718
Chronic postsurgical pain (CPSP), 717, 
801
Chronic pulmonary disease
history of, 477
laboratory examination for, 478
physical examination for, 478
and thoracic anesthesia, 477
Chronic renal disease, changes in, 503b
Chronic renal failure, 420
stages of, 503t
Chronic respiratory acidosis, 405
Chronic resynchronization therapy 
(CRT), 466
CIEDs. See Cardiac implantable 
electronic devices (CIEDs)
Cigarette smoking, 758
Circadian clock, 855–856
Circadian drive, 855–856
Circle breathing systems, anesthesia 
workstation, 239, 239f
additional components of, 241
adjustable pressure-limiting valve, 
240
anesthesia reservoir bag, 240
breathing circuit pressure sensors, 
242
carbon dioxide absorbent, 240b, 
240
corrugated breathing circuit tubing, 
239
lters and heat and moisture 
exchangers, 241
ow sensors, 242
fresh gas inlet, 239
function, 242
heated humidiers, 241
inspired oxygen concentration 
monitor, 241
unidirectional valves, 239
Y-piece, 239
Circle of Willis (COW), anatomy of, 
533f
Circulation, control of, 773
Circulatory system
in anesthetic monitoring, 362
measured variables in, 363t
Cirrhosis, complication (ascites), 
508–509
Cisatracurium
as benzylisoquinolinium 
nondepolarizing NMBD, 
172–173
chemical structure of, 164f
as intermediate-acting 
nondepolarizing neuromuscular 
blocking drug, 172
Citrate, in blood, 452
Classic coagulation cascade, 416f, 
416–417
Clearance, 33, 35f–37f
Climate change, 874, 875t
Clinical cardiac and pulmonary 
physiology, 51
Clinician burnout, 23t
Clinician well-being, 18
burnout, 18, 19t
dimensions of, 20f
factors affecting, 21
individual factors, 21
organizational level, 22
societal level, 22
importance, 19
interventions to improve, 24
personal strategies, 24
systemic approaches, 25
mental health, 23
depression, 24
fatigue mitigation, 23
substance use disorders, 23
suicide, 24
moral injury, 19
policies to support, 26
resilience, 19
well-being, 19
Clonidine, 77
α2-agonist, local anesthetics, 151
epidural, 307
perioperative use of, 77
Clopidogrel, 428
Closed, active scavenging system, 248
Closed-circuit anesthesia, 877
Closed Claims Project (ASA), 831, 
832t
Closing capacity (CC), 613
CMRO2. See Cerebral metabolic rate 
for oxygen (CMRO2); Cerebral 
metabolic rate of oxygen 
(CMRO2)
CMS. See Centers for Medicare and 
Medicaid Services (CMS)
CNS. See Central nervous system (CNS)
CO. See Carbon monoxide (CO); 
Cardiac output (CO)
CO2. See Carbon dioxide (CO2)
Coaching, 25–26
Coagulation, 506
blood therapy and, 453
laboratory-based measures of, 424
point-of-care measures of, 426
viscoelastic measures of, 426
Coagulopathy, 421, 453, 510
Cocaine, chemical structures of, 145f
Cochlear implant surgery, 555
Code status, discussing, in palliative 
care, 849
Codeine, 134
molecular structure of, 126f
Coexisting disease management, 196
cardiovascular, 198
endocrine, 206
geriatrics, 209
hematologic, 207
infectious disease, 208
liver, 206
Children (Continued)
Index
894
neurologic, 198
pulmonary, 205
renal, 206
Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT), 
761–762
Cognitive load, 17
COHb. See Carboxyhemoglobin (COHb)
Colloids, 440
Coma, denition of, 856f, 857
Combined spinal-epidural anesthesia, 
309
Combined spinal-epidural technique, 587
for cesarean delivery, 592
Common replacement uids, 
composition of, 440t
Communication, palliative care and, 
848
difcult information, frameworks 
for, 849b, 849
patient and family, prognosis and, 
848
physician tendencies in addressing 
difcult topics, 848
Comorbid conditions, 504
aspiration risk (increase), 505
Comparative properties, of inhaled 
anesthetics, 84t
Compartmental pharmacokinetic 
models, 36, 37f
Complex regional pain syndrome 
(CRPS), 800
Compound, 240
Compression injury, avoidance, 341
Computed tomography, 680
management of anesthesia for, 683
usage of, 683
Computed tomography (CT), airway 
pathologies, 261
Computer-based simulators, anesthesia 
care and, 16
COMT. See Catechol-O-
methyltransferase (COMT)
Concentration
effect, 88, 89f
spinal block height and, 299
Condensation, 235
Conduction velocity (increase), myelin 
(impact), 144
Confusion Assessment Method for the 
ICU (CAM-ICU), 736
Congenital diaphragmatic hernia, 629, 
629f
Congenital heart disease (CHD)
left-to-right shunts, 632, 633f–635f
obstructive lesions, 633
right-to-left shunts, 633
Congestive heart failure, 662
Consciousness, loss of, 
anesthesia-induced, 859
Context-sensitive decrement time, 
101–102, 102f
Context-sensitive half-time (CSHT), 32b
opioids, 129
Continuous positive airway pressure 
(CPAP), 240, 703
application of, in PACU, 703
perioperative medicine, 760
Continuous positive pressure, breathing 
circuit, 242
Continuous spinal anesthesia, 304
Continuous waveform capnography,814
Contractility, 54, 54f
Contrast nephropathy, 708
Controlled ventilation, via endotracheal 
tube, for ILD, 481
Cook airway exchange catheter, 272
COPD. See Chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD)
Corneal abrasion, 348, 552
Coronary artery disease (CAD), 198, 
199f, 200t, 459, 461f
management of anesthesia, 462, 
463b, 463t
monitoring, 462, 462t
perioperative risk reduction therapy/
medications, 460
prior myocardial infarction, 460
Coronary blood ow, 55
Coronary circulation, 55–56
Coronary reserve, 56
Coronavirus disease 2019. See 
COVID-19 pandemic
Corrugated breathing circuit tubing, 
239
Cortisol, plasma concentrations 
(decrease), etomidate 
(association), 121f
Cough reex, suppression of, opioids 
and, 130
Council on Accreditation of Nurse 
Anesthesia Educational 
Programs (COA), 7
COVID-19 pandemic, 269, 680
airway management, 7–8
anesthesia, 51
anesthesia circuit lters, 241
clinician well-being, 22–23
personal protective equipment, 19
silent hypoxia, 67
telehealth, 196
COW. See Circle of Willis (COW)
COX-1 isozyme, 427
COX-2 isozyme, 427
CPAP. See Continuous positive airway 
pressure (CPAP)
CPP. See Cerebral perfusion pressure 
(CPP)
CPR. See Cardiopulmonary 
resuscitation (CPR)
Cranial nerves, 533
CRBSIs. See Catheter-related 
bloodstream infections (CRBSIs)
Creatinine clearance, 501
Cricoarytenoid arthritis, 560
Cricoid pressure (Sellick maneuver), 
267, 268f, 521
rapid sequence induction of 
anesthesia with, 267
Cricothyroid membrane, 260
Cricothyrotomy, 275
Crisis resource management (CRM), 814
Critical care medicine, 735
Critical Care Pain Observation Tool 
(CPOT), 655
CRNAs. See Certied registered nurse 
anesthetists (CRNAs)
Crohn disease (CD), 519
CRPS. See Complex regional pain 
syndrome (CRPS)
CRT. See Chronic resynchronization 
therapy (CRT)
Cryoprecipitate, 448–449
transfusion of, 619
Crystalloids, 438
CSA. See Central sleep apnea (CSA)
CSF. See Cerebrospinal uid (CSF)
CSHT. See Context-sensitive half-time 
(CSHT)
Cuffed endotracheal tubes, 282
Culture, 22
Cushing reex, 55
Cushing syndrome, 526
Custodial care, in palliative care, 
841–842
CVP. See Central venous pressure; 
Central venous pressure (CVP)
Cyclooxygenase inhibitors, 427
CYP2D6, 135
Cystic brosis, 481
D
Damage control resuscitation, 776, 
778f–779f
DBD. See Donation after brain death 
(DBD)
DBP. See Diastolic blood pressure (DBP)
DCD. See Donation after cardiac death 
(DCD)
Dead space gases, 356–358
Dead space (wasted ventilation), 
increased, 63
Dead space volume (VDS), 360f
Debrieng, 826
Decision-making capacity, palliative 
care and, 850
Decubitus, spinal anesthesia and, 302
Deep venous thrombosis
enoxaparin, introduction of, 
573–574
and thromboembolism prophylaxis, 
573
Coexisting disease management 
(Continued)
Index
895
Deep versus awake extubation, 285
Debrillation
early, 811, 813f
pediatric advanced cardiovascular 
life support, 820
Denitive care, trauma and, 774
Delayed awakening, in PACU, 712
Delayed graft function, 663–664
Delirium
emergence agitation, 711
encephalopathy and, 736
management of, 711
in PACU, 710
postoperative, 657
prophylaxis, 711
risk factors, 711, 712b
screening tools, 658t
Denitrogenation, 224
Dense bodies, platelets, 416
Deoxygenated hemoglobin, hydrogen 
ions/carbon dioxide afnities 
in, 401–402
Dependent brachial plexus, 
compression injury (avoidance), 
341f, 341
Depolarizing neuromuscular blocking 
drugs, 165
blockade, characteristics of, 165
metabolism of, 166
Depression, 24
Desurane, 83–84
vaporizer for, 85
Desurane dual-gas blender, 237, 238f
Desmopressin acetate (DDAVP), 418, 
421
Detachable laryngoscope blades, 
examples of, 270f
Developmental neurotoxicity, 99
Dexamethasone, local anesthetics, 151
Dexmedetomidine, 77, 121
aging, 651
cardiovascular system effects of, 122
chemical structure of, 122f
clinical scenarios for potential use, 
121b
clinical uses, 122
hepatic metabolism, conjugation 
(involvement), 121–122
infusions, 77
pharmacodynamics, 121
pharmacokinetics, 121
respiratory system effects of, 122
Dextrose
baricity and, 297
ve percent, 440
Diabetes, preoperative evaluation of, 
662
Diabetes mellitus, 207, 209t, 522
characterization, 522
diagnostic criteria for, 522b
perioperative considerations, 523
Diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA), 522–523
Diameter Index Safety System (DISS), 
233
Diamorphine
as epidural additive, 307
for spinal anesthesia, 301
Diaphragm cephalad, abdominal 
viscera, to displace, 339–340
Diastolic blood pressure (DBP), 52
Diastolic function, 646f
Diazepam
chemical structure of, 116f
elimination half-time of, 116
hepatic metabolism, 116
Dibucaine, as amide local anesthetic, 
166
Differential local anesthetic blockade, 
146
Differential sensory block, 293–294
Difcult airway, 552
Difcult pediatric airway, 621
Diffusion capacity, decreased, 702
Diffusion hypoxia, 96
Diffusion impairment, 61
Diltiazem, in cardiopulmonary 
resuscitation, 818t
2,3-Diphosphoglycerate, 452
Direct-acting vasodilating drugs, 540
Direct airway injury, 773
Direct laryngoscopy, 268
for children and infants, 280
Direct oral anticoagulants (DOACs), 
202–203, 205t, 419, 430, 433
Direct thrombin inhibitors (DTIs), 429
Disability, trauma bay and, 774b, 774
Discharge criteria, for PACU, 712, 713b
Discrete neurochemical mediators, 
859–860
Discrimination, 23
Disease trajectories, in palliative care, 
847, 847f
Disseminated intravascular coagulation 
(DIC), 420–421, 421t
Dissociation constant, 146
Distal convoluted renal tubules, sodium 
delivery to, 499
Distribution, volume of, 32, 32f–35f
Distributive shock, 705, 739
Diuretics
administration of, 504
pharmacology of, 502
side effects of, 502t
DLCO. See Lung diffusing capacity for 
carbon monoxide (DLCO)
DMAIC (Dene/Measure/Analyze/ 
Improve/Control), as quality 
improvement project, 835
DNR orders. See Do-not-resuscitate 
(DNR) orders
DO2. See Oxygen delivery (DO2)
Dobutamine, 75
Donation after brain death (DBD), 661
Donation after cardiac death (DCD), 
661
Donor-recipient compatibility, blood, 
446
Do-not-resuscitate (DNR) orders, 
perioperative, 851, 851t–852t
Dopamine, 74, 502
α-adrenergic/β-adrenergic receptor, 
binding of, 74
in cardiopulmonary resuscitation, 
818t
Dorsal (afferent) nerve roots, 292, 292f
Dorsal raphe (DR), 859–860
Dose-related methemoglobinemia, 
induction, 154
Dose, spinal block height and, 299
Double burst stimulation, 174
stimulation pattern of, 177f
Double-lumen endobronchial tube
left-sided, 487f
sizing, 487, 489f, 493t
Double-lumen tube
left-sided
insertion of, methods of, 488, 490f
positioning of, 488, 490f
for lung isolation, 488t
right-sided, indications for, 489, 
490b, 491f
Draw sheet, use of, 337
Dr. Lorna Breen Health Care Provider 
Protection Act (HR1667), 26
Drug binding, impaired, 508
Drug induced, bleeding disorders, 419
Drug interactions, anesthetic, 42, 
43f–45f
Drug waste, 879
Drugs
adults resuscitation, 818t
pediatric advanced cardiovascular 
life support, 822
removal of, clearance and, 33–34
Dual afferent blood supply, schematic 
depiction of, 507f
Dual antiplatelet therapy (DAPT), 205, 
432
Duke Activity Status Index (DASI), 200, 
201t
Dura mater, 290f, 290–291
Duration of apnea without 
desaturation, 262
Dyes, 353
Dynamic properties, 64
Dynamic range, 32b
E
Ear, nose, and throat (ENT) surgery, 
552
Ear surgery, 553
emergence, 554
epinephrine, 553
Index
896
facial nerve monitoring, 553
myringotomy and tube insertion, 
554
nitrous oxide, 553
postoperative nausea and vomiting, 
554
ECG. See Electrocardiogram (ECG)
Echocardiography, 579
Echogenic properties, 320, 320f
Eclampsia, 791
ECMO. See Extracorporeal membrane 
oxygenation (ECMO)
ECT. See Electroconvulsive therapy 
(ECT)
ECV. See External cephalic version 
(ECV)
EDD. See Esophageal detector device 
(EDD)
Edinger-Westphal nucleus, stimulation 
of, opioids and, 131
Edrophonium, usage of, 80
EDV. See End-diastolic volume (EDV)
EEG. See Electroencephalogram (EEG)
EF. See Ejection fraction (EF)
Effect site, 39
concentration, 32b
three-compartment model, 41f
Efcacy, 42
Ejection fraction (EF), 53, 644
Electrical burns, 786
Electrically induced seizures, 690
Electrocardiogram (ECG), 538–539
measurement of, 362, 365f
sensitivity for detecting ischemia, 
364t
Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT), 690
anesthesia
evaluation, 691
management of, 691, 692t
psychotropic medications, 691
seizure
electrically induced, 690
management of, 691
physiologic responses to, 691
side effects, 692
treatment and, 691
Electroencephalograph monitoring, 
processed, 374
Electroencephalography (EEG)
inhaled anesthetics, 92–93, 93f
burst suppression on, 114
Electromagnetic interference (EMI), 466
Electromyograms, 174–177, 178f, 567
Elevated lactate, 406
causes of, 406b
Elimination, of drug, 32
Emergency release protocols, blood 
banking, 447, 447t
Emergent reversal of anticoagulants, 
433, 434t
EMI. See Electromagnetic interference 
(EMI)
Emphysema, in dead space, 63
Encephalopathy, 736
End-diastolic pressure in the left 
ventricle (LVEDP), 56
End-diastolic volume (EDV), 53
End of life, use of opioids at, 844
Endobronchial blockers, 492f
Endobronchial tube, for lung isolation, 
488t
Endocrine disorders, 522
preoperative evaluation, 206
Endocrine system
etomidate (impact), 120
evaluation of, in obstructive sleep 
apnea, 482
Endogenous catecholamines, 72
Endoscopic retrograde 
cholangiopancreatography 
(ERCP)
anesthesia, evaluation and 
management of, 686
challenges and complications of, 
687, 687t
endoscopy and, 686
Endoscopic surgery, 555
Endoscopy mask, 275
Endothelial cells, 415
Endothelial glycocalyx (EG), 421
Endotracheal extubation, 276
complications after, 277
complications of, 277, 279b
difcult, guidelines for, 278f
prolonged, 277
Endotracheal intubation, 266
on children and infants, 280
complications of, 277
congenital syndromes associated 
with, 257t
endoscopy mask in, 275
failed, in trauma bay, 773
beroptic endotracheal intubation
awake, 273
exible, 273
beroptic endotracheal intubation 
during anesthesia, 275
Frova intubating introducer, 272, 273f
gum elastic bougie, 272
indications for, 267b
introducers for, 272
positioning of, 266
retrograde endotracheal intubation, 
276
stylets, 272
Endotracheal tubes (ETTs)
for children, 552
for children and infants, 282
cuffed versus uncuffed, 282
external obstruction of, 355–356
size of, 272t
End-stage liver disease (ESLD), 664
anesthesia for
management of, 509
coagulopathy in, 511
postoperative jaundice in, 511
End-stage renal disease (ESRD)
anesthesia for
effects of, 509
management of, 504
ascites in, 508
cardiovascular complications of, 508
cardiovascular disease in, 503
heart rate/arterial blood pressure 
control, 505
hepatic encephalopathy in, 508
hepatorenal syndrome in, 509
hyperdynamic circulation in, 508
impaired drug binding in, 508
liver, surgery on, 509
metabolic disease in, 503
pathophysiology of, 508
portal hypertension in, 508
pulmonary complications in, 508
renal dysfunction and, 509
End-systolic volume (ESV), 54–55
decreased, 55f
End-tidal CO2 (ETCO2), 356, 361f
gradient of, increase in, 409–410
Energy efciency, 880, 881t
Enhanced recovery after surgery 
(ERAS), 8, 216, 664
ENT surgery. See Ear, nose, and throat 
(ENT) surgery
Entrustable Professional Activity (EPA), 
in anesthesiology, 12b
Environmental health, anesthesia and, 
874
Environmental impact
of anesthesia gases, 875, 876f, 
876t
of inhaled anesthesia, 103f, 104
of operating room practices, 880
of propofol, 879
Enzyme linked immunosorbent assay 
(ELISA), 423
Ephedrine, 76
Epidural anesthesia, 289, 470
anatomy and, 290
for cesarean delivery, 592
complications in, 311
unique to, 314
epidural additives, 306
evidence, 290
factors affecting epidural block 
height in, 305, 305t
hanging-drop technique, 308
indications for, 296
insertion sites of, 307t
intermediate-acting local anesthetics, 
306
long-acting local anesthetics, 306
Ear surgery (Continued)
Index
897
loss-of-resistance technique, 307, 
309f
lumbar midline approach, 308
mechanism of action of, 293
patient position in, 307
pharmacology in, 305, 306t, 310
physiologic effects of, 295
practice of, 290
preparation in, 303f, 307, 307t
principles of, 289
short-acting local anesthetics, 306
spinal anesthesia and, combined, 
309, 310f
technique for, 307
Epidural hematoma, 311
Epidural space, 291
Epidural steroid injections, 803, 804f
Epiglottis, in infants, 278–279
Epiglottitis, 555
Epinephrine, 72, 608
α-adrenergic/β-adrenergic receptor, 
binding of, 72
α- and β-adrenergic receptor agonist 
(combination), 819
adult advanced cardiovascular life 
support, 819
aerosol administration in, 73
biosynthesis of, 73f
in cardiopulmonary resuscitation, 
818t
ear surgery and, 553
local anesthetics, 151
for spinal anesthesia, 302
Epistaxis, 553
Epsilonaminocaproic acid (EACA), 431
ER. See Extraction ratio (ER)
ERAS. See Enhanced recovery after 
surgery (ERAS)
ERCP. See Endoscopic retrograde 
cholangiopancreatography 
(ERCP)
Ergonomics, 321
ERV. See Expiratory reserve volume 
(ERV)
Erythropoiesis-stimulating agent (ESA), 
756
Escharotomies, burns and, 788, 789f
ESLD. See End-stage liver disease 
(ESLD)
Esmarch bandage, usage, 334f
Esmolol (Brevibloc), 79
β-adrenergic blockers, usage, 78
in cardiopulmonary resuscitation, 
818t
Esophageal detector device (EDD), 
814
ESRD. See End-stage renal disease 
(ESRD)
ESV. See End-systolic volume (ESV)
ETCO2. See End-tidal CO2 (ETCO2)
Ethacrynic acid (loop diuretic), 502
Ethyl violet, 241
Etidocaine, chemical structures of, 145f
Etomidate, 120
aging, 649
for cesarean delivery, 594
chemical structure of, 120f
clinical scenarios for potential use, 
121b
clinical uses, 121
cortisol (plasma concentrations), 
decrease (association), 121f
propofol/barbiturate alternative, 121
ETTs. See Endotracheal tubes (ETTs)
Euglycemic diabetic ketoacidosis, 
522–523
Evoked potentials, 377
Ex utero intrapartum therapy 
procedure, 639
Excessive brinolysis, 420
Expiratory reserve volume (ERV), 580
Exposure, trauma bay and, 774
External cephalic version (ECV), 596
Extraalveolar vessels, lung volumes 
effect on, 57
Extracardiac/obstructive shock, 706
Extracellular matrix (ECM), 416
Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation 
(EMCO), 739
Extraction ratio (ER), 35
Extrajunctional receptors, 163
Extraneous load, 17
F
Facemask
characteristics of, 262
ventilation with, 261
difculty, variables associated, 
261–262
inadequate, management of, 262
Faces Pain Scale, 655
Facet injections, 804, 805f
Facial nerve monitoring, ear surgery 
and, 553
Facial trauma, 557, 557f
Factor V Leiden, 422
FADE (Focus/Analyze/Develop/ 
Execute-evaluate), as quality 
improvement project, 835
Failure Mode Effects Analysis (FMEA), 
835
“Fast-in, slow-out” local anesthetic 
(bupivacaine), 155
Fasting
guidelines, 213, 216t
trauma bay and, 771
Fastrach LMA, 265
Fat-free mass, 46t
Fatigue mitigation, 23
Febrile reactions, to blood transfusion, 
453
Femoral nerve block, 327, 328f
needle, passage, 330
Fenoldopam, 76, 502
DA1 agonist activity, possession of, 
502–503
selective D1 agonist/vasodilator, 76
Fentanyl, 135
congeners, 131
molecular structure of, 126f
obesity and, 48
pharmacodynamic effects of, 
129–130
usage, 585
Fentanyl citrate, oral transmucosal 
delivery of, 135
Fetal circulation, 613
characteristics of, 583
Fetal distress
accelerations, 604
baseline fetal heart rate, 604
decelerations, 604
diagnosis and management of, 603
key evaluation components, 603
uterine contractions, 603
variability, 604
Fetal erythrocyte production, 
occurrence of, 507
Fetal surgery, 639
Fetal uptake, 583
FFP. See Fresh frozen plasma (FFP)
Fiberoptic bronchoscopes, for children 
and infants, 283
Fibrinogen, 425
Fibrinogen concentrate (FC), 431
transfusion of, 619
Fibrinolysis, 420
Fibrinolytic system, 417f, 417
Fibrin-specic agents, 430
Fick equation, 67, 412
calculation using, 411f
Filters and heat and moisture 
exchangers, 241
First-order process, 32
Five percent dextrose, 440
Flexible beroptic endotracheal 
intubation, 273
Flexible LMA, 266
Flipped classroom, 15
Flow control assemblies, anesthesia 
workstation, 233
Flow limitation, in COPD, 481
Flow-metabolism coupling, 94
Flow-over vaporizer, 236
Flow sensors, 242
Fluid
balanced crystalloid solutions, 439
colloids in, 440
composition, 439t
crystalloids in, 438
hemodynamic monitoring for, 441
management, 437
Epidural anesthesia (Continued)
Index
898
replacement solutions, 438
synthetic colloids, 441
Fluid balance, physiology of, 437
Flumazenil, chemical structure of, 116f
FMEA. See Failure Mode Effects 
Analysis (FMEA)
Followership, trauma and, 775b, 775
Fondaparinux, 429
Forearm block technique, 327f
Foreign body, in airway, 555
Fospropofol, 113
Fractional saturation, 59
Fractured hip, 569
anesthetic technique for, 569
intraoperative considerations for, 
570
intravascular volume status, 570
peripheral nerve blocks for, 570
preoperative evaluation of, 569
regional anesthesia for, advantages 
of, 570
Frailty, 209, 643, 644f, 653t
Franks, Nicholas, 91
Frank-Starling mechanism, 53, 53f
FRC. See Functional residual capacity 
(FRC)
Fresh frozen plasma (FFP), 448–449
transfusion of, 619
Fresh gas decoupling, 247
valve, 246
Fresh gas ow compensation, 247
Fresh gas ow (FGF) rates, 875, 877b, 
878f
Fresh gas inlet, circle breathing system, 
239
Frog-leg position, 338
Front-end kinetics, 32b, 35
Frova intubating introducer, 272, 
273f
Full agonists, 42
Functional residual capacity (FRC), 60, 
64, 224, 580, 613
Functional saturation, 59
Functional status, in palliative care, 
848
Furosemide (loop diuretic), 502
G
Gabapentinoids, 723
Gallstones, presence of, 512
Galvanic cell oxygen analyzers, 242
Ganzoni equation, 756b, 756
Gas embolism, 825
Gas exchange
in chronic pulmonary disease, 478
inhaled anesthetics, 87, 88f
Gas ows, anesthesia workstation, 251
Gas leaks, anesthesia workstation, 250
Gas pipeline inlet, anesthesia 
workstation, 233
Gas supply system, anesthesia 
workstation, 230, 231f
auxiliary e-cylinder inlet, 231, 232f
auxiliary oxygen owmeters, 233
central gas supply source, 233
ow control assemblies, 233
gas pipeline inlet, 233
high-pressure section, 231
intermediate-pressure section, 233
low-pressure section, 233
oxygen ush valve, 233
pneumatic safety systems, 233
proportioning systems, 234
vaporizer mount and interlock 
system, 234
Gaseous anesthetics, 85
Gastric drainage, stopping, 407–408
Gastric ultrasound, 396, 398f
Gastroesophageal reux disease 
(GERD), 520, 520t–521t
conditions associated with, 520t
dening, 520
development, 520
diagnosis, 520–521
drug therapies for, 521t
gastric contents, 520
perioperative considerations, 521
surgical management of, 521–522
Gastrointestinal changes, 581
anesthetic implications, 581
Gastrointestinal disease, 519
gastroesophageal reux disease, 520, 
520t–521t
inammatory bowel disease, 519
Gastrointestinal effects, of neuraxial 
anesthesia, 295
Gastrointestinal physiology, opioids 
and, 131–132
Gastrointestinal prophylaxis, 749
Gastrointestinal system
aging, 648
evaluation of, in obstructive sleep 
apnea, 482
Gastroschisis, 626
Gauge pressure, 231
General anesthesia, 100, 221, 224, 225t
for cesarean delivery, 592, 593f, 
594b
denition of, 222, 222t
levels of sedation, 222, 222t
for mediastinal masses, 496
multimodal, 226, 227t
sleep medicine and anesthesia and, 
857, 858f
GERD. See Gastroesophageal reux 
disease (GERD)
Geriatric trauma, 789
Geriatrics, 209, 642
intraoperative considerations, 654
perioperative neurocognitive 
disorders, 657
pharmacologic considerations, 648
postoperative management, 655
preoperative assessment and risk 
management, 651
Germane load, 17
GFR. See Glomerular ltration rate 
(GFR)
Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) score, 774b
Glaucoma, 551
GlideScope, 270
sizes and styles of, 271f
video laryngoscopes, 283
Global Leadership Initiative on 
Malnutrition (GLIM), 757
Global warming potential (GWP), 875
Glomerular capillaries, protein in, 
ltration of, 502
Glomerular ltrate, renal tubule travel, 
500f
Glomerular ltration rate (GFR), 499
adult values, 647–648
autoregulation of, 499f
calculation of, 501–502
constant, 498–499
estimation of, 501
Glomerulus (glomeruli)
creatinine excretion in, 501–502
formation of, 500f
Glucocorticoid excess, 526
Glucose, 608
administration of, 618
control, postresuscitation care, 824
hemoglobin, combination, 522
homeostasis, 506
management of, 749
preoperative measurement, 524
Glycemic control, 759
Glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors (GPIs), 
428
Glycoproteins, as postjunctional 
receptors, 163
Glycopyrrolate (Robinul), usage of, 80
Goals-of-care consults, 842
G protein-coupled receptors, 42
Graded assertiveness, trauma and, 
775b, 775
α-Granules, platelets, 416
Great arteries, transposition of, 633
Greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, 
874–875
Group discussions, anesthesia care and, 
15
Gum elastic bougie, 272
GWP. See Global warming potential 
(GWP)
H
HAIs. See Hospital-acquired infections 
(HAIs)
Half-time, 39
Fluid (Continued)
Geriatrics (Continued)
Index
899
Halothane, 83, 101
Hanging-drop technique, 308
Hanging or descending bellow 
ventilators, 245
HCM. See Hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy (HCM)
HCVR. See Hypercapnic ventilatory 
response (HCVR)
HE. See Hepatic encephalopathy (HE)
Head
elevation of, 266
of infant, 279
in pin xation, neurosurgery 
purpose, 342
Head surgery, special considerations 
for, 552
Head tilt-jaw thrust maneuver, 811, 
813f
Health literacy, 762
Heart
autonomic innervation of, 615
autonomic nervous system control, 
55
lungs and, integration of, 67
pathologic problems on, 54
pumping action of, in Frank- 
Starling mechanism, 53
Heart block, 466
Heart failure, 466, 469t
management of anesthesia, 469
Heart rate, 52
aging, 644–646
Heart transplantation, 666
intraoperative management, 667
perioperative goals, 667b
postoperative management, 667
preoperative evaluation, 666
Heat and moisture exchangers (HMEs), 
241
Heat loss, 623
Heated humidiers, 241
HELLP syndrome, 596–597
Hematologic disorders, preoperative 
evaluation, 207
Hematologic system, 616
aging, 648
Hematoma, 700
Heme degradation, 507
Heme metabolism, 507
Hemodynamic instability, 704
cardiac dysrhythmias in, 706, 
707b
myocardial ischemia in, 706
systemic hypertension in, 704
systemic hypotension in, 704
Hemodynamic monitoring, in ICU, 741
Hemodynamic response, diminished, 
404f
Hemodynamic status, trauma bay and, 
771
Hemodynamics, 51
Hemoglobin
buffer system, 401, 402f
concentration, monitoring for, 450
protein, buffering importance, 401
Hemolysis, elevated liver function 
test results, low platelet count 
(HELLP) syndrome, 596–597
Hemolytic reactions, to blood 
transfusion, 454
Hemophilia, 418, 421
Hemophilia A, 418, 421
Hemophilia B, 418, 421
Hemophilia C, 419
Hemorrhage
controlled, 773, 779
in pregnant women, 598
as thoracotomy complication, 493t
uncontrolled, 776, 777b
Hemorrhagic shock, 63
in adults, 769t
compensated phase, 769
progressive phase, 769
tissue hypoperfusion and, 769
Hemostasis, 414, 685
antithrombotic and procoagulant 
drugs, 427, 428t
anticoagulants, 429
antiplatelet agents, 427
procoagulant drugs, 430
thrombolytics, 430
bleeding disorders, 418
acquired, 419
inherited, 418
treatment of, 421
common tests of, 424t
laboratory evaluation of, 423
laboratory-based measures of 
coagulation, 424
point-of-care measures of 
coagulation, 426
preoperative evaluation, 423
tests of platelet function, 425
normal, 414, 415f
perioperative management of 
antithrombotic therapy, 432
antiplatelet agents, 432
emergent reversal of 
anticoagulants, 433, 434t
heparins, 432
neuraxial anesthesia and 
anticoagulation, 432, 433t
vitamin K antagonists, 432, 432t
plasma-mediated, 416
platelets and, 415
primary, 414
prothrombotic states, 422
acquired thrombotic disorders, 422
inherited thrombotic disorders, 
422
treatment of thrombotic disorders, 
423
regulation of coagulation, 417
secondary, 414
vascular endothelial in, 415
Henderson-Hasselbalch equation, 146
base concentration, 401f
Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia 
(HIT), 423
Heparins, 432
Hepatic blood ow, 96, 505
anesthetics, impact of, 509
extrinsic determinants of, 505
intrinsic determinants of, 505
Hepatic changes, 582
Hepatic clearance, 35
Hepatic drug metabolism, 
characterization of, 507
Hepatic encephalopathy (HE), 508
Hepatic failure, opioids and, 132
Hepatic metabolism, 617
Hepatic perfusion pressure, 505–506, 
509
Hepatic system, inhaled anesthetics 
and, 95, 96f
Hepatopulmonary syndrome, 665
Hepatorenal syndrome (HRS), 509
diagnosis of, 509
High pressure, breathing circuit, 242
High-pressure regulator, 231
Hirudin, 429–430
History of present illness (HPI), 197t
HIT. See Heparin-induced 
thrombocytopenia (HIT)
Homeostatic drive, in sleep, 856
Homeostatic process, in sleep, 855–856
Homeostenosis, 643
Homocysteine levels, nitrous oxide, 97
Hospice and Palliative Medicine 
subspecialty, 841
Hospice consults, in palliative care, 846
Hospice, in palliative care, 840, 841f
Hospice patients, identication of, 
palliative care and, 846
hospice consults in, 846
inpatient, 846
outpatient, 847
Hospital-acquired infections (HAIs), 
748
Hospital Anxiety and Depression 
(HADS) Score, 761
HPV. See Hypoxic pulmonary 
vasoconstriction (HPV)
HRS. See Hepatorenal syndrome (HRS)
Human leukocyte antigens (HLAs), 422
Human platelet antigens, 422
HVR. See Hypoxic ventilatory response 
(HVR)
Hydrochlorothiazide, 502
Hydrogen ions
concentration, regulation of, 401
in stored blood, 452
Hemostasis (Continued)
Index
900
Hydromorphone
in epidural anesthesia, 307
for spinal anesthesia, 301
Hydrophilic opioids, for spinal 
anesthesia, 301
Hydrostatic driving forces, 57
Hydrostatic pressure, 437
Hydrostatic pulmonary edema, 57
Hydroxyethyl starches, 441
Hyperaldosteronism, 526
Hyperalgesia, 720
Hyperbaric solution, 297
Hypercapnia, 62
Hypercapnic respiratory failure, 743
Hypercapnic ventilatory response 
(HCVR), 66, 66f
Hyperdynamic circulation, 508
Hyperglycemia, 207, 522–523, 529
Hyperkalemia, 662
NMBDs and, 167
Hyperoxia, anesthetic neurotoxicity 
and, 190
Hypertension, 202b, 202
occurrence in pheochromocytoma/
paraganglioma, 527
Hypertensive disorders, of pregnancy, 
596
Hyperthyroidism, 524
anesthesia goal, 525
perioperative considerations, 525
Hypertonic saline, 439–440
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), 
469, 470b
management of anesthesia, 470
Hypnotics, analgesics and, 42–43
Hypobaric solution, 297
Hypocalcemia, 525
Hypocapnia, anesthetic neurotoxicity 
and, 190
Hypoglycemia, 523, 529
Hypokalemia, 526
Hypoparathyroidism, 525
Hypoperfusion, cause, 344
Hypopituitarism, 529
Hypopnea, 860
denition of, 482
Hypotension
blood pressure in, 365–366, 365f–
366f
differential diagnosis, 373t
intraoperative, 367f
as neuraxial anesthesia complication, 
312
physiologic approach to, 52
regional analgesia and, 591
as thoracotomy complication, 493t
in trauma, 768–769
Hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) 
axis, suppression of, 479
Hypothalamic ventrolateral preoptic 
nucleus, 859–860
Hypothermia, 537–538
blood transfusion and, 453
as thoracotomy complication, 493t
Hypothyroidism, 524
characterization, 524
perioperative considerations, 524
Hypoventilation, 63, 63f
Hypovolemia, 54, 528, 608
neuraxial anesthesia 
contraindication, 297
treatment of, 618
Hypovolemic shock, 704, 737
clinical manifestations of, 737
treatment of, 737
Hypoxemia, 656
management of, during one-lung 
ventilation, 494t
monitoring and treatment of, 703
in postanesthesia care unit, 701b
as thoracotomy complication, 493t
Hypoxemic respiratory failure, 742
Hypoxia, anesthetic neurotoxicity and, 
190
Hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction 
(HPV), 57
inhibition of, 410
Hypoxic ventilatory decline (HVD), 66
Hypoxic ventilatory response (HVR), 
66, 66f, 94–95
Hysteresis, 39
I
i-gel, 266, 266f
i-gel supraglottic airways, 264t, 281
IADLs. See Instrumental activities of 
daily living (IADLs)
IBD. See Inammatory bowel disease 
(IBD)
ICP. See Intracranial pressure (ICP)
ICU. See Intensive care unit (ICU)
Ideal body weight, 46t
ILD. See Interstitial lung disease (ILD)
Imminently dying patient, identifying, 
in palliative care, 849
Immunomodulation, transfusion-
related, 452
Immunosenescence, 648
Impella, 739
Individual factors, clinician well-being, 
21
Infants
airway management in, 278
history, 279
physical examination, 279
airway of, 279
versus adult, 279b
difcult airway management in, 284
difcult intubation in, extubation 
after, 286
direct laryngoscopy for, 280
endotracheal intubation for, 280
endotracheal tubes for, 282
expected difcult airway in, 285
beroptic bronchoscopes for, 283
laryngeal mask airways, 269f, 281
laryngoscopes for, 282
laryngospasm in, 286
nasal and oral airways for, 281
obstructive sleep apnea in, 286
parental presence during induction 
of anesthesia, 280
postextubation stridor in, 286
preanesthetic medication for, 280
resuscitation, 820
supraglottic airway devices, 281
tracheal extubation in, 285
unexpected difcult airway in, 284, 
284f
video laryngoscopes for, 271t, 283
Infection
as neuraxial anesthesia complication, 
313
neuraxial anesthesia 
contraindication, 297
Infectious disease, 208
infective endocarditis, 209, 210b
surgical site infection, 208
transmission of, 451
Infective endocarditis (IE), 209, 210b
Inammatory bowel disease (IBD), 519
anesthetics, preference/
contraindication, 520
immune system, activation trigger, 
519
pathophysiology of, 519
perioperative considerations, 519
Information, communicating difcult, 
frameworks for, palliative care 
and, 849b, 849
Informed consent, 215
for anesthesia, 215
spinal anesthesia and, 302
Infraclavicular block, 325
technique of, 326f
ultrasound transducer, 326f
Infratentorial compartments, 532
Infusion front-end kinetics, 128–129
Inhaled anesthetic solubility, 88
Inhaled anesthetics, 82
chemical and physical properties, 
83
molecular structures, 83, 83f
comparative properties of, 84t
environmental considerations, 103f, 
104
history, 82
mechanisms, 91
molecular, 91, 92f–93f
neuronal network, 92, 93f
metabolism, elimination, and 
recovery, 101, 102f–103f
Infants (Continued)
Index
901
minimum alveolar concentration, 88, 
90f, 90t, 91b
obesity and, 48
occupational hazards of, 875
organ system effects, 92
cardiovascular system, 94, 94f
central nervous system, 92, 93f
hepatic system, 95, 96f
neuromuscular function, 96
pulmonary system, 94, 95f
renal system, 95, 96f
pharmacology of, 617
physical properties, 83
toxicity and adverse events, 97
cancer recurrence and morbidity, 
100
developmental neurotoxicity, 99
malignant hyperthermia, 98, 98f, 
99t
postoperative cognitive 
dysfunction, 100b, 100
postoperative nausea and 
vomiting, 97, 97f
reactions with carbon dioxide 
absorbents, 101, 101t, 102f
unique issues with nitrous oxide, 
96, 97f
uptake and distribution in the body, 
85
anesthetic circuit, 85
concentration and second gas 
effects, 88, 89f
gas exchange, 87, 88f
partition coefcients, 85, 87f
vaporizers, 85, 86f
Inhaled induction, of anesthesia, shunt 
and, 224, 617
Inhaled volatile anesthetic agents, 
physical properties, 236t
Inherited bleeding disorders, 418
factor deciencies, 418
hemophilias, 418
von Willebrand disease, 418, 419t
Inherited coagulopathy, neuraxial 
anesthesia contraindication, 297
Inherited thrombophilias, 423
Inherited thrombotic disorders, 422
factor V Leiden, 422
protein C and protein S deciency, 
422
prothrombin gene mutation, 422
In-hospital (inpatient) pain service, 718
Injection rate, spinal anesthesia and, 
300
Injection-type vaporizers, 238
Injury patterns, with prolonged 
“shock,” 51–52
Inpatient palliative care consults, in 
palliative care, 846
Inpatient preoperative evaluation, 217
In-plane (IP), 321f, 321
Inspired oxygen, 353
concentration monitor, 241
Instrumental activities of daily living 
(IADLs), 652b
Insulin, categorization of, 523
Intensive care unit (ICU)
denitions of, 735
delirium, 736
hemodynamic monitoring in, 741
interprofessional care, 735
mechanical ventilation, weaning in, 
743
nutrition in, 747
organ failure and support, 736
palliative care in, 843b, 843
physician stafng, 735
respiratory failure in, 741
Intercostobrachial nerve block, 325
Interincisor gap, 259
Intermediate-acting nondepolarizing 
neuromuscular blocking drugs, 
171
International Anesthesia Research 
Society (IARS), 4
Interprofessional care, 735
Interscalene block, 322
Interspinous ligaments, 290f, 291
Interstitial, evolution of, 391, 393b, 
395f
Interstitial hydrostatic pressure, 437
Interstitial lung disease (ILD), 481
Interventional neuroradiology, 683
access and monitoring of, 683
anesthesia choice, 683
arterial blood pressure management, 
684
neurologic and procedural crises, 
management of, 684
Interventional radiology (IR), 683
Intraabdominal hypertension, 709
Intraabdominal structures, 297
Intraalveolar vessels, lung volumes 
effect on, 57
Intraaortic balloon pump, 738
Intracellular spaces (uid movement 
increase), mannitol in, 502
Intraconal block, 549
Intracranial aneurysms, 542
anesthetic management, 543b
Intracranial masses
anesthesia, management of, 542b
lesions, 542
Intracranial pressure (ICP), 55
anesthetics on, effects of, 535–536
decrease, 111
decrease, methods to, 537b
determinants of, 536, 536f
impact of, schematic depiction of, 
536f
increase, 167
compensation for, 536
preoperative evidence of, 538b
monitoring, 375
reduction and brain relaxation, 540
Intraocular pressure (IOP), 547
anesthetic drugs and, 547
factors, 547
Intraocular pressure, increased, 167
SCh in, 167
Intraoperative anesthetic, 13
Intraoperative blood salvage, 454
Intraoperative cardiac arrest, initial 
interventions, 825b
Intraoperative uids, 442
Intraoperative hypotension, 367f
Intraoperative hypoxia, prediction of, 
493, 494b
Intraoperative spinal cord monitoring, 
565
Intrapulmonary shunt, 60, 61f
Intravascular uid volume, 465
Intravascular injection, complications 
unique to epidural anesthesia, 
314
Intravascular resuscitation, access for, 
778, 780f
Intravascular volume
expansion, 440–441
responsiveness, measures of, 368, 
371t
Intravenous (IV) anesthetics, 107
context-sensitive half-time for, 
111f
drugs, classication, 107b
pharmacodynamic effects of, 112t
pharmacokinetic data for, 111t
pros and cons of, 108t
targeting GABAARs, 109
Intravenous (IV) uid management, 
approach to, 492
Intravenous induction of anesthesia, 
224–225
Intravenous (IV) regional anesthesia 
(IVRA), 333
characteristics, 334
local anesthetic solutions, 334
risks, 334
Intrinsic load, 17
Intrinsic renal disease, 504
Invasive airway access, 275
Invasive arterial blood pressure 
monitoring, 368
ION. See Ischemic optic neuropathy 
(ION)
IOP. See Intraocular pressure (IOP)
IP, in-plane, 321f, 321
Ischemic heart disease, 459, 461f
Ischemic optic neuropathy (ION), 
348–349, 568
diagnosed with, 348–349
Inhaled anesthetics (Continued)
Intracranial pressure (ICP) (Continued)
Index
902
Ischemic preconditioning, by volatile 
anesthetics, 95–96
Isobaric solution, 297
Isobole, 43
Isourane, 83, 95–96
Isolated nonrheumatic aortic stenosis, 
465
Isoproterenol, 74
“Isoshunt” diagrams, 60
J
Jackson table, 344
Jaw relaxation, incomplete, 168
Joint Commission
in root cause analysis, 836
Sentinel Event program, 837
sentinel events, 836b, 836
Junctional rhythm, in administration 
of SCh, 166
K
Ketamine, 118
aging, 649
analgesia, 119
anesthesia induction/maintenance, 
119
cardiovascular system effects of, 119
central nervous system effects of, 
119
for cesarean delivery, 594
chemical structure of, 118f
clinical scenarios for potential use, 
118b
clinical uses, 119
for major depression treatment, 120
pharmacodynamics, 118
pharmacokinetics, 118
respiratory depression, absence, 119
respiratory system effects of, 119
Kidney donor risk index (KDRI), 662
Kidney injury, and volatile anesthesia, 
95
Kidney transplantation
facts, 662b
intraoperative management, 662, 
663f
morphine, 6-glucuronide metabolite, 
665
postoperative management, 664
preoperative assessment, 662b, 662
recipient, preoperative assessment, 
664b
Kidneys
aging, 647f
failure in, opioids and, 133
Kinemyography (KMG), 174–177
Korotkoff sounds, 368f, 369t
L
Labetalol (Trandate, Normodyne), 79
β-adrenergic blockers, usage, 78
Labor
stages of, 583
systemic medications, 584
Labor analgesia
combined spinal-epidural technique, 
587
epidural technique in, 587
local anesthetics, 586
methods of, 584
neuraxial (regional) analgesia, 585
neuraxial opioids, 586
neuraxial techniques, 586
nitrous oxide, 585
nonpharmacologic techniques, 584
opioids, 585
spinal, 589
systemic medications, 584
Labor pain
anatomy of, 583
physiologic effects of, 583–584
Laboratory-based sleep study, 860
β-Lactam antibiotics, 419
Lactate measurements, 412
Lamina of vertebral bodies, 291
Large-dose opioid anesthesia, 137
Laryngeal axis (LA), alignment of, 
schematic diagram of, 261f
Laryngeal braking, 613
Laryngeal intubation risk (increase), 
obesity (impact), 517
Laryngeal mask airway (LMA), 265, 
880
Air-Q intubating for children and 
infants, 264t, 281
Air-Q masked, 266, 266f
for children and infants, 269f, 281
classic and unique, 265f, 265
complications of, 265
Flexible, 266
i-gel, 266
ProSeal, 265, 265f
size, appropriate, 264t, 281
Supreme, 265, 265f
Laryngeal nerve block, 274
Laryngeal nerve blockade, 324
Laryngeal nerve, monitoring, 525
Laryngoscope
blade
choice of, 269
position of, schematic diagram 
for, 270f
for children and infants, 282
choice of, in trauma bay, 772
detachable, laryngoscope blades, 
examples of, 270f
Macintosh-style blade, 270
Miller-style blade, 269–270
Laryngoscopic grades, view of, 267f, 
267
Laryngoscopy
complications during, 277
direct, 268
video, 269
for children and infants, 271t, 283
Laryngospasm, 286, 552, 700
Larynx, 254, 257f
in infants, 278
motor and sensory innervation of, 
256t
preparation of, for awake exible 
endotracheal intubation, 274
Laser surgery, 556
operating room precautions for, 556b
LAST. See Local anesthetic systemic 
toxicity; Local anesthetic 
systemic toxicity (LAST)
Latent heat of vaporization, 235
Lateral decubitus, 341f, 341–342
Lateral decubitus position, 340–341
arms and head, placement of, 341f, 
341
axillary roll in, 341f, 341
lower leg exion, 341f, 341
Laudanosine, 663
Lawn-chair position, 338f, 338
LAX, long axis, 321f
Leadership, trauma and, 775b, 775
Leak testing, anesthesia workstation, 
251
Lean body mass, 46t
Learning orientation, versus 
performance orientation, 16
Lectures, anesthesia care and, 15
Left atrial (LA) pressure, 53
Left-sided double-lumen tube
insertion of, methods of, 488, 490f
positioning of, 488, 490f
Left-to-right shunts, 632, 633f–635f
Left ventricular function, evaluation 
of, 463t
Left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH), 465
Left ventricular outow tract 
obstruction (LVOTO), 469–470, 
470b
Lepirudin, 429–430
LES. See Lower esophageal sphincter 
(LES)
Lethal triad, 445, 769f, 769
Levitan FPS, 275, 276f
Levobupivacaine
characteristic of, 143–144
epidural use, 306
for spinal anesthesia, 301
Levopropivacaine, 155
Liberal policy, for blood transfusions, 
450
Lidocaine
for airway anesthesia, 274
in cardiopulmonary resuscitation, 
818t
chemical structures of, 145f
Laryngoscopy (Continued)
Index
903
epidural use, 306
introduction, 143, 145f
local anesthetic, 154
neurotoxicity, 154
for spinal anesthesia, 300
Lieb, William, 91
Ligamentum avum, 290f, 291
Ligand-gated ion channels, 91
Lipid metabolism, 507
changes in, uremia causes, 503
Lipophilic opioids
as epidural additives, 306
for spinal anesthesia, 301
Liquid anesthetic, 238
Lithium hydroxide (LiOH)-based 
absorbents, 241
Lithotomy, 339
position, 339–340
retrospective review of, 340
Liver
blood ow, 35
dual afferent blood supply to, 
schematic depiction of, 507f
dysfunction, classication/causes 
of, 512t
function tests, values of, 509t
glucose storage/release in, 506
hepatic blood ow, 505
surgery on, 509
Liver disease, 420, 505
anesthesia (management), 509
cholesterol metabolism in, 507
coagulation in, 506
drug metabolism and, 507
glucose homeostasis and, 506
heme metabolism and, 507
hepatic and biliary function tests, 
509t
intraoperative management of, 510
lipid metabolism and, 507
MELD score formula for, 510b
operations in, 510
postoperative jaundice and, 511
preoperative evaluation of, 206, 509
protein metabolism and, 507
Liver transplantation, 664
case preparation, 665b
intraoperative management, 665
postoperative management, 666
preoperative assessment, 664b, 664
reperfusion, physiologic changes 
(treatment), 666b
LMA. See Laryngeal mask airway (LMA)
LMWH. See Low-molecular-weight 
heparin (LMWH)
Local anesthetic systemic toxicity 
(LAST), 319
Local anesthetics, 586
ACLS protocols, 152
adverse effects, 151
aging, 651
allergic reactions, 153
allergy documentation, 153
amino amide, 154
amino esters, 153
bupivacaine, 154
cardiovascular system, 152
central nervous system, 151
chloroprocaine, 153
components, 144f
cross-sensitivity, 153
deposited, 148, 150f
diffusion, 148f
distribution of, 150f, 294
dose-related methemoglobinemia, 
induction, 154
elimination, 294
failure of, 156
future, 156
hemodynamic stability, 152
history, 143
injection spread, 148
levopropivacaine, 155
lidocaine, 154
lipid resuscitation, 152
lipid solubility, 146
mepivacaine, 154
metabolism of, 151
nerve conduction, 144
peak plasma concentrations, 152f
penetration, 294
pH, critical role, 146
pharmacokinetics, 148
pharmacology/use, 149t
plasma concentrations, increase, 151
prilocaine, 154
procaine, 153
propofol, administration (avoidance), 
152
selection of, 334
single enantiomers, 155
sodium channels, actions on, 144
systemic toxicity, 151
tetracaine, 153
topical, 155
toxicity, 826, 827f
tumescent, 155
uptake, 150f, 294
use-dependent block, 146
vasoactivity, 148
vasoconstrictors, 148–151
Local care, transfer versus, 775
Local circuit currents, 146f
Locus coeruleus (LC), 859–860
Long-acting nondepolarizing 
neuromuscular blocking drugs, 
171
Long axis (LAX), 321f
Long, Crawford, 3
Loop diuretics, 502
Lorazepam, chemical structure of, 116f
Loss of consciousness, 
anesthesia-induced, 859
Loss-of-resistance technique, 307, 309f
Lower back pain, 795, 796f
Lower esophageal sphincter (LES), 520
Lower extremity
compartment syndrome, 340
nerves, 347
regional analgesia, 729
Lower extremity blocks, 327
lumbosacral nerves, cutaneous 
distribution, 328f
Low-ow anesthesia, 876, 878f
advantages and disadvantages of, 
877t
Low-molecular-weight heparin 
(LMWH), 204–205, 429
enoxaparin, use of, 573–574
Low preload, causes of, 54
Low-pressure section, gas supply 
system, 233
Lumbar epidural analgesia, for 
pulmonary hypertension, 485
Lumbar epidural technique, 292f
Lumbar spinal stenosis, 799
Lumbosacral nerves, cutaneous 
distribution, 328f
Lumbosacral radiculopathy, 797t–798t, 
799
Lung cancer, patient with, assessment 
of, 486
Lung diffusing capacity for carbon 
monoxide (DLCO), 478
Lung examination, 391, 392f
Lung parenchymal function, 485
Lung resection
anesthesia for, 485
conduct of, 491
conclusion of, 493
preoperative assessment for, 485
smoking cessation in, 486
Lung transplantation, 668
intraoperative management, 668
postoperative management, 668
preoperative evaluation, 668
Lung volumes, age-related changes in, 
646f
Lungs
controlled ventilation of, 63
development of, 612
elastic recoil of, 481
heart and, integration of, 67
intravascular uid balance in, 57
isolation
indications for, 487
options for, 487, 488t
volumes, 57
pulmonary vascular resistance 
and, relationship of, 493f
zones of, 57
Lidocaine (Continued)
Local anesthetics (Continued)
Index
904
LVEDP. See End-diastolic pressure in 
the left ventricle (LVEDP)
LVH. See Left ventricular hypertrophy 
(LVH)
LVOTO. See Left ventricular outow 
tract obstruction (LVOTO)
M
MAC. See Minimum alveolar 
concentration; Minimum 
alveolar concentration (MAC)
Macintosh-style blade, 270
Macroglossia, 344
Magnesium
in cardiopulmonary resuscitation, 
818t
for preeclampsia, 597
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), 
563f, 681
airway pathologies, 261
anesthesia for, management of, 683
compatible equipment, 682
missile injury in, 681–682
monitoring issues in, 682
safety considerations, 681
Maintenance uids, 618
Major depressive disorder (MDD), 24
Malignant hyperthermia (MH), 98, 98f, 
99t, 377
risk factors for, 551
Mallampati test, 259
illustration of, 260f
Mallinckrodt right-sided double-lumen 
tube, 490f
Malnutrition, 518
body systems affected by, 518t
development, 518
diagnosis of, 757
occurrence, 518
outcomes, 756–757
perioperative considerations, 518
treatment for, 518
Malnutrition Screening Tool (MST), 
757t
Malnutrition Universal Screening Tool 
(MUST), 757t
Mannequin-based simulators, 
anesthesia care and, 16
Mannitol, osmotic diuretic, 502
Manual in-line stabilization, 772, 
772f–773f
MAO. See Monoamine oxidase (MAO)
MAP. See Mean arterial pressure; Mean 
arterial pressure (MAP)
Mapleson breathing systems, 243, 
243f–243f
Masseter jaw rigidity, 168
Massive mediastinal hemorrhage, in 
mediastinoscopy, 495
Massive transfusion, blood banking, 
447, 447t
Maxillary prominence, 259
Maximum allowable blood loss, 
618
Maximum inspiratory force (MIF), 
746
Mayeld rigid head pins, usage of, 
342f, 342–343
Mayo Anesthesia Safety in Kids 
(MASK) study, 188–189
McGrath MAC video laryngoscopes, for 
children and infants, 283
McGrath Scope, 271
Mean arterial pressure (MAP), 362
minus hepatic vein pressure, 
505–506
monitoring, 51–52
Mean pulmonary arterial pressure 
(mPAP), 362, 470
Mechanical ventilation, 743
assist control (AC) mode in, 744
via endotracheal tube, for ILD, 
481
modes of, 744t
orders, 745t
pressure control ventilation, 744
pressure support ventilation, 744
synchronized intermittent mandatory 
ventilation, 744
volume control ventilation, 744
weaning from, 745
criteria for, 746
strategies, 746
trial, 745
Mechanically driven piston ventilators, 
246
Mechanomyography (MMG), 
174–177
Medetomidine, S-enantiomer, 
121–122
Median nerve block, 325
Median sternotomy, usage of, 347
Mediastinal masses, 495
life-threatening complications of, 
496t
Mediastinoscopy, 495
hemorrhage, anesthetic management 
of, 495b
Medicare hospice benets, 841f
Meditation, 25
MELD score. See Model for End-Stage 
Liver Disease (MELD) score
Mental health, 23
depression, 24
fatigue mitigation, 23
substance use disorders, 23
suicide, 24
Meperidine
clinical pharmacology of, 133–134
molecular structure of, 126f
for spinal anesthesia, 301
usage, 585
Mepivacaine
chemical structures of, 145f
epidural use, 306
local anesthetic, 154
for spinal anesthesia, 301
MEPs. See Motor evoked potentials; 
Motor evoked potentials (MEPs)
Merit-Based Incentive Payment System 
(MIPS), 8
Metabolic abnormalities, 452
Metabolic acidosis, 405
accumulation of, 503
causes of, 406b
compensatory responses/treatment 
of, 407
presence of, 401
Metabolic alkalosis, 407
causes of, 407b
compensatory responses/treatment 
of, 407
presence of, 401
Metabolic demand, in oxygen 
extraction, 67
Metabolic disease, 503
Metabolic equivalent of task score 
(METS), 459–460
Metabolic equivalents (METs), 459–460
of common physical activities, 
198–200, 200t
Metabolic syndrome, 516
Metabolism, elimination, and recovery, 
101, 102f–103f
Metaproterenol (Alupent, Metaprel), 77
MetHb. See Methemoglobin (MetHb)
Methemoglobin (MetHb), 59, 353–355
Methohexital
formulation, 114
structure of, 114f
Methoxyurane, 95
Methylnaltrexone, opioids and, 132
Metoclopramide, 581
Metoprolol (Lopressor), 79
β-adrenergic blockers, usage, 78
in cardiopulmonary resuscitation, 
818t
METS. See Metabolic equivalent of task 
score (METS)
METs. See Metabolic equivalents 
(METs)
Meyer-Overton correlation, 91, 92f
MH. See Malignant hyperthermia (MH)
Microaggressions, 23
Microcuff endotracheal tube, 282
Microinterventions, 23
Midazolam, 116
chemical structure of, 116f
for spinal anesthesia, 302
Middle scalene muscles, brachial 
plexus, 322
MIF. See Maximum inspiratory force 
(MIF)
Index
905
Miller-style blade, 269–270
Mineralocorticoid excess, 526
Mini Mental Status Exam (MMSE), 
651–652
Miniature end-plate potentials 
(MEPPs), 161
Mini-Cog test, 652b
Minimum alveolar concentration 
(MAC), 88, 90f, 90t, 91b, 96, 
226, 617
alert monitoring, 374
reduction in, 132
1-Minute sit to stand test (1-MSTST), 
761
Minute ventilation, decreased, 63
Miosis, production of, 131
MIPS. See Merit-Based Incentive 
Payment System (MIPS)
Mitral regurgitation, 464
management of anesthesia, 464b, 
464
Mitral stenosis, 463
management of anesthesia, 464b, 
464
Mivacurium
as benzylisoquinolinium 
nondepolarizing NMBD, 173
chemical structure of, 164f
as short-acting nondepolarizing 
neuromuscular blocking drug, 
173
Mixed apneas, 860
Mixed-expired carbon dioxide, 63
Mixed venous oxygen content, arterial 
oxygen content and, difference 
of, 412
Mixed venous oxygen saturation, 67
M-mode, 384
MOCA. See Maintenance of 
Certication in Anesthesiology 
(MOCA)
Mocardial infarction (MI), 460
Model for End-Stage Liver Disease 
(MELD) score, 510, 664
Modied Bromage scale, 305b, 305
Modied fat-free mass, 46t
Modied rapid-sequence induction 
(RSI), 226
Modulated receptor model, 146
Molecular mechanisms, of inhaled 
anesthetics, 91, 92f–93f
Molecular structures, of inhaled 
anesthetics, 83, 83f
Monitored anesthesia care (MAC), 222, 
227, 546
Monitors and alarms, anesthesia 
workstation, 250
Monoamine oxidase (MAO), 
metabolism of, 71
Monophasic waveform debrillators, 
813
Moral injury, 19
Morphine, 135
epidural, 307
metabolism of, 133
metabolites of, 133f
molecular structure of, 126f
onset time of, 135
pharmacokinetics of, 133f
preservative-free, for spinal 
anesthesia, 301
as prototype opioid, 135
usage, 585
Morphine 3-glucuronide (M3G), 133
Morphine 6-glucuronide (M6G), 133, 
135
Morton, William T. G., 3, 82, 234
Motor evoked potentials (MEPs), 377
Motor nerve bers, sensory blockade, 
148
mPAP. See Mean pulmonary arterial 
pressure (mPAP)
Mucociliary clearance, 95
Multicompartment models, 
pharmacokinetics and, 36, 37f
Multidisciplinary process improvement, 
in anesthesia care, 835, 836f
Multimodal analgesia, 869
Multimodal general analgesia, 226, 
227t
Multimodal general anesthesia, 138
Multiple births, 595
Multiple sclerosis, neuraxial anesthesia 
contraindication, 296
Multispecialty Perioperative Outcomes 
Group (MPOG), 833–834, 834f
Multiwavelength pulse oximetry, 59
Muscarinic antagonists, 79
addition, 79
Muscle rigidity, induction of, opioids 
and, 131
Myalgia, 167
Myelin
impact, 144
sheath, interruptions, 144
Myelomeningocele, 631
Myelopathy, neuraxial anesthesia 
contraindication, 296
Myocardial contractility, decreased, 54
conditions associated with, 54b
Myocardial infarction (MI)
decreased, 77
dobutamine for, 75–76
nitrous oxide, 97
Myocardial ischemia, 706
electrocardiogram, 462t
electrocardiogram for, 706
in high-risk patients, 706
in low-risk patients, 706
Myocardial oxygen
delivery, 463b
requirements, 463b
Myocardium, neonatal, 615
Myocardium refractory period 
(decrease), epinephrine (impact) 
in, 73–74
Myopathy, 170
Myringotomy, ear surgery and, 554
N
nAChRs. See Nicotinic acetylcholine 
receptors (nAChRs)
NACOR. See National Anesthesia 
Clinical Outcomes Registry 
(NACOR)
Nalbuphine, 136
Naloxone, 136
Naltrexone, 136
Nasal cavity, 254
Nasal surgery, 555
Nasopharynx, preparation of, for 
awake exible endotracheal 
intubation, 274
National Academy of Medicine (NAM), 
22–23
National Aeronautics and Space 
Administration (NASA), 21
National Anesthesia Clinical Outcomes 
Registry (NACOR), 678, 832
National Institute for Occupational 
Safety and Health (NIOSH), 
876–877
National Quality Forum (NQF), 
836–837
Nausea and vomiting, 551
as neuraxial anesthesia complication, 
314
Neck dissection surgery, 556
Neck, right side, sonogram, 320f
Neck surgery, special considerations 
for, 552
Necrotizing enterocolitis, 625
Needle-based ophthalmic regional 
anesthesia, 549, 549f
“Needle-through-needle” technique, 
309, 310f
Neonates (newborns)
anesthetic considerations in, 621
apnea in, 67
blood gas values of, 606t
cardiopulmonary resuscitation, 606
cardiovascular assessment of, 615, 
616t
medical and surgical diseases 
affecting, 625
resuscitation, 604
Neostigmine, 178–179
intrathecal, for spinal anesthesia, 
302
usage of, 80
Nephrogenic systemic brosis (NSF), 
681
Nephron, anatomy of, 500f
Index
906
Nerve blocks
characteristics, 334
preparation, 318
ultrasound, 320
Nerve fascicles, 320–321
Nerve bers, classication of, 144, 
145t
Nerve injury, 311, 320
Nerves
conduction local anesthetics 
(impact), 144
roots, illustration, 320f
stimulation, 318
Nervous system
aging, 648
changes, 581
Neural inertia, 102
Neuraxial analgesia (regional 
analgesia), 585
anticoagulants, 726
epidural administration, 726
indications for, 296
infection, 727
intraarticular administration, 728
intrathecal administration, 726
paravertebral blocks, 728
peripheral nerve blocks, 728
side effects of, 726, 727b
Neuraxial and peripheral nerve 
blockade, 223
Neuraxial anesthesia, 226, 296, 432, 
433t
cardiovascular collapse from, 826
complications of, 590
treatment, 590
contraindications to, 296, 590
excessive blockade and, 590
hypotension and, 591
increased core temperature and, 591
systemic toxicity and, 590
Neuraxial blockade, 295
Neuraxial blocks, 290
Neuraxial opioids, 586
Neuraxial techniques, 586
combined spinal-epidural technique, 
587
epidural technique, 587, 587f
neuraxial dosing and delivery 
techniques, 589
preoperative assessment, 586
spinal labor analgesia, 589
timing and placement of epidural, 
586
Neurodegeneration, anesthetic drugs 
and, 186
age-dependent vulnerability of, 
186
durations and concentrations of, 
188
sedative drugs and, 188
Neuroendocrine tumors, 529
Neurogenesis, 186
impeded, anesthetic-induced 
developmental neurotoxicity 
(AIDN) and, 187
Neurogenic shock
clinical manifestations of, 740
treatment of, 741
Neuroinammation, anesthetic induced 
developmental neurotoxicity 
(AIDN) and, 187
Neurologic disease, preoperative 
evaluation, 198
Neuromodulation, 806
Neuromuscular blockade, 538–539
basic physiology and pharmacology, 
375
evoked potential, 377
monitoring, 375
neuromuscular blockade monitor, 
375–376, 376t
Neuromuscular blocking agents 
(NMBA), 869
aging, 651
Neuromuscular blocking drugs 
(NMBDs), 160
acetylcholine, prejunctional 
receptors and release of, 162
adverse side effects of, 166
atypical plasma cholinesterase and, 
166
cardiac dysrhythmias and, 166
for cesarean delivery, 594
choice of, 161
classication of, 161t
clinical uses of, 161
depolarizing, 165
effects of
monitoring of, 173, 174f–178f
extrajunctional receptors of, 163
hyperkalemia and, 167
intracranial pressure (ICP), 537
intracranial pressure, increased and, 
167
intraocular pressure, increased and, 
167
intraoperative clinical evaluation 
of, 161
mechanically evoked responses and, 
173
myalgia and, 167
new antagonist of, 181f
postjunctional receptors of, 163, 
163f
quaternary ammonium compounds, 
163–165
renal failure, 663
structure-activity relationships of, 
163
α-subunits of, subunits
train-of-four stimulation of, 162
trismus and, 168
Neuromuscular function
inhaled anesthetics and, 96
Neuromuscular junction, 161, 162f
Neuronal network mechanisms, inhaled 
anesthetics, 92, 93f
Neuropathic pain, 800
complex regional pain syndrome, 
800
peripheral neuropathy, 800
Neuropeptide Y, 71
Neuroprotection, anesthetic, in 
developing brain, 537, 639
Neurosurgery, anesthesia for, 538
Neurotoxicity, anesthetic, 185
clinical evidence for, 188
intraoperative course for, 189, 190t
neurocognitive outcomes of, 189, 
190t
neurodegeneration and long-term 
neurocognitive decits and, 186
Neurotoxicity, developmental, 99
Neurotransmitter, release of, 71
Neurovascular coupling, 534
“Never events,” 835
Newborns. See Neonates (newborns)
Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors 
(nAChRs), 161
Nicotinic receptor, 71
Nil per os (NPO) guidelines, 198, 213
Nitric oxide, 419
Nitroglycerin, 419
Nitroprusside, 419
Nitrous oxide, 85, 88
ear surgery and, 553
inhaled anesthetics and, 96, 97f
in obstructive sleep apnea, 483
usage, 585
NMBDs. See Neuromuscular blocking 
drugs (NMBDs)
N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) 
receptors, 188
Nociception, 221, 717–718
modulation of, 718
Nodes of Ranvier, exposure, 148
Nonaccidental injury, 788, 789b
Nonanion gap, 406
Noncardiac surgery, 460
Noncatecholamine sympathomimetic 
amines, 76
Nondepolarizing neuromuscular 
blocking drugs (nondepolarizing 
NMBDs), 168
as aminosteroid compounds, 165
cardiovascular effects of, 169
comparative pharmacology of, 168t
critical illness and, 170
pharmacodynamic response of, 168, 
169f, 170f
pharmacokinetics of, 168
Nonbrin-specic agents, 430
Noninvasive blood pressure, 366
Index
907
Noninvasive cardiac output monitors, 
741
Noninvasive positive-pressure 
ventilation (NPPV), 704, 743b, 
743
Nonobstetric surgery, during 
pregnancy, 602
Nonoperating room anesthesia (NORA), 
672, 678
anesthesia services, 679b
care and equipment, standard of, 680
characteristics of, 679
communication, importance of, 679
Nonopioid analgesics, 802
Nonrapid eye movement (NREM) sleep, 
856f, 856
Nonsteroidal antiinammatory drugs 
(NSAIDs), 427–428
aging, 651
Nonvolatile weak acids, plasma 
concentration of, 406–407
NORA. See Nonoperating room 
anesthesia (NORA)
Norepinephrine, 72
α-adrenergic/β-adrenergic receptor, 
binding of, 72
biosynthesis of, 73f
release/reuptake of, 74f
Normal hemostasis, 414, 415f
Normovolemic hemodilution, 454
Nose, preparation of, for awake 
exible endotracheal intubation, 
274
Noxious stimuli, 718–719
NQF. See National Quality Forum (NQF)
NREM sleep. See Nonrapid eye 
movement (NREM) sleep
NSAIDs. See Nonsteroidal 
antiinammatory drugs 
(NSAIDs)
NSF. See Nephrogenic systemic brosis 
(NSF)
Nurse anesthesia programs, 7
Nutritional disorders, 515
Nutritional optimization, 756
O
Obese patients (perioperative 
management), dexmedetomidine 
infusions for, 77
Obesity, 515
anesthesia, induction of, 517
anesthetic drugs and, 45, 46f, 46t
bariatric surgery, 517
denition, 515, 516t
medical conditions associated with, 
515, 516t
metabolic syndrome, 516
outpatient anesthesia for, 674
perioperative considerations, 516
surgical treatment, 517
Obesity hypoventilation syndrome 
(OHS), 484
Obstetrics, 577
abnormal presentations, 595
failed intubation, airway 
management difculty 
(algorithm), 593f
Obstructive lesions, 633
Obstructive shock
clinical manifestations of, 739
treatment of, 739
Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA), 286, 
482, 860
clinical diagnostic criteria of, 860
clinical presentation of, 482
clinical signs and symptoms 
suggestive of, 482b
comorbid conditions and, 862b, 862
in head and neck surgery, 553
outpatient anesthesia for, 673
pathophysiology of upper airway 
collapse in, 860, 861f
patients with, preoperative 
evaluation of, 482
perioperative assessment of
patients with diagnosed OSA, 863, 
865f
perioperative complications, 863
perioperative management of, 482, 
863
patient with suspected, 862b, 
864b, 865f, 866, 867t–868t
perioperative risk-mitigation 
strategies, 866, 868t–869t
perioperative medicine, 760
polysomnography and portable 
devices for, 860
postoperative disposition of OSA 
patients, 869, 870f
postoperative management of, 483
prevalence of, in general and 
surgical population, 861
risk score in, determination of, 484b
severity of
determination of, 482t
surgery and, 862
treatment of, 482
in upper airway obstruction, 700
Occiput, of infant, 279
Occupational hazards, of inhaled 
anesthetics, 875
Occupational Safety and Health 
Administration (OSHA), 680
OCR. See Oculocardiac reex (OCR)
Oculocardiac reex (OCR), 546–547
Odontoid, superior migration, 561
magnetic resonance image and 
reconstruction demonstrating, 
563f
Ofce-based anesthesia, in outpatient 
anesthesia, 672
OHS. See Obesity hypoventilation 
syndrome (OHS)
Oliguria, 708
intravascular volume depletion, 708
postoperative urinary retention, 708
Omphalocele, 626
Ondine’s curse, 67
One-lung ventilation
approach to, 493, 494t
desaturation during, 493
hypoxia during, management of, 
493, 494t
in lateral position, physiologic 
considerations of, 489, 492f–
493f
OOP, out-of-plane, 321f, 321
Open, active acavenging system, 247, 
248f
Operating room (OR)
anesthesia outside, 349
preparing, 13
Operating room practices, 
environmental impact of, 880
energy efciency, 880, 881t
reusable breathing circuits, 880
reusable versus single-use 
equipment, 880
reusable versus single-use textiles, 
880
waste, 880
Ophthalmic procedures, anesthesia 
management of, 550
Ophthalmic surgery
anesthesia management of, goals for, 
549b
regional anesthesia for
altered physiologic status after, 
differential diagnosis of, 550t
complications of, 550b
needle-based, 549, 549f
Ophthalmology, 546
anesthetic options in, 549b, 549
intraocular pressure in, 547
oculocardiac reex in, 547
ophthalmic medications in, 547, 548t
postoperative eye issues in, 552
preoperative assessment in, 548
Opioid agonist-antagonists, 136
Opioid-free anesthesia (OFA), 138
Opioid-induced hyperalgesia (OIH), 132
Opioid-induced pupillary constriction, 
131
Opioid-induced ventilatory depression 
study methodology, 131f
Opioids, 66, 125, 536, 585
abuse, epidemic, 138
action in, mechanisms of, 127f
adverse effects of, 131
age and, 134
aging, 650
alfentanil as, 135
Index
908
analgesics, 803
as analgesics, 131
biased μ-receptor agonists, 138, 139f
bolus front-end kinetics and, 
127–128
bolus injection of, simulation of, 128
clinical application of, 137
clinical indications for, 137
clinical pharmacology of, 127
codeine as, 134
constant rate infusions of, clinical 
implications of, 128–129
context-sensitive half-time (CSHT), 
129
simulation, 129
developments for, 138
drug interactions with, 132
drug selection and administration 
of, 137
effect of, pulse of, 137–138
as epidural additives, 306
fentanyl as, 125, 135
formulation of, rational 
administration strategy for, 138
gender and, 134
hepatic failure and, 132
hyperalgesia induced by, 720
kidney failure and, 133
mechanism of, 126
metabolism of, 127
minimum alveolar concentration 
(MAC) and, 132
morphine as, 135
multimodal general anesthesia, 138
nausea and vomiting and, 131
neuraxial, 586
neurodegeneration and, 188
obesity and, 48, 134
for obstructive sleep apnea, 483, 
483t
opioid-free anesthesia (OFA), 138
opioid receptor (ORL1), 125
patient-controlled analgesia (PCA) 
and, 137
peak effect of, latency to, 128
pharmacodynamics of, 129
considerations, importance of, 137
summary chart of, 130f
pharmacokinetics of, 127
concepts of, application of, 128
parameters of, 126t
simulations of, 129f
pharmacologic effects of, 126
pharmacology of, 125
physicochemical features of, 
125–126
physicochemical parameters of, 126t
potency of, difference in, 128
propofol and, combination of, 132
receptors of
features of, 128t
posttranslational modication, 127
remifentanil as, 135
sparing versus free techniques, 720
spinal anesthesia and, 301
structure-activity of, 125
sufentanil as, 135
therapeutic effects of, 127, 130
total body weight (TBW) and, 134
total intravenous anesthesia (TIVA) 
and, 129, 137
on urologic effects, 132
use of, at end of life, 844
OR. See Operating room (OR)
Oral axis (OA), alignment of, schematic 
diagram of, 261f
Oral cavity, 254, 256f
Oral transmucosal delivery of fentanyl 
citrate (OTFC), 135
Oral trauma, 773
Organ failure, 736
Organ support, 736
Organ system effects, inhaled 
anesthetics, 92
cardiovascular system, 94, 94f
central nervous system, 92, 93f
hepatic system, 95, 96f
neuromuscular function, 96
pulmonary system, 94, 95f
renal system, 95, 96f
Organ transplantation, 661
considerations for, 661
donation after brain death (DBD), 
661
donation after cardiac death (DCD), 
661
Organizational culture, 22
Organizational level, clinician well-
being, 22
Oropharyngeal space, 259
Oropharynx, preparation of, for 
awake exible endotracheal 
intubation, 274
Orthopedic surgery, 559
OSA. See Obstructive sleep apnea 
(OSA)
Oscillometric cuff, 368f
OSHA. See Occupational Safety and 
Health Administration (OSHA)
Osmotic diuretics, 502
Otolaryngology, 552
head and neck surgery in, special 
considerations for, 552
procedures in, anesthesia 
management of, 553
Outcome measures, in anesthesia care, 
833
Outcome Project, of Accreditation 
Council for Graduate Medical 
Education (ACGME), 11–12
Out-of-plane (OOP), 321f, 321
Outpatient anesthesia, 671
ambulatory anesthesia settings, 671, 
672f
anesthetic techniques, 674
chronic kidney disease, 674
difcult airway management, 674
implanted and other medical devices, 
674
nonoperating room anesthesia, 672
obesity, 674
for obstructive sleep apnea, 673
ofce-based anesthesia, 672
patient, selection for, 672
postoperative care, 675
preoperative evaluation, 673
quality improvement, 675
substance use disorders, 674
surgeries and procedures, 673b, 673
trends in, 676
Outpatient palliative care consults, in 
palliative care, 846
Oxygen
administration, 682
alveolar partial pressure
decreased, 702
determinants of, 59, 60f
delivery systems, 703
extraction, 67
management of, for anesthetic 
neurotoxicity, 190
in pulmonary gas exchange, 57
saturation, versus time of apnea, 
262f
supplementation, 703
Oxygen alarm, anesthesia workstation, 
251
Oxygenated hemoglobin, hydrogen 
ions/carbon dioxide afnities 
in, 401–402
Oxygenation, 353, 404, 410
assessment of, 410
inadequate, monitoring for, 450
measurements of, 58, 58f
trauma bay and, 771
Oxygen consumption (V˙ o2), 60
of infant, 279
oxygen delivery (DO2) and, 
relationship of, 412f
Oxygen delivery (DO2), 67, 412
oxygen consumption (V˙ o2) and, 
relationship of, 412f
Oxygen E-cylinder, 232
Oxygen ush valve, anesthesia 
workstation, 233
Oxygen reservoirs, 245
Oxygen tubing, 245
Oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve, 58, 
58f
events that shift, 58t
Oxyhemoglobin saturation, 59
Opioids (Continued)
Opioids (Continued)
Index
909
P
PAC. See Pulmonary artery catheter 
(PAC)
PACE technique. See Probe, Alert, 
Challenge, Emergency Action 
(PACE) technique
Packed red blood cells (PRBCs), 448
transfusion of, 619
PaCO2. See Arterial carbon dioxide 
tension (PaCO2)
PACU. See Postanesthesia care unit 
(PACU)
Paddle electrodes, proper placement, 
813f, 813
Pain
acute. See Acute pain
analgesic delivery systems, 720
burns, trauma and, 787
chronic. See Chronic pain
leg, 797t–798t
lower back, 797t–798t
management of, 718
in palliative care, 844
neurobiology, 718
neuropathic, 800
complex regional pain syndrome, 
800
peripheral neuropathy, 800
nociception, 717–718
modulation of, 718
perioperative recovery, multimodal 
approach, 720
preventive analgesia, 719
systemic local anesthetics for, 156
TNS, relationship, 154
in total knee replacements, 572–573
Pain relief
μ-agonists opioids and, 130
opioid analgesics and, 131
Palliative care, 839, 840f
anesthesiologists’ contribution to, 
842
cancer pain and, 844, 845t–846t
communication and, 848
difcult information, frameworks 
for, 849b, 849
patient and family, prognosis and, 
848
physician tendencies in addressing 
difcult topics, 848
end of life, use of opioids at, 844
hospice, 840, 841f
Hospice and Palliative Medicine 
subspecialty, 841
identication of, and hospice 
patients, 846
hospice consults, 846
inpatient, 846
outpatient, 847
in intensive care unit, 843b, 843
noncancer pain and, 844
nurses and, 842
and pain, 844
patient, challenges in, 846
perioperative management, 849, 
850b
advance directives and, 849
decision-making capacity and, 
850
perioperative DNR conversations 
and, 851
surrogate decision makers and, 
850
physicians, 842
prognosis and, 847
disease trajectories and, 847, 847f
functional status and, 848
physician estimate and, 847
prognostic tools and, 848
specialists, 840
spirituality in serious illness, 843
teams, 842, 842b–843b
withdrawal of life support in, 843
Palliative medicine, 839
Pancreas transplantation, 668
Pancuronium
chemical structure of, 164f
as long-acting nondepolarizing 
neuromuscular blocking drugs, 
171
nondepolarizing NMBDs in, 165
PaO2/FiO2 (P/F) ratio, 411
PAP. See Pulmonary artery pressure
Para-aminobenzoic acid, metabolites, 
relationship, 153
“Paradoxical” sleep, 857
Paraganglioma, 527
perioperative considerations, 527
Paramagnetic oxygen analysis, 242
Paramedian approach
in epidural anesthesia, 308
in spinal anesthesia, 303, 304f
Paraplegia, 311
Parasternal long-axis view
cardiac ultrasound, 385
image appearance and structures 
visualized, 386, 388f
image interpretation, 386, 389b, 389f
patient positioning, 385
probe position and manipulation, 
385–386, 387f
Parasternal short-axis view
cardiac ultrasound, 386
image appearance and structures 
visualized, 386, 388f
image interpretation, 386, 390b, 
390f
patient positioning, 386
probe position and manipulation, 
386, 387f
Parasympathetic nerves (stimulation), 
effector organs (responses), 75t
Parasympathetic nervous system (PNS), 
55, 69, 72, 644–646
cranial nerves, origin of, 72
Parathyroid disease, 525
Parathyroid surgery, 557
Parkinson disease, 198
Parotid surgery, 557
Partial agonists, 42
Partial pressure, 235
of inhaled anesthetic, 84–87, 102
Partition coefcients, of inhaled 
anesthetics, 85, 87f
Patent ductus arteriosus, 630
Patient-controlled analgesia (PCA), 
216, 721
delivery systems, usage (guidelines), 
722t
opioids and, 137
Patient factors
epidural block height and, 305
spinal block height and, 299
Patient positioning
and associated risks, 336
general, 337
lateral decubitus, 340, 341f
lithotomy, 339, 340f
prone, 342, 342f
sitting, 343f, 344
supine, 337, 338f
physiologic aspects of, 336
for robotic surgery, 345
Patient safety, 19–20
Patient safety-focused programs, in 
anesthesia care, 831
Patient suction, anesthesia workstation, 
249
Patients
blood management, 449
challenges, in palliative care, 846
follow-up, 15
head, elevation, 266
PAWP. See Pulmonary artery wedge 
pressure; Pulmonary artery 
wedge pressure (PAWP)
PCA. See Patient-controlled analgesia 
(PCA)
PCWP. See Pulmonary capillary wedge 
pressure (PCWP)
PDSA (Plan/Do/Study/Act), as quality 
improvement project, 835
Peak expiratory ow (PEF) rate, 
478–479
Peak inspiratory pressure (PIP), 
355–356
Pediatric advanced cardiovascular life 
support
airway, 820
debrillation, 820
drugs, 822
Pediatric advanced life support, 820
circulation, 820, 822f
Index
910
Pediatric airway, 620
Pediatric cardiac arrest algorithm, 821f
Pediatric trauma, 788, 789b
Pediatrics, injuries in, 789b
PEEP. See Positive end-expiratory 
pressure (PEEP)
Percutaneous coronary intervention 
(PCI), 687–688
Performance orientation, versus 
learning orientation, 16
Perfusion, inadequate, monitoring for, 
450
Periodic breathing, 67
Perioperative bleeding, 430
Perioperative eye injury, visual loss 
and, 348
Perioperative uid, strategies, 442, 
443b
Perioperative Ischemia Research Group, 
β-blockade study, 78
Perioperative management, 
dexmedetomidine infusions for, 
77
Perioperative medicine, 216, 753
anesthesiologist, as perioperative 
physician, 754b
assessment and interventions, 761
cognitive screening and 
interventions, 762
consultant, 754b, 754
evolution of, 753
health literacy, 762
medical management of, 755
anemia, 755
chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease, 760
glycemic control, 759
nutritional optimization, 756
obstructive sleep apnea, 760
physical exercise regimen, 761
prehabilitation, 760
smoking cessation, 758
perioperative outcomes, 754
opportunities to improve, 762, 
763t
shared decision making, 762
social determinants of health, 762
value-added preoperative screening 
and testing, 754
Perioperative neuropathies, evaluation 
and treatment of, 348
Perioperative Nutrition Screen (PONS), 
757b
Perioperative oliguria
differential diagnosis of, 503
diuretics, administration of, 504
initial management of, 504
Perioperative pain
systemic therapy, 722
intravenous administration, 723
oral administration, 722
subcutaneous administration, 724
transmucosal administration, 724
treatment, oral/parenteral analgesics, 
721t
Perioperative (acute) pain medicine 
service, 718
Perioperative patient care, 
anesthesiology, 4
Perioperative period
benzodiazepines, usage, 115
cardiovascular collapse, causes of, 
819t
do-not-resuscitate (DNR) orders, 851, 
851t–852t
Perioperative peripheral neuropathies 
(prevention), ASA Task Force 
Consensus Findings (summary) 
on, 346, 347b
Perioperative recovery
multimodal approach, 720
multimodal strategy, principles, 720
Perioperative Surgical Home (PSH), 8
Perioperative thromboembolism, risk 
of, 202, 203t
Perioperativist, 754
Peripheral autonomic nerves, anatomic 
origin of, 70f
Peripheral autonomic nervous system, 
schematic diagram of, 71f
Peripheral chemoreceptors, 65
carotid artery bifurcation in, 402
Peripheral effector organs, functional 
innervation of, 70f
Peripheral nerve blockade, local 
anesthetic (selection), 334
Peripheral nerve blocks, 318
examples, 319t
Peripheral nerve injuries, 320, 346
brachial plexus and, 347
lower extremity nerves and, 
347–348
perioperative complication, 346
perioperative neuropathies, 
evaluation and treatment of, 
348
ulnar nerve and, 346
upper extremity nerves and, 347
Peripheral nerves
catheters, 321
characteristics, 334
cutaneous distribution, 323f
local anesthetics, deposit, 150f
transverse section of, 150f
Peripheral nervous system, in 
anesthetic monitoring, 375
Peripheral neuropathy, 800
neuraxial anesthesia 
contraindication, 296
Permissive hypercapnia, 404–405
Permissive hypotension, 737–738
Persistent pain. See Chronic pain 
(persistent pain)
Personal protective equipment (PPE), 
19
Personal strategies, well-being, 24
Pharmacodynamics, 32b
Pharmacodynamics principles, 40, 
43f
Pharmacokinetics, 32b
compartmental pharmacokinetic 
models, 37f, 38
concepts, fundamental, 32
multicompartment models, 36, 37f
in newborn, 616
principles in, 31
Pharmacokinetic mass, 46t
Pharmacologic principles, 31, 32b
in pharmacodynamics, 40, 43f
in pharmacokinetics, 31
in special populations, 45
Pharmacologically induced sedation, 
682
Pharmacology
anesthetic medications, in elderly, 
649
acetaminophen, 651
benzodiazepines, 650
dexmedetomidine, 651
etomidate, 649
ketamine, 649
local anesthetics, 651
neuromuscular blocking agents, 
651
nonsteroidal antiinammatory 
drugs, 651
opioids, 650
propofol, 649
volatile, 649
Pharyngeal axis (PA), alignment of, 
schematic diagram of, 261f
Pharyngeal muscle tone, loss of, 698
Pharyngeal space, micrognathia 
limiting, 259
Pharynx, 254, 256f
Phenoxybenzamine (Dibenzyline), 77
Phenylephrine, 76
for spinal anesthesia, 301
Pheochromocytoma, 527
perioperative considerations, 527
Pheochromocytoma multisystem crisis, 
527
pH stat, 401
Physical exercise regimen, 761
Physician anesthesiologists, 4–6
Physician estimate, in palliative care, 
847
Physician stafng, 735
Physician tendencies, in addressing 
difcult topics, 848
Physicochemical properties, of inhaled 
anesthetics, 83
Perioperative pain (Continued)
Index
911
Physiology, restoration of, trauma and, 
782
Physostigmine, usage of, 80
Pia mater, 290f, 290–291
Pin Index Safety System (PISS), 231
PIP. See Peak inspiratory pressure (PIP)
Piped gas pressures, anesthesia 
workstation, 250
Pituitary gland dysfunction, 528
Placenta accreta spectrum, 600, 601f
Placenta previa, 599
Placenta, retained, 600
Placental abruption, 791
Placental exchange, 582
Plasma cholinesterase, variants of, 167t
Plasma-mediated hemostasis, 416
Plasmin-activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1), 
417
Platelet aggregation, 429
Platelet aggregometry, 426
Platelet count, 425
Platelet disorders, 422
Platelet dysfunction, 420
Platelet function analysis (PFA), 427
Platelet function, tests of, 425
bleeding time, 425
platelet aggregometry, 426
platelet count, 425
Platelets, 449
and hemostasis, 415
transfusion of, 619
PND. See Postoperative neurocognitive 
disorder (PND)
Pneumatic safety systems, anesthesia 
workstation, 233
Pneumonia, ventilator-associated, 749
Pneumothorax
evolution for, 391, 393b, 394f
supraclavicular block, 324–325
PNS. See Parasympathetic nervous 
system (PNS)
POCD. See Postoperative cognitive 
dysfunction (POCD)
Point-of-care ultrasound (POCUS), 383, 
741
abdominal, 393
cardiac, 385
examination of, 384
gastric, 396
pulmonary, 391
review of, 383
transducers, 384, 385t, 386f
Polyneuropathy, 170
Polysomnography (PSG), 855, 860
PONV. See Postoperative nausea and 
vomiting (PONV)
Popliteal block, 330
patient position, 332f
“Pop-off” or pressure relief valve, 240
Portal blood ow, 96
Portal hypertension, 508
Portal vein pressure, minus hepatic 
vein pressure, 505–506
Portopulmonary hypertension, 508, 
664–665
Positive airway pressure (PAP) devices, 
in OSA, 864
Positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP)
dead space and, 63
in one-lung ventilation, 490–491
Positive-pressure ventilation, 64
bullae and, 480–481
of lungs, 469
Postanesthesia care unit (PACU), 560
admission to, 698
delayed awakening in, 712
delirium in, 710
discharge criteria for, 712
early postoperative physiologic 
disorders in, 698b, 698
hemodynamic instability in, 704
hypoxemia in, 703
OSA and, 870
oxygen supplementation in, 703
postoperative hypothermia and 
shivering, 709
postoperative nausea and vomiting 
in, 710
pulmonary edema in, 702
renal dysfunction in, 707
upper airway obstruction in, 698
Postanesthesia recovery, 697
Postanesthesia scoring systems, 713, 
713t
Postcardiac arrest care, algorithm for, 
823f
Postdural puncture headache, 312
Posterolateral thoracotomy, 493–495
Postextubation stridor, 286
Postganglionic sympathetic nerve 
ending, schematic depiction of, 
72f
Postjunctional receptors, 163
glycoproteins as, 163
Postobstructive pulmonary edema, 702
Postoperative acute kidney injury 
(AKI), 504
Postoperative analgesia, 869
Postoperative cognitive dysfunction 
(POCD), 100b, 100
Postoperative eye issues, 552
Postoperative hypothermia, 709
Postoperative jaundice, 511
halothane, impact, 511–512
Postoperative liver dysfunction, 
classication/causes of, 512t
Postoperative nausea and vomiting 
(PONV), 97, 97f, 710
ear surgery and, 554
prevention of, 710
risk factors for, 675b
treatment of, 710
Postoperative neurocognitive disorders 
(PND), 100, 658
Postoperative pain
adverse physiologic effects, 717b
physiologic reaction, complexity, 716
severity, factors, 720
terminology, 717
Postoperative pulmonary complications 
(PPCs), 205, 208t
Postoperative respiratory failure, 205, 
208t
Postoperative skeletal muscle myalgia, 
167
Postoperative visual loss (POVL), 552, 
568
Postoperative Visual Loss (POVL) 
Registry, establishment, 348
Postrenal oliguria, 504
Postresuscitation care, 822
anaphylaxis, 825
blood glucose concentration, 824
hemodynamic goals, 824
neurologic monitoring, 824, 825f
targeted temperature management, 
824
Posttracheal intubation care, trauma 
bay and, 773b, 773
Potassium
ions, inward transport, 144
in stored blood, 452
Potency, 42, 43f
POVL. See Postoperative visual loss 
(POVL)
Prazosin (Minipress), 77
Preanesthesia checkout procedure, 
anesthesia workstation, 248, 
249t
Preanesthesia evaluation. See 
Preoperative evaluation
Prearrival brieng, 770
Predeposited autologous donation, 454
Preeclampsia, 596
antihypertensives, 598
denitions, 597
features, 597b
magnesium, 597
neuraxial analgesia considerations, 
598
treatment of, 597
Preganglionic bers, 69–71
Preganglionic sympathetic neuron 
(terminal end), neurotransmitter 
(release), 71
Pregnancy
abruptio placentae, 599
acidosis, 602
amniotic uid embolism during, 601
anesthesia during, management of, 
603
breech presentation, 596
cardiac arrest in, 826
Index
912
hypertensive disorders of, 596
intrauterine fetal hypoxia, 
avoidance, 602
multiple births, 595
multiple gestations, 595
nonobstetric surgery during, 602
pain pathways, 584f
placenta accreta spectrum, 600, 601f
placenta previa, 599
preeclampsia, 596–597, 597b
preterm labor, prevention, 603
retained placenta, 600
teratogenic drugs, avoidance, 602
testing, 210
trauma in, 790
anatomy of, 790
anti-D immunoglobulin, 791
aortocaval compression, 790, 791f
causes of, 790
delivery, 791
fetal monitoring, 791
maternal airway, 790
maternal physiology, 790
radiation exposure, 791
uterine atony, 600
uterine rupture, 599
Pregnant women
cardiovascular system changes in, 
578, 578t
gastrointestinal changes in, 581
hemorrhage in, 598
hepatic changes in, 582
massive hemorrhage in, 599
nervous system changes in, 581
physiologic changes in, 578
pulmonary system changes in, 580
renal changes in, 582
Prehabilitation, 216, 760
Preload, 53
low, causes of, 54
Premature infant, 636
Prematurity, retinopathy of, 630
Preoperative anemia, 207–208, 755
causes of, 755–756
dened, 755
Preoperative anxiety, 463
Preoperative evaluation, 12, 195
American Society of 
Anesthesiologists basic 
standards for, 196b
clinics, 216, 217b
enhanced recovery pathways, 216
inpatient preoperative evaluation, 
217
preoperative optimization, 216
of common coexisting diseases, 196
cardiovascular, 198
endocrine, 206
geriatrics, 209
hematologic, 207
infectious disease, 208
liver, 206
neurologic, 198
pulmonary, 205
renal, 206
dened, 195
goals of, 195
hemostasis, 423
history, 195, 197t
informed consent for anesthesia, 215
medication management, 212
NPO guidelines, 213
physical examination in, 195, 197t
preoperative testing, 209
pregnancy testing, 210
preoperative transfusion testing, 
210
rationale for selective testing, 210
risk assessment, 211
ASA Physical Status, 211
settings for, 195
Preoperative uid decits, replacement 
of, 618, 618t
Preoperative medication management, 
212, 215b
Preoperative nasal endoscopy, 261
Preoperative optimization, 216
clinic, 216
Preoperative risk assessment, 211
Preoperative testing, 209, 211b, 211t
pregnancy testing, 210
preoperative transfusion testing, 210, 
213t
rationale for selective testing, 210
Preoperative transfusion testing, 210, 
213t
Preoxygenation, 224, 262, 262f–263f
trauma bay and, 771
Prerenal oliguria, 503
characterization of, 503–504
Preservative-free morphine, for spinal 
anesthesia, 301
Pressure, anesthesia workstation, 250
Pressure-compensated vaporizer, 
236
Pressure injuries, 345
Preterm labor, prevention, 603
Preventive analgesia, 719
Prilocaine
chemical structures of, 145f
epidural use, 306
local anesthetic, 154
for spinal anesthesia, 301
Prilocaine-induced 
methemoglobinemia, 154
Primary hemostasis, 414
Primary hyperparathyroidism, 525
Prior myocardial infarction, 460
Probe, Alert, Challenge, Emergency 
Action (PACE) technique, 775b
Procainamide, in cardiopulmonary 
resuscitation, 818t
Procaine, 153
chemical structures of, 145f
epidural use, 306
for spinal anesthesia, 300
Procedure factors
anatomic variations, 293
epidural block height and, 305
spinal block height and, 299
Process measures, in anesthesia care, 
833
Procoagulant drugs, 430
antibrinolytics, 431
brinogen concentrate, 431
prothrombin complex concentrate, 
431
recombinant factor VIIa, 431
Professional well-being, 19, 23t
Professionalism, 19–20
Prognosis, patient and family wishes 
about communicating, in 
palliative care, 848
Prognostic tools, in palliative care, 848
Projection
in epidural anesthesia, 307, 308f
in spinal anesthesia, 302
Prolactinoma, 529
Prone position, 342, 342f
with Wilson frame, 342f
Prophylaxis, 749
Propofol, 109
aging, 649
anesthesia, induction and 
maintenance of, 113
antiemetic, 113
chemical structure of, 110f
clinical uses of, 113
compartmental model, 110
continuous intravenous infusion, 110
environmental impact of, 879
kinetics of, 110
metabolism of, 110
neuroprotection of, 111
obesity and, 46, 47f
other effects, 112
pharmacodynamics, 110
pharmacokinetics, 110
physical properties, 110
plasma clearance, 110
respiratory system effects of, 112
sedation, 113
time course of, 108f
total intravenous anesthesia, 110b
Proportioning systems, anesthesia 
workstation, 234
Propranolol (Inderal, Ipran), 79
β-adrenergic blockers, usage, 78
ProSeal LMA, 265, 265f
Prospective randomized controlled trial 
(PREVENTT), 756
Pregnancy (Continued)
Preoperative evaluation (Continued)
Index
913
Prostaglandins, 499
Protein C and protein S deciency, 
422
Protein C system, 418
Protein metabolism, 507
Proteinuria, 502
Prothrombin complex concentrates 
(PCCs), 431, 433
Prothrombin gene mutation, 422
Prothrombin time (PT), 418, 424
Prothrombotic states, hemostasis, 422
acquired thrombotic disorders, 422
inherited thrombotic disorders, 422
treatment of thrombotic disorders, 
423
Proton pump inhibitors (PPIs), 521
Pruritus, as neuraxial anesthesia 
complication, 314
PSG. See Polysomnography (PSG)
PSH. See Perioperative Surgical Home 
(PSH)
Pulmonary arterial system, pressures 
in, 56t
Pulmonary artery catheter (PAC), 665, 
741
Pulmonary artery catheterization, 52
Pulmonary artery diastolic (PAD) 
pressure, 53
Pulmonary artery pressure (PAP), 56, 
373f, 373
decrease, in dead space, 63
Pulmonary artery wedge pressure 
(PAWP), 362
Pulmonary capillary wedge pressure 
(PCWP), 53
Pulmonary circulation, 56, 56t
Pulmonary disease, preoperative 
evaluation, 205
Pulmonary edema, 57
in PACU, 702
Pulmonary emboli, 57
Pulmonary embolism, in dead space, 
63
Pulmonary function, objective 
assessment of, 485
Pulmonary gas exchange, 57
Pulmonary hemodynamics, 57
Pulmonary hypertension, 470, 484, 
866–869
Pulmonary mechanics, 64, 64f
Pulmonary resection
anesthesia for, 485
conclusion of, 493, 495f
uid management for, 493b
preoperative assessment for, 485
Pulmonary system
aging, 646
anesthetic implications, 580
changes, 580
inhaled anesthetics and, 94, 95f
lung volumes, 580
minute ventilation, 580
oxygenation, 580
upper airway, 580
Pulmonary ultrasound, 391
interstitial and alveolar patterns, 
evolution of, 391, 393b, 395f
lung examination, 391, 392f
pleural space, evolution of, 392, 
395f
pneumothorax, evolution for, 391, 
393b, 394f
Pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR), 
56
lung volume and, relationship of, 
493f
Pulmonary vascular response, 57
Pulmonary vasoconstriction, in 
sympathetic nervous system, 57
Pulse oximetry, 353, 354f
calibration curve, 353–355, 355f
limitations of, 703
Pulse pressure, 52
Pulse pressure variation (PPV), 369, 
441–442
Pulse wave ultrasonography, 384
Pulseless arrest, 816
Pulseless cardiac arrest, resuscitation 
algorithm for, 817f
Pulseless electrical activity, 819
Puncture
of epidural anesthesia, 292f, 307
of spinal anesthesia, 302
Pupillary constriction, μ-agonists and, 
131
Pure antagonists, opioids, 136
PVR. See Pulmonary vascular 
resistance (PVR)
Pyloric stenosis, 631
P2Y12 receptor antagonists, 428
Pyridostigmine, usage of, 80
Q
QPP. See Quality Payment Program 
(QPP)
Quality Payment Program (QPP), 8
Quaternary ammonium compounds, 
163–165
“Quiet” sleep, 857
R
Radial nerve
block, 327f
injury to, 347
Radiation dose, monitoring of, 680
Radiation safety
issues, 680
practices, 680
Radiology suites, safety and concerns 
in, 680
Random-donor platelets, 449
Randomized controlled trials (RCTs), 
100
“Rapid-distribution” phase, 36–38
Rapid eye movement (REM) sleep, 856f, 
856
Rapid-sequence induction (RSI), 
225–226
Rapid-sequence induction and 
intubation (RSII), 521
Rapid shallow breathing index (RSBI), 
745–746
RBF. See Renal blood ow (RBF)
RCA. See Root cause analysis (RCA)
Rebreathing, 62
Receptors
agonists and, 42
G protein-coupled family of, 126
Recombinant factor VIIa (rFVIIa), 431, 
619
Recurrent laryngeal nerve, blockade, 
324
Recurrent PACU respiratory events, 870
Red blood cell (RBC), 420
Refeeding syndrome, 519
Refractory cardiac arrest, bupivacaine 
usage (association), 154–155
Regional analgesia, catheter 
techniques, single-shot 
techniques (contrast), 728
Regional anesthesia, 157, 221, 226, 469
cannula-based ophthalmic, 550
complications of, 550b
differential diagnosis of, 550t
of fractured hip, 570
hypotension and, 591
increased core temperature and, 591
techniques, 869
topical ophthalmic, 550
in total knee replacements, 573
Regional block checklist, 319
Regional block technique, 319f, 321
Relton frame, Mouradian/Simmons 
modication, 343
Remifentanil, 135
clinical pharmacology of, age and, 
134f
dosage of, calculation of, 
pharmacokinetic simulation of, 
134f
metabolic pathway of, 136f
obesity and, 47, 48f
usage, 585
Remimazolam, 118
obesity and, 47
REM sleep. See Rapid eye movement 
(REM) sleep
Renal blood ow (RBF), 498
aging, 647
autoregulation of, 499f
constant, 498–499
inuence in, 499
Pulmonary system (Continued)
Index
914
Renal changes, 582
Renal compensation, mechanisms of, 
403f
Renal cortical atrophy, 647
Renal disease, 420, 498, 665
drug clearance in, 500
preoperative evaluation, 206
Renal dysfunction, 509, 707b, 707
Renal effects
of neuraxial anesthesia, 295
slowness of, 402
Renal excretion, 617
Renal failure
factors, 509
implications of, 133
Renal function
evaluation of, tests for, 501t
humoral mediators of, 499
preoperative evaluation of, 501
tests, 501
Renal medulla, prostaglandins, 
production of, 499–500
Renal perfusion pressure, decrease in, 
499
Renal response, 402
Renal system, 616
aging, 647, 647f
inhaled anesthetics and, 95, 96f
Renal tubular cell, carbon dioxide/ 
water (combination) and, 402
Renal vascular dysautonomy, 647
Renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system 
(RAAS), 499, 647
Renin, proteolytic enzyme (secretion), 
499
Reperfusion syndrome, 666
Residual lung volume (RV), 580
Residual neuromuscular blockade, 
699b, 699, 869
Resilience, 19
Resistance, 52
Respiration, factors affecting, 613
Respiratory acidosis, 405
causes of, 405b
compensatory responses/treatment 
for, 405
Respiratory alkalosis, 405
causes of, 405b
compensatory responses/treatment 
for, 405
Respiratory depression, absence, 
ketamine (usage), 119
Respiratory effects, of neuraxial 
blockade, 295
Respiratory failure
in ICU, 741
identifying cause of, 67
Respiratory mechanics, 485
Respiratory process, determining, 
408b
Respiratory support, 743
Respiratory system
barbiturates, impact, 114
benzodiazepines, impact, 117
dexmedetomidine, impact, 122
etomidate, impact, 120
evaluation of, in obstructive sleep 
apnea, 482
ketamine, impact, 119
pediatric, 612
propofol, impact, 112
Respiratory variables, 613
Response surface models, 43–45
Responsiveness, 368
Restrictive blood policy, 450
Resuscitation team management, in 
ACLS, 814
Retained placenta, 600
Retina surgery, 550
Retinopathy of prematurity, 630
Retrobulbar block, 549
Retrograde endotracheal intubation, 
276
Reusable breathing circuits, 880
Reusable versus single-use equipment, 
880
Reusable versus single-use textiles, 880
Reverse Trendelenburg position, 339
Rhabdomyolysis, 709
Rheumatoid arthritis, 559
airway, changes in, 559
ankylosing spondylitis and, 563
atlantoaxial subluxation, 561
cervical spine, changes in, 559
as chronic inammatory disease, 559
odontoid, superior migration, 561
sites, involvement, 560f
subaxial subluxation, 561
systemic manifestations of, 560f
trachea in, 561
Rheumatologic disorders, 559
Rhythm generation, 65
RIFLE criteria, 748t
Right axilla, visualization, 327f
Right brachial plexus, roots/trunks/ 
divisions/cords/branches, 323f
Right-sided double-lumen tube, 
indications for, 489, 490b, 491f
Right-to-left shunts, 633
Right ventricular dysfunction, in COPD, 
480
Rigid ber-optic intubating stylets, 
275, 276f
Ritodrine (Yutopar), 77
Riva-Rocci technique, as arterial blood 
pressure measurement, 366, 
369t
Rivaroxaban, 205t
Robotic surgery, positioning for, 345
Rocuronium
average onset of maximal effect of, 
172f
in cesarean delivery, 594–595
chemical structure of, 164f
as intermediate-acting 
nondepolarizing neuromuscular 
blocking drug, 171
as monoquaternary aminosteroid 
nondepolarizing NMBD, 
171–172
as nondepolarizing NMBDs, 165
Root cause analysis (RCA), 836
Ropivacaine (levopropivacaine), 
143–144
chemical structures of, 145f
epidural use, 306
local anesthetic, 155
for spinal anesthesia, 301
Rosenthal syndrome, 419
Rotational thromboelastometry 
(ROTEM), 426
ROTEM. See Rotational 
thromboelastometry (ROTEM)
Routine preoperative tests, 209
Roux-en-Y gastric bypass, 517
RSBI. See Rapid shallow breathing 
index (RSBI)
RSI. See Rapid-sequence induction 
(RSI)
RV. See Residual lung volume (RV)
Ryanodine receptor 1 (RyR1), 98
S
Sacral canal, 292
“Saddle block,” spinal anesthesia and, 
299
Saline
epidural anesthesia and, 308
normal, 438
SAMBA. See Society for Ambulatory 
Anesthesia (SAMBA)
Sanders injector apparatus, 556f
Saphenous nerve block, 329, 329f
Saturated vapor pressure, 235
SAX, short-axis, 321f
SBP. See Systolic blood pressure (SBP)
Scavenging systems, 247, 248f, 251
SCh. See Succinylcholine (SCh)
SCI. See Spinal cord injury (SCI)
Sciatic nerve block, 330
posterior approach, 331f
SDB. See Sleep-disordered breathing 
(SDB)
Second gas effect, 88, 89f
Second victim, 25
Secondary hemostasis, 414
Secondary hyperparathyroidism, 525
Sedation increase, dexmedetomidine, 
77
Sedative-hypnotics, 66
Sedatives, 750t
obesity and, 47
Rocuronium (Continued)
Index
915
Seizure, activity, suppression, 118
Selective α-adrenergic receptor 
agonists, 76
Selective preoperative tests, 209–210, 
212t
Selective relaxant binding agents, 180
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors 
(SSRIs), 419
Selective spinal anesthesia, 304
Self-inating manual resuscitators, 
244, 244f
Sellick maneuver, 267, 268f
Sentinel events, 836b, 836
Sepsis, 739
Septic shock, 739
Sequential Organ Failure Assessment 
(SOFA), 736
Serotonin release assay (SRA), 423
Serum creatinine, 501
concentration of, 501
Severe acute respiratory syndrome 
coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), 
22–23
Sevourane, 83
Shared decision making, 762
palliative care and, 840
Shivering, 709
as neuraxial anesthesia complication, 
314
Shock
cardiogenic, 738
cardiovascular, 736
categories of, 737f
characteristics of, 736t
differential diagnosis of, 776t
distributive, 739
dopamine for, 74
etiologies of, 737f
hypovolemic, 737
neurogenic, 740
obstructive, 739
Short-acting α1 adrenoceptor 
antagonist, 527–528
Short-acting nondepolarizing 
neuromuscular blocking drugs, 
173
Short-axis (SAX), 321f
Shoulder dystocia, 596
Shunt
amount of, estimation of, 411
percentage, estimation of, 410f
SID. See Strong ion difference (SID)
Side-stream multigas analyzers, 242
Simulations, anesthesia care and, 16
Single enantiomer, local anesthetics, 
155
Single-ventricle lesions, 634
Sinus arrest, administration of SCh 
and, 166
Sinus bradycardia, SCh administration 
and, 166
Sinus surgery, 555
Sitting position, 344
beach chair position, 344
Mayeld rigid head pins, usage of, 
342f, 342–343
spinal anesthesia and, 308
surgery in, 569
Sleep
anesthesia and, 857
denition of, 855–856
functional neuroanatomy of, 857
physiology of, 855
Sleep-disordered breathing (SDB), 860
Sleep medicine and anesthesia, 855
arousal pathways and, 857, 859f
arousal states and, 857
functional neuroanatomy of sleep, 
857
general anesthesia and, 857
obstructive sleep apnea and, 860
sleep-disordered breathing or 
sleep-related breathing disorders 
and, 860
Sleep promoting center, 859–860
Sleep-related breathing disorders, 860
Sleep-related impairment, 23
Sleep state modulation, 859–860
Sleep study, 860
“Slow-distribution” phase, 36–38
Small intravenous catheter, placement/
securing, 334f
Smoking cessation, 486, 758, 758t
recommendations for, 759b
Snifng position, 260
SNS. See Sympathetic nervous system 
(SNS)
Societal level, clinician well-being, 22
Society for Ambulatory Anesthesia 
(SAMBA), 671
Society of Anesthesia and Sleep 
Medicine (SASM), 863
Society of Thoracic Surgeons (STS), 
Adult Cardiac Surgery Database, 
833
Sodium ions
channels, actions on local 
anesthetics, 144, 147f
outward transport, 144
self-sustaining inux, 144
Solubility, of inhaled anesthetics, 84–85, 
85f
Somatosensory evoked potentials 
(SSEPs), 377
loss of, surgically related conditions, 
566f
monitoring of, 565
sensory evoked potential waves, 
565–566
usage of, 346
Sore throat, after endotracheal 
extubation, 277
Sotalol, in cardiopulmonary 
resuscitation, 818t
Spare oxygen cylinder, anesthesia 
workstation, 250
SPIKES protocol, in palliative care, 
849b, 849
Spina bida, neuraxial anesthesia 
contraindication, 296
Spinal additives, spinal anesthesia and, 
301
Spinal anesthesia, 289
anatomic variations of, 293
anatomy and, 290
baricity and, 297
for cesarean delivery, 591
complications in, 311
continuous spinal anesthesia, 304
duration of block, 300, 300t
evidence, 290
factors affecting block height in, 
297, 298f, 299t–300t
indications for, 296
intermediate-acting local, 300
long-acting local, 301
mechanism of action of, 293
monitoring of block, 305
onset times of, 300t
opioids and, 301
paramedian approach in, 303, 304f
patient position in, 307
pharmacology of, 300, 300t
physiologic effects of, 295
practice of, 290
preparation in, 302
principles of, 289
prone position and, 310
selective spinal anesthesia, 304
short-acting local, 300
spinal anesthesia and, combined, 
309, 310f
spinal needle for, 302
technique for, 302
ultrasonography use in, 308
unilateral spinal anesthesia, 304
Spinal cord
anatomy of, 290, 290f
anesthetic-induced developmental 
neurotoxicity (AIDN) and, 187
blood supply in, 292, 294f
Spinal cord injury (SCI), trauma and, 
784
Spinal local anesthetic distribution, 
factors affecting, 299t
Spinal nerves, 292
Spinal stenosis, neuraxial anesthesia 
contraindication, 296
Spine, chronic pain, 795
lower back pain, 795
lumbar spinal stenosis, 799
lumbosacral radiculopathy, 799
lumbosacral spine pain, 796
Index
916
Spine, in oblique view, 290f
Spine surgery, 563
anesthetic technique, 564
awareness during, 564
blood conservation, 565
electromyograms, 567
intraoperative spinal cord 
monitoring, 565
neuraxial anesthesia 
contraindication, 296
positioning for, 565
transcranial motor evoked potentials, 
566
vision loss in, 568
wake-up test, 567
Spirometry, in chronic pulmonary 
disease, 478, 478f–479f
SPV. See Systolic pressure variation; 
Systolic pressure variation 
(SPV)
SSEPs. See Somatosensory evoked 
potentials; Somatosensory 
evoked potentials (SSEPs)
Stacking breaths, 359f
Stage N1 sleep, 856–857
Stage N2 sleep, 856–857
Stage N3 sleep, 856–857
Standby anesthesia, 222
Standing or ascending bellow 
ventilators, 245
Static properties, 64, 65f
Steady-state ventilation, 66
Stereoisomers, 155
Sterile water, baricity and, 297
Steroids, for asthma, 478
Stewart’s approach to acid-base 
equilibrium, 438–439, 440f
STOP-BANG questionnaire, 866, 
867b
Strabismus surgery, 551
Streptococcus viridans, spinal 
anesthesia and, 302
Streptokinase, 430
Stress ulcer prophylaxis, 749b
Stroke, 204–205
Stroke volume (SV), 52
Stroke volume variation, 370–371
Strong-base-containing absorbents, 
240
Strong ion difference (SID), 406–407
calculation of, 407f
Structural measures, in anesthesia care, 
833
Structured quality improvement 
programs, in anesthesia care, 
835
STS. See Society of Thoracic Surgeons 
(STS)
Stylets, 282
for endotracheal tube, 272
size of, 272t
Subarachnoid (or intrathecal) space, 
290–291
Subaxial subluxation, 561
Subclavian artery, 324f
Subcostal and inferior vena cava views
cardiac ultrasound, 388
image appearance and structures 
visualized, 389, 391f
image interpretation, 389
patient positioning, 388
probe position and manipulation, 
387f, 388–389
Subdural injection, complications 
unique to epidural anesthesia, 
314
Submandibular space, 259
Substance use disorders, 23, 674
Subtenon block, 551f
Succinylcholine (SCh), 160
adverse side effects of, 167b
in cesarean delivery, 594
chemical structure of, 164f
depolarization of, 165–166
as depolarizing neuromuscular 
blocking drug, 165
duration of action of, 166f, 167t
hydrolysis of, 166
pharmacodynamics, 165
Suction catheter, size of, 272t
Sufentanil, 135
Sugammadex, 180, 663
chemical structure of, 181f
Sugammadex-rocuronium complex, 
181f
Suicide, 24
Suicide mortality ratio (SMR), 24
Supercial cervical plexus block, 
needle placement for, 322f
Superior laryngeal nerve block, 274
Supine hypotension syndrome, 579
Supine patient, tilting, 338f, 338–339
Supine position, patient, 337, 338f
bed tilt, 338–339
complications of, 339
variations of, 338, 338f
Supplemental oxygen, 743
Supraclavicular block, 324
performing, 325
pneumothorax, 324–325
Supraglottic airways (SGAs), 263, 
264f
Supratentorial compartments, 532
Supreme LMA, 265, 265f
Surgery, 3
brutality of, 3
Surgical AVR (SAVR), 465
Surgical bleeding, risk of, 204t
Surgical Care Improvement Project, 
833
Surgical covenant, in palliative care, 
843
Surgical site (incision) inltration, 208, 
727
Surrogate decision makers, in palliative 
care, 850
Sustainable anesthesia practice, 
resources for, 881, 881t
SV. See Stroke volume (SV)
SVR. See Systemic vascular resistance 
(SVR)
Sympathetic activity, modulation of, 71
Sympathetic blockade, 804, 806f
Sympathetic nerves
stimulation, effector organ 
(responses), 75t
terminals, norepinephrine (release/ 
reuptake) at, 74f
Sympathetic nervous system (SNS), 55, 
69, 644–646
stimulation of, 499
Sympathetic neurotransmitters, 
synthesis of, 71
Symptom management consults, 842
Syndrome of inappropriate 
antidiuretic hormone secretion 
(SIADH), 529
Synthetic catecholamines, 74
Synthetic colloids, 441
Systemic approaches, well-being, 24
Systemic arterial blood pressure, 
monitoring, 51–52
Systemic hypertension, 704
Systemic hypotension, 704
Systemic therapy, 722
intravenous administration, 723
oral administration, 722
subcutaneous administration, 724
transmucosal administration, 724
Systemic vascular resistance (SVR), 52, 
94, 579
low, 54–55
neuraxial blockade and, 295
Systolic blood pressure (SBP), 52
Systolic pressure variation (SPV), 54, 
368–369, 371f, 441–442
T
Tachyarrhythmias, 528, 706
Tachycardia, 52–53, 815
resuscitation algorithm for, 816f
ventricular, 818
Tachyphylaxis, 76
Target-controlled infusion (TCI), 39
Target-controlled inhalational 
anesthesia, 247
Task-based simulators, anesthesia care 
and, 16
TCI. See Target-controlled infusion 
(TCI)
TCMEPs. See Transcranial motor 
evoked potentials (TCMEPs)
Teamwork, 19–20
Index
917
TEE. See Transesophageal 
echocardiography; 
Transesophageal 
echocardiography (TEE)
TEG. See Thromboelastography (TEG)
Temperature-compensated vaporizer, 
236
Teratogenic drugs, avoidance, 602
Terbutaline (Brethine, Bricanyl), 77
Terminal phase, 38
Tetracaine
for airway anesthesia, 274
chemical structures of, 145f
epidural use, 306
local anesthetic, 153
for spinal anesthesia, 301
TGA. See Transposition of the great 
arteries (TGA)
Thermal burns, 786
Thermodilution, 373
Thermoregulation, 623
Thiazide diuretics, 502
administration of, 502
Thienopyridines, 428
Thiopental
formulation, 114
intravenous injection, presence, 108f
structure of, 114f
Thoracic roots, cutaneous distribution, 
323f
Thoracic spinous processes, 291
Thoracic surgery, 485
Thoracic vertebra, 291f
Thoracoabdominal motion, 860
Thoracolumbar portion, of spinal cord, 
293f
Thoracotomy, posterolateral, 493–495
3-Desacetylpancuronium, 171
Threshold pressure, breathing circuit, 
242
Thrombin-activatable brinolysis 
inhibitor (TAFI), 420
Thrombin time (TT), 425
Thrombocytopenia, 207–208, 420
Thromboelastograph (TEG), 426
Thrombolytic therapy, 430
neuraxial anesthesia 
contraindication, 297
Thrombolytics, 430
Thrombomodulin (TM), 415
Thrombophilia, 422
Thromboprophylaxis, neuraxial 
anesthesia contraindication, 
297
Thrombotic disorders
acquired, 422
antiphospholipid syndrome, 422
heparin-induced 
thrombocytopenia, 423
inherited, 422
factor V Leiden, 422
protein C and protein S deciency, 
422
prothrombin gene mutation, 422
Thromboxane A2 (TxA2), 416
Thyroid disease, 524
Thyroid storm, 524
perioperative considerations, 525
thyroidectomy postoperative 
complications, 525
Thyroid surgery, 525, 557
Thyroidectomy, postoperative 
complications, 525
Thyromental/sternomental distance, 
260
Thyrotoxicosis. See Hyperthyroidism
Ticagrelor, 428
Time, debrillation, 813
Timed Up and Go (TUG) Test, 652b
Time-limited trials, in palliative care, 
849
TIPS. See Transjugular intrahepatic 
portosystemic shunt (TIPS)
Tissue absorbances, in pulse oximetry, 
354f
Tissue factor (TF), 417
Tissue factor pathway inhibitor (TFPI), 
415, 417–418
Tissue hypoxia, 406
Tissue penetration, local anesthetic 
lipid solubility (impact), 146
Tissue plasminogen activator (tPA), 
415, 430
TIVA. See Total intravenous anesthesia 
(TIVA)
TNS. See Transient neurologic 
symptoms (TNS)
TOF ratio (TOFR), 173
Tongue preparation, for awake 
exible endotracheal intubation, 
274
Tonsillectomy, 554
Topical ophthalmic regional anesthesia, 
550
Total body water, 437, 438f
Total clearance, 35
Total hip replacement, 572
methylmethacrylate cement (MMC), 
use in, 572
Total intravenous anesthesia (TIVA), 
100, 129, 879
Total joint replacement, 570
Total knee replacements, 572
complications of, 573
pain in, 572–573
postoperative pain in, 573
regional anesthesia use in, 573
and tourniquet use in, 572
Total lung capacity, 613, 647
Total parenteral nutrition (TPN), 
518–519
Toxicity and adverse events, inhaled 
anesthetics, 97
cancer recurrence and morbidity, 100
developmental neurotoxicity, 99
malignant hyperthermia, 98, 98f, 99t
postoperative cognitive dysfunction, 
100b, 100
postoperative nausea and vomiting, 
97, 97f
reactions with carbon dioxide 
absorbents, 101, 101t, 102f
Trachea, 256
preparation of, for awake exible 
endotracheal intubation, 274
rheumatoid arthritis and, 561
Tracheal extubation, in children and 
infants, 285
Tracheobronchial anatomy, 489
Tracheoesophageal stula, 628, 628f
Tracheotomies, 746
Training, in anesthesiology, 7
Train-of-four (TOF) stimulation, 
162
TRALI. See Transfusion-related acute 
lung injury (TRALI)
Tramadol, 136
Tranexamic acid (TXA), 431, 565
in orthopedics, 571, 571f
Transcapillary uid shifts, 437, 439f
Transcatheter aortic valve replacement 
(TAVR), 465
Transcranial motor evoked potentials 
(TCMEPs), 566
generation of, 566
monitoring of, 566
for spine surgical procedures, 346
waveform, loss of, 566
Transducer manipulation, 321
Transesophageal echocardiogram (TEE), 
462
Transesophageal echocardiography 
(TEE), 52
monitoring, 374
Transfusion indicators, monitoring for, 
450
Transfusion reactions, 453
Transfusion-related acute lung injury 
(TRALI), 452, 702
Transfusion-related fatalities, 451t
Transfusion-related 
immunomodulation, 452
Transfusion therapy, 618
Transient neurologic symptoms (TNS), 
312
pain/dysesthesia, relationship, 154
spinal lidocaine, relationship, 153
symptoms, 154
Transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic 
shunt (TIPS), 685
procedure, 685
Transport, trauma and, 774
Thrombotic disorders (Continued)
Index
918
Transposition of the great arteries 
(TGA), 633
Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE), 
in OSA, 864
Transtracheal block, 274
Transtracheal jet ventilation, 276
Transverse short-axis, 330
Transversus abdominis plane, 333f
block, 729
Trauma, 768
adjuncts and investigations, 774b, 
774
bay, 770
airway and oxygenation, 771
altered physiology, 771
anesthetic drug choices, 771
circulation and hemorrhage, 773
disability, 774b, 774
exposure, 774
failed endotracheal intubation 
drills, 773
fasting, 771
hemodynamic status, 771
laryngoscope, 772
management of, 771b, 771
manual in-line stabilization, 772, 
772f–773f
posttracheal intubation care, 773b, 
773
preoxygenation, 771
primary survey, 770, 771b
special groups, 773
decision making in, 775
denitive care and transport, 774
initial management, 770
intraoperative management, 776
in non-OR settings, 791
physiology in, 768
prearrival preparation, 770
patient-specic, 770b, 770
prearrival brieng, 770
universal/organization, 770
in pregnancy, 790
special considerations, 783
Trauma bay, 770
airway and oxygenation, 771
altered physiology, 771
anesthetic drug choices, 771
circulation and hemorrhage, 773
disability, 774b, 774
exposure, 774
failed endotracheal intubation drills, 
773
fasting, 771
hemodynamic status, 771
laryngoscope, 772
management of, 771b, 771
manual in-line stabilization, 772, 
772f–773f
posttracheal intubation care, 773b, 
773
preoxygenation, 771
primary survey, 770, 771b
special groups, 773
Trauma-induced coagulopathy (TIC), 
421, 769
Traumatic brain injury, trauma and, 
783, 785t
Traumatic eye injuries, 551
Trendelenburg position, 299, 
338–339
use of, 339
Triad of death, 769
Trigger points (TPs), 799
Trismus, 168
Trisomy 21, 282
Tsui test, 308
TTE. See Transthoracic 
echocardiography (TTE)
Tube insertion, ear surgery and, 554
Tuberculosis (TB), 269
Tuberomammillary nucleus, 859–860
Tuohy needles, 303f, 307
Turbine ventilators, 246
Two-pore potassium channels, 91
Type I reaction, 474
U
Ulcerative colitis (UC), 519
Ulnar nerve, 346
block, 327f
Ulnar neuropathy, 346
Ultrasonography use, in spinal 
anesthesia, 308
Ultrasound, 320
physics, review of, 383
transducer, 319f, 321
Ultrasound transducers, 384, 385t, 
386f
Uncontrolled hemorrhage, 421
Uncuffed endotracheal tubes, 282
Unfractionated heparin (UFH), 429
Unidirectional valves, circle breathing 
system, 239
Unilateral spinal anesthesia, 304
Unique LMA, 264t, 265
Upper airway abnormalities, in 
obstructive sleep apnea, 483
Upper airway collapsibility and 
patency, in OSA, 860, 861f
Upper airway, functional anatomy of, 
256f
Upper airway obstruction, 698
airway edema in, 700
hematoma, 700
laryngospasm in, 700
loss of pharyngeal muscle tone in, 
698
obstructive sleep apnea in, 700
residual neuromuscular blockade in, 
699
Upper extremity
blocks, 322
cervical/thoracic roots, cutaneous 
distribution, 323f
nerves, 347
regional analgesia, 728
Upper lip bite test (ULBT) classication 
system, 259
Upper respiratory infections (URIs), 553
Upper respiratory tract infection, 622
Uptake and distribution in body, 
inhaled anesthetics, 85
anesthetic circuit, 85
concentration and second gas 
effects, 88, 89f
gas exchange, 87, 88f
partition coefcients, 85, 87f
vaporizers, 85, 86f
Uremia, 420, 503
aspiration risk, increase, 505
Uremic toxins, accumulation of, 503
Urinary retention, as neuraxial 
anesthesia complication, 314
Urinary tract infections, 
catheter-associated, 748
Urine
drugs/metabolites in, excretion of, 
500–501
indices, 502
URIs. See Upper respiratory infections 
(URIs)
Uterine atony, 600
Uterine blood ow, 582
Uterine rupture, 599, 791
Uteroplacental circulation
fetal uptake, 583
physiology of, 582
placental exchange, 582
uterine blood ow, 582
V
VAE. See Venous air embolism (VAE)
Vagal stimulation, 55
Value-based care, anesthesiology, 8, 
9f, 9t
Value-based payment models, 8
Valvular heart disease, 463
aortic regurgitation, 465
management of anesthesia, 465
aortic stenosis, 464
management of anesthesia, 465b, 
465
management of anesthesia, 465
mitral regurgitation, 464
management of anesthesia, 464b, 
464
mitral stenosis, 463
management of anesthesia, 464b, 
464
V˙ o2 See Oxygen consumption (V˙ o2)
Vapor pressure, 84, 235f, 235
Trauma bay (Continued)
Index
919
Vaporizer mount and interlock system, 
anesthesia workstation, 234
Vaporizers, 85, 86f, 250
Variable bypass vaporizers, 236, 237f
Vascular bed, perfusion pressure of, 56
Vascular endothelial, in hemostasis, 
415
Vascular systems, autonomic nervous 
system in, 55
Vasoconstriction, hypertension and, 52
Vasoconstrictors
as epidural additives, 306
local anesthetics, impact, 148–151
as spinal additives, 302
Vasodilation, occurrence, 111–112
Vasopressin
adult advanced cardiovascular life 
support, 820
for pulmonary hypertension, 
484–485
VDS. See Dead space volume (VDS)
Vecuronium
chemical structure of, 164f
as intermediate-acting 
nondepolarizing neuromuscular 
blocking drug, 171
as nondepolarizing NMBDs, 165
Venodilation, 54
Venous admixture, 60, 61f–62f
increased, 702
Venous air embolism (VAE), 344, 541
Venous oxygen saturation, 61
Venous system, pressures in, 56t
Venous thromboembolisms (VTEs), 422, 
749
Venovenous bypass, 665–666
Ventilating pressure or volume, 
changes in, as thoracotomy 
complication, 493t
Ventilation, 355, 402, 409
depression of, opioids and, 131f
via face mask, 261
difculty, variables associated, 
261–262
Ventilation-perfusion (V˙ /Q˙ ) mismatch, 
61, 702
increase, 410
Ventilation-perfusion scintigraphy, 486
Ventilator pressure time curves, 358f
Ventilator settings, anesthesia 
workstation, 252
Ventilatory control, disorders of, 67
Ventilatory response, 402
alteration, μ-agonists and, 131
Ventral decubitus position, 342f, 342
Ventral (efferent) nerve roots, 292f, 292
Ventricles, innervation of, 55
Ventricular assist devices, 739
Ventricular compliance curves, 53f, 53
Ventricular brillation, 818
Ventricular tachycardia, 818
Ventrolateral medullary surface, 
supercial areas on, 65
Verapamil, in cardiopulmonary 
resuscitation, 818t
Vertebral column, 291f
Vigilance, intraoperative anesthetic 
and, 13–14
Viscoelastic measures of coagulation, 
426, 426f–427f
Viscoelastic testing, trauma and, 780, 
781f–782f
Vision loss, 568
Visual loss, 348
registry, ASA establishment, 349
Vitamin C, 758
Vitamin D, 758
Vitamin K antagonists (VKAs), 202, 
429, 432, 432t
Vitamin K deciency, 419
VKA warfarin, 202–203
Volatile anesthetic-induced hepatic 
dysfunction, 509
Volatile anesthetics, 83
aging, 649
cardiovascular system, 94
cerebral blood ow, 94
immune response, 100
minimum alveolar concentration 
(MAC), 520
reduction in, 133f
neural network and, 92
neuromuscular function, 96
nitrous oxide and, 88
partial pressure of, 84
potencies, 88
pulmonary system, 94
vaporizers for, 85, 86f
voltage-gated ion channels, 91
Volatile liquids, 235
Volatility, 83
Voltage-gated ion channels, 91
Voltage-gated sodium and calcium 
channels, 91
Volume, local anesthetics, spinal block 
height and, 299
Volume of distribution, 32, 32f–35f, 
Volume percent, 235
Volume reector, 246
Volume responsiveness, 54
von Willebrand disease (vWD), 418, 
419t, 421
von Willebrand factor (vWF), 416, 418
VTEs. See Venous thromboembolisms 
(VTEs)
W
Wakefulness promoting centers, 
859–860
Wakefulness (stage W), sleep and, 
856–857
Wake-up test, 567
Warfarin, 429
Warren, John C., 82
Waste, 880
Waste anesthetic gas scavenging 
systems, 879
Waste anesthetic gases, 247
Wasted ventilation, 63
Water, 437
Well-being, 19
Wellness, 19
Wellness-centered leadership (WCL), 26
Wells, Horace, 82–83
West’s zones, of lung, 57
Wheezing, in COPD, 481
Whole-blood processing, 446, 446f
Wilson frame, 343
prone position with, 342f
Wrong-sided block, 320
X
X descent, 372f
Xenon, 85
Xylidine, lidocaine derivation, 143–144
Y
Y descent, 372f
“Yellow ligament.” See Ligamentum 
avum
Yohimbine, 78
Y-piece, circle breathing system, 239
Z
Zygapophyseal joint, 799
Evidence-based answers, continually updated
Conf idence
is ClinicalKey
The latest answers, always at your ngertips 
A subscription to ClinicalKey draws content from
countless procedural videos, peer-reviewed journals,
patient education materials, and books authored by
the most respected names in medicine.
Your patients trust you. You can trust ClinicalKey.
Equip yourself with trusted, current content that provides you with 
the clinical knowledge to improve patient outcomes.
Get to know ClinicalKey at store.clinicalkey.com.
2019v1.0
