CONTRIBUTORS
Meredith C.B. Adams, MD
Assistant Professor, Departments of Anesthesiology,
Psychiatry, and Neurology, University of Florida;
Section Chief, Pain Medicine, North Florida/South
Georgia Veterans Health System, Gainesville,
Florida
Dean B. Andropoulos, MD, MHCM
Chief of Anesthesiology, Department of Pediatric
Anesthesiology, Texas Children’s Hospital; Professor,
Department of Anesthesiology and Pediatrics, Baylor
College of Medicine, Houston, Texas
Sheila R. Barnett, MD
Associate Professor of Anesthesiology, Harvard Medical
School, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston,
Massachusetts
Luca M. Bigatello, MD
Director, Surgical Critical Care, Department of
Anesthesiology and Pain Medicine, St. Elizabeth’s
Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts
Thomas J.J. Blanck, MD, PhD
Professor and Chairman, Department of Anesthesiology,
Professor of Physiology and Neuroscience, New York
University Langone Medical Center, New York,
New York
Lundy Campbell, MD
Associate Clinical Professor, Department of Anesthesia
and Perioperative Care, University of California,
San Francisco, School of Medicine, San Francisco,
California
Lydia Cassorla, MD
Professor, Department of Anesthesia and Perioperative
Care, University of California, San Francisco, School of
Medicine, San Francisco, California
Daniel Cole, MD
Professor of Anesthesiology, College of Medicine Mayo
Clinic; Chair, Department of Anesthesiology, Mayo Clinic
Arizona, Phoenix, Arizona
Adam Collins, MD
Associate Professor, Department of Anesthesia and
Perioperative Care, University of California,
San Francisco, School of Medicine, San Francisco,
California
Anil de Silva, MD
Professor, Department of Anesthesia and Perioperative
Care, University of California, San Francisco, School
of Medicine, San Francisco, California
Ken Drasner, MD
Professor of Clinical Anesthesia, Department of
Anesthesia and Perioperative Care, University of
California, San Francisco, School of Medicine,
San Francisco, California
Helge Eilers, MD
Associate Professor, Department of Anesthesia and
Perioperative Care, University of California,
San Francisco, School of Medicine, San Francisco,
California
John Feiner, MD
Professor, Department of Anesthesia and Perioperative
Care, University of California, San Francisco, School of
Medicine, San Francisco, California
Alana Flexman, MD
Clinical Assistant Professor, Department of Anesthesia
and Perioperative Care, University of California,
San Francisco, School of Medicine, San Francisco,
California
Charles J. Fox, MD
Vice Chair for Academics, Department of Anesthesiology,
Tulane University Medical Center, New Orleans,
Louisiana
William R. Furman, MD
Professor of Anesthesiology and Surgery, Vice Chair for
Clinical Affairs, Department of Anesthesiology,
Vanderbilt University School of Medicine; Executive
Medical Director, Perioperative Services, Vanderbilt
University Hospital, Nashville, Tennessee
v

Steven Gayer, MD, MBA
Professor, Department of Anesthesiology and
Ophthalmology, The Bascom Palmer Eye Institute,
University of Miami School of Medicine, Miami, Florida
David B. Glick, MD, MBA
Associate Professor, Department of Anesthesia and
Critical Care, University of Chicago; Medical Director,
Pre- and Post-Anesthesia Care Units, University of
Chicago, Chicago, Illinois
Erin A. Gottlieb, MD
Assistant Professor, Department of Pediatrics and
Anesthesiology, Baylor College of Medicine; Attending
Anesthesiologist, Division of Pediatric Cardiovascular
Anesthesiology, Texas Children’s Hospital, Houston, Texas
Tula Gourdin, MBA
Analyst, Department of Anesthesia and Perioperative
Care, University of California, San Francisco, School
of Medicine, San Francisco, California
Michael A. Gropper, MD, PhD
Professor and Executive Vice Chairman, Department
of Anesthesia and Perioperative Care, University of
California, San Francisco; Director, Critical Care
Medicine, University of California, San Francisco Medical
Center, San Francisco, California
Jennifer E. Hofer, MD
Assistant Professor, Department of Anesthesia and
Critical Care, The University of Chicago Medical
Center, Chicago, Illinois
Robert W. Hurley, MD, PhD
Associate Professor, Departments of Anesthesiology,
Neurology, Orthopaedics and Rehabilitation, and
Psychiatry, University of Florida; Chief of Pain Medicine,
College of Medicine, University of Florida; Medical
Director, University of Florida Pain and Spine Center,
Gainesville, Florida
Steve Hyman, MD, MM
Associate Professor of Clinical Anesthesiology,
Department of Anesthesiology, Vanderbilt University
School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee
Alan David Kaye, MD, PhD
Professor and Chairman, Department of Anesthesiology,
Professor, Department of Pharmacology, Louisiana State
University School of Medicine-New Orleans, New
Orleans, Louisiana
Jae-Woo Lee, MD
Associate Professor in Residence, Department of
Anesthesiology and Perioperative Care, University of
California, San Francisco, School of Medicine, San
Francisco, California
Eric Y. Lin, MD
Assistant Professor, Department of Anesthesia and
Perioperative Care, University of California,
San Francisco, School of Medicine, San Francisco,
California
Lawrence Litt, PhD, MD
Emeritus Professor, Departments of Anesthesia and
Perioperative Care, and Radiology, University of
California, San Francisco, School of Medicine,
San Francisco, California
Henry Liu, MD
Associate Professor of Anesthesiology, Director of
Cardiothoracic and Vascular Anesthesia, Tulane
University Medical Center, New Orleans, Louisiana
Linda Liu, MD
Professor, Department of Anesthesia and Perioperative
Care, University of California, San Francisco, School of
Medicine, San Francisco, California
Jennifer Lucero, MD
Assistant Professor, Department of Anesthesia and
PerioperativeCare, University of California, San Francisco,
School of Medicine, San Francisco, California
Anuj Malhotra, MD
Pain Management Fellow, Department of Anesthesia,
Stanford University, Palo Alto, California
Vinod Malhotra, MD
Professor, Department of Anesthesiology and Urology,
Vice Chair for Clinical Affairs, Clinical Director of the
Operating Rooms, Weill Cornell Medical College and
Medical Center, New York, New York
Rachel Eshima McKay, MD
Clinical Professor, Department of Anesthesia and
Perioperative Care, University of California,
San Francisco, School of Medicine, San Francisco,
California
Pankaj Mehta, MD
Faculty of Interventional Pain Medicine, Cleveland Clinic
Foundation, Cleveland, Ohio
Douglas G. Merrill, MD, MBA
Professor of Anesthesiology, Dartmouth Medical School;
Director, The Center for Perioperative Services; Medical
Director, Outpatient Surgery, Dartmouth-Hitchcock
Medical Center, Lebanon, New Hampshire
Ronald D. Miller, MD
Professor, Department of Anesthesia and Perioperative
Care, University of California, San Francisco, School
of Medicine, San Francisco, California
vi
Contributors
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
Theodora K. Nicholau, PhD, MD
Clinical Professor, Department of Anesthesia and
Perioperative Care, University of California, San Francisco,
School of Medicine, San Francisco, California
Howard D. Palte, MBChB, FCA(SA)
Assistant Professor, Department of Anesthesiology,
University of Miami, Miami, Florida
Anup Pamnani, MD
Assistant Professor, Department of Anesthesiology, Weill
Cornell Medical College, New York, New York
Siamak Rahman, MD
Associate Clinical Professor, Department of
Anesthesiology, University of California, Los Angeles,
Los Angeles, California
James P. Rathmell, MD
Professor of Anesthesia, Harvard Medical School; Vice
Chair and Chief, Division of Pain Medicine, Department
of Anesthesia, Critical Care, and Pain Medicine,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts
Mark Rollins, MD, PhD
Associate Professor, Department of Anesthesia and
Perioperative Care, University of California, San Francisco,
School of Medicine, San Francisco, California
Andrew D. Rosenberg, MD
Chief, Department of Anesthesiology, New York
University Hospital For Joint Diseases; Executive Vice-
Chair, Department of Anesthesiology, New York
University School of Medicine, New York, New York
Patricia Roth, MD
Professor, Department of Anesthesia and Perioperative
Care, University of California, San Francisco, School of
Medicine, San Francisco, California
Isobel A. Russell, MD, PhD, FACC
Professor, Department of Anesthesia and Perioperative
Care, University of California, San Francisco, School of
Medicine; Chief, Cardiac Anesthesia Services, University
of California, San Francisco Medical Center,
San Francisco, California
David Shimabukuro, MDCM
Associate Professor, Department of Anesthesia and
Perioperative Care, University of California,
San Francisco, School of Medicine, San Francisco,
California
Randolph H. Steadman, MD
Professor and Vice Chair, Department of Anesthesiology,
David Geffen School of Medicine at University of
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California
Greg Stratmann, MD, PhD
Associate Professor, Department of Anesthesia and
Perioperative Care, University of California,
San Francisco, School of Medicine, San Francisco,
California
Bobbie Jean Sweitzer, MD
Professor, Departments of Anesthesiology and Critical
Care and Medicine, University of Chicago; Director,
Anesthesia Perioperative Medicine Clinic, University
of Chicago Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois
Pekka Talke, MD
Professor, Chief of Neuroanesthesia, Department of
Anesthesia and Perioperative Care, University of
California, San Francisco, School of Medicine,
San Francisco, California
Arthur W. Wallace, MD, PhD
Professor in Residence and Vice Chair, Department
of Anesthesia and Perioperative Care, University
of California, San Francisco, School of Medicine; Chief of
Anesthesia, Veterans Affairs Medical Center,
San Francisco, California
Jeffrey D. Wilkinson, MD
South County Anesthesia Associates; Chairman, Quality
Committee of the Board, St. Anthony’s Medical Center,
St. Louis, Missouri
Victor W. Xia, MD
Associate Clinical Professor, Department of
Anesthesiology, David Geffen School of Medicine at
University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles,
California
vii
Contributors
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
PREFACE
As with all medical disciplines, the practice of anesthesia
requires a solid knowledge base as well as clinical
competence. There are many textbooks that provide the
student of anesthesiology with the information needed to
practice anesthesia. What was lacking was a book that
allowed students at every level to actively participate in
their learning. This study guide lets the reader evaluate
his or her own knowledge and formulate answers alone
or in groups, and it provides an alternate means of study
of the information.
The format of the book is question and answer. It is
organized in a logical progression from basic anesthesia
principles and concepts to more complex issues. These
include the delivery of anesthesia in various settings and
the administration of anesthesia to patients with organ
system dysfunction and disease states. All the answers
are current, fully formed, and self-explanatory, and
the page number references provided at the end of each
question refer the reader to the Basics of Anesthesia,
Sixth Edition, text where further information on the
given topic can be found.
There are several ways this study guide can be used.
The first-year anesthesia resident may use it to solidify
information read. Anesthesia residents at every level
may use it to prepare for specific clinical applications
that they may face on a subspecialty rotation or with
given cases. Anesthesia residents can also use this study
guide for group study in which they will be required
to verbalize answers to questions on given topics.
Similarly, faculty may use the study guide to quiz
residents orally in a coherent, progressive manner in
formal or informal settings. This question and answer
book can be used for self-study for Board examinations,
which may be particularly useful to the anesthesiologist
who is in practice and is required to register with the
ABA MOCA program for recertification every 10 years.
Finally, anesthesiologists in practice may find the study
guide useful to refresh their knowledge base and review
old and new information that they may not have been
taught during their residencies. The multiple uses of
this study guide make it an appropriate choice for
students, teachers, and clinicians of anesthesiology at
every level.
Lorraine M. Sdrales
Ronald D. Miller
ix
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
CONTENTS
1
Scope of Anesthesia Practice
1
Ronald D. Miller, Tula Gourdin
2
Basic Pharmacologic Principles
7
Jeffrey D. Wilkinson
3
Clinical Cardiac and Pulmonary Physiology
16
John Feiner
4
Autonomic Nervous System
29
David B. Glick
5
Inhaled Anesthetics
40
Rachel Eshima McKay
6
Intravenous Anesthetics
51
Helge Eilers
7
Opioids
64
Siamak Rahman
8
Local Anesthetics
73
Ken Drasner
9
Neuromuscular Blocking Drugs
84
Ronald D. Miller, Tula Gourdin
10
Preoperative Evaluation and Medication
102
Jennifer E. Hofer, Bobbie Jean Sweitzer
11
Choice of Anesthetic Technique
117
Ronald D. Miller, Tula Gourdin
12
Anesthesia Delivery Systems
123
Patricia Roth
13
Airway Management
140
Patricia Roth
14
Spinal and Epidural Anesthesia
155
Ken Drasner
15
Peripheral Nerve Blocks
175
Adam Collins
16
Patient Positioning and Associated Risks
183
Jae-Woo Lee, Lydia Cassorla
17
Anesthetic Monitoring
193
Anil de Silva
18
Acid-Base Balance and Blood Gas Analysis
202
Linda Liu
19
Hemostasis
209
Greg Stratmann
20
Fluid Management
226
Charles J. Fox, Henry Liu, Alan David Kaye
21
Blood Therapy
231
Ronald D. Miller, Tula Gourdin
22
Cardiovascular Disease
241
Arthur W. Wallace
23
Congenital Heart Disease
275
Isobel A. Russell
24
Chronic Pulmonary Disease
283
Luca M. Bigatello
xi
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
25
Renal, Liver, and Biliary Tract Disease
297
Anup Pamnani, Vinod Malhotra
26
Nutritional and Gastrointestinal Disease
310
Steve Hyman, William R. Furman
27
Central Nervous System Disease
324
Alana Flexman, Pekka Talke
28
Ophthalmology and Otolaryngology
337
Steven Gayer, Howard D. Palte
29
Orthopedics
349
Andrew D. Rosenberg, Thomas J. J. Blanck
30
Obstetrics
363
Mark Rollins, Jennifer Lucero
31
Pediatrics
387
Erin A. Gottlieb, Dean B. Andropoulos
32
Elderly Patients
407
Sheila R. Barnett
33
Organ Transplantation
419
Randolph H. Steadman, Victor W. Xia
34
Outpatient Anesthesia
426
Douglas G. Merrill
35
Procedures Performed Outside the
Operating Room
431
Lawrence Litt
36
Postanesthesia Recovery
440
Theodora K. Nicholau
37
Perioperative Pain Management
450
Meredith C.B. Adams, Robert W. Hurley
38
Critical Care Medicine
458
Lundy Campbell, Michael A. Gropper
39
Trauma, Bioterrorism, and Natural Disasters 469
Eric Y. Lin
40
Chronic Pain Management
480
Pankaj Mehta, James P. Rathmell
41
Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation
492
David Shimabukuro
42
Awareness Under Anesthesia
501
Daniel Cole
43
Quality of Care and Patient Safety
505
Anuj Malhotra, Vinod Malhotra
xii
Contents
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
Chapter
1 SCOPE OF ANESTHESIA
PRACTICE
Ronald D. Miller, Tula Gourdin
INTRODUCTION
1. When did the specialty of anesthesiology become recognized?
2. Initially, how was anesthesia primarily used and how did it evolve?
3. Name the two medical organizations whose approval allowed anesthesia to be
recognized as a medical specialty.
DEFINITION OF
ANESTHESIOLOGY
AS A SPECIALTY
4. Besides monitoring and maintenance of normal physiology during the perioperative
period, what are some of the areas that define the practice of anesthesia?
5. Name some of the organizations that comprise the American system of
anesthesiology.
EVOLUTION
OF ANESTHESIA AS A
MULTIDISCIPLINARY
MEDICAL SPECIALTY
6. Name the four subspecialties of anesthesiology that require an additional
certification process from the American Board of Anesthesiology (ABA).
7. In pain management, anesthesiologists are usually part of a multidisciplinary team.
Name some of the other specialties that provide services that support pain
management.
8. Describe an open versus a closed critical care unit.
9. Which other anesthesia subspecialties are evolving toward a separate certification
process?
10. What factor dictates whether some institutions have subspecialized anesthesia
teams? Give an example of two such teams.
PERIOPERATIVE
PATIENT CARE
11. What services are included in perioperative care?
12. What was the impetus behind the creation of preoperative clinics and who generally
manages these?
13. Describe the standard perioperative pathway.
14. What is throughput?
TRAINING AND
CERTIFICATION IN
ANESTHESIOLOGY
15. What subspecialties are studied in the clinical anesthesia postgraduate training
years (years 1 to 3)?
16. Describe the fundamental steps that lead to being a “board-certified anesthesiologist.”
17. What is the emphasis of the Maintenance of Certification in Anesthesiology (MOCA)?
18. What are other anesthesia specialties that the ABA certifies?
19. Name the three new professional performance concepts developed by the
Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education and the American Board of
Medical Specialties.
1
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
OTHER ANESTHETIC
PROVIDERS
20. What are the training differences between a certified registered nurse anesthetist
and an anesthesiologist assistant?
QUALITY OF CARE
AND SAFETY IN
ANESTHESIA
21. The Joint Commission provides quality improvement guidelines in anesthesia for
health care organizations. What three fundamental areas do these guidelines
address?
22. Continuous quality improvement (CQI) programs may focus on both critical
incidents and sentinel events. Describe critical incidents versus sentinel events.
23. What are some of the key factors in preventing patient injuries related to anesthesia?
24. Provide two examples of Patient Safety Practices and the Suggested Penalties for
FailuretoAdheretothePracticeaspublishedintheNewEnglandJournalofMedicine.
ORGANIZATIONS
WITH EMPHASIS
ON ANESTHESIA
AND SAFETY
25. Anesthesia has the distinction of being the only specialty in medicine with a
foundation dedicated to issues of safety in patient care. Name the foundation.
26. Which organization provides a retrospective database of patient and safety data that
can be used to assess and improve patient care?
27. Which organization investigates legal cases as a vehicle for identifying patient and
practice areas of risk?
28. Name the foundation that provides research support in anesthesia.
PROFESSIONAL
LIABILITY
29. This chapter states that 93 claims were filed in the United Kingdom in the years 1995
to 2007. What two areas of patient care and safety did these claims emphasize?
30. What is the anesthesiologist’s best protection against medicolegal action?
31. What actions should the anesthesiologist take in the event of an accident?
RISKS OF
ANESTHESIA
32. What is the estimated mortality rate from anesthesia?
33. What are some of the factors that have contributed to the decrease in anesthesia-
related deaths?
34. What is the anesthesiologist’s greatest anesthesia patient safety issue?
35. Vigilance accounts for a large proportion of avoidance of adverse anesthesia events.
What are some of the factors in the operating room environment that diminish the
anesthesiologist’s ability to perform the task of vigilance?
HAZARDS OF
WORKING IN THE
OPERATING ROOM
36. Name some of the most prevalent hazards encountered in the operating room?
SUMMARY AND
FUTURE OUTLOOK
37. Anesthesiology is constantly evolving and changing. Describe some of the changes
the specialty has undergone and the direction it is moving toward.
ANSWERS*
INTRODUCTION
1. In the early 19th century, the concept of providing analgesia and eventually
anesthesia became increasingly possible. (11)
*Numbers in parentheses: numbers refer to pages, figures, or tables in Miller RD, Pardo MC: Basics of Anesthesia,
6th ed. Philadelphia, Elsevier Saunders, 2011.
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
2
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
2. The major emphasis was initially on surgical anesthesia, which evolved into airway
management including endotracheal intubation, which led to the development of
critical care medicine, regional anesthesia, and pain medicine. (11)
3. The two organizations whose approval allowed anesthesia to be recognized as a
medical specialty are the American Medical Association and the American Board
of Medical Specialties. (11)
DEFINITION OF
ANESTHESIOLOGY
AS A SPECIALTY
4. The American Board of Anesthesiology defines anesthesiology as a discipline within
the practice of medicine that deals with:
a.
Assessment of, consultation for, and preparation of patients for anesthesia.
b.
Relief and prevention of pain during and following surgical, obstetric,
therapeutic, and diagnostic procedures.
c.
Monitoring and maintenance of normal physiology during the perioperative
period.
d.
Management of critically ill patients.
e.
Diagnosis and treatment of acute, chronic, and cancer-related pain.
f.
Clinical management and teaching of cardiac and pulmonary resuscitation.
g.
Evaluation of respiratory function and application of respiratory therapy.
h.
Conduct of clinical, translational, and basic science research.
i.
Supervision, teaching, and evaluation of performance of both medical and
paramedical personnel involved in perioperative care.
j.
Administrative involvement in health care facilities and organizations, and
medical schools necessary to implement these responsibilities. (11-12)
5. As with other medical specialties, anesthesiology is represented by professional
societies (American Society of Anesthesiologists, International Anesthesia Research
Society), scientific journals (Anesthesiology, Anesthesia and Analgesia), a residency
review committee with delegated authority from the Accreditation Council for
Graduate Medical Education to establish and ensure compliance of anesthesia
residency training programs with published standards, and a medical specialty
board, the American Board of Anesthesiology, which establishes criteria for
becoming a certified specialist in anesthesiology. Other countries have comparable
systems of training and certifying mechanisms. (12)
EVOLUTION OF
ANESTHESIA AS A
MULTIDISCIPLINARY
MEDICAL SPECIALTY
6. In addition to board certification in anesthesiology, the American Board of
Anesthesiology has an additional certification process for pain management,
critical care medicine, hospice and palliative medicine, and sleep medicine. (12)
7. Many other supportive services are involved in the pain management specialty of
anesthesia, including neurology, medicine, psychiatry, and physical therapy. (12)
8. Regarding critical care units, usually a “closed” system means that full-time critical
care physicians take care of the patients. An “open” system means that the patient’s
attendingphysician continues to provide the care in the intensive care unit (ICU). (12)
9. The American Board of Pediatrics and the American Board of Anesthesiology have
commenced a combined integrated training program in both pediatrics and
anesthesiology that would take 5 years instead of the traditional 6. In addition,
cardiac anesthesiologists who now serve both pediatric and adult cardiac patients
may move toward a separate certification process. (12)
10. Institutional patient volume in a given specialty often dictates whether only
subspecialized anesthesia teams can administer anesthesia to these patients. Two
examples may be obstetric or neurosurgical anesthesia teams. (13)
PERIOPERATIVE
PATIENT CARE
11. Preoperative care includes preoperative evaluation, preparation in the immediate
preoperative period, intraoperative care, postanesthesia care unit (PACU), acute
postoperative pain management, and possibly the ICU. (13)
Scope of Anesthesia Practice
3
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
12. Initially preoperative clinics were formed when patients were no longer admitted to
the hospital the day before surgery. Also the increased complexity of patient
medical risks and surgical procedures prompted the creation of preoperative clinics
that allowed patients to be evaluated before the day of surgery. These clinics should
be multidisciplinary and lead by anesthesia. (13)
13. The pathway includes preoperative evaluation, the accuracy of predicting length
and complexity of surgical care, and patient flow in and out of PACUs. (13)
14. Throughput is the term used to describe the efficiency of each patient’s perioperative
experience. This can be influenced by such things as operating room availability,
length of surgery scheduling times, availability of beds in the PACU, and many
other issues. At some institutions perioperative or operating room directors are
appointed to manage this perioperative process. (13)
TRAINING AND
CERTIFICATION IN
ANESTHESIOLOGY
15. All aspects of clinical anesthesia are covered in postgraduate training for anesthesia,
including obstetric, pediatric, cardiothoracic, neuroanesthesia, anesthesia for
outpatient surgery, recovery room care, regional anesthesia and pain management,
as well as training in critical care medicine. (13)
16. To become a certified diplomate of the American Board of Anesthesiology, one must
complete an accredited postgraduate training program, pass a written and oral
examination, and meet licensure and credentialing requirements. (14)
17. MOCA emphasizes continuous self-improvement and evaluation of clinical skills
and practice performance to ensure quality and public accountability. In 2000,
board certification became a 10-year, time-limited certificate that emphasizes
participation in MOCA. (14)
18. Pain Management, Critical Care Medicine, Hospice and Palliative Medicine, and
Sleep Medicine are issued to diplomats who have completed 1 year of additional
postgraduate training in the respective subspecialty, meet licensure and
credentialing requirements, and pass a written examination. (14)
19. Evaluation of a clinician’s professional performance now includes data regarding
General Competences, Focused Professional Practice Evaluation, and Ongoing
Professional Practice Evaluation. (14)
OTHER ANESTHETIC
PROVIDERS
20. The certified registered nurse anesthetist (CRNA) must first be a registered nurse,
spend 1 year as a critical care nurse, and then complete 2 to 3 years of didactic and
clinical training in the techniques of administration of anesthetics in an approved
nursing training program. The anesthesiologist assistant completes a graduate level
27-month program leading to a master of science degree in anesthesia. (14-15)
QUALITY OF CARE
AND SAFETY IN
ANESTHESIA
21. The Joint Commission guidelines evaluate quality of care based on the measurement
and improvement of these areas:
a.
Structure (personnel and facilities used to provide care)
b.
Process (sequence and coordination of patient care activities such as
performance and documentation of a preanesthetic evaluation, and continuous
attendance to and monitoring of the patient during anesthesia)
c.
Outcome (15)
22. Critical incidents (e.g., ventilator disconnection) are events that cause or have the
potential to cause injury if not noticed and corrected in a timely manner.
Measurement of the occurrence rate of important critical incidents may serve as a
substitute for rare outcomes in anesthesia and lead to improvement in patient safety.
Sentinel events are isolated events that may indicate a systematic problem
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
4
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
(e.g., syringe swap because of poor labeling, drug administration error related to
keeping unneeded medications on the anesthetic cart). (15)
23. Some key factors for the prevention of patient injury in anesthesia are vigilance,
up-to-date knowledge, and adequate monitoring. (15)
24. The following examples of patient safety practices and suggested penalties are from
Table 2-1, page 16. The Patient Safety Practice is listed first, followed by the
suggested initial penalty.
a.
Practice hand hygiene.
i.
Initial penalty: Education and loss of patient care privileges for 1 week
b.
Following an institution’s guidelines regarding provider-to-provider sign out at
the end of a shift
ii.
Initial penalty: Education and loss of patient care privileges for 1 week
c.
Performing a “time-out” before surgery
iii. Initial penalty: Education and loss of operating room privileges for 2 weeks
d.
Marking the surgical site to prevent wrong-site surgery.
iv. Initial penalty: Education and loss of operating room privileges for 2 weeks
e.
Using the checklist when inserting central venous catheters
v.
Initial penalty: Counseling and review of evidence; loss of catheter
insertion privileges for 2 weeks (16)
ORGANIZATIONS
WITH EMPHASIS
ON ANESTHESIA
AND SAFETY
25. The Anesthesia Patient Safety Foundation (APSF) is dedicated to patient safety
issues and has a quarterly newsletter that provides discussion on this topic. (15)
26. The Anesthesia Quality Institute (AQI) is the primary source of information for
quality improvement in the practice of anesthesiology. AQI provides the National
Anesthesia Clinical Outcomes Registry (NACOR) on its website. (16)
27. The American Society of Anesthesiology Closed Claims Project is a retrospective
analysis of legal cases with adverse outcomes. Its investigations have helped
identify patient and practice risk areas that tend to have difficulties and require
added attention with regard to quality and safety. (16)
28. The Foundation for Anesthesia Education and Research (FAER) encourages
research, education, and scientific innovation in anesthesiology, perioperative
medicine, and pain management. (16)
PROFESSIONAL
LIABILITY
29. The majority of the 93 claims in the United Kingdom from 1995-2007 involved drug
administration errors with muscle relaxants being the most common issue.
The second area involved being awake and paralyzed. (16)
30. Besides continuing medical education, the anesthesiologist should be thoroughly
knowledgeable of the patient’s condition and care. This includes preoperative and
postoperative visits, as well as detailed records of the course of anesthesia. (17)
31. The anesthesiologist should promptly document the facts on the patient’s medical
record and immediately notify the appropriate agencies, particularly one’s own
medical center administration and legal office. In addition, the anesthesiologist
should provide the hospital and the company that writes the physician’s
professional liability insurance with a complete account of the incident. (17)
RISKS OF
ANESTHESIA
32. Currently, it is estimated that the mortality rate from anesthesia is approximately
1 in 250,000 patients. (17)
33. The increased safety of anesthesia is presumed to reflect the introduction
of improved anesthesia drugs and monitoring, as well as the training of
anesthesiologists. In addition, motivating patients to stop smoking, lose weight,
avoid excess intake of alcohol, and achieve optimal medical control of essential
Scope of Anesthesia Practice
5
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
hypertension, diabetes mellitus, and asthma before undergoing elective surgery has
led to a decrease in anesthesia-related deaths. (17)
34. Difficult airway management is perceived to be the greatest anesthesia patient
safety issue. Other examples of possible adverse outcomes besides death include
peripheral nerve damage, brain damage, airway trauma, intraoperative awareness,
eye injury, fetal/newborn injury, and aspiration of gastric contents. (17)
35. Prominent among the factors are sleep loss and fatigue with known detrimental
effects on work efficiency and cognitive tasks (monitoring, clinical decision
making). (17)
HAZARDS OF
WORKING IN THE
OPERATING ROOM
36. Anesthesiologists are exposed to vapors from chemicals, ionizing radiation, and
infectious agents. There is psychological stress from demands of the constant
vigilance required for patients under anesthesia. In addition, interactions with
members of the operating team may introduce varying levels of interpersonal stress.
Other hazards include latex sensitivity from exposure to latex gloves, substance
abuse, mental illness and suicide, and infection control. (18)
SUMMARY AND
FUTURE OUTLOOK
37. Responsibilities of the anesthesiologist have grown in magnitude, scope, and depth.
Anesthesia has become a leading specialty with regard to inpatient medicine,
especially in the perioperative period including critical care and pain medicine.
The specialty will become more valuable to medicine overall by attempting to
anticipate future societal needs and continuing to dedicate its members to the
pursuit of excellence. (18)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
6
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
Chapter
2 BASIC PHARMACOLOGIC
PRINCIPLES
Jeffrey D. Wilkinson
1. What is pharmacokinetics?
2. What is pharmacodynamics?
PHARMACOKINETICS
3. What factors govern drug absorption?
4. How is absorption via buccal mucosa significantly different from drug absorption
via the stomach?
5. What aspects of absorption make transdermal drug delivery distinct from other
modes of drug delivery? Name some examples of drugs for which a transdermal
application is clinically important.
6. What is the mechanism for the offset of local anesthetic effects following nerve
block?
7. What is “first order” transfer? How does doubling the dose of a drug affect the shape
of a plot of drug absorbed versus time?
8. How does absorption rate from its delivery site affect peak plasma concentration of
a drug? What does absorption rate mean regarding the relative safety of intercostal
nerve blocks?
9. Define distribution. Define volume of distribution.
10. Distinguish central volume of distribution from peripheral volume of distribution.
11. What factors increase a peripheral volume of distribution for a drug?
12. What are two empiric models of peripheral volumes of distribution that are
clinically useful?
13. Generally speaking, what is clearance of a drug? What is the difference between
systemic clearance and “intercompartmental” clearance?
14. How are most anesthetic drugs removed from the body?
15. What processes are used in the liver to metabolize drugs?
16. What drugs are metabolized by cytochrome CYP 3A4?
17. What drugs or substances induce CYP 3A4? What drugs or substances inhibit
CYP 3A4?
18. What function important to anesthesia does CYP 2D6 have? What drugs inhibit CYP
2D6, and what clinical implication does this have?
19. Why do remifentanil, succinylcholine, and esmolol generally vanish from the
plasma so quickly after intravenous administration?
20. Why is the pharmacokinetics of succinylcholine less predictable than other drugs
cleared by ester hydrolysis?
21. Define “linear” pharmacokinetics.
22. Describe the formula for rate of drug metabolism in terms of liver blood flow.
23. What is an extraction ratio? What is the formula for clearance in terms of hepatic
blood flow? What are the units for clearance?
7
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
24. In the case of a drug exhibiting “linear” pharmacokinetics, what is significant about
the constant relationship between metabolic rate and drug concentration?
25. What does it mean to say that a drug’s metabolism is “flow limited”? Name a drug
whose metabolism is “flow limited.”
26. What does it mean to say that a drug’s metabolism is “capacity limited”? What effect
does an alteration of blood flow to the liver have on drugs whose metabolism is
“capacity limited”?
27. How is the maximum metabolic rate (Vm) of the liver defined? What is Km?
28. What factors may alter the maximum metabolic rate for a drug in the liver? How do
changes in maximum metabolic rate for a drug alter the clearance of “flow limited”
and “capacity limited” drugs?
29. What does it mean for a drug to have saturable pharmacokinetics?
30. What class of drugs significant to anesthesia practice are eliminated by the kidneys?
31. Why is a normal serum creatinine value in an elderly person not a reliable indicator
of the individual’s ability to clear drugs in the kidney?
32. Describe the clearance of propofol from the bloodstream following intravenous
injection.
33. What is distribution clearance? What is the clinical significance of this
phenomenon?
34. What is the capacity for plasma proteins to bind most anesthetic drugs? How does
the number of protein binding sites for a drug in plasma influence the amount
of a drug in the plasma bound to proteins?
35. What effect does a change in plasma protein concentrations have on the apparent
potency of a drug?
36. Sketch a graph plotting time versus the amount of drug for a first order
pharmacokinetic process. What does it mean to say that a first order
pharmacokinetic process demonstrates exponential decay?
37. What do the rate constants between pharmacokinetic compartments relate?
38. For anesthetic drugs, which compartment model best reflects their pharmacokinetic
behavior? What about anesthetic drug pharmacokinetics makes this model
appropriate? What do the “compartments” correspond to?
39. Why is it impossible to achieve a steady-state drug concentration with a bolus of
drug followed by a simple infusion when a drug is best described by a multiple
compartment model?
40. What is the time course of drug effect? Why does this exist for anesthesia drugs, and
what pharmacokinetic properties does this process exhibit?
41. Define context-sensitive half-time. What are its limitations? Why is context-
sensitive half-time a more meaningful concept with regard to the offset of
anesthetic drug effects than drug half-life?
42. Why is morphine not an appropriate choice for continuous infusion during
anesthesia? Define context-sensitive effect site decrement time.
PHARMACODYNAMICS
43. When a drug’s concentration is equal to its dissociation constant for the binding of a
certain receptor, what may be said regarding occupation of those receptors? If a
dissociation constant is relatively high, what does this mean regarding the nature
of the binding between a receptor and a drug?
44. Define receptor full agonist. What is a partial agonist?
45. Define receptor antagonist. What is an inverse agonist?
46. Distinguish efficacy from affinity.
47. What is the difference between competitive and noncompetitive antagonism?
48. How does binding of a receptor by a drug result in drug effect?
49. What three types of receptors are of most significance to anesthesia? For each type
of receptor, name several drugs important in anesthesia whose effects are mediated
by that receptor type.
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
8
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
50. Sketch a graph plotting the dose of a drug (or measure of exposure) versus its
response (drug effect). If a dose-response curve is “shifted to the left,” what does this
mean regarding drug (or exposure) potency?
51. Define ED50, LD50, and therapeutic index. Why is a drug with a higher therapeutic
index safer?
52. Describe the interaction of hypnotics and opioids, specifically with regard to
fentanyl and isoflurane MAC.
53. What is a response surface?
54. Define additive drug interactions, supraadditive interactions, and infraadditive
interactions.
ANSWERS*
1. Pharmacokinetics is the process by which the body “disposes” of drugs via
absorption, distribution, metabolism, and elimination. It can be thought of as “what
the body does to the drug.” (35)
2. Pharmacodynamics is the process by which drugs interact with specific receptors in
the body to produce pharmacologic effects. It can be thought of as “what the drug
does to the body.” (35)
PHARMACOKINETICS
3. Drug absorption is governed by route of delivery, bioavailability of the drug, and
possibly first-pass metabolism. (36)
4. Drug absorption via buccal mucosa differs from absorption from lower in the
gastrointestinal tract because presence of food does not hinder delivery of drug to
the mucosa. Also, venous outflow from the buccal mucosa returns directly to
the systemic circulation, thereby avoiding the potential for the first-pass hepatic
effect that is present for drugs absorbed in the stomach, which first enter the
portal venous system. (36)
5. Transdermal drug delivery is distinct in that skin is designed to be a significant
barrier to absorption. This means that drugs delivered transdermally will have a
markedly delayed onset of action following administration. Also, the skin serves as
a depot of the drug, resulting in prolonged drug effect following removal of the skin
application. Examples of drugs delivered transdermally include clonidine,
scopolamine, nitroglycerin, and fentanyl. (36)
6. Local anesthetics applied in nerve blocks have their pharmacologic effects
ended by movement of the drug away from the site of action. The process by
which the body absorbs this locally applied bolus of drug, thus ending its local
effects, is the same by which the body absorbs drugs injected into tissues for
the purpose of eliciting systemic drug effects that follow absorption. (36)
7. “First order” transfer is when the rate of drug absorption is proportional to the
concentration gradient. Doubling the dose of a drug does not affect the shape of the
curve (absorption over time) when a “first order” transfer is occurring.
Concentrations will be exactly twice as high at all times, but peak absorption will
occur at the same time and the shape of the curve will be identical. (36)
8. The absorption rate from drug delivery sites significantly affects peak plasma
concentrations. The higher the absorption rate, the higher the peak plasma
concentration that will result. Nerve blocks at sites with rapid absorption result
*Numbers in parentheses: numbers refer to pages, figures, or tables in Miller RD, Pardo MC: Basics of Anesthesia,
6th ed. Philadelphia, Elsevier Saunders, 2011.
Basic Pharmacologic Principles
9
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
in higher peak plasma concentrations of the local anesthetic injected, providing a
risk of toxicity relatively greater than nerve blocks at sites with slower absorption.
Intercostal blocks are performed in areas of relatively high absorption. (36)
9. Distribution is the process by which an injected drug mixes with blood and body
tissues after its administration. Measuring plasma concentration of a drug
allows calculation of a mixing volume, or volume of distribution. Volume of
distribution is thus a calculated number (dose of drug administered intravenously
divided by plasma concentration) that reflects the apparent volume of body
tissues that the drug is distributed across, assuming all the tissues it is distributed
across are in equilibrium with plasma concentration. Higher levels of drug
remaining in the plasma after drug administration lead to a smaller
calculated volume of distribution. (36)
10. Central volume of distribution is the apparent volume immediately (within a
minute) following intravenous drug injection. It anatomically consists of the heart,
the great vessels, and the lungs. Peripheral volumes of distribution are those
volumes of distribution that are calculated after the injected drug has had time to
distribute to tissues to which distribution of drug is slower. These peripheral
tissues include muscle, fat, and bone. While there is an anatomic correlation to
central and peripheral volumes of distribution, volume of distribution is a
calculated number that does not necessarily equate to an actual physical
volume. (36)
11. The solubility of the drug in the tissue relative to the solubility in the blood
or plasma determines the peripheral volume of distribution. If the drug is
highly soluble in the tissue, then less of it will stay in the plasma. Sampling the
plasma concentration of the drug will result in calculation of a higher volume
of distribution than if plasma levels remained higher. Drug properties that lower free
plasma levels include low levels of binding to plasma proteins, a lower degree of
ionization, and higher lipid solubility. (36)
12. One clinically useful model to describe peripheral volumes of distribution divides
the body into tissue beds: “vessel rich group” (brain, most organs), muscle group,
fat group, and “vessel poor group” (skin, cartilage, ligaments). Another is
to identify the number of compartments in the body needed to explain the
pharmacokinetics of the drug in question. The pharmacokinetics of most anesthetic
drugs can be explained by a three compartment model (one central volume of
distribution, and two peripheral volumes of distribution). In spite of names given
to different compartments in different models, such compartments are empiric,
and do not necessarily correlate directly to underlying anatomic structures
or physiologic processes. (36-37)
13. Clearance is the removal of drug from tissue. Systemic clearance is when the drug
is permanently removed from the body. “Intercompartmental” clearance is when
the drug leaves the body tissue in question but moves into a different body
tissue. (37)
14. Most anesthetic drugs are removed from the body by hepatic metabolism. (37)
15. In the liver, drugs are metabolized through the processes of oxidation, reduction,
conjugation, and hydrolysis. Oxidation and reduction occurs via the cytochrome
P-450 system. (37)
16. Drugs important to anesthesia that are metabolized by CYP 3A4 include
acetaminophen, alfentanil, dexamethasone, fentanyl, lidocaine, methadone,
midazolam, and sufentanil. Also, propofol is partly oxidized by CYP 3A4. (37)
17. Rifampin, rifabutin, tamoxifen, glucocorticoids, carbamazepine, barbiturates, and
St. John’s wort induce CYP 3A4, increasing the metabolism of substrates of CYP 3A4
(hastening clearance). Inhibitors of CYP 3A4 include midazolam, propofol,
grapefruit juice, antifungal drugs, protease inhibitors, “mycin” antibiotics, and
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
10
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs). In the case of midazolam, this has
been shown to prolong the effects of other drugs metabolized by CYP 3A4, such as
alfentanil and fentanyl. (37)
18. CYP 2D6 is the cytochrome in the liver responsible for the conversion of codeine
to morphine (the active metabolite of codeine). CYP 2D6 is inhibited by
quinidine and SSRIs. The clinical implication of this is that codeine, oxycodone, and
hydrocodone, which all rely on activity of CYP 2D6 for production of the active
metabolite from which their clinically relevant pharmacologic effects are derived,
are poor analgesic choices for patients receiving SSRIs. (37)
19. Remifentanil, succinylcholine, and esmolol are cleared in the plasma and tissue by
ester hydrolysis. This occurs very quickly because these esterases are so abundant. (37)
20. The pharmacokinetics of succinylcholine are less reliable than that of other drugs
cleared by plasma and tissue esterases because it is metabolized specifically by
butylcholinesterase (formerly known as “pseudocholinesterase”). Defects in the
gene for butylcholinesterase lead to a potentially significant slowing in the
metabolism of succinylcholine. (37)
21. “Linear” pharmacokinetics are said to exist for a drug when the rate of the drug’s
metabolism is directly proportional to its concentration. This is a general
characteristic of anesthetic drugs. (37)
22. Rate of metabolism equals liver blood flow times the difference in drug
concentration between blood flowing into the liver and blood flowing out. (38)
23. The extraction ratio of a drug is the fraction of the drug that is removed from
the plasma during passage through the liver. Clearance by the liver is equal to
hepatic blood flow multiplied by the extraction ratio. (Therefore, units of clearance
are liters per minute.) Hepatic extraction ratios are unchanging properties of
specific drugs. More of a drug is metabolized by the liver when the drug is being
delivered to the liver in increasing concentrations. This must be true for the
extraction ratio to remain constant. (37-38)
24. For most anesthetic drugs, metabolic rate is proportional to drug concentration
(“linear” pharmacokinetics). The proportionality constant that relates the drug
concentration to the metabolic rate is another definition of clearance.
Rate of metabolism grams=minute
ð
Þ ¼
proportionality constant liters=minute
ð
Þ 
inflow concentration grams=liter
ð
Þ:
Extraction ratio and proportionality constant (clearance) are only constant
if drugs exhibit “linear” pharmacokinetics, but this is generally true of anesthetic
drugs. (38)
25. The clearance of a “flow limited” drug is limited only by the rate of blood flowing to
the liver. Changes in hepatic blood flow result in a proportional change in drug
clearance. Such drugs have extraction ratios near or equal to 1. The liver has a
seemingly boundless ability to metabolize such drugs. One drug exhibiting
“flow limited” clearance is propofol. (38)
26. The clearance of a “capacity limited” drug is limited by the liver’s ability to
metabolize the drug. Such drugs have low extraction ratios (much less than 1).
Alterations of liver blood flow have no effect on clearance of “capacity limited”
drugs because liver blood flow has no effect on clearance of such drugs. One drug
exhibiting “capacity limited” clearance is alfentanil. (38)
27. The maximum metabolic rate of the liver for a given drug (Vm) is the theoretical
rate of drug metabolism if every possible enzyme in the liver were being used
for that function. Km is the concentration of drug in the plasma associated
with half of the maximum metabolic rate. (38)
Basic Pharmacologic Principles
11
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
28. Factors altering the maximum metabolic rate for a drug in the liver include enzyme
inhibition, enzyme induction, and liver disease. Clearance of “flow limited”
drugs is relatively insensitive to changes in maximum metabolic rate because
there is such a reserve of metabolic capacity for these drugs. For clearance of such
drugs to be affected by an alteration in metabolic rate requires such alteration
to be massive. Clearance of “capacity limited” drugs is very sensitive to changes in
the maximum metabolic rate, because the ability of the liver to metabolize the
drug is so small. (38)
29. For a drug to have saturable pharmacokinetics means that the concentration of
the drug in the plasma exceeds the concentration at which the metabolic rate of the
drug is half its maximum (Km). Clearance of such drugs is a function of drug
concentration (at clinical plasma concentrations). On the other hand, drugs that
do not have saturable pharmacokinetics (i.e., their concentration is well below
Km) are metabolized at a rate proportional to their concentration (most
anesthetic drugs). Clearance of these drugs is a constant. (40)
30. Steroidal muscle relaxants, including pancuronium, vecuronium, and
rocuronium are at least partially eliminated by the kidneys; 85% of pancuronium
is eliminated by the kidneys, while 20% to 30% of vecuronium and 10% to
20% of rocuronium are eliminated. (40)
31. Clearance of drugs by the kidney is achieved by filtration of drug from the plasma
at the glomerulus and direct transport to the tubules. Creatinine clearance is generally
a good indicator of renal ability to clear drugs because it is a good measure of
glomerular filtration. Increasing age is an independent factor in the establishment of a
patient’s creatinine clearance. Leaving serum creatinine unchanged and increasing
a patient’s age results in shrinking of the numerator in the formula for creatinine
clearance. In this, it can be seen that creatinine clearance decreases with age even
if serum creatinine never changes. Therefore, creatinine clearance may be decreased
despite “normal” serum creatinine levels. In fact, this is inevitably true the older a
person gets. Serum creatinine must eventually fall to below “normal” values for
creatinine clearance to remain “normal” as very advanced age is reached. (40)
32. Propofol is primarily cleared by metabolism in the liver. Every bit of propofol that
flows to the liver is cleared there, at all clinically significant doses and even in the
presence of all but the most massive insults to the cellular processes responsible for
its metabolism. Propofol’s clearance is actually greater than hepatic blood flow. This
is only possible if, in addition to the robust ability of the liver to metabolize this
drug, there are extrahepatic sites of drug metabolism. About a quarter of
administered propofol is eliminated by the kidneys. Propofol is eliminated virtually
completely by metabolism (metabolism occurring in both liver and kidney), with
only a minute fraction (less than 1%) excreted in the urine unchanged. Renal
elimination of propofol is not a function of filtration, but is a function of renal blood
flow since the kidneys remove every molecule of the drug that enters them. (37-38, 40)
33. Distribution clearance is the transfer of a drug out of the plasma into peripheral
tissues. The drug remains in active form and may be sequestered in tissues for an
extended period, serving as a reservoir for recurrent or prolonged pharmacologic
effects of drug administration. (40)
34. The capacity of plasma proteins to bind most anesthetic drugs is very large. That is,
the number of sites on proteins available to bind drug is far greater than the number
of molecules of an anesthetic drug administered at clinical levels. This does not
necessarily mean that a lot of the drug will become bound to plasma proteins upon
arrival in the bloodstream. Such binding is dependent on the rate constants for
binding and dissociation of each specific drug has for plasma proteins. The effect of
an excess of protein binding sites is that the amount of drug bound to plasma
proteins is purely a function of the concentration of the plasma protein. Whether
this function allocates a large or small amount of drug to a protein-bound form is
governed by the rate constants for binding and dissociation. (40)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
12
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
35. If plasma protein levels decrease due to aging or some disease process, then the
free fraction of drug will increase. This will increase the apparent potency of
the drug—with a couple of caveats. First, the increase in potency will be greater for
drugs that are highly protein bound. A decrease in plasma protein levels has much
more effect on drugs highly bound to plasma proteins. Potency of the drug will only
appear to increase if the drug in question is more than 90% protein bound (free
fraction <10%). Second, any noted increase in potency will only exist directly after
intravenous bolus injection, while the volume of distribution is that of the central
compartment, and protein binding of a drug is only to proteins in the plasma.
Once drug concentration in the plasma equilibrates with peripheral tissues, then
tissue proteins also participate in drug binding. The amount of drug binding by
plasma proteins once the total body concentration of the drug is in equilibrium is
trivial when compared to the amount bound by proteins in the tissue. For this
reason, variations in plasma protein levels are significant to drug potency only
immediately after administration, but have no significant effect on drug potency
once drug concentration has equilibrated with the peripheral tissues. (40)
36. First order pharmacokinetic processes demonstrate exponential decay, which is to
say that the rate of decrease in drug amount slows as the amount of the drug
decreases. (Conversely, rate of decrease in the drug amount speeds up if the
amount of drug increases.) (41, Figure 5-4)
37. Rate constants between compartments in pharmacokinetic compartment models
relate flow of drug between compartments to the amount of drug in the
driving compartment. (41)
38. For most anesthetic drugs, three distinct phases of pharmacokinetics following
bolus injection can be distinguished, which is the defining characteristic of a three
compartment pharmacokinetic model. These three phases correspond to rapid
distribution, slow distribution, and the terminal phase. The distribution phases
reflect the peripheral volumes initially filling with the drug, and the terminal phase
reflects the drug being discharged back into the plasma. These three processes are
definitive of a pharmacokinetic three compartment model, but do not discreetly
correspond to the “three compartments” themselves. The three compartments
themselves represent one central volume of distribution (central compartment) and
two peripheral volumes of distribution (peripheral compartments). (41)
39. To achieve a steady-state drug concentration for a drug best described by a multiple
compartment model, the initial bolus of the drug must be followed by an infusion of
drug that changes over time. The initial rate of infusion must be high enough to
compensate for the drug leaving the central compartment for the peripheral
compartment(s). After the peripheral compartment(s) have come to equilibrium with
the plasma concentration, then the infusion must be decreased to a rate that exactly
matches the rate of clearance of the drug. (42-43)
40. Time course of the drug effect is the delay between introduction of the drug into
the plasma and the onset of measurable drug effect. This exists for anesthetic drugs
because most of them produce their desired clinical effects via actions occurring
outside the plasma. The drug must be delivered and diffuse into its target tissue
before it produces effects, and this takes a certain amount of time. The site of the
drug effect is connected to the plasma by a first order pharmacokinetic process,
which means that the higher the drug concentration in the plasma, the faster the
drug levels will rise in the target tissue site. The factor that relates the plasma
concentration to the target tissue concentration is the equilibration rate
constant. (43-44)
41. Context-sensitive half-time is the time necessary for a drug’s plasma concentration
to decrease 50% after discontinuation of a continuous intravenous infusion of
specific duration. The limitation of this value is that it fails to take into account
equilibration delay, which is to say it does not factor in the time lag between
changes in plasma drug concentration and concentration at target tissue
Basic Pharmacologic Principles
13
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
sites. Context-sensitive half-time has much more clinical utility for anesthesia
practice than drug half-life. Half-life is indicative of the time it takes to eliminate
a drug from the body. Context-sensitive half-time is indicative of the time it
takes plasma levels of drug to fall. Termination of the clinical effect of an
anesthetic drug (i.e., awakening) is dependent on its plasma level (and by extension,
corresponding target tissue concentration) of the drug and not the drug’s
overall presence in the body. (44)
42. Morphine is not an appropriate choice for continuous infusion during anesthesia,
because it has a very slow plasma-effect site equilibration. Although morphine has
rapid plasma pharmacokinetics (a short context-sensitive half-time), it has very
slow blood-brain equilibration (a long context-sensitive effect site decrement time).
Context-sensitive effect site decrement time relates the time course of effect site
concentration with the duration of drug delivery. Drugs such as morphine, which do
not equilibrate quickly between their plasma concentrations and target tissue
concentrations, do not have their clinical effects well represented by context-
sensitive half-time values. (44)
PHARMACODYNAMICS
43. When a drug’s concentration is equal to its dissociation constant for the binding
of a certain receptor, then 50% of those receptors are bound by the drug. A high
dissociation constant means that the receptor has low affinity for the drug
(weak binding). A low dissociation constant means that the receptor has high
affinity for the ligand drug (tight binding). (45)
44. A full agonist is a drug that activates a receptor to its maximum capacity. A partial
agonist is a drug that binds a receptor and produces a less effective response than
a full agonist, even at high concentrations. (45)
45. An antagonist is a drug that blocks access to a receptor by agonists, but itself
produces no activation of the receptor. An inverse agonist is a drug that binds
a receptor and produces a pharmacologic response that is below the baseline
response measured in the absence of the drug. This is usually thought to
result from the inverse agonist acting to block access to the receptor by
endogenous agonist(s). (45)
46. Efficacy of a drug is the level of activation of receptors that results when the drug
interacts with the receptors. Affinity refers to how much of a drug binds to receptors
at any given drug concentration. These are completely independent properties;
therefore, drugs may have identical affinities for a receptor type, but have very
different efficacies. The difference between, for example, full agonists and
antagonists is not a function of their relative affinities for the receptor in question.
By definition, it is a function of their relative efficacies. (45)
47. Competitive antagonism is when an antagonist competes with an agonist for
receptor binding, causing the total number of receptors bound by the agonist to
decrease. The competitive antagonist displaces an agonist, without blocking it, and
can therefore be displaced from the receptor by an increased dose of agonist.
A noncompetitive antagonist alters the conformation of the receptor by irreversibly
binding to the receptor complex. (45)
48. Binding of a receptor by a drug causes the receptor to favor, and spend more time
in, one of its conformations more than it did before being bound by the drug.
The particular conformation favored by receptor-drug interaction facilitates the
particular biochemical cascade that results in the drug effect. (45)
49. G-protein-coupled receptors mediate the action of opioids, serotonin, all vasoactive
amines, prostaglandins, and histamine. Ligand-gated ion channels mediate the
action of propofol, midazolam, thiopental, ketamine, and muscle relaxants.
Voltage-gated ion channels are the target of local anesthetic action. (46)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
14
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
50. Shifting of a dose-response curve “to the left” means that a lower dose of drug
is necessary to provide an effect. This means that a shift in the curve “to the
left” represents an increase in drug potency. Conversely, shifting the curve
“to the right” represents a decrease in drug potency. (46, Figure 5-11)
51. ED50 is the dose of drug required to produce a specific effect in 50% of individuals.
LD50 is the dose required to produce death in 50% of individuals. Therapeutic
index is the ratio between LD50 and ED50. The higher the therapeutic index, the
further the lethal dose of the drug is from the therapeutic dose. This makes
administering the drug safer because giving a dose greater than that needed
for a therapeutic response is less likely to climb to the level that constitutes
a lethal dose. (46)
52. Fentanyl administration in conjunction with isoflurane administration results in an
effective decrease in the MAC of the volatile anesthetic. This decrease in MAC is
proportional to fentanyl dose, but it levels off and never reaches zero because
fentanyl alone cannot ensure nonresponsiveness. (46-47)
53. A response surface is a three-dimensional surface that shows the effect of the
combination of any two drugs. (46-47)
54. If drugs have additive effects, their concomitant administration results in
pharmacologic effects equivalent to the sum of the effects each would have
produced if administered alone. If drugs have supraadditive (synergistic) effects,
their concomitant administration produces pharmacologic effects in excess of the
sum of each drug’s individual effects. If drugs have infraadditive effects, their
concomitant administration produces pharmacologic effects more than what
either would produce if administered alone, but less than if the individual effects
of each drug were added to one another. (47-48)
Basic Pharmacologic Principles
15
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
Chapter
3 CLINICAL CARDIAC
AND PULMONARY
PHYSIOLOGY
John Feiner
HEMODYNAMICS
ARTERIAL BLOOD
PRESSURE
1. What is mean arterial pressure (MAP)?
2. What is the relationship of MAP to cardiac output and systemic vascular resistance?
3. What is the “pulse pressure”?
4. What factors affect pulse pressure?
SYSTEMIC
VASCULAR
RESISTANCE
5. What pathologic factors may decrease systemic vascular resistance?
6. How is systemic vascular resistance calculated?
7. Where is most of the resistance in the vascular system?
8. How is resistance related to the radius of the blood vessel?
CARDIAC OUTPUT
9. Which monitors allow calculation of cardiac output?
10. How is stroke volume calculated?
11. What is the cardiac index?
12. How might changes in heart rate affect stroke volume?
13. What is the definition of ejection fraction and what is a normal value?
PRELOAD
14. How can “preload” be measured clinically?
15. When will central venous pressure (CVP) poorly reflect filling pressures in the left
heart?
16. What is the Frank-Starling mechanism?
17. What are common causes of low preload?
18. What is systolic pressure variation and how might it be useful in analyzing
hypotension?
CONTRACTILITY
19. What is “contractility”?
20. What are some important clinical causes of low contractility?
AFTERLOAD
21. What does low systemic vascular resistance (SVR) or afterload do to ejection
fraction?
22. What does low SVR or afterload do to cardiac filling pressures?
23. What does low SVR or afterload do to end-systolic volume and how might this best
be detected by monitoring?
16
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
CARDIAC REFLEXES
Autonomic Nervous System
24. What are the physiologic effects of the sympathetic and parasympathetic nerves on
the cardiovascular system?
RECEPTOR SYSTEMS
25. What are the baroreceptors and where are they located?
26. What is the Bainbridge reflex?
27. What effects do anesthetic agents have on cardiac reflexes?
CORONARY BLOOD
FLOW
28. What is the usual myocardial oxygen extraction and how does this compare to the
body as a whole?
29. When is the subendocardium perfused?
PULMONARY CIRCULATION
PULMONARY
ARTERY PRESSURE
30. What are normal pulmonary artery (PA) pressures?
Pulmonary Vascular Resistance
31. How does pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR) respond to increased cardiac
output?
32. How does lung volume affect PVR?
33. What drugs modify PVR?
34. What is the effect of hypoxia on PVR?
35. What are some pathologic causes of elevated PVR?
ZONES OF THE LUNG
36. How does gravity affect pulmonary blood flow?
Pulmonary Edema
37. What are the two types of pulmonary edema?
PULMONARY GAS EXCHANGE
OXYGEN
38. How is blood oxygen measured?
39. What is the “P50”? What is a normal value?
40. What are common clinical factors that shift the oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve
left and right?
41. What are the benefits of a rightward shift in the oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve?
42. What is the equation describing the effect of ventilation on oxygenation?
43. How does increased FIO2 improve oxygenation during hypercapnia?
44. Is it possible to deliver hypoxic gas mixtures with a modern anesthesia machine?
45. What does an A-a gradient mean with respect to a problem in oxygenation?
46. What is intrapulmonary shunt?
47. What is the shunt equation?
48. Is diffusion limitation a significant clinical cause of hypoxemia?
Clinical Cardiac and Pulmonary Physiology
17
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
49. Which causes of hypoxemia are very responsive to supplemental oxygen and
therefore easily treated with higher FIO2?
50. How does low mixed venous oxygen saturation affect arterial oxygenation?
CARBON DIOXIDE
51. What are the three forms in which carbon dioxide is carried in the blood?
52. Why is hypercapnia a problem clinically?
53. What are the four physiologic causes of hypercapnia?
54. What are significant causes of increased CO2 production under anesthesia?
55. What are the various types of dead space?
56. What pathologic conditions may increase dead space?
57. What is a normal value for physiologic dead space?
58. What is the Bohr equation?
59. How quickly can apnea increase PaCO2?
PULMONARY
MECHANICS
60. What are pulmonary mechanics?
Static Properties
61. What factors contribute to the static pressure in the lung?
62. How is surface tension reduced in the lungs?
63. What is the definition of static compliance?
64. What is functional residual capacity (FRC) with respect to the static mechanical
properties of the lung and chest wall?
Dynamic Properties and Airway Resistance
65. What determines airway resistance?
66. How can one distinguish clinically between elevated airway pressure produced from
resistance or static compliance?
67. What are important clinical causes of elevated airway resistance?
CONTROL OF BREATHING
Central Chemoreceptors
68. Where are the central chemoreceptors located?
69. What is the main stimulus for the central chemoreceptors?
70. How would the central chemoreceptors respond to lactic acidosis?
Peripheral Chemoreceptors
71. What are the primary peripheral chemoreceptors?
72. What factors stimulate the peripheral chemoreceptors?
73. Why do peripheral chemoreceptors effectively sense arterial, not venous, blood
values?
Hypercapnic Ventilatory Response
74. How is the hypercapnic ventilatory response measured?
75. What receptors drive the hypercapnic response?
76. What is an “apneic threshold”?
77. How quickly does a CO2 response develop?
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
18
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
Hypoxic Ventilatory Response
78. How is hypoxic ventilatory drive measured?
79. What receptors are responsible for hypoxic stimulation of ventilation?
80. How does hypoxia depress ventilation?
81. How quickly does the hypoxic response develop?
82. What is the effect of higher PCO2 on hypoxic drive?
EFFECTS OF
ANESTHESIA
83. Do opioids depress hypercapnic ventilatory drive, hypoxic ventilatory drive, or both?
Disorders of Ventilatory Control
84. What ventilatory problems are premature infants of low postconceptual age at
risk for?
85. What is Ondine curse?
86. When is periodic breathing most likely to occur?
INTEGRATION OF
THE HEART AND
LUNGS
87. What is the Fick equation?
Oxygen Delivery
88. What is oxygen delivery?
Oxygen Extraction
89. Why is examining oxygen extraction clinically useful?
90. What is normal mixed venous oxygen saturation?
91. How would the arterial to venous oxygen content difference change with higher FIO2?
92. Why is the oxygen extraction ratio useful?
93. How can the body respond physiologically to anemia or increased metabolic
demand (oxygen consumption)?
ANSWERS*
HEMODYNAMICS
ARTERIAL BLOOD
PRESSURE
1. Mean arterial pressure (MAP) is the average blood pressure. On modern monitors,
MAP is calculated from integrating the arterial waveform over time. MAP can often
be estimated by adding one third of the pulse pressure to the diastolic blood
pressure. (50)
2. MAP is the product of cardiac output (CO) and SVR, or MAP ¼ CO  SVR. This
is similar to electricity where voltage ¼ current  resistance. (If we were to be
exactly correct, we would use the pressure drop across the systemic vascular system,
or MAP – CVP.) (50)
3. Pulse pressure is the difference between systolic and diastolic blood pressure. (50)
*Numbers in parentheses: numbers refer to pages, figures, or tables in Miller RD, Pardo MC: Basics of Anesthesia,
6th ed. Philadelphia, Elsevier Saunders, 2011.
Clinical Cardiac and Pulmonary Physiology
19
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
4. Pulse pressure is produced from the stroke volume being pushed into the aorta.
The compliance features of the aorta therefore have a very significant effect
on pulse pressure so that a stiff aorta results in a higher pulse pressure, a common
feature of aging. A lower diastolic pressure can reduce pulse pressure by moving to a
more compliant part of the aortic compliance curve. A higher stroke volume
generally increases pulse pressure. Lower SVR can decrease pulse pressure because
part of the stroke volume “runs off” rapidly during ejection. Aortic insufficiency
can increase pulse pressure as the diastolic pressure drops significantly during
backward flow into the left ventricle. (50-51)
SYSTEMIC
VASCULAR
RESISTANCE
5. Classic pathologic causes of low SVR include sepsis, anaphylactic and
anaphylactoid reactions, and reperfusion of ischemic organs. Many anesthetic
drugs and neuraxial anesthesia also lower SVR.
6. SVR ¼ 80 ðMAP  CVPÞ
CO
, where MAP is mean arterial pressure, SVR is systemic
vascular resistant, CVP is central venous pressure, and CO is cardiac output. The
factor “80” converts the SVR to the proper units. (51)
7. Most of the resistance in the vascular system is in the arterioles. Despite having
smaller diameters, there are large numbers of capillaries in parallel, resulting
in overall lower resistance at this level of the vascular tree. (51)
8. Resistance is inversely proportional to the fourth power of the radius of the
vessel. (51)
CARDIAC OUTPUT
9. Cardiac output can be determined by thermodilution with a PA catheter. In addition,
transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) may be used to estimate cardiac output.
A variety of other noninvasive monitors are available and being developed that
estimate cardiac output, including Doppler of the ascending aorta and arterial
pressure waveform analysis. Thermodilution is still the dominant technique. The
Fick equation can also be used to calculate cardiac output from the oxygen
consumption, and arterial and mixed venous oxygen content. (51)
10. Stroke volume is the cardiac output divided by heart rate. It is important to calculate
stroke volume, because a high heart rate may make cardiac output appear normal
despite inadequate stroke volume. (51)
11. Because the appropriate cardiac output changes with body size, the cardiac “index” is
used to normalize for body size by dividing cardiac output by body surface area. (51)
12. An excessively rapid heart rate might not leave sufficient time to fill the ventricle.
Loss of a “p” wave with certain rhythms will also lead to inadequate ventricular
filling from loss of atrial contraction. (51)
13. Ejection fraction is the percentage of ventricular blood volume that is pumped
during a single contraction or SV/end-diastolic volume. Unlike stroke volume,
ejection fraction does not change with body size. A normal ejection fraction is 60%
to 70%. (51, Figure 6-3)
PRELOAD
14. The volume of the heart at end-diastole can be directly measured by
transesophageal echocardiography (TEE). Ventricular filling pressures can be
measured on the right side of the heart with central venous pressure and on the left
side of the heart by pulmonary capillary wedge pressure. A complete picture of
preload would still require both pressure and volume information to more fully
understand the compliance of the heart. Systolic pressure variation may also be an
important indicator of low preload. (51-52, Figure 6-1)
15. CVP will poorly reflect filling of the left ventricle in a number of pathologic
conditions. With pulmonary disease and elevated PVR, right heart failure may
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
20
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
develop with elevated CVP despite poor filling of the left ventricle. With left
ventricular failure, CVP may be normal despite elevated left heart filling pressures
as long as right ventricular function is preserved. (51)
16. The Frank-Starling mechanism describes how the heart responds to increased
filling by increasing contraction and stroke volume. This can be described by the
cardiac function curves in Figure 6-2. (51)
17. “Hypovolemia” or low circulating blood volume is a key cause of low preload. Blood
loss and fluid loss from other sources are commonly faced during surgery. Low
preload can also occur with venodilation from an anesthetic agent and neuraxial
anesthesia. Pathologic problems such as pericardial tamponade and tension
pneumothorax may result in low preload (inadequate filling of the heart) despite
normal blood volume and high CVP. (52)
18. Systolic pressure variation describes the regular changes in systolic pressure
that occur with ventilation. During mechanical ventilation, significant systolic
pressure variation reflects low preload. Systolic pressure variation may
be more useful than other monitors in determining which patients will
appropriately respond to fluid administration. In cases of hypotension, SPV
may indicate low preload. Extreme SPV may indicate other important causes
of hypotension, such as pericardial tamponade or tension pneumothorax.
Pulse pressure variation, which is closely related, requires a computer to evaluate;
systolic pressure variation can be measured with a standard arterial line and
monitor. (52)
CONTRACTILITY
19. Contractility, or inotropic state, describes the force of contraction independent
of preload and afterload. It is reflected in the rate of rise of pressure over
time. Graphically, it is reflected in the systolic pressure volume relationship.
(52, Figure 6-3)
20. Important causes of poor contractility that may be associated with hypotension
include myocardial ischemia, previous myocardial infarction, cardiomyopathy, and
myocardial depression from a number of different drugs. In addition, when
considering a differential diagnosis of hypotension, valvular heart disease would be
considered as low contractility. (52, Table 6-1)
AFTERLOAD
21. Low SVR or afterload increases ejection fraction, which can approach 75% or
even 80% in low SVR states. This is a classic feature of low SVR conditions such as
liver failure. (52-53, Figure 6-4)
22. Low SVR or afterload lowers cardiac filling pressure (central venous pressure
or pulmonary capillary wedge pressure) via the Frank-Starling mechanism.
Vasodilation can therefore cause relative hypovolemia and a volume-responsive
condition. Likewise high SVR or afterload increases cardiac filling pressure.
(52-53, Figure 6-4)
23. Low SVR or afterload leads to low end-systolic left ventricular volume. This is a
pathognomonic sign of low SVR on TEE. (52-53, Figure 6-4)
CARDIAC REFLEXES
Autonomic Nervous System
24. The parasympathetic nervous system primarily affects the cardiovascular system by
decreasing heart rate through vagal innervation of the sinoatrial node. Mild
negative effects on contractility are probably less important. The sympathetic
nervous system can increase heart rate and contractility, but it also causes
peripheral vasoconstriction. (54)
Clinical Cardiac and Pulmonary Physiology
21
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
RECEPTOR SYSTEMS
25. Baroreceptors are present in the carotid sinus and aortic arch. Increased blood
pressure will stimulate baroreceptors, leading to parasympathetic stimulation and a
decrease in sympathetic stimulation. (54)
26. The Bainbridge reflex describes the increase in heart rate from atrial stretch.
This helps increase cardiac output in response to increased venous return. (54)
27. Anesthetic agents decrease cardiac reflex responsiveness. This increases the
likelihood of hypotension under anesthesia. (54)
CORONARY BLOOD
FLOW
28. The myocardium extracts a higher percentage of oxygen than other tissues in
the body, up to 60% to 70%. Normal whole body oxygen extraction is
approximately 25%. (54)
29. Intramural pressure of the myocardium during systole stops blood flow to the
subendocardium. Therefore, blood flow to the subendocardium occurs
predominantly during diastole. (54)
PULMONARY CIRCULATION
PULMONARY
ARTERY PRESSURE
30. The pulmonary circulation has much lower pressures than the system
circulation. This is due to lower PVR compared to the systemic vascular
resistance, since both systems accept the entire cardiac output. Since these pressures
can be measured clinically with a PA catheter, the anesthesiologist should be
familiar with normal and pathologic values, which are shown in Table 6-2.
(54-55, Table 6-2)
Pulmonary Vascular Resistance
31. Pulmonary artery pressure stays remarkably constant over a wide range of cardiac
output. PVR accommodates to increased cardiac output by distention and
recruitment of capillaries, so that resistance decreases as cardiac output increases. (55)
32. Both high and low lung volumes increase PVR. At high lung volumes,
intraalveolar vessels are compressed. At low lung volumes, extraalveolar vessels are
compressed. Increased PVR at low lung volumes may be physiologically helpful
in diverting blood flow from a collapsed lung. (55)
33. Elevated PVR can be very difficult to treat. Inhaled nitric oxide, prostaglandins, and
phosphodiesterase inhibitors may lower PVR, but cannot always completely
reverse elevated PA pressure. (55)
34. Hypoxia increases PVR through “hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction” (HPV). This
process may significantly improve gas exchange by lowering blood flow to areas
of poor ventilation. However, global hypoxia, such as occurs at high altitude,
can result in increased PA pressure through HPV. (55)
35. Pathologic elevation in PVR may occur with pulmonary emboli. In addition,
arteriolar hyperplasia may occur with certain congenital cardiac diseases
(Eisenmenger syndrome), idiopathically (primary pulmonary hypertension), and
associated with cirrhosis (portopulmonary hypertension). Intrinsic lung disease
from a variety of causes can also increase PVR. (55)
ZONES OF THE LUNG
36. Because the hydrostatic changes due to gravity are of a similar order of magnitude
as PA pressure, gravity can have significant effects on pulmonary blood flow.
Notable effects are in zone 1, where airway pressure is higher than pulmonary artery
pressure, leading to no perfusion and therefore dead space. If areas of poor gas
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
22
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
exchange are in an elevated position, lower perfusion can result, improving gas
exchange. In lung surgery, the lower PA pressure in the nondependent collapsed
lung helps gas exchange. (55)
Pulmonary Edema
37. Hydrostatic leak can occur in the lung when pulmonary capillary pressure is
elevated. Pulmonary edema (hydrostatic) results when lymphatic system removal of
fluid is overwhelmed. The risk of pulmonary edema increases as pulmonary
capillary wedge pressure exceeds 20 mm Hg. Capillary leak can also occur with
pulmonary injury from a variety of causes, such as aspiration or sepsis. The adult
respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) represents very significant lung injury
with a high risk of mortality. (56)
PULMONARY GAS EXCHANGE
OXYGEN
38. Three measurements of blood oxygen are used clinically: partial pressure (in mm Hg),
oxygen saturation (in %), and oxygen content (in mL O2/dL). The oxyhemoglobin
dissociation curve (Figure 6-5) relates oxygen partial pressure and saturation.
“Content,” really a concentration, is the sum of the amount of oxygen in hemoglobin
(1.39 mL O2/dL/g hemoglobin) and in the dissolved (0.003 mL O2/mm Hg). (56)
39. The “P50” is the partial pressure at which hemoglobin is 50% saturated, normally
26.8 mm Hg. Sigmoidal curves are usually defined by such midpoints. This is
shown graphically in Figure 6-5. (56, Figure 6-5)
40. The most important factors shifting the oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve to the
right are metabolic acidosis and hypercapnia. Metabolic alkalosis and hypocapnia
shift the curve to the left. Lower 2-3 DPG in stored blood leads to a significant left
shift. (56, Table 6-3)
41. Right shifts of the oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve improve unloading of oxygen
in the tissues. For the same tissue PO2 more oxygen will be unloaded because
of a right shift. Because of the sigmoidal shape of the curve, little change in loading
of oxygen in the lungs will occur because of the rightward shift. (56)
42. The “alveolar gas equation” is used most to determine the effect of ventilation on
oxygenation. The equation describes the transfer of oxygen from the environment
to the alveoli, and therefore contains all the determinants of alveolar oxygen:
barometric pressure, FIO2, and ventilation. (57)
43. FIO2 is another determinant of alveolar oxygen, and it can overcome the effect of
higher CO2 on alveolar oxygen. The effect of hypoventilation with and without
supplemental oxygen is shown in Figure 6-8. (57-58)
44. Modern anesthesia machines can effectively prevent delivery of hypoxic gas
mixtures. Multiple features are necessary, including pin indexing of tanks and gas
hoses, shut-off valves for nitrous oxide, and use of oxygen to drive the bellows. These
safety mechanisms might be overcome if a gas other than oxygen were delivered
through the oxygen piping, which has occurred because of construction mishaps.
A monitor measuring FIO2 is therefore still critical. Hypoxemia still occurs because of
unintentional delivery of room air in patients requiring supplemental oxygen. (58)
45. Calculation of an A-a gradient divides the potential causes of hypoxemia into two
groups of causes. Figure 6-7 illustrates this division. The first group of causes includes
all the factors that determine alveolar oxygen: FIO2, barometric pressure (altitude),
and ventilation. A normal A-a gradient would indicate that this first group is the
Clinical Cardiac and Pulmonary Physiology
23
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
problem. An abnormal A-a gradient indicates a gas exchange issue, usually V/Q
•
•
mismatch or shunt. (58)
46. Shunt describes the passage of mixed venous blood through the lung, unexposed to
alveolar gas. This commonly occurs because alveoli are collapsed, or filled with
fluid such as in pneumonia or pulmonary edema. Mixed venous blood combines
with blood passing through normal lung, lowering the PaO2, which is the end result
of the mixture. (58-59, Figure 6-9)
47. The shunt equation quantitatively describes the physiologic effect of shunt on
oxygenation. Since V/Q
•
• mismatch may also be present, the shunt equation really
describes a simple two-compartment model analyzing oxygenation as if it were all
pure shunt. (59)
48. Diffusion impairment or limitation is not a major clinical cause of hypoxemia.
However, diffusion limitation is often misunderstood. If an alveolus is filled
with fluid, such that no diffusion of oxygen occurs, this is shunt, not diffusion
limitation. Diffusion limitation occurs when a partial pressure gradient still
exists between the alveolus and the capillary blood after the blood has passed
through. Sufficient time for diffusion usually occurs, such that equilibration
occurs early in the process. Even alveolar thickening, which may slow diffusion,
does not usually result in diffusion limitation because equilibration of PO2
between the alveolus and capillary blood does occur. Diffusion limitation
may be a clinically significant physiologic problem at extreme altitude during
exercise. (59)
49. Hypoventilation, diffusion impairment, and V/Q
•
• mismatch are all very responsive to
supplemental oxygen. High FIO2 can effectively eliminate hypoxemia from these
causes. Shunt is much more resistant to supplemental oxygen. At shunt fractions
over 30%, hypoxemia may remain despite administration of 100% oxygen. Higher
FIO2 does improve oxygenation with pure shunt, although there is an incorrect
impression that this impact is minimal. The effect of FIO2 is difficult to calculate and
is not linear, so it is best graphically illustrated as in Figure 6-9. (59)
50. Low mixed venous oxygen levels may affect PaO2, but only in the presence of
intrapulmonary shunt. For the same shunt, lower mixed venous oxygen results in
a lower PaO2. (59)
CARBON DIOXIDE
51. In the blood, CO2 is carried as dissolved gas, as bicarbonate, and bound to
hemoglobin as carbaminohemoglobin. The greatest total quantity of CO2 is as
bicarbonate, which is in fairly rapid equilibrium with CO2 through carbonic acid.
Despite being the smallest total, the CO2 from carbaminohemoglobin represents
about one third of the arterial to venous CO2 movement. (59)
52. Hypercapnia can be well tolerated, although at higher levels, probably approaching
80 mm Hg or greater, hypercapnia can cause CO2 narcosis. The most significant
problem is what hypercapnia represents. A major cause of hypercapnia is
oversedation or narcotization. This could progress to apnea and anoxia.
Hypercapnia may also represent impending respiratory failure from a variety
of causes. (59-60)
53. Physiologically, hypercapnia can be caused by (1) rebreathing (elevated inspired
CO2), (2) hypoventilation, (3) elevated CO2 production, and (4) elevated dead space.
(60-61)
54. The most concerning cause of significant CO2 production under general anesthesia
is malignant hyperthermia (MH). While fever alone will increase CO2 production, the
increase is not dramatic. MH may increase CO2 production several fold. Thyroid
storm may increase CO2 production. Absorption of CO2 introduced during
laparoscopy may be quite significant for certain procedures, particularly if
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
24
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
subcutaneous CO2 emphysema develops. The CO2 removed through the lungs
appears as if it is CO2 production. (60, Table 6-4)
55. Dead space is described as anatomic, alveolar, or physiologic (total). Anatomic dead
space consists of the conducting airways, which are not involved in gas exchange,
plus the larynx and pharynx. Alveolar dead space consists of alveoli that are
not involved in gas exchange, usually from lack of blood flow. Physiologic or total
dead space consists of all dead space, and is the easiest to measure. “Equipment”
dead space may be produced by the addition of tubing beyond the y-connector
of the anesthesia circuit. (60-61)
56. Many forms of end-stage lung disease, such as emphysema, are characterized by
elevated dead space. Pulmonary emboli of any source increase dead space.
Hypovolemic shock increases dead space, since very low PA pressures result in more
zone 1 of the lung, where alveoli are not perfused and therefore represent dead
space. (60-61)
57. Normal dead space is 25% to 30% and consists almost entirely of anatomic dead
space. (60-61)
58. The Bohr equation is used to calculate dead space, Vd/Vt. It requires measuring
PaCO2 and mixed-expired CO2 by collecting exhaled gas. The gradient from
PaCO2 to end-tidal PaCO2 is a reflection of alveolar dead space and is a simple
semiquantitative way of evaluating dead space under general anesthesia. (61)
59. CO2 jumps up fairly rapidly during the first 30 seconds to one minute of apnea. This
jump is due to rapid transition to mixed venous CO2 levels, which usually means
an increase of about 6 mm Hg. This occurs because the lungs do not continue to
store CO2, so once equilibration of CO2 occurs across the alveoli, PaCO2 will jump
to mixed venous levels. Thereafter, CO2 increases due to metabolism at a slower
rate of about 2 to 3 mm Hg/min. (61)
PULMONARY
MECHANICS
60. Pulmonary mechanics describes the pressure, volume, and flow relationships of gas
within the lungs and the tracheobronchial tree. (61)
Static Properties
61. The lung itself has elastic properties. It requires pressure to expand. The chest wall
and abdominal cavity produce a pressure effect on the lung. Surface tension,
which exists at any air-fluid interface, also contributes. (61)
62. Without surfactant, surface tension would make the lungs much stiffer.
Additionally, alveoli would be less stable and would tend to collapse. (61-62)
63. Static compliance is the change in volume divided by the change in pressure. By
static, this means that the pressure and volume measurements are made at a point
of no gas flow, which would contribute a resistive pressure component. Low or
poor compliance would indicate that more pressure is needed to inflate the lungs.
(62-63, Figures 6-12 and 6-13)
64. The FRC is simply the balance point between the lungs collapsing and the chest wall
expanding. Stiffer lungs will produce a lower FRC, because this balance point
will occur at a lower lung volume. On the other hand a disease such as emphysema,
with loss of elastic recoil, results in a higher FRC. (62)
Dynamic Properties and Airway Resistance
65. Similar to the vascular system, resistance is largely determined by airway diameter.
However, turbulent gas flow can add a significant resistance component, which
can happen at airway narrowing. (62)
Clinical Cardiac and Pulmonary Physiology
25
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
66. Pressure from resistance only occurs during gas flow. By ceasing gas flow with
aninspiratorypause,onecandeterminethestaticorplateaupressure.(62, Figure6-12)
67. High airway resistance can be caused by a number of common clinical
conditions. A useful differential might trace the potential resistance anatomically,
starting with airway equipment, including the endotracheal tube. Cause of
resistance in the upper airways can include compression, foreign bodies, and
secretions. In the lower airway, bronchoconstriction becomes the dominant cause.
(62-63, Table 6-5)
CONTROL OF BREATHING
Central Chemoreceptors
68. The central chemoreceptors are located on the ventral surface of the brainstem. (62)
69. Carbon dioxide is the main stimulus for the central chemoreceptors. While the
signal transduction may be through protons, the mechanisms are not completely
understood. Because CO2 crosses the blood-brain barrier, for clinical purposes, we
consider that CO2 is the primary stimulus. (62-63)
70. The central chemoreceptors are protected from metabolic acid by the blood-brain
barrier. Cerebrospinal fluid pH will change in response to peripheral blood pH
changes, but this may take days. An acute lactic acidosis will therefore have no
effect on central chemoreceptors, except due to decreases in PaCO2 that may occur
from the ventilatory response to the peripheral acidosis. (63)
Peripheral Chemoreceptors
71. The carotid bodies are the primary peripheral chemoreceptors in humans. Aortic
bodies do not appear to have a significant clinical effect (which was studied in
humans who had aortic body denervation). (63)
72. The peripheral chemoreceptors are stimulated by low pH, high PaCO2, and low PaO2.
Unlike the central chemoreceptors, the peripheral chemoreceptors are not protected
from an acute metabolic acidosis, which will cause stimulation and
hyperventilation (the lower PaCO2 from this hyperventilation will affect the central
chemoreceptors). (63)
73. High blood flow relative to metabolic rate creates a tissue with hardly any arterial to
venous PO2 difference. This allows the carotid bodies to effectively sense arterial
values. (63)
Hypercapnic Ventilatory Response
74. Whileavarietyoftechniquesareusedtoobtainventilatorydata,theslopeofCO2versus
minute ventilation is the primary measure of hypercapnic ventilatory responsiveness.
TheslopeisthechangeinminuteventilationdividedbythechangeinCO2(usuallyend-
tidal PCO2 since a noninvasive measurement can be preferable). (63-64, Figure 6-14)
75. The central chemoreceptors are the major receptor system responsible for hypercapnic
drive. However, in room air, approximately one third of the CO2 response is from
peripheral chemoreceptor drive. Usually hypercapnic drive is measured at higher FIO2
where the majority of the response will then be from central chemoreceptors. (63-64)
76. Below a certain value of PaCO2, ventilation usually ceases. In an awake person, this
can be difficult to measure due to an awake drive to breath. Under general
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
26
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
anesthesia, this phenomenon is easy to observe. With mechanical ventilation, if a
patient is hyperventilating, spontaneous ventilatory efforts cease at a PCO2 about
approximately 5 mm Hg lower than the set point. As CO2 is allowed to build up
again, ventilation begins slowly and will stabilize again at the set point. (63-64)
77. CO2 ventilatory drive is a slow response, with a time constant of approximately
2 minutes. This is rarely appreciated, although it is easy to observe that ventilation
takes noticeable time to stabilize as CO2 rises to a patient’s set point. (64)
Hypoxic Ventilatory Response
78. Hypoxic ventilatory drive can be measured from a plot of PO2 versus minute
ventilation or SaO2 versus minute ventilation. Because the relationship of PO2 to
minute ventilation is nonlinear, more complex parameters would be needed to
describe the relationship, which then are not very clinically useful. A plot of SaO2
(SpO2 is conveniently and noninvasively measured by pulse oximetry) versus
minute ventilation is quite linear. Hypoxic responsiveness can then be measured by
a simple slope (which will be negative), the change in minute ventilation divided by
the change in SpO2. (64, Figure 6-15)
79. Hypoxic ventilatory stimulation is from the carotid bodies. (64)
80. Central nervous effects of hypoxia lead to a slower development of ventilatory
depression known as hypoxic ventilatory decline. The carotid bodies initially lead to
increased minute ventilation, but if hypoxia is prolonged, ventilation drops to a
level lower than peak ventilation, but still above baseline. This central response is a
regulated response probably involving several inhibitory neurotransmitters. (64)
81. Hypoxic drive from the peripheral chemoreceptors develops extremely rapidly.
The time constant is 10 to 20 seconds. Peak ventilation will therefore usually occur
within 1 minute. The response is rapid enough that carotid body output will actually
vary in response to the small oscillations of PO2 and PCO2 that occur with tidal
breathing. (64)
82. The hypoxic drive is significantly higher with a higher PCO2. This synergistic
response between PO2 and PCO2 will be most noticeable during apnea. (64)
EFFECTS OF
ANESTHESIA
83. Opioids and most ventilatory depressants work on neurons in the integratory
area of the brainstem. They do not affect detection of hypoxia or hypercapnia
per se. The clinically observed respiratory depression therefore affects both
hypercapnic and hypoxic ventilatory drive equally. (64)
Disorders of Ventilatory Control
84. Premature infants less than 60 weeks of postconceptual age can be at risk of apnea
following general anesthesia. (64)
85. Originally described following surgery near the high cervical spinal cord,
Ondine curse describes patients with a nearly absent drive to breath. While
awake, they may breathe fairly normally. But asleep, or under general anesthesia,
breathing can be significantly depressed. This is due to abnormalities in the
central integratory system that seem to blunt the hypoxic and hypercapnic
ventilatory responses. Idiopathic forms of Ondine curse, which can be seen in
children, are usually referred to as primary central alveolar hypoventilation
syndrome. (64)
86. Periodic breathing, most commonly Cheyne-Stokes breathing, occurs frequently
when some degree of hypoxia is present. The stimulation of the carotid bodies
can lead to overshoots and undershoots of ventilation. Periodic breathing can often
be observed on sedated patients with some degree of hypoxia during sleep. This is
Clinical Cardiac and Pulmonary Physiology
27
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
a major cause of sleep disturbance at high altitudes. Some patients with central
sleep apnea have problems primarily with periodic breathing. Periodic breathing
will not usually be observed in patients who are awake. (64)
INTEGRATION OF
THE HEART AND
LUNGS
87. The Fick equation describes the relationship between cardiac output, oxygen
consumption, and oxygen about (arterial to venous content difference). (64)
Oxygen Delivery
88. Oxygen delivery (DO2) is defined as the product of cardiac output (CO) and arterial
oxygen content (CaO2), DO2 ¼ CO • CaO2. (65)
Oxygen Extraction
89. Examining oxygen extraction provides a better global indication of whether cardiac
output is matched to the body’s oxygen needs. Oxygen extraction may provide
clinically and diagnostically useful clues as to disease state. In cardiogenic shock,
oxygen extraction is high because cardiac output is insufficient. In sepsis and liver
failure, oxygen extraction may be very low. (65)
90. Normal whole body mixed venous oxygen saturation is about 75%. Individual
organs and tissues can differ significantly. (65)
91. Arterial to venous oxygen content difference (CaO2 – CvO2) is independent of FIO2,
whereas the mixed venous oxygen saturation (SvO2) can increase significantly with
higher PaO2. (65)
92. Oxygen extraction ratio is probably the most reliable index. It is the oxygen
extraction value most independent of FIO2 and hemoglobin level. (65)
93. The two major compensatory mechanisms for increased demand or less availability
of oxygen is (1) increased cardiac output and (2) increased extraction. This is readily
apparent by examining the Fick equation. In anemia without general anesthesia,
the primary compensation is increased cardiac output. Increased extraction occurs
with more severe anemia. Under anesthesia, the cardiac output compensation
may be blunted, and oxygen extraction is more important. In exercise, both
increased cardiac output and increased extraction are utilized. (65)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
28
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
Chapter
4 AUTONOMIC NERVOUS
SYSTEM
David B. Glick
1. What are the two principal branches of the autonomic nervous system (ANS), and
what is the primary function of each?
THE SYMPATHETIC
NERVOUS SYSTEM
2. Where do the preganglionic fibers of the sympathetic nervous system (SNS)
originate?
3. Where are the ganglia of the SNS located?
4. How are sympathetic signals amplified to broaden the sympathetic response?
5. What neurotransmitter and receptor are involved in the autonomic ganglia?
6. What is the most common neurotransmitter released by the postganglionic
sympathetic neurons when they synapse with their target organs?
7. What are the other neurotransmitters of the SNS?
8. What are some of the common cotransmitters released at the terminal of the
postganglionic sympathetic fibers, and what do they do?
9. What receptor types do the various classic sympathetic neurotransmitters bind to at
the target organ?
10. Where are a2 receptors located, and what happens when they are stimulated?
11. What are the chemical intermediates in the synthesis of norepinephrine from
tyrosine substrate, and where does this process occur?
12. What is the rate limiting step in the synthesis of norepinephrine, and what enzyme
catalyzes this step?
13. Where is epinephrine synthesized?
14. What percent of the norepinephrine reserve stored in vesicles at the sympathetic
nerve terminal is released with each depolarization of the postganglionic nerve?
15. How is the action of norepinephrine at the synapse terminated?
THE
PARASYMPATHETIC
NERVOUS SYSTEM
16. Where do the preganglionic fibers of the parasympathetic nervous system (PNS)
originate?
17. Where are the ganglia of the PNS located?
18. How are the postganglionic neurons of the PNS different from the postganglionic
neurons of the SNS?
19. What happens to ACh after it is released into the synaptic cleft?
ADRENERGIC
PHARMACOLOGY
20. Which adrenergic effect of norepinephrine predominates, the a or the b? What are
the usual clinical responses seen to administration of norepinephrine?
21. What risks are associated with the administration of norepinephrine?
22. What receptors does epinephrine stimulate?
23. What life-threatening events are treated with epinephrine?
24. Name two ways that the local vasoconstrictive effects of epinephrine are
used clinically.
29
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
25. What are the therapeutic effects of intravenous epinephrine?
26. Whichresponse,sympatheticorparasympathetic,predominatesinthefollowingorgans?
Theheart,thevasculature,thebronchialtree,theuterus,thegastrointestinaltract,andthe
pancreas.
27. What are the usual infusion rates for the catecholamines dopamine, norepinephrine,
epinephrine, and dobutamine?
28. What are the primary endocrine and metabolic effects of epinephrine
administration?
29. In what circumstances is an intravenous bolus of 1.0 mg of epinephrine appropriate?
30. What are epinephrine’s primary effects at low, medium, and high infusion rates?
31. What are the mechanisms of action of epinephrine for the treatment of
bronchospasm? How is the epinephrine administered? What is the dosing?
32. What is the concern when giving epinephrine to a patient during a halothane-based
anesthetic?
33. What receptors bind dopamine?
34. In what two ways does dopamine exert its sympathomimetic effects?
35. Which vascular beds are uniquely dilated by dopamine?
36. How is dopamine metabolized?
37. How does the dose of dopamine administered affect its clinical response?
38. How does dopamine affect renal function in shocklike states?
SYNTHETIC
CATECHOLAMINES
39. What receptors are stimulated by isoproterenol?
40. Why has isoproterenol fallen into disuse?
41. Which adrenergic receptors are stimulated by dobutamine?
42. What patients are most likely to benefit from treatment with dobutamine?
43. What is the problem with prolonged administration of dobutamine?
44. Which receptors are stimulated by fenoldopam?
45. What are the pharmacologic effects of fenoldopam?
46. What are the clinical uses of fenoldopam?
NONCATECHOLAMINE
SYMPATHOMIMETIC
AMINES
47. Through what two mechanisms do most noncatecholamine sympathomimetic
amines exert their effects?
48. Name three noncatecholamine sympathomimetic amines.
49. What are the advantages and disadvantages of using ephedrine to treat hypotension
in pregnancy?
50. What is the cause of tachyphylaxis after repeat doses of ephedrine?
51. Should ephedrine be used to treat life-threatening events?
a1 AGONISTS
52. What is the primary effect of phenylephrine and when is its use common?
53. What is the usual dosing for intravenous phenylephrine?
54. Besides its effects on the cardiovascular system, what other pharmacologic actions
does phenylephrine have?
a2-ADRENERGIC
AGONISTS
55. What is the mechanism of action of the a2-adrenergic agonists?
56. What are the clinical effects of administering a2 agonists?
57. What is “clonidine withdrawal”?
58. What drug is commonly used to treat clonidine withdrawal?
59. Howdoestheadministrationofana2agonistaffectapatient’sanestheticrequirements?
60. What effect do the a2 agonists have on perioperative mortality?
61. How is clonidine used in the treatment of chronic pain syndromes?
62. What is the context-specific half-life of dexmedetomidine?
63. What is the dosing for a dexmedetomidine infusion?
64. What makes dexmedetomidine an attractive agent for use in awake intubations?
65. What makes dexmedetomidine an attractive agent for use in patients with sleep
apnea?
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
30
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
b2 AGONISTS
66. What are two common uses for b2-adrenergic agonist drugs?
a-ADRENERGIC
RECEPTOR
ANTAGONISTS
67. What side effects are commonly associated with the use of a1 antagonists as
antihypertensive therapies?
68. What must happen before there is complete recovery from a1-blockade with
phenoxybenzamine?
69. What are the primary clinical effects of treatment with phenoxybenzamine?
70. Phenoxybenzamine is most often used to treat what disease?
71. What is the treatment for phenoxybenzamine overdose?
72. What effect does prazosin have on serum lipid levels?
b-ADRENERGIC
ANTAGONISTS
73. What are some of the clinic indications for b-blocker therapy?
74. What benefit has been demonstrated for the use of perioperative b-blockers in
patients at risk for coronary artery disease?
75. What are the risks of giving perioperative b-blockers?
76. What are the current recommendations for initiating b-blockade perioperatively?
77. What are the significant characteristics that differentiate the intravenous b-
blockers commonly used in anesthetic practice?
78. What are the primary effects of the cardioselective (b1 selective) b-blockers?
79. What are the cardiac side effects of b-blockade?
80. What are the risks of treating diabetics with b-blockers?
81. Can b-blockers be used in patients who have pheochromocytomas?
82. How should a b-blocker overdose be treated?
83. Which drug-drug interactions are particularly concerning when a patient is on
b-blockers?
84. How is propranolol metabolized?
85. What effect does propranolol have on the oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve?
86. What is the intravenous dosing for the cardioselective b-blocker metoprolol?
87. What adrenergic receptors are antagonized by labetalol?
88. What is the dosing for labetalol?
89. Why is labetalol used to treat hypertension during pregnancy?
90. What accounts for the short half-life of esmolol?
91. When is esmolol an especially good choice for b-blockade?
CHOLINERGIC
PHARMACOLOGY
92. What are the pharmacologic effects of the muscarinic antagonists?
93. How does the quaternary structure of glycopyrrolate affect its clinical actions?
94. In what kinds of cases are muscarinic antagonists still commonly given as
premedications?
95. Why is glycopyrrolate given when neuromuscular blockade is reversed with the
anticholinesterase drugs?
96. What are the common uses and side effects of a scopolamine patch?
97. What is the central anticholinergic syndrome and how is it treated?
98. What is the mechanism of action of the cholinesterase inhibitors
(anticholinesterases)?
99. What is the clinical use for the cholinesterase inhibitors in the perioperative period?
100. What is the anesthetic risk for patients who use echothiophate eye drops?
ANSWERS*
1. The two principal branches of the ANS are the sympathetic and parasympathetic
nervous systems. The sympathetic nervous system (SNS) is responsible for
increasing cardiac output and shunting blood to the skeletal muscles to enable the
*Numbers in parentheses: numbers refer to pages, figures, or tables in Miller RD, Pardo MC: Basics of Anesthesia,
6th ed. Philadelphia, Elsevier Saunders, 2011.
Autonomic Nervous System
31
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
“fight or flight” response necessary when an organism is threatened. The
parasympathetic nervous system (PNS), on the other hand, is responsible for the
body’s maintenance functions such as digestion and genitourinary function. (66)
THE SYMPATHETIC
NERVOUS SYSTEM
2. The preganglionic neurons of the SNS originate from the thoracic and lumbar
regions of the spinal cord. (66)
3. Most of the ganglia of the SNS are distributed along the paired sympathetic chains
that are immediately lateral to the left and right borders of the vertebral column.
Other sympathetic fibers extend to ganglia along the midline in the celiac or
mesenteric plexuses. (66)
4. The initial sympathetic signal is amplified as the preganglionic fibers do not synapse
at the ganglion of the level of their origin alone; rather they course up and down
the sympathetic chain activating ganglia of the adjacent spinal levels thereby
widening the body’s response to the sympathetic signal. (66-68)
5. The neurotransmitter released at both sympathetic and parasympathetic ganglia
is acetylcholine (ACh) and the postganglionic receptors that bind the ACh in
both the SNS and the PNS are nicotinic receptors. (68)
6. While preganglionic sympathetic fibers are short (traveling only from the
spinal column to the adjacent sympathetic chains before they synapse at the
sympathetic ganglia), the postganglionic sympathetic neurons are relatively
long as they must travel from the sympathetic chain to the target organ. The
neurotransmitter released at the terminal end of the postganglionic sympathetic
fiber at the synapse with its target organ is usually norepinephrine. (68)
7. Besides norepinephrine, the other classic neurotransmitters of the SNS are
epinephrine and dopamine. (68)
8. Identified sympathetic cotransmitters include adenosine triphosphate (ATP) and
neuropeptide Y. These molecules are released into the sympathetic synapse with the
target organ and modulate the sympathetic activity. (68)
9. Norepinephrine and epinephrine bind to adrenergic receptors located
postsynaptically on the target organ. These receptors include a1, b1, b2, and b3
receptors. Dopamine binds postsynaptically to dopamine-1 (D-1) receptors. (68)
10. a2 Receptors are located presynaptically on the terminal end of the postganglionic
nerve fiber. When norepinephrine binds to the a2 receptor, subsequent
norepinephrine release is decreased (negative feedback). (68)
11. Tyrosine is converted to dihydroxyphenylalanine (DOPA), DOPA is converted to
dopamine, and dopamine is converted to norepinephrine. These transformations
occur in the postganglionic sympathetic nerve ending. (69)
12. The rate limiting step in the synthesis of norepinephrine is the conversion of tyrosine
to DOPA. The enzyme that catalyzes this reaction is tyrosine hydroxylase. (69)
13. Norepinephrine is converted to epinephrine in the adrenal medulla. The enzyme
that catalyzes the methylation of norepinephrine to epinephrine is
phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase. (69)
14. Approximately 1% of the stored norepinephrine is released with each
depolarization, so there is a tremendous functional reserve of norepinephrine
at the nerve ending. (69)
15. After being released from the adrenergic receptor(s), most of the norepinephrine
in the synaptic cleft is actively taken up at the presynaptic nerve terminal
and transported to vesicles for reuse. Norepinephrine that escapes reuptake and
makes its way into the bloodstream is metabolized by either the monoamine oxidase
(MAO) or catechol-O-methyltransferase enzyme in the blood, liver, or kidney. (69)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
32
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
THE
PARASYMPATHETIC
NERVOUS SYSTEM
16. The preganglionic fibers of the PNS arise from cranial nerves III, VII, IX, and X and
from sacral nerve roots. (69)
17. Unlike the ganglia of the SNS that are located in ganglionic chains on either side of
the vertebral column, the ganglia of the PNS are located close to or within their
target organs. (70)
18. The postganglionic neurons of the PNS are short (since the PNS ganglia are close
to or within the target organs), and they release acetylcholine (ACh) from their
terminal end when the postganglionic neuron depolarizes. (70)
19. ACh released from the parasympathetic neuron binds to postsynaptic muscarinic
receptors on the target cell. Upon release from these receptors, ACh is rapidly
metabolized within the synapse by the cholinesterase enzyme. (70)
ADRENERGIC
PHARMACOLOGY
20. Norepinephrine’s stimulatory effects on a1-adrenergic receptors predominate. This
leads to an increase in peripheral vascular resistance and a resultant increase in
diastolic, systolic, and mean arterial pressure. The increase in systemic vascular
resistance can also lead to a reflex bradycardia. (70)
21. Besides the acute risks associated with severe hypertension that can occur
with the administration of norepinephrine, the vasoconstriction caused by
norepinephrine can decrease the blood flow to the pulmonary, renal, and mesenteric
circulations so infusions must be carefully monitored to decrease the risk of
injury to these vital organs. Additionally, prolonged norepinephrine infusions
can cause ischemia of the fingers because of the marked peripheral
vasoconstriction. (70)
22. Epinephrine binds to a- and b-adrenergic receptors. (70)
23. Exogenous epinephrine is given intravenously to treat cardiac arrest, circulatory
collapse, and anaphylaxis. (70)
24. Epinephrine is commonly added to local anesthetics to decrease the spread of
the local anesthetic. It can also be injected locally to decrease surgical blood
loss from the soft tissue (as in tumescent anesthesia for liposuction). (70)
25. Among the therapeutic effects of intravenous epinephrine are: positive inotropy,
chronotropy, and enhanced conduction through the heart (b1 mediated); smooth
muscle relaxation in the vasculature and bronchial tree (b2 mediated); and
vasoconstriction (a1 mediated). The predominant effect depends on the dose of
epinephrine administered. (70)
26. Most organs receive dual innervation from the SNS and PNS. When an organ
receives these dual inputs one or the other normally predominates. In the heart, the
rate and force of the contraction are mainly determined by the cholinergic (PNS)
response. Vascular tone is determined solely by adrenergic (SNS) inputs. The tone of
the smooth muscle of the bronchial tree is predominantly controlled by PNS inputs.
Uterine tone is primarily controlled by adrenergic inputs. The gastrointestinal tract’s
primary inputs are from the PNS. The pancreas’ insulin release is controlled
exclusively by the SNS. (70-72)
27. All the exogenous catecholamines have short half-lives so they are administered
as continuous infusions. The usual dose for dopamine is 2 to 20 mg/kg/min.
The usual dose of norepinephrine is 0.01 to 0.1 mg/kg/min. The usual dose
of epinephrine is 0.03 to 0.15 mg/kg/min. The usual dose of dobutamine is
2 to 20 mg/kg/min. (72)
28. Epinephrine’s endocrine and metabolic effects result in increased blood glucose
(via decreased insulin release), increased lactate, and increased free fatty acids. (72)
Autonomic Nervous System
33
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
29. An intravenous dose of 1.0 mg of epinephrine is given for cardiovascular collapse,
asystole, ventricular fibrillation, electromechanical dissociation, or anaphylactic
shock. This dose of epinephrine is chosen because it constricts the peripheral
vasculature while maintaining myocardial and cerebral perfusion. (72)
30. At low infusion rates (1 to 2 mg/min), epinephrine’s primary action is a
b2-mediated decrease in airway resistance and vascular tone. At medium doses
(2 to 10 mg/min) of epinephrine one usually sees an increase in heart rate, an
increase in myocardial contractility, and increased conduction through the
AV node. At high doses (>10 mg/min), the a1 effects predominate and there is
a generalized vasoconstriction with a reflex bradycardic response. (72)
31. Epinephrine is effective therapy for bronchospasm both because of its direct
effect as a bronchodilator (via relaxation of the bronchial smooth muscle) and
because it decreases antigen-induced release of bronchospastic substances
(as may occur during anaphylaxis) by stabilizing the mast cells that release these
substances. When using epinephrine to treat bronchospasm, it can be given
subcutaneously. The usual SQ dose is 300 mg every 20 minutes with a
maximum of three doses. (72)
32. Epinephrine decreases the myocardial refractory period, so giving epinephrine
during a halothane-based anesthetic increases the risk of cardiac arrhythmias
associated with the administration of halothane. This risk seems to be lower in
pediatric cases (the population in which halothane is still used) and the arrhythmic
risk increases with hypocapnia. (72)
33. Dopamine is bound by a, b, and dopaminergic receptors. (72)
34. Dopamine binds to the adrenergic receptors on target cells to cause a direct
adrenergic effect. Dopamine also causes the release of endogenous norepinephrine
from storage vesicles. This is referred to as dopamine’s indirect sympathomimetic
effect. (72)
35. Dopamine is unique in its ability to selectively improve blood flow through the
renal and mesenteric beds in shocklike states by binding to postjunctional dopamine-1
receptors. (72)
36. Dopamine, like the other endogenous catecholamines, is rapidly metabolized by
MAO and COMT. The rapid metabolism by these enzymes results in dopamine’s half-
life of 1 minute. (72)
37. At doses between 0.5 to 2 mg/kg/min the dopamine-1 receptors are stimulated
resulting in renal and mesenteric vascular dilation. At doses between 2 to
10 mg/kg/min, the b1 effects predominate with increases in cardiac contractility
and cardiac output. At doses greater than 10 mg/kg/min, the a1 effects
predominate, and there is generalized vasoconstriction negating any benefit to
renal perfusion. (72)
38. Whereas previous literature suggested that low-dose dopamine infusions
protected the kidneys and aided in diuresis, recent studies have shown no
renal protection when dopamine is administered during periods of global
hypoperfusion, and the use of dopamine under these circumstances has been
called into question. (72)
SYNTHETIC
CATECHOLAMINES
39. Isoproterenol is bound by the b1- and b2-adrenergic receptors, with its b1 effects
predominating. Because it is not taken up into the adrenergic nerve ending like
the endogenous catecholamines, its half-life is longer than the endogenous
catecholamines. (72)
40. Administration of isoproterenol is associated with marked tachycardia and
arrhythmias. As a result, it has been removed from the ACLS resuscitation protocols.
Its one remaining use is as a chronotropic agent after cardiac transplantation. (72)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
34
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
41. Dobutamine stimulates b1-adrenergic receptors without significant effects on b2, a,
or dopaminergic receptors. (72)
42. Dobutamine is particularly useful in patients with congestive heart failure (CHF)
or myocardial infarction complicated by low cardiac output. Doses lower than
20 mg/kg/min usually do not cause tachycardia. Because dobutamine has no indirect
adrenergic action, it is effective even in catecholamine-depleted states such as
chronic CHF. While dobutamine treatments have improved exercise tolerance in
chronic CHF, they have not been shown to improve survival. (72)
43. Prolonged treatment with dobutamine causes down-regulation of b receptors, and
tolerance to its hemodynamic effects is significant after 3 days. To avoid the
problem of tachyphylaxis, intermittent infusions of dobutamine have been used in
the long-term treatment of heart failure. (72)
44. Fenoldopam is a selective dopamine-1 agonist. (72)
45. Fenoldopam is a potent vasodilator that increases renal blood flow and diuresis. It is
usually administered as a continuous infusion at 0.1 to 0.8 mg/kg/min. (72)
46. Because of unconvincing data from clinical trials, fenoldopam is no longer used
to treat CHF or chronic hypertension. It is still used as an alternative to
sodium nitroprusside to treat severe acute hypertension. Its peak effects occur
in 15 minutes. (72)
NONCATECHOLAMINE
SYMPATHOMIMETIC
AMINES
47. Noncatecholamine sympathomimetic amines exert their effects on the a and b
receptors via both direct and indirect actions. The direct effects result from
the binding of these compounds to the adrenergic receptors like other
sympathomimetic agents. The indirect effects result from the release of endogenous
norepinephrine stores that these compounds induce. (73)
48. Mephentermine, metaraminol, and ephedrine. (73)
49. Animal models suggest that ephedrine does not decrease uterine blood flow
significantly and, as a result, it has been the drug of choice for treating hypotension
in the parturient for many years. Recent studies, however, suggest that
phenylephrine causes less fetal acidosis than ephedrine and so the use of
phenylephrine to treat hypotension in these laboring patients is on the rise. (73)
50. The response to the indirect sympathomimetic effects of ephedrine wanes as the
body’s stores of norepinephrine available for release become depleted. (73)
51. While ephedrine is widely used as a first-line drug to treat intraoperative
hypotension, data from the closed-claims database suggest that relying on
ephedrine in situations where there is life-threatening hypotension rather than
switching early on to epinephrine leads to an increase in morbidity from these
events. (73)
a1 AGONISTS
52. The primary effect of the a1 agonists is to cause vasoconstriction. The rise in blood
pressure that results leads to a reflex slowing of the heart rate. These agents are used
when blood pressure is low and cardiac output is adequate (e.g., to treat the
hypotension that can accompany the delivery of a spinal anesthetic). Phenylephrine
is also used when a decrease in afterload compromises coronary perfusion in the
context of aortic stenosis. (73)
53. Phenylephrine has a rapid onset of action and a short duration of action
(5 to 10 minutes). It can be given as a bolus of 40 to 100 mg or as an infusion starting
at 10 to 20 mg/min. (73)
54. Phenylephrine is also a mydriatic and nasal decongestant. It can be applied topically
to the nostril to prepare the nose for nasotracheal intubation. (73)
Autonomic Nervous System
35
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
a2-ADRENERGIC
AGONISTS
55. The a2 agonists bind the presynaptic a2 receptor on the postganglionic sympathetic
neuron and decrease the release of norepinephrine. This results in a decrease
in the overall sympathetic tone of the patient. (73)
56. Besides the decrease in blood pressure, the a2 agonists have sedative, anxiolytic, and
analgesic effects. (73)
57. Acute stoppage of chronic clonidine therapy can lead to a rebound hypertensive
crisis, so clonidine should be continued throughout the perioperative period. If a
patient is unable to take clonidine orally, administration can be topical via a
transdermal patch. (73)
58. Labetalol is commonly used to treat clonidine withdrawal syndrome. (73)
59. a2 Agonists reduce the requirements for other intravenous or inhaled anesthetics as
part of a general or regional anesthetic technique. (73)
60. Like the b-blockers, the a2 agonists decrease the incidence of myocardial infarction
and perioperative mortality in patients undergoing vascular surgeries. (73)
61. Clonidine is used to treat patients with reflex sympathetic dystrophy and
other neuropathic pain syndromes. Epidural clonidine has orphan drug approval
from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the treatment of
intractable pain. (73)
62. The distribution half-life of dexmedetomidine is less than 5 minutes, making its
clinical effect quite short. (73)
63. Because of its short clinical effect dexmedetomidine is run as a continuous infusion
of 0.3 to 0.7 mg/kg/hr either with or without a 1 mg/kg loading dose given over 10
minutes. (73)
64. The relatively minor impact of a2 induced sedation on respiratory function
combined with its short duration of action has made dexmedetomidine a popular
sedative agent for awake fiber-optic intubations. (73)
65. Infusions of dexmedetomidine in the perioperative period in obese patients with
sleep apnea minimize the need for narcotics while providing adequate
analgesia. (73)
b2 AGONISTS
66. b2 agonists (metaproterenol and albuterol) are used to treat reactive airway disease.
Ritodrine (another b2 agonist) is used to interrupt premature labor. All of these
agents lose their b2 selectivity when given at higher doses which leads to
b1 associated adverse events. (74)
a-ADRENERGIC
RECEPTOR
ANTAGONISTS
67. The common side effects of a1-blockers are orthostatic hypotension, fluid retention,
and nasal stuffiness. (74)
68. Because phenoxybenzamine irreversibly binds a1 receptors, new receptors must
synthesized before complete recovery can occur. (74)
69. The primary clinical effects of phenoxybenzamine are decreased blood pressure and
increased cardiac output (both are the result of decreased peripheral vascular
resistance). (74)
70. Phenoxybenzamine is most often used to create a “chemical sympathectomy”
ahead of resection of a pheochromocytoma (a catecholamine secreting tumor).
Effective a-adrenergic blockade in these patients makes arterial pressure
less labile intraoperatively and has decreased surgical mortality
dramatically. (74)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
36
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
71. When exogenous sympathomimetic drugs are given following a-blockade, their
effects are inhibited. Nevertheless, a phenoxybenzamine overdose is treated with an
infusion of norepinephrine. Presumably, this is effective because some of the
a receptors remain free of the phenoxybenzamine. (74)
72. Prazosin lowers low-density lipid levels and raises high-density lipid levels. (74)
b-ADRENERGIC
ANTAGONISTS
73. b-blockers are used in ischemic heart disease, postinfarction management,
arrhythmias, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, hypertension, heart failure, migraine
prophylaxis, thyrotoxicosis, and glaucoma. (74)
74. In the 1990s, the Perioperative Ischemia Research Group showed that patients going
for surgery who were at risk for coronary artery disease and who were given
perioperative b-blockers had a decrease in all cause mortality up to 2 years after
surgery. (74)
75. The POBBLE and DIPOM studies showed no survival benefit to initiating b-blockers
in patients undergoing vascular surgery or patients with diabetes (two of the “at-
risk” groups for coronary artery disease). Furthermore, a large retrospective study
showed an increased risk of morbidity in patients started on b-blockers who did not
have clear-cut evidence of coronary artery disease. (74)
76. At this point, the only strong indication for initiating b-blockade perioperatively
is for patients who need vascular surgery and have evidence of coronary ischemia
on preoperative testing. While these are the only indications for initiating
b-blockade immediately ahead of surgery, it is important to remember that patients
on chronic b-blocker therapy for angina, arrhythmias, or hypertension should
continue their b-blockers because acute b-blocker withdrawal can lead to life-
threatening events. (74)
77. The b-blockers commonly used during anesthesia are propranolol, metoprolol,
labetalol, and esmolol. These intravenous agents are differentiated based on their
duration of action and cardioselectivity. (74)
78. With b1 selective blockade, velocity of atrioventricular conduction, heart rate, and
cardiac contractility all decrease. Renin release and lipolysis also decrease with
b1-blockade. At higher doses, the cardioselectivity of the b1-blockers is lost and b2
receptors are also blocked, which can lead to bronchoconstriction, vasoconstriction,
and decreased glycogenolysis. (74)
79. Life-threatening bradycardia or asystole may occur with b-blockade. In addition,
b-blockade can precipitate heart failure in patients with compromised cardiac
contractility. (75)
80. Diabetes mellitus is a relative contraindication to the long-term use of b-blockers
because warning signs of hypoglycemia (tachycardia and tremor) can be
masked and because compensatory glycogenolysis is inhibited. (75)
81. To avoid worsening the hypertension in patients with pheochromocytomas,
b-blockers should only be given after the patient is fully a blocked. (75)
82. A b-blocker overdose may be treated with atropine. Isoproterenol, dobutamine,
glucagon, or cardiac pacing may also be necessary depending on the patient’s
symptoms and response to initial therapy. (75)
83. The combination of a b-blocker with either verapamil or digoxin can lead to
life-threatening effects on heart rate (verapamil or digoxin) and contractility
(verapamil) or conduction (digoxin). (75)
84. Propranolol is highly lipid soluble and extensively metabolized in the liver, so
changes in liver function or hepatic blood flow can profoundly affect propranolol’s
clinical response and duration of action. (75)
Autonomic Nervous System
37
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
85. Propranolol shifts the oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve to the right. (75)
86. Intravenous dosing formetoprolol is 2.5to 5 mgevery 2to 5 minutes up to atotaldose
of 15 mg. The doses are titrated to the patient’s heart rate and blood pressure. (75)
87. Labetalol is a competitive antagonist of the a1- and b-adrenergic receptors. (75)
88. Five to 10 mg of labetalol can be given intravenously every 5 minutes. Because,
like propranolol, it is metabolized in the liver, changes in hepatic blood flow affect
its clearance. (75)
89. Labetalol is used acutely and chronically to treat hypertension during pregnancy
because uterine blood flow is not affected by labetalol therapy, even with
significant reductions in blood pressure. (75)
90. Esmolol is hydrolyzed by blood-borne esterases, resulting in a half-life for the drug
of only 9 to 10 minutes. (75)
91. Because of its short half-life, esmolol is particularly useful when the duration of
b-blockade desired is short or in critically ill patients in whom the adverse
effects of bradycardia, heart failure, or hypotension may require rapid
discontinuation of the drug. (75)
CHOLINERGIC
PHARMACOLOGY
92. The muscarinic antagonists cause an increase in heart rate, sedation, and dry
mouth. (75)
93. The quaternary structure of glycopyrrolate (as opposed to the tertiary structure
of atropine and scopolamine) makes it impossible for this larger compound to
cross the blood-brain barrier. As a result, glycopyrrolate has fewer CNS
effects than the other two muscarinic antagonists. (75-76)
94. Preoperative use of muscarinic antagonists continues in some pediatric and
otorhinolaryngologic cases or when planning fiber-optic intubation to dry the oral
secretions. (76)
95. Glycopyrrolate is given along with the reversal agent to block the adverse effects
(bradycardia) of the anticholinesterase. Glycopyrrolate is used because it has
a longer duration of action than atropine and because unlike atropine or
scopolamine it does not cross the blood-brain barrier, so there are fewer CNS side
effects (sedation or delirium). (76)
96. A scopolamine patch is used prophylactically to protect against postoperative
nausea and vomiting. It can be associated with adverse eye, bladder, skin, and
psychological effects. (76)
97. The distortion of mentation (delusions and/or delirium) that can result from
atropine or scopolamine’s effects on the CNS has been labeled the “central
anticholinergic syndrome.” It is treated with physostigmine, a cholinesterase
inhibitor that has a tertiary structure that allows it to cross the blood-brain
barrier. (76)
98. The cholinesterase inhibitors inhibit the cholinesterase enzyme that normally
catalyzes the inactivation of acetylcholine at the nicotinic and muscarinic
receptors. As a result, these drugs sustain cholinergic agonism at the cholinergic
receptors. (76)
99. The cholinesterase inhibitors are used clinically in the reversal of muscle
relaxation produced by nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking drugs.
The accumulation of acetylcholine that results from the administration of the
anticholinesterases allows acetylcholine to more effectively compete with
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
38
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking drugs for sites on the nicotinic receptor,
thereby overcoming the effects of the paralytic agents. (76)
100. Echothiophate iodine irreversibly binds the cholinesterase enzyme and can
interfere with the metabolism of succinylcholine (as the anticholinesterases impair
the function of the pseudocholinesterase enzyme as well) leading to a marked
prolongation of succinylcholine’s paralytic effects. (76)
Autonomic Nervous System
39
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
Chapter
5 INHALED ANESTHETICS
Rachel Eshima McKay
MECHANISM
OF ACTION
1. What characterizes the anesthetic state?
2. Which characteristics of the anesthetic state are achieved by the administration of
inhaled volatile anesthetics?
3. Which characteristics of the anesthetic state are achieved by the administration of
nitrous oxide?
PHYSICAL
PROPERTIES
4. Why are vaporizers required for the inhaled administration of volatile anesthetics?
5. Describe how a vaporizer for volatile anesthetics works.
6. What are the characteristics of desflurane that preclude its delivery in the
conventional variable-bypass vaporizer?
7. What considerations must be taken into account when administering inhaled
anesthetics at high altitude?
8. What are two potentially toxic compounds that can be produced as a result of the
degradation or metabolism of volatile anesthetics?
9. What is a potentially toxic compound that can be produced as a result of the
interaction between sevoflurane and the carbon dioxide absorbent? What factors
may increase this risk?
10. What is the potential risk of human exposure to compound A? How can this risk be
minimized?
11. What is a potentially toxic compound that can be produced as a result of the
interaction between desflurane and the carbon dioxide absorbent? What factors
may increase this risk?
12. What is the potential risk of carbon monoxide production from the carbon dioxide
absorbent?
RELATIVE POTENCY
OF INHALED
ANESTHETICS
13. How are relative inhaled anesthetic potencies compared?
14. What are MAC values for isoflurane, sevoflurane, desflurane, and nitrous oxide in a
30- to 55-year-old?
15. What concentration of anesthetic is sufficient to provide amnesia in volunteers?
How does this value relate to surgical patients?
16. What factors increase MAC?
17. What factors decrease MAC?
PHARMACOKINETICS
OF INHALED
ANESTHETICS
18. Describe the process by which induction of anesthesia is achieved by an inhaled
anesthetic.
19. What six factors determine the alveolar partial pressure of anesthetic?
40
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
20. Describe a strategy that allows maintenance of stable anesthetic partial pressure
in the brain after the induction of anesthesia.
21. How does a shunt affect the induction of an inhalation anesthetic?
22. How is anesthetic solubility expressed?
23. How does anesthetic solubility influence speed of induction?
24. What is the “second gas effect”?
25. How does nitrous oxide affect the enzyme methionine synthase? How might this
relationship affect patients receiving nitrous oxide?
26. How does nitrous oxide affect closed air-filled spaces in the body? What is the
clinical relevance of this?
27. What are some differences between the induction of inhaled anesthesia and
recovery from anesthesia?
28. How are volatile anesthetics metabolized?
29. What is diffusion hypoxia?
CIRCULATORY
EFFECTS
30. Why might an individual patient’s responses vary in the circulatory effects of
equipotent doses of a given inhaled volatile anesthetic?
31. How do inhaled volatile anesthetics affect arterial blood pressure? What is the
mechanism by which this effect occurs?
32. How does the substitution of nitrous oxide for an equipotent portion of volatile
anesthetic affect arterial blood pressure at a given anesthetic dose?
33. How do inhaled volatile anesthetics affect heart rate? What is the mechanism
by which this occurs?
34. How do inhaled volatile anesthetics affect cardiac output?
35. How do inhaled volatile anesthetics affect myocardial rhythm?
36. How do inhaled volatile anesthetics affect myocardial conduction?
37. How do inhaled volatile anesthetics affect coronary artery blood flow? What is
coronary artery steal syndrome? What is its clinical relevance?
EFFECTS ON
VENTILATION
38. How is the rate of breathing affected by inhaled volatile anesthetics?
39. How is the tidal volume affected by inhaled volatile anesthetics?
40. How is the minute ventilation affected by inhaled volatile anesthetics? How is the
overall pattern of ventilation affected by inhaled volatile anesthetics?
41. How is the ventilatory drive affected by inhaled volatile anesthetics?
42. How does the addition of nitrous oxide to a volatile anesthetic affect the ventilatory
drive and the resultant PaCO2?
43. How do inhaled volatile anesthetics affect hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction?
44. How do inhaled volatile anesthetics affect bronchial tone?
45. How do inhaled anesthetics differ in their capacity to cause airway irritation? How
do these differences affect their use in various clinical situations?
OTHER ORGAN
SYSTEM EFFECTS
46. How does nitrous oxide affect cerebral blood flow and intracranial pressure?
47. How do inhaled volatile anesthetics affect cerebral blood flow and intracranial
pressure?
48. How do inhaled volatile anesthetics affect cerebral metabolic oxygen
requirements?
49. How do inhaled volatile anesthetics affect evoked potentials?
50. What electroencephalographic (EEG) changes occur with increasing concentration
of inhaled volatile anesthetics?
51. How do inhaled volatile anesthetics affect neuromuscular function?
52. Which inhaled anesthetics have the potential to trigger malignant hyperthermia?
53. How do inhaled volatile anesthetics affect the liver?
Inhaled Anesthetics
41
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
ANSWERS*
MECHANISM OF
ACTION
1. Characteristics of the anesthetic state include immobility, amnesia, analgesia, and
skeletal muscle relaxation. (81)
2. Characteristics of the anesthetic state that are achieved by inhaled volatile
anesthetics include immobility, amnesia, and skeletal muscle relaxation.
Analgesia is difficult to define in an amnestic, immobile patient, but surrogate
measures of perception of painful stimuli (i.e., increases in heart rate or blood
pressure at the time of incision or intubation) suggest that inhaled anesthetics do not
possess analgesic characteristics at concentrations typically used in
clinical practice. (81)
3. Nitrous oxide contributes to immobility, but is not reliable in doing so when
administered alone. It has amnestic effects at higher concentration (although
these are difficult to assure), and in contrast to potent inhaled anesthetics, does
not contribute to skeletal muscle relaxation. (81)
PHYSICAL
PROPERTIES
4. Volatile anesthetics exist as liquids at room temperature and at atmospheric
pressure. The inhaled delivery of these anesthetics requires that the anesthetics
be vaporized. Vaporizers allow not only the vaporization of liquid anesthetics,
but they also reliably and accurately deliver the specified concentration of
anesthetic to the common gas outlet and ultimately to the patient. Nitrous oxide
exists as a gas at room temperature and therefore does not require a vaporizer
for inhaled delivery to a patient. (81)
5. Conventional volatile anesthetic vaporizers are classified as agent-specific,
variable-bypass, flow-over, temperature-compensated, out-of-circuit vaporizers.
After passing through the flowmeters, gases mix in the common manifold, then
enter the vaporizers. Once in the vaporizer there are different streams of flow that
the gases can take. The gases may be diverted by a temperature-compensating
bypass valve to the bypass chamber, or they may enter the vaporizing chamber.
The temperature-compensating bypass valve adjusts the amount of gas that
enters each of the other two chambers. When the temperature of the vapor is warm,
more gas is directed to the vaporizer outlet via the bypass chamber than when
the temperature is relatively cooler. The opposite occurs when the temperature of
the vapor is relatively cooler. That is, more of the gas is directed toward the
vaporizing chamber. The temperature-compensating valve allows the vaporizer to
compensate for changes in temperature, so the desired concentration of
volatile anesthetic is maintained.
Typically about 20% of the gas flows through the vaporizing chamber. A higher
dialed concentration will result in more gas going to the vaporizing chamber
than otherwise. In the vaporizing chamber, there are a series of wicks that have been
saturated with the liquid anesthetic. (Vaporizers are designed for a specific gas as the
quantity of anesthetic in the gas phase is dependent on the vapor pressure of the
anesthetic gas, a physical property that is unique to each anesthetic.) As the gas passes
over the series of wicks, the gas becomes saturated with the anesthetic vapor. The gas,
now saturated with anesthetic vapor, enters the mixing bypass chamber. In the
mixing bypass chamber, the saturated gas mixes with the unsaturated gas that has
been diverted there. Together the gases pass through the vaporizer outlet toward the
common gas outlet at the desired concentration of volatile anesthetic. (82-83)
*Numbers in parentheses: numbers refer to pages, figures, or tables in Miller RD, Pardo MC: Basics of Anesthesia,
6th ed. Philadelphia, Elsevier Saunders, 2011.
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
42
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
6. The two characteristics of desflurane that preclude its delivery in a conventional
variable-bypass vaporizer are its volatility and its potency. At 20 C, the vapor
pressure of desflurane is 669 mm Hg, whereas those of isoflurane and sevoflurane
are 238 mm Hg and 157 mm Hg, respectively. In addition, the boiling point
of desflurane is near room temperature. Because of its volatility, erratic and
dangerously high concentrations of desflurane would be delivered if a conventional
variable-bypass vaporizer were to be used. The Tec-6 heated vaporizer was
developed to address this problem. Desflurane’s potency is substantially lower than
that of other volatile anesthetics—roughly three times less than that of sevoflurane
and almost five times less than that of isoflurane. Thus, the large number of
molecules converted from liquid to gas phase would create a large cooling effect
(from the heat of vaporization) and it would not be possible to compensate without
externally heating the anesthetic. Thus, desflurane vaporization requires a
vaporizer that is electrically heated and pressurized for these reasons. (83 and
Table 8-1)
7. Although vaporizer output is conventionally expressed in volumes percent, the
pharmacologically relevant measure is anesthetic partial pressure. Administration
of anesthesia at high altitude will result in higher volumes percent vaporizer output
when a variable bypass vaporizer is used. However, the increase in anesthetic
partial pressure will be minimized by the overall decrease in ambient pressure, and
the clinical effect will be very small. On the other hand, the Tec 6 vaporizer behaves
differently, since it is a blender of two gases and maintains constant volumes
percent output. Therefore, at high altitude, although the volumes percent
output will be unaffected, the delivered partial pressure will be substantially
smaller and an adjustment must be made to avoid unintentional delivery of partial
pressures below those clinically needed. The anesthesiologist should select the
desired anesthetic vaporizer setting that would be appropriate at sea level,
and multiply by this value by the ratio of sea level divided by the local
barometric pressures. (82-83)
8. Two potentially toxic compounds that can be produced as a result of the
degradation or metabolism of volatile anesthetics include compound A and carbon
monoxide. (83)
9. A potentially toxic compound that can be produced as a result of the interaction
between sevoflurane and the carbon dioxide absorbent is compound A. This can
occur with either soda lime or baralyme, but the risk appears to be higher with
baralyme. Other factors that may increase the risk of compound A production
include the low inflow of fresh gases, high concentrations of sevoflurane, higher
absorbent temperatures, and fresh absorbent. (83, Table 8-1)
10. The concern with exposure to compound A is for nephrotoxicity. Compound A
has been shown to be nephrotoxic in animals. Indeed, in humans prolonged
exposure to sevoflurane at low fresh gas flows (1 L/min) has been shown to result in
transient proteinuria, enzymuria, and glycosuria. There has been no evidence
for increased serum creatinine levels or prolonged deleterious effects, however.
This is evidenced by the millions of anesthetics that have been administered
with sevoflurane without harm. Regardless, the recommendation is that when
sevoflurane is administered fresh gas flows should be greater than 1 L/min
for the first 2 hours, then 2 L/min thereafter. (83)
11. A potentially toxic compound that can be produced as a result of the interaction
between desflurane and the carbon dioxide absorbent is carbon monoxide.
Carboxyhemoglobin concentrations can reach as high as 30%. This can occur with
either soda lime or baralyme, but the production of carbon monoxide appears to be
greater with baralyme. Other factors that appear to increase the production of
carbon monoxide include the higher anesthetic concentrations, an increased
Inhaled Anesthetics
43
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
temperature, and greater dryness of the absorbent. The majority of cases of carbon
monoxide toxicity occurred after 2 days of disuse of the absorbent, particularly with
continued airflow through the circle system. (83, Table 8-1)
12. The production of carbon monoxide from the interaction between desflurane
and carbon dioxide absorbent can result in the inhaled delivery of carbon monoxide
to the patient. The diagnosis of carbon monoxide poisoning under these conditions
can be difficult because the toxicity may be masked by the anesthesia itself and the
pulse oximetry readings are likely to be unchanged. (83)
RELATIVE POTENCY
OF INHALED
ANESTHETICS
13. Relative potency between inhaled anesthetics is most commonly described by the
dose required to suppress movement in 50% of patients in response to surgical
incision, known as MAC (minimum alveolar concentration). Since this dose has
a standard deviation of approximately 10%, 95% of patients should not move
in response to incision at 1.2 MAC, and 99% should not move at 1.3 MAC.
(83-84 and Table 8-1)
14. In a 30- to 55-year-old, MAC of isoflurane is 1.15%, sevoflurane 1.85%,
desflurane 6%, and nitrous oxide 104%. MAC values are additive. For example,
0.5 MAC of nitrous oxide administered with 0.5 MAC isoflurane has the same
effect as 1 MAC of any inhaled anesthetic in preventing movement in
response to incision. (83-84, Table 8-1)
15. The expired concentration of isoflurane that prevented recall of events in 50% of
volunteers was 0.20 MAC, and the concentration preventing recall in 95% of
volunteers was 0.40 MAC. Assuming a standard normal distribution in dose-
response, and a standard deviation of 0.10 MAC, the calculated highest anesthetic
concentration required by 1 in 100,000 subjects with the highest requirement
would be 4.27 standard deviations above the mean, or 0.627 MAC or more.
Extrapolation of this value to the context of surgery must be made with caution,
however, because (1) the dose required to prevent recall of painful as opposed to
verbal stimulation may be considerably larger; and (2) the ratio of concentration
necessary to prevent recall versus MAC differs substantially between potent
inhaled anesthetics and nitrous oxide (recall occurs with as much as 0.6 MAC
of nitrous oxide). (84)
16. Age has a large influence on MAC, being highest at 6 months of age. After 6 months
of age, MAC declines, increases again during adolescence, and thereafter declines
until the end of life. Other factors that increase MAC include acute amphetamine
use, cocaine, ephedrine, and chronic alcohol use. Hyperthermia, hypernatremia, and
red hair color also increase MAC. (Table 8-2)
17. Older age decreases MAC. Hyponatremia, anemia, hypothermia, hypoxia,
and pregnancy all decrease MAC, as does acute alcohol ingestion and chronic
amphetamine use. The concomitant administrationof certain drugs such as propofol,
etomidate, barbiturates, ketamine, opioids, local anesthetics, benzodiazepines,
a2-agonists, lithium, and verapamil all decrease MAC.
(Table 8-2)
PHARMACOKINE-
TICS OF INHALED
ANESTHETICS
18. The induction of anesthesia relies on delivery of inhaled anesthetic from the alveoli
to the brain via the arterial blood. By controlling the inspired partial pressure, a
gradient is created between the machine, the alveoli, the arterial blood, and the
brain. Higher inspired anesthetic partial pressure is needed during inhaled
induction to offset the impact of anesthetic uptake into the blood and tissues. This
is termed the concentration effect. The delivery of higher fresh gas flow allows the
avoidance of rebreathing anesthetic-depleted gases. Anesthetic present in the
alveoli is taken up by the blood and carried to the tissues, including the brain;
initially the uptake of anesthetic in the blood limits the rate at which the
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
44
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
partial pressure in the brain can rise. As the gradient diminishes, alveolar
partial pressure approaches equilibrium with blood and vessel rich tissue and
the partial pressure in the alveoli begins to reflect partial pressure in the brain.
The primary objective of inhalation anesthesia is to establish equilibrium between
the alveoli and the brain, such that there is a constant, optimal partial pressure
of anesthetic in the brain. This can be reflected in the partial pressure of anesthetic in
the alveoli, or end-tidal anesthetic value. (84)
19. The alveolar partial pressure is determined by input of anesthetic into the
alveoli minus the uptake of anesthetic into the pulmonary arterial blood. The input of
anesthetic into the alveoli is determined by the inspired partial pressure of anesthetic,
alveolar ventilation, and the characteristics of the breathing circuit. The uptake of
anesthetic from the alveoli is determined by the anesthetic solubility in blood and
tissues, cardiac output, and the alveolar to venous partial pressure difference. For a
high partial pressure in the alveoli, and thus a rapid induction of anesthesia, the
following should occur: a high inspired partial pressure of anesthetic, a high minute
ventilation, a low volume breathing circuit, high fresh gas flows, a low solubility
of anesthetic in the tissues, a low cardiac output, and a small alveolar to venous partial
pressure difference. (84-85 and Table 8-3)
20. A higher inspired anesthetic partial pressure is needed during an inhaled
induction to offset the impact of anesthetic uptake into the blood and tissues
and higher fresh gas flow allows for the avoidance of rebreathing. Uptake
diminishes as the anesthetic partial pressure in blood and tissues approaches that in
the alveoli. The speed at which this equilibration takes place is expressed as a time
constant. The time constant related to a tissue group is correlated to the amount of
anesthetic that can be dissolved in that tissue divided by the blood flow received
by the tissues. The vessel-rich tissue group (i.e., brain, heart, kidneys, and liver)
accounts for less than 10% of the body mass but it receives 75% of cardiac
output. One time constant reflects about 67% equilibration between blood and
tissue, and complete equilibration is achieved in three time constants. After three
time constants (6 to 12 minutes), 75% of returning venous blood has the same
anesthetic partial pressure as the alveolus, resulting in narrowing of
the alveolar-venous difference, reduced uptake, and if inspired anesthetic
concentration is maintained, a rapid increase in brain concentration. The brain time
constant for isoflurane is 3 to 4 minutes, whereas those of sevoflurane
and desflurane are about 2 minutes. Therefore, complete equilibration between
alveoli and the brain may be achieved as quickly as 6 to 10 minutes.
Delivered anesthetic concentration must therefore be decreased after 5 to 10
minutes to avoid a subsequent rapid rise in brain concentration after
equilibration with the vessel-rich tissues has taken place. The decrease in
delivered anesthetic may be achieved by decreasing vaporizer concentration,
fresh gas flows, or both. (84-85, Table 8-4 and Figure 8-4)
21. A right-to-left shunt slows the rate of the induction of an inhalation anesthetic
through the dilutional effect of shunted blood without the mixing of anesthetic with
blood that is being delivered to the tissues from ventilated alveoli. The clinical
impact of this is probably negligible, however. (87)
22. Anesthetic solubility in blood and tissues is denoted by partition coefficients.
A partition coefficient can be viewed as the affinity of anesthetic for one particular
tissue, and indicates the quantitative ratio of anesthetic distributed between
two phases when partial pressures are equal. For example, a blood gas partition
coefficient of 0.65 means that the concentration of sevoflurane in the alveolus
is 1 and 0.65 in blood at equilibrium. Partition coefficients are dependent
upon temperature and, unless otherwise stated, are given for 37 C.
(85-86 and Table 8-1)
Inhaled Anesthetics
45
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
23. When an anesthetic has a high solubility in blood, it means that a large amount
of inhaled anesthetic must be dissolved in the blood before equilibration with
the gas phase is reached. The blood can be considered a pharmacologically inactive
reservoir, and the size of this reservoir is directly related to the solubility of
the anesthetic in blood. Therefore greater inhaled anesthetic solubility
slows induction. (86 and Figure 8-5)
24. The second gas effect describes the influence of one gas, administered at high
volume, on the uptake of a companion gas. The process occurs when a large volume
of “first” gas (e.g., nitrous oxide) is taken up during induction, and this uptake
effectively concentrates the “second” gas (oxygen or potent inhaled anesthetic) into
a smaller alveolar volume. Pharmacokinetic models have proven the second gas
effect, but its clinical importance is doubtful. (85)
25. Nitrous oxide inactivates methionine synthase, the enzyme that regulates vitamin
B12 and folate metabolism. While this inactivation may not usually produce
clinically evident change, patients with an underlying critical illness, exposure to
chemotherapy, or preexisting vitamin B12 deficiency may suffer neurologic or
hematologic sequelae. Another consequence of methionine synthase inactivation is
increased serum homocysteine concentration since the enzyme is needed to convert
cysteine to methionine. Elevated homocysteine levels and increased frequency of
ischemic episodes have been concurrently demonstrated in patients undergoing
carotid endarterectomy while receiving nitrous oxide. (86-87)
26. Nitrous oxide is 34 times more soluble than nitrogen in blood, as reflected by their
respective blood gas partition coefficients of 0.46 versus 0.014. As a result, nitrous
oxide can more readily diffuse out of the circulation and occupy an air-filled
compartment than the air in the compartment can diffuse from the compartment
into the circulation. The result of this imbalance is an increase in the gas
contents of a closed air-filled space. The space and volume of gas will expand if the
walls of the space are compliant (e.g., intestinal gas, pneumothorax, air
embolism), or the pressure in the space will increase if the walls of the space are
noncompliant (e.g., middle ear, eye, cerebral ventricles, supratentorial subdural
space). The magnitude of volume or pressure increase in the air-filled space will be
influenced by the alveolar partial pressure of nitrous oxide, blood flow to the
compartment, and the duration of nitrous oxide administration. Presence of a
closed pneumothorax is a contraindication to nitrous oxide administration.
Difficulty with ventilation encountered in the setting of chest trauma may
reflect nitrous oxide expansion of a previously unrecognized pneumothorax.
Air bubbles associated with venous air embolism expand rapidly when exposed
to nitrous oxide. (87)
27. The recovery from anesthesia differs from the induction of anesthesia in several
ways. First, there cannot be a concentration effect to accelerate recovery. For
example, the inhaled pressure of anesthetic cannot be less than zero to augment the
partial pressure of anesthetic gradient from the brain to the alveoli. Second, there
are variable concentrations of anesthetic in the tissues at the start of recovery, and
there are thus multiple reservoirs of anesthetic throughout the body. These
reservoirs are of variable influence, and their significance is dependent on the
duration of the anesthetic as well as the solubility characteristic of the anesthetic
itself. And finally, the metabolism of anesthetic may impact the rate of recovery. The
clinical significance of the metabolism of anesthetics on the rate of recovery of
anesthetics is minimal for the less lipid-soluble anesthetics such as isoflurane,
desflurane, and sevoflurane. The metabolism of halothane may play a role in the
rate of recovery of anesthesia. (88, Figures 8-6, 8-7)
28. All volatile anesthetics are biotransformed to a variable extent in the liver.
Halothane, isoflurane, and desflurane all undergo oxidative metabolism (15% to
40%, 0.2%, and 0.02%, respectively) by cytochrome P-450 enzymes to produce
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
46
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
trifluoroacetate. Sevoflurane is metabolized (5% to 8%) to hexafluoroisopropanol.
(Table 8-1, 89, 96)
29. Diffusion hypoxia is a term used to describe the dilution of oxygen in the alveoli
due to the presence of another gas. This can occur at the conclusion of a nitrous
oxide anesthetic when there is an initial high volume output of nitrous oxide
diffusing from the blood to the alveoli and filling the alveoli. If the patient is
breathing room air at the time, the partial pressure of oxygen in the alveoli
can be diluted to the extent that hypoxia results. Diffusion hypoxia at the
conclusion of a nitrous oxide anesthetic can be avoided through the inhaled
delivery of 100% oxygen. (90)
CIRCULATORY
EFFECTS
30. The circulatory effect of an inhaled anesthetic for a given patient is influenced
by multiple factors. These can include the effects of age, surgical stimulation,
coexisting diseases such as myocardial dysfunction and stenotic valve
lesions, intravascular fluid volume status, and concurrent drug
administration. (90)
31. The volatile anesthetics all produce a dose-dependent decrease in mean arterial
blood pressure, although the mechanism by which they exert their effects varies.
Halothane primarily acts to decrease blood pressure by decreasing myocardial
contractility and cardiac output. Isoflurane, desflurane, and sevoflurane primarily
decrease blood pressure through their effects of peripheral vasodilation and an
associated decrease in systemic vascular resistance. Nitrous oxide, when
administered alone, causes minimal if any alteration in blood pressure. (90 and
Figures 8-8 and 8-9, Table 8-6)
32. Nitrous oxide, when administered alone, causes little if any alteration of
blood pressure. The substitution of nitrous oxide for an equipotent dose of a
volatile anesthetic therefore results in a smaller decrease in arterial blood
pressure than would have otherwise occurred if the volatile anesthetic were
administered alone. This is in part the basis for the administration of nitrous oxide in
combination with a volatile anesthetic. The combination of nitrous oxide with a
volatile anesthetic allows for an increase in the MAC of anesthesia delivered
with less circulatory depression than would occur if an equivalent dose of
anesthetic composed of a volatile agent alone were to be used. (92-93 and
Figure 8-11)
33. Halothane has minimal effect on heart rate. Isoflurane, sevoflurane, and
desflurane all tend to increase heart rate, but each behaves in a somewhat
different manner. At concentrations as low as 0.25 MAC, isoflurane induces a linear,
dose-dependent heart rate increase. Heart rate shows minimal increase with
desflurane below 1 MAC, but above 1 MAC a steep dose-dependent increase in
heart rate and blood pressure may be observed. In contrast to desflurane and
isoflurane, heart rate in the presence of sevoflurane does not increase until the
concentration exceeds 1.5 MAC. The tendency for desflurane to stimulate the
circulation (i.e., increase MAP and heart rate) is attenuated with the
administration of b-adrenergic blocker (esmolol), opioid (fentanyl), and the
passage of time (10 to 15 minutes). The transient increase in heart rate that
occurs above 1 MAC of desflurane results from sympathetic nervous system
stimulation, rather than baroreceptor reflex response to decreased MAP. (90-91
and Figure 8-12)
34. Halothane produces a dose-dependent decrease in the cardiac index that parallels
the decrease in blood pressure that is seen with its administration. In contrast,
cardiac index is minimally influenced by administration of isoflurane, sevoflurane,
and desflurane over a wide range of concentrations in young healthy adults.
(92 and Figure 8-10)
Inhaled Anesthetics
47
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
35. The only inhaled volatile anesthetic that has any effect on myocardial rhythm is
halothane. The administration of halothane may be accompanied by a junctional
rhythm, and halothane sensitizes the myocardium to premature ventricular
extrasystoles, especially in the presence of catecholamines. Sensitization of the
myocardium to ventricular extrasystoles is exaggerated in the presence of
hypercarbia. In contrast, isoflurane, sevoflurane, and desflurane do not affect
myocardial rhythm. (93)
36. Inhaled volatile anesthetics all prolong the QT interval on the electrocardiogram,
particularly halothane and sevoflurane. Although malignant arrhythmias have been
reported in patients receiving halothane who were subsequently found to have
congenital long QT syndrome, the clinical significance of sevoflurane’s QT
interval prolongation is unclear. Regardless, sevoflurane should be avoided in
patients with known congenital long QT syndrome. (93)
37. Isoflurane has been shown to selectively dilate small coronary arterioles in
animal models. If coronary arterioles undergo vasodilation and blood flow is
diverted from narrowed arterioles that are already maximally dilated to healthy
arterioles with less resistance, this theoretically could result in ischemia in the
areas supplied by the narrowed arterioles, and this process is known as
“coronary steal.” However these concerns turned out not to be valid. Isoflurane,
sevoflurane, and desflurane all appear to exert a protective effect on the
heart, limiting the area of myocardial injury and preserving function after
exposure to ischemic insult. (93)
EFFECTS ON
VENTILATION
38. Inhaled volatile anesthetics produced a dose-dependent increase in the rate of
breathing. Although the exact mechanism for this is unclear, it is believed to result
from central nervous system stimulation by the anesthetic. (93)
39. Inhaled volatile anesthetics decrease the tidal volume of patients breathing the
anesthetic, leading to an increase in dead space ventilation in a dose-dependent
manner. (93)
40. Inhaled anesthetics increase breathing frequency and decrease tidal volume in a
dose-dependent manner. The pattern of breathing is regular, rapid, and shallow. The
decrease in tidal volume is not sufficiently compensated by the increase in
respiratory rate, however. This results in a decrease in the minute ventilation of
individuals breathing an inhaled anesthetic. The resting PaCO2 of these patients is
increased as a result. The resting PaCO2 is used as an index to evaluate the degree of
respiratory depression that is produced by inhaled anesthetics. (93)
41. Inhaled anesthetics produce a dose-dependent depression of the ventilatory drive.
The mechanism by which this occurs is thought to be due to direct depression of the
medullary ventilatory centers along with a lesser contribution from depressant
effects on chest wall mechanics. Normally, minute ventilation should increase by
1 to 3 L/m for every 1 mm Hg increase in carbon dioxide, but in anesthetized
patients there is a blunting of carbon dioxide responsiveness. This effect of inhaled
anesthetics results in a progressive increase in carbon dioxide as anesthetic
concentration rises. Indeed, at 1 MAC, carbon dioxide responsiveness is two to four
times less than baseline values. At 1.7 MAC of desflurane in 100% oxygen,
volunteer subjects become apneic. Volatile anesthetics all blunt or abolish the
ventilatory stimulation evoked by arterial hypoxemia, even at a partial pressure
below that where patients are awake. This is of great clinical importance during
early recovery, when the concomitant effects of opioid and unresolved
neuromuscular weakness may interact to compound ventilatory depression.
(93-94 and Figures 8-14, 8-15, and 8-16)
42. The administration of nitrous oxide to patients does not change their PaCO2 levels
from awake levels. Although there is an increase in the anesthetic depth when
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
48
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
nitrous oxide is added to a volatile anesthetic, the patient’s PaCO2 does not change
with the addition of nitrous oxide to the volatile anesthetic. Similarly, the
substitution of nitrous oxide for an equivalent dose of volatile anesthetic results
in less of an increase in the PaCO2 than that which would have otherwise
occurred with the volatile anesthetic alone. (94, Figures 8-14 and 9-15)
43. Hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction is a reflex response of pulmonary
arterioles to vasoconstrict in areas of low alveolar PaO2 in an attempt to decrease
perfusion to underventilated alveoli, as in atelectasis. Although inhaled volatile
anesthetics alter pulmonary blood flow, inhibition of hypoxic pulmonary
vasoconstriction is minimal. (94-95)
44. All volatile inhaled anesthetics have been shown to be bronchodilators and
exert some attenuation of bronchospasm with their administration. The
bronchodilating effects of inhaled volatile anesthetics may be due to decreased
efferent vagal tone from the central nervous system and through direct relaxation of
bronchial smooth muscle. In the absence of bronchoconstriction, the
bronchodilating effects of the inhaled volatile anesthetics are small. (95)
45. Sevoflurane, halothane, and nitrous oxide are all nonpungent, causing minimal
or no irritation over a broad range of concentrations. For this reason, sevoflurane
and halothane, usually with nitrous oxide, are selected most frequently for inhaled
induction of anesthesia, since very high concentrations can be introduced to
overcome the initial uptake of anesthesia into the blood. Both desflurane and
isoflurane are pungent, and can irritate the airway at concentrations above 1 MAC
when given without opioids or propofol. However, isoflurane and desflurane may be
administered via laryngeal mask airway (LMA) after propofol induction without
greater incidence of coughing, breath holding, laryngospasm, or desaturation
compared with sevoflurane or propofol, probably because anesthetic maintenance
usually does not require concentrations in excess of 1 MAC, and small doses of
opiate (1 mg/kg of fentanyl) attenuate or abolish the irritating effects. Because
of their pungency, isoflurane and desflurane are not practical for inhaled
induction of anesthesia. (95)
OTHER ORGAN
SYSTEM EFFECTS
46. Nitrous oxide increases cerebral blood flow through cerebral vasodilation. The
effect of nitrous oxide appears to be blunted in the presence of intravenous
anesthetics. Nitrous oxide has less of an effect on cerebral blood flow than
volatile anesthetics. Limitation of the inspired concentration of nitrous oxide to
less than 0.7 MAC minimizes its effect of cerebral vasodilation. (95)
47. Inhaled volatile anesthetics at concentrations above 0.6 MAC increase cerebral
blood flow in a dose-dependent manner, most likely through the direct relaxation of
vascular smooth muscle leading to vasodilation. Cerebral blood flow increase is
greater with equipotent doses of halothane compared with isoflurane,
sevoflurane, or desflurane. Intracranial pressure increases with all inhaled
anesthetics above 1 MAC. Inhaled anesthetics do not abolish the cerebral
vascular responsiveness to changes in PaCO2. (95-96)
48. Inhaled volatile anesthetics decrease the cerebral metabolic oxygen requirement.
Volatile anesthetics also increase cerebral blood flow. Normally, cerebral blood flow
parallels the cerebral metabolic oxygen requirement, such that as the cerebral
metabolic oxygen requirement increases, so does cerebral blood flow. Given that
volatile anesthetics increase cerebral blood flow and decrease cerebral metabolic
oxygen requirements, it has been said the volatile anesthetics uncouple these
two physiologic characteristics. (95-96)
49. All volatile anesthetics and nitrous oxide depress the amplitude and increase the
latency of somatosensory evoked potentials in a dose-dependent manner, and
Inhaled Anesthetics
49
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
the somatosensory evoked potentials may be abolished at 1 MAC. Motor evoked
potentials become unreliable at concentrations as low as 0.2 to 0.3 MAC. (96)
50. Increasing depth of anesthesia with inhaled volatile anesthetics is characterized by
increased amplitude and synchrony of electroencephalogram (EEG) waveforms.
Periods of electrical silence begin to occupy a greater proportion of time as
depth increases (i.e., burst suppression), predominantly at 1.5 to 2.0 MAC.
Sevoflurane and enflurane have been associated with appearance of epileptiform
EEG activity at high concentrations, although the clinical implications of these
observations are not clear. (96)
51. All the inhaled volatile anesthetics produce mild, dose-related skeletal muscle
relaxation (desflurane>sevoflurane and isoflurane), and their administration may
be helpful in achieving optimum surgical conditions. Use of inhaled volatile
anesthetic will likewise potentiate the effect of neuromuscular blocking drugs.
The clinician may minimize or avoid the use of neuromuscular blocking drugs
by virtue of the inhaled anesthetic’s effects on skeletal muscle tone. At the
conclusion of surgery, the presence of inhaled volatile anesthetic will delay the
recovery of neuromuscular function when the effects of muscle relaxants are no
longer desired. Nitrous oxide does not provide skeletal muscle relaxation. (96)
52. All of the inhaled volatile anesthetics have the potential to trigger malignant
hyperthermia in susceptible patients. Studies in animals suggest that this risk may
be greater with the use of halothane than with the use of isoflurane, sevoflurane, or
desflurane. Nitrous oxide is not a trigger for malignant hyperthermia. (96)
53. All inhaled volatile anesthetics have the potential to cause severe hepatic injury,
leading to death or the requirement for liver transplantation. The mechanism for
this injury is immunologic, requiring previous exposure to a volatile anesthetic.
Trifluoroacetate, produced by metabolism of halothane, isoflurane, and
desflurane, binds covalently to hepatocyte proteins and acts as a hapten.
Hexafluoroisopropanol, produced by sevoflurane metabolism, does not appear to
have the same antigenic behavior as trifluoroacetate. Exposure to halothane may
result in a clinically milder form of liver injury characterized by elevation of
transaminases, and may be mediated by reductive metabolism and related
to conditions where hepatic blood flow is compromised. (96)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
50
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
Chapter
6 INTRAVENOUS
ANESTHETICS
Helge Eilers
1. Name some examples of intravenous anesthetics. What are the potential clinical
uses of intravenous anesthetics?
PROPOFOL
2. What type of chemical structure is propofol?
3. What is the mechanism of action of propofol?
4. How is propofol cleared from the plasma?
5. What degree of metabolism does propofol undergo? How should the dose of
propofol be altered when administered to patients with liver dysfunction?
6. What is the context-sensitive half-time of propofol relative to other intravenous
anesthetics? What is the effect-site equilibration time of propofol relative to
other intravenous anesthetics?
7. How does the emergence from a propofol anesthetic or propofol induction differ
from the emergence seen with the other induction agents?
8. How does propofol affect the cardiovascular system?
9. How does propofol affect ventilation?
10. How does propofol affect the central nervous system?
11. How does propofol affect the seizure threshold?
12. What is the relationship between propofol and nausea and vomiting?
13. How is propofol administered for sedation?
14. How is propofol administered for maintenance anesthesia?
15. How can the pain associated with the intravenous injection of propofol be
attenuated?
16. Why is asepsis important when handling propofol?
17. Which patients may be at risk for a life-threatening allergic reaction to propofol?
FOSPROPOFOL
18. What type of drug is fospropofol?
19. How are the structure, function, and physicochemical properties of fospropofol
different from propofol?
20. What are the clinical uses of fospropofol?
BARBITURATES
21. Name some of the barbiturates. From what chemical compound are they derived?
22. What is the mechanism of action of barbiturates?
23. How are barbiturates cleared from the plasma?
24. What degree of metabolism do barbiturates undergo?
25. What is the context-sensitive half-time of barbiturates relative to other intravenous
anesthetics? What is the effect-site equilibration time of barbiturates relative to
other intravenous anesthetics?
51
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
26. How do methohexital and thiopental compare with regard to induction doses,
duration of action, and clinical utility?
27. How do barbiturates affect the arterial blood pressure?
28. How do barbiturates affect the heart rate?
29. How do barbiturates affect ventilation?
30. How do barbiturates affect laryngeal and cough reflexes?
31. How do barbiturates affect the central nervous system? How do barbiturates affect
an electroencephalogram?
32. How should thiopental be administered and dosed for cerebral protection in patients
with persistently elevated intracranial pressures?
33. What are the various routes and methods for the administration of barbiturates
in clinical anesthesia practice?
34. What are some potential adverse complications of the injection of thiopental?
35. What is the risk of a life-threatening allergic reaction to barbiturates?
BENZODIAZEPINES
36. Name some of the commonly used benzodiazepines. What are some of the clinical
effects and properties of benzodiazepines that make them useful in anesthesia
practice?
37. What is the mechanism of action of benzodiazepines?
38. Where are benzodiazepine receptors located?
39. How does midazolam compare with diazepam with regard to its affinity for the
benzodiazepine receptor?
40. How does water-soluble midazolam cross the blood-brain barrier to gain access to
the central nervous system?
41. What is the effect-site equilibration time of benzodiazepines relative to other
intravenous anesthetics? How do the context-sensitive half-times of the
benzodiazepines compare?
42. How do benzodiazepines affect the cardiovascular system?
43. How do benzodiazepines affect ventilation?
44. How do benzodiazepines affect the central nervous system?
45. What are some clinical uses of benzodiazepines in anesthesia practice?
46. How do midazolam and diazepam compare with regard to time of onset and degree
of amnesia when administered for sedation?
47. What are some advantages and disadvantages of benzodiazepines for use as
induction agents?
48. How can the effects of benzodiazepines be reversed?
49. What organic solvent is used to dissolve diazepam into solution? What are some
of the effects of this solvent?
50. How common are allergic reactions to benzodiazepines?
KETAMINE
51. What chemical compound is ketamine a derivative of? What is its mechanism of
action?
52. How do patients appear clinically after an induction dose of ketamine?
53. What is the mechanism by which the effects of ketamine are terminated?
54. What are the induction doses for intravenous and intramuscular routes of
administration of ketamine? What is the time of onset for the effect of ketamine
subsequent to its administration?
55. How does ketamine affect the cardiovascular system?
56. How does ketamine affect ventilation?
57. How does ketamine affect skeletal muscle tone? How does this affect the upper
airway?
58. How does ketamine affect the central nervous system?
59. What does the emergence delirium associated with ketamine refer to? What is the
incidence? How can it be prevented?
60. What are some common clinical uses of ketamine?
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
52
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
61. What can the repeated administration of ketamine lead to? How is it manifest
clinically?
62. How common are allergic reactions to ketamine?
ETOMIDATE
63. What type of structure is etomidate? What is its mechanism of action?
64. How is etomidate cleared from the plasma?
65. What degree of metabolism does etomidate undergo?
66. What is the context-sensitive half-time of etomidate relative to other intravenous
anesthetics? What is the effect-site equilibration time of etomidate relative to other
intravenous anesthetics?
67. How does etomidate affect the cardiovascular system?
68. How does etomidate affect ventilation?
69. How does etomidate affect the central nervous system?
70. How does etomidate affect the seizure threshold?
71. What are the endocrine effects of etomidate?
72. What are some potential negative effects associated with the administration of
etomidate?
DEXMEDETOMIDINE
73. What type of structure is dexmedetomidine?
74. What is the mechanism of action for dexmedetomidine?
75. What are some common clinical uses for dexmedetomidine?
76. What are the typical doses for dexmedetomidine when used as infusion in the
operating room?
77. How does dexmedetomidine affect the cardiovascular system?
78. How does dexmedetomidine affect the respiratory system?
79. What are the effects of dexmedetomidine on cerebral blood flow?
ANSWERS*
1. Examples of intravenous anesthetics include the barbiturates, benzodiazepines,
opioids, etomidate, propofol, ketamine, and dexmedetomidine. These drugs can
be used as induction agents or, in combination with other anesthetics, for the
maintenance of anesthesia. (100)
PROPOFOL
2. Propofol is a lipid-soluble isopropyl phenol formulated as an emulsion. The current
formulation consists of 1% propofol, soybean oil, glycerol, and purified egg
phosphatide. (100, Figure 9-1)
3. The mechanism by which propofol exerts its effects is not fully understood, but
it appears to be in part via the gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) activated
chloride ion channel. Evidence suggests that propofol may interact with the GABA
receptor and maintain it in an activated state for a prolonged period, thereby
resulting in greater inhibitory effects on synaptic transmission. Propofol also
inhibits the NMDA subtype of the glutamate receptor, which may contribute
to its CNS effects. (101)
4. Propofol is cleared rapidly from the plasma through both redistribution to inactive
tissue sites and rapid metabolism by the liver. (100-101)
*Numbers in parentheses: numbers refer to pages, figures, or tables in Miller RD, Pardo MC: Basics of Anesthesia,
6th ed. Philadelphia, Elsevier Saunders, 2011.
Intravenous Anesthetics
53
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
5. Propofol is extensively metabolized by the liver to inactive, water-soluble
metabolites, which are then excreted in the urine. Less than 1% of propofol
administered is excreted unchanged in the urine. The metabolism of propofol is
extremely rapid. Patients with liver dysfunction appear to rapidly metabolize
propofol as well, lending some proof that extrahepatic sites of metabolism exist.
This has been further supported by evidence of metabolism during the anhepatic
phase of liver transplantation. (100)
6. The context-sensitive half-time refers to the time required to pass for the
concentration of a particular drug to reach 50% of its peak plasma concentration
after the discontinuation of its administration as a continuous intravenous
infusion for a given duration. The context-sensitive half-time of a drug depends
mostly on the drug’s lipid solubility and clearance mechanisms. The continuous
infusion of propofol rarely results in cumulative drug effects. After the continuous
administration of propofol for several days for sedation in the intensive care
unit the discontinuation of the infusion resulted in the rapid recovery to
consciousness. The lack of cumulative effects of propofol illustrates that the
context-sensitive half-time of propofol is short. The effect-site equilibration time
refers to the interval of time required between the time that a specific plasma
concentration of the drug is achieved and a specific effect of the drug can be
measured. The effect-site equilibration time reflects the time necessary for the
circulation to deliver the drug to its site of action, such as the brain. The rapid
administration of an induction dose of propofol results in unconsciousness in less
than 30 seconds, illustrating its rapid effect-site equilibration time. (100-101,
Figure 9-3)
7. After the administration of propofol, patients experience a rapid return to
consciousness with minimal residual central nervous system effects. Patients who are
to undergo brief procedures or outpatient surgical patients may especially benefit from
the rapid wake-up associated with propofol anesthesia. Propofol also tends to result in
the patient awakening with a general state of well-being and mild euphoria. Patient
excitement has also been observed. Hallucinations and sexual fantasies have been
reported to have occurred in association with the administration of propofol. (101)
8. The administration of an induction dose of propofol results in a profound decrease
in systolic blood pressure greater than any other induction agent. This effect of
propofol appears to be primarily due to vasodilation, which is dose dependent.
Unlike the barbiturates, the heart rate is usually unchanged with the administration
of propofol. Propofol may selectively decrease sympathetic nervous system activity
more than parasympathetic nervous system activity. In fact, propofol inhibits the
normal baroreceptor reflex such that profound bradycardia and asystole have
occurred in healthy adults after its administration. (102)
9. The administration of an induction dose of propofol (1.5 to 2.5 mg/kg) almost
always results in apnea through a dose-dependent depression of ventilation in a
manner similar to, but more prolonged than, that of thiopental. The apnea that
results appears to last for 30 seconds or greater and is followed by a return of
ventilation that is characterized by rapid, shallow breathing such that the minute
ventilation is significantly decreased for up to 4 minutes. Propofol causes a greater
reduction in airway reflexes than any other induction agent, making it a better
choice as the sole agent for instrumentation of the airway. (102)
10. The administration of propofol results in decreases in intracranial pressure, cerebral
blood flow, and cerebral metabolic oxygen requirements in a dose-dependent
manner. In patients with an elevated intracranial pressure, the administration of
propofol, however, may be accompanied by undesirable decreases in the cerebral
perfusion pressure. (101-102)
11. The effects of propofol on the seizure threshold are controversial. The administration
of propofol has resulted in seizures and opisthotonos and has been used to facilitate
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
54
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
the mapping of seizure foci. Propofol has also been used to treat seizures. High
doses of propofol can result in burst suppression on the electroencephalogram.
Excitatory effects that cause muscle twitching are not uncommon, but do not
indicate seizure activity. (102)
12. Propofol appears to have a significant antiemetic effect, given the low incidence
of nausea and vomiting in patients who have received a propofol anesthetic.
In addition, propofol administered in subhypnotic doses of 10 to 15 mg has
successfully treated both postoperative nausea and vomiting and nausea in patients
receiving chemotherapy. (102)
13. Propofol may be administered for sedation through a continuous intravenous
infusion at a rate of 25 to 75 mg/kg/min. At these doses, propofol will provide
sedation and amnesia without hypnosis. Because of the pronounced respiratory
depressant effect, propofol, even for sedation, should only be administered by
individuals trained in airway management. (102)
14. Propofol may be administered for maintenance anesthesia through a continuous
intravenous infusion at a rate of 100 to 200 mg/kg/min. The clinician may use signs
of light anesthesia such as hypertension, tachycardia, diaphoresis, or skeletal
muscle movement as indicators for the need to increase the infusion rate of
propofol. For procedures lasting more than 2 hours, the use of propofol for
maintenance anesthesia may not be cost effective. (102)
15. The injection of propofol intravenously can cause pain in awake patients. The pain
can be attenuated by using large veins for its administration, or with the prior
administration of lidocaine at the injection site. Alternatively, lidocaine may be
mixed with the propofol for simultaneous infusion. (102)
16. Asepsis is important when handling propofol because the solvent for propofol, a
lipid emulsion containing soybean oil, glycerol, and lecithin, provides for a
favorable culture medium for bacterial growth. Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid,
metabisulfate, or benzyl alcohol is added to the propofol formulation in an attempt
to suppress bacterial growth. (100)
17. Patients at risk for a life-threatening allergic reaction to propofol are those with a
history of atopy or allergy to other drugs that also contain a phenyl nucleus or
isopropyl group. Anaphylactoid reactions to the propofol itself and separate from
the lipid emulsion have been reported. (100)
FOSPROPOFOL
18. Fospropofol is a water-soluble phosphate ester prodrug of propofol. It is metabolized
by alkaline phosphatase in a reaction that produces propofol and also phosphate
and formaldehyde, which is then further metabolized. (103, Figure 9-4)
19. Fospropofol is water-soluble and comes in an aqueous, sterile preparation. It can
be injected without the need for a lipid emulsion, thereby reducing the risk for
contamination. (103)
20. In the United States, fospropofol is currently approved for sedation during
monitored anesthesia care. (103)
BARBITURATES
21. Thiopental is the most commonly used barbiturate in the practice of anesthesia.
Other barbiturates include pentobarbital, thiamylal, and methohexital. The
barbiturate compounds are a derivative of barbituric acid. Structural alterations
of two of the carbon atoms of barbituric acid result in the barbiturates used in
clinical practice. Historically, the barbiturates had been classified as short-acting
or long-acting agents. This method of classification is no longer used because of
the erroneous implication that the duration of action is predictable for a given
agent. (103, Figure 9-5)
Intravenous Anesthetics
55
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
22. The mechanism of action of barbiturates is based on their ability to enhance and
mimic the action of the neurotransmitter gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) in
the central nervous system. GABA is the main inhibitory neurotransmitter in the
central nervous system. Barbiturates bind to the GABA receptor and increase
the duration of activity of the GABA receptor, such that the chloride ion influx
into the cells is prolonged. The chloride ion hyperpolarizes the cell and inhibits
postsynaptic neurons. At higher concentrations, the chloride ion channel may be
stimulated by the barbiturate alone even in the absence of GABA. (104)
23. Barbiturates are cleared from the plasma primarily through its rapid redistribution
to inactive tissue sites after its administration as a bolus. (103-104, Figure 9-6)
24. Barbiturates are eliminated from the body through hepatic metabolism. Less than
1% of the drug is excreted unchanged by the kidneys. (103-104)
25. Barbiturates are most often used for the intravenous induction of general
anesthesia. Maximal brain uptake and onset of effect takes place within 30 seconds
after the rapid intravenous injection of a barbiturate. Rapid awakening follows the
administration of an induction dose of a barbiturate secondary to the rapid
redistribution of these drugs. This accounts for the short effect-site equilibration
time for these agents. The duration of action of a barbiturate after its intravenous
injection is dictated by its redistribution from the plasma to inactive sites. Large or
repeated doses of the lipid-soluble barbiturates can result in saturation of the
inactive sites. This may lead to the accumulation of a drug and to prolonged effects
of the usually short-acting drugs. The context-sensitive half-time of barbiturates
is thus prolonged. (103-104, Figure 9-3)
26. The induction dose of methohexital is 1 to 1.5 mg/kg intravenously, whereas the
induction dose of thiopental is 3 to 5 mg/kg IV. Methohexital undergoes greater
hepatic metabolism than thiopental, resulting in a shorter duration of action and
more rapid awakening. Based on the shorter duration of action of methohexital, it is
sometimes chosen over thiopental for the induction of anesthesia for patients
undergoing outpatient procedures when rapid awakening is desired. An example of
a procedure in which methohexital is frequently chosen for the induction of
anesthesia is electroconvulsive shock therapy. This is not only due to the short
duration of action of methohexital, but also to its epileptogenic property. (105-106)
27. The administration of barbiturates typically results in a decrease in arterial
blood pressure by 10 to 20 mm Hg. This decrease in blood pressure primarily
results from peripheral vasodilation. The vasodilation that accompanies the
administration of barbiturates is due to a combination of depression of the
vasomotor center in the medulla and a decrease in sympathetic nervous system
outflow from the central nervous system. Exaggerated blood pressure decreases
may be seen in patients who are hypertensive, whether or not they are being
treated by antihypertensives. The administration of barbiturates should also be
undertaken with caution in patients who are dependent on the preload to the heart
to maintain cardiac output, as in patients with ischemic heart disease, pericardial
tamponade, congestive heart failure, heart block, or hypovolemia. (105)
28. The administration of barbiturates results in an increase in heart rate. This increase
in heart rate is thought to be due to a baroreceptor-mediated reflex response to the
decrease in blood pressure caused by the administration of the barbiturate. The increase
in heart rate may increase myocardial oxygen requirements during a time when
significantdecreasesinbloodpressuremaydecreasecoronaryarterybloodflowaswell.
Given this, the administration of a barbiturate to patients with ischemic heart disease
must be done with extreme caution. Although the administration of barbiturates
typically results in an increase in heart rate, the cardiac output may be decreased.
This is in part due to the direct myocardial contractile depression that results from the
administrationofbarbiturates. Theeffectofa decreaseincardiacoutputby barbiturates
is not of such significance that it is frequently seen clinically, however. (105)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
56
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
29. Barbiturates depress ventilation centrally by depressing the medullary ventilatory
centers. This is manifest clinically as a decreased responsiveness to the ventilatory
stimulatory effects of carbon dioxide. Depending on the dose administered, the
patient will have a slow breathing rate and small tidal volumes to the extent that
apnea follows. Typically, after an induction dose of barbiturate transient apnea will
result and require controlled ventilation of the lungs. When spontaneous ventilation
is resumed, it is again characterized by a slow breathing rate and small tidal
volumes. (105)
30. Induction doses of thiopental alone do not reliably depress laryngeal and
cough reflexes. Stimulation of the upper airway, as with the placement of an oral
airway or an endotracheal tube, can result in laryngospasm or bronchospasm.
It is therefore recommended that adequate suppression of these reflexes be
obtained before instrumenting the airway. This can be accomplished with
increased doses of a barbiturate, by the administration of a neuromuscular
blocking drug, or by the addition of another preoperative medicine, such as
opioids, to augment the anesthetic effects of thiopental during stimulation of
the upper airway. (105)
31. Barbiturates are potent cerebral vasoconstrictors. This results in a decrease in
cerebral blood flow, a decrease in cerebral blood volume, a decrease in intracranial
pressure, and a decrease in cerebral metabolic oxygen requirements. Barbiturates
are also thought to depress the reticular activating system, which is believed to be
important in maintaining wakefulness. Thiopental produces a dose-dependent
depression of the electroencephalogram. A flat electroencephalogram may be
maintained with a continuous infusion of thiopental. Methohexital is the only
barbiturate that does not decrease electrical activity on an electroencephalogram.
In fact, methohexital activates epileptic foci and is often used intraoperatively
to identify epileptic foci during the surgical ablation of these foci. The effects of
barbiturates on the central nervous system indicate that barbiturates are useful
for patients in whom elevated intracranial pressures are a concern. Examples of
patients who may benefit from the administration of a barbiturate as an induction
agent or as maintenance anesthesia include patients with intracranial space-
occupying lesions or patients who have suffered head trauma. (105)
32. In patients with persistently elevated intracranial pressures, barbiturates may be
administered intravenously in high doses to decrease the intracranial pressure.
Care must be taken to avoid decreases in mean arterial pressure that would
compromise the cerebral perfusion pressure under these conditions. To ascertain
the optimal dose of barbiturate administered for these patients, an
electroencephalogram can be obtained. The dose of barbiturate can be titrated to a
flat-line electroencephalogram. When the electroencephalogram is isoelectric
there is no further depression of cerebral metabolism or of cerebral metabolic
oxygen requirements with increasing doses of barbiturate. This allows the clinician
to administer the dose of barbiturate that provides the maximal benefit with
minimal adverse effects. Barbiturates may offer some cerebral protection for
patients with regional cerebral ischemia. Patients with global cerebral ischemia,
such as from cardiac arrest, are not thought to derive any protection from
the administration of barbiturates. (105-106)
33. There are various routes and methods for the administration of barbiturates in
clinical anesthesia practice. For instance, the rapid intravenous administration of a
bolus of barbiturate is indicated for a rapid sequence induction of anesthesia. The
bolus of barbiturate should be immediately followed by the administration of
succinylcholine or a nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking drug to produce
skeletal muscle paralysis and facilitate tracheal intubation under these conditions.
Alternatively, small doses of intravenous thiopental, in the range of 0.5 to 1 mg/kg,
may be administered to adult patients who have difficulty accepting the application
of an anesthesia mask and/or the inhalation of a volatile anesthetic. The rectal
Intravenous Anesthetics
57
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
administration of the barbiturate methohexital can be used to facilitate the
induction of anesthesia in young or uncooperative patients. (106)
34. Potential adverse complications of the injection of thiopental may result from
accidental intraarterial, subcutaneous, and even appropriate venous administration
of thiopental. The accidental intraarterial injection of barbiturates results in
excruciating pain and intense vasoconstriction that can last for hours. It is believed
that barbiturate crystal formation in the blood causes the occlusion of distant small
diameter arteries and arterioles. There are several treatment modalities for this
potential problem, including the intraarterial injection of papaverine and/or
lidocaine, sympathetic nervous system blockade by stellate ganglion block of the
involved upper extremity, and the administration of heparin to prevent thrombosis.
Despite aggressive therapy, gangrene of the extremity often results. The accidental
subcutaneous injection of barbiturates results in local tissue irritation. The irritation
may proceed to pain, edema, erythema, or even tissue necrosis, depending on the
volume and concentration injected. It has been recommended that 5 to 10 ml of 0.5%
lidocaine be injected locally when the subcutaneous injection of thiopental occurs in
an attempt to dilute the barbiturate. Venous thrombosis has been seen after the
intravenous administration of thiopental. It is presumed that the thrombosis results
from the deposition of barbiturate crystals in the vein. The crystallization of
barbiturates is more likely to occur when the pH of the blood is too low to keep
the alkaline barbiturate in solution. (105)
35. Life-threatening allergic reactions to barbiturates are rare. The risk has been
estimated to be 1 in 30,000. (105)
BENZODIAZEPINES
36. Benzodiazepines that are commonly used in the perioperative period include
midazolam, diazepam, and lorazepam. The most common effects of benzodiazepines
are their anxiolytic and sedative effects. When administered at higher doses,
benzodiazepines may also produce unconsciousness. Other properties of
benzodiazepines include anterograde amnesia, a lack of retrograde amnesia, minimal
cardiopulmonary depression, anticonvulsant activity, and relative safety when taken
in overdose. Clinical uses of benzodiazepines include their use for preoperative
medication, for intravenous sedation, for the intravenous induction of anesthesia,
and for the suppression of seizure activity. In addition to the intravenous route of
administration, benzodiazepines can be administered via intramuscular,
intranasal, and sublingual routes. (106, Figure 9-7)
37. Benzodiazepines exert their effects through their actions on the gamma-
aminobutyric acid (GABA) receptor. When GABA receptors are stimulated by the
inhibitory neurotransmitter GABA, a chloride ion channel opens, allowing chloride
ions to flow into the cell. This results in hyperpolarization of the neuron and a
resistance of the neuron to subsequent depolarization. Benzodiazepines enhance the
effect of GABA by binding to subunits of the GABA receptor and maintaining the
chloride channel open for a longer period of time. (107, Figure 9-8)
38. Benzodiazepine receptors are located primarily on postsynaptic nerve endings in
the central nervous system. The greatest density of benzodiazepine receptors is in
the cerebral cortex. The distribution of benzodiazepine receptors is consistent
with the minimal cardiopulmonary effects of these drugs. (107)
39. Midazolam has almost two times the affinity for benzodiazepine receptors than does
diazepam, which is consistent with its greater potency. (107)
40. Midazolam is a hydrophilic drug. When midazolam is exposed to the pH of the
blood it undergoes a change in its structure and becomes highly lipid soluble.
This change in structure allows it to cross the blood-brain barrier and gain access
to the central nervous system. (106-107)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
58
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
41. Benzodiazepines are highly lipid-soluble drugs. This allows them to gain rapid
entrance into the central nervous system by crossing the blood-brain barrier,
where they are able to exert their effects. Thus the effect-site equilibration time of
benzodiazepines is short, although it is slower than propofol or thiopental. The
duration of action of benzodiazepines is dependent on the redistribution of the
drug from the brain to inactive tissue sites. A continuous infusion or repeated
boluses can result in saturation of the inactive tissue sites and a prolongation of
the drug effect, particularly for the benzodiazepines that have active metabolites.
For instance, diazepam undergoes hepatic metabolism to active metabolites,
whereas midazolam has no active metabolites. The context-sensitive half-times
for diazepam and lorazepam are prolonged when compared with that of
midazolam. (107)
42. Induction doses of midazolam may lead to decreases in systemic blood pressure that
are greater than those seen with the induction dose of diazepam. This effect of
midazolam may be particularly pronounced in patients who are hypovolemic.
The decrease in systemic blood pressure is believed to be due to decreases in
systemic vascular resistance. (67, 107-108)
43. In general, benzodiazepines alone produce dose-dependent ventilatory depressant
effects. Transient apnea may occur with the rapid administration of induction
doses of midazolam, particularly if an opioid has been used for premedication. (108)
44. Benzodiazepines decrease cerebral blood flow and cerebral metabolic oxygen
requirements in a dose-dependent manner, but there is a ceiling to this effect.
This makes benzodiazepines safe for use in patients with intracranial space-
occupying lesions, although the administration of benzodiazepines to patients with
intracerebral pathologic processes may make subsequent neurologic evaluation
of the patient difficult secondary to the potentially prolonged effects of these drugs.
Benzodiazepines also have anticonvulsant effects that are thought to occur
through the enhancement of the inhibitory effects of the neurotransmitter
GABA acid in the central nervous system. Benzodiazepines have been shown to
increase the seizure threshold or treat seizures due to local anesthetic toxicity,
alcohol withdrawal, and epilepsy. The dose of diazepam used to treat seizures is
0.1 mg/kg intravenously. An isoelectric electroencephalogram is not able to be
achieved with the administration of benzodiazepines. (107-108)
45. Clinical uses of benzodiazepines in anesthesia practice include preoperative
medication, intravenous sedation, the intravenous induction of anesthesia, and
the suppression of seizure activity. (109)
46. When administered for sedation, midazolam has a more rapid onset and produces
a greater degree of amnesia than diazepam. The slow onset and greater duration
of action of lorazepam limits its usefulness as a preoperative medication. All
benzodiazepines may have prolonged and more pronounced sedative effects in the
elderly. (109)
47. The intravenous induction doses of midazolam and diazepam are 0.1 to 0.2 mg/kg
and 0.2 to 0.3 mg/kg, respectively. The time of onset of midazolam is anywhere
between 30 and 80 seconds, depending on the dose and premedication. The time
of onset of midazolam is more rapid than the time of onset of diazepam, making it
the benzodiazepine of choice for the induction of anesthesia. The speed of onset
of both these agents can be facilitated by the prior administration of opioids.
Benzodiazepines are advantageous over barbiturates for the induction of anesthesia
only because of their potentially lesser circulatory effects and greater reliability for
the production of amnesia. A disadvantage of benzodiazepines for the induction
of anesthesia is their lack of analgesic properties. Additional medicines would need
to be administered to blunt the cardiovascular and laryngeal responses to direct
laryngoscopy. The major disadvantage of benzodiazepines for the induction of
anesthesia is delayed awakening, which limits the usefulness of benzodiazepines for
Intravenous Anesthetics
59
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
this purpose. Midazolam is the shortest-acting of the benzodiazepines and therefore
the most appropriate choice of benzodiazepine for the induction of anesthesia. Even
so, awakening after a single induction dose of midazolam in healthy volunteers
takes more than 15 minutes. Diazepam and lorazepam require even greater periods
of time before awakening after an induction dose, precluding their use as anesthesia
induction agents. (108-109)
48. The effects of benzodiazepines can be reversed by a specific antagonist drug,
flumazenil. Flumazenil is a competitive antagonist that binds to the benzodiazepine
receptor but has little intrinsic activity. Flumazenil should be titrated to effect
by administering 0.2 mg intravenously every 60 seconds up to a total dose of 1
to 3 mg. Flumazenil binds tightly to the benzodiazepine receptor but is cleared
rapidly from the plasma. This results in a short duration of action of only about
20 minutes. The short duration of action of flumazenil requires that the patient be
closely monitored for resedation after a dose of flumazenil is administered to
reverse the effects of a benzodiazepine. Alternatively, an infusion of flumazenil may
be started and titrated to the desired effect to maintain a constant plasma
level of this reversal agent. (109)
49. Propylene glycol is an organic solvent used to dissolve lipid soluble diazepam into
solution. Propylene glycol is likely responsible for the unpredictable absorption
of diazepam when administered intramuscularly. It is also responsible for the
pain and possible subsequent thrombophlebitis experienced by patients on
the intravenous injection of diazepam. (109)
50. Allergic reactions to benzodiazepines are extremely rare. (109)
KETAMINE
51. Ketamine is a derivative of phencyclidine. The administration of ketamine
produces unconsciousness and analgesia that is dose related. The exact mechanism
by which ketamine exerts its effects is unknown. Ketamine occupies some m-opioid
receptors in the brain and spinal cord, which may partially explain its analgesic
effects. Ketamine also binds to the NMDA receptor, which is believed to mediate
the general anesthetic actions of ketamine. Other receptors that ketamine interacts
with include monoaminergic receptors, muscarinic receptors, and calcium ion
channels. Functionally, ketamine is believed to cause selective depression of the
projections from the thalamus to the limbic system and cortex. The anesthesia
derived from the administration of ketamine has thus been termed a dissociative
anesthesia. There have not been any drugs isolated that are able to antagonize
the effects of ketamine. (109-110, Figure 9-9)
52. After an induction dose of ketamine the patient appears to be in a cataleptic state.
The appearance of the patient may be characterized as eyes remaining open with a
slow nystagmic gaze; the maintenance of cough, swallow, and corneal reflexes;
moderate dilation of the pupils; lacrimation; salivation; and an increase in skeletal
muscle tone, with apparently coordinated but purposeless movements of the
extremities. Induction doses of ketamine provide an intense analgesia and amnesia
in patients despite the patient appearing as if he or she may be awake. (109)
53. The redistribution of highly lipid-soluble ketamine to inactive tissue sites allows
for rapid awakening after the administration of a bolus of ketamine. Ketamine
undergoes extensive hepatic metabolism to norketamine for its elimination.
Norketamine has between 20% and 30% of the potency of ketamine and may
contribute to some of the delayed effects of ketamine when administered as
a continuous infusion. (110)
54. For the induction of anesthesia, the intravenous dose of ketamine is 1 to 2 mg/kg,
whereas the intramuscular dose is 5 to 10 mg/kg. The induction of anesthesia after
intravenous administration is achieved within 60 seconds. The induction of
anesthesia after intramuscular administration is achieved within 2 to 4 minutes.
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
60
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
Return of consciousness after an intravenous induction dose of ketamine usually
requires 10 to 20 minutes, whereas full orientation may take 60 to 90 minutes.
Ketamine may also be administered orally or rectally. (110-111)
55. The administration of ketamine results in an increase in systemic blood pressure,
pulmonary artery blood pressure, heart rate, and cardiac output. The systemic
blood pressure may increase by 20 to 40 mm Hg over the first 5 minutes after
induction doses of ketamine are administered. The rise in blood pressure is often
sustained for over 10 minutes. The degree of hemodynamic change elicited by the
administration of ketamine is not influenced by the dose of ketamine that is
administered, but it can be blunted by the prior administration of barbiturates,
benzodiazepines, or opioids. These cardiovascular effects of ketamine are most
likely mediated centrally through the activation of the sympathetic nervous system
and the direct stimulation of sympathetic nervous system outflow. Endogenous
norepinephrine release has been found to accompany the administration of
ketamine. This property of ketamine may make it useful as an induction agent in
hypovolemic patients in whom hemodynamic support is beneficial. Conversely,
patients with a history of myocardial ischemia may be adversely affected by the
increases in myocardial oxygen demand induced by the administration of ketamine,
making ketamine a poor choice for an induction agent in this patient population.
Of note, the cardiovascular stimulatory effects of ketamine may not be as
pronounced and may even be absent in patients who are catecholamine depleted.
In catecholamine-depleted patients, such as the trauma patient, the administration
of ketamine may actually lead to myocardial depression and a decrease in
systemic blood pressure. (110)
56. The administration of ketamine can result in a transient depression of ventilation,
even apnea with large doses, but the resting PaCO2 is typically unaltered in these
patients. Ketamine relaxes bronchial smooth muscle, resulting in bronchodilation.
This effect of ketamine is most likely mediated by its sympathomimetic effects and
may make it useful as an induction agent in patients with bronchial asthma. The
administration of ketamine also induces an increase in airway secretions. When
ketamine is used as an induction agent, the administration of an antisialagogue
preoperatively may be useful in decreasing the amount of airway secretions. (110)
57. Ketamine preserves and may even increase skeletal muscle tone. Patients have
varying degrees of purposeful skeletal muscle movement and hypertonus after an
induction dose of ketamine. The preservation of skeletal muscle tone results in
maintenance of a patent upper airway and the preservation of cough and swallow
reflexes. Despite this, airway protection by these reflexes against regurgitation or
vomiting cannot be assumed. (110)
58. Ketamine has excitatory effects on the central nervous system such that there are
increases in cerebral metabolism, cerebral blood flow, intracranial pressure, and
cerebral metabolic oxygen requirements associated with its administration. These
excitatory effects of ketamine are reflected by the development of theta wave
activity on the electroencephalogram when ketamine is administered. Because of
thecentralnervoussystemexcitatoryeffectsofketamine,itisnotrecommendedasan
induction agent in patients with space-occupying intracranial lesions or after head
trauma in whom increases in the intracranial pressure can be detrimental. (110)
59. The emergence after the administration of ketamine has been associated with a
delirium, often referred to as an emergence delirium. The severity of the emergence
delirium varies. The emergence of delirium manifests as vivid dreaming, visual and
auditory illusions, and a sense of floating outside the body. These sensations are
often associated with confusion, excitement, and fear, and are unpleasant to the
patient. The emergence of delirium typically occurs in the first hour after
emergence and persists for 1 to 3 hours. The incidence of emergence delirium with
ketamine administration has been estimated to be up to 30%, and it is more likely
Intravenous Anesthetics
61
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
to occur when ketamine is used as the sole anesthetic agent. The risk of emergence
delirium can be decreased with the preoperative or postinduction administration of
benzodiazepines. (110)
60. Some common clinical uses of ketamine include its administration for the
induction of anesthesia in hypovolemic patients, its intramuscular injection
for the induction of anesthesia in children or in developmentally disabled patients
who are difficult to manage, and for dressing changes and debridement procedures
in burn patients. Small doses of ketamine may be titrated for its analgesic
effects. (110-111)
61. The repeated administration of ketamine may result in the development of a
tolerance to the analgesic effects of ketamine. Clinically, this would manifest as an
increase in the dose of ketamine required with each subsequent anesthetic to
provide sufficient analgesic effects. An example in which this situation may arise is
in burn patients who are being administered ketamine while undergoing recurrent
dressing changes. (110)
62. Allergic reactions to ketamine are uncommon. (110)
ETOMIDATE
63. Etomidate is an imidazole derivative. The mechanism by which etomidate exerts its
effects is not completely understood. It appears that etomidate acts in part through
agonist effects at the GABA receptor. (111, Figure 9-10)
64. The induction dose of etomidate is 0.3 mg/kg. The administration of etomidate
in induction doses results in unconsciousness in less than 30 seconds. The duration
of action of etomidate after an induction dose is very short, owing to its rapid
clearance from the plasma through redistribution to inactive tissue sites. (111)
65. Etomidate rapidly undergoes nearly complete ester hydrolysis to pharmacologically
inactive metabolites by the liver, with less than 3% of the drug being excreted
in the urine unchanged. (111)
66. Like thiopental and propofol, etomidate is highly lipid soluble, which allows it
to quickly cross the blood-brain barrier to exert its effects. This accounts for the
short effect-site equilibration time for these agents. The context-sensitive half-time
of etomidate may be prolonged if repeated or continuous doses of the drug result in
saturation of the inactive sites. It is less likely than thiopental to accumulate and
have prolonged effects, however. (111, Figure 9-3)
67. The administration of etomidate provides cardiovascular stability in that
induction doses of etomidate result in minimal changes in heart rate, mean arterial
pressure, central venous pressure, stroke volume, or cardiac index. Minimal
decreases in blood pressure may result from the administration of etomidate to
hypovolemic patients. The cardiovascular stability associated with etomidate sets it
apart from the other induction agents and is the basis for its usefulness as
an induction agent in patients with limited cardiac reserve. When etomidate is
administered to these patients, it is important to realize that it does not have any
analgesic effects. Supplemental agents need to be administered in conjunction with
etomidate to blunt the stimulatory effects of direct laryngoscopy. (111)
68. The administration of etomidate alone appears to result in less depressant effects on
ventilation than propofol or thiopental. The effects of etomidate on ventilation
may be augmented when administered in combination with other anesthetics or
opioids. (111)
69. The administration of etomidate results in decreases in cerebral blood flow,
intracranial pressure, and cerebral metabolic oxygen requirements. Etomidate has
similar effects as barbiturates on the electroencephalogram as well, such that
etomidate may be titrated to an isoelectric electroencephalogram to maximally
decrease cerebral metabolic oxygen requirements. (111)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
62
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
70. The administration of etomidate has been shown to increase the activity of seizure
foci on an electroencephalogram. Etomidate is similar to methohexital in this
regard. Its effects can be used intraoperatively to facilitate intraoperative mapping
of seizure foci for surgical ablation. (111)
71. The administration of etomidate is associated with the suppression of adrenocortical
function. The suppression of adrenocortical function may last for up to 4 to
8 hours after the induction dose of etomidate has been administered. The concern
regarding this suppression of adrenocortical function is the potential for the
adrenal cortex to be unresponsive to adrenocorticotropic hormone. Should the
adrenal cortex be unresponsive to adrenocorticotropic hormone, desirable
protective responses against the stresses that accompany the perioperative period
may be prevented. No adverse outcomes have been shown to have occurred
secondary to short-term adrenocortical suppression associated with the
administration of etomidate, however. (111-112, Figure 9-11)
72. Potential negative effects associated with the administration of etomidate include
pain during intravenous injection, superficial thrombophlebitis, involuntary
myoclonic movements, and an increased incidence of postoperative nausea and
vomiting. (111-112)
DEXMEDETOMIDINE
73. Dexmedetomidine, the active S-enantiomer of medetomidine, is an imidazole. It is
also a selective a2-adrenergic agonist. (112)
74. Dexmedetomidine is a highly selective a2-adrenergic agonist and exerts its effects
through activation of a2 receptors in the central nervous system. The analgesic
effects originate at the level of the spinal cord, and its hypnotic effects likely
originate through receptor sites in the locus ceruleus. (113)
75. Some common clinical uses for dexmedetomidine include infusion as an adjunct
during general anesthesia in the operating room, sedation for procedures, sedation
for airway management (i.e., fiber-optic intubation), and sedation of intubated
patients in the intensive care unit. (113)
76. When administered during general anesthesia, dexmedetomidine (0.5- to 1-mg/kg
loading dose over a period of 10 to 15 minutes, followed by an infusion of 0.2 to
0.7 mg/kg/hr) decreases the dose requirements for inhaled and injected
anesthetics. (113)
77. Dexmedetomidine infusion decreases systemic blood pressure by moderate
decreases in heart rate and systemic vascular resistance. Bradycardia associated
with dexmedetomidine infusion may sometimes require treatment. Severe
bradycardia, heart block, and asystole have been described. A bolus injection may
produce transient increases in systemic blood pressure and pronounced decreases in
heart rate, an effect that is probably mediated through activation of peripheral
a2-adrenergic receptors. (113)
78. Dexmedetomidine has only minor effects on the respiratory system when compared
with other intravenous anesthetics. These effects include small decreases in tidal
volume without much change in the respiratory rate. The ventilatory response
to carbon dioxide is unchanged. Upper airway obstruction as a result of sedation is
possible and may be augmented when dexmedetomidine is combined with
other sedative-hypnotics. (113)
79. Dexmedetomidine likely leads to a decrease in cerebral blood flow without
significant changes in intracranial pressure and cerebral metabolic oxygen
requirements. (113)
Intravenous Anesthetics
63
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
Chapter
7 OPIOIDS
Siamak Rahman
STRUCTURE
ACTIVITY
RELATIONSHIPS
1. Name some of the commonly used opioids in anesthesia practice. Which opioids
occur naturally and are obtained from the poppy plant?
MECHANISM
OF ACTION
2. What is the mechanism of action of opioids?
3. Describe the location, subtypes, and pharmacologic responses of the opioid
receptors. What are the primary receptor subtypes for supraspinal and spinal
analgesia?
4. What endogenous neurotransmitters normally bind to and activate opioid receptors?
METABOLISM
5. What are the different ways that opioids are metabolized?
6. How are opioids cleared from the plasma? Which opioids have active metabolites?
PHARMACOKINETICS
7. What are the potency, time of onset, and duration of action of opioids dependent
on? How rapid is the effect-site equilibration time of morphine relative to the
other opioids?
8. What is the latency time to peak effect of opioids (i.e., bolus front-end kinetics) after
a bolus injection?
9. How is the time to steady-state concentration after starting a continuous infusion
defined and measured? How is remifentanil different from other opioids when
used as a continuous infusion?
10. What is context-sensitive half-time (CSHT)? What are some clinical implications of
the CSHT?
PHARMACODYNAMICS
THERAPEUTIC
EFFECTS
11. What are some therapeutic effects of opioids?
ADVERSE EFFECTS
12. What are the effects of opioids on the cardiovascular system?
13. What are the effects of opioids on ventilation?
14. What are the effects of opioids on the central nervous system?
64
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
15. What are the effects of opioids on the thoracoabdominal muscles? How can they be
treated?
16. What are the effects of opioids on the gastrointestinal system?
17. What are the effects of opioids on the genitourinary system?
18. What is the mechanism by which opioids are thought to cause nausea
and vomiting?
19. How do opioids modulate immune function?
DRUG
INTERACTIONS
20. What is an example of a pharmacokinetic drug interaction of opioids?
21. What is an example of a pharmacodynamic drug interaction of opioids?
SPECIAL
POPULATIONS
22. What are some considerations of using opioids in patients with hepatic failure?
23. What are some considerations of using opioids in patients with kidney failure?
24. Does gender have an influence on opioid pharmacology?
25. Does age have an influence on opioid pharmacology?
26. How should opioids be dosed in obese patients?
UNIQUE FEATURES
OF INDIVIDUAL
OPIOIDS
27. How does the onset time of morphine compare with the other opioids? What are
some potential drawbacks of the administration of morphine?
28. How does fentanyl compare with morphine with regard to its effect-site
equilibration time? What is the potency of fentanyl relative to morphine?
29. What are some routes for the administration of fentanyl?
30. How are the effects of fentanyl terminated? How does the context-sensitive half-
time of fentanyl compare with other opioids?
31. What are some systemic clinical effects associated with the administration of
fentanyl?
32. What are some clinical uses of fentanyl in anesthesia practice?
33. How does sufentanil compare with the other opioids with respect to its effect-site
equilibration time and its context-sensitive half-time?
34. What is the potency of sufentanil relative to morphine?
35. What are some systemic clinical effects associated with the administration of
sufentanil?
36. How does alfentanil compare with the other opioids with respect to its effect-site
equilibration time and its context-sensitive half-time?
37. What are some clinical uses of alfentanil?
38. How does remifentanil compare with the other opioids with respect to its effect-site
equilibration time and its context-sensitive half-time?
39. What is the potency of remifentanil relative to morphine?
40. What are some clinical uses of remifentanil?
CLINICAL APPLICATION
COMMON CLINICAL
INDICATIONS
41. What are some common clinical indications for the use of opioids?
RATIONAL DRUG
SELECTION AND
ADMINISTRATION
42. What is the basis of opioid selection in different situations?
Opioids
65
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
ANSWERS*
STRUCTURE
ACTIVITY
RELATIONSHIPS
1. Opioids that are commonly used in anesthesia practice include morphine, meperidine,
fentanyl, sufentanil, alfentanil, and remifentanil. The only clinically significant
opioids that occur naturally and are derived from the poppy plant are papaverine,
codeine, and morphine. Papaverine lacks any opioid activity. Morphine is considered
the prototype opioid with which all other opioids are compared. (115, Figure 10-1)
MECHANISM
OF ACTION
2. Opioids exerttheireffectsthrough theiragonist actionsat the opioidreceptors. Opioids
bind to the opioid receptors in the ionized state. After an opioid binds to a receptor,
there are at least two mechanisms by which opioids alter the activity of the cell. The
main action of opioids appears to be through the interaction withG-proteins, resulting
in inhibition of the activity of adenylate cyclase and increasing potassium
conductance. This ultimately results in hyperpolarization of the cell and leads to a
suppression of synaptic transmission. The second mechanism by which opioids may
produce theireffect isthrough the interferenceof calciumion intracellulartransport in
the presynaptic cells. This results in interference with the release of neurotransmitters
from the presynaptic cell and again suppresses synaptic transmission.
Neurotransmitters that are affected by this mechanism of action of opioids include
acetylcholine, dopamine, norepinephrine, and substance P. (116, Figure 10-2)
3. Opioid receptors are located in various tissues throughout the central nervous
system and exert their therapeutic effects at multiple sites. They inhibit the release
of substance P from primary sensory neurons in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord,
mitigating the transfer of painful sensations to the brain (spinal analgesia).
Opioid actions in the brainstem modulate nociceptive transmission in the dorsal
horn of the spinal cord through descending inhibitory pathways. Opioids probably
change the affective response to pain through actions in the forebrain (supraspinal
analgesia). Three classical opioid receptors have been identified: m, k, and d. More
recently, a fourth opioid receptor, ORL1 (also known as NOP), has also been
identified, but its function is quite different from that of the classical
opioid receptors. Although the existence of opioid receptor subtypes (e.g., m1, m2,
etc.) has been proposed, it is not clear from molecular biology techniques that
distinct genes code for them. The responses evoked by opioid agonists at the m
receptor include spinal and supraspinal analgesia, ventilatory depression,
gastrointestinal effects (nausea, vomiting, and ileus), and sedation. The responses
evoked by agonists at the delta receptor include the modulation of the m receptor.
The responses evoked by agonists at the k receptor were almost the same as the m
receptor but lacked any ventilatory depression effect. (116-117, Table 10-2)
4. Endorphins and enkephalins are endogenous neurotransmitters that normally bind
to and activate opioid receptors. (Table 10-2)
METABOLISM
5. Opioids are transformed and excreted by different metabolic pathways. Codeine is a
prodrug and its metabolite, morphine, is the active compound. Codeine is partly
metabolized by O-demethylation into morphine, a metabolic process mediated by
the liver microsomal isoform CYP2D6. Genetic variation in the metabolic pathway
of codeine can drastically alter its clinical effects. Patients who lack CYP2D6
because of deletions, frame shift, or splice mutations (i.e., approximately 10% of the
white population) or whose CYP2D6 is inhibited (e.g., patients taking quinidine) do
not benefit from codeine even though they exhibit a normal response to morphine.
Morphine is metabolized by hepatic conjugation and subsequent excretion by
the kidney. Morphine has a high hepatic extraction ratio (first pass effect), when
*Numbers in parentheses: numbers refer to pages, figures, or tables in Miller RD, Pardo MC: Basics of Anesthesia,
6th ed. Philadelphia, Elsevier Saunders, 2011.
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
66
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
administered orally, which decreases its effect significantly than when injected
intravenously. The hepatic first pass effect of orally administered morphine also
results in high morphine-6-glucuronide levels.
Alfentanil, fentanyl, and sufentanil are also metabolized by liver microsomal
enzymes. Liver metabolism is unpredictable for alfentanil, and less so for fentanyl
and sufentanil. The primary enzyme responsible for alfentanil biotransformation,
CYP3A4, has significant individual variability. Remifentanil is a very short-acting
drug because of de-esterification (i.e., ester hydrolysis) by nonspecific plasma and
tissue esterases to an inactive metabolite. (118, 124, 125, Figure 10-10)
6. Opioids are cleared principally by hepatic metabolism. Morphine is the only opioid
that possesses an active metabolite. About 10% of the metabolism of morphine is to
the active metabolite morphine-6-glucuronide. Morphine-6-glucuronide has
analgesic and ventilatory depressant effects and is eliminated by renal excretion. It is
more potent at the m receptor than morphine and has a similar duration of action.
Care must be taken when administering morphine to patients with renal failure
because the elimination of the active metabolite of morphine may be prolonged.
Morphine’s principal metabolite, morphine-3-glucuronide, is inactive. (124)
PHARMACOKINETICS
7. The potency of an opioid is related to its affinity for the opioid receptor. The time of
onset, or effect-site equilibration time, and duration of action of an opioid are related
to its lipid solubility and degree of ionization at physiologic pH. A greater lipid
solubility and greater nonionization allow for quicker crossing of the blood-brain
barrier, quicker access to the central nervous system to exert its effects, and quicker
redistribution to inactive tissue sites. For example, morphine has relatively low lipid
solubility and is only 10% to 20% nonionized at physiologic pH, accounting for its
relatively prolonged effect-site equilibration time. (118, Figure 10-3)
8. The latency time to peak effect (bolus front-end kinetics) of common intravenous
opioids (morphine, fentanyl, sufentanil, alfentanil, and remifentanil) after
administering a bolus is influenced by the opioid’s ionization and lipid solubility.
Opioids that are un-ionized and unbound, and have high lipid solubility rapidly
equilibrate to the effect site. The time on peak effect is also influenced by the amount
of drug administered in the initial bolus. The offset of effect after bolus injection is
also called bolus back-end kinetics. (118-119)
9. The time required to reach steady state after starting an opioid infusion is defined as
the time required to achieve steady-state effect-site concentrations (i.e., infusion
front-end kinetics). It is important to understand the clinical relevance of
administering a continuous opioid infusion. First, the time required to approach
steady-state effect-site concentrations can be very long, often longer than a surgical
procedure. To achieve final steady-state concentrations more rapidly, a bolus can be
administered before the infusion is started. Additionally, opioid concentrations will
increase slowly for many hours after an infusion is started and continued at a
constant infusion rate. Because remifentanil rapidly equilibrates to the effect site, it
is an exception to this general rule. For this reason, remifentanil is often chosen for
total intravenous anesthesia (TIVA). (118)
10. The context-sensitive half-time (CSHT) is defined as the time required for a
50% decrease in drug concentration after stopping a steady-state infusion.
The CSHT predicts the termination of drug effect or “infusion back-end” kinetics.
It has many clinical utilities. First, for most drugs, the CSHT changes with the
length of the infusion time that it has been infused. After a short duration of
infusion, the predicted back-end kinetics for the various drugs do not differ much
(remifentanil is an exception). But if the duration of infusion is increased, the CSHTs
will vary for the different opioids. Second, clinically shorter- or longer-acting drugs
should be chosen depending on the duration of opioid effect acceptable after
discontinuing it. Finally, the shapes of these curves are not the same if a different
degree of concentration decline (20% or an 80% decrease) is required. (118-119)
Opioids
67
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
PHARMACODYNAMICS
THERAPEUTIC
EFFECTS
11. Opioids appear to be highly effective for the relief of pain that arises from
the viscera, skeletal muscles, and joints, by acting at spinal and brain m receptors.
Other clinical effects of morphine include euphoria, sedation, and altered
mentation. Opioids also suppress the cough reflex via the cough centers in the
medulla. (120)
ADVERSE EFFECTS
12. There are several mechanisms by which the administration of opioids may result in
hypotension. These include histamine release, centrally mediated decreases in
sympathetic tone, vagal-induced bradycardia, and direct and indirect venous and
arterial vasodilation. For example, morphine may result in hypotension primarily
due to histamine release or through centrally mediated decreases in sympathetic
tone. The release of histamine is most likely to accompany the administration of
morphine when high doses of morphine are administered rapidly. The effects of
morphine on blood pressure may manifest clinically only as orthostatic hypotension
in the supine, normovolemic patient. The hypotension associated with the
administration of morphine may also occur due to vagal stimulation. Hypertension
may accompany the administration of opioids secondary to inadequate dosing of
the opioid or to the ill-timed administration of the opioid relative to the
stimulus inducing the increase in blood pressure. (121, Figure 10-4)
13. All the m receptor agonist opioids produce a dose-dependent depression of
ventilation. This is reflected by an increase in the resting PaCO2, an increase in the
apneic threshold, a decrease in the responsiveness to the ventilatory stimulant
effects of carbon dioxide, and a decrease in the hypoxic ventilatory drive. The
administration of opioids also affects the rate of breathing and the tidal volume.
The respiratory rate is typically slowed and insufficiently compensated by an
increase in the tidal volume. Consequently, the minute ventilation is decreased.
The mechanism by which these effects of opioids on ventilation occur is thought to
be through the direct depression of the medullary ventilatory centers. (120-121)
14. The administration of opioids results in several central nervous system effects.
Opioids are unable to produce a dose-related general depression of the central
nervous system typical of other general anesthetics. Instead, opioids have a
ceiling effect that is not overcome by increasing the administered dose of
opioids. Opioids do contribute to the MAC of anesthesia delivered and decrease
the amount of volatile agent required to achieve a given anesthetic depth.
Opioids are not considered to be true anesthetics, however, because of their
inability to reliably produce unconsciousness even in high doses. Finally, the
administration of opioids causes miosis through its cortical inhibition of the
Edinger-Westphal nucleus. (122)
15. The administration of opioids can result in increased thoracoabdominal muscle
tone, which may result in chest wall stiffness. This “stiff-chest” syndrome can
interfere with ventilation. Although the exact mechanism for this muscle rigidity is
not known, it appears to occur most frequently when rapid, large boluses of fentanyl
congeners are initially administered. Termination of the rigidity to allow for
ventilation can be accomplished through the administration of a neuromuscular
blocking drug or an opioid antagonist such as naloxone. Prophylaxis against this
muscle rigidity can be achieved through the administration of a priming dose
of a nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking drug and the slow, intermittent
administration of opioid. (121)
16. Among the several effects opioids have on the gastrointestinal system are effects
on gastrointestinal motility, gastric emptying, and biliary smooth muscle tone.
Opioids increase tone and decrease propulsive motility in both the small and large
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
68
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
intestines. Opioids also increase the gastric emptying time through both central
and peripheral effects of the opioid. Centrally, this effect is mediated by the vagus
nerve. Peripherally, binding of an opioid to the opioid receptors in the myenteric
plexus and cholinergic nerve terminals inhibits the release of acetylcholine at
these nerve terminals. Opioids also increase pyloric sphincter tone, further
contributing to a delay in gastric emptying. Opioids can cause spasm of biliary
smooth muscle, increasing biliary duct pressure. Opioids also increase the tone
of the sphincter of Oddi. In patients receiving intraoperative cholangiograms,
approximately 3% of patients who have been administered opioids have opioid-
induced spasm of the sphincter of Oddi. Together these can result in an increase
in intrabiliary pressure that may manifest as biliary colic or mimic angina pectoris
in the awake patient. The clinician can distinguish between opioid-induced biliary
colic pain and myocardial ischemia through the administration of naloxone.
Naloxone can relieve the pain of biliary colic, but it has no effect on the pain caused
by myocardial ischemia. Glucagon also reverses biliary spasm due to opioids.
Nitroglycerin has resulted in pain relief in both circumstances, making diagnosis
difficult. (121-122)
17. Opioids can decrease bladder detrusor tone and increase the tone of the urinary
sphincter. This may lead to urinary retention in some patients, particularly in males,
when the opioid is administered intrathecally or epidurally. When this occurs there
may be the need to catheterize the patient’s bladder to drain it. These effects are in
part centrally mediated, although peripheral effects are also likely given the
widespread presence of opioid receptors in the genitourinary tract. (122)
18. There are several mechanisms by which opioids are thought to cause nausea and
vomiting. The primary mechanism appears to be through the direct stimulation of
the chemoreceptor trigger zone in the area postrema on the floor of the fourth
ventricle in the brain. In addition to this, opioids also increase gastrointestinal
secretions, decrease gastrointestinal tract motility, and prolong gastric emptying
time. (121)
19. Both administered and endogenous (e.g., endorphins) opioids depress cellular
immunity. For example, opioids have been shown to inhibit the transcription of
interleukin-2inactivatedTcells.Thedifferentopioidsmaydifferinthemechanismand
extent of their immunomodulatory effects. Some possibleadverse outcomes due tothe
impairment of cellular immunity may include impaired wound healing, perioperative
infections, and cancer recurrence. These effects are not completely understood. (122)
DRUG
INTERACTIONS
20. A pharmacokinetic drug interaction is one in which the administration of a drug
influences the concentration of another administered drug. An example of this
occurs when opioids are administered concurrent with a continuous propofol
infusion. Opioid concentrations may be higher when administered with a
continuous propofol infusion than they are when the same dose is administered
alone. This may be due in part to the hemodynamic changes induced by
propofol. (122)
21. A pharmacodynamic drug interaction is one in which the administration of a drug
influences the effect of another administered drug. The most common and most
important pharmacodynamic drug interaction of opioids is its synergistic effect
when administered with sedatives. Opioids also synergistically reduce the minimum
alveolar concentration (MAC) when administered with volatile anesthetics. The
reduction in the MAC of anesthesia can be substantial, by up to 75% or more. (122)
SPECIAL
POPULATIONS
22. With the exception of remifentanil, the liver is the organ primarily responsible
for the metabolism of opioids. The anhepatic phase of orthotopic liver
transplantation is the only situation in which opioid concentrations may
accumulate. Other than that, liver failure is usually not severe enough to have a
Opioids
69
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
major impact on opioid concentrations. Clinically, patients with severe liver disease,
such as those with hepatic encephalopathy, may be more sensitive to the sedative
effects of opioids. (122-123)
23. Kidney failure may have clinical effects on opioid administration, depending on the
opioid. Kidney failure has major clinical relevance when administering morphine
and meperidine. Two metabolites of morphine, morphine-3-glucuronide and
morphine-6-glucuronide (M3G and M6G), are excreted via the kidney. Indeed,
nearly half of morphine conversion to M3G and M6G also happens in the kidney.
M3G is inactive, but M6G is an analgesic whose potency approaches that of
morphine. Life-threatening respiratory depression can develop in patients with
renal failure administered morphine due to very high levels of M6G.
Normeperidine is the main metabolite of meperidine and is excreted through
the kidney. Normeperidine has analgesic and excitatory central nervous system
effects. Increasing levels of CNS toxicity of normeperidine include anxiety,
tremulousness, myoclonus, and frank seizures. Therefore, normeperidine
accumulation is of particular concern in patients with renal failure. For most other
opioids, kidney failure has minimal clinical importance. Remifentanil, which is
metabolized through ester hydrolysis, is not affected by kidney disease.
(123, Figure 10-7).
24. Gender may have an influence on opioid pharmacology. Morphine is more potent in
women, but has a slower onset of action. (123)
25. Age has an important influence on opioid pharmacology. For example, fentanyl
is more potent in the older patient. Pharmacokinetic changes, decreases in
clearance and central distribution volume in older patients, play a lesser role.
Pharmacodynamic differences are primarily responsible for the decreased dose
requirement in older patients (>65 years of age). Doses of opioids, including
remifentanil, should be decreased by at least 50% or more in elderly patients.
(123, Figure 10-8)
26. The clearance of opioids appears to be more closely related to lean body mass, such
that obese patients do not require as high a dose as would be suggested by their
total body weight. For this reason lean body mass should be used to calculate the
dose of opioid administered. Pharmacokinetic simulations used to calculate the
remifentanil dosage based on total body weight (TBW) or lean body mass (LBM)
in obese and lean patients showed dramatically higher concentrations of opioids
when TBW was used in obese patients. (124, Figure 10-9)
UNIQUE FEATURES
OF INDIVIDUAL
OPIOIDS
27. Morphine is the opioid with which other opioids are compared. The onset time
of morphine is slower than the other opioids given its high degree of ionization
and its low lipid solubility. Some potential drawbacks of the administration
of morphine include its active metabolite, the histamine release it causes, and the
potential for “stacking” of subsequent doses in patients in pain due to its slow
onset time. (124-125)
28. Fentanyl administered intravenously has a more rapid onset and shorter duration
of action than morphine. This reflects its greater lipid solubility. The effect-site
equilibration time of fentanyl is about 6.5 minutes. Its shorter duration of action
is also reflective of its rapid redistribution to inactive tissue sites, leading to
a rapid decrease in the plasma concentration of fentanyl. Fentanyl is 75 to 125 times
more potent than morphine. (Figure 10-3)
29. Fentanyl can be administered numerous ways. In addition to the intravenous route,
transdermal, transmucosal, transnasal, and transpulmonary routes are all
effective routes for the administration of fentanyl. The oral transmucosal delivery
of fentanyl citrate results in a faster achievement of higher peak levels than
when the same dose is swallowed. (125)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
70
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
30. The effects of fentanyl are terminated through its redistribution to inactive tissue
sites followed by its metabolism by the liver. High intravenous doses of fentanyl
or a continuous intravenous infusion can lead to saturation of the inactive tissue sites.
This may result in prolonged redistribution, prolonged elimination, and prolonged
pharmacologic effects of the drug. The cumulative drug effects during continuous
intravenous infusions of fentanyl, sufentanil, alfentanil, and remifentanil have
been compared. Alfentanil and remifentanil do not seem to produce clinically
significant cumulative drug effects, and awakening appears to be prompt with
minimal lingering side effects when compared with fentanyl. (118, Figure 10-3)
31. The administration of fentanyl is associated with a decrease in heart rate. The
administration of fentanyl alone leads to little change in systemic blood pressure,
whereas its administration after a benzodiazepine may lead to decreases in blood
pressure. There are also synergistic effects between fentanyl and benzodiazepines
on ventilatory depression and sedation. (121-122)
32. Clinical uses of fentanyl in anesthesia practice include perioperative analgesia, the
induction and maintenance of anesthesia, the inhibition of the sympathetic nervous
system response to direct laryngoscopy or surgical stimulation, and preemptive
analgesia. Opioids are most commonly used during the maintenance of anesthesia
as a supplement to inhaled anesthetics. Opioids used in this manner are often
administered in small intravenous boluses or as a continuous infusion. High doses
of a narcotic, especially fentanyl or sufentanil, may be used as the sole anesthetic
agent in patients who are unable to tolerate any effects of cardiac depression
that inhaled anesthetics may produce. A disadvantage of an opioid-based anesthetic
is the potential for patient awareness. (126)
33. Sufentanil has an effect-site equilibration time similar to fentanyl. Its context-
sensitive half-time is less than that of alfentanil for infusions lasting less than
8 hours, but it is greater than that of remifentanil. (Figure 10-3)
34. Sufentanil is 500 to 1000 times more potent than morphine. It is the most potent
opioid currently in use in anesthesia practice. (125)
35. Systemic clinical effects associated with the administration of sufentanil include
depression of ventilation and bradycardia that appears to be greater than that
produced by fentanyl. Sufentanil in large doses may result in thoracoabdominal
muscle rigidity as well. (121)
36. Alfentanil has an effect-site equilibration time that is shorter than that of fentanyl
and sufentanil, about 1.4 minutes. This is a result of its low pKa, which allows
for about 90% of the drug to be nonionized and lipid soluble at physiologic pH. The
context-sensitive half-time of alfentanil varies by as much as 10 times among
individuals. This is believed to be due to individual variations in its metabolism.
Even so, the context-sensitive half-time of alfentanil is considered to be short when
compared with other opioids. (Figure 10-3, Table 10-1)
37. The rapid, short-acting effect of alfentanil makes it useful for situations in which the
response to a single, brief, intense, noxious stimulus requires blunting. Examples
include the response to direct laryngoscopy and endotracheal intubation, or the
performance of a retrobulbar block. (126)
38. Remifentanil has an effect-site equilibration time of about 1.4 minutes, which
is shorter than that of fentanyl and sufentanil, and about equal to that of
alfentanil. The context-sensitive half-time of remifentanil is much shorter than that
of the other opioids, approximately 4 minutes. It is also independent of the
duration of the continuous infusion, which is unique to remifentanil among
the opioids. The basis for this is its structure, which has an ester link.
The ester link allows for hydrolysis in the plasma to inactive metabolites.
This accounts for its rapid titratability, noncumulative effects, and rapid recovery.
(Figure 10-3, 125)
Opioids
71
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
39. Remifentanil is 250 times more potent than morphine. (125)
40. Like alfentanil, the unique pharmacokinetic profile of remifentanil makes it
desirable in cases where the response to a brief, intense stimulus requires
blunting. It can also be used as maintenance anesthesia when rapid recovery might
be desired, as during an intraoperative wake-up test for the evaluation of motor
nerve integrity during spine surgery. Likewise, a remifentanil infusion is commonly
administered along with propofol for total intravenous anesthesia. When
remifentanil is used as maintenance anesthesia, a longer-acting opioid may need to
be administered before patient arousal for analgesia. (125-126)
CLINICAL APPLICATION
COMMON CLINICAL
INDICATIONS
41. Opioids have been used in different areas of anesthesia. Their main and oldest
indication is postoperative analgesia. To increase the safety of opioid use for
postoperative pain control they can be delivered by a patient-controlled analgesia
(PCA) machine. They can be combined with other drugs and techniques to decrease
pain as well. Another common indication of opioid use is for “balanced anesthesia.”
With this technique, the opioids are primarily used for their ability to decrease MAC,
thereby avoiding the direct myocardial depression and other untoward
hemodynamic effects of the volatile anesthetics. Cardioprotection against ischemia
(preconditioning) is another possible beneficial indication of opioids. Total
intravenous anesthesia (TIVA) can be achieved when opioids are administered in
combination with propofol infusions. This is another recent indication of
opioids during anesthesia that may result in postoperative euphoria and less
nausea and vomiting. (126)
RATIONAL DRUG
SELECTION AND
ADMINISTRATION
42. Pharmacokinetic differences between opioids are the main consideration in
selecting them for appropriate purpose. All m agonists are equally efficacious when
given in equipotent doses. Among key elements when selecting an opioid for
administration is the desired time of onset, the duration of effect, and potential
side effects. Side effects for consideration include sedation and respiratory
depression. (126-127)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
72
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
Chapter
8 LOCAL ANESTHETICS
Ken Drasner
HISTORY
1. What was the first local anesthetic introduced into clinical practice? What was its
clinical use?
STRUCTURE
ACTIVITY
RELATIONSHIPS
2. What is the basic structure of local anesthetics?
3. Why are local anesthetics marketed as hydrochloride salts?
4. What are two differences between ester and amide local anesthetics that make
classifying local anesthetics important?
5. Name four ester local anesthetics.
6. Name seven amide local anesthetics.
7. What is an easy way to remember whether a local anesthetic is an ester or an amine?
MECHANISM
OF ACTION
8. What is the mechanism of action of local anesthetics?
9. Where is the major site of local anesthetic effect?
10. How is the effect of a local anesthetic on the nerve terminated?
11. How is the resting membrane potential and the threshold potential altered in nerves
that have been infiltrated by local anesthetic?
12. What is the temporal progression of the interruption of the transmission of
neural impulses between the autonomic nervous system, motor system, and sensory
system after the infiltration of a mixed nerve with local anesthetic?
13. What is frequency-dependent blockade? How does frequency-dependent blockade
relate to the activity of local anesthetics?
CLASSIFICATION OF
NERVES AND
SENSITIVITY TO
LOCAL ANESTHETICS
14. What three characteristics are nerve fibers classified by? What are the three main
nerve fiber types?
15. Which types of nerve fibers are myelinated? What is the function of myelin and how
does it affect the action of local anesthetics?
16. How many consecutive nodes of Ranvier must be blocked for the effective blockade
of the nerve impulse by local anesthetic?
17. Which two nerve fiber types primarily function to conduct sharp and dull pain
impulses? Which of these two nerve fibers is more readily blocked by local
anesthetic?
18. Which two nerve fiber types primarily function to conduct impulses that result in
large motor and small motor activity?
19. What is meant by differential block? Name an anesthetic that has had limited use
because of its poor sensory selectivity.
20. How do local anesthetics diffuse through nerve fibers when deposited around a
nerve? Which nerve fibers are blocked first as a result?
73
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
SPREAD OF
ANESTHESIA AND
PERIPHERAL NERVE
BLOCKADE
21. How are the nerve fibers arranged from the mantle to the core in a peripheral nerve
with respect to the innervation of proximal and distal structures? How does this
correlate with the temporal progression of local anesthetic-induced blockade of
proximal and distal structures?
22. What very fundamental difference exists between the local anesthetics and most
systemically administered drugs?
PHARMACOKINETICS
23. Is the pKa of local anesthetics more than or less than 7.4?
24. At physiologic pH, does most local anesthetic exist in the ionized or nonionized
form? What form must the local anesthetic be in to cross nerve cell membranes?
25. Does local tissue acidosis create an environment for higher or lower quality local
anesthesia? Why?
26. What is the primary determinant of local anesthetic potency?
27. After a local anesthetic has been absorbed from the tissues, what are the primary
determinants of local anesthetic peak plasma concentrations?
28. How are ester local anesthetics cleared?
29. How are the amide local anesthetics metabolized?
30. What percent of local anesthetic undergoes renal excretion unchanged?
31. What aretwo organsthatinfluencethepotential for localanestheticsystemictoxicity?
32. What accounts for chloroprocaine’s relatively low systemic toxicity?
33. Patients with atypical plasma cholinesterase are at an increased risk for what
complication with regard to local anesthetics?
34. What disease states may influence the rate of clearance of lidocaine from the plasma?
35. How extensive is renal excretion of the parent local anesthetic compound?
36. How does the addition of epinephrine or phenylephrine to a local anesthetic
solution prepared for injection affect its systemic absorption?
37. How does the addition of epinephrine or phenylephrine to a local anesthetic
solution prepared for injection affect its duration of action?
38. How does the addition of epinephrine or phenylephrine to a local anesthetic
solution prepared for injection affect its potential for systemic toxicity?
39. How does the addition of epinephrine or phenylephrine to a local anesthetic
solution prepared for injection affect the rate of onset of anesthesia?
40. How does the addition of epinephrine or phenylephrine to a local anesthetic
solution prepared for injection affect local bleeding?
41. What are some potential negative effects of the addition of epinephrine to a local
anesthetic solution prepared for injection?
42. Name some situations in which the addition of epinephrine to a local anesthetic
solution prepared for injection may not be recommended.
SIDE EFFECTS
43. What are some potential negative side effects associated with the administration of
local anesthetics?
44. What is the most common cause of local anesthetic systemic toxicity?
45. What are the factors that influence the magnitude of the systemic absorption of
local anesthetic from the tissue injection site?
46. From highest to lowest, what is the relative order of peak plasma concentrations of
local anesthetic associated with the following regional anesthetic procedures:
brachial plexus, caudal, intercostal, epidural, sciatic/femoral?
47. Which two organ systems are most likely to be affected by excessive plasma
concentrations of local anesthetic?
48. What are the initial and subsequent manifestations of central nervous system
toxicity due to increasingly excessive plasma concentrations of local anesthetic?
49. What is a possible pathophysiologic mechanism for seizures that result from
excessive plasma concentrations of local anesthetic?
50. What are some potential adverse effects of local anesthetic-induced seizures?
51. How should local anesthetic-induced seizures be treated?
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
74
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
52. What is the indication for and disadvantage of the administration of neuromuscular
blocking drugs for the treatment of seizures?
53. Is the cardiovascular system more or less susceptible to local anesthetic toxicity
than the central nervous system?
54. What are two mechanisms by which local anesthetics produce hypotension?
55. What is the mechanism by which local anesthetics exert their cardiotoxic effects?
How is this manifested on the electrocardiogram?
56. How is the relative cardiotoxicity between local anesthetic agents compared?
What is the relative cardiotoxicity between lidocaine, bupivacaine, and
ropivacaine?
57. How does bupivacaine differ from lidocaine with respect to their cardiotoxic effects,
and what underlying electrophysiologic differences exist between lidocaine and
bupivacaine that might contribute to their differing clinical toxicities?
58. What is the maximum recommended concentration of bupivacaine to be
administered for obstetric epidural anesthesia? Why?
59. What relatively simple and apparently effective therapy for treatment of systemic
local anesthetic toxicity has been recently introduced into clinical practice?
What appears to be its predominant mechanism of action?
60. The administration of which local anesthetics have been associated with
methemoglobinemia? What is the mechanism by which this occurs? How can it be
treated?
61. What is the nature of the neurotoxicity that has been reported in association with
the use of chloroprocaine? What is the mechanism by which this occurs?
62. What is TNS?
63. What is the mechanism by which local anesthetics have resulted in cauda
equina syndrome?
64. What changes have been recommended with respect to the dose of lidocaine
used for spinal anesthesia?
65. What changes in practice have occurred with respect to the relative use of
lidocaine for spinal anesthesia?
66. What is the allergenic potential of local anesthetics? What are the potential
causes of an allergic reaction associated with administration of local
anesthetics?
67. Does cross-sensitivity exist between the classes of local anesthetics?
CLINICAL USES
68. What is the principal use of tetracaine in current clinical practice?
69. What other local anesthetics might be used in place of lidocaine for short-duration
or outpatient surgery?
70. What is an enantiomer?
71. What two marketed local anesthetics are chiral compounds?
72. What is eutectic mixture of local anesthetics (EMLA)?
ANSWERS*
HISTORY
1. The first local anesthetic introduced into clinical practice was cocaine. Cocaine’s
use has been limited by its systemic toxicity, its irritant properties when placed
topically or near nerves, and its substantial potential for physical and
psychological dependence. (130)
*Numbers in parentheses: numbers refer to pages, figures, or tables in Miller RD, Pardo MC: Basics of Anesthesia,
6th ed. Philadelphia, Elsevier Saunders, 2011.
Local Anesthetics
75
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
STRUCTURE
ACTIVITY
RELATIONSHIPS
2. Local anesthetics consist of a lipophilic end and a hydrophilic end connected by
a hydrocarbon chain. The lipophilic end is an aromatic ring, and the hydrophilic end
is a tertiary amine and proton acceptor. The bond that links the hydrocarbon
chain to the lipophilic end of the structure is either an ester (—CO—) or an amide
(—HNC—). The local anesthetic is thus classified as either an ester or an amide local
anesthetic. (131, Figure 11-2)
3. Local anesthetics are bases that are poorly water-soluble. For this reason they
are marketed as hydrochloride salts. The resulting solution is generally slightly
acidic with a pH of about 6. (133)
4. The metabolism and possibly the potential to produce allergic reactions differ
between ester and amide local anesthetics, making this classification of local
anesthetics important. (131)
5. The ester local anesthetics include procaine, chloroprocaine, cocaine, and
tetracaine. (132, Figure 11-3)
6. The amide local anesthetics include lidocaine, mepivacaine, bupivacaine,
levobupivacaine, etidocaine, prilocaine, and ropivacaine. (132, Figure 11-3)
7. As a general rule, ester local anesthetics will have only one “i” in their generic name,
while the amides will have two. (132, Figure 11-3)
MECHANISM
OF ACTION
8. Local anesthetics act by producing a conduction blockade of neural impulses in the
affected nerve. This is accomplished through the prevention of the passage of
sodium ions through ion-selective sodium channels in the nerve membranes.
The inability of sodium ions to pass through their ion selective channels results
in slowing of the rate of depolarization. As a result, the threshold potential is not
reached and an action potential is not propagated. (131)
9. Local anesthetics are thought to exert their predominant action on the nerve
by binding to a specific receptor on the sodium ion channel. The location of
the binding site appears to be within the inner vestibule of the sodium
channel. (131)
10. The conduction blockade produced by a local anesthetic is normally completely
reversible(i.e.,reversaloftheblockadeisspontaneous,predictable,andcomplete).(130)
11. Neither the resting membrane potential nor the threshold potential is appreciably
altered by local anesthetics. (131)
12. The temporal progression of the interruption of the transmission of impulses is
autonomic, sensory, and then motor nerve blockade. This yields a temporal
progression of autonomic nervous system blockade, then sensory nervous system
blockade, followed by skeletal muscle paralysis. (135)
13. According to the modulated receptor model, sodium ion channels alternate between
several conformational states, and local anesthetics bind to these different
conformationalstateswithdifferentaffinities.Duringexcitation,thesodiumchannel
moves from a resting-closed state to an activated-open state, with passage of sodium
ions and consequent depolarization. After depolarization, the channel assumes an
inactivated-closed conformational state. Local anesthetics bind to the activated and
inactivated states more readily than the resting state, attenuating conformational
change. Drug dissociation from the inactivated conformational state is slower than
from the resting state. Thus, repeated depolarization produces more effective
anesthetic binding. The electrophysiologic consequence of this effect is progressive
enhancement of conduction blockade with repetitive stimulation, an effect referred
to as use-dependent or frequency-dependent block. For this reason, selective
conduction blockade of nerve fibers by local anesthetics may in part be related to
the characteristic frequency of activity of the nerve. (132-133)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
76
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
CLASSIFICATION OF
NERVES AND
SENSITIVITY TO
LOCAL ANESTHETICS
14. Fiber diameter, the presence or absence of myelin, and function are the three
characteristics by which nerve fibers are classified. A, B, and C are the three main
types of nerve fibers. (133, 135, Table 11-2)
15. The A and B nerve fiber types are myelinated. Myelin is composed of plasma
membranes of specialized Schwann cells that wrap around the axon during axonal
growth. Myelin functions to insulate the axolemma, or nerve cell membrane, from
the surrounding conducting media. It also forces the depolarizing current to
flow through periodic interruptions in the myelin sheath called the nodes of
Ranvier. The sodium channels that are instrumental in nerve pulse propagation
and conduction are concentrated at these nodes of Ranvier. Myelin increases the
speed of nerve conduction and makes the nerve membrane more susceptible to
local anesthetic-induced conduction blockade. (133, 135, Table 11-2)
16. In general, three consecutive nodes of Ranvier must be exposed to adequate
concentrations of local anesthetic for the effective blockade of nerve impulses to
occur. (135)
17. The nerve fiber type A-d, which is myelinated, conducts sharp or fast/first pain
impulses. The nerve fiber type C, which is unmyelinated, conducts dull burning pain
impulses. The large diameter type A-d fiber appears to be more sensitive to
blockade than the smaller diameter type C fiber. This lends support to the theory
that myelination of nerves has a greater influence than nerve fiber diameter on the
conduction blockade produced by local anesthetics. In clinical practice, however,
the relatively high concentrations of local anesthetic that are generally achieved
will overcome this difference. (135, Table 11-2)
18. The nerve fiber types A-a and A-b, which are both myelinated, conduct motor nerve
impulses. The nerve fiber type A-a conducts large motor nerve impulses, and
the nerve fiber type A-b conducts small motor nerve impulses. (135, Table 11-2)
19. Differential block refers to the relative block of sensory versus motor function. For
equivalent analgesia or anesthesia, etidocaine tends to produce more profound
motor block than most commonly used local anesthetics, making it an unfavorable
choice, particularly for use in labor or postoperative pain management. (135)
20. Local anesthetics diffuse along a concentration gradient from the outer surface,
or mantle, of the nerve toward the center, or core, of the nerve. As a result, the
nerve fibers located in the mantle of the nerve are blocked before those in
the core of the nerve. (135, Figure 11-5)
SPREAD OF
ANESTHESIA AND
PERIPHERAL NERVE
BLOCKADE
21. In a peripheral nerve, the nerve fibers in the mantle generally innervate more
proximal anatomic structures. The distal anatomic structures are more frequently
innervated by nerve fibers near the core of the nerve. This physiologic
orientation of nerve fibers in a peripheral nerve explains the observed initial
proximal analgesia with subsequent progressive distal spread as local anesthetics
diffuse to reach more central core nerve fibers. (135, Figure 11-5)
22. In contrast to most systemically administered drugs, the local anesthetics are
deposited at the target site, and systemic absorption and circulation serve to
attenuate or curtailtheir effect rather than distribute them to their site of action. (135)
PHARMACOKINETICS
23. The pKa of most local anesthetics is greater than 7.4 (benzocaine is a notable
exception with a pKa of approximately 3.5). This means that the pH at which the
cationic form and nonionized form will be equivalent is greater than 7.4 for almost
all of the clinically used anesthetics. (133, Table 11-1)
24. Most local anesthetic molecules exist in the ionized, hydrophilic form at physiologic
pH. However, local anesthetics must be in the nonionized, lipid-soluble form to
cross the lipophilic nerve cell membranes. (131, 133, Table 11-1)
Local Anesthetics
77
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
25. Local tissue acidosis is associated with a lower quality anesthesia. This is presumed
to be due to an increase in the ionized fraction of the drug in an acidotic
environment, with less of the neutral form available to penetrate the cell membrane.
(133, Figure 11-4)
26. The primary determinant of the potency of a local anesthetic is its lipid
solubility. (133)
27. The rate of systemic uptake and the rate of clearance of the drug are the two
primary determinants of peak plasma concentrations of a local anesthetic after
its absorption from tissue sites. (136)
28. Ester local anesthetics are cleared by hydrolysis by pseudocholinesterase enzymes
in the plasma. (136)
29. Amide local anesthetics undergo degradation in the liver by hepatic microsomal
enzymes. (136)
30. Less than 5% of the injected dose of local anesthetic undergoes renal excretion
unchanged. The low water solubility of local anesthetics limits their renal
excretion. (136)
31. The lungs and the liver both influence the potential for local anesthetic
systemic toxicity. The extent to which the lungs extract local anesthetics from
the circulation—so-called first-pass pulmonary extraction—influences systemic
toxicity by preventing the rapid accumulation of local anesthetics in the plasma.
The liver also influences local anesthetic systemic toxicity, especially for the
amide local anesthetics that depend upon the liver for metabolism. (136)
32. The relatively rapid hydrolysis by plasma cholinesterase makes chloroprocaine less
likely to produce sustained plasma concentrations. (136)
33. Patients with atypical plasma cholinesterase enzyme may be at increased risk
for developing excessive plasma concentrations of ester local anesthetics. Ester
local anesthetics rely on plasma hydrolysis for their metabolism, which may
be limited or absent in these patients. (136)
34. Lidocaine, an amide local anesthetic, is cleared by hepatic metabolism. The
clearance of lidocaine from the plasma parallels hepatic blood flow. Liver disease
or decreases in hepatic blood flow as can occur with congestive heart failure or
general anesthesia can decrease the rate of metabolism of lidocaine. (136)
35. The low water solubility of the local anesthetics usually limits renal excretion of the
parent compound to less than 5% of the administered dose. (136)
36. The addition of epinephrine or phenylephrine to a local anesthetic solution produces
a local tissue vasoconstriction. This results in a slowing of the rate of systemic
absorption of the local anesthetic. (136)
37. The addition of epinephrine or phenylephrine to a local anesthetic solution produces
local tissue vasoconstriction. This results in a prolonged duration of action of the
local anesthetic by keeping the anesthetic in contact with the nerve fibers for a
longer period of time. (136)
38. The addition of epinephrine or phenylephrine to a local anesthetic solution causes
a slower rate of systemic absorption and a prolonged duration of action.
This increases the likelihood that the rate of metabolism will match the rate of
absorption, resulting in a decrease in the possibility of systemic toxicity.
Inclusion of epinephrine may also decrease the potential for toxicity by serving as
a marker for misplaced intravascular injection, whereby the elevation of heart
rate can serve as a warning of such misplacement, alerting the clinician
to halt injection and thus prevent the administration of additional
anesthetic. (136)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
78
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
39. The addition of epinephrine or phenylephrine to a local anesthetic solution has little
effect on the rate of onset of anesthesia. (136)
40. The addition of epinephrine or phenylephrine to a local anesthetic solution
decreases bleeding in the area infiltrated due to its vasoconstrictive properties. (136)
41. The systemic absorption of epinephrine from the local anesthetic solution may
contribute to cardiac dysrhythmias or accentuate hypertension in vulnerable
patients. (136)
42. The addition of epinephrine to a local anesthetic solution may not be recommended
in patients with unstable angina, cardiac dysrhythmias, uncontrolled hypertension,
or uteroplacental insufficiency. The addition of epinephrine to a local anesthetic
solution is not recommended for intravenous anesthesia or for peripheral nerve
block anesthesia in areas that may lack collateral blood flow, such as the digits
(though the soundness of this latter proscription has been recently questioned). (136)
SIDE EFFECTS
43. Potential negative side effects associated with the administration of local
anesthetics include systemic toxicity, neurotoxicity, and allergic reactions. (136)
44. Local anesthetic systemic toxicity occurs as a result of excessive plasma
concentrations of a local anesthetic drug. The most common cause of local
anesthetic systemic toxicity is accidental intravascular injection of local
anesthetic solution during the performance of a nerve block. (136)
45. The magnitude of the systemic absorption of local anesthetic from the tissue
injection site is influenced by the pharmacologic profile of the local anesthetic, the
total dose injected, the vascularity of the injection site, and the inclusion of a
vasoconstrictor in the local anesthetic solution. (136)
46. The relative order from highest to lowest of peak plasma concentrations of local
anesthetic associated with regional anesthesia is intercostal nerve block, caudal
block, epidural, brachial plexus, and sciatic/femoral. (136, Figure 11-6)
47. The central nervous system and cardiovascular system are most likely to be affected
by excessive plasma concentrations of local anesthetic. (136)
48. The initial manifestations of central nervous system toxicity due to excessive
plasma concentrations of local anesthetic include circumoral numbness, facial
tingling, restlessness, vertigo, tinnitus, and slurred speech. With progressively
increasing concentrations of local anesthetic in the plasma, symptoms may progress
to manifestations of central nervous system excitation, such as facial and extremity
muscular twitching and tremors. Finally, tonic-clonic seizures, apnea, and death
can follow. However, deviations from this classic progression are common. (137)
49. Local anesthetic drugs in excessive plasma concentrations sufficient to cause
seizures are believed to initially depress inhibitory pathways in the cerebral
cortex. This allows for the unopposed action of excitatory pathways in the central
nervous system, which manifests as seizures. As the concentration of local
anesthetic in the plasma increases, there is subsequent inhibition of both excitatory
and inhibitory pathways in the brain. Ultimately this leads to generalized global
central nervous system depression. (137)
50. Potential adverse effects of local anesthetic-induced seizures are arterial
hypoxemia, metabolic acidosis, and pulmonary aspiration of gastric contents.
The mainstay of treatment of local anesthetic-induced seizures, as with all seizures,
is aimed toward supporting the patient while attempting to abort the seizure
with anticonvulsant drugs. Supplemental oxygen should be administered.
The patient’s airway may need to be secured with a cuffed endotracheal tube if there
is a need to facilitate adequate ventilation and delivery of oxygen to the lungs,
and to protect the airway from the aspiration of gastric contents. (137)
Local Anesthetics
79
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
51. Anticonvulsant drugs that can be used to stop local anesthetic-induced seizures
include diazepam and propofol. Diazepam is the preferred agent, though propofol
is generally more readily accessible for immediate administration. However,
propofol should be used cautiously in small doses as seizures may portend
cardiovascular toxicity that might be augmented by propofol’s cardiovascular
depression. (137)
52. The administration of paralyzing doses of a rapidly acting neuromuscular blocking
drug may be necessary to facilitate intubation of the trachea during a seizure.
The administration of a neuromuscular blocking drug with prolonged paralytic
effects during a seizure may be indicated when benzodiazepines and barbiturates
have not been effective in stopping the seizure activity. However, while the
neuromuscular block aborts the peripheral seizure activity, it does not alter the
abnormal cerebral electrical activity, and therefore does not negate the need to
adequately control underlying seizure activity with anticonvulsants. (137)
53. The cardiovascular system is generally less susceptible to local anesthetic toxicity
than the central nervous system. That is, the dose of local anesthetic required to
produce central nervous system toxicity is less than the dose of local anesthetic
required to result in cardiotoxicity. (138)
54. Twomechanismsbywhichlocalanestheticsproducehypotensionincludetherelaxation
of peripheral vascular smooth muscle and direct myocardial depression. (138)
55. Local anesthetics exert their cardiotoxic effects primarily through the blockade of
sodium ion channels in the myocardium. This blockade results in an increase in the
conduction time throughout the heart, manifested as a prolongation of the P-R
interval and widening of the QRS complex. Local anesthetics also produce a dose-
dependent negative inotropic effect. Clinically, these may result in a decreased
cardiac output. With extremely elevated serum levels of local anesthetic,
bradycardia and sinus arrest can result. (138)
56. The relative cardiotoxicity of local anesthetic agents is made through a comparison
of the dose (or serum concentration) required to produce cardiovascular collapse
relative to central nervous system toxicity. Through the evaluation of these ratios,
it has been determined that bupivacaine is roughly twice as cardiotoxic as
lidocaine and that levobupivacaine and ropivacaine are intermediate. (138)
57. Bupivacaine is more cardiotoxic than lidocaine per dose administered to achieve a
given anesthetic effect. When electrophysiological differences between anesthetics
are compared, lidocaine is found to enter the sodium ion channel quickly and to
leave quickly. In contrast, recovery from bupivacaine blockade during diastole
is relatively prolonged, making it far more potent with respect to depressing
the maximum upstroke velocity of the cardiac action potential (Vmax) in
ventricular cardiac muscle. As a result, bupivacaine has been labeled a “fast-in,
slow-out” local anesthetic. This characteristic likely creates conditions favorable
for unidirectional block and reentry. Other mechanisms may contribute to
bupivacaine’s cardiotoxicity, including disruption of atrioventricular nodal
conduction, depression of myocardial contractility, and indirect effects mediated
by the central nervous system. (140)
58. The maximum recommended concentration of bupivacaine to be administered
for epidural anesthesia in obstetrics is 0.5%. This recommendation emerged as a
result of numerous fatal cardiotoxic reactions that occurred with the
administration of 0.75% bupivacaine in this patient population. (140)
59. Recently, a series of systematic experimentation and clinical events have identified a
practicalandapparentlyeffectivetherapyforsystemicanesthetictoxicity.Following
experiments in rats and dogs, which demonstrated that administration of a lipid
emulsion could attenuate bupivacaine cardiotoxicity, numerous clinical cases
were reported in which intravenous lipid appears to have been effective in reversing
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
80
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
local anesthetic systemic toxicity. The mechanism by which lipid is effective is
incompletely understood, but its predominant action is most likely related to its
ability to extract bupivacaine (or other lipophilic drugs) from aqueous plasma or
tissue targets, thus reducing their effective concentration (“lipid sink”). (138)
60. The administration of prilocaine has been associated with methemoglobinemia in a
dose-dependent manner, with significant toxicity generally occurring with doses
exceeding 600 mg. Methemoglobinemia results from the accumulation of ortho-
toluidine, a metabolite of prilocaine. Ortho-toluidine is an oxidizing compound
that oxidizes hemoglobin to methemoglobin, creating methemoglobinemia.
Methemoglobinemia that occurs through the administration of prilocaine is
spontaneously reversible. Alternatively, methylene blue may be administered
intravenously to treat this condition. Methemoglobinemia can also be a
significant clinical problem with benzocaine topically administered on mucosal
surfaces. (140)
61. The administration of chloroprocaine has been associated with prolonged motor
and sensory deficits when administered at recommended doses for epidural
anesthesia that appeared to have been inadvertently administered into the
subarachnoid space. Early studies suggested that this effect might have
occurred due to a combination of the low pH of the anesthetic solution (pH
approximately 3.0)and the antioxidant sodium bisulfite, which resulted in the
liberation of sulfur dioxide. However, this mechanism has been challenged by more
recent studies, which implicate the high doses of chloroprocaine, per se. (139)
62. Transient neurologic symptoms (TNS) is a syndrome of pain/dysesthesia in the
lower back, posterior thighs, or buttocks that generally occurs within 24 hours of
recovery from a spinal anesthetic. Full recovery from the symptoms most often
occurs within 3 days. Importantly, TNS is not associated with sensory loss, motor
weakness, or bowel or bladder dysfunction. Risk factors for TNS following spinal
anesthesia include the use of lidocaine, lithotomy position during surgery, and
outpatient status. Indeed, when these three risk factors are combined, the incidence
rate has been found to be 24%. Similar to lithotomy, positioning for knee
arthroscopy appears to dramatically increase risk. (139)
63. Cauda equina syndrome represents the clinical manifestation of injury to the nerve
roots caudal to the conus. Symptoms may include perineal sensory loss, bowel and
bladder dysfunction, and lower extremity motor weakness. In the past, a cluster
of cases was reported in association with the use of lidocaine administered through
microbore spinal catheters (also referred to as small-bore and defined as smaller
than 27 gauge). It is believed that pooling of local anesthetic in the most
dependent portion of the subarachnoid space led to high concentrations of local
anesthetic around the nerve roots of the cauda equina and subsequent irreversible
neurotoxicity. Small-bore catheters for continuous spinal anesthesia are no longer
marketed in the United States. However, risk remains because similar neurotoxic
injury can occur with repetitive doses of any local anesthetic even if administered
through a large-bore (e.g., epidural) catheter. In fact, this mechanism of neurotoxic
injury has also been reported with repeat needle injection after a failed
single-injection spinal anesthesia. (139)
64. Recent experience suggests that lidocaine has greater potential for direct
neurotoxicity than traditionally appreciated. In addition to the aforementioned
cases of cauda equina syndrome with small-bore catheters, lidocaine appears to be
capable of inducing injury when administered at the high end of the manufacturer’s
specified dose range for spinal anesthesia (100 mg). Accordingly, it has been
suggested that if this drug is used for spinal anesthesia, the dose should be limited to
75 mg, and the concentration of the anesthetic solution should not exceed 2.5%.
However, lidocaine with epinephrine remains an appropriate and popular choice for
epidural anesthesia and peripheral blocks. (139)
Local Anesthetics
81
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
65. The occurrence of major (cauda equina syndrome) and minor (TNS) sequelae
occuring with lidocaine has resulted in near abandonment of this agent
for spinal anesthesia.
66. Less than 1% of all adverse reactions to local anesthetics are believed to be true
allergic reactions. When an allergic reaction to a local anesthetic is suspected to
have occurred, full documentation should be made in the chart regarding the dose
and route of local anesthetic administered and the reaction that occurred. There are
three potential causes of an allergic reaction to administered local anesthetic. In
addition to the anesthetic itself, a reaction might result from exposure to one of its
metabolites. For example, it has been traditionally taught that ester local anesthetics
have a proclivity to induce allergic reactions due to one of its breakdown products,
para-aminobenzoic acid, making esters more likely than amides to cause allergic
reactions, though some have questioned the validity of this assertion. Allergic
reactions may also occur to another component of the anesthetic solution (e.g., the
preservative methylparaben, used in some commercial preparations of both amides
and esters, appears to have significant antigenic potential). (138)
67. Cross-sensitivity has not been found to exist between the classes of local
anesthetics. A patient found to be allergic to ester local anesthetics would not be
expected to be allergic to amide local anesthetics.
CLINICAL USES
68. Tetracaine is primarily used as a spinal anesthetic in current clinical practice,
where its long duration of action, particularly if used with a vasoconstrictor, can at
times be a useful attribute. (139)
69. Of the available local anesthetics, two have received considerable attention as
alternatives to lidocaine for short-duration spinal anesthesia: prilocaine and
chloroprocaine. However, while prilocaine has an acceptable profile for short-
duration anesthesia, it is not available in the United States in a formulation that
would be appropriate to administer intrathecally. Consequently, chloroprocaine
appears to be the favored contender for lidocaine’s replacement. The rationale for
using chloroprocaine for deliberate intrathecal administration largely rests on the
relative dose (i.e., the dose required for spinal anesthesia is an order of magnitude
less than those previously associated with injuries occuring with inadvertent
intrathecal injection of anesthetic intended for the epidural space). Chloroprocaine
rarely, if ever, results in TNS, and it has a duration of action as a spinal anesthetic
that is even shorter than lidocaine, making it extremely well suited for short-
duration outpatient spinal anesthesia. Although the issue of bisulfite toxicity has
not been adequately resolved, chloroprocaine administered intrathecally should be
bisulfite-free, and the dose should not exceed 60 mg.
70. Isomers are different compounds that have the same molecular formula. Subsets of
isomers that have atoms connected by the same sequence of bonds but that have
different spatial orientations are called stereoisomers. Enantiomers are a particular
class of stereoisomers that exist as mirror images. The term chiral is derived from the
Greek cheir for “hand,” because the forms can be considered nonsuperimposable
mirror images. Enantiomers have identical physical properties except for the
direction of the rotation of the plane of polarized light. This property is used to
classify the enantiomer as dextrorotatory (þ) if the rotation is to the right or
clockwise and as levorotatory (–) if it is to the left or counterclockwise. A racemic
mixture is a mixture of equal parts of enantiomers and is optically inactive because
the rotation caused by the molecules of one isomer is cancelled by the opposite
rotation of its enantiomer. Chiral compounds can also be classified on the basis of
absolute configuration, generally designated as R (rectus) or S (sinister).
Enantiomers may differ with respect to specific biologic activity. (140)
71. Ropivacaine and levobupivacaine differ from other local anesthetics because
they are chiral compounds rather than racemic mixtures. Both are S() enantiomers,
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
82
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
and were marketed in response to the cardiotoxic effects of bupivacaine because they
appear to cause modestly less myocardial depression and are modestly
less arrhythmogenic than bupivacaine. (140-141)
72. EMLA is a topical anesthetic cream that consists of lidocaine 2.5% and 2.5%
prilocaine. This mixture has a lower melting point than either component, and it
exists as an oil at room temperature that is capable of overcoming the barrier of the
skin. EMLA cream is particularly useful in children for relieving pain associated
with venipuncture or placement of an intravenous catheter, although it may take up
to an hour before adequate topical anesthesia is produced. (141)
Local Anesthetics
83
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
Chapter
9 NEUROMUSCULAR
BLOCKING DRUGS
Ronald D. Miller, Tula Gourdin
1. Describe the physiologic effect of neuromuscular blocking drugs.
CLINICAL USES
2. What are some clinical situations in which skeletal muscle relaxation is desired?
3. What are some methods by which skeletal muscle relaxation can be achieved
without the administration of neuromuscular blocking drugs?
4. What analgesic effects do neuromuscular blocking drugs have?
5. What are some characteristics of neuromuscular blocking drugs that may influence
the choice of which drug is administered for clinical use for a given patient?
NEUROMUSCULAR
JUNCTION
6. What is the neuromuscular junction?
7. What events lead to the release of neurotransmitter at the neuromuscular junction?
What is the neurotransmitter that is released?
8. What class of receptors is located on postjunctional membranes? What clinical
effect results from the stimulation of these receptors?
9. How, and in what time course, is the action of acetylcholine terminated in the
synaptic cleft? What is the clinical relevance of this?
10. With respect to the neuromuscular junction, what are the three sites at which
nicotinic cholinergic receptors are located?
11. What is the role of prejunctional receptors?
12. What is the role of extrajunctional receptors? What is their effect when stimulated?
13. What is the structure of nicotinic cholinergic receptors? How is the junction of the
cholinergic receptor related to its structure?
14. What is the binding site for an agonist at the nicotinic cholinergic receptor?
STRUCTURE
ACTIVITY
RELATIONSHIPS
15. How does the chemical structure of neuromuscular blocking drugs relate to their
pharmacologic action?
DEPOLARIZING
NEUROMUSCULAR
BLOCKING DRUGS
16. What is the intubating dose of succinylcholine? What are its approximate time of
onset and duration of action when administered at this dose?
17. What is the mechanism of action of succinylcholine?
18. What is phase I neuromuscular blockade?
19. What is phase II neuromuscular blockade? What is the mechanism by which it
occurs? When is phase II neuromuscular blockade most likely to occur clinically?
20. What occurs clinically as a result of the opening of the nicotinic cholinergic receptor
ion channel that occurs with the administration of succinylcholine?
84
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
21. How efficiently does plasma cholinesterase hydrolyze succinylcholine? Where is
plasma cholinesterase produced?
22. How is the effect of succinylcholine at the cholinergic receptor terminated?
23. How is the duration of action of succinylcholine influenced by plasma
cholinesterase?
24. What are some drugs, chemicals, or clinical diseases that may affect the activity
of plasma cholinesterase?
25. What is atypical plasma cholinesterase? What is its clinical significance?
26. What is dibucaine? What is its clinical use?
27. What is the normal dibucaine number? For heterozygous and homozygous
atypical cholinesterase patients, what is their associated dibucaine number,
duration of action of an intubating dose of succinylcholine, and incidence
in the population?
28. Why is succinylcholine usually not administered to children under nonemergent
conditions?
29. What are some adverse cardiac rhythms that may result from the administration
of succinylcholine? When and why are they likely to occur?
30. How can the potential risk of adverse cardiac rhythms associated with the
administration of succinylcholine be minimized?
31. What is the mechanism by which succinylcholine may induce a hyperkalemic
response with its administration? Which patients are especially at risk for this effect
of succinylcholine?
32. Are renal failure patients at greater risk for a hyperkalemic response to the
administration of succinylcholine?
33. What is the mechanism by which succinylcholine may induce postoperative
myalgias with its administration? Which muscles are typically affected? Which
patients are especially at risk for this effect of succinylcholine?
34. How might the fasciculations associated with the administration of succinylcholine
be blunted?
35. What effect does the administration of succinylcholine have on intraocular
pressure? What is the clinical significance of this?
36. What effect does the administration of succinylcholine have on intragastric
pressure? What is the clinical significance of this?
37. What effect does the administration of succinylcholine have on masseter
muscle tension? What is the clinical significance of this?
NONDEPOLARIZING
NEUROMUSCULAR
BLOCKING DRUGS
38. What is the mechanism of action of nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking
drugs?
39. Describe the lipid solubility of nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking drugs.
How does this influence its volume of distribution and clinical effect?
40. What are some of the methods by which nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking
drugs are cleared? How does this influence its duration of action?
41. What are some drugs and physiologic states that may enhance the
neuromuscular blockade produced by nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking
drugs?
42. What is the mechanism by which volatile anesthetics are believed to enhance the
neuromuscular blockade produced by nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking
drugs?
43. What are some of the methods by which nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking
drugs are able to exert cardiovascular effects?
44. What is a concern regarding patients receiving long-term nondepolarizing
neuromuscular blocking drugs in the intensive care unit?
45. Which patients are at risk for developing a myopathy after the administration
of nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking drugs in the intensive care unit?
How might they present clinically?
Neuromuscular Blocking Drugs
85
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
LONG-ACTING
NONDEPOLARIZING
NEUROMUSCULAR
BLOCKING DRUGS
46. How is the clearance of pancuronium affected by renal or liver disease?
47. What are the cardiovascular effects associated with the administration of
pancuronium? What is the mechanism by which these effects occur?
INTERMEDIATE-
ACTING
NONDEPOLARIZING
NEUROMUSCULAR
BLOCKING DRUGS
48. Name some intermediate-acting nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking drugs.
What is their approximate time of onset and duration of action?
49. How is vecuronium excreted from the body? How does renal failure affect the
clearance of vecuronium?
50. How does the time of onset of rocuronium compare with the time of onset of
succinylcholine?
51. How is rocuronium excreted from the body? How does renal failure affect the
clearance of rocuronium?
52. How are cisatracurium and atracurium structurally related?
53. How are atracurium and cisatracurium cleared from the plasma? How does renal
failure affect the clearance of these drugs?
54. What is the principal metabolite of atracurium and its potential adverse physiologic
effect? Which patients are especially at risk for this adverse effect?
55. What are some of the cardiovascular effects of atracurium?
56. What are some differences between cisatracurium and atracurium that make
cisatracurium more desirable for clinical use?
SHORT-ACTING
NONDEPOLARIZING
NEUROMUSCULAR
BLOCKING DRUGS
57. Name a short-acting nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking drug. What is its
approximate time of onset and duration of action?
58. How is mivacurium cleared from the plasma? How is the duration of action of
mivacurium altered in patients who have deficiencies in plasma cholinesterase
enzyme, liver disease, or renal disease?
59. Does the administration of neostigmine reverse the neuromuscular blockade
produced by mivacurium?
60. What are some of the cardiovascular effects of mivacurium?
MONITORING THE
EFFECTS OF
NONDEPOLARIZING
NEUROMUSCULAR
BLOCKING DRUGS
61. What is the most common method for monitoring the effects of neuromuscular
blocking drugs during general anesthesia?
62. What are two ways in which a peripheral nerve stimulator may be useful during the
administration of neuromuscular blocking drugs during general anesthesia?
63. Which nerve and muscle are most commonly used to evaluate the neuromuscular
blockade produced by neuromuscular blocking drugs?
64. Which nerves may be used for the evaluation of the neuromuscular blockade
produced by neuromuscular blocking drugs through the use of a peripheral nerve
stimulator when the arm is not available to the anesthesiologist?
65. Howdotheneuromuscularblockingdrugs varywithregard totheirtime ofonsetatthe
adductor pollicis muscle, orbicularis oculi muscle, laryngeal muscles, and diaphragm?
66. What are some of the mechanical responses evoked by a peripheral nerve stimulator
that are used to monitor the effects of neuromuscular blocking drugs? What are the
methods to evaluate the mechanically evoked response?
67. What percent of depression of a mechanically evoked single twitch response from
its control height correlates with adequate neuromuscular blockade for
intubation of the trachea or for the performance of intraabdominal surgery?
What approximate percent of nicotinic cholinergic receptors must be occupied by
a nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking drug to achieve this effect?
68. What is the train-of-four stimulus delivered by a peripheral nerve stimulator? What
is its clinical use?
69. What is the train-of-four ratio? What is its clinical use?
70. What train-of-four ratio correlates with the complete return to control height of
a single twitch response?
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
86
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
71. What is the train-of-four ratio during phase I neuromuscular blockade resulting
from the administration of a depolarizing neuromuscular blocking drug such
as succinylcholine?
72. How accurate is the estimation of the train-of-four ratio by clinicians evaluating the
response visually and manually? What percent of the first twitch control height
must be present before the fourth twitch is detectable?
73. What is the double burst suppression stimulus delivered by a peripheral nerve
stimulator? What is its clinical use?
74. What is tetany? How might it be mechanically produced by a peripheral nerve
stimulator?
75. How is the normal response to tetany altered by the administration of depolarizing
and nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking drugs?
76. What is posttetanic stimulation? What is its clinical use?
ANTAGONISM OF
NONDEPOLARIZING
NEUROMUSCULAR
BLOCKING DRUGS
77. What is the mechanism by which the neuromuscular blockade produced by
nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking drugs is antagonized?
78. How are the cardiac muscarinic effects of anticholinesterases attenuated?
79. Name two factors that influence the choice of anticholinesterase drug to be
administered to antagonize the neuromuscular blockade produced by
nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking drugs.
80. When might neostigmine or edrophonium be an appropriate choice of
anticholinesterase drug to administer to antagonize neuromuscular blockade?
What anticholinergic drug is often paired with each?
81. What are some tests that can be done to evaluate the adequacy of the recovery from
the effects of neuromuscular blockade?
82. How might the residual effects of neuromuscular blockers be manifest clinically
in the awake patient?
83. What are some pharmacologic or physiologic factors that may interfere with the
antagonismoftheneuromuscularblockadeproducedbyneuromuscularblockingdrugs?
ADVERSE
OUTCOMES FROM
INADEQUATE
ANTAGONISM OF
NEUROMUSCULAR
BLOCKADE
84. What risk factors contribute to adverse respiratory events in the first hour
postoperative in the postanesthetic care unit (PACU)?
85. In addition to induction of anesthesia, what is the most dangerous time for
anesthetic complications in the postoperative period?
86. What is sugammadex? What is the mechanism of action of sugammadex?
87. What are the major clinical differences between sugammadex and neostigmine?
88. What are some advantages of sugammadex for the antagonism of neuromuscular
blockade?
ANSWERS*
1. Neuromuscular blocking drugs interrupt transmission of nerve impulses at the
neuromuscular junction and thereby produce paresis or paralysis of skeletal
muscles. (144)
CLINICAL USES
2. Skeletal muscle relaxation (i.e., paralysis) is desired most frequently to facilitate
intubation of the trachea and provide excellent surgical conditions. Other clinical
situations in which skeletal muscle relaxation is desired include to facilitate
*Numbers in parentheses: numbers refer to pages, figures, or tables in Miller RD, Pardo MC: Basics of Anesthesia,
6th ed. Philadelphia, Elsevier Saunders, 2011.
Neuromuscular Blocking Drugs
87
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
mechanical ventilation of the lungs either intraoperatively, in the intensive care
unit, or during cardiopulmonary resuscitation. (144)
3. Skeletal muscle relaxation can be achieved without the administration of
neuromuscular blocking drugs by the administration of high concentrations
of volatile anesthetics, regional anesthesia, and by proper patient positioning on the
operating table. (81, 252, 300)
4. Neuromuscular blocking drugs do not have any anesthetic or analgesic effects.
Thepotentialthereforeexistsforthepatienttoberenderedparalyzedwithoutadequate
anesthesia and subsequent unrecognized awareness during anesthesia. (144, 737)
5. Neuromuscular blocking drugs vary in their mechanism of action, speed of onset,
duration of action, route of elimination, and associated side effects. These
characteristics of a neuromuscular blocking drug may influence whether a specific
neuromuscular blocking drug is chosen for administration to a given patient. (144)
NEUROMUSCULAR
JUNCTION
6. The neuromuscular junction is the location where the transmission of neural
impulses at the nerve terminal becomes translated into skeletal muscle contraction
at the motor endplate. The highly specialized neuromuscular junction consists of the
prejunctional motor nerve ending, a highly folded postjunctional skeletal muscle
membrane, and the synaptic cleft in between. (144-146, Figure 12-1)
7. A nerve impulse conducted down the motor nerve fiber, or axon, ends in the
prejunctional motor nerve ending. The resulting stimulation of the motor nerve
terminal causes an influx of calcium into the nerve terminal. The influx of calcium
results in a release of the neurotransmitter acetylcholine into the synaptic cleft. This
is why administration of calcium briefly improves neuromuscular function. The
nerve synthesizes and stores acetylcholine in vesicles in the motor nerve terminals,
which is available for release with the influx of calcium. Acetylcholine released into
the synaptic cleft binds to receptors in the postjunctional skeletal muscle membrane,
leading to skeletal muscle contraction. (145-146, Figure 12-1)
8. Nicotinic cholinergic receptors are located on the skeletal muscle membrane, or
postjunctional membrane. When acetylcholine binds to the nicotinic cholinergic
receptor, there is a change in the permeability of the skeletal muscle membrane to
sodium and potassium ions. The resultant movement of these ions down their
concentration gradients causes a decrease in the membrane potential of the skeletal
muscle cell from the resting membrane potential to the threshold potential. The
resting membrane potential is the electrical potential of the skeletal muscle cell at
rest, usually about 90 mV. The threshold potential is about 45 mV. When the
threshold potential is reached, an action potential becomes propagated over the
surfaces of skeletal muscle fibers. This leads to the contraction of these skeletal
muscle fibers. (146, Figure 12-2)
9. Acetylcholine is hydrolyzed in the synaptic cleft by the enzyme
acetylcholinesterase, or true cholinesterase. This occurs rapidly, within 15 ms.
Clinically, this allows for the restoration of the membrane to its resting membrane
potential. The metabolism of acetylcholine also prevents sustained depolarization of
the skeletal muscle cells, and thus prevents tetany from occurring. (145, Figure 12-1)
10. Nicotinic cholinergic receptors are located in three separate sites relative to the
neuromuscular junction and are referred to by their varied locations. Each of these
receptors also has a different functional capacity with regard to its role in
skeletal muscle contraction. The three types of nicotinic cholinergic receptors are
prejunctional, postjunctional, and extrajunctional. Prejunctional receptors are
located at the motor nerve terminal. Postjunctional receptors are located just
opposite the prejunctional receptors in the endplate and are the most important
receptors for the action of neuromuscular blocking drugs. Extrajunctional receptors
are immature in form and are located throughout the skeletal muscle membrane.
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
88
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
They are located in areas other than the endplate region of the muscle membrane as
well as at the motor endplate region. (145-146, Figure 12-1)
11. Prejunctional receptors are located on the motor nerve terminal and influence
the release and replenishment of acetylcholine from the nerve terminal.
(145-146, Figure 12-1)
12. Extrajunctional receptors are located throughout the skeletal muscle membrane.
They differ from the other two types of nicotinic cholinergic receptors both in their
location and by their molecular structure. Under normal circumstances, the
synthesis of extrajunctional receptors is suppressed by neural activity and has
minimal contribution to skeletal muscle action. Extrajunctional receptors may
proliferate under conditions of denervation, trauma, strokes, or burn injury.
Conversely, when neuromuscular activity returns to normal, extrajunctional
receptors quickly lose their activity. Extrajunctional receptors are stimulated more
by lower concentrations of acetylcholine and depolarizing neuromuscular blocking
drugs than are prejunctional or postjunctional receptors. In addition, extrajunctional
receptors remain open longer and permit more ions to flow across the skeletal muscle
cell membrane once activated. Clinically, this may manifest as an exaggerated
hyperkalemic response when succinylcholine is administered to patients with
denervation injuries. (146)
13. Nicotinic cholinergic receptors are made up of glycoproteins divided into five
subunits. There are two a subunits and one each of b, g, and d subunits. The subunits
are arranged in such a way that they form a channel in the membrane, with the
binding site for the agonist being the a subunits. When the receptor becomes
stimulated by the binding of an agonist or acetylcholine, the channel changes
conformation such that it allows the flow of ions through the cell membrane along
their concentration gradient. Extrajunctional receptors differ slightly from
postjunctional nicotinic cholinergic receptors in that the g and d subunits of these
receptors are altered from those of the postjunctional receptors. The two a subunits,
however, are identical. (146, Figure 12-2)
14. The binding site for agonists at the nicotinic cholinergic receptor is the a subunit.
Acetylcholine must bind to both of the two a subunits of the receptor to stimulate
the receptor to change conformation and allow the flow of ions through the
resulting ion channel. Nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking drugs also bind to
the a subunits of the receptor but only require that one a subunit be bound to exert
their pharmacologic effect. With the binding of a nondepolarizing neuromuscular
blocking drug to an a subunit on the receptor, acetylcholine is unable to bind to the
receptor, the flow of ions across the channel does not occur, and the physiologic
effect of skeletal muscle contraction becomes blocked. The binding of a depolarizing
neuromuscular blocking drug, like acetylcholine, requires that both a subunits be
bound before stimulating the receptor to change conformation and the resulting
skeletal muscle contraction. Succinylcholine, a depolarizing neuromuscular
blocking drug, exerts its effect in this manner. The elimination of succinylcholine is
through its clearance from the plasma and requires a few minutes to occur.
This accounts for its prolonged binding period on the nicotinic cholinergic
receptor and subsequent skeletal muscle paralysis for the minutes after its
administration. (146-148)
STRUCTURE
ACTIVITY
RELATIONSHIPS
15. Both depolarizing and nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking drugs have
a chemical structure similar to that of acetylcholine, which explains its
pharmacologic activity at the nicotinic cholinergic receptor. Succinylcholine
is two acetylcholine molecules linked together by methyl groups. The
nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking drugs are much larger and bulkier
than acetylcholine but have an internal structure that is chemically related
to acetylcholine and allows for interaction with the nicotinic cholinergic
receptor. (146-147, Figure 12-3)
Neuromuscular Blocking Drugs
89
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
DEPOLARIZING
NEUROMUSCULAR
BLOCKING DRUGS
16. The usual intubating dose of succinylcholine when administered intravenously
is 1 to 1.5 mg/kg. Complete muscle paralysis after the administration of
succinylcholine is typically within 30 to 60 seconds. The duration of action, or
duration of skeletal muscle paralysis, after the administration of an intubating
dose of succinylcholine is usually 5 to 10 minutes. (148)
17. Succinylcholine acts at the nicotinic cholinergic receptor through a similar
mechanism as acetylcholine. Succinylcholine attaches to the two a subunits on
the nicotinic cholinergic receptor and causes the ion channel in the muscle cell to
open. This results in depolarization of the skeletal muscle cell. Unlike acetylcholine,
succinylcholine is not hydrolyzed at the motor endplate but continues to attach to
the cholinergic receptors until it is cleared from the plasma. The administration
of succinylcholine therefore results in sustained depolarization of the motor
endplate. The skeletal muscle paralysis associated with the administration of
succinylcholine is due to the inability of the depolarized postjunctional
membrane to respond to a subsequent release of acetylcholine. (148)
18. Phase I neuromuscular blockade refers to the blockade of the transmission of
neuromuscular impulses caused by succinylcholine with its initial administration.
This neuromuscular blockade is due to succinylcholine remaining on the receptor
and the sustained depolarization of skeletal muscle cells that results. The sustained
depolarization prevents the muscle cell from being able to respond to a subsequent
release of acetylcholine. (149, Table 12-2)
19. Phase II neuromuscular blockade refers to the blockade of the transmission of
neuromuscular impulses produced by succinylcholine after repolarization of the
cell membrane has taken place, but while the cell membrane does not yet respond
normally to the release of acetylcholine. Phase II neuromuscular blockade resembles
the blockade produced by nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking drugs. The
mechanism of phase II neuromuscular blockade is not completely understood, but it
is believed to result from the development of a nonexcitable area around the motor
endplate that interferes with the spread of subsequent impulses that have been
initiated by the release of acetylcholine. Phase II neuromuscular blockade is most
likely to occur when the neuromuscular junction is continuously exposed to a
depolarizing neuromuscular blocking drug. This may occur with a succinylcholine
infusion, with the administration of a second dose of succinylcholine after the first,
or when the intravenous dose of succinylcholine administered exceeds 3 to 5 mg/kg.
(149, Table 12-2)
20. The sustained depolarization, and subsequent sustained opening of the cholinergic
receptor ion channel, that results from the administration of succinylcholine
clinically manifests as skeletal muscle fasciculations. Sustained opening of the
nicotinic cholinergic receptor ion channel is also associated with leakage of
potassium from the interior of cells into the plasma. The leakage of potassium ions
associated with the administration of an intubating dose of succinylcholine is
sufficient to increase the serum potassium level by about 0.2 to 0.5 mEq/L.
(148, Table 12-2)
21. The enzymeresponsiblefor the hydrolysis of succinylcholineis plasmacholinesterase,
or pseudocholinesterase. This is in contrast to acetylcholinesterase, or true
cholinesterase, the enzyme responsible for the hydrolysis of acetylcholine. Plasma
cholinesterase hydrolyzes succinylcholine at a rapid rate and extremely efficiently,
such that only a small fraction of succinylcholine reaches the receptor after its
intravenous administration. Plasma cholinesterase is produced in the liver.
(148-149, Figure 12-4)
22. The effect of succinylcholine at the cholinergic receptor is terminated by the
diffusion of succinylcholine away from the neuromuscular junction and into the
extracellular fluid. In the extracellular fluid succinylcholine is rapidly hydrolyzed
by plasma cholinesterase. (148)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
90
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
23. Plasma cholinesterase influences the duration of action of succinylcholine by
limiting the amount of succinylcholine that reaches the receptor for its initial action
and by hydrolyzing succinylcholine on its diffusion away from the receptor. (148)
24. Potent anticholinesterases often used in insecticides or for the treatment of
myasthenia gravis, and certain chemotherapeutic drugs such as nitrogen mustard
and cyclophosphamide, can significantly decrease plasma cholinesterase activity
and prolong succinylcholine. Prolonged effects of succinylcholine lasting as long as
1 to 3 hours may occur. Liver disease may also result in a decrease in the amount of
circulating plasma cholinesterase and a subsequent prolonged clinical effect of
succinylcholine. The degree of liver disease must be severe before the synthesis of
plasma cholinesterase is sufficiently decreased to result in prolonged muscle
paralysis after the administration of succinylcholine, however. (148)
25. Atypical plasma cholinesterase is an abnormal genetic variant of the plasma
cholinesterase enzyme that lacks the ability to hydrolyze ester bonds in drugs such
as succinylcholine and mivacurium. Patients who are otherwise healthy may have
atypical plasma cholinesterase enzyme. Clinically, the presence of this enzyme
manifests as prolonged skeletal muscle paralysis after the administration of a
conventionaldoseofsuccinylcholine.Thesepatientsmayhaveskeletalmuscleparalysis
that persists for over an hour after the administration of succinylcholine. (149)
26. Dibucaine is an amide local anesthetic that greatly inhibits normal plasma
cholinesterase activity, but it has limited inhibition of the activity of atypical plasma
cholinesterase. This characteristic of dibucaine has led to an evaluation of the
percent of inhibition of plasma cholinesterase activity by dibucaine, the result of
which is referred to as the dibucaine number. By determining the dibucaine
number for a given patient the diagnosis of the presence of atypical plasma
cholinesterase may be established. It is important to realize that the dibucaine
number reflects the quality, and not the quantity, of the circulating plasma
cholinesterase enzyme in the plasma. For instance, patients with liver disease severe
enough to decrease the number of circulating plasma cholinesterase enzymes
would still have a normal dibucaine number. (149, Table 12-3)
27. The normal dibucaine number is 80. That is, normal plasma cholinesterase
enzyme is inhibited by 80% in the presence of dibucaine. An individual
heterozygous for atypical plasma cholinesterase would have a dibucaine number
between 40 and 60. In these individuals a conventional dose of succinylcholine
would lead to neuromuscular blockade that persisted for approximately 20 minutes.
The incidence of individuals heterozygous for atypical plasma cholinesterase is
about 1 in 480. An individual homozygous for atypical plasma cholinesterase
would have a dibucaine number of about 20. In these individuals a conventional
dose of succinylcholine would lead to neuromuscular blockade persisting for
60 to 180 minutes. The incidence of individuals homozygous for atypical plasma
cholinesterase is about 1 in 3200. (149, Table 12-3)
28. Succinylcholine is usually not administered to children under nonemergent
conditions. This is mostly secondary to a number of case reports of cardiac arrest
in children and adolescents who were otherwise apparently healthy and had been
administered succinylcholine. Hyperkalemia, rhabdomyolysis, and acidosis were
frequently documented in these cases. It is believed that many of these
children had undiagnosed myopathies. (149)
29. Succinylcholine may induce a wide variety of cardiac dysrhythmias with its
administration. Among the most likely adverse cardiac rhythms to result from the
administration of succinylcholine are sinus bradycardia, junctional rhythms, and
ventricular arrhythmias. This is likely due to the similarity of the chemical
structures of succinylcholine and acetylcholine. In addition to stimulating nicotinic
receptors, succinylcholine may stimulate cardiac postganglionic muscarinic
receptors in the sinus node of the heart and mimic the normal effect of acetylcholine
Neuromuscular Blocking Drugs
91
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
at these receptors. This potential adverse effect of the administration
of succinylcholine is most likely to occur when a second intravenous
dose of succinylcholine is administered about 5 minutes after the first.
(149-150)
30. The potential risk of adverse cardiac rhythms associated with the administration of
succinylcholine may be minimized by pretreating patients before the administration
of succinylcholine. The most effective pretreatment regimens include the
intravenous administration of atropine or subparalyzing doses of nondepolarizing
neuromuscular blocking drugs 1 to 3 minutes before administration of
succinylcholine. (150)
31. A hyperkalemic response to succinylcholine in susceptible patients occurs
secondary to a proliferation of extrajunctional receptors in the area of skeletal
muscle after a denervation injury. These extrajunctional receptors are especially
sensitive to succinylcholine. With the administration of succinylcholine to patients
with a history of denervation injury there are more ion channels being opened, and
more sites for the leakage of potassium out of cells during depolarization. In fact,
patients with a history of denervation injury may be placed at risk of hyperkalemia
sufficient to cause cardiac arrest when administered succinylcholine. Patients
especially at risk are those with disease leading to skeletal muscle atrophy and those
with unhealed skeletal muscle injury as produced by third-degree burns, upper
motor neuron injury, and multiple trauma. Patients who have had denervation
injuries are at risk of a hyperkalemic response to the administration of
succinylcholine from 4 days to up to 3 to 6 months after the injury. Susceptibility
to the hyperkalemic response peaks 7 to 10 days after the injury. The current
recommendation is the avoidance of the administration of succinylcholine to
the patient more than 24 hours after the denervation injury has occurred.
(150, Figure 12-2)
32. Renal failure patients who are normokalemic can safely receive succinylcholine
without being placed at risk for an exaggerated hyperkalemic response. This
excludes patients with renal failure who have neuropathy secondary to
uremia. (150)
33. Transient, generalized, unsynchronized skeletal muscle contractions referred to
as fasciculations often accompany the administration of succinylcholine. This
occurs secondary to the depolarization of the skeletal muscle membrane that occurs
with the administration of succinylcholine. These fasciculations can result
in skeletal muscle damage and myalgias postoperatively. The presence of
myoglobinuria may be a clinical sign of skeletal muscle damage in these patients.
Postoperative myalgias associated with the administration of succinylcholine most
often occur in the muscles of the neck, back, and abdomen. Myalgias localized
to the neck may be described as a sore throat by the patient and may be incorrectly
attributed to tracheal intubation as the cause of the pain. Young, muscular
adults undergoing minor surgical procedures that allow for early ambulation
are most likely to complain about myalgias after the administration of
succinylcholine. (150)
34. The cause of postoperative myalgias after the administration of succinylcholine
has been speculated to be due to the fasciculations associated with the administration
of this drug. A nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking drug can be administered at a
dose of 5% to 10% of its ED95 dose 2 to 4 minutes before the administration of
succinylcholinetobluntthefasciculations.Whenpretreatmentwithanondepolarizing
neuromuscular blocking drug has been given to block fasciculations, the subsequent
dose of succinylcholine should be increased by 50% to 70%. Pretreatment with a
defasciculating dose of a nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking drug has been
shown to decrease the incidence of postoperative myalgias, but not abolish
them completely. (150)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
92
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
35. The administration of succinylcholine is associated with transient increases in
intraocular pressure. The mechanism by which this occurs is not clearly understood,
but it may be due to the contraction of extraocular muscles. The increase
in intraocular pressure peaks 2 to 4 minutes after the administration of
succinylcholine. The clinical concern regarding this effect of succinylcholine is
the possibility of the extrusion of global contents when succinylcholine
is administered to patients with open-eye injuries. Clinical experience with
succinylcholine in these patients, however, has not shown this to be the case.
For example, the administration of thiopental results in a decrease in intraocular
pressure. When thiopental is administered before succinylcholine, the potential
increase in intraocular pressure associated with succinylcholine may be attenuated.
The prior administration of subparalyzing doses of nondepolarizing neuromuscular
blocking drugs may also prevent succinylcholine-induced increases in intraocular
pressure. In addition, the benefit of skeletal muscle paralysis associated with the
administration of succinylcholine to patients with open-eye injuries far outweighs
the risk of the markedly elevated intraocular pressures that are associated with
bucking on an endotracheal tube. Intraoperative “bucking” with an endotracheal
tube in place can increase intraocular pressure and corneal damage. (150-151)
36. The administration of succinylcholine produces increases in intragastric pressure
that are unpredictable. Increases in intragastric pressure with succinylcholine
administration, when they do occur, appear to correlate with the magnitude and
the intensity of fasciculations. The increase in intragastric pressure is assumed to
be due to fasciculation of the abdominal skeletal muscles. There is a theoretical risk
of the aspiration of gastric fluid and contents with the increased intragastric
pressure associated with the administration of succinylcholine. This risk appears to
be increased in patients with ascites, obesity, a hiatal hernia, or an intrauterine
pregnancy secondary to the altered angle of entry of the esophagus into the
stomach in these patients. Because the magnitude of increase of intragastric
pressure appears to be related to the intensity of fasciculations, the prior
administration of subparalyzing doses of nondepolarizing neuromuscular
blocking drugs may prevent the increase in intragastric pressure from occurring
and decrease the theoretical risk of aspiration. (151)
37. The administration of succinylcholine can result in varying degrees of increased
masseter muscle tension. In extreme cases this can result in trismus and in difficulty
opening the mouth for direct laryngoscopy and intubation of the trachea.
Pediatric patients are especially at risk for this complication of succinylcholine
administration. Patients who develop trismus in association with the administration
of succinylcholine may be susceptible to the subsequent development of
malignant hyperthermia. (150)
NONDEPOLARIZING
NEUROMUSCULAR
BLOCKING DRUGS
38. Nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking drugs compete with acetylcholine for
the binding sites on the a subunit of the nicotinic cholinergic receptor. With the
binding of a nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking drug to one or both
a subunits on the receptor there are no two a subunits available for acetylcholine
to bind. Subsequent depolarization in the postjunctional membrane through the
actions of acetylcholine cannot occur, and skeletal muscle paralysis results.
Fasciculations do not accompany the administration of nondepolarizing
neuromuscular blocking drugs. (151, Table 12-6)
39. Nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking drugs have very limited lipid solubility.
This is due to the highly ionized state of nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking
drugs at physiologic pH. This limits their accessibility to the various tissues and
results in a small volume of distribution. The small volume of distribution implies
that neuromuscular blocking drugs are limited primarily to the extracellular
fluid. Physiologically, the highly ionized state of nondepolarizing neuromuscular
blocking drugs minimizes their transfer across lipid membrane barriers. This
Neuromuscular Blocking Drugs
93
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
includes lipid membranes such as the blood-brain barrier, renal tubular epithelium,
gastrointestinal epithelium, and placenta. Clinically, nondepolarizing
neuromuscular blocking drugs therefore produce minimal central nervous
system effects, undergo minimal renal tubular absorption, are ineffective when
administered orally, and do not affect the fetus when administered to a parturient.
(151-152)
40. Because of the hydrophilic nature of nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking
drugs, all these neuromuscular blocking drugs may be eliminated by glomerular
filtration via the kidneys. When additional methods of clearance of the drugs are
possible, the duration of action of the drug shortens. For example, the long-acting
neuromuscular blocking drugs, such as pancuronium, undergo little or no
metabolism and are primarily cleared by the kidneys. Yet, intermediate-acting and
short-acting nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking drugs are relatively
independent of renal function for their clearance from the plasma. For example,
vecuronium and rocuronium are cleared primarily through biodegradation in the
liver, cisatracurium undergoes chemodegradation by Hofmann elimination and
ester hydrolysis, and mivacurium is cleared principally by ester hydrolysis by the
enzyme plasma cholinesterase. (151-152, Table 12-6)
41. There are several drugs that are often administered in the perioperative period
that may enhance the neuromuscular blockade produced by nondepolarizing
neuromuscular blocking drugs. These drugs include volatile anesthetics, local
anesthetics, aminoglycoside antibiotics, cardiac antidysrhythmic agents,
dantrolene, magnesium, lithium, tamoxifen, and calcium channel blockers.
Hypothermia, hypokalemia, and decreases in pH may also prolong the action
of nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking drugs. (152)
42. Volatile anesthetics produce an enhancement of the magnitude and duration of
neuromuscular blockade that is dose dependent and drug specific. Volatile
anesthetics are thought to enhance the effects of nondepolarizing neuromuscular
blocking drugs by directly inducing central nervous system depression and causing
a corresponding decrease in skeletal muscle tone. In addition, nondepolarizing
neuromuscular blocking drugs may alter the lipid membrane around the nicotinic
cholinergic receptors, changing the properties of the ion channel. In this respect,
volatile anesthetics may alter the sensitivity of postjunctional membranes to
depolarization. (152)
43. Nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking drugs may exert cardiovascular effects
through several methods. First, they may induce the release of histamine. Second,
nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking drugs may have some direct action at
cardiac postganglionic muscarinic receptors. Finally, nondepolarizing
neuromuscular blocking drugs may have some direct effects on nicotinic
receptors at the autonomic ganglia. The clinical significance of the cardiovascular
effects produced by neuromuscular blocking drugs is minimal, however. (152,
Table 12-5)
44. Most patients receiving neuromuscular blocking drugs for a prolonged period of
time in the intensive care unit recover full muscle strength within a few hours of
discontinuation of the drug. There have been reports of a subset of patients who,
after receiving neuromuscular blocking drugs for several days or weeks, have had
persistent skeletal muscle weakness after the discontinuation of the neuromuscular
blocking drug. In some cases the skeletal muscle weakness has persisted for months.
Weaning the patient from the mechanical ventilation of the lungs is therefore
delayed. (152)
45. Risk factors for developing a myopathy secondary to the administration of
nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking drugs in the intensive care unit include
patients with asthma, female patients with renal failure receiving vecuronium, the
concurrent administration of high doses of corticosteroids, and the administration
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
94
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
of large doses of neuromuscular blocking drugs for prolonged periods. Clinically,
these patients may present with flaccid quadriplegia and increased creatine kinase
concentrations. The pathophysiology of the myopathy is not known. (152)
LONG-ACTING
NONDEPOLARIZING
NEUROMUSCULAR
BLOCKING DRUGS
46. The principal route of clearance of pancuronium, like the other long-acting
nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking drugs, is by glomerular filtration. The
clearance of all these long-acting nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking drugs is
greatly affected by renal disease, such that the plasma clearance of pancuronium
in patients with renal failure is decreased by 30% to 50%. Patients with renal disease
are therefore likely to exhibit prolonged neuromuscular blockade with the
administration of conventional doses of pancuronium. Pancuronium is also
metabolized by in the liver to a limited degree. A metabolite of pancuronium,
3-desacetylpancuronium, possesses limited muscle relaxant properties. Patients
with biliary obstruction or cirrhosis of the liver may also manifest decreased plasma
clearance and prolonged elimination half-times of pancuronium, although not
to as great an extent as that seen with renal disease. (152)
47. The administration of pancuronium results in a modest increase in heart rate
and arterial blood pressure by 10% to 15%. This effect of pancuronium is primarily
due to muscarinic receptor blockade at the sinus node of the heart exerted directly
by pancuronium. This selective vagal blockade of the heart is similar to the
mechanism by which atropine increases heart rate. The increase in heart rate
associated with the administration of pancuronium is dose-related and additive,
such that subsequent doses of pancuronium will result in similar, additional
increases in heart rate as previous doses. This increase in heart rate cannot be
blunted or avoided through the slower injection of the drug. A minimal contributor
to the increases in heart rate and blood pressure associated with the administration
of pancuronium is activation of the sympathetic nervous system. Patients with
altered atrioventricular conduction of cardiac impulses, such as patients with
atrial fibrillation, appear to be the most likely to have marked increases in heart
rate associated with the administration of pancuronium. (152-153)
INTERMEDIATE-
ACTING
NONDEPOLARIZING
NEUROMUSCULAR
BLOCKING DRUGS
48. The intermediate-acting nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking drugs include
atracurium, cisatracurium, vecuronium, and rocuronium. Their approximate time of
onset is 3 to 5 minutes. Their approximate duration of action is 20 to 35 minutes, or
33% to 50% shorter than that of long-acting neuromuscular blocking drugs. The
intermediate-acting neuromuscular blocking drug rocuronium stands apart from all
the other muscle relaxants with respect to its time of onset, which is 1 to 2 minutes.
(153, Figure 12-5, Table 12-6)
49. Vecuronium is metabolized by deacetylation in the liver to 3-, 17-, and 3,17-
hydroxy metabolites. Only the 3-hydroxy metabolite has any significant
neuromuscular blocking properties. Up to 60% of the injected dose of vecuronium,
whether metabolized or unchanged, is excreted in the bile. Vecuronium is also
partially cleared by the kidneys. Patients with renal failure may have impaired
excretion of the unchanged form of vecuronium as well as the active 3-hydroxy
metabolite of vecuronium. This may result in cumulative effects of vecuronium with
the administration of large or repeated doses of vecuronium in renal failure patients.
There are reports of prolonged neuromuscular blockade in renal failure patients
in the intensive care unit being administered continuous infusions of
vecuronium. (153)
50. Rocuronium has an onset time of 1 to 2 minutes at its ED95 dose, which makes it
unique among the intermediate-acting nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking
drugs. In the event that a more rapid onset time is desired, rocuronium may be
administered at a dose of three to four times its ED95 dose. This increased dose results
in an onset time similar to that of succinylcholine. Because of the relatively
Neuromuscular Blocking Drugs
95
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
increased dose of rocuronium required to produce an onset time similar to
succinylcholine, whenadministeredat thisdosethe durationofaction ofrocuronium
becomes similar to that of pancuronium. (153, Figure 12-5, Table 12-6)
51. Rocuronium is mostly cleared from the plasma through the bile largely unchanged.
About 30% of administered rocuronium is excreted renally. Large or repeated doses
of rocuronium in patients with renal failure may theoretically produce prolonged
effects of the drug, although this has not been seen clinically. (153, Table 12-6)
52. Cisatracurium is an isolated form of a stereoisomer of atracurium. (154, Figure 12-3)
53. The clearance of atracurium and cisatracurium from the plasma is completely
independent of the kidneys. Two thirds of administered atracurium or cisatracurium
undergoes ester hydrolysis, whereas the remaining third undergoes nonenzymatic
spontaneous degradation by Hofmann elimination. Hofmann elimination is
dependent on the pH and temperature of the plasma. The metabolism of these
drugs is also independent of plasma cholinesterase since nonspecific plasma
esterases are responsible for the ester hydrolysis. Both of the routes of metabolism
for these drugs are independent of the kidneys or liver, making the duration of
action of atracurium or cisatracurium unaltered in patients with hepatic or renal
failure. (154, Table 12-6)
54. The principal metabolite of atracurium is laudanosine, which has no neuromuscular
blocking effects. Laudanosine freely crosses the blood-brain barrier and, in high
concentrations, can act as a central nervous system stimulant. Patients who have
been administered continuous infusions of atracurium for several days, as in an
intensive care unit setting, are especially at risk for the accumulation of the
metabolite laudanosine and its central nervous system stimulatory effects.
Laudanosine is primarily cleared through the liver. Patients with impaired hepatic
function have a further risk of the adverse effects of laudanosine. (154)
55. The administration of atracurium can result in a transient decrease in systolic
blood pressure by as much as 20%, along with facial erythema. These effects of
atracurium are related to histamine release and only occur when rapidly doses
of three times ED95 of atracurium are administered. (154)
56. Cisatracurium undergoes primarily Hofmann elimination to laudanosine and does
not seem to undergo ester hydrolysis. In contrast to atracurium, the plasma
concentrations of laudanosine after the administration of cisatracurium are very
small, making it less likely to exert any central nervous system–stimulating effects.
In addition, cisatracurium has minimal cardiovascular effects and does not invoke
the release of histamine with its administration. (154)
SHORT-ACTING
NONDEPOLARIZING
NEUROMUSCULAR
BLOCKING DRUGS
57. A short-acting nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking drug is mivacurium.
Its approximate time of onset is 3 to 5 minutes. Its approximate duration of
action is 10 to 20 minutes, or 30% to 40% shorter than intermediate-acting
neuromuscular blocking drugs. (154, Table 12-6)
58. Mivacurium is dependent on the enzyme plasma cholinesterase for its
clearance. Patients who have either atypical plasma cholinesterase or a decreased
concentration of plasma cholinesterase will have a prolonged duration of
action of mivacurium in a similar manner as succinylcholine. For instance, the
administration of an intubating dose of mivacurium in patients who are
heterozygous for atypical plasma cholinesterase will result in a prolonged duration
of effect by 30% to 50%, whereas patients who are homozygous for atypical plasma
cholinesterase will have a prolonged effect for 3 to 4 hours. Although the
metabolism of mivacurium is completely independent of the kidneys and liver,
patients with liver failure may have a prolonged effect of mivacurium secondary
to decreases in the concentration of plasma cholinesterase and a subsequent
slower rate of clearance. Patients with renal failure who have been receiving
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
96
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
continuous intravenous infusions of mivacurium may also have a mildly
prolonged duration of action of mivacurium to 10 to 15 minutes. (154)
59. Neostigmine is an anticholinesterase that inhibits the activity of both plasma
cholinesterase and true cholinesterase. The reversal of the neuromuscular blockade
produced by mivacurium may be accomplished with the administration of
neostigmine. The benefits of increasing the concentration of acetylcholine
available to compete for binding sites on the nicotinic cholinergic receptor in
the neuromuscular junction outweigh the inhibition of the activity of plasma
cholinesterase in this circumstance, and the actions of mivacurium may be
reversed. (154)
60. The administration of mivacurium rapidly and at doses of three times ED95 may
result in histamine release and associated transient decreases in systemic
blood pressure. (154, Table 12-6)
MONITORING THE
EFFECTS OF
NONDEPOLARIZING
NEUROMUSCULAR
BLOCKING DRUGS
61. The most common method for monitoring the effects of neuromuscular blocking
drugs during general anesthesia is through the use of a peripheral nerve stimulator.
The peripheral nerve stimulator works by stimulating a motor nerve to conduct an
impulse. A mechanically evoked muscle response is then evaluated by the clinician.
The mechanical motor response of the muscle reflects the number of muscle fibers
that are blocked and provides an indication to the clinician of the degree of
neuromuscular blockade. (154-155)
62. A peripheral nerve stimulator may be useful during the administration of
neuromuscular blocking drugs during general anesthesia in at least two ways. First,
a peripheral nerve stimulator allows the clinician to titrate the neuromuscular
blocking drug to optimize skeletal muscle relaxation for surgery without
unnecessarily overdosing the patient. Second, a peripheral nerve stimulator may be
used as an objective means with which to judge the recovery from neuromuscular
blockade at the conclusion of surgery either before or after the antagonism of a
nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking drug with an anticholinesterase drug,
such as neostigmine. (154-155)
63. The ulnar nerve and adductor pollicis muscle are the nerve and muscle most
commonly used for the evaluation of the neuromuscular blockade produced by
neuromuscular blocking drugs through the use of a peripheral nerve stimulator. The
adductor pollicis muscle is solely innervated by the ulnar nerve. This means that the
only source for motor stimulation of the adductor pollicis muscle is through the
mechanical stimulation of the ulnar nerve. Different muscle groups differ in their
sensitivities to neuromuscular blocking drugs. The adductor pollicis muscle is more
sensitive to the effects of neuromuscular blockers than are the diaphragm or upper
airway muscles. (155)
64. When the arm is not available to the anesthesiologist, the facial nerve and
orbicularis oculi muscle are often used for the evaluation of the neuromuscular
blockade produced by neuromuscular blocking drugs through the use of a
peripheral nerve stimulator. Other nerves that may be used include the median,
posterior tibial, and common peroneal nerves. (155)
65. In general, the administration of nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking drugs
produces laryngeal muscle relaxation and conditions favorable for intubation
of the trachea more rapidly than relaxation of the adductor pollicis muscle as
measured by ulnar nerve stimulation. Facial nerve stimulation and measurement of
neuromuscular blockade of the orbicularis oculi muscle more closely correlates with
laryngeal muscle relaxation and vocal cord paralysis than ulnar nerve stimulation.
An exception to the pattern of neuromuscular blockade onset in the various muscles
is with the administration of succinylcholine. The administration of this
neuromuscular blocking drug results in neuromuscular blockade at the adductor
pollicis muscle and the laryngeal muscles at approximately the same time. Thus
Neuromuscular Blocking Drugs
97
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
the measurement of neuromuscular blockade at the ulnar nerve provides a better
indication of vocal cord paralysis when succinylcholine is administered. The
diaphragm muscle appears to be resistant to the effects of neuromuscular blocking
drugs, such that larger doses of drug are required to produce relaxation of
the diaphragm than doses required for relaxation of either the laryngeal muscles,
orbicularis oculi, or adductor pollicis muscles. (155-156, Figure 12-6)
66. Some of the mechanical responses evoked by a peripheral nerve stimulator and used
to monitor the effects of neuromuscular blocking drugs include a single twitch
response, a train-of-four ratio, double burst suppression, tetanus, and posttetanic
stimulation. The various methods of evaluation of the mechanically evoked
response vary with regard to ease and accuracy. The mechanically evoked response
can be evaluated visually, manually by touch, or by recording. (154-155)
67. Depression by 90% or more of a mechanically evoked single twitch response from
its control height correlates with adequate neuromuscular blockade for the
performance of intraabdominal surgery or tracheal intubation. Greater than 70%
of nicotinic cholinergic receptors must be occupied by a nondepolarizing
neuromuscular blocking drug to achieve this. (158, Table 12-8)
68. The train-of-four stimulus delivered by a peripheral nerve stimulator is four
electrical stimuli at 2 Hz each delivered every 0.5 seconds. The train-of-four
stimulus is useful for the evaluation of the degree of neuromuscular blockade
based on the premise that each successive electrical stimulus will further deplete
stores of acetylcholine in the nerve terminal. In the presence of neuromuscular
blockade produced by nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking drugs, there will be
a resultant decrease in the mechanically evoked muscle response with each
stimulus. The amount of decrease in the mechanical muscle response correlates with
the degree of neuromuscular blockade. Only four twitches are used in the train-
of-four stimulus because any further stimulation of the nerve after the fourth
does not result in any further depletion of acetylcholine stores at the nerve
terminal. (158, Table 12-8)
69. The train-of-four ratio is a calculation of the height of the fourth evoked twitch
response divided by the height of the first evoked twitch response of a train-of-four
stimulus. For example, if the height of the fourth twitch is one half the height of the
first twitch, the train-of-four ratio would be 0.5. The train-of-four ratio reflects how
much fade has occurred, which correlates with the degree of neuromuscular
blockade. The control, or baseline, train-of-four ratio should be 1.0 before the
administration of neuromuscular blocking drugs. This corresponds to a height of the
fourth mechanically evoked twitch response being equal to the height of the first
evoked twitch response. (158, Table 12-8)
70. A train-of-four ratio of 0.7 or greater correlates with the complete return to the
control height of a single twitch response. That is, when the height of the fourth
mechanically evoked twitch response is 70% of the height of the first evoked twitch
response in a train-of-four stimulus, a single twitch response will have returned to
its control height. (158, Table 12-8)
71. After the administration of succinylcholine for a neuromuscular blockade, a
phase II neuromuscular blockade may be reflected in the train-of-four response as
a train-of-four ratio less than 0.3. The train-of-four response thus shows
some fade of the fourth twitch when compared with the first twitch of the train-
of-four stimulus when phase II neuromuscular blockade is present. (156,
Figure 12-8)
72. Estimation of the train-of-four response by clinicians evaluating the response visually
and manually is not very accurate. Although clinicians have difficulty assessing the
train-of-four ratio, the assessment of the absolute number of twitches evoked by the
train-of-four stimulus is much more reliable. When the first twitch is approximately
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
98
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
35% of the control twitch height, the fourth twitch is able to be detected. This
corresponds to a train-of-four ratio of about 0.35. (156-157, Figure 12-8)
73. The double burst suppression stimulus delivered by a peripheral nerve stimulator is
two bursts of three 50-Hz electrical stimuli separated by 750 milliseconds between
each burst, but it is perceived by the clinician as two separate twitches. The use of the
double burst suppression stimulus appears to make the estimation of the fade
response easier for clinicians. It is thought that the estimation of the ratio between
the two twitches is easier for clinicians because the middle two twitches of the train-
of-four response are eliminated. A train-of-four ratio of 0.3 or less is most accurately
detected by clinicians when using the double burst suppression stimulus. Accuracy
of the estimation of a train-of-four ratio greater than 0.7 is still poor, however. (157)
74. Tetany is a continuous skeletal muscle contraction that occurs secondary to
continuous stimulation of the postjunctional receptors. Tetany can be mechanically
produced through the use of a peripheral nerve stimulator. The delivery of a
continuous electrical stimulus of about 50 Hz for 5 seconds is frequently used in
clinical anesthesia practice to induce tetany for the evaluation of neuromuscular
blockade. (157-158, Figure 12-10)
75. The normal response to tetany is a sustained muscular contraction. This response is
altered by the administration of neuromuscular blocking drugs. Phase I
neuromuscular blockade subsequent to the administration of depolarizing
neuromuscular blocking drugs, such as succinylcholine, induces a mechanical
muscle contraction in response to a tetanic stimulus that is greatly decreased from
the control response and does not undergo fade over time. The administration
of nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking drugs induces a mechanical muscular
contraction in response to a tetanic stimulus that fades over time. (157-158,
Figure 12-10)
76. Posttetanic stimulation refers to the evaluation of a train-of-four response after a
tetanic stimulus has been delivered. The mechanical muscle response to a train-of-
four stimulus after the delivery of a tetanic stimulus is useful during intense
neuromuscular blockade when there is no evoked mechanical response to either a
single twitch or a train-of-four stimulus. The clinical use of posttetanic stimulation
is derived from the transient enhancement of the mechanical muscle response
obtained when a train-of-four stimulus is delivered immediately after a tetanic
stimulus. This enhancement is due to an increase in the available stores of
acetylcholine in the nerve terminals after a tetanic stimulus and is termed
posttetanic facilitation. (157, Figure 12-10)
ANTAGONISM OF
NONDEPOLARIZING
NEUROMUSCULAR
BLOCKING DRUGS
77. The antagonism of the neuromuscular blockade produced by nondepolarizing
neuromuscular blocking drugs is achieved through the intravenous administration
of anticholinesterases. The anticholinesterases most often used for this purpose are
neostigmine and edrophonium. These drugs exert their effect by inhibiting the
activity of acetylcholinesterase, the enzyme that hydrolyzes acetylcholine in the
neuromuscular junction. As a result of the inhibition of the hydrolysis of
acetylcholine, acetylcholine accumulates in the neuromuscular junction. With
more acetylcholine available at the neuromuscular junction, the competition
between acetylcholine and the nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking drug is
altered such that it is more likely that acetylcholine will bind to the postjunctional
receptor. In addition to increasing the amount of acetylcholine available in the
neuromuscular junction to compete for sites on the nicotinic cholinergic receptors,
acetylcholine also accumulates at the muscarinic cholinergic receptor sites
through the same mechanism. (158)
78. Anticholinesterases increase the concentration of acetylcholine available at the
muscarinic cholinergic receptors as well as at the nicotinic cholinergic receptors.
This may result in profound bradycardia through the stimulation of muscarinic
Neuromuscular Blocking Drugs
99
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
cholinergic receptors in the heart. To attenuate the cardiac muscarinic effects of
anticholinesterases, a peripheral-acting anticholinergic such as atropine or
glycopyrrolate is administered intravenously before or simultaneous with
the intravenous administration of the anticholinesterase. (156, Table 12-7)
79. Two factors that influence the choice of which anticholinesterase drug to administer
to antagonize neuromuscular blockade include the approximate duration of action
of the nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking drug that had been administered
and the intensity of the neuromuscular blockade that exists at the conclusion of
surgery. (159)
80. Neostigmine and edrophonium are the quaternary ammonium-structured
anticholinesterases that are most frequently administered for the antagonism of the
effects of nondepolarizing muscle relaxants. Neostigmine should be administered
for the antagonism of the effects of nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking drugs
when the neuromuscular blockade is intense and/or when the neuromuscular
blocking drug that had been administered is long-acting. This is primarily due to the
prolonged duration of effect of neostigmine when compared with the duration of
effect of edrophonium. Glycopyrrolate is often paired with neostigmine as the
anticholinergic of choice because its delayed cardiac anticholinergic effects more
closely parallel the time of onset of the muscarinic effects produced by neostigmine.
Conversely, edrophonium has a shorter time of onset and shorter duration of action
than neostigmine. Edrophonium should be administered for the antagonism of the
effects of nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking drugs when there has been
adequate spontaneous recovery from the effects of these drugs and/or when the
nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking drug that had been administered was
short- or intermediate-acting. Atropine is often paired with edrophonium as the
anticholinergic of choice because its shorter time of onset is similar to the short
onset time of edrophonium. (157, Table 12-7)
81. Confirmation of the recovery from the effects of neuromuscular blockade that have
occurred either spontaneously or through the administration of anticholinesterases
should be obtained before extubation of the patient’s trachea at the conclusion
of general anesthesia. Often the mechanical muscle response to a train-of-four
stimulus is difficult for the clinician to evaluate manually or visually. When this
is the case, the evaluation of the muscular response to a continuous tetanic
stimulation may be useful. A sustained muscular contraction to a continuous tetanic
stimulus usually indicates a train-of-four ratio greater than 0.7 and is an indication
of adequate recovery from neuromuscular blockade. Alternatively, a double burst
suppression stimulus may be delivered by the peripheral nerve stimulator to
facilitate the clinician’s ability to evaluate the degree of fade. Clinical tests that may
also be used to evaluate the adequacy of the reversal of neuromuscular blockade
include the patient’s ability to open the eyes, cough, stick out the tongue, and
sustain a head lift for 5 to 10 seconds; grip strength; vital capacity; and maximal
inspiratory force. Of these clinical tests, a sustained head lift is considered to be
the most sensitive test to evaluate the adequacy of the recovery from
neuromuscular blockade. (159)
82. Residual effects of neuromuscular blockers may manifest clinically in awake
patients as diplopia, decreased hand grip strength, difficulty swallowing,
and difficulty speaking. Patients may also have difficulty sustaining their minute
ventilation without assistance. (159)
83. There are several pharmacologic and physiologic factors that may interfere with
the antagonism of the neuromuscular blockade produced by neuromuscular
blocking drugs. Physiologic factors include abnormalities in the patient’s
temperature, acid-base status, electrolytes, or metabolism pathways. These may all
interfere with the metabolism and clearance of the neuromuscular blocking drug.
In particular, renal or liver disease may result in markedly prolonged elimination
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
100
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
times and prolonged clinical effects of certain nondepolarizing neuromuscular
blocking drugs. Pharmacologic factors include the concurrent administration
of aminoglycoside antibiotics, local anesthetics, volatile anesthetics, magnesium,
dantrolene, and cardiac antidysrhythmic agents. Another cause of an apparent
inability to antagonize the effects of neuromuscular blocking drugs is not allowing
sufficient time to pass for an anticholinesterase to begin exerting its effect. Finally,
the lack of a mechanically evoked muscular response to a train-of-four stimulus
is an indication that the antagonism of the neuromuscular blockade is not
possible. (159)
ADVERSE
OUTCOMES FROM
INADEQUATE
ANTAGONISM OF
NEUROMUSCULAR
BLOCKADE
84. Residual neuromuscular blockade, obesity, the administration of opioids, long
duration of surgery, and emergency and abdominal surgery are all risk factors for
patients becoming hypoxic in the immediate postoperative period. (158)
85. The most dangerous time for anesthetic complications in the postoperative period
starts with the extubation of the trachea, transport to the postanesthesia care
unit (PACU), and the first 30 minutes in the PACU. (158)
86. Sugammadex is a neuromuscular blocking drug antagonist that is under
development, but not yet approved by the Food and Drug Administration for use
in the United States due to hypersensitivity concerns. It has been approved for
use in Europe and other countries. The mechanism of action of sugammadex is
through encapsulation and inactivation of steroid muscle relaxants (not
atracurium). (159-160)
87. Sugammadex differs from neostigmine in several ways. First, it has no
cardiovascular effects and does not require other drugs such as glycopyrrolate.
Sugammadex, unlike neostigmine, can reverse a profound neuromuscular blockade.
For example, if rocuronium, 1.2 mg/kg is given, its neuromuscular blockade can be
completely reversed within minutes (e.g., 5 minutes). In this situation, neostigmine
would be ineffective. (159)
88. Sugammadex confers several advantages for the antagonism of neuromuscular
blockade. First, a rocuronium-sugammadex combination can be used for rapid
sequence induction of anesthesia and subsequent reversal. Second, profound
neuromuscular blockade can be achieved and maintained through the end of
surgery and still have adequate reversal at the conclusion of surgery. Finally, the
incidence of residual neuromuscular blockade can be reduced or eliminated. (159)
Neuromuscular Blocking Drugs
101
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
Chapter
10 PREOPERATIVE
EVALUATION AND
MEDICATION
Jennifer E. Hofer, Bobbie Jean Sweitzer
1. What is the purpose of the preanesthetic visit before the day of surgery?
2. How does the anesthesiologist classify a patient’s physical status?
HISTORY AND
PHYSICAL
EXAMINATION
3. How is the patient’s functional status determined? Why is it important?
4. Why is the airway examination important?
5. What are the components of the airway examination?
COMORBIDITIES
IMPACTING
ADMINISTRATION
OF ANESTHESIA
6. What are the guidelines for cardiovascular evaluation for patients having
noncardiac surgery?
7. How long does the patient need to wait after revascularization to undergo elective
noncardiac surgery?
8. Should aspirin be continued perioperatively?
9. What can happen if aspirin is stopped abruptly?
10. What percentage of patients with compensated versus decompensated heart failure
will have perioperative cardiac complications?
11. What are the main types of heart failure?
12. What are the common causes of systolic and diastolic dysfunction?
13. What finding on an ECG would suggest diastolic dysfunction?
14. For patients with heart failure, which symptoms should prompt echocardiographic
evaluation preoperatively?
15. What further evaluation does a patient with heart failure symptoms at rest
(decompensated failure or Class IV) need beyond an echocardiogram?
16. Is there a benefit of routine perioperative evaluation of left ventricular (LV) function
before surgery?
17. What are the recommendations for preoperative noninvasive evaluation of LV
function?
18. Are all cardiac murmurs associated with valvular pathology?
19. Which cardiac murmurs are always pathologic?
20. What are the clinical clues that suggest a patient may have valvular disease?
21. Which planned anesthetics should prompt the anesthesiologist to want an
echocardiogram before proceeding with an anesthetic in a patient with a cardiac
murmur?
22. When is an echocardiogram indicated in an asymptomatic patient with a cardiac
murmur?
23. Are regurgitant or stenotic valvular lesions better tolerated perioperatively?
24. Does aortic stenosis and aortic sclerosis have similar hemodynamic manifestations?
102
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
25. Should patients with valvular abnormalities receive antibiotic prophylaxis to
prevent infective endocarditis?
26. Which other conditions need antibiotic prophylaxis against infective endocarditis?
27. Should patients undergoing genitourinary (GU) and gastrointestinal (GI) tract
procedures take antibiotic prophylaxis to prevent infective endocarditis?
28. For patients meeting criteria for prophylaxis against infective endocarditis, for
which procedures is prophylaxis recommended?
29. What conditions are typically associated with a pacemaker and implantable
cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) placement?
30. How should the ICD be managed in the surgical patient?
31. Will a magnet disable an ICD?
32. Which comorbidities are hypertensive patients at risk of?
33. When should surgery be delayed due to elevated blood pressure (BP)? What is severe
hypertension?
34. What is the preoperative BP goal for hypertensive patients?
35. Is there a risk in normalizing BP in hypertensive patients?
36. What are predictors of postoperative pulmonary complications?
37. Is chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) the greatest risk factor for
postoperative pulmonary complications?
38. Does well-controlled asthma increase perioperative complications?
39. How can the risk of bronchospasm after tracheal intubation be decreased in patients
with obstructive airway disease?
40. If steroids are given, how much steroid should be administered preoperatively to a
patient with persistent airway obstruction?
41. Which types of anesthesia are associated with a greater risk of postoperative
pulmonary complications (PPC)?
42. Does preoperative testing predict the risk of PPC?
43. Which maneuvers can reduce PPC rates?
44. What is obstructive sleep apnea (OSA)?
45. Which symptoms and risk factors are associated with OSA?
46. What components of the patient’s history or physical examination can identify
those at risk of OSA?
47. Which comorbidities are associated with OSA?
48. What impact does OSA have for anesthesia?
49. Should patients having anesthesia bring their continuous positive airway pressure
(CPAP) devices to the hospital?
50. What are the American Society of Anesthesiologists’ (ASA) published
recommendations for perioperative care of patients with OSA?
51. What are the most common causes of dyspnea?
52. How should dyspnea be evaluated?
53. Is renal insufficiency a risk factor for perioperative complications?
54. When should a patient with renal insufficiency receive dialysis before surgery?
55. Must chronic hyperkalemia be corrected in a patient with renal insufficiency?
56. Does radiocontrast medium worsen renal function in normal patients?
57. Can the risk of renal injury be reduced in patients receiving radiocontrast medium?
58. What are the goals of perioperative glucose control in diabetic patients?
59. If a diabetic patient has an Hb A1c of 12 on the day of surgery with a glucose level
of 350 g/dL, should the surgery be cancelled?
60. What body mass index (BMI) defines extreme obesity?
61. Which comorbidities are associated with obesity?
62. Does anemia predict perioperative morbidity and mortality?
63. Does a patient with anemia require further evaluation to identify its cause?
64. What perioperative concerns surround a pregnant patient who needs a nonobstetric
procedure?
65. Are elderly patients at a higher risk for hospital admission after ambulatory surgery?
66. How does a patient’s do not resuscitate (DNR) status transfer from the hospital ward
to the operating room?
Preoperative Evaluation and Medication
103
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
CONSULTATIONS
67. What is the purpose of a preoperative consultation?
68. Is a consultation letter stating “cleared for surgery” or “low risk” adequate?
TESTING
69. Is preoperative testing indicated for every patient?
70. When should preoperative tests be ordered?
71. Should all patients of a certain age receive a preoperative electrocardiogram
(ECG)?
72. Do preoperative ECGs or chest radiographs predict postoperative complications?
73. What are the recommendations for obtaining a preoperative ECG?
74. Do all females of childbearing years require a b-human chorionic gonadotropin
(b-hCG) assay prior to surgery?
75. Which types of preoperative tests are useful when evaluating patients with severe
comorbidities and undergoing intermediate-high risk procedures?
76. What are the minimal recommendations for testing before anesthesia?
MEDICATIONS
77. Should all medications be continued perioperatively?
78. Should b-adrenergic blockers (BB) be continued preoperatively?
79. Are there medications that can lower cardiac risk for high-risk patients scheduled
for elective noncardiac surgery?
80. What are the benefits of statins perioperatively?
81. Can statins be abruptly stopped?
82. Can neuraxial or peripheral anesthesia be performed on a patient taking aspirin or
clopidogrel?
83. Should psychiatric medications be continued preoperatively?
84. Should angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEIs) or angiotensin receptor
blockers (ARBs) be continued preoperatively?
85. When should low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH) be discontinued before
surgery?
86. How many days before surgery should warfarin be stopped?
87. What should be done if the international normalized ratio (INR) is elevated near the
day of surgery?
88. When should patients on warfarin be bridged with LMWH before surgery?
89. In which patients is LMWH contraindicated?
90. How should type 1 and type 2 diabetics be managed preoperatively?
91. Should ultra–long-acting insulin such as glargine be continued on the day of
surgery?
92. Does metformin need to be discontinued before the day of surgery?
93. Should oral hypoglycemic drugs be withheld on the day of surgery?
94. Which medications should be continued on the day of surgery?
95. Which medications should be discontinued for surgery?
96. Which herbal medication should not be discontinued abruptly before surgery?
97. Is neuraxial anesthesia contraindicated in patients taking herbal medications?
98. Should monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs) be discontinued before surgery?
99. Should narcotics, anxiolytics, or nicotine replacement be discontinued before
surgery?
100. Should patients taking oral steroids take the steroid on the day of surgery?
101. How much cortisol does a patient typically produce a day?
102. Which patients are at risk for adrenal insufficiency?
103. What risks are associated with high-dose steroids?
104. How should perioperative glucocorticoids be dosed for a patient on chronic
steroids?
105. How should anxious patients be premedicated before surgery?
106. What medications can be offered preoperatively to patients with a history of severe
postoperative nausea and vomiting (PONV)?
107. Who is at risk for pulmonary aspiration, and how should they be premedicated?
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
104
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
FASTING
108. What are the guidelines for food and fluid intake for adult patients before elective
surgery?
FORMULATION OF
ANESTHETIC PLAN,
ASSESSMENT OF
RISK, AND
INFORMED CONSENT
109. What does the anesthesiologist consider when choosing an anesthetic technique?
110. What side effects of general anesthesia are commonly disclosed to patients?
111. What side effects of regional anesthesia are commonly disclosed to patients?
112. What is entailed in obtaining informed consent?
ANSWERS*
1. The purpose of the visit is to interview the patient or guardian and establish a
medical, medication, and anesthesia history, and to determine the patient’s
functional capacity. At this visit, the anesthesiologist performs a physical
examination focusing on the airway, vital signs, and cardiovascular, pulmonary,
and neurologic systems; reviews previous diagnostic tests, consultations, and
laboratory results; assigns an ASA-physical status (see question 2); and determines
whether further tests are necessary before surgery. An anesthetic plan is formulated
and discussed with the responsible adult before informed consent is obtained.
Medical therapies are optimized, fasting instructions are provided, and preoperative
medication recommendations are given. (165-166, Figure 13-1)
2. The American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) Physical Status Classification
ranges from ASA 1 to ASA 6. A patient who is classified as ASA 1 is healthy,
without disease. ASA 2 is for patients with mild systemic disease that is well
controlled. ASA 3 refers to patients with systemic disease sufficiently severe to
limit daily activity (renal failure on dialysis or class 2 heart failure). ASA 4 is for
patients with a severe disease that is a constant threat to life and seriously limits
daily activities (acute myocardial infarction or respiratory failure requiring
mechanical ventilation). ASA 5 refers to moribund patients likely to die in
less than 24 hours with or without surgery. ASA 6 is reserved for brain-dead patients
who are organ donors. The letter E is added to a classification if the surgical
procedure is an emergency. (Table 13-1)
HISTORY AND
PHYSICAL
EXAMINATION
3. A patient’s functional capacity is measured in metabolic equivalents (MET). One
MET is equivalent to the consumption of 3.5 mL O2/kg/min. A patient able to eat,
get dressed, and work at a computer has a MET of 1. A patient who can walk two
blocks has a MET of 3. Climbing one flight of stairs equals a MET of 5; a MET of 10 is
running or jogging briskly. A MET of 12 is achieved with running rapidly for long
distances. A patient’s functional capacity predicts outcome, perioperative
complications, and indicates the need for further evaluation. (166, Table 13-2)
4. The airway examination is performed to assist in predicting the ease of hand mask
ventilation and endotracheal intubation of the patient. If difficult airway
management is predicted, then necessary equipment can be set up and skilled
personnel alerted and available on the day of surgery. (Figure 13-2, Table 13-3)
5. During the airway examination the following are assessed: the condition of the
teeth, the ability of the patient to advance or protrude the mandibular incisors; the
tongue size; visibility of the uvula, tonsils, soft palate, or hard palate only
*Numbers in parentheses: numbers refer to pages, figures, or tables in Miller RD, Pardo MC: Basics of Anesthesia,
6th ed. Philadelphia, Elsevier Saunders, 2011.
Preoperative Evaluation and Medication
105
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
(Mallampati classification I-IV); the presence of facial hair; the thyromental
distance; and the length, thickness, and range of motion of the neck. (Figure 13-2,
Table 13-3)
COMORBIDITIES
IMPACTING
ADMINISTRATION
OF ANESTHESIA
6. The American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association (ACC/AHA)
guidelines have decreased the number of recommendations for testing and
revascularization. The approach to this algorithm should stop at the first step that
applies to the patient.
Step 1 (emergency surgery): if the patient has ischemic heart disease and needs
emergency surgery, the focus is on perioperative surveillance (serial ECG,
enzymes, monitoring) and risk reduction (b-adrenergic blockers, statins, pain
control), not on preoperative testing.
If the surgery is not an emergency, then the algorithm is as follows:
Step 2 (active cardiac conditions): if the patient has an active cardiac condition
(unstable angina, acute myocardial infarction, recent myocardial infarction if
other myocardium is at risk, decompensated heart failure, significant arrhythmias,
or severe valvular disease), surgery should be postponed until the active cardiac
condition is stabilized or corrected.
Step 3 (low-risk surgery): a patient without an active cardiac condition
undergoing a low-risk surgery (superficial or endoscopic, cataract, breast, or
ambulatory) may proceed to surgery without further testing.
Step 4 (good functional capacity): if the patient has a MET of 4 or more (refer to
question 3), and is asymptomatic, the patient may proceed to surgery without
further testing.
Step 5 (poor functional capacity): if the patient has poor functional capacity
and needs intermediate-risk or vascular surgery, then important clinical
predictors (not increased age or elevated blood pressure) are used to determine if
more testing is necessary. The five important clinical predictors based on the
revised cardiac risk index (RCRI) include ischemic heart disease, compensated or
prior heart failure, cerebrovascular disease (stroke, transient ischemic attack),
diabetes mellitus, and renal insufficiency. If no clinical predictors are present, the
patient may proceed to surgery without further testing. If one or more clinical
predictors are present, the patient may proceed to surgery with heart rate control,
or noninvasive testing may be considered before surgery if it will change
management. (166, Figure 13-3)
7. How long the patient needs to wait after revascularization to undergo elective
noncardiac surgery depends on the type of revascularization and the associated
period of dual antiplatelet therapy to prevent thrombosis or restenosis. For
percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) without stenting, 2 weeks of dual
antiplatelet therapy is required. If a drug-eluting stent (DES) is placed, 12 months
of aspirin and thienopyridine therapy (clopidogrel or ticlopidine) are required; a
bare metal stent (BMS) requires 1 month of dual therapy. Elective surgical
procedures should be delayed past this high-risk period. If a patient with a DES
requires a procedure that mandates the discontinuation of thienopyridine therapy,
aspirin should be continued perioperatively and the thienopyridine restarted as
soon as possible. During the preanesthetic visit, the type of stent (DES or BMS)
should be identified and managed perioperatively with a cardiologist familiar with
these stents, especially to prevent premature withdrawal of antiplatelet drugs. The
patient should be made aware of the risks associated with premature
discontinuation of the drugs, including stent thrombosis, myocardial infarction,
and death. If stent thrombosis does occur, it is best treated in the immediate
postoperative period by percutaneous coronary intervention. (169-170, 180,
Table 13-4, Figure 13-4)
8. Patients taking aspirin for primary prevention (no known vascular disease but
only to prevent ischemic heart disease or stroke) should stop aspirin 7 days before
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
106
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
the procedure. If aspirin is for secondary prevention (for known vascular disease
of any type, such as after myocardial infarction, acute coronary syndrome,
stent, stroke, or peripheral arterial disease) aspirin should be continued
perioperatively unless the procedure is associated with bleeding into a closed
space (e.g., intracranial neurosurgery), in which case aspirin is stopped 7 days
before the procedure.
If the patient is taking aspirin and clopidogrel, and the condition is low risk
(stroke, uncomplicated myocardial infarction, PCI without stenting, or past the
high-risk period with stents (see question 8), it is acceptable for the patient to stop
clopidogrel 7 days before the surgery and continue aspirin perioperatively. If the
patient is taking aspirin and clopidogrel, and the situation is high risk (<2 weeks
after PCI without stents, <4 weeks after BMS, <12 months after DES, high-risk
stents) then dual antiplatelet therapy is continued unless there is risk of bleeding
into a closed space (intracranial), in which case the risk/benefits of antiplatelets are
evaluated. If aspirin is stopped, it is best reinstituted early in the postoperative
period. (169, 179-180, Table 13-4, Figure 13-4)
9. There is an increased risk of vascular events (including acute coronary syndromes
and acute cerebral events) if aspirin is stopped perioperatively. This increase in
adverse events may be from a rebound hypercoagulable state when aspirin is
withdrawn. (179)
10. The risk of perioperative cardiac complications is 5% to 7% with
compensated heart failure and 20% to 30% or higher with decompensated
heart failure. (170)
11. Systolic dysfunction (decreased ejection fraction from decreased contractility) and
diastolic dysfunction (increased filling pressures with abnormal relaxation but
preserved contractility and ejection fraction), or a combination of systolic and
diastolic dysfunction. (170-171)
12. Systolic dysfunction is most commonly caused by ischemic heart disease; diastolic
dysfunction is associated with hypertension. (171)
13. Left ventricular hypertrophy on an ECG may suggest diastolic dysfunction.
(171)
14. Symptoms of recent weight gain, complaints of shortness of breath, fatigue,
orthopnea, paroxysmal dyspnea, nocturnal cough, peripheral edema, recent
hospitalizations, or necessary changes in medical management prompt
echocardiographic evaluation. (171)
15. A patient with heart failure symptoms at rest needs evaluation by a cardiologist
before undergoing anesthesia. (171)
16. Routine perioperative evaluation of LV function in patients is not recommended.
(Table 13-5)
17. Class IIA (reasonable to perform) recommendations exist for evaluation of LV
function in the following patients: patients with dyspnea of unknown origin, with
current or previous heart failure with worsening dyspnea, or with another change
in clinical status if the LV function has not been evaluated in the previous
12 months. Class IIB (may be considered) recommendations suggest reassessment
of LV function in clinically stable patients with previously documented
cardiomyopathy, although the recommendations are not well established.
(Table 13-5)
18. Not all cardiac murmurs are pathologic. Functional murmurs arise from turbulent
flow across the aortic or pulmonary outflow tracts in high output states, such as
hyperthyroidism, pregnancy, or anemia. Functional murmurs are not associated
with valvular abnormalities. (171, Table 13-6)
19. Diastolic murmurs are always pathologic and require evaluation. (171)
Preoperative Evaluation and Medication
107
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
20. Important factors for valvular disease include advanced age, coronary artery
disease (CAD), a history of rheumatic fever, volume overload, pulmonary disease,
cardiomegaly, an abnormal ECG, or a murmur. (171, Table 13-6)
21. Before general anesthesia, or spinal anesthesia (contraindicated if severe aortic
stenosis is present), an anesthesiologist would evaluate a cardiac murmur by
echocardiogram. (171)
22. Per ACC/AHA guidelines, there is evidence that echocardiography is useful in
murmurs associated with ejection clicks, murmurs that radiate to the neck or back,
or grade 3 or louder systolic murmurs. Obtaining an echocardiogram for a patient
with a murmur and an abnormal ECG or chest radiograph is a class IIa
recommendation; obtaining an echocardiogram for a patient with a grade 2 or
softer midsystolic murmur, which is considered innocent or functional by an
experienced observer, is a class III recommendation (i.e., not recommended).
(171, Table 13-6)
23. Regurgitant valvular lesions are better tolerated perioperatively than stenotic
disease. (171)
24. Systolic ejection murmurs are heard in both aortic stenosis and aortic sclerosis.
Aortic sclerosis (a calcified valve without narrowing) is associated with a loud
murmur, and is more prevalent than aortic stenosis; however, it is aortic
stenosis that is associated with a significant compromise in hemodynamics.
Patients with severe or critical aortic stenosis should always undergo cardiac
evaluation unless the procedure is an emergency. Aortic stenosis is associated
with a high risk for perioperative complications. Both conditions are independent
predictors of CAD. (171)
25. No, antibiotic prophylaxis is no longer recommended for patients with
abnormalities on native valves (e.g., aortic stenosis, tricuspid regurgitation, mitral
stenosis from rheumatic heart disease). However, patients with previous episodes
of infective endocarditis or a transplanted heart with valvular abnormalities do
require infective endocarditis prophylaxis. (171, Table 13-7, Table 13-8)
26. Antibiotic prophylaxis is needed for patients with a prosthetic cardiac valve,
previous infective endocarditis, unrepaired congenital heart disease, repaired
congenital defects within 6 months of the repair, or lifelong if a residual defect
remains. (171, Table 13-8)
27. No, GU and GI tract procedures, unless infection is present, do not require
antibiotic prophylaxis against infective endocarditis. (Table 13-7)
28. Antibiotic prophylaxis against infective endocarditis is recommended for all
dental procedures that involve manipulation of gingival tissues or the periapical
region of the teeth or perforation of oral mucosa, and for procedures on the
respiratory tract, or through infected tissue. (Table 13-7)
29. Patients with heart failure, ischemic or valvular disease, cardiomyopathies, or
potentially lethal arrhythmias often have a pacemaker or ICD placed. (171-172)
30. First, the patient should carry a wallet card with pertinent information regarding
the device. Interference with the device may be caused by monitors, ventilators,
chest prepping, cautery, and central line placement. If interference causes
unnecessary cardioversion, or an unexpected discharge, patient movement that
occurs during a delicate intracranial, spinal, or ocular procedure may be
catastrophic. Because of concern for interference causing unexpected discharge
and patient movement, ICDs are typically deactivated during procedures.
Patients must be connected to monitors, and equipment for cardioversion
must be available when ICDs are programmed off. (171-172)
31. A magnet will suspend antishock therapies only. Magnets disable only the
antitachycardia function, not the pacing function of an ICD. If the ICD is disabled
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
108
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
by a magnet, a defibrillator must be available as an alternate form of antishock
therapy. Once the magnet is removed, the antitachycardia function may not
resume in some ICD models. Additionally, some ICDs will not respond to a
magnet. If an ICD is reprogrammed or if a magnet is used at any time, the
device must be reinterrogated and reenabled before the patient leaves a
monitored setting. (172)
32. Hypertensive patients may develop end-organ damage depending on the severity
and duration of hypertension. Ischemic heart disease, heart failure, renal
insufficiency, and cerebrovascular disease are common in hypertensive
patients. (172)
33. Severe hypertension is systolic BP greater than 200 mm Hg or diastolic BP greater
than 115 mm Hg. Surgery should be delayed for patients with severe hypertension
until the BP is less than 180/110 mm Hg. (172)
34. The preoperative goal is to restore BP to normal levels before surgery if significant
end-organ damage is present or intraoperative hypotensive techniques are
planned. (172)
35. If BP is lowered rapidly and aggressively, a risk of cerebral or coronary ischemia
exists. Extreme lowering of BP resulting in intraoperative hypotension is more
dangerous than hypertension. (172)
36. Predictors of postoperative pulmonary complications include advanced age, heart
failure, COPD, smoking, poor general health (impaired sensorium, functional
dependency), and obstructive sleep apnea. (172-174, Table 13-9)
37. No, COPD is not the greatest risk factor for postoperative pulmonary
complications. Heart failure, advanced age, and poor general health are associated
with a greater risk of postoperative pulmonary complications than is COPD.
However, the more severe the COPD, the greater the risk. (173, Table 13-9)
38. No, well-controlled asthma does not increase perioperative complications;
however, patients with poorly controlled asthma as evidenced by wheezing are at a
higher risk of complications. (172-173)
39. Administration of corticosteroids and b-adrenergic agonists preoperatively
decreases the incidence of bronchospasm upon tracheal intubation. (173-174)
40. Prednisone 0.5 to 1 mg/kg orally for 1 to 4 days before surgery for patients likely to
have endotracheal intubation is recommended for patients with persistent airway
obstruction despite the use of inhaled medication. (174)
41. General anesthesia is associated with a greater risk of PPC. Neuraxial anesthesia
and peripheral nerve blocks are associated with a lower risk of PPC. In addition,
percutaneous interventions (endovascular repairs) have a lower risk of PPC than
open interventions. (174, Table 13-9)
42. Routine pulmonary function tests, chest radiography, or arterial blood gases do not
predict PPC risk. (174)
43. PPC rates can be decreased by maximizing airflow in obstructive disease, treating
infections and heart failure, and using lung expansion maneuvers such as
coughing, deep breathing, incentive spirometry, positive end-expiratory pressure
(PEEP), and continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP). (174)
44. OSA is intermittent airway obstruction during sleep. (174, Figure 13-5)
45. OSA is associated with snoring, daytime sleepiness, hypertension, obesity, and a
family history of OSA. (174, Figure 13-5)
46. The STOP-Bang questionnaire can be used to identify patients at risk for OSA. The
questions address snoring, daytime fatigue, treatment for high blood pressure,
Preoperative Evaluation and Medication
109
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
observed apneas during sleep, BMI of 35 or more, age of 50 or over, neck
circumference greater than 15.7 inches (40 cm), and male gender. Patients are at
high risk for OSA if they answer yes to three or more items. (174, Figure 13-5)
47. Patients with OSA have increased rates of diabetes, hypertension, atrial fibrillation,
bradyarrhythmias, ventricular ectopy, stroke, heart failure, pulmonary
hypertension, dilated cardiomyopathy, and CAD. (174, Figure 13-5)
48. Ventilation by mask, direct laryngoscopy, endotracheal intubation, and
fiber-optic visualization of the airway are more difficult in patients with OSA.
Patients with OSA may have perioperative airway obstruction, hypoxemia,
atelectasis, ischemia, pneumonia, and prolonged hospitalizations. (174-175,
Figure 13-5)
49. Yes, if CPAP is used at home, the patient should bring the home CPAP device on the
day of the procedure for perioperative use. (174)
50. The ASA recommends that patients with OSA have preoperative diagnosis and
treatment. The appropriateness of ambulatory surgery should be reviewed since
patients with OSA are at a higher risk for perioperative complications and
prolonged hospitalization than are patients without OSA. (175, Figure 13-5)
51. The most common pathologic causes of dyspnea are COPD, asthma, and heart
failure. Deconditioning is also a common nonpathologic cause of dyspnea.
(175, Figure 13-6)
52. In a patient with dyspnea, history and physical examination determine whether the
cause is cardiac, pulmonary, both, or other. Dyspnea of cardiac origin may be
caused by myocardial ischemia, angina, heart failure, valvular disease, or
pericardial disease, such as tamponade or constrictive pericarditis. Evaluation
includes an ECG, chest radiograph, stress test, echocardiogram, and a brain
natriuretic peptide level. If the etiology of dyspnea is suspected to be pulmonary,
this may be caused by COPD, asthma, pneumonia, lung injury, pulmonary
embolism, pulmonary hypertension, restrictive lung disease, pulmonary fibrosis,
or pleural disease. Evaluation includes a chest radiograph, arterial blood gases,
pulmonary function testing, and chest computed tomography. Other causes for
dyspnea include anemia, deconditioning, renal failure, neuromuscular disease,
hypothyroidism, and psychogenic. For these causes, a complete blood count,
blood urea nitrogen, creatinine, electrolytes, thyroid function tests, and
comprehensive exercise testing should be obtained. Once the cause of the dyspnea
is identified and a diagnosis made, treatment can be implemented to improve
the patient’s medical condition and decrease the risk of perioperative
complications. (175, Figure 13-6)
53. Yes, renal insufficiency is the strongest predictor of perioperative worsening of
renal function. It is also equal to CAD as a risk factor for perioperative cardiac
complications. (175)
54. Dialysis should be performed within 24 hours of surgery, but not immediately
before to avoid acute volume depletion and electrolyte alterations. (175)
55. If the potassium level is less than 6 mEq/dL and within the range of a
patient’s established levels, then chronic hyperkalemia may not need to be
corrected. (175)
56. Radiocontrast medium transiently decreases the glomerular filtration rate (GFR)
in almost all patients, but patients with diabetes or renal insufficiency are at
highest risk. (175)
57. The risk of renal injury from radiocontrast medium may be reduced by
alkalinizing renal tubular fluid with sodium bicarbonate or by simple hydration
in patients with a GFR less than 60 mL/kg/min. (175)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
110
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
58. Perioperative glucose control in diabetic patients focuses on preventing
hypoglycemia during fasting, and preventing extreme hyperglycemia and ketosis.
(175-176)
59. Targeting tight glucose control in the immediate perioperative period is not likely
to substantially impact outcomes in diabetics having surgery. No data support
cancellation of procedures for any increased level of blood glucose or even
treatment of high levels for noncardiac surgery cases. Perioperative intervention
is warranted if a patient has hypoglycemia (glucose <50 g/dL). Chronically
elevated blood sugars are associated with perioperative morbidity. Long-term
optimization of diabetes should be considered for high-risk procedures (e.g., joint
replacement). (175-176)
60. A BMI of greater than 40 defines extreme obesity. (176)
61. Obesity is associated with OSA, heart failure, diabetes, hypertension,
pulmonary hypertension, difficult airway management, and decreased arterial
oxygenation. (176)
62. Anemia is a marker for an increased risk of perioperative death, and a predictor of
worse short- and long-term outcomes. (176)
63. For an elective procedure with expected blood loss or anticoagulation, anemia
should be evaluated preoperatively. If a patient is asymptomatic with chronic
anemia and has no history of CAD, and is undergoing a low-risk procedure,
then transfusion is not warranted unless the hemoglobin is less than 6 g/dL. If the
cause of the anemia is unknown, an evaluation is indicated. A patient with
sickle cell disease should be evaluated by a hematologist perioperatively to
guide therapy. (176)
64. Pregnant patients may require fetal monitoring, and the potential for preterm labor
or delivery should be anticipated. Perioperative plans should be confirmed with the
patient’s obstetrician. (176)
65. Patients older than 85 years, and patients with a history of hospital admission
within the previous 6 months, are at high risk for postoperative admission after
ambulatory surgery. (176)
66. A patient has the right to self-determination in the perioperative period. DNR
policiesshouldbereviewedwiththepatientorthepatient’ssurrogatebeforesurgery
and modified as needed to uphold the patient’s wishes. There are three parts to
the perioperative DNR (A, B, and C). Choice A is full attempt at resuscitation. This
choice requests full suspension of existing directives during the anesthetic and
immediate postoperative period, thereby consenting to the use of any resuscitation
procedures to treat clinical events during this time. Choice B is a limited attempt
at resuscitation, which may apply or reject certain specific resuscitation procedures
(e.g., chest compressions, defibrillation, tracheal intubation). Choice C is a
limited attempt at resuscitation defined with regard to the patient’s goals. This
choice allows the anesthesiologist and surgical team to use clinical judgment in
determining which resuscitation procedures are appropriate in the context of
the situation and the patient’s stated goals. (176, Figure 13-7, Table 13-10)
CONSULTATIONS
67. The purpose of a preoperative consultation is to diagnose, evaluate, and improve a
new or poorly controlled condition, and to create a clinical risk profile to help
guide the patient, anesthesiologist, and surgeon to make management
decisions. (176)
68. A thorough consultation should summarize a patient’s medical problems,
condition, and the results of diagnostic tests and provide therapeutic
recommendations to help the anesthesiologist provide a safe anesthetic. (176)
Preoperative Evaluation and Medication
111
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
TESTING
69. No, preoperative testing is not indicated for every patient. Preoperative tests
without specific indications lack utility and may lead to patient injury because of
unnecessary interventions, delay of surgery, anxiety, and even inappropriate
therapies. (176, 178)
70. Preoperative tests should be ordered if the results will impact the decision to proceed
with the planned procedure or alter the care plans. Based on a patient’s history (e.g.,
increased dyspnea on exertion, new onset chest pain, syncope), tests are ordered
to establish a diagnosis, evaluate a worsening condition, or aid in preoperative
decisions and the management of patients with severe comorbidities. (176, 178)
71. No, age is not an indication for a preoperative ECG. (176, Table 13-11)
72. No, neither preoperative ECGs or chest radiographs predict postoperative
complications beyond information available from the patient’s history and
examination. (176, 178, Table 13-11)
73. The class I recommendation (procedure is indicated) for ordering a preoperative
ECG is for patients with at least one RCRI clinical risk factor (ischemic heart
disease, heart failure, cerebrovascular disease, diabetes, renal insufficiency)
who are undergoing vascular surgery procedures, and for patients with known
coronary heart disease (CHD), peripheral arterial disease, or cerebrovascular
disease who are undergoing intermediate-risk surgical procedures. The class IIa
recommendations (procedure is reasonable to perform) include patients with no
RCRI clinical risk factors who are undergoing vascular surgical procedures.
Class IIb recommendations (procedure may be considered) include patients with at
least one RCRI clinical risk factor who are undergoing intermediate-risk
procedures. Class III recommendations (procedure should not be performed
because it is not helpful) include asymptomatic patients undergoing low-risk
surgical procedures. (176, 178, Table 13-11)
74. Pregnancy testing should be offered to women. Some facilities make it
mandatory before anesthesia; other facilities allow women to decline testing.
(178, Table 13-12)
75. The recommendations are to check the following: albumin level if a patient has
anasarca, liver disease, malnutrition, or malabsorption; a complete blood count
(CBC) with platelets if there is alcohol abuse, anemia, dyspnea, hepatic or renal
disease, malignancy, malnutrition, personal history of bleeding, poor exercise
tolerance, or recent chemotherapy or radiation therapy; creatinine level if the
patient has renal disease; chest radiograph if the patient has an active, acute, or
chronic pulmonary symptom such as a cough, dyspnea, abnormal unexplained
physical findings on chest examination, decompensated heart failure, malignancy
within the thorax, or radiation therapy (to chest, breasts, lungs, thorax); an ECG
if there is alcohol abuse, an active cardiac condition, an ICD, OSA, pacemaker,
pulmonary hypertension, radiation therapy, severe obesity, syncope, or use of
amiodarone or digoxin; electrolytes if there is alcohol abuse, cardiovascular,
hepatic, renal or thyroid disease, diabetes, malnutrition, or use of digoxin or
diuretics; glucose level if the patient has diabetes, is severely obese, or uses
steroids; liver function tests (LFTs) if there is a history of alcohol abuse, hepatic
disease, recent hepatitis exposure, or an undiagnosed bleeding disorder; a platelet
count if there is a history of alcohol abuse, hepatic disease, bleeding disorder,
hematologic malignancy, recent chemotherapy or radiation therapy, or
thrombocytopenia; a prothrombin time (PT) if there is a history of alcohol abuse,
hepatic disease, malnutrition, bleeding disorder (personal or familial), or use of
warfarin; a partial thromboplastin time if there is a bleeding disorder (personal or
familial), undiagnosed hypercoagulable state, or use of unfractionated heparin;
thyroid-stimulating hormone, triiodothyronine, and thyroxine test if there is a
goiter, thyroid disease, unexplained dyspnea, fatigue, palpitations, or tachycardia;
and a urinalysis if a urinary tract infection is suspected. (178, Table 13-2)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
112
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
76. A creatinine level should be checked within 3 months if a patient is to receive an
injection of contrast dye. A hemoglobin/hematocrit should be checked if the
surgery has the potential for significant blood loss, and a type and screen should be
obtained if there is a likelihood of transfusion. On the day of surgery it may be
useful to obtain a potassium level in a patient with end-stage renal disease, and a
glucose determination in a patient with diabetes, although no absolute level of
either potassium or glucose has been determined to preclude surgery and
anesthesia. The benefits of the procedure must be balanced against the risk of
proceeding in a patient with abnormal results. An ECG is indicated if the
patient has an active cardiac condition such as decompensated heart failure,
arrhythmia, chest pain, or murmur. (178, Table 13-13)
MEDICATIONS
77. Perioperative medications should be evaluated on a case by case basis.
Generally, cardiac medications, antihypertensive drugs, and nonloop diuretics
when taken for hypertension are continued preoperatively. If ACEIs or ARBs are
continued, doses of induction and other anesthetic drugs may be altered, and
vasopressin should be available to prevent or mitigate hypotension. (178-184,
Table 13-14)
78. There are class I recommendations that BB should be continued preoperatively in
patients who take them to treat angina, symptomatic arrhythmias, or hypertension.
(179, Table 13-14, Table 13-15)
79. Minimizing risk for high-risk patients includes postponing elective surgery to
optimize BB and statin therapy. (179)
80. Statins reduce the length of hospital stay, risk of stroke, renal dysfunction,
myocardial infarction, and death. Serious consideration should be given to starting
a statin if the patient has risk factors for or has known atherosclerotic disease. (179)
81. Abruptly stopping statins may be associated with an increased risk, including
death. (179)
82. According to the American Society of Regional Anesthesia (ASRA), neuraxial and
peripheral anesthesia is safe for patients taking aspirin. However, since the risk of
spinal hematoma is unknown for patients taking clopidogrel, ASRA guidelines
suggest discontinuation of clopidogrel 7 days before a planned neuraxial
blockade. (180)
83. Yes, antidepressants, antianxiety, and psychiatric medications including MAOIs
should be continued preoperatively. Anesthesia management may need to be
altered for patients taking MAOIs. (183, Table 13-14)
84. Continuing ACEIs or ARBs prior to surgery may contribute to hypotension
under anesthesia. These medications may be discontinued 12 to 24 hours
before surgery if taken only for hypertension, especially if the surgical procedure
will be lengthy; there will be significant blood loss or fluid shifts; or planned
administration of general anesthesia. Also, if the patient is on multiple
antihypertensive medications and has well-controlled blood pressure, ACEi or
ARBs may be considered for discontinuation 12 to 24 hours before the
procedure. (178, Table 13-14)
85. LMWH is discontinued 12 to 24 hours (12 hours if prophylactic dosing
0.5 mg/kg/day, 24 hours if therapeutic dosing 1 mg/kg/day) before procedures
with a risk of bleeding or planned neuraxial blockade. (180, Table 13-16)
86. If the INR is 2 to 3, warfarin administration should be stopped 5 days before
surgery (unless the procedure is minor such as cataract surgery without bulbar
block) to allow the INR to decrease to within reference limits. (180, Table 13-14,
Table 13-16)
Preoperative Evaluation and Medication
113
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
87. If the INR is measured a day or two before surgery and is greater than 1.8, a
small dose of vitamin K (1 to 5 mg orally or subcutaneously) can reverse
anticoagulation. (180, Table 13-16)
88. Patients on warfarin should be bridged with LMWH perioperatively if they have
had an acute arterial or venous thromboembolism 1 to 3 months before an
operation, if the procedure cannot be postponed, if they have a mechanical heart
valve, or if they have high-risk hypercoagulable states. (180, Table 13-16)
89. LMWH is typically contraindicated in patients with creatinine clearance less than
40 mL/min, body weight greater than 150 kg, porcine allergy, heparin-induced
thrombocytopenia, or patients with a history of bleeding complications while on
LMWH. (180, Table 13-16)
90. Type 1 diabetics have an absolute insulin deficiency and require insulin to
prevent ketoacidosis even if they are not hyperglycemic. Type 2 diabetics are
often insulin-resistant and prone to extreme hyperglycemia. Both type 1 and
type 2 diabetics should discontinue intermittent short-acting regular insulin with
the exception of the insulin pump. The insulin pump should be continued at the
lowest basal rate, which is generally the nighttime dose. Insulin should be
discontinued if the blood sugar level is less than 100. Type 1 diabetics should
take half of their usual intermediate- to long-acting morning insulin (lente or
NPH) the day of surgery to avoid ketoacidosis. Type 2 diabetics take none or up to
a half dose of intermediate- to long-acting insulin (lente or NPH) or a
combination of a 70/30 preparation insulin on the day of surgery. (180-182,
Table 13-14)
91. Yes, glargine should be continued on the day of surgery, but the dose should be
decreased if it is 1 unit/kg or more. (182, Table 13-14)
92. No, metformin does not need to be discontinued before the day of surgery and will
not cause hypoglycemia during fasting periods of 1 to 2 days. There is no risk of
lactic acidosis with metformin in patients with functioning liver and kidneys.
Metformin is not administered postoperatively until the risk of lactic acidosis has
passed. (182-183, Table 13-14)
93. Yes, to avoid potential hypoglycemia in fasting patients from some oral agents, these
medications are generally held on the day of surgery. (182-183, Table 13-14)
94. On the day of surgery patients should continue asthma medications, birth control
pills, cardiac medications, triamterine and hydrochlorothiazide if used for
hypertension (while loop diuretics are typically withheld), eye drops,
gastrointestinal reflux medications, seizure medications, steroids (oral or inhaled),
thyroid medications, and autoimmune medications such as methotrexate if there is
no risk of renal failure (while entanercept, infliximab, and adalimumab are
generally discontinued). Patients may continue COX-2 inhibitors (unless the
surgeon is concerned about bone healing), estrogen compounds when used for
birth control or cancer therapy, and narcotics for pain or addiction. (178-184,
Table 13-14, Table 13-15)
95. Herbals and nonvitamin supplements should be discontinued 7 to 14 days before
surgery. The administration of nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs should be
discontinued 48 hours before surgery. Topical creams, ointments, and Viagra
should be discontinued 24 hours before surgery. Vitamins, minerals, and iron
should not be taken on the day of surgery. Sildenafil if taken for right heart failure
or pulmonary hypertension should be continued perioperatively. (178-184,
Table 13-14)
96. Valerian is a central nervous system depressant, which may cause a
benzodiazepine-like withdrawal when abruptly discontinued. It is safest to taper
this medication. (183)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
114
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
97. Herbal therapy alone is not a contraindication to neuraxial or regional anesthesia
per ASRA guidelines. (183)
98. MAOIs have a long duration of action, approximately 3 weeks. Discontinuation
of MAOIs may produce severe depression or result in suicide. The safest
alternative is to continue MAOIs and adjust the anesthetic plan. (183)
99. Patients should continue any narcotic pain medications to prevent withdrawal
symptoms and discomfort. Anxiolytics are continued as well. Drugs used to treat
addiction, such as methadone or nicotine-replacement therapies, are also
continued. (183-184, Table 13-14)
100. Yes, patients taking oral steroids should continue the steroid on the day of surgery.
(183-184)
101. A normal daily adrenal output of cortisol is 30 mg, which is equivalent to 5 to
7.5 mg of prednisone. (183)
102. The hypothalamic-pituitary axis (HPA) may be suppressed in patients taking 5 to
20 mg/day of prednisone or its equivalent for more than 3 weeks. The HPA is
usually suppressed with more than 20 mg/day of prednisone for more than
3 weeks. The risk of adrenal insufficiency remains for up to 1 year after the
cessation of high-dose steroids. A patient with a suppressed HPA may need
supplemental perioperative steroids if his or her HPA cannot increase the output of
glucocorticoids during the period of surgery, trauma, or infection. (183)
103. High-dose steroids are associated with infections, psychosis, poor wound healing,
and hyperglycemia. (183)
104. For a minor procedure (e.g., inguinal herniorrhaphy), the target hydrocortisone
equivalent is 25 mg/day, so additional supplementation is not necessary and the
patient should just take their usual daily dose of steroid. For a moderate stress
surgical procedure (colon resection, total joint replacement, lower extremity
revascularization) the target hydrocortisone equivalent is 50 to 75 mg/day for 1 to
2 days. The patient should take their usual daily dose of steroid, receive 50 mg
hydrocortisone intraoperatively, then 20 mg hydrocortisone every 8 hours
through postoperative day 1, then resume their home dosing of steroid. If a major
surgery is planned (pancreatoduodenectomy, esophagectomy), then the target
hydrocortisone equivalent is 100 to 150 mg/day for 2 to 3 days. The patient should
take their usual daily dose of steroid, receive 50 mg hydrocortisone
intraoperatively, and continue with 50 mg hydrocortisone every 8 hours through
postoperative day 2. After postoperative day 2, they should then resume their home
dose of steroid. (183, Table 13-17)
105. Premedication for anxious patients before surgery may include a short course of
benzodiazepines in the days preceding surgery and the day of the operation, or
opioids in patients with preoperative pain or discomfort associated with regional
anesthesia or insertion of invasive monitors before the induction of anesthesia.
(183-184, Table 13-18)
106. Patients at risk for PONV may be prescribed a scopolamine patch to be placed
2 to 4 hours preoperatively. Scopolamine is contraindicated in patients with closed
angle glaucoma. (184, Table 13-18)
107. Patients at increased risk for pulmonary aspiration include parturient
patients, patients with intraabdominal masses, nonfasting individuals, patients
with an incompetent lower esophageal sphincter with reflux, symptomatic
hiatal hernia, diabetes mellitus, gastric motility disorders, anticipated difficult
airway, bowel obstruction, and ascites. Alteration of gastric contents to
increase pH and limit the severity of potential pulmonary aspiration can be
achieved with H2 antagonists, proton pump inhibitors, and non-particulate
antacids, along with prokinetic agents to stimulate gastric emptying. (184)
Preoperative Evaluation and Medication
115
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
FASTING
108. Up to 8 hours prior to surgery, any food or fluid may be consumed. For patients
without risk factors for pulmonary aspiration (see question 107) the following
applies: up to 6 hours before surgery, the patient may have a light meal (toast and
clear liquids), infant formula, or nonhuman milk; up to 4 hours before surgery,
breast milk may be consumed; up to 2 hours before surgery, the patient may take
clear liquids without milk, pulp, or alcohol. During the 2 hours before surgery, no
solids or liquids may be taken orally. If the patient has risk factors for pulmonary
aspiration, no food or fluid should be consumed within 8 hours of the surgery.
(184, Table 13-19)
FORMULATION OF
ANESTHETIC PLAN,
ASSESSMENT OF
RISK, AND
INFORMED CONSENT
109. The anesthesiologist considers the patient’s coexisting diseases, the site of
surgery, position of the patient during surgery, risk of aspiration, age of the patient,
patient cooperation and preference, anticipated ease of airway management,
coagulation status, and the patient’s previous response to anesthesia.
(185, Table 13-20)
110. With general anesthesia, side effects that occur frequently but have minimal
consequences include oral or dental damage, sore throat, hoarseness,
postoperative nausea/vomiting, drowsiness/confusion, and urinary retention.
Side effects of general anesthesia that occur infrequently but have severe
consequences include intraoperative awareness, visual loss, aspiration, organ
failure, malignant hyperthermia, drug reactions, failure to wake up/recover,
and death. (Table 13-22)
111. With regional anesthesia, side effects that occur frequently but with minimal
impact include prolonged numbness/weakness, postdural puncture headache, and
failure of technique. Side effects of regional anesthesia that occur infrequently but
with severe consequences include bleeding, infection, nerve damage/paralysis,
persistent numbness/weakness, seizures, coma, and death. (Table 13-22)
112. Informed consent involves the indications for the treatment in terms a
layperson can understand, and elucidation of alternatives. When an
anesthesiologist obtains informed consent prior to the day of surgery, anxiety
is lower in patients before their operation. (185)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
116
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
Chapter
11 CHOICE OF ANESTHETIC
TECHNIQUE
Ronald D. Miller, Tula Gourdin
1. What should be accomplished in the preoperative evaluation and visit by the
anesthesiologist according to the standard adopted by the American Society
of Anesthesiologists?
2. What are some important aspects that should be included in the preoperative
medical evaluation of the surgical patient?
ANESTHETIC
TECHNIQUE
3. What are the several anesthetic options available to the anesthesia provider?
4. Name some considerations that influence the choice of anesthetic technique.
5. What are some of the unpleasant side effects associated with anesthesia?
6. Describe some of the optimal conditions to be achieved with the ideal anesthetic
technique.
7. What should be included in the discussion of informed consent for anesthesia by
the anesthesiologist? Is it required that the anesthesiologist discuss with the
patient all the remote risks of anesthesia, including death?
8. How is the induction of general anesthesia often achieved?
9. What is preoxygenation? What is its purpose?
10. What are some methods by which preoxygenation can be achieved?
11. What are some methods by which the proper placement of an endotracheal tube
can be confirmed?
12. What is a rapid sequence induction?
13. Describe a rapid sequence induction.
14. When is a rapid sequence induction indicated?
15. Describe an inhalation induction of anesthesia.
16. When is an inhalation induction indicated?
17. What are some objectives during the maintenance of general anesthesia?
18. What are some advantages of nitrous oxide for general anesthesia? What are some
advantages of volatile anesthetics for general anesthesia? Why are the two often
administered in combination?
19. Why might neuromuscular blocking drugs be used intraoperatively?
20. What are some of the advantages of injected opioids for general anesthesia? What is
a disadvantage of injected opioids for general anesthesia?
21. What are some regional anesthetic techniques?
22. What surgical procedures are regional anesthetics often administered for?
23. What are some advantages of spinal anesthesia when compared with epidural
anesthesia?
24. What are some advantages of epidural anesthesia when compared with spinal
anesthesia?
117
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
25. What are some of the conditions that may increase the risk associated with spinal
or epidural anesthesia?
26. When is intravenous regional anesthesia or Bier block used?
27. What are some advantages of peripheral nerve blocks for surgical anesthesia?
28. What are some disadvantages of peripheral nerve blocks for surgical anesthesia?
29. What is monitored anesthesia care?
30. What are some anesthesiologist responsibilities during monitored anesthesia care?
31. What are some of the advantages of using monitored anesthesia care?
PREPARATION
FOR ANESTHESIA
32. What are some advantages and disadvantages to having a separate room from the
operating room for the induction of anesthesia?
33. Regardless of the anesthetic technique, what are some routine preparations the
anesthesiologist should make before anesthetizing a patient?
PHARMACO-
ECONOMICS
34. Name some of the ways that costs can be contained in the operating room.
ANSWERS*
1. According to the standard adopted by the American Society of Anesthesiologists,
preoperatively the anesthesia provider is responsible for determining the
medical status of the patient: obtaining and reviewing tests and consultations
necessary for the conduct of anesthesia, developing a plan of anesthesia care,
and reviewing with the patient or a responsible adult the proposed anesthesia
care plan. (190)
2. Important aspects that should be included in the preoperative medical evaluation of
the surgical patient include data gathering and the imparting of information to the
patient. The anesthesiologist needs to gather information regarding the patient’s
history and physical examination and current drug therapy regimen, as well as the
ordering and interpretation of laboratory data. In turn, the anesthesia provider
must present the patient and the patient’s family with information regarding the
events of the day of surgery, preoperative instructions regarding medicines and
fasting, the anesthetic, and the potential risks of anesthesia. In addition, informed
consent for the procedure must be obtained. The overriding goal of the
preoperative medical evaluation of the surgical patient is to decrease
perioperative morbidity and mortality. (190-191, Table 14-1)
ANESTHETIC
TECHNIQUE
3. Several anesthetic options are available to the anesthesia provider including
(1) general anesthetic, (2) regional anesthetic, (3) peripheral nerve block,
(4) monitored anesthetic care (MAC), or (5) a combination of techniques. (190)
4. Some considerations that influence the choice of anesthetic technique include the
patient’s history of medical problems and diseases, site of surgery, body position of
the patient during surgery, whether the surgery is elective or emergent, the
likelihood of the aspiration of gastric contents, the age of the patient, and patient
preference. (191, Table 14-1)
5. Some of the unpleasant side effects associated with anesthesia include nausea and
vomiting, urinary retention, myalgia, pruritus, anxiety, and apprehension caused
by the concern of being awake or aware of operating room sights, sounds, and
smells during general anesthesia. (191)
*Numbers in parentheses: numbers refer to pages, figures, or tables in Miller RD, Pardo MC: Basics of Anesthesia,
6th ed. Philadelphia, Elsevier Saunders, 2011.
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
118
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
6. Ideally, the anesthetic technique would achieve optimal patient safety and
satisfaction, provide excellent surgical conditions (e.g., relaxation) for the surgeon,
allow rapid recovery, and avoid postoperative side effects. In addition, the
anesthetic should be economical, allow early transfer or discharge from the
postanesthesia care unit, provide optimal postoperative pain control, and permit
optimal operating room efficiency including turnover times. (191)
7. The discussion of informed consent for anesthesia should include a discussion of
the planned method of anesthesia and specific potential complications relative to
the patient, anesthetic technique, and the surgical case. Informed consent does
not require that the anesthesia provider discuss with the patient all the remote risks
of anesthesia. The patient or responsible adult should sign an informed consent
statement before surgery. The anesthesiologist should document that the patient
understands and accepts the anesthetic plan as well as the accompanying
risks. (191)
8. The induction of general anesthesia is often achieved with the administration of an
intravenous anesthetic, typically thiopental, propofol, or etomidate. These drugs are
all beneficial in that they rapidly produce unconsciousness. Then, ventilation can be
sustained via a face mask or a laryngeal mask airway (LMA). A neuromuscular
blocking drug may be given intravenously to facilitate direct laryngoscopy
before tracheal intubation. (191)
9. Preoxygenation is the replacement of nitrogen with oxygen (denitrogenation) in the
patient’s functional residual capacity before the induction of general anesthesia.
The purpose of preoxygenation is to increase the time period the patient can
safely be apneic. Preoxygenation prolongs the time to oxygen desaturation with
the apnea that accompanies the induction of anesthesia. (192)
10. There are a few methods by which preoxygenation can be achieved. The patient can
take eight vital capacity breaths of 100% oxygen over a period of 1 minute, or the
patient can breathe 100% oxygen for 3 minutes at normal tidal volumes. Another
method, which is somewhat less efficacious but faster, is to have the patient breathe
four vital capacity breaths of 100% oxygen over a 30-second period. (192)
11. Some methods by which the proper placement of an endotracheal tube can be
confirmed include the observation of upper chest expansion and reservoir bag
collapse with inspiration, refilling of the reservoir bag with exhalation, cyclic
waveforms on end-tidal carbon dioxide tracings that cycle from 0 to more
than 20 mm Hg with inhalation and exhalation respectively, continuous pulse
oximeter readings above 95%, and bilateral breath sounds. Confirmation of
endotracheal tube placement can also be achieved by fiber-optic bronchoscopy.
(192, Table 14-2)
12. A rapid sequence induction of anesthesia is the intravenous injection of an
anesthetic to produce unconsciousness followed immediately by a neuromuscular
blocking drug that produces a rapid onset of skeletal muscle paralysis
(succinylcholine, rocuronium). (191)
13. A rapid sequence induction of anesthesia should be preceded with preparations such
as the placement of routine monitors, confirmation of a functioning suction
catheter, positioning the patient in an advantageous position to achieve intubation
of the trachea by direct laryngoscopy, premedication with an antacid to
neutralize the acidity of gastric contents, preoxygenation, and cricoid pressure.
An induction dose of intravenously administered anesthetic, typically thiopental
or propofol, followed by a dose of 1 to 2 mg/kg succinylcholine are then
administered together in rapid sequence. After approximately 30 seconds, which
corresponds to the onset of muscle relaxation, direct laryngoscopy should be
instituted with the laryngoscope blade of choice. Only after successful intubation
of the trachea has been confirmed by at least two methods should cricoid
Choice of Anesthetic Technique
119
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
pressure be released. Alternatives to succinylcholine for neuromuscular
blockade for a rapid sequence induction include rocuronium at two to three
times ED95. (192)
14. A rapid sequence induction of anesthesia is indicated when patients are at an
increased risk of the aspiration of gastric contents with the loss of protective
laryngeal reflexes. The patients at an increased risk of the aspiration of gastric
contents include those: with neurologic compromise, in cardiopulmonary arrest,
with ascites, a hiatal hernia, or history of gastroesophageal reflux, with a history
of gastroparesis, with an obstructed bowel, undergoing emergency surgery, or
patients that are obese, pregnant, or intoxicated. (192)
15. An inhalation induction of anesthesia allows the patient to spontaneously breathe
sevoflurane, possibly in conjunction with nitrous oxide via a face mask. Nitrous
oxide mixed with sevoflurane has not been shown to improve the inhalation
induction of anesthesia with sevoflurane, however. Sevoflurane is chosen most
often because of its lack of pungency. In some cases, the prior administration of a
premedicant drug may be indicated. The technique for the inhalation induction of
anesthesia with sevoflurane is by priming the circuit, dialing the concentration
of sevoflurane to 8%, administering high fresh gas flow of at least 8 L/min, and
having the patient breathe deeply. The induction of anesthesia is usually achieved
within 1 minute using this technique. Care should be taken to dial back down
the sevoflurane concentration administered to avoid excessive anesthetic doses.
This can be followed by placement of a laryngeal mask airway or endotracheal
intubation facilitated by a neuromuscular blocking drug. Desflurane is not
suitable for an inhalation induction due to its pungency and airway irritant
effects. (192)
16. An inhalation induction of anesthesia is frequently used in pediatric patients in
whom intravenous access is difficult to achieve while awake. Another benefit of an
inhalation induction is the maintenance of the capacity to breathe spontaneously,
which may avoid the need for paralysis and controlled ventilation. (192)
17. Objectives during the maintenance of general anesthesia are to maintain amnesia,
analgesia, and skeletal muscle relaxation and to control sympathetic nervous
system responses evoked by noxious simulation. These objectives are often
achieved by combining drugs to optimize their effects. (193)
18. Advantages of nitrous oxide for general anesthesia include its relative lack of
significant cardiovascular effects and its low blood gas solubility. Advantages of
volatile anesthetics for general anesthesia include their high potency, their ability to
attenuate sympathetic nervous system responses, and their ease of administration.
Nitrousoxideandvolatileanestheticsareoftenadministeredincombinationtodecrease
the concentration of the volatile anesthetic necessary for a given anesthetic effect.
Administrationofnitrousoxidedecreasesthecardiovasculardepressionthatmayresult
from the administration of higher concentrations of volatile anesthetics alone. (193)
19. Neuromuscular blocking drugs are used intraoperatively to ensure lack of patient
movement during certain operative procedures, as in neurosurgery. With the
administration of neuromuscular blocking drugs during general anesthesia there is
the inherent risk of paralysis with an inadequate depth of anesthesia and resultant
patient awareness. Therefore, neuromuscular blockade must be accompanied with
adequate levels of anesthesia. (193)
20. Advantages of injected opioids during general anesthesia are the increase in depth
of anesthesia, and analgesia without added cardiovascular depression. A
disadvantage of injected opioids when compared with inhaled anesthetics for
general anesthesia is the inability to easily titrate opioids intraoperatively. (193)
21. Regional anesthetic techniques include spinal, epidural, and caudal anesthetics.
(193-194)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
120
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
22. Regional anesthetics are often administered for procedures involving the lower
abdomen or lower extremities. (194)
23. Some advantages of spinal anesthesia when compared with epidural anesthesia are (1) it
takes less time to perform, (2) it produces a more rapid onset and better quality sensory
and motor anesthesia, and (3) it is associated with less pain during surgery. (194)
24. Some advantages of epidural anesthesia when compared with spinal anesthesia
are (1) a lower risk for postdural puncture headache, (2) less systemic hypotension
than with a spinal anesthetic if epinephrine is not added to the local anesthetic
solution, (3) the ability to prolong or extend the anesthesia through an indwelling
epidural catheter, and (4) the option of using the epidural catheter to provide
postoperative analgesia. (194)
25. Certain preexisting conditions increase the relative risk of spinal or epidural
anesthesia and the anesthesia provider must balance the perceived benefits of this
technique. These conditions include hypovolemia, increased intracranial pressure,
coagulopathy (thrombocytopenia), sepsis, infection at the cutaneous puncture
site, and preexisting neurologic disease (e.g., multiple sclerosis). (194, Table 14-3)
26. Intravenous regional anesthesia is used for procedures lasting between 20 and
90 minutes. It provides reliable anesthesia for both the upper and lower extremities
and is more cost effective than general anesthesia or brachial plexus block for
outpatient hand surgery. (194)
27. Peripheral nerve blocks for surgical anesthesia provide the advantage of an
isolated anesthetic effect without manipulation of the airway or prolonged systemic
effects. They typically do not cause any cardiopulmonary impairment, nor are
protective airway reflexes compromised. (194)
28. One disadvantage of peripheral nerve blocks for anesthesia is the unpredictability of
the adequacy of the block for surgery. Other disadvantages of peripheral nerve
blocks are related to the potential complications of the peripheral nerve block itself,
such as nerve injury and systemic local anesthetic toxicity. (194)
29. Monitored anesthesia care describes when an anesthetic provider is requested or
required to provide anesthetic during a procedure. This can include the preoperative
evaluation, anesthetic care during the procedure, and management after the
procedure. General anesthesia is not given in these cases. (194-195)
30. Some anesthesiologist responsibilities during monitored anesthesia care include the
diagnosis and treatment of clinical problems during the procedure, the support
of vital functions, the administrations of medicines as necessary for sedation,
analgesia, or hemodynamic support, psychological support and physical comfort,
and the provision of other services necessary to facilitate the safe completion of
the procedure. (194-195)
31. Monitored anesthesia care may facilitate the avoidance of side effects of general
or regional anesthesia (sympatholysis, respiratory depression, delayed emergence)
and may be particularly cost effective in comparison to general or regional
anesthetics in the ambulatory care setting. (195)
PREPARATION
FOR ANESTHESIA
32. An advantage to having a separate room from the operating room for the induction
of anesthesia is that peripheral nerve blocks or epidural catheter placement can
be achieved before the operating room is available. The distinct disadvantage to
having an induction room is that the practice of moving anesthetized patients
may be unsafe. (195)
33. Regardless of the anesthetic technique, there are some routine preparations the
anesthesiologist should make before anesthetizing a patient. These include
evaluation of the anesthesia machine and monitors, and confirmation of the
Choice of Anesthetic Technique
121
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
availability of emergency drugs, anesthetic drugs, and equipment that might be
necessary for controlled ventilation or the emergent intubation of the trachea.
(195, Table 14-4)
PHARMACO-
ECONOMICS
34. Cost containment in the operating room may lead to recommendations for low cost
drugs; for example, antiemetics, intravenous drugs to induce anesthesia, volatile
anesthetics, and neuromuscular blocking drugs. In addition, a useful method to
decrease the cost of volatile anesthetics is the use of low fresh gas flow (2 L/min)
during the maintenance of anesthesia. (196)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
122
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
Chapter
12 ANESTHESIA DELIVERY
SYSTEMS
Patricia Roth
ANESTHESIA
WORKSTATION
1. What are some components of an anesthesia workstation?
2. What is the purpose of the fail-safe valve? What triggers the fail-safe valve on the
anesthesia machine?
3. Can a hypoxic mixture be delivered from the anesthesia machine with an intact
fail-safe valve? Explain.
4. How are oxygen, nitrous oxide, and air gases that are used in anesthesia typically
delivered to the anesthesia machine? At what pressure must these gases be
delivered for proper function of the anesthesia machine?
5. How is the delivery of erroneous gases to the anesthesia machine minimized?
6. What is the purpose of the cylinders of oxygen and nitrous oxide that are found on
the back of the anesthesia machine?
7. How is an erroneous hookup of a gas cylinder to the anesthesia machine
minimized?
8. Please complete the following table illustrating the characteristics of compressed
gases stored in E-sized cylinders:
Characteristics
Oxygen
Nitrous
Oxide
Carbon
Dioxide
Air
Cylinder color
Physical state in cylinder (gas/liquid)
Cylinder contents (liters)
Cylinder pressure full (psi)
9. How is the pressure of oxygen related to the volume of oxygen in an oxygen
gas cylinder? What does this mean with regard to calculating the volume of
oxygen remaining in a used oxygen cylinder?
10. How is the pressure of nitrous oxide related to the volume of nitrous oxide in a
nitrous oxide gas cylinder?
11. Why does atmospheric water vapor accumulate as frost on the outside surface of
oxygen tanks and nitrous oxide tanks in use?
12. What is the purpose of flowmeters on an anesthesia machine?
13. How do flowmeters on an anesthesia machine work?
14. Are flowmeters for various gases interchangeable?
15. Why is the oxygen flowmeter the last flowmeter in a series on the anesthesia
machine with respect to the direction in which the gas flows?
123
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
16. What is the purpose of the oxygen flush valve?
17. What is the flow of oxygen delivered to the patient when the oxygen flush valve
is depressed?
18. What is the risk of activating the oxygen flush valve during a mechanically
delivered inspiration?
VAPORIZERS
19. Why do volatile anesthetics require placement in a vaporizer for their inhaled
delivery to patients via the anesthesia machine?
20. What is the heat of vaporization?
21. What is vapor pressure? What influence does temperature have on vapor
pressure?
22. Why are contemporary vaporizers unsuitable for use with desflurane?
23. Describe how contemporary vaporizers for volatile anesthetics are classified.
24. What does the term agent-specific refer to?
25. What do the terms variable-bypass and flow-over refer to?
26. What does the term temperature-compensated refer to? Between what
temperatures is vaporizer output reliably constant?
27. What does the term out of circuit refer to?
28. How does tipping of a vaporizer affect vaporizer output?
29. How is the delivery of two different volatile anesthetics to the same patient via the
same anesthesia machine prevented?
30. How is the potential risk of filling the agent-specific vaporizer with the erroneous
volatile anesthetic minimized?
ANESTHETIC
BREATHING
SYSTEMS
31. What is the function of anesthetic breathing systems?
32. How do anesthetic breathing systems impart resistance to the spontaneously
ventilating patient?
33. What are some features of an anesthetic breathing system that enable them to be
classified as either open, semiopen, closed, or semiclosed?
34. What are the most commonly used anesthetic breathing systems?
35. What characterizes the Mapleson systems?
36. Describe the Mapleson F anesthetic breathing system. What is another name for
this anesthetic breathing system?
37. When is the Mapleson F system commonly used?
38. What are some advantages of the Mapleson F anesthetic breathing system?
39. What are some disadvantages of the Mapleson F anesthetic breathing system?
40. Describe the Bain circuit anesthetic breathing system.
41. What are some advantages of the Bain circuit anesthetic breathing system?
42. What are some disadvantages of the Bain circuit anesthetic breathing system?
43. How does the circle anesthetic breathing system get its name?
44. How does the circle system prevent rebreathing of carbon dioxide?
45. What are the classifications of a circle system and on what does this depend?
46. What is the most commonly used circle breathing system used in the
United States?
47. What are some advantages of the semiclosed and closed circle systems?
48. What are some disadvantages of the circle anesthetic breathing system?
49. What is the impact of the rebreathing of anesthetic gases in a semiclosed circle
system?
50. What are the components of a circle system?
51. What is the purpose of unidirectional valves in the circle system? What would
occur if one of the unidirectional valves should become incompetent?
52. Where is the dead space in the circle system?
53. What is advantageous about the corrugated tubing in the circle system?
54. What is disadvantageous about the corrugated tubing in the circle system?
55. Describe the Y-piece connector in the circle system circuit.
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
124
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
56. What are other names for the adjustable pressure-limiting (APL) valve?
57. Describe the function of the APL valve when the “bag/vent” selector switch is set
to “bag.”
58. What are the advantages of the reservoir bag on the circle system?
59. Describe a closed anesthetic breathing system. What is the inflow volume of fresh
gases in a closed anesthetic breathing system?
60. What are some advantages to the closed circle anesthetic breathing system?
61. What is a disadvantage to the closed circle anesthetic breathing system?
62. What are the dangers of the closed circle anesthetic breathing system?
63. Are inspired concentrations of oxygen more or less predictable when nitrous
oxide is also being delivered in a closed circle anesthetic breathing system? Why?
64. How can the potential problem of the inadequate delivery of oxygen using a
closed circle anesthetic breathing system be minimized?
65. In a closed circle anesthetic breathing system, to what extent is the inhaled
concentration of anesthetic dependent on the exhaled concentration of
anesthetic? What is the potential problem with this? How can this problem be
partially offset?
ANESTHESIA
MACHINE
VENTILATORS
66. What parts of a circle system are eliminated in anesthesia machine ventilators
when the “bag/vent” selector switch is set to “vent”?
67. What are two different ways in which anesthesia machine ventilators are
powered?
68. Describe the mechanics of a conventional anesthesia machine ventilator during
inspiration.
69. Why is oxygen preferred over air as the ventilator driving gas?
70. Describe the mechanics of a conventional anesthesia machine ventilator during
exhalation.
71. Describe the mechanically driven piston type of ventilators found on some newer
anesthesia machines.
72. Why are standing or ascending bellows preferred over hanging or descending
bellows?
73. How are inhaled gases normally humidified in awake patients breathing through
their native airway?
74. What effect does tracheal intubation or the use of a laryngeal mask airway have
on airway humidification? What are the negative consequences of this?
75. Describe anesthetic breathing system humidification. What effect does chemical
neutralization of carbon dioxide have on this process?
76. What are three types of humidifiers used for anesthesia and in the intensive care
unit?
77. Describe heat and moisture exchanger (HME) humidifiers. What is the difference
between an HME and an HMEF?
78. What are the advantages of HME humidifiers over other types of humidifiers?
79. What are the disadvantages of HME humidifiers?
80. What is the advantage of heated water vaporizers and humidifiers over HME
humidifiers? When are they used most frequently?
81. What are the risks of heated water vaporizers and humidifiers?
82. Describe nebulizer humidifiers used for anesthesia and in the intensive care unit.
POLLUTION OF THE
ATMOSPHERE WITH
ANESTHETIC GASES
83. In the operating room, what are the Occupational Safety and Health
Administration (OSHA) recommendations for the maximum concentrations of
nitrous oxide and volatile anesthetics in parts per million?
84. What is required to control pollution of the atmosphere with anesthetic gases?
85. Describe operating room scavenging.
86. Describe the two types of scavenging systems used in the operating room.
Anesthesia Delivery Systems
125
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
87. What are the advantages of active scavenging with a waste gas receiver mounted
on the side of the anesthesia machine?
88. What are the potential hazards of scavenging systems?
89. What two features do scavenging systems have to minimize their potential
hazards?
90. Where might be the source of a high-pressure leak of nitrous oxide?
91. Where might be the source of a low-pressure leak of nitrous oxide?
92. What anesthetic techniques can lead to operating room pollution?
93. How often should the air in the operating room be exchanged?
ELIMINATION OF
CARBON DIOXIDE
94. How is carbon dioxide eliminated in open and semiopen breathing systems?
95. How is carbon dioxide eliminated in a semiclosed or closed anesthetic breathing
system?
96. What are two types of chemicals that are used to neutralize carbon dioxide? What
products are formed? Are the neutralization reactions endothermic or exothermic?
97. What does soda lime consist of?
98. Why is silica added to soda lime?
99. Why is the water in the soda lime carbon dioxide absorbent canister hazardous?
100. What does Amsorb Plus consist of?
101. Why are calcium sulfate and polyvinylpyrrolidine added to Amsorb Plus?
102. Why is the water formed by the neutralization of carbon dioxide useful? What if
the carbon dioxide absorbent canister fails to become warm during use?
103. What two factors influence the efficiency of carbon dioxide neutralization?
104. How does the size of the carbon dioxide absorbent granules affect the efficiency of
carbon dioxide neutralization?
105. What is the optimal carbon dioxide absorbent granule size? How is this sizing
system defined?
106. What does channeling in the carbon dioxide absorbent granule-containing
canister refer to? How does channeling in the canister affect the efficiency of
carbon dioxide neutralization?
107. What is the most frequent cause of channeling in the carbon dioxide absorbent
granule-containing canister? How can it be minimized?
108. Define carbon dioxide absorbent absorptive capacity. What can cause a decrease in
absorptive capacity?
109. Why do the carbon dioxide absorbent granules change color?
110. Contrast the color change of soda lime granules with those of Amsorb Plus.
111. Describe the degradation of inhaled anesthetics by soda lime to carbon monoxide.
112. Describe the degradation of inhaled anesthetics by soda lime to compound A.
113. Does Amsorb Plus degrade inhaled anesthetics?
114. What factor contributes to the degradation of inhaled anesthetics by soda lime?
115. Why do most instances of increased blood concentrations of carboxyhemoglobin
occur in anesthetized patients on a Monday?
116. What causes the development of fire and extreme heat in the breathing system?
How can this be avoided?
117. Complete the following table:
Feature
Soda Lime
Amsorb Plus
Mesh size
Generation of compound
A with sevoflurane
Generation of carbon monoxide
with inhaled anesthetics
Risk of exothermic reactions and
fire in the presence of sevoflurane
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
126
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
CHECKING THE
ANESTHESIA
MACHINE AND
CIRCLE SYSTEM
FUNCTION
118. What are the current recommendations for preanesthesia checkout procedures?
How do these apply to newer machines with automated checkout procedures?
119. How often should these checkout procedures be performed?
120. What are the most important preoperative checks?
121. Does the presence of a Jackson-Rees circuit along with a full oxygen E-cylinder
mounted on the back of the anesthesia machine comply with the current checkout
recommendations?
122. What does a leak check of the machine’s low-pressure system evaluate? Why is this
so important?
123. Why is calibration of the oxygen monitor so important?
124. Does a manual positive-pressure leak test check the integrity of the unidirectional
valves?
ANSWERS*
ANESTHESIA
WORKSTATION
1. Components of an anesthesia workstation include what was previously recognized
as the anesthesia machine, (the pressure-regulating and gas-mixing components),
as well as the vaporizers, anesthesia breathing circuit, ventilator, scavenging
system, and respiratory and physiologic monitoring systems (electrocardiogram,
arterial blood pressure, temperature, pulse oximeter, and inhaled and exhaled
concentrations of oxygen, carbon dioxide, anesthetic gases, and vapors).
(198, Table 15-1)
2. The purpose of the fail-safe valve is to prevent the delivery of hypoxic gas mixtures
from the anesthesia machine in the event of failure of the oxygen supply. The fail-
safe valve is triggered when the pressure in the oxygen delivery line decreases
to less than 30 psi. When the fail-safe valve is triggered, it either shuts off or
proportionally decreases the flow of all gases. Note that it is only the pressure
of oxygen that triggers the fail-safe valve. (199)
3. An intact fail-safe valve is actually only a pressure-sensor valve. A hypoxic
mixture may still be delivered to the patient if the fail-safe valve is sensing an
adequate gas pressure in the circuit of the anesthesia machine when the oxygen
flow is zero. This confirms the importance of the oxygen analyzer on the anesthesia
machine. Far superior to the fail-safe valve or an oxygen analyzer is the
continuous presence of a vigilant anesthesiologist. (199)
4. The oxygen, nitrous oxide, and air gases that are used in anesthesia are most often
delivered to the anesthesia machine as compressed gases from a central supply
source located in the hospital. These hospital supplied gases enter the operating
room from a central source through pipelines to operating room wall outlets.
Pressure hoses then connect the wall outlets to the anesthesia machine. These gases
must be delivered at a pressure of about 50 psi for the anesthesia machine to
function properly. (199-200).
5. The delivery of erroneous gases from the central supply source to the pipeline inlet
connections on the anesthesia machine is minimized in two ways. First, the wall
outlets and pressure hoses are color-coded. Second, and more importantly, the
pressure hoses are connected to the wall outlet and anesthesia machine by
noninterchangeable gas-specific diameter fittings. This diameter index safety
system (DISS) is designed to prevent misconnections of pipeline gases. (199-200)
*Numbers in parentheses: numbers refer to pages, figures, or tables in Miller RD, Pardo MC: Basics of Anesthesia,
6th ed. Philadelphia, Elsevier Saunders, 2011.
Anesthesia Delivery Systems
127
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
6. The purpose of the cylinders of oxygen and nitrous oxide that are found on the
back of the anesthesia machine is for the delivery of those gases should the central
gas supply fail. (200)
7. An erroneous hookup of a gas cylinder to the anesthesia machine is minimized
in two ways. First, the cylinders are color-coded. Second, and more importantly,
the color-coded cylinders are attached to the anesthesia machine by a hanger
yoke assembly, which consists of two metal pins that correspond to holes in the
valve casing of the gas cylinder. This pin index safety system (PISS) makes it
impossible to attach an oxygen cylinder to any yoke on the anesthesia machine
other than that designed for oxygen. Otherwise, a cylinder containing nitrous
oxide could be attached to the oxygen yoke, which would result in the delivery
of nitrous oxide when the oxygen flowmeter was activated. (200)
8.
Characteristics
Oxygen
Nitrous Oxide
Carbon Dioxide
Air
Cylinder color
Green
Blue
Gray
Yellow
Physical state in cylinder
(gas/liquid)
Gas
Liquid and gas
Liquid and gas
Gas
Cylinder contents (liters)
625
1590
1590
625
Cylinder pressure full (psi)
2000
750
838
1800
(201, Table 15-2)
9. The pressure in an oxygen cylinder is directly proportional to the volume of
oxygen in the cylinder. For example, a full oxygen cylinder is evidenced by a
pressure of approximately 2000 psi. If the pressure gauge on an oxygen cylinder
were to read 500 psi, one fourth of the initial pressure, it can be estimated that only
one fourth of the volume remains in the oxygen cylinder. The volume in the
cylinder could be estimated to be 625/4, or about 155 L. (201)
10. In contrast to oxygen, the pressure gauge for nitrous oxide does not indicate the
amount of gas remaining in the cylinder because the pressure in the gas cylinder
remains at 750 psi as long as any liquid nitrous oxide is present. When nitrous oxide
leaves the cylinder as a vapor, additional liquid is vaporized to maintain an
unchangingpressureinthecylinder.Afteralltheliquidnitrousoxideisvaporized,the
pressure begins to decrease, and it can be assumed that about 75% of the contents of
the gas cylinder have been exhausted. Because a full nitrous oxide cylinder (E-size)
contains about 1590 L, approximately 400 L of nitrous oxide remains when the
pressure gauge begins to decrease from its previously constant value of 750 psi. (201)
11. Vaporization of a liquefied gas (nitrous oxide), as well as expansion of a
compressed gas (oxygen), absorbs heat, which is extracted from the metal cylinder
and the surrounding atmosphere. For this reason, atmospheric water vapor
often accumulates as frost on gas cylinders and in valves, particularly during high
gas flow from these tanks. Internal icing does not occur because compressed
gases are free of water vapor. (201)
12. Flowmeters on the anesthesia machine precisely control and measure gas flow to
the common gas inlet. (201)
13. Measurement of the flow of gases is based on the principle that flow past a
resistance is proportional to pressure. Typically, gas flow enters the bottom of
a vertically positioned and tapered (the cross-sectional area increases upward
from site of gas entry) glass flow tube. Gas flow into the flowmeter tube raises
a bobbin or ball-shaped float. The float comes to rest when gravity is balanced
by the decrease in pressure caused by the float. The upper end of the bobbin
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
128
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
or the equator of the ball indicates the gas flow in milliliters or liters per
minute. (201)
14. Proportionality between pressure and flow is determined by the shape of the tube
(resistance) and the physical properties (density and viscosity) of the gas. The
flowmeters are initially calibrated for the indicated gas at the factory. Because few
gases have the same density and viscosity, flowmeters are not interchangeable
with other gases. (201)
15. The oxygen flowmeter should be the last in the sequence of flowmeters, and
thus oxygen should be the last gas added to the manifold. This arrangement
reduces the possibility that leaks in the apparatus proximal to oxygen inflow can
diminish the delivered oxygen concentration, whereas leaks distal to that
point result in loss of volume without a qualitative change in the mixture.
Nevertheless, an oxygen flowmeter tube leak can produce a hypoxic mixture
regardless of the flowmeter tube arrangement. (201, Figure 15-4)
16. The purpose of the oxygen flush valve is to provide a large volume of oxygen to the
patient quickly. Oxygen delivered to the patient when the oxygen flush valve is
depressed bypasses the flowmeters and manifold. (201-202)
17. The flow of oxygen that is delivered to the patient via the oxygen flush valve
is 35 to 75 L/min. (201-202, Figure 15-3)
18. Activation of the oxygen flush valve during a mechanically delivered
inspiration from the anesthesia machine ventilator permits the transmission of
high airway pressure to the patient’s lungs, with the possibility of
barotrauma. (202)
VAPORIZERS
19. Volatile anesthetics are liquids at room temperature and atmospheric
pressure. Vaporization, which is the conversion of a liquid to a vapor, takes place in
a closed container, referred to as a vaporizer. The inhaled delivery of volatile
anesthetics requires that they be vaporized. The vapor concentration resulting
from vaporization of a volatile liquid anesthetic must be delivered to the
patient with the same accuracy and predictability as other gases (oxygen,
nitrous oxide). (202)
20. The heat of vaporization of a liquid is the number of calories required at a specific
temperature to convert 1 g of a liquid into a vapor. (202)
21. Vaporization in the closed confines of a vaporizer ceases when equilibrium is
reached between the liquid and vapor phases such that the number of
molecules leaving the liquid phase is the same as the number reentering. The
molecules in the vapor phase collide with each other and the walls of the container,
thereby creating pressure. This pressure is termed vapor pressure and is unique for
each volatile anesthetic. Vapor pressure is temperature dependent such that a
decrease in the temperature of the liquid is associated with a lower vapor pressure
and fewer molecules in the vapor phase. Cooling of the liquid anesthetic reflects a
loss of heat (heat of vaporization) necessary to provide energy for vaporization.
This cooling is undesirable because it lowers the vapor pressure and limits the
attainable vapor concentration. (202)
22. Desflurane has a vapor pressure near 1 atm (664 mm Hg) at 20 C. For this reason,
adesfluranevaporizeriselectricallyheatedto23 Cand25 Candpressurizedwitha
backpressure regulator to 1500 mm Hg to create an environment in which the
anesthetic has a relatively lower, but predictable volatility. (202)
23. Contemporary vaporizers are classified as agent-specific, variable-bypass,
flow-over, temperature-compensated, and out of circuit. (202, Figure 15-5)
24. Vaporizers are calibrated to accommodate a single volatile anesthetic. (203)
Anesthesia Delivery Systems
129
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
25. Variable-bypass describes dividing (splitting) the total fresh gas flow through the
vaporizer into two portions. The first portion of the fresh gas flow (20% or less)
passes into the vaporizing chamber of the vaporizer, where it becomes
saturated (flow-over) with the vapor of the liquid anesthetic. The second portion of
the fresh gas flow passes through the bypass chamber of the vaporizer.
Both portions of the fresh gas flow mix at the patient outlet side of the anesthesia
machine. The proportion of fresh gas flow diverted through the vaporizing
chamber, and thus the concentration of volatile anesthetic delivered to the patient,
is determined by the concentration control dial. (202, Figure 15-5)
26. As the vaporizer temperature changes, a temperature-sensitive bimetallic strip or
an expansion element inside the vaporizer influences proportioning of total gas
flow between the vaporizing and bypass chambers. For example, as the
temperature of the liquid anesthetic in the vaporizer chamber decreases, the
temperature-sensing elements allow increased gas inflow into this chamber to
offset the effect of decreased anesthetic liquid vapor pressure. Vaporizers are often
constructed of metals with high thermal conductivity (copper, bronze) to further
minimize heat loss. As a result, vaporizer output is nearly linear between 20 C and
35 C. (203, Figure 15-5)
27. Out of circuit describes the fact that vaporizers are isolated from the anesthetic
breathing system. (203)
28. Tipping of vaporizers can cause liquid anesthetic to spill from the vaporizing
chamber into the bypass chamber with a resultant increased vapor concentration
exiting from the vaporizer. (203)
29. A safety interlock mechanism ensures that only one vaporizer at a time can be
turned on. (203)
30. Use of an anesthetic-specific keyed filler device prevents placement of a liquid
anesthetic into the vaporizing chamber that is different from the anesthetic for
which the vaporizer was calibrated. This is uniquely important for desflurane
because its vapor pressure is near 1 atm and accidental placement of desflurane in
a contemporary vaporizer could result in an anesthetic overdose. (203)
ANESTHETIC
BREATHING
SYSTEMS
31. The function of anesthetic breathing systems is to deliver oxygen and anesthetic
gases to the patient and to eliminate carbon dioxide. (204)
32. Anesthetic breathing systems can add considerable resistance to inhalation
because peak flows as high as 60 L/min are reached during spontaneous
inspiration. This resistance is influenced by unidirectional valves and connectors.
The components of the breathing system, particularly the tracheal tube connector,
should have the largest possible lumen to minimize this resistance to breathing.
Right-angle connectors should be replaced with curved connectors to minimize
resistance. Substituting controlled ventilation of the patient’s lungs for
spontaneous breathing can offset the increased resistance to inhalation imparted
by anesthetic breathing systems. (204)
33. Anesthetic breathing systems are classified as open, semiopen, semiclosed, and
closed according to the presence or absence of (1) a gas reservoir bag in the circuit,
(2) rebreathing of exhaled gases, (3) means to chemically neutralize exhaled
carbon dioxide, and (4) unidirectional valves. (204, Table 15-3)
34. The most commonly used anesthetic breathing systems are the (1) Mapleson F
(Jackson-Rees) system, (2) Bain circuit, and (3) circle system. (204)
35. The Mapleson systems are characterized by the absence of valves to direct gases to
or from the patient and the absence of chemical carbon dioxide neutralization.
(204, Figures 15-6 and 15-8)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
130
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
36. The Mapleson F system is a T-piece arrangement with a reservoir bag and an
adjustable pressure-limiting overflow valve on the distal end of the gas reservoir
bag. Another name for this anesthetic breathing system is the Jackson-Rees circuit.
(204, Figure 15-6)
37. The Mapleson F system is commonly used for controlled ventilation during
transport of endotracheally intubated patients. (206)
38. Advantages of the Mapleson F anesthetic breathing system include its minimal
dead space and resistance. This makes this system ideal for pediatric anesthesia.
(206)
39. Disadvantages of the Mapleson F system include (1) the need for high fresh gas
inflow to prevent rebreathing, (2) the possibility of high airway pressure and
barotrauma should the overflow valve become occluded, and (3) the lack of
humidification. Lack of humidification can be offset by allowing the fresh gas to
pass through an in-line heated humidifier. (206)
40. The Bain circuit is a coaxial version of the Mapleson D system in which the fresh
gas supply tube runs coaxially inside the corrugated expiratory tubing. The fresh
gas tube enters the circuit near the reservoir bag, but the fresh gas is actually
delivered at the patient end of the circuit. The exhaled gases are vented through the
overflow valve near the reservoir bag. (206, Figure 15-7)
41. Advantages of the Bain circuit include (1) warming of the fresh gas inflow by the
surrounding exhaled gases in the corrugated expiratory tube, (2) conservation of
moisture as a result of partial rebreathing, and (3) ease of scavenging waste
anesthetic gases from the overflow valve. It is lightweight, easily sterilized,
reusable, and useful when access to the patient is limited, such as during head and
neck surgery. (207)
42. Hazards of the Bain circuit include unrecognized disconnection or kinking of the
inner fresh gas tube. The outer expiratory tube should be transparent to allow
inspection of the inner tube. (207)
43. The essential components of a circle anesthetic breathing system are arranged in a
circular manner. (207, Figure 15-9)
44. The circle system prevents rebreathing of carbon dioxide by chemical
neutralization of carbon dioxide with carbon dioxide absorbents. (207)
45. A circle system can be classified as semiopen, semiclosed, or closed, depending on
the amount of fresh gas inflow. (207)
46. A semiclosed system is associated with rebreathing of gases and is the most
commonly used breathing system in the United States. (207)
47. The semiclosed and closed circle system are both advantageous in that they
allow for the rebreathing of exhaled gases. The rebreathing of exhaled gases results
in (1) some conservation of airway moisture and body heat and (2) decreased
pollution of the surrounding atmosphere with anesthetic gases when the fresh gas
inflow rate is set at less than the patient’s minute ventilation. (207)
48. Disadvantages of the circle system include (1) increased resistance to breathing
because of the presence of unidirectional valves and carbon dioxide absorbent, (2)
bulkiness with loss of portability, and (3) enhanced opportunity for malfunction
because of the complexity of the apparatus. (207)
49. The rebreathing of exhaled gases in a semiclosed circle system influences the
inhaled anesthetic concentrations of these gases. For example, when uptake
of the anesthetic gas is high, as during induction of anesthesia, rebreathing
of exhaled gases depleted of anesthetic greatly dilutes the concentration of
anesthetic in the fresh gas inflow. This dilutional effect of uptake is offset clinically
Anesthesia Delivery Systems
131
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
by increasing the delivered concentration of anesthetic. As uptake of anesthetic
diminishes, the impact of dilution on the inspired concentration produced by
rebreathing of exhaled gases is lessened. (207)
50. The circle system consists of (1) a fresh gas inlet, (2) inspiratory and expiratory
unidirectional check valves, (3) inspiratory and expiratory corrugated tubing, (4) a
Y-piece connector, (5) an adjustable pressure-limiting (APL) valve, also referred to
as an overflow or “pop-off” valve, (6) a reservoir bag, (7) a canister containing
carbon dioxide absorbent, (8) a bag/vent selector switch, and (9) a mechanical
anesthesia ventilator. (207-208)
51. Two unidirectional valves are situated in different limbs of the corrugated tubing
in a circle system such that one functions for inhalation and the other for
exhalation. These valves (1) permit positive-pressure breathing and (2) prevent the
rebreathing of exhaled gases until they have passed through the carbon
dioxide absorbent canister and have had their oxygen content replenished.
Rebreathing and hypercapnia can occur if the unidirectional valves stick in the
open position, and total occlusion of the circuit can occur if they are stuck in the
closed position. If the expiratory valve is stuck in the closed position, breath
stacking and barotrauma can occur. (208)
52. Dead space in the circle system is between the Y-piece and the patient. (208)
53. The inspiratory and expiratory corrugated tubes serve as conduits for delivery of
gases to and from the patient. Their large bore provides minimal resistance, and the
corrugations provide flexibility, resist kinking, and promote turbulent instead of
laminar flow. (208)
54. During positive-pressure ventilation, some of the delivered gas distends the
corrugated tubing and some is compressed within the circuit, which leads to a
smaller delivered tidal volume. (208)
55. The Y-piece connector at the patient end of the circuit has (1) a curved elbow, (2) an
outer diameter of 22 mm to fit inside a facemask, and (3) an inner diameter of
15 mm to fit onto an endotracheal tube connector. (208)
56. The APL valve is also known as the overflow or “pop-off” valve. (208)
57. When the “bag/vent” selector switch is set to “bag,” the APL (overflow or “pop-
off”) valve (1) allows venting of excess gas from the breathing system into the
waste gas scavenging system and (2) can be adjusted to allow the anesthesiologist
to provide assisted or controlled ventilation of the patient’s lungs by manual
compression of the gas reservoir bag. The APL valve should be fully open during
spontaneous ventilation so that circuit pressure remains negligible throughout
inspiration and expiration. (208)
58. When the “bag/vent” selector switch is set to “bag,” the gas reservoir bag
maintains an available reserve volume of gas to satisfy the patient’s
spontaneous inspiratory flow rate (up to 60 L/min), which greatly exceeds
conventional fresh gas flows (commonly 3 to 5 L/min) from the anesthesia
machine. The bag also serves as a safety device because its distensibility
limits pressure in the breathing circuit to less than 60 cm H2O, even when the
APL valve is closed. (208)
59. In a closed anesthetic breathing system, there is total rebreathing of exhaled gases
after absorption of carbon dioxide, and the APL valve or relief valve of the
ventilator is closed. A closed system is present when the fresh gas inflow into the
circle system (150 to 500 mL/min) satisfies the patient’s metabolic oxygen
requirements (150 to 250 mL/min during anesthesia) and replaces anesthetic
gases lost by virtue of tissue uptake. If sidestream gas analyzers are used, the
analyzed gas exiting the analyzer must be returned to the breathing system
to maintain a closed system. (208)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
132
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
60. Advantages of a closed circle anesthetic breathing system over a semiclosed circle
anesthetic breathing system include (1) maximal humidification and warming of
inhaled gases, (2) less pollution of the surrounding atmosphere with anesthetic
gases, and (3) economy in the use of anesthetics. (208)
61. A disadvantage of a closed circle anesthetic breathing system is an inability to
rapidly change the delivered concentration of anesthetic gases and oxygen
because of the low fresh gas inflow. (208)
62. The principal dangers of a closed anesthetic breathing system are delivery of (1)
unpredictable and possibly insufficient concentrations of oxygen and (2) unknown
and possibly excessive concentrations of potent anesthetic gases. (208)
63. Unpredictable and possibly insufficient delivered concentrations of oxygen when
using a closed anesthetic breathing system are more likely if nitrous oxide is
included in the fresh gas inflow. For example, decreased tissue uptake of nitrous
oxide with time in the presence of unchanged uptake of oxygen can result in a
decreased concentration of oxygen in the alveoli. (208, Table 15-4)
64. The potential problem of the inadequate delivery of oxygen using a closed circle
anesthetic breathing system can be minimized by the use of an oxygen analyzer
placed on the inspiratory or expiratory limb of the closed circle system. (208)
65. Exhaled gases, devoid of carbon dioxide, form a major part of the inhaled gases
when a closed anesthetic breathing system is used. This means that the
composition of the inhaled gases is influenced by the concentration present in the
exhaled gases. The concentration of anesthetic in exhaled gases reflects tissue
uptake of the anesthetic. Initially, tissue uptake is maximal, and the concentration
of anesthetic in the exhaled gases is minimal. Subsequent rebreathing of these
exhaled gases dilutes the inhaled concentration of anesthetic delivered to the
patient. Therefore, high inflow concentrations of anesthetic are necessary to offset
maximal tissue uptake. Conversely, only small amounts of anesthetic need to be
added to the inflow gases when tissue uptake has decreased. The unknown impact
of tissue uptake on the concentration of anesthetic in exhaled gases makes it
difficult to estimate the inhaled concentration delivered to the patient through a
closed anesthetic breathing system. This disadvantage can be partially offset by
administering higher fresh gas inflow (3 L/min) for about 15 minutes before
instituting the use of a closed anesthetic breathing system. This approach permits
elimination of nitrogen from the lungs and corresponds to the time of greatest
tissue uptake of anesthetic. (208-209, Table 15-4)
ANESTHESIA
MACHINE
VENTILATORS
66. When the anesthesia machine ventilator “bag/vent” selector switch is set to “vent,”
the gas reservoir bag and APL valve are eliminated from the circle anesthetic
system and the patient’s ventilation is delivered from the mechanical anesthesia
ventilator. (209, Figure 15-10)
67. Anesthesia ventilators are powered by compressed gas, electricity, or both. (209)
68. Most conventional anesthesia machine ventilators are pneumatically driven by
oxygen or air that is pressurized and, during the inspiratory phase, routed to
the space inside the ventilator casing between the compressible bellows and the
rigid casing. Pressurized air or oxygen entering this space forces the bellows to
empty its contents into the patient’s lungs through the inspiratory limb of the
breathing circuit. This pressurized air or oxygen also causes the ventilator
relief valve to close, thereby preventing inspiratory anesthetic gas from
escaping into the scavenging system. (209)
69. Oxygen is preferable to air as the ventilator driving gas because if there is a leak in
the bellows, the fraction of inspired oxygen will be increased. If there is a
leak in the bellows in a ventilator driven by 50 psi oxygen or air, the peak
inspiratory pressure will rise. (209)
Anesthesia Delivery Systems
133
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
70. During exhalation, the driving gas is either vented into the room or directed to the
scavenging system, and the bellows refills as the patient exhales. (209)
71. Some newer anesthesia machines have mechanically driven piston type of
ventilators. The piston operates much like the plunger of a syringe to deliver the
desired tidal volume or airway pressure to the patient. (209)
72. Ventilators with bellows that rises during exhalation (standing or ascending
bellows) are preferred because the bellows will not rise (fill) if there is a leak in the
anesthesia breathing system or the system becomes accidentally disconnected.
Ventilators with a bellows that descends during exhalation (hanging or descending
bellows) are potentially dangerous because the bellows will continue to rise and
fall during a disconnection. Whenever a ventilator is used, a disconnect alarm must
be activated and audible. (209)
73. The upper respiratory tract (especially the nose) functions as the principal heat and
moisture exchanger (HME) to bring inspired gas to body temperature and 100%
relative humidity in its passage to the alveoli. (209)
74. Water is removed from medical gases (cylinders or piped) to prevent corrosion and
condensation. Tracheal intubation or the use of a laryngeal mask airway bypasses
the upper airway and thus leaves the tracheobronchial mucosa the burden of
heating and humidifying inspired gases. Humidification of inspired gases by the
lower respiratory tract in intubated patients can lead to dehydration of the mucosa,
impaired ciliary function, impaired surfactant function, inspissation of secretions,
atelectasis, and a rise in the alveolar-to-arterial gradient. Breathing of dry and
room temperature gases in intubated patients is associated with water and heat loss
from the patient. Heat loss is more important than water loss, and the most
important reason to provide heated humidification for intubated patients is to
decrease heat loss and associated decreases in body temperature. This is especially
true in infants and children, who are rendered poikilothermic by general
anesthesia. (209)
75. Humidification is a form of vaporization in which water vapor (moisture) is
added to the gases delivered by the anesthetic breathing system to minimize
water and heat loss. The water formed and the heat generated by chemical
neutralization of carbon dioxide help humidify and heat the gases in the breathing
circuit. (210)
76. Humidifiers used for anesthesia and in the intensive care unit include (1) heat and
moisture exchanger (HME) humidifiers, (2) heated water vaporizers and
humidifiers, and (3) nebulizers. (210)
77. HME humidifiers are devices that, when placed between the endotracheal tube and
Y-piece of the circle system, conserve some of the exhaled water and heat
and return it to the inspired gases. They contain a porous hydrophobic or
hygroscopic membrane that traps exhaled humidified gases and returns them to
the patient on inspiration. Bacterial and viral filters can be incorporated in
HME humidifiers to convert them into heat and moisture exchanging filters
(HMEFs). (211)
78. The advantages of HME humidifiers over other types of humidifiers are that
they are (1) simple and easy to use, (2) lightweight, (3) not dependent on an
external power source, (4) disposable, and (5) low cost. (211)
79. The disadvantages of HME humidifiers are that they (1) are not as effective as
heated water vaporizers and humidifiers in maintaining patient temperature,
(2) add resistance and increase the work of breathing and therefore should be used
with caution in spontaneously ventilating patients, (3) can become clogged
with patient secretions or blood, and (4) can increase dead space, which can cause
significant rebreathing in pediatric patients. Special low-volume HME humidifiers
are available for pediatric patients. (211)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
134
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
80. Heated water vaporizers and humidifiers are used to deliver a relative humidity
higher than that delivered by HME humidifiers. Heated water vaporizers are more
frequently used in pediatric anesthesia and intensive care unit patients. (211)
81. Risks from heated water vaporizers and humidifiers include (1) thermal injury, (2)
nosocomial infection, (3) increased work of breathing, and (4) increased risk of
malfunction because of the complexity of these systems. (211)
82. Nebulizers produce a mist of microdroplets of water suspended in a gaseous
medium. The quantity of water droplets delivered is not limited by the temperature
of the carrier gas. In addition to water, nebulizers can deliver medications to
peripheral airways. (211)
POLLUTION OF THE
ATMOSPHERE WITH
ANESTHETIC GASES
83. In the operating room, OSHA recommends that the concentration of nitrous oxide
not exceed 25 ppm and exposure concentrations of volatile anesthetics not exceed
2 ppm. (211)
84. Control of pollution of the atmosphere with anesthetic gases requires (1) scavenging
of waste anesthetic gases, (2) periodic preventive maintenance of anesthesia
equipment, (3) attention to the anesthetic technique, and (4) adequate ventilation of
the operating rooms. (211)
85. Scavenging is the collection and subsequent removal of vented gases from the
operating room. The excess gas comes from either the APL valve if the bag/
vent selector switch is set to “bag,” or from the ventilator relief valve if the bag/vent
selector switch is set to “vent.” All excess gas from the patient exits the breathing
system through these valves. The amount of delivered gas used to anesthetize a
patient commonly far exceeds the patient’s needs. In addition, when the bag/vent
selector switch is set to vent, some anesthetic breathing systems direct the drive gas
inside the bellows canister to the scavenging system. If sidestream gas analyzers are
used, the analyzed gas exiting the analyzer must be directed to the scavenging
system or returned to the breathing system. (211)
86. Scavenging systems may be characterized as active or passive. An active system is
connected to the hospital’s vacuum system and gases are drawn from the machine
by a vacuum. A passive system is connected to the hospital’s ventilation duct and
waste gases flow out of the machine on their own. (212)
87. Many anesthesia machines provide active scavenging with a waste gas receiver
mounted on the side of the anesthesia machine. Advantages of this system include
(1) a needle valve that allows the clinician to manually adjust the amount of vacuum
flow through the scavenging system, (2) a needle valve that can be adjusted such
that the 3-L reservoir bag will be slightly inflated and appear to “breathe” with the
patient, and (3) unlike other active scavenging systems, a waste gas receiver that
does not require a strong vacuum to operate. (212)
88. Hazards of scavenging systems include (1) obstruction of the scavenging pathways,
which can result in excessive positive pressure in the breathing circuit and possible
barotrauma, and (2) excessive vacuum applied to the scavenging system, which can
cause negative pressures in the breathing system. (212)
89. Scavenging systems contain two relief valves to minimize their potential hazards. If
gas accumulates in the scavenging system and cannot leave the anesthesia machine
properly, the positive-pressure scavenge relief valve opens when the pressure
reaches 10 cm H2O to allow the gas to escape into the room. If negative pressure is
applied to the scavenging system, the negative-pressure scavenge relief valve opens
and allows room air to be drawn in (instead of drawing gas from the patient).
Additionally, if the amount of fresh gas flow exceeds the capacity of the scavenging
system, the excess waste anesthetic gas exits the scavenging system through the
positive-pressure relief valve and pollutes the operating room. (212)
Anesthesia Delivery Systems
135
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
90. High-pressure leakage of nitrous oxide can occur as a result of faulty yokes
attaching the nitrous oxide tank to the anesthesia machine or faulty connections
from the central nitrous oxide gas supply to the anesthesia machine. (212)
91. Low-pressure leakage of anesthetic gases can occur because of leaks inside the
anesthesia machine and leaks between the machine and patient. (212)
92. Anesthetic techniques that can lead to operating room pollution include
(1) poorly fitting facemasks, (2) flushing the anesthetic delivery circuit, (3) filling
anesthetic vaporizers, (4) the use of uncuffed endotracheal tubes, (5) failure to
turn off the nitrous oxide flow or vaporizers at the end of the anesthesia, and
(6) the use of semiopen breathing circuits such as the Jackson-Rees, which
are difficult to scavenge. (212)
93. The air in the operating room should be exchanged at least 15 times per hour by the
operating room ventilation system. This rate should be checked periodically by the
hospital’s clinical engineering department. (212)
ELIMINATION OF
CARBON DIOXIDE
94. Open and semiopen breathing systems eliminate carbon dioxide by venting all
exhaled gases to the atmosphere. (212)
95. Semiclosed and closed breathing systems eliminate carbon dioxide by chemical
neutralization. (212)
96. Soda lime and Amsorb Plus absorbents are used to neutralize carbon dioxide.
The products formed by their reactions with carbon dioxide are carbonates, water,
and heat, making them exothermic reactions. (212-213)
97. Soda lime granules consist of water, calcium hydroxide, and small amounts of
sodium and potassium hydroxide that serve as activators. (212, Table 15-6)
98. Soda lime granules fragment easily and produce alkaline dust, which can lead to
bronchospasm if inhaled. Silica is added to the granules to provide hardness
and minimize alkaline dust formation. (213)
99. The water formed from the neutralization of carbon dioxide, the water present in
the soda lime granules, and the water condensed from the patient’s exhaled
gases leach the alkaline bases from the soda lime granules and produce a slurry
containing NaOH and KOH in the bottom of the canister. These monovalent
bases can be corrosive to the skin. (213)
100. Amsorb Plus granules consist of water, calcium hydroxide, and calcium chloride.
(213, Table 15-6)
101. Calcium sulfate and polyvinylpyrrolidine are added to Amsorb Plus to increase
hardness. (213)
102. The water formed by the neutralization of carbon dioxide with soda lime and
Amsorb Plus is useful for humidifying the gases and for dissipating some of the
heat generated in these exothermic reactions. The heat generated during the
neutralization of carbon dioxide can be detected by the warmness of the canister.
Failure of the canister to become warm should alert the anesthesia provider to the
possibility that chemical neutralization of carbon dioxide is not taking place. (213)
103. The efficiency of carbon dioxide neutralization is influenced by the size of the
carbon dioxide granules and the presence or absence of channeling in the carbon
dioxide canister. (213)
104. The optimal absorbent granule size represents a compromise between absorptive
efficiency and resistance to airflow through the carbon dioxide absorbent canister.
Absorbent efficiency increases as absorbent granule size decreases because the
total surface area coming in contact with carbon dioxide increases. The smaller the
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
136
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
absorbent granules, however, the smaller the interstices through which gas must
flow and the greater the resistance to flow. (213)
105. Absorbent granule size is designated as mesh size, which refers to the number of
openings per linear inch in a sieve through which the granular particles can pass.
The granular size of carbon dioxide absorbents in anesthesia practice is between 4
and 8 mesh, a size at which absorbent efficiency is maximal with minimal
resistance. A 4-mesh screen means that there are four quarter-inch openings per
linear inch. An 8-mesh screen has eight eighth-inch openings per linear inch. (213)
106. Channeling is the preferential passage of exhaled gases through the carbon dioxide
absorber canister via pathways of low resistance such that the bulk of the carbon
dioxide absorbent granules are bypassed. (213)
107. Channeling results from loose packing of absorbent granules and can be
minimized by gently shaking the canister before use to ensure firm packing of the
absorbent granules. Carbon dioxide absorbent canisters are designed to facilitate
uniform dispersion of exhaled gas flow through the absorbent granules. (213)
108. Absorptive capacity is determined by the maximum amount of carbon dioxide that
can be absorbed by 100 g of carbon dioxide absorbent. Channeling of exhaled
gases through the absorbent granules can substantially decrease their efficiency.
Carbon dioxide absorber canister design also influences the absorptive capacity of
the carbon dioxide absorbent. (213)
109. Carbon dioxide absorbents contain a pH-sensitive indicator dye that changes color
when the carbon dioxide absorbent granules are exhausted. When the absorptive
components of the granules are exhausted, carbonic acid accumulates and
produces a change in the pH and thus in the indicator dye color. (213-214)
110. Soda lime contains the indicator dye ethyl violet, which changes granule color
from white to purple when exhausted. Over time, exhausted granules may revert
to their original white color even though absorptive capacity does not recover
with time. On reuse, the dye quickly produces the purple color change again.
Amsorb Plus contains an indicator dye that changes granule color from white
to purple when exhausted and, once changed, does not revert to its original
color. (214)
111. Desiccated soda lime may degrade sevoflurane, isoflurane, enflurane, and
desflurane to carbon monoxide. (214)
112. Soda lime, whether moist or dry, degrades sevoflurane and halothane to
unsaturated nephrotoxic compounds (compound A). (214)
113. In contrast to soda lime, Amsorb Plus, whether desiccated or moist, does not
degrade inhaled anesthetics. (214)
114. Desiccation of soda lime increases the degradation of inhaled anesthetics. Without
a patient attached to the conventional circle system, desiccation of soda lime is
enhanced by retrograde gas flow, which is facilitated by fresh gas flows greater
than 5 L/min, an open APL valve, and removing the breathing bag. (214)
115. Desiccation of soda lime requires a prolonged period (usually 48 hours) of
retrograde gas flow. Accordingly, most instances of increased blood
concentrations of carboxyhemoglobin occur in patients anesthetized on a Monday
after continuous flow of oxygen (flowmeter accidentally left on) through the
carbon dioxide absorbent over the weekend. (214)
116. Desiccation of the carbon dioxide absorbent Baralyme (no longer clinically
available) can lead to fire within the circle system with sevoflurane use.
A poorly characterized chemical reaction between sevoflurane and Baralyme can
produce sufficient heat and combustible degradation products to lead to the
Anesthesia Delivery Systems
137
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
spontaneous generation of fires within the carbon dioxide absorber canister and
breathing circuit. Cases of extreme heat without fire associated with desiccated
soda lime have been reported in Europe. To avoid this problem, anesthesia
providers should make every effort to not use desiccated carbon dioxide
absorbents. (214, Table 15-8)
117.
Feature
Soda Lime
Amsorb Plus
Mesh size
4 - 8
4 - 8
Generation of compound A with
sevoflurane
Yes
No
Generation of carbon monoxide with
inhaled anesthetics
Yes
No
Risk of exothermic reactions and fire in
the presence of sevoflurane
No
No
(212-214, Table 15-6)
CHECKING THE
ANESTHESIA
MACHINE AND
CIRCLE SYSTEM
FUNCTION
118. In 2008 the American Society of Anesthesiologists developed new
recommendations for preanesthesia checkout (PAC) procedures to provide
guidelines applicable to all anesthesia delivery systems. This allows individual
departments to develop a PAC specific to the anesthesia delivery systems currently
used at their facilities that can be performed consistently and expeditiously.
Specifically, for newer anesthesia delivery systems that incorporate automated
checkout features, items that are not evaluated by the automated checkout need
to be identified, and supplemental manual checkout procedures included as
needed. (215, Table 15-9)
119. A complete anesthesia machine and circle system function checkout procedure
should be performed each day before the first case. An abbreviated checkout
should be performed before each subsequent use that day. (215, Table 15-9)
120. The most important preoperative checks are (1) verification that an auxiliary
oxygen cylinder and self-inflating manual ventilation device (Ambu bag) are
available and functioning, (2) a leak check of the machine’s low-pressure
system, (3) calibration of the oxygen monitor, and (4) a positive-pressure leak
check of the breathing system. (215-216)
121. No. Failure to ventilate is a major cause of morbidity and death related to
anesthesia care. Because equipment failure with resulting inability to ventilate the
patient can occur at any time, a self-inflating manual ventilation device (e.g.,
Ambu bag) should be present at every anesthetizing location for every case
and should be checked for proper function. In addition, a source of oxygen
separate from the anesthesia machine and pipeline supply, specifically an oxygen
cylinder with a regulator and a means to open the cylinder valve, should be
immediately available and checked. (215)
122. A leak check of the machine’s low-pressure system is performed to confirm the
integrity of the anesthesia machine from the flowmeters to the common gas outlet.
It evaluates the portion of the anesthesia machine that is downstream from all
safety devices, except the oxygen monitor. The low-pressure circuit is the most
vulnerable part of the anesthesia machine because the components located
within this area are the ones most subject to breakage and leaks. The machine’s
low-pressure system must be checked because leaks in this circuit can lead to
hypoxia or patient awareness, or both. (215)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
138
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
123. The oxygen monitor is the only machine safety device that detects problems
downstream from the flowmeters. The other machine safety devices (the fail-safe
valve, the oxygen supply failure alarm, and the proportioning system) are all
upstream from the flowmeters. (216)
124. No. A positive-pressure leak check of the breathing system must be
performed before every procedure. This test does not check the integrity of
the unidirectional valves inasmuch as the breathing system will pass the
leak check even if the unidirectional valves are incompetent or
stuck shut. (216, Table 15-9, items 12-13)
Anesthesia Delivery Systems
139
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
Chapter
13 AIRWAY MANAGEMENT
Patricia Roth
1. What is the definition of difficult mask ventilation?
2. What is the incidence of difficult mask ventilation?
3. What is the definition of difficult tracheal intubation/laryngoscopy?
4. What is the incidence of difficult tracheal intubation/laryngoscopy?
5. What is the incidence of failed tracheal intubation?
ANATOMY AND
PHYSIOLOGY OF THE
UPPER AIRWAY
6. How does resistance to airflow through the nasal passages compare to that through
the mouth?
7. What nerves innervate the nasal mucosa?
8. What nerves innervate the hard and soft palate?
9. What nerve provides sensation to the anterior two thirds of the tongue?
10. What nerve innervates the posterior third of the tongue, the soft palate, and the
oropharynx?
11. What are the three components of the pharynx?
12. What nerves innervate the pharynx?
13. Complete the following table: (223, Table 16-1, Motor and Sensory Innervation
of Larynx)
Nerve
Sensory
Motor
Superior laryngeal,
internal division
Superior laryngeal,
external division
Recurrent
laryngeal
14. Where is the narrowest part of the adult airway?
15. What isspecial aboutthe cricoidcartilage comparedwith the othertracheal cartilages?
AIRWAY
ASSESSMENT
16. What is the purpose of the Mallampati classification system?
17. Describe the observer/patient position during Mallampati classification.
18. Describe the Mallampati classes.
19. What is the purpose of the Cormack and Lehane score?
20. Describe the Cormack and Lehane grades.
21. What is the purpose of the upper lip bite test (ULBT)?
22. Describe the upper lip bite test (ULBT) classes.
140
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
23. What three axes must be aligned to obtain a line of vision during direct
laryngoscopy? How is this accomplished? What is this final position called?
24. What is the concern with a “short” thyromental distance?
25. What is the concern with a decreased submandibular compliance?
26. What position is associated with improved alignment of the three axes to obtain a
line of vision during laryngoscopy in obese patients?
27. What maneuver facilitates identification of the cricoid cartilage in patients who do
not have a prominent thyroid cartilage?
AIRWAY
MANAGEMENT
TECHNIQUES
28. What is “preoxygenation” prior to the induction of anesthesia? What is its value?
29. How is preoxygenation accomplished?
30. Name ten independent variables that are associated with difficult facemask
ventilation.
31. Why is it important to limit ventilation pressure to less than 20 cm H2O during
facemask ventilation?
32. What are contraindications to nasal airway placement?
33. What are some indications for endotracheal intubation?
34. What is another name for cricoid pressure and how is it performed?
35. What is the purpose of cricoid pressure?
36. Describe the proper placement of the tip of a curved (Macintosh) laryngoscope blade
versus that of a straight (Miller) laryngoscope blade for exposure of the glottic
opening during laryngoscopy.
37. Describe the OELM and BURP maneuvers. What is their purpose?
38. How are endotracheal tubes sized?
39. Why are endotracheal tubes radiopaque and transparent?
40. Why are low-pressure, high-volume cuffs on endotracheal tubes preferred?
41. What are some serious complications attributable to endotracheal cuff pressures?
42. Name some stylets that can be used to facilitate endotracheal intubation.
43. What are some methods to confirm the correct placement of an
endotracheal tube?
44. When is an awake fiberoptic endotracheal intubation most frequently chosen?
45. Why is fiberoptic endotracheal intubation recommended for patients with unstable
cervical spines?
46. Why is fiberoptic endotracheal intubation recommended for patients who have
sustained an injury to the upper airway from either blunt or penetrating trauma?
47. What is an absolute contraindication to fiberoptic endotracheal intubation?
48. What are some relative contraindications to fiberoptic endotracheal intubation?
49. What are some advantages and disadvantages of nasal fiberoptic endotracheal
intubation?
50. Why should an antisialagogue be given before fiberoptic endotracheal intubation?
51. On what basis is the choice of sedation for an awake fiberoptic tracheal intubation
made?
52. Describe preparation of the nose and nasopharynx for nasal fiberoptic tracheal
intubation.
53. Describe preparation of the tongue and oropharynx for nasal or oral fiberoptic
tracheal intubation.
54. Describe preparation of the larynx and trachea for nasal or oral fiberoptic tracheal
intubation.
55. Why is lidocaine the preferred airway topical local anesthetic?
56. Name two blocks that can be performed to topicalize the larynx and trachea.
FLEXIBLE
FIBEROPTIC
LARYNGOSCOPY
57. How can the risks of mucosal trauma or submucosal bleeding with nasal
endotracheal intubation be minimized?
58. What advantages does inflation of the endotracheal tube cuff during advancement
with the fiberoptic scope offer?
Airway Management
141
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
59. How is endotracheal tube depth verified during fiberoptic intubation?
60. What are possible causes of resistance when removing the fiberoptic
bronchoscope?
61. What is the utility of oral intubating airways during oral fiberoptic endotracheal
tracheal intubation?
62. Why is visualization more difficult during fiberoptic endotracheal tracheal
intubation in an asleep patient?
63. Why is having a second person trained in anesthesia delivery present
recommended for fiberoptic endotracheal tracheal intubation in an asleep patient?
64. Describe a Patil-Syracuse mask.
65. Describe an Aintree airway exchange catheter.
RIGID FIBEROPTIC
LARYNGOSCOPES/
VIDEOLARYN
GOSCOPES
66. Name some rigid fiberoptic laryngoscopes. When might these laryngoscopes be
useful?
RETROGRADE
TRACHEAL
INTUBATION
Blind Nasotracheal Intubation
67. Describe the retrograde and blind nasal endotracheal intubation techniques and
when they might be useful.
SUPRAGLOTTIC
AIRWAY DEVICES
68. Describe correct anatomic placement of the laryngeal mask airway (LMA).
69. For what purpose was the LMA Fastrach designed?
70. When using an ILMA, why are silicone Euromedical endotracheal tubes preferred
over standard endotracheal tubes? What is the disadvantage of these tubes?
71. Describe the LMA CTrach.
72. Describe the ProSeal LMA.
73. Describe the esophageal-tracheal Combitube (ETC).
TRANSTRACHEAL
TECHNIQUES
74. What is transtracheal jet ventilation and when might it be useful? When is it
contraindicated? What are some potential risks of transtracheal jet ventilation?
75. What is a cricothyrotomy and when is it usually performed?
TRACHEAL
EXTUBATION
76. Why is tracheal extubation during a light level of anesthesia dangerous?
77. What is laryngospasm? When is it most likely to occur?
78. How should laryngospasm be treated?
79. When is deep tracheal extubation contraindicated?
80. What are the steps of tracheal extubation?
81. What is the most common complication during direct laryngoscopy?
82. Describe endotracheal tube movement during head flexion and extension.
83. What are the two most serious complications after tracheal extubation?
84. What is the major complication of prolonged tracheal intubation?
AIRWAY
MANAGEMENT IN
INFANTS AND
CHILDREN
85. What are some differences between the infant and the adult airway? At what age
does the pediatric upper airway take on more adultlike characteristics?
86. Contrast the location of the larynx in an infant versus an adult. What effect does
this have on the tongue?
87. Contrast the size of an infant’s tongue in proportion to the size of the mouth with
that of an adult. What are the consequences of this?
88. Contrast an infant’s epiglottis with that of an adult.
89. What advantages do straight laryngoscopes offer over curved laryngoscopes when
intubating an infant or small child?
90. What is the narrowest portion of an infant’s airway versus an adult airway?
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
142
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
91. What is the correct size of an uncuffed endotracheal tube in infants and
children?
92. Can cuffed endotracheal tubes be safely used in infants and children? What
if nitrous oxide is used during the anesthetic?
93. What are the dangers of an endotracheal tube that is too large for infants and
children?
94. Contrast proper head and neck positioning of an adult with that of an infant during
direct laryngoscopy.
95. What is different about an infant’s nares compared to an adult’s? Why is this
important?
96. Why is a history of snoring important in infants and children?
97. Why is premedication useful in pediatric anesthesia? At what age does this become
important?
98. What is the dose of oral midazolam for infants or children? What is the maximum
oral dose? What if the child is uncooperative with taking oral midazolam?
99. Describe an inhaled induction in a child. When should the nitrous oxide be
discontinued?
100. Describe maneuvers to overcome airway obstruction during mask induction in
infants and children.
101. What determines the appropriate size of an LMA for use in infants and
children?
102. What is the LMA Flexible? What advantages does it offer?
103. What advantage does the Air-Q intubating laryngeal airway (ILA) have over an
LMA?
104. What formula is often used to estimate the appropriate-sized endotracheal tubes
for infants and children?
105. Is the formula used to estimate the appropriate-sized endotracheal tube for
infants and children applicable for cuffed or uncuffed endotracheal tubes?
106. How is the formula used to estimate the appropriate-sized endotracheal tubes for
infants and children adapted for cuffed endotracheal tubes?
107. What three advantages do Microcuff endotracheal tubes have over conventional
pediatric cuffed endotracheal tubes?
108. Are stylets useful in intubating infants and children?
109. What is the disadvantage of a straight laryngoscope blade compared to a curved
blade?
110. Describe the most useful sizes of laryngoscope blades according to age.
111. What is the most important first step when an unexpected difficult airway occurs in
pediatric patients?
112. Why should repeated attempts at direct laryngoscopy be avoided? What should be
done instead?
113. Is an awake fiberoptic endotracheal intubation usually an option in managing an
expected pediatric difficult airway?
114. What personnel and equipment should be in the operating room before induction
of anesthesia in a pediatric patient with an expected difficult airway?
115. What airway devices are available in smaller sizes to facilitate intubation of a child
with a difficult airway?
116. Why is tracheal extubation in infants and children riskier than that of adults?
117. When does postextubation croup most commonly occur? Why is this important?
118. What are the clinical manifestations of postextubation croup?
119. How is postextubation croup treated?
120. Why is obstructive sleep apnea especially important in infants and children?
121. How should opiate therapy be managed in an infant or child with obstructive
sleep apnea?
122. Describe tracheal extubation and postoperative monitoring for infants and
children with obstructive sleep apnea.
123. How should extubation after a difficult intubation be handled in infants and
children?
Airway Management
143
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
ANSWERS*
1. Difficult mask ventilation is defined as an inability to maintain oxygen saturation
(SpO2) greater than 90% or an inability to prevent or reverse the signs of inadequate
ventilation. (220)
2. The incidence of difficult mask ventilation ranges from 0.07% to 5%. (220)
3. Difficult tracheal intubation/laryngoscopy is defined as successful intubation
requiring more than three attempts or taking longer than 10 minutes. (220)
4. Difficult tracheal intubation/laryngoscopy occurs in 1.1% to 8.5% of patients. (220)
5. Failed tracheal intubation occurs at an incidence of 0.01% to 0.03%. (220)
ANATOMY AND
PHYSIOLOGY OF THE
UPPER AIRWAY
6. Resistance to airflow through the nasal passages is twice that through the mouth
and accounts for approximately two thirds of total airway resistance. (220)
7. The ophthalmic (V1) and maxillary divisions (V2) of the trigeminal nerve (cranial
nerve V) provide innervation to the nasal mucosa as the anterior ethmoidal,
nasopalatine, and sphenopalatine nerves. (220, Figure 16-2)
8. The palatine nerves branch from the sphenopalatine ganglion to innervate the hard
and soft palate. (220, Figure 16-2)
9. The mandibular division (V3) of the trigeminal nerve (cranial nerve V) forms the
lingual nerve, which provides sensation to the anterior two thirds of the tongue.
(220, Figure 16-3)
10. The posterior third of the tongue, the soft palate, and the oropharynx are innervated
by the glossopharyngeal nerve (cranial nerve IX). (220, Figure 16-4)
11. The three components of the pharynx are the nasopharynx, the oropharynx, and the
hypopharynx. (220)
12. The pharynx is innervated by cranial nerves IX (glossopharyngeal) and X (vagus).
(220, Figures 16-4 and 16-5)
13.
Nerve
Sensory
Motor
Superior laryngeal,
internal division
Epiglottis
Base of tongue
Supraglottic mucosa
Thyroepiglottic joint
Cricothyroid joint
None
Superior laryngeal,
external division
Anterior subglottic
mucosa
Cricothyroid m.
Recurrent
laryngeal
Subglottic mucosa
Muscle spindles
Thyroarytenoid m.
Lateral cricoarytenoid m.
Interarytenoid m.
Posterior cricoarytenoid m.
14. The vocal cords are the narrowest portion of the adult airway. (220)
*Numbers in parentheses: numbers refer to pages, figures, or tables in Miller RD, Pardo MC: Basics of Anesthesia,
6th ed. Philadelphia, Elsevier Saunders, 2011.
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
144
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
15. The cricoid cartilage is the most cephalad tracheal cartilage and is the only one that
has a full ring structure. It is shaped like a signet ring, wider in the cephalocaudal
dimension posteriorly. (220)
AIRWAY
ASSESSMENT
16. Mallampati proposed a classification system (Mallampati score) to correlate the
oropharyngeal space with the predicted ease of direct laryngoscopy and tracheal
intubation. (223)
17. With the observer at eye level, the patient holds the head in a neutral position, opens
the mouth maximally, and protrudes the tongue without phonating. (223)
18. Class I: The soft palate, fauces, uvula, and tonsillar pillars are visible.
Class II: The soft palate, fauces, and uvula are visible.
Class III: The soft palate and base of the uvula are visible.
Class IV: The soft palate is not visible. (223, Figure 16-6)
19. The Cormack and Lehane score classifies laryngoscopic view. (223)
20. Grade I: Most of the glottis is visible.
Grade II: Only the posterior portion of the glottis is visible.
Grade III: The epiglottis, but no part of the glottis, can be seen.
Grade IV: No airway structures are visualized. (223, Figure 16-7)
21. The ULBT correlates the patient’s ability to prognath the mandible with
visualization of glottic structures on direct laryngoscopy. (225)
22. Class I: Lower incisors can bite above the vermilion border of the upper lip.
Class II: Lower incisors cannot reach vermilion border.
Class III: Lower incisors cannot bite upper lip. (225)
23. The laryngeal, pharyngeal, and oral axes must be aligned to obtain a line of vision
during direct laryngoscopy. Flexion of the neck, by elevating the head
approximately 10 cm, aligns the laryngeal and pharyngeal axes. Extension of the
head on the atlanto-occipital joint aligns the oral and pharyngeal axes. These
maneuvers place the head in the “sniffing” position and bring the three axes into
optimal alignment. (225, Figure 16-8)
24. A thyromental distance (mentum to thyroid cartilage) less than 6 to 7 cm correlates
with a poor laryngoscopic view. Three ordinary fingerbreadths approximate this
distance. (226)
25. Decreased submandibular compliance correlates with poor laryngoscopic view.
The submandibular space is the area into which the soft tissues of the pharynx must
be displaced to obtain a line of vision during direct laryngoscopy. Anything that
limits the size of this space or compliance of the tissue will decrease the amount
of anterior displacement that can be achieved. (226)
26. Obesity is associated with difficulty in airway management. To increase the likelihood
of successful endotracheal intubation, a wedge-shaped bolster placed behind the
obese patient’s back results in a more optimal sniffing position. (226)
27. In patients who do not have a prominent thyroid cartilage, identification of the
cricoid cartilage can be achieved by beginning palpation of the neck at the sternal
notch and sliding the fingers up the neck until a tracheal cartilage that is wider and
higher (cricoid cartilage) than those below is felt. (227)
AIRWAY
MANAGEMENT
TECHNIQUES
28. “Preoxygenation” describes the administration of oxygen to patients prior to the
induction of anesthesia resulting in apnea. The goal is to achieve an end tidal
oxygen level of about 90%. Preoxygenation increases the duration of apnea without
oxygen desaturation by filling the functional residual capacity with oxygen, thus
increasing the patient’s reserve of oxygen while apneic. (227)
Airway Management
145
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
29. Methods by which to preoxygenate a patient prior to the induction of anesthesia
include having the patient breathe 100% oxygen for 3 minutes or take eight deep
breaths in 60 seconds. Although it was previously believed that having a patient
take four deep breaths was sufficient for preoxygenation, this has been since proved
not to be as effective as the other two methods. In obese patients, adequate
preoxygenation may take longer. Having the obese patient sit in an upright
position and applying continuous positive airway pressure may facilitate
preoxygenation. (227)
30. Independent variables associated with difficult facemask ventilation include:
(1) age older than 55 years, (2) a body mass index greater than 26 kg/m2, (3) a beard,
(4) lack of teeth, (5) a history of snoring, (6) repeated attempts at laryngoscopy,
(7) Mallampati class III to IV, (8) neck radiation, (9) male gender, and (10) limited
ability to protrude the mandible. (227)
31. Ventilating pressure during facemask ventilation should be less than 20 cm H2O to
avoid insufflation of the stomach. (227)
32. Nasal airways are relatively contraindicated in patients with coagulation or platelet
abnormalities and those with basilar skull fractures. (228)
33. Indications for endotracheal intubation include:
(1) Provide a patent airway. (2) Prevent inhalation (aspiration) of gastric contents;
(3) need for frequent suctioning; (4) facilitate positive-pressure ventilation of
the lungs; (5) operative position other than supine; (6) operative site near or
involving the upper airway; and (7) airway maintenance by mask difficult. (228,
Table 16-5)
34. Cricoid pressure, also known as the Sellick maneuver, can be applied by an assistant
exerting downward external pressure with the thumb and index finger on the cricoid
cartilage to displace the cartilaginous cricothyroid ring posteriorly and thus compress
the underlying esophagus against the cervical vertebrae. (228, Figure 16-10)
35. Conceptually, cricoid pressure should prevent spillage of gastric contents into the
pharynx during the period from induction of anesthesia (unconsciousness) to
successful placement of a cuffed endotracheal tube. This is thought to prevent,
or minimize, the aspiration of gastric contents during the induction of anesthesia.
The efficacy of cricoid pressure for this purpose is not clear. (229)
36. During laryngoscopy with a Macintosh blade, the distal end of the curved blade
is advanced into the space between the base of the tongue and the pharyngeal
surface of the epiglottis. During laryngoscopy with a Miller blade, the distal end
of the straight blade is advanced beneath the laryngeal surface of the epiglottis.
(229, Figure 16-12)
37. Depression or lateral movement of the patient’s thyroid cartilage externally on the
neck (known as optimal external laryngeal manipulation [OELM] or backward
upward rightward pressure [BURP]) with the laryngoscopist’s right hand may
facilitate exposure of the glottic opening. (229)
38. Endotracheal tube sizes are specified according to their internal diameter (ID), which
is marked on each tube. (230, Table 16-6)
39. Endotracheal tubes are radiopaque to ascertain the position of the distal tip relative
to the carina. They are transparent to permit visualization of secretions or airflow as
evidenced by condensation of water vapor in the lumen of the tube (“breath
fogging”) during exhalation. (230)
40. Use of the minimum volume of air in a low-pressure, high-volume cuff prevents air
leaks during positive ventilation pressure (20 to 30 cm H2O) while also minimizing
the likelihood of mucosal ischemia resulting from prolonged pressure on the
tracheal wall. (231)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
146
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
41. Serious complications attributable to endotracheal cuff pressure include ciliary
denudation, tracheal stenosis, tracheal rupture, tracheoesophageal fistula,
tracheocarotid fistula, and tracheoinnominate artery fistula. (231)
42. Stylets that can be used to facilitate endotracheal intubation include gum elastic
bougie, Schroeder stylet, Frova intubating introducer, lighted stylets, and seeing
optical stylets. (231-232)
43. Correct placement of an endotracheal tube is confirmed by:
(1) The presence of end-tidal CO2: the presence of carbon dioxide in the exhaled
gases from the endotracheal tube as detected by capnography. An end-tidal
PCO2 >30 mm Hg for three to five consecutive breaths should be immediate
and sustained. Carbon dioxide may initially be present in low concentrations, but
will not persist in exhaled gases from a tube accidentally placed in the esophagus.
(2) Auscultation for bilateral breath sounds: symmetrical bilateral movement of
the chest with manual ventilation, combined with the presence of bilateral breath
sounds on apical or midaxillary auscultation of the lungs is confirmed after
endotracheal intubation. (3) Characteristic feel of the reservoir bag: a characteristic
feel of the reservoir bag is evaluated. It should be associated with normal lung
compliance during manual inflation of the lungs and the presence of expiratory
refilling of the bag. (4) Condensation of water in the tube lumen: condensation of
water in the tube lumen (breath fogging) during exhalation is evidence of tracheal
placement of the tube. (5) Sustained arterial hemoglobin oxygen saturations:
progressive decreases in arterial hemoglobin oxygen saturation as evident on the
pulse oximeter may alert the anesthesia provider to a previously unrecognized
esophageal intubation. (6) Ballottement of tracheal tube cuff in the suprasternal
notch. (232-233)
44. Awake fiberoptic endotracheal intubation is most frequently chosen when a difficult
tracheal intubation by direct laryngoscopy is anticipated. This technique is suited
to these situations because it can be performed before inducing general anesthesia,
thus eliminating the risk of failed tracheal intubation and failed ventilation in
anesthetized patients. It is usually safest to maintain spontaneous breathing
if there is a question about the ability to manage the patient’s airway. (233)
45. Fiberoptic endotracheal intubation is recommended for patients with unstable
cervical spines because the technique does not require movement of the patient’s
neck and can be performed before the induction of general anesthesia, thereby
allowing for evaluation of the patient’s neurologic function after tracheal
intubation and surgical positioning. (233)
46. Patients who have sustained an injury to the upper airway from either blunt or
penetrating trauma are at risk for the endotracheal tube creating a false passage by
exiting the airway through the disrupted tissue during direct laryngoscopy. By
performing a fiberoptic intubation, not only can the injury be assessed, but the
tracheal tube can also be placed beyond the level of the injury and thus eliminate the
risk of causing subcutaneous emphysema, which could compress and further
compromise the airway. (233)
47. An absolute contraindication to fiberoptic endotracheal intubation is a lack of time.
The technique requires time to set up the equipment and prepare the patient’s airway
for tracheal intubation. Therefore, if immediate airway management is required,
another technique should be used. (233)
48. Relative contraindications to fiberoptic endotracheal intubation include lack of
space around the scope, the presence of excessive blood or secretions, and the
presence of a pharyngeal abscess. (233)
49. In general, the nasal route is easier than the oral route for fiberoptic endotracheal
intubation because the angle of curvature of the endotracheal tube naturally
approximates that of the patient’s upper airway. Additionally, nasal fiberoptic
Airway Management
147
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
endotracheal intubation tends to be less of a stimulus for the gag reflex.
A disadvantage of nasal fiberoptic endotracheal intubation is that the risk of
inducing bleeding is higher when the nasal route is used. Therefore, the nasal
route is relatively contraindicated in patients with platelet abnormalities or
coagulation disorders. (233)
50. An antisialagogue (glycopyrrolate, 0.2 mg IV) should be administered to inhibit the
formation of secretions that can obscure fiberoptic visualization. (233)
51. Sedation choices are numerous, but the depth of sedation should be titrated to
reflect individual patient needs. Sedation should be administered cautiously in
patients in whom the airway management is predicted to be difficult. (233)
52. The nasal mucosa must be anesthetized and vasoconstricted, which is typically done
with either a 4% cocaine solution or a combination of 3% lidocaine and 0.25%
phenylephrine. Local anesthetic solutions can be applied on soaked cotton-tipped
swabs or pledgets. (233)
53. Topicalization of the tongue and oropharynx may be achieved by aerosolized local
anesthetic or by performing bilateral blocks of the glossopharyngeal nerve at the
base of each anterior tonsillar pillar. (233-234)
54. Topicalization or nerve blocks may be used for the larynx and trachea. Local
anesthetic may be sprayed, aerosolized, or nebulized into the airway. It should be
noted that the larger particle size of a spray tends to cause it to be deposited in
the pharynx, with only a small proportion reaching the trachea. Conversely, the
small particle size of a nebulized spray is carried more effectively into the
trachea, but also into the smaller airways, where the anesthetic is not needed
and undergoes more rapid systemic absorption. (234)
55. Lidocaine is the preferred topical local anesthetic because of its broad therapeutic
window. Benzocaine can cause methemoglobinemia even in therapeutic doses.
Tetracaine has a very narrow therapeutic window, and the maximum allowable dose
(1.2 mg/kg) can easily be exceeded. Cetacaine is a mixture of benzocaine and
tetracaine and has the disadvantages of each local anesthetic. (234)
56. Two blocks that can be performed to topicalize the larynx and trachea include the
superior laryngeal nerve block and the transtracheal block. (234)
FLEXIBLE
FIBEROPTIC
LARYNGOSCOPY
57. Softening the endotracheal tube in warm water before use makes it less likely to
cause mucosal trauma or submucosal tunneling during nasal intubation. (234)
58. Inflation of the endotracheal tube cuff during advancement with the fiberoptic
bronchoscope in the pharynx serves to create an enlarged pharyngeal space.
Because secretions tend to adhere to the pharyngeal walls, endotracheal tube cuff
inflation also helps keep the optics of the fiberoptic bronchoscope from being
obscured. The inflated cuff further aims the tip of the endotracheal tube
anteriorly. (234)
59. The appropriate depth of endotracheal tube placement can be verified by observing
the distance between the carina and the tip of the endotracheal tube as the fiberoptic
bronchoscope is withdrawn. (234)
60. If there is any resistance when removing the fiberoptic bronchoscope, the scope is
either through the Murphy eye or kinked in the pharynx. In both instances, the
endotracheal tube and the scope must be withdrawn together to prevent damaging
the fiberoptic bronchoscope. (234)
61. Use of an oral intubating airway facilitates directing the bronchoscope during oral
fiberoptic tracheal intubation. (235)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
148
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
62. An important difference in performing fiberoptic laryngoscopy in an anesthetized
patient is that the soft tissues of the pharynx, in contrast to the awake state,
tend to relax and limit space for visualization with the fiberoptic bronchoscope.
Using jaw thrust or a tonsil retractor, expanding the endotracheal tube cuff in
the pharynx, or applying traction on the tongue, may overcome this problem. (235)
63. It is advisable to have a second person trained in anesthesia delivery assisting when
a fiberoptic endotracheal intubation is performed under general anesthesia because
it is difficult to maintain the patient’s airway, be attentive to the monitors, and
perform the fiberoptic intubation alone. (235)
64. The Patil-Syracuse mask is designed with a port that will accommodate an
endotracheal tube and a fiberoptic bronchoscope through a diaphragm. This device
allows for spontaneous or controlled ventilation while fiberoptic nasal or oral
endotracheal intubation is being performed. (235)
65. The Aintree catheter is an airway exchange catheter with connectors that allow
ventilation with an anesthesia breathing circuit or jet ventilator. It differs from
other exchange catheters by having a lumen of adequate size to accommodate
a fiberoptic bronchoscope. (235)
RIGID FIBEROPTIC
LARYNGOSCOPES/
VIDEOLARYNGO
SCOPES
66. Rigid fiberoptic laryngoscopes include the WuScope system, Bullard Laryngoscope,
UpsherScope, GlideScope, McGrath Scope, Pentax-AWS, and Airtraq. These
laryngoscopes may provide for better visualization of laryngeal structures and
therefore facilitate endotracheal intubation in patients in whom direct laryngoscopy
would otherwise be difficult. The laryngoscopes provide for better optics because of
their rigid shape and/or because of the distal light source and optics on the
laryngoscope blade. (235-236, Figure 16-6)
RETROGRADE
TRACHEAL
INTUBATION
Blind Nasotracheal Intubation
67. Retrograde endotracheal intubation involves threading a wire retrograde to the
mouth through an external hole created by a needle in the cricothyroid membrane.
The endotracheal tube can then be thread over the wire into the trachea with or
without the aid of a fiberoptic bronchoscope. This technique may be useful in
patients in which there is bleeding, limited mouth opening, or neck movement.
It should not be performed in cases in which there is pathology.
Blind nasotracheal intubation involves advancing an endotracheal tube blindly
from the nose into the trachea while listening to breath sounds or attaching the
endotracheal tube to an anesthesia circuit and observing end-tidal CO2. This
technique is rarely used, however, since there are a number of other devices now
available for management of the difficult airway. (235)
SUPRAGLOTTIC
AIRWAY DEVICES
68. When correctly placed, the distal tip of the cuff should be against the upper
esophageal sphincter (cricopharyngeus muscle), the lateral edges rest in the piriform
sinuses, and the proximal end seats under the base of the tongue. (237-238)
69. The LMA Fastrach (Intubating LMA, ILMA) was designed to obviate the problems
encountered when attempting to blindly intubate the trachea through a classic LMA.
(238, Figure 16-18)
70. The ILMA is designed to be used with a silicone Euromedical endotracheal tube
(size 7.0 ID, 7.5 ID, or 8.0 ID). These tracheal tubes exit the laryngeal mask at a different
angle than do standard endotracheal tubes and thus result in better alignment with the
airway. The ILMA is advanced into the pharynx by following the natural curvature of
the patient’s upper airway. Because Euromedical tubes have low-volume, high-
pressure cuffs, itis recommended that the largest size that is appropriate for the patient
be used to minimize mucosal pressure from the cuff. (238)
Airway Management
149
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
71. The LMA CTrach is a modified LMA Fastrach with fiberoptic bundles located within
the bowl of the mask and a lightweight viewer that attaches after the device is
inserted. (238-239)
72. The ProSeal LMA is a modification of the classic LMA. The cuff of the ProSeal
LMA extends onto the back of the mask, which results in an improved airway
seal without increasing mucosal pressure. It has a second lumen that parallels
the one for the airway, but opens at the distal tip of the mask to act as an
esophageal vent. When optimally seated, the ProSeal LMA effectively isolates
the trachea from the esophagus, thus protecting the lungs from aspiration when
a minimum of 10 mL of air has been placed in the LMA cuff. (239, Figure 16-19)
73. The ETC is a double-lumen device that can function as either an endotracheal device
or an esophageal obturator. It has been used successfully in emergency medical
management and requires minimal training. (239)
TRANSTRACHEAL
TECHNIQUES
74. Transtracheal jet ventilation is the administration of oxygen under high pressure
through a needle placed in the cricothyroid membrane into the trachea.
Transtracheal jet ventilation is contraindicated in patients with any upper airway
disruption or obstruction. Risks of transtracheal jet ventilation include
pneumothorax, pneumomediastinum, bleeding, infection, and subcutaneous
emphysema. (241)
75. Cricothyrotomy is almost always performed under emergent circumstances
when mask ventilation and/or endotracheal intubation are not possible. This
technique involves the placement of a breathing tube through the cricothyroid
membrane. (241)
TRACHEAL
EXTUBATION
76. Tracheal extubation after general anesthesia must be performed when the patient
is either deeply anesthetized or fully awake. Tracheal extubation during a light
level of anesthesia (disconjugate gaze, breath holding or coughing, and not
responsive to command) increases the risk for laryngospasm. (241)
77. Laryngospasm is an involuntary spasm/closure of the vocal cords that may present
as stridor or attempts to breathe without air exchange. Laryngospasm is likely to
occur during tracheal extubation, particularly under a light level of anesthesia,
when vocal cords are stimulated by mucus, blood, or other substance.
78. Laryngospasm can be treated with mask ventilation with 100% oxygen and
continuous positive airway pressure along with forward displacement of the
mandible with the anesthesia provider’s index fingers to apply pressure at the
temporomandibular joints. If laryngospasm persists, a small dose of an
anesthetic induction agent or muscle relaxant may be used. (242-243)
79. Contraindications to deep tracheal extubation include previous difficult
facemask ventilation or endotracheal intubation, risk of aspiration, and a
surgical procedure that may have resulted in airway edema or increased airway
irritability. (241)
80. Spontaneous ventilation with 100% oxygen is established before tracheal
extubation. As with tracheal intubation, a functional residual capacity filled with
oxygen allows for the longest safe period should breath holding or laryngospasm
occur immediately after tracheal extubation. The effects of neuromuscular blocking
drugs should be fully reversed. The oropharynx is suctioned just before tracheal
extubation. The endotracheal tube cuff is deflated and the tracheal tube rapidly
removed from the patient’s trachea and upper airway while a positive-pressure
breath is delivered to help expel any secretions. After tracheal extubation, oxygen is
delivered by facemask. (241)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
150
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
81. Dental trauma is the most frequent type of damage related to direct laryngoscopy.
(242, Table 16-9)
82. Flexion of the patient’s head may advance the tube up to 1.9 cm and convert an
endotracheal placement into an endobronchial intubation, especially in children.
Conversely, extension of the head can withdraw the tube up to 1.9 cm and
result in pharyngeal placement. (242)
83. Laryngospasm and aspiration of gastric contents are the two most serious potential
immediate complications after tracheal extubation. (242-243)
84. The major complication of prolonged tracheal intubation (>48 hours) is damage
to the tracheal mucosa, which may progress to destruction of cartilaginous
rings and subsequent scar formation and tracheal stenosis. Stenosis
becomes symptomatic when the adult tracheal lumen is decreased to less
than 5 mm. (243)
AIRWAY
MANAGEMENT IN
INFANTS AND
CHILDREN
85. The difference between the infant and adult airway includes positioning of the
larynx in the neck, tongue size, epiglottis size, size of the head relative to the body,
neck length, nares size, and location of the narrowest point. Usually by the time
the child is about 10 years old, the upper airway has taken on more adultlike
characteristics. (243, Table 16-10)
86. The infant larynx is located higher in the neck at the level of C3-C4. In adults the
larynx is at the level of C4-C5. In infants this causes the tongue to shift more
superiorly, closer to the palate. The tongue more easily apposes the palate, which
can cause airway obstruction in situations such as the inhalation induction of
anesthesia. (243)
87. An infant’s tongue is larger in proportion to the size of the mouth than in
adults. The relatively large size of the tongue makes direct laryngoscopy
more difficult and can contribute to obstruction of the upper airway
during sedation, inhalation induction of anesthesia, or emergence from
anesthesia. (243)
88. The epiglottis in an infant’s airway is often described as relatively larger,
stiffer, and more omega shaped than an adult epiglottis. More importantly, an
infant’s epiglottis is typically angled in a more posterior position, thereby
blocking visualization of the vocal cords during direct laryngoscopy. (243)
89. In infants and small children, it is often necessary to lift the epiglottis with the tip
of the blade of the laryngoscope to visualize the vocal cords and successfully
intubate the trachea. Straight laryngoscope blades, which have a smaller
profile than curved laryngoscope blades, more easily fit in the smaller infant
mouth. Straight laryngoscope blades with their narrower tips also more
effectively lift the epiglottis allowing better visualization of the vocal
cords. (243)
90. The narrowest portion of an infant’s airway is at the cricoid cartilage, whereas the
narrowest portion of an adult’s airway is at the vocal cords. (243)
91. The correct size uncuffed endotracheal tube is one that results in an air leak
around the endotracheal tube with the application of 20 to 25 cm H2O positive
pressure. (243)
92. Cuffed endotracheal tubes can be used in infants and children if the inflation of the
cuff is carefully adjusted and monitored so that the leak pressure remains at 20 to
25 cm H2O. If nitrous oxide is used during the anesthetic, the nitrous oxide will
diffuse into the air-filled cuff and increase both its volume and the pressure
transmitted to the underlying tracheal mucosa. (243)
Airway Management
151
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
93. If the leak pressure is too high with either a cuffed or uncuffed endotracheal tube,
the tracheal mucosa will be compressed causing subglottic edema either at the
level of the cricoid cartilage or below. This complication can result in
postextubation croup or stridor in mild cases and tracheal stenosis in more severe
cases involving prolonged tracheal intubation. (243)
94. An infant’s head and occiput are relatively larger than an adult’s. The proper
position for direct laryngoscopy and tracheal intubation in an adult is often
described as the sniffing position with the head elevated and the neck flexed
at C6-C7 and extended at C1-C2. An infant, on the other hand, requires a
shoulder roll or neck roll to establish an optimal position for facemask
ventilation and direct laryngoscopy. (243)
95. Infant’s nares are relatively smaller than an adult’s. This can offer significant
resistance to airflow, and increase the work of breathing, especially when
secretions, edema, or bleeding narrow them. (243-244)
96. A history of snoring should prompt additional questioning about whether the child
has obstructive sleep apnea and should alert the anesthesia provider that
respiratory obstruction may develop during the induction and emergence phases
of anesthesia, as well as in the postoperative period. This is of particular concern if
opioids are given for pain management. (244)
97. Preanesthetic medication can facilitate separation of the infant or child from the
parents before the induction of anesthesia. Preanesthetic medication is often not
necessary in infants younger than 6 months because stranger anxiety does not
usually develop until 6 to 9 months of age. (244)
98. Midazolam syrup can be given orally (2 mg/mL) in a dose of 0.5 mg/kg up to a
maximum dose of about 20 mg. If the child is uncooperative with taking oral
midazolam and preanesthetic medication is essential, midazolam can also be given
intranasally, intramuscularly, or rectally. (244)
99. In a child without an intravenous catheter in place, the induction of anesthesia
with the odorless mixture of nitrous oxide and oxygen through a facemask and
then slowly increasing the concentration of sevoflurane is the best approach in a
cooperative child. When the infant or child becomes unconscious, the nitrous
oxide should be turned off to administrate 100% oxygen to the child. (244)
100. Airway obstruction during mask induction in infants and children can usually
be relieved by opening the mouth, extending the neck, and pushing anteriorly
on the angle of the jaw. Occasionally, an oral or nasal airway may need to
be inserted. (244)
101. The weight of the infant or child determines the appropriate size of LMA. (245)
102. The LMA Flexible has a wire-reinforced airway tube that resists kinking and
can be positioned in such a way that interference with surgical procedures
involving the head and neck is minimized. (245)
103. The major advantage of the Air-Q ILA is a design that facilitates endotracheal
intubation with standard oral endotracheal tubes. The airway tube has a larger
diameter than the LMA, allowing for intubation with a larger ETT than the
correspondingly sized LMA. In addition, the Air-Q ILA can be used with a specially
designed ILA removal stylet that stabilizes the ETT and allows controlled removal
of the ILA without dislodging the ETT from the trachea. (245-246)
104. The appropriately sized endotracheal tube for infants and children can be
estimated by using the following formula:
ðAge þ 16Þ=4 ¼ Endotracheal Tube size: 246
ð
Þ
105. The formula is for uncuffed endotracheal tubes. (246)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
152
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
106. When using a cuffed endotracheal tube in infants and children, the formula used
to estimate the appropriate-sized uncuffed endotracheal tube must be adapted.
To adapt the formula it is necessary to subtract half a size from the calculated
size to estimate the appropriate size cuffed endotracheal tube. (246)
107. The new Microcuff pediatric endotracheal tubes appear to offer several
distinct advantages over conventional pediatric cuffed endotracheal tubes.
The Microcuff endotracheal tubes have a cuff that is made from a microthin
polyurethane membrane that, while stronger than conventional cuffs, seals the
airway at lower cuff pressures than conventional endotracheal tubes. This reduces
the potential for mucosal edema and postextubation croup. The cuff on the
Microcuff endotracheal tube is also shorter and placed closer to the tip of the
endotracheal tube, increasing the chances that the endotracheal tube is
correctly placed. The Microcuff endotracheal tube also has an intubation depth
mark, which indicates the correct depth for insertion and also increases the
ability for correct placement. (246)
108. Using a stylet stiffens the endotracheal tube and makes it easier to manipulate
during direct laryngoscopy and tracheal intubation. The trachea of infants and
small children can often be intubated without using a stylet, but a stylet may be
useful for whenever a difficult tracheal intubation is anticipated. Even if
intubating without a stylet, the appropriately sized stylet should always be
immediately available. (246, Table 16-6)
109. The disadvantage of a straight blade is that it does not retract the tongue as well to
the left side of the mouth. A curved blade has a larger flange that retracts the
tongue to the left more effectively and may be useful in certain patient populations
in which the tongue is larger than normal. (246-247)
110. In infants younger than 1 year, a Miller 1 straight laryngoscope blade is most
useful. In children between 1 and 3 years of age, a 1½ straight laryngoscope blade,
such as a Wis-Hipple, is often useful. A longer straight laryngoscope blade such as
a Miller 2 is appropriate for most children between 3 and 10 years of age. The
tracheas of children older than 11 years are often more easily intubated with a
curved laryngoscope blade such as a Macintosh 3. Both straight and curved
laryngoscope blades of various sizes should always be available. (247)
111. When an unexpected difficult airway appears in pediatric patients, the most
important first step is to call for an additional anesthesia colleague to help. (247,
Figure 16-23)
112. It is critical to not persist with repeated attempts at direct laryngoscopy, which
can result in trauma to the upper airway, edema, and bleeding. In most
situations, an LMA should be inserted to provide an airway to oxygenate and
ventilate the patient and allow time to obtain additional personnel and airway
equipment. An LMA may be the only way to maintain an airway until the patient
wakes up or a surgical airway is established. An LMA is also an excellent
conduit for fiberoptic intubation. (247)
113. It is unlikely that infants and children will cooperate with procedures such as an
awake fiberoptic endotracheal intubation, so it is usually necessary to induce
anesthesia and manage the airway with the patient asleep. (247)
114. An additional anesthesia colleague should be available for help during the induction
of anesthesia, inserting an intravenous line, and securing the airway. A surgeon
capable of establishing a surgical airway and emergency airway equipment should
be in the operating room before beginning the induction of anesthesia. (247)
115. Lighted stylets, the GlideScope video laryngoscope, and fiberoptic
bronchoscopes are all available in smaller sizes to facilitate intubation of a child
with a difficult airway. (247-248)
Airway Management
153
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
116. Infants and small children are at a more likely risk than adults for croup, stridor,
and laryngospasm after tracheal extubation. (248)
117. Croup occurs most commonly when either a cuffed or uncuffed endotracheal
tube is used that is too large or when the cuff is inflated with too much air.
The resulting mechanical pressure on the tracheal mucosa causes venous
congestion and edema, and in severe cases can even compromise the arterial
blood supply causing mucosal ischemia. The resulting edema can narrow the
tracheal lumen, especially in infants and small children. Because resistance to
flow in an endotracheal tube is inversely proportional to the radius of the
lumen to the fourth power, 1 mm of edema in an infant airway is much more
significant than 1 mm of edema in an adult airway. Other risk factors for croup
include multiple tracheal intubation attempts, unusual positioning of the head
during surgery, increased duration of surgery, and procedures involving the
upper airway, such as rigid bronchoscopy. (248-249)
118. An infant or child with postextubation croup usually has respiratory distress in
the postanesthesia care unit. Nasal flaring, retractions, an increased respiratory
rate, audible stridor, and decreased oxygen saturation are common clinical
findings. (249)
119. Treatment of postextubation croup or stridor depends on the degree of respiratory
distress. Mild symptoms can be managed with humidified oxygen and prolonged
observation in the postanesthesia care unit. More severe cases may require
aerosolized racemic epinephrine and postoperative observation in an intensive
care unit. Patients whose respiratory distress is severe and not relieved with
these measures may need to be reintubated with an endotracheal tube smaller
than the one previously used. Steroids administered intravenously for preventing
upper airway edema are more beneficial when given before the airway is
instrumented and should be administered before procedures such as rigid
bronchoscopy. (249)
120. Infants and children with obstructive sleep apnea are at significant risk for airway
obstruction, respiratory distress, and the potential for apnea in the postoperative
period. At baseline these infants and children hypoventilate, which results in
hypercapnia and often arterial hypoxemia while asleep. Residual inhaled
anesthetics or residual neuromuscular blockade can depress airway reflexes,
skeletal muscle tone and strength, and respiratory drive, and result in significant
airway compromise in infants and children with obstructive sleep apnea. (249)
121. Opioids must be very carefully titrated both intraoperatively and postoperatively
because they can depress the ventilatory drive and contribute to significant
hypercapnia and arterial hypoxemia in these infants and children. (249)
122. Tracheal extubation in patients with obstructive sleep apnea should be considered
only when these infants and children are fully awake. All infants and children
with obstructive sleep apnea should be monitored postoperatively with pulse
oximetry and apnea monitoring. High-risk patients should be monitored
postoperatively in an intensive care unit setting. (249)
123. Tracheal extubation of an infant or child after a difficult intubation is considered
carefully because reintubation can be more difficult than the initial intubation.
The tracheas of infants and children with difficult airways should be extubated
only when they are fully awake and there is no residual neuromuscular
blockade. An infant or child with a difficult airway should be extubated only
when appropriate equipment and personnel are available for urgent
reintubation. (250)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
154
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
Chapter
14 SPINAL AND EPIDURAL
ANESTHESIA
Ken Drasner
1. What term is used to collectively describe spinal and epidural anesthesia?
2. Where is medicine deposited during performance of spinal anesthesia? With
epidural anesthesia? With caudal anesthesia?
3. Whataresomeadvantagesofspinalanesthesiawhencomparedwithepiduralanesthesia?
4. What are some advantages of epidural anesthesia?
ANATOMY
5. What is the relative clinical significance of the curvatures of the spinal canal with
respect to spinal and epidural anesthesia?
6. What is the number of each type of vertebrae composing the vertebral column?
7. Describe the anatomic parts of a vertebra by answering the following questions:
What are the two parts that make up a vertebra? From what parts of the
vertebra does the transverse process arise? From what parts of the vertebra does
the spinous process arise?
8. How do the different characteristic features of the spinous processes and laminae of
the thoracic and lumbar vertebrae impact clinical performance of neuraxial blocks?
9. What is the sacral hiatus?
10. What are some important surface landmarks used to identify specific spinal
interspaces to guide placement of a spinal or epidural needle?
11. How are the laminae of adjacent vertebrae connected?
12. How are the tips of the spinous processes of adjacent vertebrae connected?
13. What passes through the intervertebral foramina?
14. What are the rostral and caudal limitations of the spinal canal? What accounts for
the disparity between the vertebral level and spinal level?
15. What is the cauda equina, and what characteristic features are relevant to spinal
anesthesia?
16. What are the three meningeal layers surrounding the spinal cord?
17. Where is cerebrospinal fluid relative to the meningeal layers? What are two
interchangeable terms for this space?
18. What structures form the boundaries of the epidural space?
19. What structures are contained within the epidural space?
20. As the nerves pass through the intervertebral foramen they become encased by the
dura, arachnoid, and pia, forming what three components of a peripheral nerve?
21. Where do the preganglionic nerves of the sympathetic nervous system originate,
and what is their course of travel after leaving the spinal cord?
22. What is the plica mediana dorsalis? What might be its clinical significance?
23. Describe the blood supply of the spinal cord. Which area of the cord is most
vulnerable to ischemic insult?
24. What is the artery of Adamkiewicz?
155
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
PREOPERATIVE
PREPARATION
25. What are the potential complications that should be discussed with the patient
before proceeding with a spinal or epidural anesthetic?
26. What are the common indications for spinal anesthesia?
27. What are the common indications for epidural anesthesia?
28. What are the absolute contraindications to neuraxial anesthesia?
29. Does bacteremia preclude performance of a neuraxial technique?
30. Does chronic back pain preclude performance of a neuraxial technique?
31. What cardiac disorders warrant specific concern with respect to neuraxial
anesthesia?
32. Do coagulation abnormalities preclude performance of a neuraxial anesthetic?
SPINAL ANESTHESIA
33. What are the common positions patients are placed in for administration of a spinal
anesthetic?
34. What are some advantages and disadvantages of having a patient in a sitting
position during performance of a spinal anesthetic?
35. Why might an anesthetist choose to administer a spinal with a patient in the lateral
decubitus position?
36. What vertebral level is crossed by a line drawn across the patient’s back at the level
of the top of the iliac crests? What interspace is located directly above this line?
What interspace is located directly below this line?
37. What is the reason for placing a spinal anesthetic at a level below the L2 vertebra?
38. On what basis are spinal needles generally classified?
39. Which characteristics of a spinal needle will result in the lowest incidence of
postdural puncture headache?
40. What are the two approaches used for spinal anesthesia, and what are their relative
advantages and disadvantages?
41. When a midline approach is chosen, what are the tissue planes that will be traversed
as the needle is advanced toward the subarachnoid space?
42. What accounts for the “pop” the anesthetist may feel when advancing a spinal
needle into the subarachnoid space?
43. How is subarachnoid placement of the spinal needle confirmed?
44. How can the spinal needle be handled to stabilize the needle after proper placement
in the subarachnoid space is confirmed?
45. After the syringe containing the local anesthetic solution for administration into the
subarachnoid space is attached to the spinal needle, how can continued
subarachnoid placement of the spinal needle be confirmed?
46. What should be done if blood-tinged cerebral spinal fluid (CSF) appears at the hub
of the needle?
47. Describe the lumbosacral (Taylor) approach. When is this approach advantageous?
48. What are the three factors that most influence the distribution of the local
anesthetic solution in cerebrospinal fluid after its administration into the
subarachnoid space?
49. How is the baricity of a local anesthetic solution to be administered into the
subarachnoid space defined? Why is this clinically important?
50. What are the two things that most influence the duration of a spinal anesthetic?
51. What is the baricity of the most commonly used spinal anesthetics? What is added
to local anesthetics for spinal anesthesia to make the solution hyperbaric?
What is the principal advantage of these solutions?
52. What role does the contour of the vertebral canal play in anesthetic distribution,
and hence, level of spinal block?
53. What is a “saddle block”?
54. What situations might warrant use of a hypobaric solution?
55. What are the relative advantages and disadvantages of isobaric solutions?
56. What is the purpose of adding a vasoconstrictor to the local anesthetic solution
used for spinal anesthesia? What is their mechanism of action?
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
156
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
57. What are the two potentially useful effects derived from adding an opioid to the
local anesthetic used for spinal anesthesia? What is their mechanism of action?
58. How do spinal anesthetics regress during the recovery from spinal anesthesia?
59. What recent events have led to concern regarding the use of lidocaine for spinal
anesthesia? What are some modifications in practice that have been suggested
should lidocaine be used for this purpose?
60. What is TNS, and what are the factors that increase the risk of its occurrence
following spinal anesthesia with lidocaine?
61. List the rank order for the relative incidence of TNS with the following local
anesthetics used for spinal anesthesia: bupivacaine; chloroprocaine; lidocaine;
mepivacaine; prilocaine; and procaine.
62. What are some important restrictions with respect to the anesthetic solution
if using chloroprocaine off-label for spinal administration?
63. What are some distinguishing characteristics between bupivacaine and tetracaine
with respect to spinal anesthesia?
64. What is the temporal order of blockade of the motor, sensory, and sympathetic
nerves after the administration of a spinal anesthetic?
65. What is a useful way to gain an early indication of the level of spinal anesthesia?
66. How do the ultimate dermatomal levels of motor, sensory, and sympathetic block
compare during spinal anesthesia?
67. How is the extent of motor block produced by a spinal anesthetic generally assessed?
68. What surface landmarks are used to determine the approximate level of spinal
anesthesia?
69. What are some advantages and disadvantages of a continuous spinal technique?
70. Why were microcatheters used for spinal anesthesia withdrawn from the U.S.
market?
71. What is the likely mechanism of injury associated with microcatheters?
72. Has removal of microcatheters eliminated the risk of neurologic injury?
73. What elements of the continuous spinal technique are important to prevent
neurologic injury?
74. What dose of anesthetic should be used when repeating a spinal because of a failed
block?
75. What are the physiologic effects on the respiratory system of an appropriately
instituted spinal anesthetic?
76. What are some physiologic effects on the gastrointestinal tract and the
genitourinary system that result from a spinal anesthetic?
77. What is the effect of spinal anesthesia on blood pressure and what accounts for
this effect?
78. How is spinal anesthetic-induced hypotension treated?
79. What is the effect of spinal anesthesia on heart rate, and what is believed to be
the underlying mechanism?
80. How are spinal anesthetic-induced perturbations in heart rate treated?
81. What is the cause and typical onset of a postdural puncture headache?
82. What is the hallmark feature of a postdural puncture headache?
83. What are some of the other characteristic features of a postdural puncture
headache?
84. What serious complications may result from a postdural puncture headache?
85. Which patients are most at risk for development of a postdural puncture
headache?
86. What features of a spinal needle will impact the incidence of a postdural puncture
headache?
87. What are some of the commonly used treatment options for a postdural puncture
headache?
88. What are the likely predominant mechanism(s) by which an epidural blood patch
may relieve a postdural puncture headache?
89. What is a “total spinal”?
90. How should a total spinal be managed?
Spinal and Epidural Anesthesia
157
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
91. What are two possible causes of nausea that present soon after the administration
of a spinal anesthetic?
92. What might contribute to backache occurring in a patient who has received a
spinal for surgical anesthesia?
EPIDURAL
ANESTHESIA
93. Is it acceptable to place a lumbar epidural after the induction of general
anesthesia?
94. Is it acceptable to place a thoracic epidural after the induction of general
anesthesia?
95. What are the advantages and disadvantages of epidural catheters that have an
inner stainless steel core?
96. What are the comparative advantages and disadvantages of epidural catheters with
a closed versus open tip?
97. Which approach (midline or paramedian) is most often used for placement of
a thoracic epidural, and why is it chosen?
98. What is the “loss-of-resistance” technique?
99. What is the “hanging-drop” technique?
100. What are the potential advantages and disadvantages of the single-injection versus
catheter technique for epidural anesthesia?
101. What is the technique used for placement of a catheter following identification of
the epidural space?
102. What is the “test dose” for an epidural catheter? What is it testing for? How long
must the anesthetist wait after administering the test dose to make this
determination?
103. Why is the anesthetic administered in incremental doses?
104. Complete the following table of local anesthetics used for epidural anesthesia:
Concentration (%)
Onset (min)
Duration (min)
Chloroprocaine
Lidocaine
Ropivacaine
Bupivacaine
105. Why are tetracaine and procaine rarely used for epidural anesthesia?
106. How is the caudal epidural space identified?
107. What anatomic variations may impact success and complications with caudal
anesthesia?
108. What are the major factors affecting the spread of epidural anesthesia?
109. What patient-related factors might influence spread of epidural anesthesia?
110. How do patient position and anesthetic baricity influence the spread of epidural
anesthesia?
111. What are the principal factors affecting the duration of epidural anesthesia?
112. What are some of the potential advantages of adding epinephrine to an anesthetic
solution used for epidural anesthesia?
113. What is the effect of sodium bicarbonate when added to the local anesthetic
solution used for epidural anesthesia?
114. For which local anesthetics is sodium bicarbonate commonly used as an additive?
115. How does lipophilicity affect the choice of opioids used for epidural
administration?
116. What are some potential causes of failure of an epidural block?
117. What are the options for managing a failed epidural block?
118. What is the major site of action of local anesthetics administered epidurally?
119. How do the risks of epidural anesthesia compare with that of spinal anesthesia?
120. What are the commonly used management options following a “wet-tap”?
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
158
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
121. What are the risks associated with accidental subarachnoid injection of an epidural
dose of anesthetic, and how should this complication be managed?
122. How do the hemodynamic effects of an epidural compare with those of spinal
anesthesia?
123. Why does epidural anesthesia differ from spinal anesthesia with respect to
systemic local anesthetic toxicity?
124. What are the clinical characteristics of an accidental subdural injection of
anesthetic intended for the epidural space?
125. What is the significance of a paresthesia occuring during performance of an
epidural anesthetic?
126. What is “combined spinal-epidural” anesthesia, and in what clinical setting
is it commonly used?
127. What are the potential advantages of a combined epidural-general technique?
ANSWERS*
1. Spinal and epidural anesthesia are collectively referred to as central neuraxial
block. These procedures are subcategories or specific types of regional or
conduction anesthesia. (253)
2. In spinal anesthesia, medicine is deposited into the cerebrospinal fluid within the
subarachnoid space, with very rare exception at the lumbar level. In epidural
anesthesia, the drug is deposited within the epidural space, and is commonly
performed at both the lumbar and thoracic level. In caudal anesthesia, medicine is
also deposited in the epidural space but the needle used to inject the medicine
approaches the epidural space via the sacral hiatus. (253)
3. When compared with epidural anesthesia, spinal anesthesia takes less time to
perform, causes less discomfort during placement, requires less local anesthetic,
and produces more intense sensory and motor block. In addition, correct
placement of the needle in the subarachnoid space is confirmed by a clearly
defined endpoint (appearance of cerebral spinal fluid). (253)
4. Advantages of epidural anesthesia include a decreased risk of a postdural puncture
headache (assuming a negligible incidence of inadvertent dural puncture), a lower
incidence of systemic hypotension, the ability to produce a segmental sensory
block, and greater control over the intensity of sensory anesthesia and motor block
achieved by adjustment of the local anesthetic concentration. The routine
placement of catheters for epidural anesthesia imparts additional benefit by
allowing titration of the block for the duration of surgery. Additionally,
maintenance of a catheter provides a means for long-term administration of local
anesthetics or opioid-containing solutions (or both), which are highly effective for
control of postoperative or obstetric pain. (253)
ANATOMY
5. On a lateral view, the vertebral canal exhibits four curvatures, of which the thoracic
convexity (kyphosis) and the lumbar concavity (lordosis) are of major importance
to the distribution of local anesthetic solution in the subarachnoid space. In
contrast, these curves have little effect on the spread of local anesthetic solutions
in the epidural space. (253, Figure 17-1)
6. The vertebral column is composed of 7 cervical vertebrae, 12 thoracic vertebrae,
and 5 lumbar vertebrae, as well as the 5 fused sacral and 4 fused coccygeal
vertebrae. (253, Figure 17-1)
*Numbers in parentheses: numbers refer to pages, figures, or tables in Miller RD, Pardo MC: Basics of Anesthesia,
6th ed. Philadelphia, Elsevier Saunders, 2011.
Spinal and Epidural Anesthesia
159
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
7. A vertebra is made up of the vertebral body and the bony arch. The transverse
process arises from the junction of the pedicle and laminae. The spinous process
arises posteriorly from the joining of the laminae. (253, Figure 17-2)
8. The nearly perpendicular orientation of the spinous process in the lumbar area and
the downward angular orientation in the thoracic area define the angle required for
placement and advancement of a needle intended to access the vertebral canal. The
wide interlaminar space in the lumbar spine reflects the fact that the lamina
occupies only about half the space between adjacent vertebrae. In contrast, the
interlaminar space is just a few millimeters wide at the level of the thoracic
vertebrae. (254, Figure 17-5)
9. The opening between the unfused lamina of the fourth and fifth sacral vertebrae
is called the sacral hiatus. There is considerable anatomic variability in the
features of the dorsal surface of the sacrum. Indeed, the sacral hiatus is absent in
nearly 8% of adult subjects, thereby preventing entry through the sacrococcygeal
ligament into the sacral canal and performance of caudal anesthesia.
(255, Figure 17-4)
10. Surface landmarks are used to identify specific spinal interspaces. The most
important surface landmarks include a line drawn between the iliac crests, which
generally traverses the body of the L4 vertebra and is the principal landmark used to
determine an appropriate level for insertion of a spinal needle; the C7 spinous
process appreciated as a bony knob at the lower end of the neck; and a line drawn
between the lower limits of the scapulae roughly correlating with the T7-8
interspace that is often used to guide needle placement for passage of a catheter
into the thoracic epidural space. (255, Figure 17-6)
11. The laminae of adjacent vertebrae are connected by the ligamentum flavum.
(256, Figure 17-3)
12. The tips of the spinous processes of adjacent vertebrae are connected by the
supraspinous ligaments. (256, Figure 17-3)
13. The spinal nerves pass through the intervertebral foramina and supply a specific
dermatome. (258, Figure 17-3)
14. The spinal cord begins at the rostral border of the medulla and, in the fetus, extends
the entire length of the vertebral canal. However, because of disproportionate
growth of neural tissue and the vertebral canal, the spinal cord generally terminates
around the third lumbar vertebra at birth and at the lower border of the first
lumbar vertebra in adults. As a further consequence of this differential growth, the
spinal nerves become progressively longer and more closely aligned with the
longitudinal axis of the vertebral canal. (256)
15. The cauda equina—so named because of its resemblance to a horse’s tail—is the
collection of lumbar and sacral nerves that extend beyond the end of the spinal cord
as a collection of nerves in the spinal canal before exiting via the intervertebral
foramina at their respective vertebral column levels. The nerve roots of the cauda
equina move relatively freely within the CSF, a fortunate arrangement that
permits them to be displaced rather than pierced by an advancing needle. (256)
16. The outermost meningeal layer, the dura mater, is a tough fibroelastic membrane
that provides structural support. It originates at the foramen magnum and
continues caudally to terminate between S1 and S4. Closely adherent to the inner
surface of the dura lies the arachnoid membrane. Though far more delicate than the
dura, the arachnoid serves as the major pharmacologic barrier preventing
movement of the drug from the epidural to the subarachnoid space. The innermost
layer of the spinal meninges, the pia, is a highly vascular structure closely
applied to the cord that forms the inner border of the subarachnoid space.
(258, Figures 17-9 and 17-10)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
160
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
17. Cerebrospinal fluid is contained between the pia and arachnoid, consequently
referred to as the subarachnoid space. Another term for this anatomic compartment
is the intrathecal space. (258, Figure 17-10)
18. The epidural space lies between the dura and the wall of the vertebral canal. It
is bounded cranially by the foramen magnum, caudally by the sacrococcygeal
ligament, anteriorly by the posterior longitudinal ligament, laterally by the
vertebral pedicles, and posteriorly by both the ligamentum flavum and vertebral
lamina. (259)
19. Although often referred to as a “potential space,” the epidural space is actually
an irregular column of fat, lymphatics, and blood vessels. It is not a closed space but
communicates with the paravertebral spaces by way of the intervertebral
foramina. (259)
20. The dura, arachnoid, and pia encasement of the peripheral nerve are the origins
of the epineurium, perineurium, and endoneurium, respectively. (258, Figure 17-10)
21. Preganglionic nerves of the sympathetic nervous system originate from the spinal
cord at the T1 to L2 levels. From there they travel with the spinal nerves before
separating to form the sympathetic chain, and more distant sites such as the
celiac plexus. (258, Figure 17-11)
22. There is controversy regarding the existence and clinical significance of a
connective tissue band (plica mediana dorsalis) extending from the dura mater
to the ligamentum flavum and hence dividing the posterior epidural space into
two compartments. Anatomic studies have suggested the presence of this structure
and have led to speculation that this tissue band may occasionally be responsible
for difficulty threading a catheter into the epidural space or the occurrence of a
unilateral sensory block. However, some investigators have been unable to
confirm the presence of this structure.
23. The blood supply of the spinal cord arises from a single anterior and two paired
posterior spinal arteries (Figure 17-13). The posterior spinal arteries emerge from the
cranial vault and supply the dorsal (sensory) portion of the spinal cord. Because they
are paired and have rich collateral anastomotic links from the subclavian and
intercostal arteries, this area of the spinal cord is relatively protected from
ischemic damage. This is not the case with the single anterior spinal artery that
originates from the vertebral artery and supplies the ventral (motor) portion of
the spinal cord. (260, Figure 17-13)
24. The anterior spinal artery receives branches from the intercostal and iliac arteries,
but these branches are variable in number and location. The largest anastomotic
link, the radicularis magna (artery of Adamkiewicz), arises from the aorta in the
lower thoracic or upper lumbar region. The vessel is highly variable but, most
commonly, is on the left and enters the vertebral canal through the L1
intervertebral foramen. The artery of Adamkiewicz is critical to the blood supply of
the lower two thirds of the spinal cord, and damage to it will produce characteristic
bilateral lower extremity motor loss (anterior spinal artery syndrome).
(260, Figure 17-13)
PREOPERATIVE
PREPARATION
25. Relevant complications that should be discussed with the patient include (1) those
that are rare but serious, including nerve damage, bleeding, and infection, and (2)
those that are common but of relatively minor consequence, such as a postdural
puncture headache. There are no common serious complications (if there were, these
techniques would not be used in clinical practice), and the infrequent minor
problems are not of sufficient concern to warrant specific discussion. The possibility
of a failed block should be discussed, and the patient should be reassured that in
Spinal and Epidural Anesthesia
161
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
such circumstances, alternative anesthetic techniques will be provided to ensure
their comfort. (262)
26. Spinal anesthesia is generally used for surgical procedures involving the lower
abdominal area, perineum, and lower extremities. Although the technique can also
be used for upper abdominal surgery, most consider it preferable to administer a
general anesthetic to ensure patient comfort. In addition, the extensive block
required for upper abdominal surgery and the nature of these procedures may have a
negative impact on ventilation and oxygenation. (262)
27. Epidural anesthesia, like spinal anesthesia, is often used as the primary anesthetic
for surgeries involving the lower abdomen or lower extremities. However,
because of its segmental nature, anesthesia provided by lumbar epidural anesthesia
may be suboptimal for procedures involving the lower sacral roots. Epidural
anesthesia is also frequently used as a supplement to general anesthesia, particularly
for thoracic and upper abdominal procedures. In such cases, significant benefit
derives from the ability to provide continuous epidural anesthesia postoperatively
to facilitate effective treatment of postoperative pain, as numerous studies
confirm the superiority of epidural techniques compared to parenteral opioids.
Similarly, continuous epidural anesthesia is very effective and widely used for
the control of labor pain. (262)
28. Absolute contraindications to neuraxial anesthesia include patient refusal,
infection at the site of planned needle puncture, elevated intracranial pressure, and
bleeding diathesis. Patients should never be encouraged against their wishes to
accept a regional anesthetic technique. (262)
29. Bacteremia does not necessarily mitigate against performance of a regional
anesthetic technique. Although concern that an epidural abscess or meningitis
might result from the introduction of infected blood during the procedure, clinical
experience suggests that the risk is small and can be weighed against the potential
benefit. In such cases, there is evidence to suggest that institution of appropriate
antibiotic therapy before the block may decrease the risk for infection. (262)
30. Chronic back pain does not represent a contraindication to neuraxial anesthetic
techniques, although they may be avoided because patients may perceive a
relationship between postoperative exacerbation of pain and the block, even
though they are not causally related. (262)
31. Patients with mitral stenosis, idiopathic hypertrophic subaortic stenosis, and aortic
stenosis are intolerant of acute decreases in systemic vascular resistance. Thus,
though not a contraindication, neuraxial block should be used cautiously in
such cases. (262)
32. The decision to use a neuraxial block in patients with abnormal coagulation,
either endogenous or produced by the administration of anticoagulants, must be
based on a risk-benefit assessment and include discussion with the patient and the
surgical team. Guidelines developed by the American Society of Regional
Anesthesia (www.asra.com) are updated periodically based on evolving literature
and changes in clincal practice, and can thus provide valuable guidance in the
management of these patients. (262)
SPINAL ANESTHESIA
33. Spinal anesthesia can be performed with the patient in the lateral decubitus,
sitting, or less commonly, the prone position. To the extent possible, the spine
should be flexed by having the patient bend at the waist and bring the chin toward
the chest, which will optimize the interspinous space and the interlaminar
foramen. (263)
34. The sitting position encourages flexion and facilitates recognition of the midline,
which may be of increased importance in an obese patient. Because lumbar cerebral
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
162
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
spinal fluid (CSF) is elevated in this position, the dural sac is distended, thus
providing a larger target for the spinal needle. This higher pressure also facilitates
recognition of the needle tip within the subarachnoid space, as heralded by the free
flow of CSF. When combined with a hyperbaric anesthetic, the sitting position
favors a caudal distribution; the resultant anesthesia is commonly referred to as a
“saddle block.” However, in addition to being poorly suited for a heavily sedated
patient, vasovagal syncope can occur. (263)
35. The lateral decubitus position is more comfortable and more suitable for the ill
or frail. It also enables the anesthetist to safely provide greater levels of
sedation. (263)
36. A line drawn across the patient’s back at the level of the top of the iliac crests is
generally considered to identify the L4 vertebral level. The interspace palpated
directly above this line would be L3-4, and the interspace palpated directly below
this line would be L4-5. However, this is not invariant, and not uncommonly, use of
this conceptual line will result in estimates that are inaccurate by as much as two
interspaces. (263)
37. The caudal limitation of the spinal cord in an adult usually lies between the
L1 and L2 vertebrae. For this reason, spinal anesthesia is not ordinarily
performed above the L2-3 interspace. Nevertheless, some risk remains because the
spinal cord extends to the third lumbar vertebra in approximately 2% of
adults. (263)
38. A variety of needles are available for spinal anesthesia and they are generally
classified by their size (most commonly 22 to 25 gauge) and the shape of their
tip. The two basic designs of spinal needles are (1) an open-ended (beveled or
cutting) needle and (2) a closed tapered-tip pencil-point needle with a side
port. (263, Figure 17-14)
39. The incidence of postdural puncture headache varies directly with the size of
the needle, and it is also lower when a pencil-point (Whitacre or Sprotte) rather
than a beveled-tip (Quincke) needle is used. Consequently, a 24- or 25-gauge
pencil-point needle is usually selected when spinal anesthesia is performed on
younger patients in whom postdural puncture headache is more likely to develop.
(263, Figure 17-14)
40. Spinal anesthesia can be accomplished using a midline or a paramedian approach.
The midline approach is technically easier, and the needle passes through less
sensitive structures, thus requiring less local anesthetic infiltration to ensure patient
comfort. However, the paramedian approach is better suited to challenging
circumstances when there is narrowing of the interspace or difficulty in flexion
of the spine. (264)
41. As the spinal needle progresses toward the subarachnoid space, it passes through
the skin, subcutaneous tissue, supraspinous ligament, interspinous ligament,
ligamentum flavum, and the epidural space to reach and pierce the dura/arachnoid.
(264, Figure 17-3)
42. The anesthetist may feel a characteristic “pop” just before accessing the
subarachnoid space as the spinal needle is being advanced. This “pop” is produced
by the spinal needle passing through the dura mater. (265)
43. Subarachnoid placement of the spinal needle is confirmed by the appearance
of cerebrospinal fluid in the hub of the spinal needle. (265)
44. After proper positioning in the subarachnoid space, the spinal needle may be
stabilized by holding the hub of the spinal needle between the anesthesiologist’s
thumb and forefinger and resting the dorsum of the same hand on the patient’s
back. When the spinal needle is held in this manner, it should remain stabilized even
with patient movement. (265)
Spinal and Epidural Anesthesia
163
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
45. After the syringe containing the local anesthetic solution for administration into the
subarachnoid space is attached to the spinal needle, the anesthetist typically
aspirates back on the syringe to confirm continued subarachnoid placement of
the spinal needle tip. Confirmation is made by the characteristic swirl in the syringe
as cerebrospinal fluid enters the syringe and mixes with the local anesthetic
solution. The local anesthetic solution can then be deposited into the subarachnoid
space over approximately 3 to 5 seconds. After completion of the deposition of the
local anesthetic solution into the subarachnoid space, cerebrospinal fluid can
again be aspirated to verify delivery of the anesthetic. The spinal needle and syringe
should be removed together as a single unit, and the antiseptic wiped from
the patient’s back. (265)
46. Occasionally, blood-tinged CSF initially appears at the hub of the needle. If clear
CSF is subsequently seen, the spinal anesthetic can be completed. Conversely, if
blood-tinged CSF continues to flow, the needle should be removed and reinserted
at a different interspace. Should blood-tinged CSF still persist, the attempt to
induce spinal anesthesia should be terminated. (265)
47. The Taylor approach (first described by Dr. John A. Taylor, a urologist)
describes the paramedian technique to access the L5-S1 interspace. Though
generally the widest interspace, it is often inaccessible from the midline because of
the acute downward orientation of the L5 spinous process. The spinal needle is
passed from a point 1 cm caudad and 1 cm medial to the posterior superior iliac
spine and advanced cephalad at a 55-degree angle with a medial orientation
based on the width of the sacrum. The Taylor approach is technically
challenging but very useful because it is minimally dependent on patient flexion
for successful passage of the needle into the subarachnoid space.
(265, Figure 17-15)
48. The three factors that most influence the distribution of local anesthetic solution
in the subarachnoid space are the baricity of the solution, the contour of the
spinal canal, and the position of the patient during, and for the first few minutes
after, its administration. (266)
49. Local anesthetic solutions are classified as hypobaric, isobaric, and hyperbaric based
on their density relative to the density of CSF. Baricity is an important consideration
because it predicts the direction that local anesthetic solution will move after
injection into the CSF. (266)
50. The two things that most influence the duration of a spinal anesthetic are the
particular drug selected and whether a vasoconstrictor, such as epinephrine or
phenylephrine, is present in the local anesthetic solution. (266)
51. The most commonly selected local anesthetic solutions for spinal anesthesia are
hyperbaric (achieved by the addition of glucose), and their principal advantage is
the ability to achieve greater cephalad spread of anesthesia. Commercially
available hyperbaric local anesthetic solutions include 0.75% bupivacaine with
8.25% glucose and 5% lidocaine with 7.5% glucose. Tetracaine is formulated as a
1% plain solution and is most often used as a 0.5% solution with 5% glucose,
which is achieved by dilution of the anesthetic with an equal volume of 10%
glucose. (266)
52. The contour of the vertebral canal is critical to the subarachnoid distribution of
hyperbaric local anesthetic solutions. For example, in the supine horizontal
position, the patient’s thoracic kyphosis will be dependent relative to the peak
created by the lumbar lordosis. Anesthetic delivered cephalad to this peak will
thus move toward the thoracic kyphosis, which is normally around T6-8.
Placing the patient in a head-down (Trendelenburg) position will further
accentuate this cephalad spread of local anesthetic solution.
(266, Figure 17-1)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
164
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
53. Hyperbaric local anesthetic solutions can be administered with the patient seated and
this position maintained during the initial movement of anesthetic to deliberately
encourage restricted sacral anesthesia (referred to as a “saddle block,” reflecting
sensory anesthesia of the area that would be in contact with a saddle). (266)
54. Hypobaric local anesthetic solutions find limited use in clinical practice and
are generally reserved for patients undergoing perineal procedures in the
“prone jackknife” position or undergoing hip arthroplasty where anesthetic can
“float up” to the nondependent operative site. (267)
55. Isobaric local anesthetic solutions undergo limited spread in the subarachnoid
space, which may be considered an advantage or disadvantage depending on the
clinical circumstances. Because the distribution of local anesthetic solutions is not
affected by gravity, spinal anesthesia can be performed without concern that the
resultant block might be influenced by patient position. Isobaric spinal anesthesia is
particularly well suited for perineal or lower extremity procedures, as well as
surgery involving the lower part of the trunk (hip arthroplasty, inguinal hernia
repair). (267)
56. Vasoconstrictors are frequently added to spinal anesthetic solutions to increase the
duration of spinal anesthesia. This is most commonly achieved by the addition
of epinephrine (0.1 to 0.2 mg, which is 0.1 to 0.2 mL of a 1:1000 solution) or
phenylephrine (2 to 5 mg, which is 0.2 to 0.5 mL of a 1% solution). Increased
duration of spinal anesthesia is believed to result from a reduction in spinal cord
blood flow, which decreases loss of local anesthetic from the perfused areas and thus
increases the duration of exposure to local anesthetic. However, with epinephrine,
there may be a small contribution as a result of its a2-adrenergic analgesic
activity. (267)
57. Opioids may be added to local anesthetic solutions to enhance surgical
anesthesia and provide postoperative analgesia. This effect is mediated at the dorsal
horn of the spinal cord, where opioids mimic the effect of endogenous enkephalins.
Commonly, fentanyl (25 mg) is used for short surgical procedures, and its
administration does not preclude discharge home on the same day. The use of
morphine (0.1 to 0.5 mg) can provide effective control of postoperative pain for
roughly 24 hours, but it necessitates in-hospital monitoring for respiratory
depression. (267)
58. During recovery from spinal anesthesia, regression of the anesthetic is from
the highest dermatome in a caudad direction. (266)
59. Recent reports of major and minor complications associated with spinal lidocaine
have tarnished its reputation and jeopardize its continued clinical use. Initial reports
of permanent neurologic deficits were restricted to its use for continuous spinal
anesthesia, where extremely high doses were administered. However, subsequent
reports suggest that injury may occur even with the administration of a dose
historically recommended for single-injection spinal anesthesia. These injuries
have led to suggested modifications in practice that include a reduction in the
lidocaine dose from 100 mg to 60 or 75 mg and dilution of the commercial
formulation of 5% lidocaine with an equal volume of saline or CSF before
subarachnoid injection. (267)
60. Lidocaine has been linked to the development of transient neurologic symptoms
or “TNS” (pain and/or dysesthesia in the back, buttocks, and lower extremities)
in up to a third of patients receiving this anesthetic for spinal anesthesia.
Factors that increase the risk for TNS in association with lidocaine spinal
anesthesia include patient positioning (lithotomy, knee arthroscopy) and
outpatient status. (268)
61. With respect to TNS, the approximate rank order with respect to its incidence is
lidocaine>procaine, mepivacaine>prilocaine, bupivacaine, chloroprocaine. (268)
Spinal and Epidural Anesthesia
165
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
62. When using chloroprocaine off-lable for spinal administration, the solution should
be preservative-free, and epinephrine should not be used. (268)
63. The recommended doses (5 to 20 mg) and reported durations of action (90 to 120
minutes) of bupivacaine and tetracaine are similar. However, bupivacaine
produces slightly more intense sensory anesthesia (as evidenced by a lower
incidence of tourniquet pain), whereas motor block with tetracaine appears to be
slightly more pronounced. The more important distinction between these local
anesthetics is that the duration of tetracaine spinal anesthesia is more variable and
more profoundly affected by the addition of a vasoconstrictor. Consequently,
tetracaine remains the most useful spinal anesthetic in circumstances in which
a prolonged block is sought. Unfortunately, the inclusion of a vasoconstrictor
with tetracaine results in a significant incidence of transient neurologic
symptoms, as opposed to the rarity of these symptoms when tetracaine is used
alone. (268)
64. Sympathetic nerves are blocked before both motor nerves and sensory nerves after
the administration of a spinal anesthetic. (268)
65. A useful way to gain an early indication of the level of spinal anesthesia is by
testing the patient’s ability to discriminate temperature in the relevant dermatomes.
For example, in an unblocked area, an alcohol sponge will produce a cold
sensation, whereas in the blocked areas the same alcohol sponge will feel warm
or neutral. (268)
66. The dermatomal order of blockade produced by a spinal anesthetic, from highest to
lowest, is sympathetic, sensory, then motor. (268)
67. Skeletal muscle strength can be tested by asking the patient to dorsiflex the foot
(S1-2), raise the knees (L2-3), or tense the abdominal rectus muscles (T6-12). (269)
68. The surface landmarks and their respective dermatomal level most often used
clinically are: nipple, T4-5; tip of xiphoid, T7; umbilicus, T10; inguinal ligament,
T12. (269)
69. Inserting a catheter into the subarachnoid space increases the utility of spinal
anesthesia by permitting repeated drug administration as necessary to maintain the
level and duration of sensory and motor block. Anesthesia can thus be provided for
prolonged operations without delaying recovery. An added benefit is the possibility
of using lower doses of anesthetic. (With a catheter in place, smaller doses can be
titrated to the patient’s response. In contrast, with the single-injection technique,
relatively high doses must be administered to all patients to ensure successful
anesthesia in a large percentage of cases.) However, use of large-bore epidural
needles and catheters for continuous spinal anesthesia poses significant risk of
postdural puncture headache. (269, Figure 17-4)
70. Microcatheters (27 gauge and smaller) used for continuous spinal anesthesia were
withdrawn from clinical practice in the United States after reports of cauda equina
syndrome associated with their use. (269)
71. It is likely that the injury associated with the use of microcatheters resulted from the
combination of maldistribution and repetitive injection of local anesthetic solution.
It is speculated that pooling of local anesthetic solution in the dependent sacral sac
produced a restricted block that was inadequate for surgery. In response to
inadequate anesthesia, injections were repeated and ultimately achieved adequate
sensory anesthesia, but not before neurotoxic concentrations were reached in the
caudal region of the subarachnoid space. It is possible that the microcatheter
contributed to this problem because the long narrow-bore tubing creates resistance
to injection and thereby results in a low flow rate that can encourage a restricted
distribution. (269)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
166
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
72. Removal of microcatheters from clinical practice has not eliminated risk. The
problem of maldistribution is not restricted to microcatheters or lidocaine, and the
same injuries have occurred with larger “epidural” catheters used for continuous
spinal anesthesia and other local anesthetics. (269)
73. Guidelines for continuous spinal anesthesia include the following elements:
▪Insert the catheter just far enough to confirm and maintain placement
▪Use the lowest effective local anesthetic concentration
▪Place a limit on the dose of local anesthetic to be used
▪Administer a test dose and assess the extent of any sensory and motor block
▪If maldistribution is suspected, use maneuvers to increase the spread of local
anesthetic (change the patient’s position, alter the lumbosacral curvature, switch
to a solution with a different baricity)
▪If well-distributed sensory anesthesia is not achieved before the dose limit
is reached, abandon the technique (269, Figure 17-4)
74. Similar to continuous spinal anesthesia, single-injection spinal anesthesia may fail
due to local anesthetic maldistribution. This issue becomes important when
considering whether to repeat a “failed” spinal and, if so, the dose of anesthetic that
should be used for the second injection. In the past, it was considered acceptable to
readminister a “full dose.” However, if failure derives from maldistribution of the
local anesthetic solution, this strategy may introduce a risk of injury. Accordingly, if
a spinal anesthetic is to be repeated, it should be assumed that the first injection was
delivered in the subarachnoid space as intended, and the combination of the two
doses should not exceed that considered reasonable as a single injection for spinal
anesthesia. (270)
75. Spinal anesthesia has little, if any, effect on resting alveolar ventilation (arterial
blood gases unchanged), but high levels of motor anesthesia that produce
paralysis of abdominal and intercostal muscles can lead to a decreased ability to
cough and expel secretions. Additionally, patients may complain of difficulty
breathing (dyspnea)—despite adequate ventilation—because of inadequate
sensation of breathing from the loss of proprioception from abdominal and
thoracic muscles. (270)
76. Spinal anesthesia above T5 inhibits sympathetic nervous system innervation to
the gastrointestinal tract, and the resulting unopposed parasympathetic nervous
system activity results in contracted intestines and relaxed sphincters. Similarly,
the ureters are contracted, and the ureterovesical orifice is relaxed.
77. Hypotension (systolic blood pressure <90 mm Hg) is estimated to occur in about
a third of patients receiving spinal anesthesia. This hypotension results from a
sympathetic nervous system block that (1) decreases venous return to the heart
and decreasescardiac outputand/or (2) decreasessystemic vascularresistance.Modest
decreases in systemic blood pressure are most likely due to decreases in systemic
vascular resistance, whereas large decreases in systemic blood pressure are believed to
be the result of decreases in venous return and cardiac output. (270)
78. Spinal anesthesia–induced hypotension is treated physiologically by restoration of
venous return to increase cardiac output. In this regard, the internal
autotransfusion produced by a modest head-down position (5 to 10 degrees) will
facilitate venous return without greatly exaggerating cephalad spread of the spinal
anesthetic. Adequate hydration before the institution of spinal anesthesia is
important for minimizing the effects of venodilation from sympathetic nervous
system block. Sympathomimetics with positive inotropic and venoconstrictor
effects, such as ephedrine (5 to 10 mg IV), are often chosen as first-line drugs
to maintain perfusion pressure during the first few minutes after the institution
of spinal anesthesia. Phenylephrine (50 to 100 mg IV) and other
Spinal and Epidural Anesthesia
167
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
sympathomimetics that increase systemic vascular resistance may decrease
cardiac output and do not specifically correct the decreased venous return
contributing to the spinal anesthesia–induced hypotension. Nevertheless,
anesthesiologists have long used phenylephrine successfully to treat decreases in
systemic blood pressure associated with spinal anesthesia. Furthermore, this drug
is of particular value when administration of ephedrine is associated with
significant increases in heart rate. (270)
79. The heart rate does not change significantly in most patients during spinal
anesthesia. However, in an estimated 10% to 15% of patients, significant
bradycardia occurs. As with hypotension, the risk for bradycardia increases with
increasing sensory levels of anesthesia. Speculated mechanisms for this bradycardia
include the block of cardioaccelerator fibers originating from T1 through T4 and
decreased venous return (Bezold-Jarisch reflex). (271)
80. Although bradycardia is usually of moderate severity and promptly responsive
to atropine or ephedrine, there are reports of precipitous bradycardia and
asystole in the absence of any preceding event. This catastrophic event can
probably be prevented through maintenance of preload and reversal of
bradycardia by aggressive stepwise escalation of treatment (ephedrine, 5 to 50 mg
IV; atropine, 0.4 to 1.0 mg IV; epinephrine, 0.05 to 0.25 mg IV), whereas
the development of profound bradycardia or asystole mandates immediate
treatment with full resuscitative doses of epinephrine. (271, Figure 17-16)
81. Postdural puncture headache is a direct consequence of the hole in the dura, which
results in the loss of CSF at a rate exceeding its production. Loss of CSF causes
downward displacement of the brain and a resultant stretch on sensitive
supporting structures. Pain also results from distention of the blood vessels, which
must compensate for the loss of CSF because of the fixed volume of the skull.
The pain associated with postdural puncture headache generally begins 12 to
48 hours after transgression of the dura, but it can occur immediately and has
been reported to occur up to several months after the event. (271, Figure 17-17)
82. The hallmark of a postdural puncture headache is its postural component: it appears
or intensifies with sitting or standing and is partially or completely relieved by
recumbency. This feature is so distinctive that it is difficult to consider the diagnosis
in its absence. (271)
83. Postdural puncture headache is typically occipital or frontal (or both) and is usually
described as dull or throbbing. Associated symptoms such as nausea, vomiting,
anorexia, and malaise are common. Ocular disturbances, manifested as diplopia,
blurred vision, photophobia, or “spots,” may occur and are believed to result from
the stretch of the cranial nerves, most commonly cranial nerve VI, as the brain
descends because of the loss of CSF. Although symptomatic hearing loss is unusual,
formal auditory testing will routinely reveal abnormalities. (271)
84. Though generally a transient problem, loss of CSF may rarely result in significant
morbidity because caudal displacement of the brain can result in tearing of bridging
veins with the development of a subdural hematoma. (271)
85. Age is one of the most important factors affecting the incidence of postdural
puncture headache. Children are at low risk, but after puberty, risk increases
substantially and then slowly declines with advancing age. Females have long been
suspected to be at increased risk, and a recent meta-analysis confirms this
impression, even in the absence of pregnancy. A previous history of postdural
puncture headache places one at increased risk for the development of this
complication after a subsequent spinal anesthetic. (272)
86. The incidence of postdural puncture headache varies directly with the diameter of
the needle that has pierced the dura. The shape of the hole created by the needle also
has an impact on loss of CSF; this has led to the development of “pencil-point”
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
168
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
needle tips, which appear to spread the dural and arachnoid fibers, and to produce
less tear and a smaller hole for a given diameter needle. (272)
87. Initial treatment of postdural puncture headache is usually conservative and
consists of bed rest, fluids, analgesics, and possibly caffeine. More definitively, a
blood patch can be performed in which 15 to 20 mL of the patient’s blood,
aseptically obtained, is injected into the epidural space. (272)
88. The immediate effect is related to the volume effect of the injected blood, whereas
long-term relief is thought to occur from sealing or “patching” of the dural tear. (272)
89. Total spinal anesthesia is the term applied to excessive sensory and motor anesthesia
associated with a loss of consciousness. Apnea and loss of consciousness are often
attributed to ischemic paralysis of the medullary ventilatory centers because of
profound hypotension and associated decreases in cerebral blood flow. However,
loss of consciousness may also be the direct consequence of local anesthetic effect
above the foramen magnum inasmuch as patients may lose or fail to regain
consciousness despite restoration of systemic blood pressure. Total spinal anesthesia
is typically manifested soon after injection of the local anesthetic solution into the
subarachnoid space. (272)
90. Treatment of high or total spinal anesthesia consists of maintenance of the airway
and ventilation, as well as support of the circulation with sympathomimetics and
intravenous fluid administration. Patients are placed in a head-down position to
facilitate venous return. An attempt to limit the cephalad spread of local anesthetic
solution in CSF by placing patients in a head-up position is not recommended,
because this position will encourage venous pooling and potentially jeopardize
cerebral blood flow, which may contribute to medullary ischemia. Tracheal
intubation is usually warranted and is mandated for patients at risk of aspiration
(e.g., pregnant women). It may be appropriate to administer an intravenous
induction drug before tracheal intubation if consciousness is retained and
cardiovascular status is acceptable. (273)
91. Nausea occurring after the initiation of spinal anesthesia must alert the anesthetist to
the possibility of systemic hypotension sufficient to produce cerebral ischemia.
In such cases, treatment of hypotension with a sympathomimetic should eliminate
the nausea. Alternatively, nausea may occur because of a predominance of
parasympathetic activity as a result of selective block of sympathetic nervous system
innervation to the gastrointestinal tract. Similar to bradycardia, the incidence of
nausea and vomiting parallels the sensory level of spinal anesthesia. (273)
92. Backache presenting after spinal anesthesia is frequently due to the position that
was maintained during surgery. Patients with decreased sensory perception induced
by a spinal anesthetic may remain in positions for long periods of time that may
otherwise have been too uncomfortable, thus resulting in ligament strain that might
not have otherwise occurred. In support of this is the fact that roughly 25% of
patients complain of backache after surgery regardless of the anesthetic
technique. (273)
EPIDURAL
ANESTHESIA
93. Controversy exists regarding the wisdom of placing lumbar epidural catheters
after the induction of general anesthesia. Although there is concern that an
inability to elicit a patient response might increase the risk for neural injury, a
retrospective review challenges this assertion. Nonetheless, many anesthesiologists
believe that lumbar epidural anesthesia and catheter placement are best
performed in a communicative patient. (273)
94. Performance of thoracic epidural anesthesia in an anesthetized patient should be
avoided. However, the same considerations do not apply to pediatric anesthesia,
where a conscious patient would probably impart no benefit but instead add
Spinal and Epidural Anesthesia
169
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
substantial risk. Consequently, it is standard practice to place caudal, lumbar, and
even thoracic epidural catheters in children after induction of general
anesthesia. (273)
95. Some catheters have an inner stainless steel wire coil that imparts flexibility
and prevents kinking. This characteristic makes them less likely to (1) pierce an
epidural vessel, (2) find false passage into a fascial plane, or (3) be advanced out
of the epidural space through the intervertebral foramen. However, their
flexibility also makes them more difficult to thread into the epidural space.
(274, Figure 17-18)
96. The tip of an epidural catheter may be open or have a closed “bullet” tip with
proximal ports. Bullet-tipped or multiorifice catheters tend to produce more
uniform distribution of local anesthetic solution, but they have the disadvantage of
requiring greater insertion depth to ensure complete delivery of local anesthetic
solution into the epidural space. (274, Figure 17-18)
97. In contrast to procedures performed in the lumbar area, thoracic epidural
anesthesia is generally accomplished through a paramedian approach. In this
region the spinous processes are angulated and closely approximated, which
makes it difficult to avoid bony obstruction when approaching from the midline.
(275, Figure 17-5)
98. With the loss-of-resistance technique, a syringe containing saline, air, or both
is attached to the needle, and the needle is slowly advanced while assessing
resistance to injection. One method is to use a syringe containing 2 to 3 mL of
saline with a small air bubble (0.1 to 0.3 mL). If the needle is properly seated in the
ligamentum flavum, it will be difficult to inject the saline or the air bubble, and the
plunger of the syringe will “spring back” to its original position. The needle is
advanced while continuous pressure is exerted on the plunger of the syringe.
An abrupt loss of resistance to injection signals passage through the ligamentum
flavum and into the epidural space, at which point the contents of the syringe are
delivered. Another technique uses repeated advances of the needle without
continuous pressure, and an assessment of the resistance to injection is made after
each advancement. (275, Figure 17-19)
99. The “hanging-drop” technique is an alternative method for identifying the
epidural space. With this technique, a small drop of saline is placed at the hub of
the epidural needle. As the needle passes through the ligamentum flavum into the
epidural space, the saline drop is retracted into the needle by the negative pressure
in the epidural space. Interestingly, the hanging-drop technique can be used in the
lumbar region despite the lack of negative pressure in the lumbar epidural space. In
this region, the needle pushing the dura away from the ligamentum flavum creates
negative pressure. Accordingly, this technique is likely to be associated with a
higher incidence of accidental dura penetration (“wet tap”). (275)
100. The advantage of the single-injection technique is its simplicity, and the
distribution of local anesthetic solution tends to be more uniform than when
administered through an indwelling catheter. The disadvantage is the lack of
ability to reinject, and thus the inability to provide prolonged anesthesia titrated to
the duration of surgery. Additionally, with the catheter technique, anesthetic
administration can extend into the postoperative period to provide highly effective
postoperative analgesia. (276)
101. Following identification of the epidural space, the catheter is advanced 3 to 5 cm
beyond the tip of the needle positioned in the epidural space. Further
advancement increases the risk that the catheter might enter an epidural vein, exit
an intervertebral foramen, or wrap around a nerve root. The epidural needle is
withdrawn over the catheter, with care taken to not move the catheter. No attempt
should be made to withdraw a catheter back through the needle because
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
170
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
shearing (transection) of the catheter might result, with retention of the
transected tip of the catheter in the epidural space. An empty 3-mL syringe is
then attached to the distal end of the catheter, and negative pressure is applied
to the syringe. Failure to aspirate CSF or blood helps rule out accidental
subarachnoid or intravascular placement. It is also important to reconfirm
negative aspiration of CSF or blood from the catheter before any subsequent
dose of local anesthetic is administered. (276)
102. The test dose commonly used for an epidural catheter is 3 mL of 1.5% lidocaine
with 1:200,000 epinephrine. Failure of the test dose to produce sensory and motor
anesthesia is assessed after 3 minutes to rule out accidental subarachnoid injection
(spinal anesthesia has a more rapid onset of sensory and motor block). If
epinephrine has been included in the test dose, the heart rate is monitored to detect
an increase that may signal accidental intravascular injection. The local anesthetic
solution is then injected in fractionated doses (e.g., multiple injections of 5-mL
aliquots) over a 1- to 3-minute period at an appropriate volume and concentration
(dose) for the planned surgical procedure. (276)
103. Intermittent dosing is critical because a negative test result does not conclusively
rule out intravascular placement. This becomes even more critical with the single-
injection epidural technique, where the needle’s position may change during
or between injections. (276)
104. The following are local anesthetics commonly used for epidural anesthesia, their
concentration, time of onset, and duration of action. (277, Figure 17-5)
Concentration (%)
Onset (min)
Duration (min)
Chloroprocaine
2-3
5-15
45-60
Lidocaine
1-2
10-15
60-120
Ropivacaine
0.25-1
10-20
120-180
Bupivacaine
0.25-0.5
15-20
120-200
105. Tetracaine and procaine are rarely used for epidural anesthesia because of their
slow onset of action. (277)
106. After sterile preparation, the sacral cornu (typically 3 to 5 cm above the coccyx) is
identified by the anesthetist’s palpating fingers. The depression between the
cornu is the sacral hiatus, and a skin wheal is raised. The needle is introduced
perpendicular to the skin through the sacrococcygeal ligament (generally felt
as a rather distinct pop) and advanced until the sacrum is contacted. The needle
is then slightly withdrawn, the angle is reduced, and the needle is advanced
about 2 cm into the epidural caudal canal. Confirmation that the needle is
properly positioned can be obtained by rapidly injecting 5 mL of air or saline
through the needle while palpating the skin directly covering the caudal canal.
Subcutaneous crepitus or midline swelling indicates that the needle is
positioned posterior to the bony sacrum and requires replacement.
(276, Figure 17-20)
107. Subarachnoid injection may occur if the needle is advanced too far cephalad
in the sacral canal, or it may result from anatomic variation (the dural sac
extends beyond S2 in approximately 10% of individuals). Anatomic variation may
also hinder success inasmuch as the sacral hiatus is absent in nearly 10% of
patients.
108. The principal factors affecting the spread of epidural anesthesia are dose (volume
times concentration) and site of injection. However, administration of an
equivalent dose (mass) at lower concentration may foster greater spread,
Spinal and Epidural Anesthesia
171
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
particularly with lower concentrations of local anesthetic. Cephalad-to-caudad
extension of epidural anesthesia depends on the site of administration of the local
anesthetic solution into the epidural space. Lumbar epidural injections produce
preferential cephalad spread because of negative intrathoracic pressure
transmitted to the epidural space, whereas resistance to caudad spread of local
anesthetic solution is created by narrowing of the space at the lumbosacral
junction. In contrast, thoracic injections tend to produce symmetric anesthesia and
result in greater dermatomal spread for a given dose of local anesthetic. This latter
effect results, at least in part, from the smaller volume of the thoracic epidural
space. The site of placement of the local anesthetic solution in the epidural space
also defines the area of peak anesthetic effect, which decreases with increasing
distance from the injection site.
109. The spread of epidural anesthesia varies directly with age and inversely with
height, although these effects are small, and likely to be overshadowed by
interpatient variability. (277)
110. In contrast to spinal anesthesia, the baricity of local anesthetic solutions does not
influence the level of epidural anesthesia. Likewise, patient position during
performance of an epidural block is less important than with a spinal block, but
the dependent portion of the body may still manifest more intense anesthesia
than the nondependent side. This effect is most noticeable in a pregnant
woman who has remained in a specific lateral position for a prolonged period
during labor. (277)
111. The duration of epidural anesthesia, as with spinal anesthesia, is principally
affected by the choice of local anesthetic and whether a vasoconstrictor drug
is added to the anesthetic solution. (277)
112. The addition of epinephrine (generally 1:200,000; 5 mg/mL) decreases vascular
absorption of the local anesthetic from the epidural space, thus maintaining
effective anesthetic concentrations at the nerve roots for more prolonged periods.
Decreased vascular absorption also serves to limit systemic uptake and reduce the
risk of systemic anesthetic toxicity. In addition, the inclusion of epinephrine serves
as a marker of intravascular injection that may occur with cannulation of an
epidural vein. (277)
113. Local anesthetic effect requires transfer across the nerve membrane. Because local
anesthetics are weak bases, they exist largely in the ionic form in commercial
preparations. Adding sodium bicarbonate to the solution favors the nonionized
form of the local anesthetic and promotes more rapid onset of epidural
anesthesia. (278)
114. Most commonly, 1 mL of 8.4% sodium bicarbonate is added to 10 mL of a
solution containing lidocaine or chloroprocaine. Alkalinization of a bupivacaine
solution is not recommended because this local anesthetic precipitates at
alkaline pH. (278)
115. In contrast to spinal administration, lipid solubility of the opioid is a critical
factor in determining the selection and appropriate use of epidural opioids. For
example, morphine, which is relatively hydrophilic, spreads rostrally within
the CSF and can produce effective analgesia for thoracic surgery, even when
administered into the lumbar epidural space. In contrast, a lipophilic opioid such as
fentanyl is rapidly absorbed into the systemic circulation and exhibits little rostral
spread. (278)
116. Failed epidural anesthesia may occur when local anesthetic solution is not
delivered into the epidural space or because spread of the local anesthetic solution
is inadequate to cover the relevant dermatomes. A false loss of resistance can occur
in the interspinous ligament before entry into the ligamentum flavum or as
the needle passes through fascial planes. In some cases, failure results from
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
172
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
advancement of the catheter through an intervertebral foramen, which generally
gives rise to a limited unilateral block. Fortunately, these blocks can often be
salvaged by retracting the catheter a few centimeters. Opinion varies on the
presence of a midline barrier to diffusion of local anesthetics. (278)
117. If epidural anesthesia is nearly adequate and there are concerns that additional
local anesthetic would create a risk for systemic toxicity, small doses of
chloroprocaine, which are rapidly hydrolyzed in plasma, may provide adequate
extension to permit surgery. At other times, failure of epidural anesthesia
may be managed by replacement of the epidural catheter or abandonment of the
technique in favor of a general or spinal anesthetic. However, subarachnoid
injection after a failed epidural produces unpredictable and often excessive
spinal anesthesia. This effect probably results from compression of the dural sac
by the volume of anesthetic solution in the epidural space. (278)
118. The major site of action of local anesthetic solutions placed in the epidural space
appears to be the spinal nerve roots, where the dura is relatively thin. To a lesser
extent, anesthesia results from diffusion of local anesthetic solutions from the
epidural space into the subarachnoid space. (278)
119. Side effects of epidural anesthesia resemble those described for spinal anesthesia,
with the added risks of accidental subarachnoid injection, and anesthetic systemic
toxicity, the latter attributable to the high doses of local anesthetic required for
the epidural anesthetic. Additional potential complications include epidural
hematoma and epidural abscess, particularly in patients with preexisting
coagulopathy or infection. Although postdural puncture headache is not an issue if
the dura is not pierced, when dural puncture does occur inadvertently, the risk of
headache is far greater than with spinal anesthesia owing to the larger diameter
needles used for the epidural technique. (279)
120. Accidental dural puncture may be managed by converting to single-injection
or continuous spinal anesthesia, or epidural anesthesia can be attempted at a
different lumbar interspace. Either placement of an epidural catheter at another
interspace or passage of a subarachnoid catheter may decrease the risk for
postdural puncture headache. (279)
121. Accidental subarachnoid injection of large volumes of local anesthetic solution
used for epidural anesthesia may produce rapid progression to total spinal
anesthesia. Immediate treatment is focused on supporting ventilation and
restoring or maintaining hemodynamics. However, in contrast to an excessive
block produced during spinal anesthesia, the large epidural doses of local
anesthetics injected into the subarachnoid space can result in permanent
neurologic deficits because of the neurotoxic effects of these agents. Consequently,
consideration should be given to irrigation of the subarachnoid space by removal
of small volumes of CSF and repetitive injections of saline. This maneuver may
circumvent or minimize neurologic injury. (280)
122. Because the onset of sympathetic nervous system block is slower in epidural
versus spinal anesthesia, excessive decreases in systemic blood pressure do not
usuallyaccompanyepiduralanesthesiaadministeredtonormovolemicpatients.(280)
123. The high doses of local anesthetics required for epidural anesthesia along with
the presence of numerous venous plexuses in the epidural space create a risk of
substantial systemic absorption of local anesthetic. Additionally, accidental
intravascular injection of local anesthetic will produce high blood levels and
predictable toxicity ranging from mild central nervous system symptoms
(restlessness, slurred speech, tinnitus) to loss of consciousness, seizures, and
cardiovascular collapse. (280)
124. The subdural space is difficult to enter deliberately because the arachnoid is
generally closely adherent to the overlying dura. The rare occurrence of subdural
Spinal and Epidural Anesthesia
173
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
injection is difficult to detect because CSF cannot be aspirated through the catheter
and the usual test dose is negative. Subdural injection of a local anesthetic solution
can produce an unusual block characterized by patchy sensory anesthesia and
often unilateral dominance. (280)
125. Neural injury after an epidural anesthetic is very rare but seems to be more likely if
a paresthesia occurs during performance of this technique. The development of
paresthesia as a result of the advancing epidural needle reflects stimulation of a
nerve root and is a signal to the anesthetist that the needle is not in the midline and
needs to be redirected. As with spinal anesthesia, injection of local anesthetic
solution in the presence of a paresthesia is contraindicated because nerve damage
may be induced or enhanced by the injection. (280)
126. Combined spinal-epidural anesthesia is a technique in which a spinal anesthetic
and an epidural catheter are placed concurrently. This approach combines the
rapid onset and intense sensory anesthesia of a spinal anesthetic with the ability to
supplement and extend the duration of the block afforded by an epidural catheter.
The technique is commonly used in obstetric anesthesia, as well as orthopedic
procedures such as hip and knee replacement. (280, Figure 17-21)
127. Advantages of epidural block during general anesthesia include less need for
opioids, pain-free emergence from anesthesia, and block of the stress response that
is nearly complete for most surgical procedures performed below the umbilicus.
However, use of this technique demands heightened attention to fluid
management and blood pressure. (281)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
174
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
Chapter
15 PERIPHERAL NERVE
BLOCKS
Adam Collins
1. Name some types of peripheral nerve blocks.
2. Other than as anesthesia for a surgical procedure, what are some uses for peripheral
nerve blocks?
3. What are some special considerations that should be made in the preoperative
evaluation of a patient who is to undergo a peripheral nerve block?
PREPARATION FOR
NERVE BLOCKS
4. What is the benefit of preoperative medication for patients who are to undergo
a peripheral nerve block?
5. Where should a peripheral nerve block be performed?
6. What are the expected onset times and durations of some commonly used local
anesthetics?
SPECIFIC BLOCK
TECHNIQUES
7. What are some of the advantages of ultrasound-guided peripheral
nerve blocks?
8. Describe the macroscopic cross-sectional appearance of peripheral nerves.
9. When using high-resolution ultrasound, what percent of the fascicles within a
peripheral nerve are able to be visualized?
10. Describe the sonographic appearance of a proximal nerve.
11. What are the image characteristics of high-frequency ultrasound compared with
low frequency?
12. What factors affect ultrasound visibility of needles?
13. Describe the short axis and long axis scanning orientations.
14. Describe the in-plane and out-of-plane needle approaches.
15. What is the significance of a paresthesia during block performance?
16. Describe cathodal stimulation and the significance of electrode reversal in evoking
a motor response from a peripheral nerve.
17. What is an optimal stimulating threshold for nerve stimulator technique before
injection of local anesthetic?
PERIPHERAL NERVE
CATHETERS
18. What are some of the clinical uses of peripheral nerve catheters?
19. Describe the technique by which peripheral nerve catheters are placed.
CERVICAL PLEXUS
BLOCK
20. For what surgical procedures is a cervical plexus block most often performed?
What areas become anesthetized by a cervical plexus block?
21. What nerves form the cervical plexus?
22. How is blockade of the superficial cervical plexus achieved?
175
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
BRACHIAL PLEXUS
BLOCK
23. For what surgical procedures is a brachial plexus block useful? What areas become
anesthetized by a brachial plexus block?
24. What nerve roots form the brachial plexus?
25. What landmarks are used to locate the brachial plexus for blockade?
26. What are four different approaches to blockade of the brachial plexus?
27. How is a brachial plexus block via the interscalene approach achieved? What
volume of local anesthetic is deposited with this approach to brachial plexus
blockade?
28. What are some advantages of brachial plexus blockade via the interscalene
approach?
29. What is a disadvantage of brachial plexus blockade via the interscalene approach?
30. What are some potential complications of brachial plexus blockade via the
interscalene approach?
31. How is a brachial plexus block via the supraclavicular approach achieved? What
volumeoflocalanestheticisdepositedwiththis approachtobrachialplexus blockade?
32. What are some advantages of brachial plexus blockade via the supraclavicular
approach?
33. What are some potential complications of brachial plexus blockade via the
supraclavicular approach?
34. Describe the in-plane ultrasound-guided technique for blockade of the brachial
plexus via the axillary approach. What volume of local anesthetic is deposited
with this approach to brachial plexus blockade?
35. Axillaryblockprovidesanesthesiaforsurgeryinwhichregionsoftheupperextremity?
36. What nerves are blocked by injection superficial to the axillary sheath during the
axillary brachial plexus block? How is this achieved?
37. What are some advantages of brachial plexus blockade via the axillary approach?
38. What are some potential complications of brachial plexus blockade via the axillary
approach?
DISTAL NERVE
BLOCKS OF THE
UPPER EXTREMITY
39. What is the sensory distribution of the median nerve? How is it blocked at the
forearm with ultrasound guidance?
40. What is the sensory distribution of the ulnar nerve? How is it blocked at the forearm
with ultrasound guidance?
41. What is the sensory distribution of the radial nerve? What is the typical course of
the superficial radial nerve through the forearm, and how is it blocked at the
forearm with ultrasound guidance?
BLOCKS OF THE
LOWER EXTREMITY
42. What are the challenges of lower extremity blocks relative to those of the upper
extremity?
43. What are the four major nerves of the lower extremity?
44. What nerves form the sciatic nerve, and what are its approximate dimensions in the
pelvis?
45. What area is anesthetized by sciatic nerve blockade and what additional blocks
are usually necessary to provide lower extremity anesthesia?
46. How is sciatic nerve blockade achieved? What volume of local anesthetic should
be deposited for sciatic nerve blockade?
47. What nerves form the femoral nerve? How does it reach the thigh? What is the
terminal branch of the femoral nerve?
48. For what procedure is femoral nerve blockade a definitive anesthetic?
49. How is femoral nerve blockade achieved? What volume of local anesthetic should
be deposited for femoral nerve blockade?
50. What nerve forms the saphenous nerve?
51. How is blockade of the saphenous nerve performed at the level of the thigh?
52. Where along the course of the sciatic nerve is the popliteal nerve block performed?
What surgical sites are best covered by this block?
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
176
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
53. What supplemental blocks may need to be combined with popliteal nerve blockade?
54. What are the five nerves that supply the foot? What areas do each supply?
55. How is an ankle block achieved? What is the total volume of local anesthetic that
is typically deposited in an ankle block?
INTRAVENOUS
REGIONAL NEURAL
ANESTHESIA
56. For what procedure types is intravenous regional neural anesthesia (Bier block)
commonly used?
57. What are some contraindications for intravenous regional anesthesia?
58. How is a Bier block achieved? What volume of local anesthetic is used in a Bier block?
59. What local anesthetics are typically used for a Bier block?
60. What are some advantages of a Bier block?
61. What are some disadvantages of a Bier block?
62. What is a potential complication of a Bier block? How can this risk be minimized?
ANSWERS*
1. Types of peripheral nerve blocks include blocks of the cervical plexus, brachial
plexus, median nerve, ulnar nerve, radial nerve, sciatic nerve, femoral nerve,
saphenous nerve, and ankle block. (285)
2. In addition to surgical anesthesia, peripheral nerve blocks may be used for
postoperative analgesia and for the diagnosis and management of chronic pain
syndromes. (284)
3. Considerations that should be made in the preoperative evaluation of a patient who
is to undergo a peripheral nerve block include the patient’s coagulation status, the
presence of any neuropathy in the involved nerves, the presence of any skin
infection overlying the area where the needle will be inserted, and the presence of
any anatomic abnormalities or difficulties with the usual landmarks for the
performance of the nerve block. In addition, the patient should be evaluated in the
usual manner with regard to history, physical examination, and laboratory analysis.
The anesthesiologist must be prepared to administer another anesthetic in the event
that the peripheral nerve block is not sufficient for surgical anesthesia and the
surgery must proceed. (284-285)
PREPARATION FOR
NERVE BLOCKS
4. Preoperative medication for patients who are to undergo a peripheral nerve
block may reduce their level of anxiety. Patients are often more receptive to
receiving a peripheral nerve block if they are assured they will be made comfortable
during the anesthetic and surgical procedures. (284)
5. Peripheral nerve blocks that are not performed in the operating room should be
performed in a block room with the appropriate monitors, drugs, equipment, and
oxygen should their use become urgently necessary. (284-285)
6. The choice of local anesthetic agent for peripheral nerve blockade depends on a
number of factors, including the desired onset, duration, and degree of conduction
block (see Chapter 11). Lidocaine and mepivacaine, 1% to 1.5%, produce surgical
anesthesia in 10 to 20 minutes that lasts 2 to 3 hours. Ropivacaine, 0.5%, and
bupivacaine, 0.375% to 0.5%, have a slower onset and produce less motor blockade,
but the effect lasts for at least 6 to 8 hours. (285)
*Numbers in parentheses: numbers refer to pages, figures, or tables in Miller RD, Pardo MC: Basics of Anesthesia,
6th ed. Philadelphia, Elsevier Saunders, 2011.
Peripheral Nerve Blocks
177
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
SPECIFIC BLOCK
TECHNIQUES
7. High-resolution ultrasound imaging allows direct visualization of peripheral
nerves, block needle placement, and the distribution of local anesthetic solution
and thereby improves block success and minimizes local anesthetic volume
(see Figure 15-1). In addition, ultrasound can also be used to visualize adjacent
structures, such as blood vessels or pleurae, and may therefore reduce the risk for
complications from peripheral nerve blocks. A major advantage of ultrasound
imaging is that variability in surface landmarks, body habitus, and patient
positioning can be appreciated. (285)
8. Peripheral nerves can be round, oval, or triangular in transverse cross section (short
axis view) and can change shape along their nerve path.
9. About a third of the fascicles within a peripheral nerve can be seen with high-
resolution ultrasound. (285)
10. Proximal nerves such as the roots and ventral rami of the brachial plexus appear
dark, or hypoechoic, in their core but bright, or hyperechoic, in their outer
mantle (Figure 15-1). This distinction occurs because incident sound waves reflect
strongly off the connective tissue encasing nerve fascicles but pass through the
inner portions of the fascicles undisturbed. (285-286)
11. High-frequency ultrasound provides better resolution but poor penetration into
deeper tissue because of attenuation of the sound beam. (286)
12. Ultrasound visibility of needles for a regional block primarily depends on the
gauge and insertion angle, such that larger needles parallel to the ultrasound
transducer are seen most easily. (286)
13. In short axis imaging, cylindrical structures such as nerves appear as circles. Long
axis imaging is achieved by placing the transducer longitudinally, or parallel to
the course of a nerve, such that it appears as a linear structure. (286)
14. With the in-plane approach, the block needle is introduced within the plane
of imaging, such that the entire needle and bevel are seen as a linear structure.
The out-of-plane needle approach involves passing the needle from outside the
plane of imaging so that it intersects the scan plane as an echogenic dot.
(286, Figure 15-2)
15. A paresthesia is a radiating electric shocklike sensation that can occur during the
performance of a peripheral nerve block, which indicates that the nerve has been
localized by the needle tip. Local anesthetic solution should not be injected in the
presence of persistent paresthesia because intraneural injection accompanied by
intense pain increases the likelihood of permanent nerve injury. (286)
16. For nerve stimulation, the block needle is used as a stimulating cathode and another
lead on the body serves as the anode to complete the electrical circuit (Figure 15-3).
Cathodal stimulation is more efficient than anodal stimulation, so it is important
to not reverse the leads during nerve stimulation–guided block procedures. The
location of the surface anode (usually an electrocardiographic pad) on the patient
does not alter the stimulation. (286)
17. A motor response evoked with currents of 0.3 to 0.5 mA indicates sufficient
proximity of the block needle to the nerve for success of the block after the injection
of local anesthetic solution. A motor response at a current of less than 0.2 mA
may suggest an intraneural needle position. (286-287)
PERIPHERAL NERVE
CATHETERS
18. Continuous peripheral nerve blocks can be used in the hospital setting to facilitate
vigorous early joint mobilization following orthopedic surgery. They can also
be used to provide potent analgesia for outpatient surgery (also see
Chapter 37). (287)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
178
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
19. For placement of these catheters, the peripheral nerve should be first located in a
fashion similar to that for single-injection blocks (typically nerve stimulation or
ultrasound guidance with a large-bore needle), and then the catheter is threaded.
Initially injecting a local anesthetic or dextrose solution to create more space
adjacent to the nerve before catheter placement is useful. (287)
CERVICAL PLEXUS
BLOCK
20. The anesthesia produced by a cervical plexus block includes the area from the
inferior surface of the mandible to the level of the clavicle. A cervical plexus block is
used most often to provide anesthesia in conscious patients undergoing carotid
endarterectomy. Although combined superficial and deep cervical plexus blocks
have traditionally been used for this surgical procedure, studies have demonstrated
that a superficial block alone is sufficient. (287)
21. The cervical plexus is derived from nerves C1 to C4. (287)
22. Blockade of the superficial cervical plexus can be achieved by infiltrating local
anesthetic along the posterior border of the sternocleidomastoid muscle. (287)
BRACHIAL PLEXUS
BLOCK
23. Brachial plexus blocks are useful for surgery on the shoulder or upper extremity.
Areas anesthetized by a brachial plexus block include all the muscles and most
of the sensation of the upper extremity. (287-288)
24. The brachial plexus is derived from the anterior rami of C5 to T1. (287-288)
25. Landmarks that may be used to locate the brachial plexus for blockade include the
anterior and middle scalene muscles, the interscalene groove, the transverse process
of C6, the clavicle, the axillary artery, and the subclavian artery pulse. With
ultrasound use, these landmarks are the starting point for scanning. (287-292)
26. The four different approaches to blockade of the brachial plexus are the
interscalene, supraclavicular, infraclavicular, and axillary approaches. (287-292)
27. An interscalene block of the brachial plexus is achieved by injecting local anesthetic
solution into the interscalene groove adjacent to the transverse process of C6
(the external jugular vein often overlies this area) (Figure 15-7). An interscalene
block of the brachial plexus should be performed with the arm at the patient’s side to
relax the shoulder. High-frequency ultrasound can be used to image the brachial
plexus within the posterior triangle of the neck. In this location, the nerves of the
brachial plexus do not contain an abundance of connective tissue. Therefore,
the nerves appear hypoechoic on ultrasound scans (see Figure 15-7). Using an
in-plane technique, local anesthetic can be deposited adjacent to the brachial plexus
between the anterior and middle scalene muscles. Injection of 20 to 30 mL of local
anesthetic solution will anesthetize the cervical plexus and brachial plexus, and
thus permit surgery on the shoulder and more distal upper extremity, although
fibers that innervate the ulnar side of the forearm and hand (C8-T1, inferior
trunk) may be spared (Figure 15-6). (288-289)
28. Advantages of brachial plexus blockade via the interscalene approach include a
relatively low risk of pneumothorax, ease of palpation of necessary landmarks, and
ease of nerve imaging with ultrasound. Additionally, it is possible to perform the
block with the patient’s arm at his or her side. (288)
29. A disadvantage of brachial plexus blockade via the interscalene approach is the
inconsistency with which the inferior trunk of the brachial plexus is blocked,
making it possible that surgery involving the C8-T1 dermatomes will have
inadequate anesthesia. (288)
30. Complications of brachial plexus blockade via the interscalene approach include
phrenic and recurrent laryngeal nerve blocks; epidural, intrathecal, and
intravascular injections; and nerve damage. (288-289)
Peripheral Nerve Blocks
179
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
31. Supraclavicular block of the brachial plexus is achieved by injecting 20 to 30 mL
of local anesthetic solution around the brachial plexus where it is usually tightly
bundled and adjacent to the subclavian artery, just cephalad to the clavicle.
The supraclavicular block can be performed with a similar technique to interscalene
blocks. The ultrasound probe is moved closer to the clavicle and faces caudally to
facilitate imaging of the brachial plexus adjacent to the subclavian artery and over
the first rib. In this location, almost all practitioners use the in-plane technique
because of the proximity of the pleura. (289)
32. Advantages of a supraclavicular block are rapid onset and ability to perform the
block with the arm in any position. Additionally the nerves are tightly bundled
in this location. (289)
33. Complications of brachial plexus blockade via the supraclavicular approach include
its relatively increased risk of a pneumothorax. In fact, the incidence of a
pneumothorax with this technique is about 1%, making it a poor choice for patients
with respiratory compromise. Other complications include phrenic nerve block,
Horner syndrome, and nerve injury. (289)
34. An axillary brachial plexus block is achieved by injecting 30 to 40 mL of local
anesthetic solution around the nerves that lie in close proximity to the axillary
artery (Figure 15-9). At the level of the axilla, the terminal branches of the brachial
plexus reside within the axillary sheath and in the tissue that immediately surrounds
it (see Figure 15-9). The patient is positioned supine with the arm abducted to 90
degrees and externally rotated to gain access to the axilla. A high-frequency
ultrasound transducer is placed in the axilla, showing the brachial artery and the
surrounding nerves of the brachial plexus. A needle is advanced from superior
to inferior within the plane of imaging so that the tip lies within the axillary sheath.
Multiple injections of local anesthetic surround each of the nerves, including
the musculocutaneous nerve, which lies lateral to the brachial plexus in the Five
muscle. (290-292)
35. An axillary block can be used for anesthesia of the hand, forearm, and elbow. (290)
36. Five milliliters of local anesthetic solution is infiltrated into the subcutaneous
tissue immediately superficial to the axillary artery to block the intercostobrachial,
medial brachial cutaneous, and medial antebrachial cutaneous nerves. (292)
37. An axillary perivascular block has the advantage of being remote from the lung and
neuraxis, and can therefore be performed with relative safety. (292)
38. Potential complications of brachial plexus blockade via the axillary approach
include systemic local anesthetic toxicity as a result of intravascular
injection and nerve injury from needle trauma, intraneural injection, and
hematoma. (292)
DISTAL NERVE
BLOCKS OF THE
UPPER EXTREMITY
39. The median nerve provides most of the sensory innervation to the palm of the hand.
The forearm is scanned in short axis with high-frequency ultrasound showing
the median nerve with a fine fascicular appearance that is distinct from the
surrounding muscles and tendons. Under continuous visualization, 3 to 5 mL of
local anesthetic is injected around the median nerve. (292)
40. The ulnar nerve provides sensation to the dorsal and palmar sides of the ulnar
aspect of the hand. The ulnar nerve is blocked by injecting 3 to 5 mL of local
anesthetic solution around the ulnar nerve in the forearm, usually at a level
in the forearm where the ulnar nerve is not in direct contact with the ulnar
artery. (292)
41. Most patients have radial dominance of sensation on the dorsal aspect of the hand.
The superficial radial nerve is the distal sensory branch of the radial nerve that
follows the radial artery along its course through the forearm. It can be blocked by
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
180
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
ultrasound-guided infiltration of 3 to 5 mL of local anesthetic solution anywhere
along its course deep to the brachioradialis muscle or in a subcutaneous ring at the
level of the anatomic snuffbox. (292-293)
BLOCKS OF THE
LOWER EXTREMITY
42. Unlike the compactness of the brachial plexus, the lower extremity is supplied
by nerves that are widely separated from each other as they enter the thigh. For
many operations, it is easier to perform an epidural or spinal anesthetic than to
attempt the same extent of anesthesia with multiple peripheral nerve blocks. (293)
43. The four major nerves of the lower extremity are the sciatic, femoral, lateral femoral
cutaneous, and obturator nerves. (293)
44. The sacral plexus (L4-5, S1-3) gives rise to the sciatic nerve, which is nearly 2 cm
wide as it leaves the pelvis. (294-296)
45. Sciatic nerve blockade provides nearly complete anesthesia of the foot and lower
part of the leg. More often, a sciatic nerve block is combined with a femoral
nerve block to provide more extensive anesthesia of the lower extremity. (294-296)
46. The classic approach to sciatic nerve blockade is with the patient lying on the side
opposite the nerve to be blocked (Figure 15-14). A line is drawn between the
posterior superior iliac spine and the greater trochanter of the femur. Using a
peripheral nerve stimulator, the needle is inserted about 5 cm caudad from the
midpoint of this line. Foot movement evoked by nerve stimulation is a satisfactory
end point for needle placement before the injection of local anesthetic solution
(about 25 to 30 mL is typically used). (294-296)
47. The femoral nerve is derived from L2, L3, and L4. The femoral nerve reaches the
thigh by passing underneath the inguinal ligament just lateral to the femoral artery
and vein, and separated from them by the iliopectineal ligament. The femoral nerve
lies deep to the fascia iliaca, which invests the iliopsoas muscle. Along its course, the
femoral nerve divides into multiple anterior cutaneous branches of the thigh and
gives rise to the saphenous nerve of the medial aspect of the leg. (293-294)
48. Femoral nerve blockade is most often used together with other nerve blocks for
surgery in the leg. Alone, femoral nerve blockade provides anesthesia of the anterior
thigh and may be used for muscle biopsies in that area. (293)
49. Femoral nerve blockade is performed with the patient in the supine position and the
thigh slightly abducted and externally rotated to improve access. The femoral nerve
is appreciated on sonograms as a flattened bundle of fascicles lying between the
hypoechoic subcutaneous tissue and the hyperechoic iliopsoas muscle
(Figure 15-12). The block needle is advanced within the plane of imaging from
lateral to medial until it punctures the fascia iliaca, with a distinct pop. The needle
position is optimized to create the circumferential spread of 20 to 30 mL of local
anesthetic around the femoral nerve. (294)
50. The saphenous nerve is a branch of the femoral nerve that contributes to innervation
below the knee. (294)
51. The saphenous nerve is blocked at the midthigh level, where it lies anterior to the
femoral artery (Figure 15-13). The femoral artery is a landmark for the saphenous
nerve, both of which lie just deep to the sartorius muscle (see Figure 15-13). The block
needle is advanced within the plane of imaging and 5 to 10 mL of local anesthetic is
deposited deep to the sartorius muscle, adjacent to the femoral artery. (294-295)
52. Popliteal nerve blockade provides sciatic nerve anesthesia near the point where the
sciatic nerve divides into its common peroneal and tibial nerve components in
the popliteal fossa. It is most commonly used for foot and ankle surgery. (296)
53. Femoral or saphenous nerve blockade can be performed in addition to a popliteal
nerve block to improve tourniquet tolerance and for surgery that involves the
medial aspect of the leg. (296)
Peripheral Nerve Blocks
181
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
54. The tibial, sural, deep peroneal, superficial peroneal, and saphenous nerves supply
the entire innervation to the foot. The tibial nerve innervates the sole of the foot,
heel, and plantar portion of the toes. The sural nerve innervates the lateral portion
of the foot and ankle. The deep peroneal nerve innervates primarily between the
first two digits of the foot. The superficial peroneal nerve innervates the majority of
the dorsum of the foot. The saphenous nerve innervates the medial foot and
ankle. (296-297)
55. The tibial nerve lies on the heel side of the posterior tibial artery and can be blocked
by infiltrating 3 to 5 mL of local anesthetic solution in a fanning pattern around this
artery. The sural nerve can be blocked by injecting 5 mL of local anesthetic solution
in the groove between the lateral malleolus and the calcaneus near the small
saphenous vein. The saphenous nerve is blocked by infiltration of 5 mL of local
anesthetic solution anterior to the medial malleolus near the great saphenous. The
deep peroneal is blocked by injecting 5 mL of local anesthetic solution adjacent to
the anterior tibial artery. Alternatively, if arterial pulsation is absent, the deep
peroneal nerve can also be blocked deep to the extensor hallucis longus tendon and
extensor retinaculum. The superficial peroneal nerve’s terminal branches are
blocked by injecting a subcutaneous ridge of local anesthetic between the medial
and lateral malleoli over the anterior surface of the foot. (296-297)
INTRAVENOUS
REGIONAL NEURAL
ANESTHESIA
56. Intravenous regional neural anesthesia (Bier block) is commonly used for anesthesia
for short surgical procedures on an extremity, particularly those in which
postoperative pain is not expected to be significant. (297)
57. Contraindications to a Bier block are essentially contraindications to tourniquet
application (sickle cell disease, infection, ischemic vascular disease). Pain limits the
effectiveness of exsanguination of extremities with fractures. Traumatic lacerations
may allow escape of local anesthetic from the extremity. (297)
58. A Bier block is achieved by first placing an intravenous catheter distal in the
extremity to be anesthetized. The extremity is then exsanguinated, a double
tourniquet is placed proximal in the extremity, and the more proximal cuff is
inflated. A dose of local anesthetic based on the patient’s weight is administered
slowly. The volume of local anesthetic is 40 to 50 mL in the upper extremity.
If the patient starts to develop tourniquet pain during the procedure, the distal cuff
may be inflated and the proximal cuff deflated. (297)
59. Commonly used local anesthetic solutions for intravenous regional neural anesthesia
are 0.5% lidocaine or prilocaine (plain solutions without epinephrine). Bupivacaine is
avoided because of potential systemic toxicity, most notably malignant ventricular
cardiac dysrhythmias leading to refractory cardiac arrest. (297)
60. Technically, a regional intravenous neural block is easier and faster to perform than
a brachial plexus block or lower extremity block and is readily applicable to all age
groups, including pediatric patients. (297-298)
61. Severe tourniquet pain and the maximum allowable tourniquet time limit the
practical duration of the block. Because the duration of postoperative analgesia
is also limited, this procedure is not usually performed when postoperative pain is
a significant issue. (297-298)
62. A complication of a Bier block includes the risk of excessive, toxic doses of local
anesthetic reaching the systemic circulation with accidental deflation of the
tourniquet. This risk can be minimized at the conclusion of cases 20 to 40 minutes in
duration by deflating the tourniquet in increments over time. This allows the local
anesthetic to enter the systemic circulation over a greater period of time. (298)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
182
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
Chapter
16 PATIENT POSITIONING
AND ASSOCIATED RISKS
Jae-Woo Lee, Lydia Cassorla
1. Whose responsibility is the intraoperative position of the anesthetized patient?
2. How does the lack of response to pain affect the positions that are tolerated by
patients under general anesthesia? What is the clinical implication of this?
3. What are potential injuries to the patient that can be sustained during mask
ventilation of the airway?
4. What areas of skin are especially prone to ischemic damage during surgery? How
can this risk be minimized?
SPECIFIC POSITIONS
5. What are the cardiovascular effects of placing the patient in the supine position for a
surgical procedure?
6. How does the supine position affect lung perfusion?
7. How does the functional residual capacity change when a patient’s position is
changed from standing to supine?
8. How should the patient’s legs be ideally positioned during surgery in the supine
position?
9. Why might focal alopecia result following surgery?
10. Why might backache result from surgery in the supine position?
11. What are some potential positions the patient’s arms may be placed in while the
patient is in the supine position for surgery?
12. Describe how the patient’s arms should be positioned when the patient is supine and
the arms are abducted.
13. Describe how the patient’s arms should be positioned when the patient is supine and
the arms are adducted.
14. What are the cardiovascular effects of placing the patient in the head-down
position, or Trendelenburg position, for a surgical procedure?
15. What are the pulmonary effects of placing the patient in the Trendelenburg position
for a surgical procedure?
16. How does the Trendelenburg position affect the patient’s intracranial pressure?
17. What is a potential complication of the use of shoulder braces to prevent the patient
from sliding off the table while in a steep Trendelenburg position?
18. How does the prone position affect the patient’s ventilatory mechanics? How can
this effect be offset?
19. What are the cardiovascular effects of placing the patient in the prone position for a
surgical procedure? How can this potential problem be minimized?
20. What are the potential problems with turning the prone patient’s head laterally?
21. What is a potential problem with placing the prone patient’s head in a neutral
forward-facing position, as in a Mayfield headrest? How can this potential problem
be minimized?
183
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
22. How should the patient’s arms be positioned while in the prone position?
23. How can venous pooling in the lower extremities be offset while the patient is in the
prone position, as during a laminectomy?
24. How does the lateral decubitus position affect the patient’s ventilatory mechanics
and ventilation-perfusion ratio during mechanical ventilation of the lungs? How
might these effects of the lateral decubitus position be manifest clinically?
25. What are the cardiovascular effects of placing the patient in the lateral decubitus
position for a surgical procedure?
26. What is the purpose of the axillary roll for patients who are placed in the lateral
decubitus position? What monitoring may be helpful?
27. How should the patient’s head and neck be positioned when in the lateral decubitus
position?
28. How should the patient’s legs be positioned when in the lateral decubitus position?
29. How should the patient’s nondependent arm be positioned when in the lateral
decubitus position?
30. For what types of surgery is the sitting position most often used?
31. What are the cardiovascular effects of placing the patient in the sitting position for a
surgical procedure?
32. What is the principal potential intraoperative complication of positioning a patient
in the sitting position for surgery?
33. Which patients are most likely to manifest cardiopulmonary effects from being
placed in the lithotomy position for a surgical procedure?
34. How should a patient with a history of low back pain be positioned in the lithotomy
position for surgery?
35. What is the principal potential intraoperative complication of positioning a patient
in the lithotomy position for surgery? How can this potential problem be
minimized?
36. What is a potential problem that can result from placing a patient in the lithotomy
position for more than 4 hours during a surgical procedure?
37. How can the patient’s digits of the fingers or toes be injured during moving of
operating table parts?
PERIPHERAL NERVE
INJURY
38. How important are peripheral nerve injuries? During what types of anesthetics do
peripheral nerve injuries occur? What is the mechanism of a peripheral nerve injury
during surgery? How can this risk be minimized?
39. What are some coexisting medical conditions that place a patient at an increased
risk for a peripheral nerve injury?
40. What is the usual recovery time from a peripheral nerve injury?
41. Which peripheral nerve is most likely to manifest a postoperative neuropathy?
42. What are some ways in which the ulnar nerve may be injured intraoperatively?
What position should a patient’s arm be placed in to minimize this risk?
43. Are males or females more prone to ulnar nerve injury during surgery?
44. How does injury to the ulnar nerve manifest clinically?
45. What is the second most common peripheral nerve injured during surgery?
46. Why is the brachial plexus especially susceptible to nerve injury during surgery?
47. What are some ways in which the brachial plexus may be injured intraoperatively?
48. How does injury to the brachial plexus manifest clinically?
49. What are some ways in which the radial nerve may be injured intraoperatively?
50. How does injury to the radial nerve manifest clinically?
51. What are some ways in which the median nerve may be injured intraoperatively?
52. How does injury to the median nerve manifest clinically?
53. What are some ways in which the sciatic nerve may be injured intraoperatively?
54. How does injury to the sciatic nerve manifest clinically?
55. Which peripheral nerve of the lower extremity is most likely to manifest a
postoperative neuropathy?
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
184
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
56. What are some ways in which the common peroneal nerve may be injured
intraoperatively?
57. How does injury to the common peroneal nerve manifest clinically?
58. What are some ways in which the anterior tibial nerve may be injured
intraoperatively?
59. How does injury to the anterior tibial nerve manifest clinically?
60. What are some ways in which the femoral nerve may be injured intraoperatively?
61. How does injury to the femoral nerve manifest clinically?
62. What are some ways in which the saphenous nerve may be injured
intraoperatively?
63. What are some ways in which the obturator nerve may be injured
intraoperatively?
64. How does injury to the obturator nerve manifest clinically?
65. Can the intraoperative use of a tourniquet result in nerve injury?
PERIOPERATIVE EYE
INJURY AND
VISUAL LOSS
66. How common are perioperative eye injuries?
67. How does postoperative visual loss occur?
68. What risk factors are associated with postoperative visual loss?
69. What is the ASA Postoperative Visual Loss Registry?
EVALUATION AND
TREATMENT OF
PERIOPERATIVE
NEUROPATHIES
70. Why is it important to seek early neurologic consultation when a peripheral nerve
injury is manifest in the postoperative period?
ANSWERS*
1. The position the patient is placed in intraoperatively while under general
anesthesia is the responsibility of the anesthesiologist, surgeon, and nurses. The
responsibility is shared among these operating room personnel. During the course of
surgery the responsibility becomes primarily that of the anesthesiologist, who
must be aware of any changes in the patient’s position. (300)
2. An awake patient will typically respond to pain, numbness, or tingling associated
with nerve injury. However, positions that would not be tolerated by an awake
patient can be assumed for hours while under anesthesia care, especially when
combined with drug-induced skeletal muscle relaxation. Therefore, the
anesthesiologist must share responsibility for the proper positioning of the
patient during anesthesia, for appropriate padding of the pressure points, and
must be aware of potential injuries associated with various positions. A description
of the positioning and padding should also be documented in the anesthesia
record. (300)
3. Potential injuries to the patient that can be sustained during mask ventilation of the
airway include damage to the facial nerve and necrosis to the bridge of the
nose. Facial nerve injury can be caused by the face strap on the anesthetic mask
compressing the buccal branch of the nerve or by the anesthesiologist’s fingers
on the ascending ramus of the patient’s mandible. Both of these risks are rare,
however.
*Numbers in parentheses: numbers refer to pages, figures, or tables in Miller RD, Pardo MC: Basics of Anesthesia,
6th ed. Philadelphia, Elsevier Saunders, 2011.
Patient Positioning and Associated Risks
185
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
4. Skin that is subject to excessive or prolonged pressure is at risk for ischemic damage.
Areas of skin that are especially prone to ischemic damage during surgery
include the heels, supraorbital ridge, and the skin at the corner of the mouth in
contact with the endotracheal tube. The risk of skin ischemia can be
minimized with adequate padding at potential pressure points.
SPECIFIC POSITIONS
5. Placement of a patient in the supine position may modestly increase cardiac
output secondary to an increase in venous return. This causes a slight, reflex
mediated decrease in heart rate that results in minimal changes to the
blood pressure. (301)
6. The supine position produces a relatively even distribution of blood flow
throughout the lung. (301)
7. The functional residual capacity decreases when a patient’s position is changed
from standing to supine, largely because of cephalad displacement of the diaphragm
by the abdominal contents. (301)
8. While undergoing surgery in the supine position, the patient’s legs should be
positioned with slight flexion at both the hips and knees. Not only does this
facilitate venous drainage from the lower extremities, it also decreases
the amount of anterior abdominal wall tension during surgical closure of
the abdomen. (303, Figure 19-1)
9. Focal alopecia may result from continued pressure on one area of the scalp. This risk
may be minimized by padding and by periodically moving the patient’s head during
long procedures if possible. (303)
10. Backache may result from surgery in the supine position because of the loss of the
normal lordotic curvature of the lumbar spine that can occur, particularly with
skeletal muscle relaxation. (303)
11. One or both arms may be placed in the abducted or adducted (tucked) positions
while a patient is in the supine position for surgery. (302-303, Figure 19-1, A and C)
12. When the supine patient’s arms are abducted, they should be placed on well-padded
armboards. The arms should be extended less than 90 degrees at the shoulder. Some
debate exists regarding the position of the hand when the arm is abducted. It is
believed that supination of the forearm may result in greater protection of the ulnar
nerve from compression. However, supination of the hand may result in greater
stretching of the brachial plexus. In addition, supination of the forearm in awake
patients is uncomfortable. An alternative is leaving the forearm in the neutral
position. The neutral position is the spontaneous position of an awake, supine
patient. (302-303)
13. When the supine patient’s arms are adducted, or tucked in to the patient’s side,
care should be taken to avoid placing any portion of the arm or fingers against
any metal surfaces or hard edges of the operating table. This can be accomplished by
padding the arm circumferentially before securing it. Most often the arms are
allowed to remain in the neutral position, with the palms facing the patient’s
side. (302-303)
14. Placement of a patient in the head-down position, or Trendelenburg position, for a
surgical procedure results in increases in central venous, intracranial, and
intraocular pressures. The Trendelenburg position is often used to increase venous
return during hypotension, to improve exposure during abdominal and
laparoscopic surgery, and during central line placement. (303)
15. Placement of a patient in the head-down position for a surgical procedure results
in an increase in pulmonary venous pressure and a decrease in pulmonary
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
186
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
compliance and functional residual capacity. This occurs secondary to an
increase in central venous pressure and from the cephalad displacement of the
abdominal contents against the diaphragm. This may manifest as increased
peak inspiratory pressure with mechanical ventilation. (303)
16. Placement of a patient in the head-down position for a surgical procedure results
in an increase in the intracranial pressure. (303)
17. Brachial plexus injury can occur when shoulder braces are used to prevent the
patient from sliding down the table when in the Trendelenburg position. The injury
is due to both direct compression and stretching of the brachial plexus. (313)
18. Placement of a patient in the prone position results in cephalad displacement of the
diaphragm because of pressure from the abdominal contents against the operating
room table. This can lead to a decrease in the functional residual capacity and
impairment of diaphragmatic movement manifesting as increased peak inspiratory
pressures with mechanical ventilation. This effect of the prone position may be
offset by allowing space for the abdomen and chest to move with minimum pressure
during respiration. Examples are special tables such as the Jackson table with
support only under bony areas, additions to a standard operating room bed such as
the Wilson frame, and firm rolls or bolsters placed under each side from the clavicle
to the iliac crest. (307-308, Figure 19-4)
19. Placement of a patient in the prone position may result in compression of the
inferior vena cava, leading to impaired venous return to the heart and decreased
cardiac output. This effect of the prone position may be offset by techniques
that reduce compression of the abdomen, as outlined above. Examples include
special tables, frames, and bolsters. (308, Figure 19-4, A)
20. Turning the prone patient’s head laterally can result in jugular venous outflow
obstruction, as well as obstruction to vertebral artery blood flow and, rarely,
thrombosis.Inaddition,thisposition canresultinpostoperativeneck pain,especially
in patients with a history of cervical arthritis. The brachial plexus is also stretched on
the contralateral side. These potential problems can be avoided by placing the
patient’s head neutral in a forward-facing position on a padded rest. The padded rest
typically supports the patient’s head around the periphery of the face, leaving the
center of the face and eyes without contact with the padding. (308, Figure 19-4, D)
21. A potential problem with placing the prone patient’s head in a neutral forward-
facing position, as in a Mayfield headrest, is the risk of compression of the face
on the table or padding. This can be especially hazardous with unrecognized
movement of the patient during the surgery. Of particular concern is pressure on
the globes of the eye, which can result in retinal ischemia and blindness. This
potential problem can be minimized by frequently checking the patient’s eyes,
nose, and ears during the course of the surgical procedure. (308)
22. While in the prone position the patient’s arms should be positioned such that
abduction of the arms at the shoulder is limited to less than 90 degrees. The patient’s
arms may be placed at the patient’s sides or above the head. This helps to minimize
the risk of injury to the brachial plexus. (308)
23. Venous pooling in the lower extremities while the patient is in the prone position
can be offset with the placement of fitted elastic stockings or sequential
compression devices. (308)
24. Placement of a patient in the lateral decubitus position can result in significant
mismatching of pulmonary ventilation-to-perfusion during mechanical ventilation
of the lungs for a number of reasons. First, while in the lateral position the
mechanically ventilated patient has relatively better ventilation of the nondependent
lung as compared to the dependent lung. The reasons for the dependent lung being
Patient Positioning and Associated Risks
187
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
ventilated less are secondary to the loss of lung volume from compression by
abdominal contents and mediastinal contents. The patient concurrently has better
perfusion of the dependent lung, primarily secondary to the effects of gravity.
Together, these factors result in greater mismatching of ventilation and perfusion of
the lungs during mechanical ventilation in a patient in the lateral decubitus position.
Clinically, this may manifest as arterial hypoxemia. (306, Figure 19-3)
25. Placement of a patient in the lateral decubitus position can result in compression
of the inferior vena cava from the pressure of a kidney rest. This can lead to
a decrease in venous return to the heart. (305-306)
26. In the lateral position, the dependent brachial plexus may be injured should the
axilla be compressed sufficiently to compress the brachial plexus. An axillary roll
properly placed under the thorax caudal to the axilla supports the patient’s chest
and minimizes the risk of compression of the nerves and vessels in the axilla.
Arterial or pulse oximetry monitoring of the dependent arm may help detect
axillary compression. Alternatively, the radial pulse may be checked periodically to
ensure complete compression of the artery has not occurred. (306, Figure 19-3, C)
27. The patient’s head and neck while in the lateral decubitus position should be
positioned such that the cervical vertebrae of the neck are in line with the thoracic
vertebrae. This can be accomplished by placing the patient’s head on a pillow of the
correct height. Insufficient padding under the head of the patient in the lateral
decubitus position can result in compression and stretching to the brachial plexus
and direct compression to the dependent ear and eye. (305-306)
28. The patient’s legs while in the lateral decubitus position should be positioned such that
the dependent leg is flexed at the knee and there is a pillow between the two legs.
This helps to minimize stretch of the nerves of the dependent leg and distributes
more evenly the weight of the legs, such that discrete pressure points are avoided.
Indeed, there have been case reports of arterial insufficiency of the dependent
leg of patients undergoing hip arthroplasty in the lateral position. (305-306)
29. The patient’s nondependent arm while in the lateral decubitus position should be
supported by a holder or padding above and in front of the patient’s face.
Alternatively, the arm may be suspended from a support bar that is well padded.
Both positions should limit the extension of the arm to less than 90 degrees at
the shoulder. (305-306, Figure 19-3, B)
30. The sitting position is most often used for neurosurgical procedures, especially in
the posterior fossa, and for orthopedic surgeries on the shoulder. The advantages
of the sitting position for posterior fossa craniotomies are improved surgical
exposure and facilitated jugular venous drainage leading to less bleeding.
(309, Figure 19-5)
31. Patients placed in the sitting position for a surgical procedure may become
hypotensive, especially if hypovolemic. Additionally, patients may have decreases
in cardiac output and cerebral perfusion pressures. Hypotension can be avoided by
positioning the patient in gradual steps to allow for accommodation, by ensuring
adequate hydration, and through the temporary administration of small doses of
vasopressors. (309)
32. The principal potential intraoperative complication of positioning a patient in the
sitting position for neurosurgery is a venous air embolus. Placing the surgical
site above the level of the heart during the procedure facilitates the entrainment of
air. Patients undergoing craniotomies are especially at risk, given that veins in
the bony cranium do not collapse after being transected. (310)
33. Patients with a large abdominal mass, pregnant, or obese patients are most likely
to manifest cardiovascular effects when placed in the lithotomy position for a
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
188
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
surgical procedure. These patients are more likely to have obstruction of the inferior
vena cava in this position. In addition, the lithotomy position leads to the cephalad
displacement of the diaphragm by the abdominal viscera, potentially impairing
spontaneous ventilation. (305, Figure 19-2)
34. Patients with a history of low back pain may suffer from exacerbation of their
pain after being placed in the lithotomy position for surgery. These patients may
benefit from assuming the position themselves when awake and choosing the
position that is most comfortable for them. An alternative position for surgery may
also be considered. (305)
35. The principal potential intraoperative complication of positioning a patient in
the lithotomy position for surgery is peripheral nerve injury. Injury can occur to the
sciatic, common peroneal, femoral, saphenous, or obturator nerves in this position.
This potential problem can be minimized by ensuring that the patient’s legs are well
padded in areas where they could potentially be compressed such as against metal
braces. While positioning the patient, the legs should be lifted simultaneously,
flexed no more than 90 degrees at the hip, and then simultaneously rotated for
placement into the stirrups. (305, Figure 19-2, B and C)
36. Compartment syndrome secondary to inadequate circulation can result from
placing a patient in the lithotomy position for more than 4 hours during a surgical
procedure. The common initiating event is probably direct local muscle pressure.
This can occur from inadequate padding, tight leg straps, or the surgeon leaning on
the leg for a prolonged period of time. The direct pressure may lead to arterial
insufficiency, tissue necrosis and edema, and rhabdomyolysis. (305)
37. A patient’s digits of the fingers or toes can be injured intraoperatively during
moving of operating table parts. Movement of the table into a space where the
fingers or toes lie could lead to crushing of the digit. (304-305, Figure 19-2, D)
PERIPHERAL NERVE
INJURY
38. Peripheral nerve injuries are responsible for 18% of closed claims in the ASA
Closed Claims Project, second only to death (22%). Peripheral nerve injuries have
occurred in patients after regional anesthesia, monitored anesthesia care, and
general anesthesia. The causes of a peripheral nerve injury are often
multifactorial. However, injury occurring to a nerve intraoperatively is felt to be due
to ischemia from compression or stretching of the nerve. The injury usually
sustained to the nerve is neurapraxic, which is a loss of function without
corresponding anatomic injury. The risk of sustaining an intraoperative nerve
injury can be minimized by carefully positioning patients and by using padding
when and where appropriate. There is evidence to suggest that patients who
experience intraoperative nerve injury may have preexisting conditions that
made the injury unavoidable, even with proper positioning and padding.
(310-311, Tables 19-1 through 19-3)
39. Risk factors for peripheral nerve injury include extreme positions, male sex for ulnar
nerve injury, extremes of weight, hypotension, prolonged tourniquet time, and
central venous or arterial catheter placements. The prone “superman” and lateral
decubitus positions appear to be risk factors for upper extremity nerve injuries.
(312-313)
40. The usual recovery time from an intraoperative peripheral nerve injury is
3 to 12 months. In rare cases, injury can be permanent, particularly with a stretch
injury that results in disrupted axons. (315)
41. The most common peripheral nerve to manifest a postoperative neuropathy is
the ulnar nerve. The mechanism of ulnar neuropathy is felt to be multifactorial
and remains poorly understood, and therefore is not completely preventable.
(311-313)
Patient Positioning and Associated Risks
189
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
42. The ulnar nerve may be injured intraoperatively secondary to compression of
the nerve against the posterior aspect of the medial epicondyle of the humerus or in
the cubital tunnel. There also appears to be an increased incidence of ulnar
nerve injury associated with sternal retraction during cardiac surgery. The ulnar nerve
may be at a greater risk of injury when the elbow is hyperflexed or the forearm is
pronated. Supination of the forearm intraoperatively may provide some protection to
the ulnar nerve, although this may increase the risk to the brachial plexus. (311-313)
43. Males are five times more likely to acquire an ulnar neuropathy than females,
possibly due to anatomic differences. (313)
44. Ulnar nerve injury manifests clinically as decreased sensation over the ventral
and dorsal portions of the medial 1½ fingers, and an inability to abduct or oppose
the fifth finger. Over time, ulnar nerve injury results in the appearance of
a “claw hand” secondary to atrophy of the intrinsic muscles. (311-313)
45. The second most common peripheral nerve injured during surgery is the brachial
plexus. (310)
46. The brachial plexus is especially susceptible to nerve injury during surgery
because its course is superficial and fixed between two points: the vertebra and the
axillary fascia. In addition, it lies close to the clavicle and humerus, which are
very mobile, and slings under the clavicle and the pectoralis muscles. (313)
47. The brachial plexus may be injured intraoperatively through both stretching and
compression of the plexus. Stretching of the brachial plexus can occur with neck
extension, with turning the head to the opposite side, or with the patient in the lateral
decubitus position with inadequate padding to support the neck in the midline
position. It can also occur in any position when the arm is abducted more than 90
degrees. Compression of the brachial plexus may occur with inappropriately placed
shoulder braces or during spreading of the sternum during cardiac surgery. (313)
48. Injury to the brachial plexus manifests as a limply hanging arm at the side,
rotated medially, with a pronated forearm. This position of the arm is commonly
referred to as “waiter’s tip.” (313)
49. The radial nerve may be injured intraoperatively if the arm slips off the surgical
table or if pressure is applied to the humerus where the radial nerve runs in the
spiral groove. A rare cause of radial nerve injury is the mechanical effects of
an automated blood pressure cuff. (313)
50. Injury to the radial nerve manifests as decreased sensation over the dorsal surface
of the lateral three fingers and an inability to extend the metacarpophalangeal
joints or abduct the thumb. It is also characterized by wristdrop. (313)
51. The median nerve may be injured intraoperatively by the insertion of an
intravenous catheter into the antecubital fossa or by the extravasation of injected
medications. (313)
52. Injury to the median nerve manifests as decreased sensation on the palmar surface
of the lateral three fingers and an inability to oppose the first and fifth digits. (313)
53. The sciatic nerve may be injured intraoperatively by direct compression of the nerve
or during intramuscular injections in the upper, outer quadrant of the buttocks.
Injury may also occur by stretching with external rotation of the leg, which
most often occurs while in the lithotomy position. The risk of sciatic nerve
stretching can be minimized by the avoidance of excessive rotation of the legs at the
hip while in the lithotomy position. Injury of the sciatic nerve may be mistaken
as injury to the peroneal nerve, because the peroneal nerve is a branch of the sciatic
nerve. (313-314)
54. Injury to the sciatic nerve manifests as decreased sensation over the lateral leg and
foot, and weakness of all the skeletal muscles below the knee. (313-314)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
190
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
55. The most common peripheral nerve in the lower extremity to manifest a
postoperative neuropathy is the common peroneal nerve. (313-314)
56. The common peroneal nerve may be injured intraoperatively by compression
between the patient’s fibula and leg support for the lithotomy position. The risk
of this nerve injury can be minimized with appropriate padding, limiting the
length of cradle leg rests to avoid pressure on the fibular head, and strict attention to
candy cane leg holders to avoid contact with the leg. (313-314)
57. Injury to the common peroneal nerve manifests as a loss of dorsal extension of the
toes, inability to evert the foot, and footdrop. (313-314)
58. The anterior tibial nerve may be injured intraoperatively with prolonged plantar
flexion of the feet. This risk can be avoided by placing a roll under the ankles
of patients in the prone position.
59. Injury to the anterior tibial nerve manifests as footdrop.
60. The femoral nerve may be injured intraoperatively by compression from a pelvic
retractor against the pelvic brim during abdominal surgery. It may also occur
with excessive flexing and external rotation at the groin while in the lithotomy
position. (314)
61. Injury to the femoral nerve manifests as a decreased sensation over the
superior aspect of the thigh, as well as on the medial and anteromedial side of
the leg. (314)
62. The saphenous nerve may be injured intraoperatively by compression against
the medial tibial condyle and a metal support for the lithotomy position when the
brace is placed medial to the patient’s leg. The risk of a saphenous nerve
injury may be minimized with the appropriate use of padding.
63. The obturator nerve may be injured intraoperatively during a difficult
forceps-assisted vaginal delivery or by excessive flexion of the thigh to the
abdomen, as during vaginal delivery.
64. Injury to the obturator nerve manifests as decreased sensation over the medial thigh
and an inability to adduct the leg.
65. The intraoperative use of a tourniquet can result in nerve injury, particularly
if the inflation time of the tourniquet exceeds 2 hours or with the application of
excessive tourniquet pressures. For this reason, after about 2 hours if there is
a continued need for the tourniquet, it may be prudent to deflate it for
15 minutes and reinflate it. (314)
PERIOPERATIVE EYE
INJURY AND
VISUAL LOSS
66. Although quite rare, eye complications accounted for 3% of all claims (ASA
Closed Claims Project Database) and were associated with greater monetary
settlements as compared with nonocular injuries. Corneal abrasion continues to
be the most common type of perioperative eye injury. (314)
67. Postoperative visual loss is a rare devastating complication associated with patients
undergoing spine surgery in the prone position and in cardiac surgery with
cardiopulmonary bypass. Ischemic optic neuropathy (ION) and to a lesser extent
central retinal arterial occlusion (CRAO) from direct eye compression are the
conditions most commonly cited as potential causes. (314)
68. The causes of postoperative visual loss appear to be multifactorial in nature.
However, patient risk factors include hypertension, diabetes, atherosclerosis,
morbid obesity, and smoking. Perioperative risk factors for patients undergoing
spine surgery in the prone position include prolonged hypotension, long
duration of surgery, large volumes of blood loss, large crystalloid use, anemia or
hemodilution, and increased intraocular or venous pressure. (314)
Patient Positioning and Associated Risks
191
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
69. The ASA Committee on Professional Liability established the ASA Postoperative
Visual Loss (POVL) registry to study the complication. By 2005, 131 cases were
reported to the registry of which 73% of the cases occurred during spine
surgeries and 9% involved cardiac surgery. Of patients with POVL undergoing spine
surgery, 89% of patients were diagnosed with ION, predominantly posterior,
and 11% with CRAO. (314)
EVALUATION AND
TREATMENT OF
PERIOPERATIVE
NEUROPATHIES
70. Neurologic consultation obtained early after a peripheral nerve injury manifests in
the postoperative period may be useful in detecting between acute and chronic
injury. This can be accomplished through nerve conduction velocity and
electromyographic studies. Signs of denervation from acute nerve injury are
detected by an electromyogram 18 to 21 days after the injury, emphasizing the
importance of obtaining neurologic consultation before this time. It may also be
useful to test the same nerve in the limb opposite the symptomatic one to
exclude any preexisting nerve injury that is asymptomatic. When the injury is
reversible, recovery often takes place within 3 to 12 months. (315)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
192
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
Chapter
17 ANESTHETIC
MONITORING
Anil de Silva
1. What is the purpose of intraoperative patient monitoring?
2. What are some monitors that have been mandated for use by the American Society
of Anesthesiologists? How frequently is it mandated that intraoperative blood
pressure be measured?
ELECTROCARDIO-
GRAPHIC
MONITORING
3. What are some potential intraoperative problems during anesthesia that can be
detected by an anesthesiologist through the use of an electrocardiogram?
4. Which lead is selected on the electrocardiogram for continuous tracing on the
monitor to best detect cardiac dysrhythmias? Why?
5. Which lead is selected on the electrocardiogram for continuous tracing on the
monitor to best detect inferior wall myocardial ischemia? Which lead is selected for
continuous tracing on the monitor to best detect anterior or lateral wall myocardial
ischemia?
SYSTEMIC BLOOD
PRESSURE
MONITORING
6. How does an automated oscillometric blood pressure measuring device, such as the
Dinamap, work?
7. What is the appropriate-sized cuff for use with an automated oscillometric blood
pressure measuring device?
8. When using an automated oscillometric blood pressure measuring device, will
the blood pressure be falsely high or low with a cuff that is too small? When using an
automated oscillometric blood pressure measuring device, will the blood
pressure be falsely high or low with a cuff that is too loose?
9. What is a potential problem that can result from too frequent cycling of an
automated oscillometric blood pressure measuring device?
10. What are some possible indications for intraarterial blood pressure monitoring?
11. What are some arteries that may be used for intraarterial blood pressure
monitoring? Which of these is most commonly selected?
12. How does the intraarterial blood pressure waveform change with increasing
distance from the heart?
CENTRAL VENOUS
PRESSURE
MONITORING
13. What are some indications for the placement of a central venous catheter?
14. What veins are used for central venous access? What are some potential
complications of the cannulation of veins for central access?
15. Which is the preferred jugular vein for cannulation? Why?
16. What are some advantages and disadvantages of cannulation of the internal jugular
vein over other central veins?
193
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
17. What are some advantages and disadvantages of cannulation of the subclavian vein
over other central veins?
18. What does the central venous waveform look like? What do each of the peaks and
descents represent relative to the cardiac cycle?
19. Why is the central venous pressure able to be used to estimate a patient’s
intravascular fluid volume status?
20. Under which circumstances does central venous pressure not estimate a patient’s
intravascular fluid volume status? What invasive monitor can be used instead
of a central venous catheter under these conditions?
PULMONARY
ARTERY CATHETER
MONITORING
21. Name six possible indications for the placement of a pulmonary artery catheter.
What information can be obtained regarding the patient’s status with the use
of a pulmonary artery catheter?
22. Of what is the pulmonary capillary wedge pressure a reflection? What other
measurement derived by the pulmonary artery catheter can also be used in lieu of
the pulmonary capillary wedge pressure?
23. How is estimation of the cardiac output accomplished through the use of a
pulmonary artery catheter?
24. What are some potential complications of pulmonary artery catheterization?
25. Please complete the following table illustrating the usefulness of central venous
catheters and pulmonary artery catheters in the evaluation of various hemodynamic
disorders (PAEDP, pulmonary artery end-diastolic pressure; PAOP, pulmonary
artery occlusion pressure).
Central Venous
Pressure " or #
PAOP " or #
PAEDP Relation
to PAOP
Hypovolemia
Left ventricular failure
Right ventricular failure
Pulmonary embolism
Cardiac tamponade
ECHOCARDIO-
GRAPHIC
MONITORING
26. What is some information that can be derived intraoperatively through the use of
a transesophageal echocardiogram?
27. What is the difference between M-mode and B-mode echocardiography?
28. When would one use continuous-wave Doppler as opposed to using pulsed-wave
Doppler? What is the Nyquist limit?
PULSE OXIMETRY
MONITORING
29. How does a pulse oximeter work?
30. Enumerate five factors that influence the accuracy of pulse oximetry.
31. Is the SpO2 read by the pulse oximeter falsely high or falsely low in the presence
of carboxyhemoglobin?
32. What is the SpO2 read by the pulse oximeter in the presence of methemoglobinemia?
33. What is the SpO2 read by the pulse oximeter in the presence of intravenous dyes?
ELECTRO-
PHYSIOLOGIC
MONITORING
34. What is an evoked potential? What are some evoked potentials that can be
monitored?
35. What are some intraoperative uses of evoked potentials? What is the most common
procedure for which evoked potentials are monitored intraoperatively?
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
194
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
36. How do evoked potentials appear when the patient is under general anesthesia?
What is the potential problem with this?
37. What are some factors that may limit the usefulness of evoked potentials in the
intraoperative period?
38. The integrity of which spinal cord neurologic tissue is monitored by somatosensory
evoked potentials and motor evoked potentials?
CAPNOGRAPHY
MONITORING
39. What is a capnograph?
40. Please refer to Figure 20-10. What portion of the ventilatory cycle is represented by
each letter in the figure?
41. What does the absence of carbon dioxide in a patient’s exhaled gases indicate during
endotracheal intubation? What does the absence of carbon dioxide in a person’s
exhaled gases indicate after proper and confirmed endotracheal intubation?
42. What are some possible causes of a decrease in the concentration of carbon dioxide
in a patient’s exhaled gases?
43. What are some possible causes of an increase in the concentration of carbon dioxide
in a patient’s exhaled gases?
44. How does the end-tidal carbon dioxide concentration measured on a capnogram
compare with the arterial carbon dioxide concentration? Why?
ELECTROEN-
CEPHALOGRAPHIC
MONITORING
45. What are some intraoperative uses of an electroencephalogram?
46. What factors may influence the tracings obtained by an intraoperative
electroencephalogram?
47. What is the bispectral index monitor?
48. What are some potential clinical uses of a bispectral index monitor? What are its
limitations?
TEMPERATURE
MONITORING
49. How does a patient’s body temperature usually change under anesthesia?
50. What are some sites for measurement of a patient’s body temperature?
51. What is the potential benefit of maintaining intraoperative normothermia?
INHALED GAS
MONITORING
52. What are some methods by which the exhaled concentrations of multiple gases,
including respiratory and anesthetic gases, may be measured?
53. What are some advantages and disadvantages of mass spectrometry techniques
for measuring a patient’s exhaled gases?
54. What are some advantages and disadvantages of Raman spectrometry techniques
for measuring a patient’s exhaled gases?
ANSWERS*
1. The primary purpose of intraoperative patient monitoring is to gather data
regarding the physiologic status of the patient. Monitoring provides the
anesthesiologist with the information to respond appropriately to any salutary or
adverse physiologic changes. In addition, the patient’s response to the therapeutic
interventions can be assessed. (320)
2. The American Society of Anesthesiologists has mandated that qualified anesthesia
personnel shall be present in the room to administer anesthesia and monitor the
patient throughout the conduct of all general anesthetics, regional anesthetics, and
monitored anesthesia care. The standard adopted by the American Society of
Anesthesiologists is that during all anesthetics the patient’s oxygenation,
*Numbers in parentheses: numbers refer to pages, figures, or tables in Miller RD, Pardo MC: Basics of Anesthesia,
6th ed. Philadelphia, Elsevier Saunders, 2011.
Anesthetic Monitoring
195
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
ventilation, circulation, and temperature shall be continually evaluated. The full
description of these standards (Appendix B) also provides an explanation of each of
these objectives and specific methods by which they can be achieved. In brief, the
use of pulse oximetry, capnography, an oxygen analyzer, a disconnect alarm, and a
visual display of the electrocardiogram are all addressed. In addition, the blood
pressure and heart rate are to be evaluated at least every 5 minutes during the course
of anesthesia. (320)
ELECTROCAR-
DIOGRAPHIC
MONITORING
3. Potential intraoperative problems such as cardiac dysrhythmias, myocardial
ischemia, and electrolyte abnormalities may all be detected through the use of
an electrocardiogram. (321)
4. Lead II provides for the best visualization of the P wave on the electrocardiogram,
making it the best lead for the detection of cardiac dysrhythmias on a continuous
tracing. (321)
5. Lead II on the electrocardiogram provides for the best detection of inferior wall
myocardial ischemia on a continuous tracing. The V5 precordial lead on the
electrocardiogram provides for the best detection of anterior or lateral wall
myocardial ischemia. (321)
SYSTEMIC BLOOD
PRESSURE
MONITORING
6. Automated oscillometric blood pressure monitoring devices work by inflating a
pneumatic cuff encircling a limb until arterial blood flow through the limb is
occluded. The cuff is then deflated until pressure oscillations are detected. The
pressure at which oscillations are initially detected is considered to be the systolic
blood pressure. The cuff continues to deflate and the oscillations increase for a time
and then begin to decrease. The diastolic pressure is defined as the point at which
further deflation of the cuff provides no further evidence of pressure oscillations. The
most reliable blood pressure parameter measured by this noninvasive blood pressure
monitoring device is the mean arterial blood pressure. (321-322, Figure 20-3)
7. The appropriate cuff size for use with a noninvasive blood pressure measuring
device is one whose width is about 40% of the circumference of the patient’s
limb. (322)
8. When using an automated oscillometric blood pressure measuring device, the blood
pressure will be falsely high when the blood pressure cuff is too small. Conversely,
the blood pressure will be falsely low when the blood pressure cuff is too large. (322)
9. Cycling an automated oscillometric blood pressure measuring device too frequently
can result in limited perfusion to the extremity distal to the cuff. Complications such
as edema, nerve paresthesia, superficial thrombophlebitis, and compartment
syndrome have all been reported as a result of noninvasive blood pressure devices
that have been repeatedly cycled. These complications are rare. (321)
10. Possible indications for intraarterial blood pressure monitoring include the need for
continuous blood pressure monitoring, access for frequent arterial blood gas
samplings, need for monitoring intentional pharmacologic cardiovascular
manipulation, and failure of indirect blood pressure measurement. (322)
11. Arteries that may be used for intraarterial blood pressure monitoring include the
radial, ulnar, brachial, axillary, femoral, dorsalis pedis, and the superficial
temporal arteries. Of these, the radial artery is the most frequently used artery
for cannulation. (323, Table 20-3)
12. The waveform from an intraarterial catheter changes progressively with increasing
distance from the heart. The waveform peak is higher and the trough lower at
more distal arterial sites. The mean arterial pressure, however, remains
approximately the same. (323, Figure 20-4)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
196
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
CENTRAL VENOUS
PRESSURE
MONITORING
13. Indications for the placement of a central venous catheter include the measurement
of central venous pressures, access through which to provide long-term intravenous
feedings, access for the administration of large volumes of fluids, intravascular
access when no peripheral access is available, the administration of vasoactive or
caustic drugs, to initiate transvenous cardiac pacing, for temporary hemodialysis,
and for the aspiration of air emboli. (324)
14. Veins that are cannulated for central venous access include the internal jugular,
subclavian, femoral, and antecubital veins. Potential complications of cannulation of
the central veins include arterial puncture, hematoma, hemothorax, pneumothorax,
nerve injury, emboli, cardiac dysrhythmias, thrombosis, and infection. Accidental
arterialpuncturewhileattemptingcannulationofthejugularveincanresultintheneed
to surgically explore and repair the artery. A pneumothorax occurs more frequently
after placement of a subclavian catheter. This is the basis for the recommendation that
a chest radiograph be done after failed subclavian catheterization and before
attempting catheterization on the other side. (323, Table 20-4)
15. The right internal jugular vein is preferred over the left jugular vein for cannulation
because of its short, straight, valveless route to the superior vena cava. (323)
16. Advantages of cannulation of the internal jugular vein include its predictable
anatomic location with palpable landmarks, its location at the head of the patient’s
bed allowing the anesthesiologist easy access to the catheter intraoperatively, and
the relatively decreased complications associated with cannulation of this central
vein. Disadvantages of cannulation of the internal jugular vein include the potential
for puncture of the carotid artery and pleural cavity and trauma to the brachial
plexus. (323)
17. Advantages of cannulation of the subclavian vein include its landmarks, its capacity
to remain patent despite hypovolemia, easier nursing care, and the relative increase
in patient comfort associated with cannulation of this central vein. Disadvantages of
cannulation of the subclavian vein include the potential for puncture of the
subclavian artery and pleural cavity and for thoracic duct damage on the left. (323)
18. The central venous pressure waveform has a typical trace in a normally functioning
heart. The a wave correlates with atrial contraction, the c wave correlates with
closure of the tricuspid valve and its bulging into the right atrium, and the v wave
correlates with blood accumulation in the vena cava and right atrium against a
closed tricuspid valve. The x descent correlates with atrial relaxation, and the
y descent correlates with opening of the tricuspid valve and right ventricular filling.
(324, Figure 20-5)
19. The central venous pressure parallels right atrial pressure in a patient with normal
cardiovascular physiology. In these patients, the central venous pressure can be
used to estimate the patient’s intravascular fluid volume status. (324)
20. The central venous pressure does not estimate the patient’s intravascular fluid
volume status in the face of right-sided heart dysfunction, left ventricular
dysfunction, or pulmonary hypertension. Under these conditions, a pulmonary
artery catheter may be used for cardiovascular monitoring. (324)
PULMONARY
ARTERY CATHETER
MONITORING
21. Possible indications for the placement of a pulmonary artery catheter
perioperatively include poor left ventricular function, valvular heart disease, recent
myocardial infarction, adult respiratory distress syndrome or any pulmonary
vascular disease process, massive trauma, and major vascular surgery. In general,
the pulmonary artery catheter allows for more accurate assessment of cardiac filling
pressure than a central venous monitor in the presence of pulmonary vascular
disease, left-sided heart dysfunction, or potential left-sided heart dysfunction due to
myocardial ischemia. The pulmonary artery catheter also measures cardiac output
and calculates systemic and pulmonary vascular resistance. (324, Table 20-5)
Anesthetic Monitoring
197
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
22. The pulmonary capillary wedge pressure is a reflection of left atrial pressure.
The pulmonary artery diastolic pressure may be used as an approximation of left
atrial pressure in lieu of the pulmonary artery wedge pressure. This allows for
continuous monitoring. The pulmonary artery diastolic pressure does not accurately
reflect left atrial pressure in conditions in which pulmonary vascular resistance
is increased, as with hypoxia, hypercarbia, hypothermia, and various forms of
pulmonary disease. (324, Figure 20-6)
23. Cardiac output can be estimated through the use of a pulmonary artery catheter via
the thermodilution method. To do this, cold saline is rapidly injected through the
proximal central venous port. A thermistor located at the distal end of the
pulmonary artery catheter senses the change in temperature. Because blood flow
is the source of dilution of temperature, the flow, or cardiac output, can be
calculated. It is the right ventricular cardiac output that is actually measured by this
technique, whereas left ventricular cardiac output can only be estimated based
on the results. (325)
24. Potential complications of pulmonary artery catheterization include pulmonary
ischemia or infarction from prolonged wedging of the catheter, cardiac dysrhythmias,
infection, catheter knotting, and, rarely, pulmonary artery rupture. (324)
25. (325, Table 20-6)
Central Venous
Pressure " or #
PAOP " or #
PAEDP Relation
to PAOP
Hypovolemia
Decreased
Decreased
PAEDP ¼ PAOP
Left ventricular
failure
Increased
Increased
PAEDP ¼ PAOP
Right ventricular
failure
Increased
No change
PAEDP ¼ PAOP
Pulmonary embolism
Increased
No change
PAEDP > PAOP
Cardiac tamponade
Increased
Increased
PAEDP ¼ PAOP
ECHOCARDIO-
GRAPHIC
MONITORING
26. Intraoperative cardiac imaging with a transesophageal echocardiogram is
now widely accepted as a monitor for cardiac function during surgery, especially
cardiac surgery. Information that can be derived from an intraoperative
echocardiogram includes regional ventricular and atrial wall motion, ejection
fraction, cardiac valve function, the presence of intracardiac air, and the effects
of surgery and anesthesia on cardiac function. The use of a transesophageal
echocardiogram requires advanced technical training. Complications associated
with the use of transesophageal echocardiography include pharyngeal and
esophageal injury and bleeding, but these occurrences are rare. (326,
Table 20-7)
27. M-mode echocardiography provides a unidimensional view of the myocardium,
while B-mode echocardiography provides a two-dimensional image of the
myocardium. The M-mode is most useful for determining velocities, while the
B-mode is most useful for evaluating changes in myocardium function. (326)
28. One would use continuous–wave Doppler when measuring velocities with high
Doppler shifts. Pulsed-wave Doppler can only be used when the velocities measured
are relatively slow. However an advantage is that the location of the moving object
is also measurable. In pulsed-wave Doppler echocardiography, the maximal
Doppler shift measurable by echocardiography is limited to half the pulse repetition
frequency, also called the Nyquist limit. (326)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
198
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
PULSE OXIMETRY
MONITORING
29. A pulse oximeter works by emitting a light through a diode and sensing the light,
usually on the opposite side of a digit. The wavelength of light that is absorbed by
oxyhemoglobin relative to reduced hemoglobin in the pulsatile (and therefore
arterial) vessel allows the device to calculate the saturation of oxygen in the
peripheral artery. (327, Figure 20-8)
30. Factors that influence the accuracy of pulse oximetry include low flow conditions,
motion artifact, nail polish, ambient light interference, dysfunctional hemoglobins,
methylene blue, and a shift in the oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve. (327,
Table 20-8)
31. The SpO2 read by the pulse oximeter in the presence of carboxyhemoglobin is falsely
high. This occurs because carboxyhemoglobin has an absorbance of light that is
markedly similar to oxyhemoglobin. (327)
32. The SpO2 read by the pulse oximeter in the presence of methemoglobinemia
approaches 85% regardless of the true arterial hemoglobin oxygen saturation. (327)
33. The SpO2 read by the pulse oximeter in the presence of intravenous dyes (methylene
blue, indigo carmine) will be artificially low regardless of the true arterial
hemoglobin oxygen saturation. (326)
ELECTRO-
PHYSIOLOGIC
MONITORING
34. An evoked potential is a measured low amplitude signal from the central nervous
system that occurs in response to sensory or motor nerve stimulation. Evoked
potentials that can be monitored include visual, auditory, sensory, and motor. (328)
35. Evoked potentials can be used intraoperatively to assess the integrity of the neural
pathways during anesthesia. The most common evoked potentials monitored
intraoperatively are somatosensory evoked potentials from the spinal cord during
surgery on the spinal cord or vertebral column. (328)
36. Evoked potentials may undergo changes in the latency period and amplitude while
patients are under general anesthesia. These changes are similar to the changes
that are seen with neural ischemia, which can complicate interpretation of the
evoked potential values. Limiting the minimum alveolar concentration (MAC) of
volatile anesthetics to 0.5 to 0.75 facilitates monitoring of evoked potentials.
Opioids and propofol have less of an effect on evoked potentials, and muscle
relaxants do not affect somatosensory evoked potentials at all. (328)
37. Factors that may limit the intraoperative usefulness of evoked potentials because of
their influence on the results include age and gender of the patient, arterial blood
gas tensions, and body temperature. In addition, the cost and complexity of
performing evoked potentials may limit their use. (328)
38. Somatosensory evoked potentials of the lower extremities monitor the integrity
of the dorsal column of the spinal cord. Motor evoked potentials monitor the
corticospinal tract. Unlike somatosensory evoked potentials, motor evoked
potentials are sensitive to muscle relaxants. (328)
CAPNOGRAPHY
MONITORING
39. A capnograph is a waveform display that illustrates the patient’s inhaled and
exhaled concentrations of carbon dioxide. (328-329)
40. In the capnogram, the point A designates the exhalation of anatomic dead space gas
just before the exhalation of alveolar gas. Point B designates the beginning of
exhalation of alveolar gas that contains carbon dioxide. Phase C-D designates the
exhalation of alveolar gas, while point D designates the end-tidal carbon dioxide
concentration. Phase D-E designates the beginning of inspiration and the
entrainment of inspired gases. (329, Figure 20-10)
41. The absence of carbon dioxide in a patient’s exhaled gases just after attempted
endotracheal intubation with properly functioning equipment provides evidence
Anesthetic Monitoring
199
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
that the patient’s lungs are not being ventilated. That is, the endotracheal tube may
not be in the trachea. The absence of carbon dioxide in a patient’s exhaled gases
after intubation of the trachea has been confirmed may indicate that there is either a
malfunction of equipment, a malfunction in the interface between the patient and
the equipment (as in disconnection from the anesthesia circuit), movement or
dislodgment of the endotracheal tube from its previously proper position, or a
physiologic patient problem such as a cardiac arrest. (328)
42. Possible causes of a decrease in the patient’s exhaled concentration of carbon dioxide
include hyperventilation, hypothermia, low cardiac output, pulmonary embolism,
accidental disconnection, tracheal extubation, or cardiac arrest. (328, Table 20-9)
43. Possible causes of an increase in the patient’s exhaled concentration of carbon
dioxide include hypoventilation, hyperthermia, sepsis, rebreathing, the
administration of bicarbonate, and the insufflation of carbon dioxide during
laparoscopy. (328, Table 20-9)
44. The end-tidal carbon dioxide concentration measured on a capnogram is less than
the true arterial concentration of carbon dioxide, typically by a 2- to 5-mm Hg
gradient. This occurs as a result of the alveolar-to-arterial difference for carbon
dioxide concentrations secondary to dead space ventilation. (328)
ELECTROEN-
CEPHALOGRAPHIC
MONITORING
45. Intraoperative uses of an electroencephalogram include monitoring for cerebral
ischemia and monitoring the depth of anesthesia. (329)
46. Among the factors that influence the tracings obtained by an electroencephalogram
and limit its usefulness intraoperatively are anesthetics, changes in body
temperature, and alterations in the arterial carbon dioxide concentration. (329)
47. The bispectral index monitor performs a bispectral analysis of the
electroencephalogram and provides the clinician with a processed evaluation of its
analysis through its display of a number between 0 to 100. The analysis is done
through superficial scalp electrodes typically on the forehead of the patient. The
number provided by the bispectral index monitor reflects the state of wakefulness of
the central nervous system. (329, Figure 20-11)
48. The bispectral index monitor may be used clinically to predict loss of consciousness
and lack of recall during anesthesia. A bispectral index numerical value of 0 is
consistent with an isoelectric encephalogram. A numerical value of 60 or less
corresponds to a low probability of recall or awareness. Thus the use of the bispectral
index monitor for the titration of medicines to achieve adequate but not excessive
loss of consciousness may result in more rapid awakening at the end of the
procedure. The bispectral index has not been shown to be well correlated with the
hemodynamic or movement responses to noxious stimuli. In addition, a recent
study has shown that the use of a bispectral index monitor showed no decrease
in the incidence of awareness when using volatile anesthetics. (329)
TEMPERATURE
MONITORING
49. Patients will typically have a passive decrease in body temperature by 1 C to 4 C
during anesthesia. Intraoperative passive cooling occurs because of anesthesia-
induced vasodilation, environmental temperature, and surgical exposure. The
mechanism for core heat loss is through redistribution, and for peripheral heat loss
is through radiation, convection, conduction, and evaporation. (330)
50. Sites for body temperature monitoring include the esophagus, nasopharynx,
rectum, bladder, and tympanic membrane. Axillary and skin temperature monitors
are less reliable. (330)
51. Maintaining intraoperative normothermia may decrease risks associated with
hypothermia, namely coagulopathies, impaired wound healing, and potentially
increased myocardial oxygen requirements as from shivering. (330)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
200
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
INHALED GAS
MONITORING
52. Multiple gas analysis can be achieved by infrared absorption, mass spectrometry,
and Raman spectroscopy. (330)
53. Advantages of mass spectrometry techniques for measuring a patient’s exhaled
gases are that it can measure the gases continuously, it can measure all gases
including inhaled anesthetics, oxygen, and nitrogen, and it can measure the inspired
gas concentrations as well as the exhaled concentrations. A disadvantage of the
mass spectrometry technique is that it has traditionally used large and expensive
monitors. (330)
54. Advantages of Raman spectrometry techniques for measuring a patient’s exhaled
gases are that they can measure all gases including inhaled anesthetics, oxygen, and
nitrogen and they do not alter the gas molecule so that it can be returned to the
anesthetic delivery system. A disadvantage of Raman spectrometry techniques is
that they require a very high intensity light source to work, such as a laser. (330)
Anesthetic Monitoring
201
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
Chapter
18 ACID-BASE BALANCE
AND BLOOD GAS
ANALYSIS
Linda Liu
GENERAL
DEFINITIONS
1. What is the importance of maintaining a physiologic acid-base status?
2. What is the definition of an acid or a base?
3. How are acidemia and alkalemia defined?
4. How are acidosis and alkalosis defined?
5. What is the definition of base excess?
REGULATION OF THE
HYDROGEN ION
CONCENTRATION
6. What is the normal plasma Hþ concentration, the normal plasma HCO3

concentration, and the normal arterial pH of blood?
7. How is normal arterial pH maintained?
8. What are the buffering systems, and which system has the greatest contribution to
the total buffering capacity of blood?
9. How does the bicarbonate buffering system work? What enzyme facilitates this
reaction?
10. How does hemoglobin act as a buffer?
11. How does the ventilatory response work?
12. How does the renal response work?
13. How quickly can the buffering system, ventilation changes, and the renal response
work?
MEASUREMENT OF
ARTERIAL BLOOD
GASES
14. What is the relationship between a venous and arterial blood gas drawn from the
same patient concurrently?
15. What errors can occur if heparin or air is present in an arterial blood gas sample?
16. What happens if there is a delay in analysis of the blood sample?
17. How does temperature affect the arterial blood gas (ABG)?
18. What does an anesthesia provider using alpha stat during cardiopulmonary bypass
do to the ABG?
19. What does an anesthesia provider using pH stat during cardiopulmonary bypass do
to the ABG?
DIFFERENTIAL
DIAGNOSIS OF
ACID-BASE
DISTURBANCES
20. What is the difference between a primary disturbance and a compensatory
disturbance in acid-base status?
21. What adverse responses are associated with severe acidemia?
22. What adverse responses are associated with severe alkalemia?
23. What defines a primary respiratory acidosis or alkalosis?
24. What are the causes of a respiratory acidosis?
25. What is the compensatory response for a respiratory acidosis?
26. What is the treatment for a respiratory acidosis?
202
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
27. What are the causes of a respiratory alkalosis?
28. What is the compensatory response for a respiratory alkalosis?
29. What is the treatment for a respiratory alkalosis?
30. What defines a primary metabolic acidosis or alkalosis?
31. How is the anion gap calculated?
32. What are the causes of a metabolic acidosis?
33. What is the compensatory response for a metabolic acidosis?
34. Describe how the Stewart strong ion difference approach works.
35. What is the treatment for a metabolic acidosis?
36. What are the causes of a metabolic alkalosis?
37. What is the compensatory response for a metabolic alkalosis?
38. What is the treatment for a metabolic alkalosis?
39. How can an acute respiratory process be distinguished from a chronic process?
40. How is the Dgap determined?
41. How is the Winter’s formula used?
42. Diagram the algorithm for diagnosing an acid-base disorder.
OTHER
INFORMATION
PROVIDED BY THE
ARTERIAL BLOOD
GAS
43. Define dead space to tidal volume (VD/VT) ratio.
44. What are the causes of arterial hypoxemia?
45. What does the alveolar gas equation calculate?
46. How is the alveolar-arterial (A-a) gradient calculated? And what is the significance
of the gradient?
47. What is the PaO2/FIO2 (P/F) ratio?
CARDIAC OUTPUT
ESTIMATES
48. What is the normal mixed venous PO2?
49. What is the Fick equation used for?
50. What is the arteriovenous difference used for?
ANSWERS*
GENERAL
DEFINITIONS
1. A physiologic acid-base status optimizes enzyme function, myocardial
contractility, and saturation of hemoglobin with oxygen. (334)
2. Bronsted defined an acid as a molecule that can act as a proton [Hþ] donor, and a base
as a molecule that can act as a proton acceptor. In biologic molecules, weak acids
or bases are molecules that can reversibly donate Hþ or reversibly bind Hþ. (334)
3. Acidemia is defined as an arterial pH less than 7.35 and alkalemia is defined as an
arterial pH greater than 7.45. (334)
4. An acidosis is the underlying process that lowers the pH, whereas an alkalosis
is the process that raises the pH. A patient can have a mixed disorder with both an
acidosis and an alkalosis, but can only be either acidemic or alkalemic. (334)
5. Base excess is usually defined as the amount of strong acid or strong base
required to return 1 L of whole blood exposed in vitro to a PCO2 of 40 mm Hg
to a pH of 7.4. The number is supposed to refer to the metabolic component of
an acid-base disorder. It is most often used in the operating room as a surrogate
marker for lactic acidosis to help determine the adequacy of volume
resuscitation. (335)
*Numbers in parentheses: numbers refer to pages, figures, or tables in Miller RD, Pardo MC: Basics of Anesthesia,
6th ed. Philadelphia, Elsevier Saunders, 2011.
Acid-Base Balance and Blood Gas Analysis
203
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
REGULATION OF
THE HYDROGEN ION
CONCENTRATION
6. At 37 C, the normal plasma Hþ concentration is 35 to 45 nmol/L. The normal
plasma HCO3
 concentration is 24  2 mEq/L, and the normal arterial pH of blood
is between 7.36 and 7.44. (335)
7. Normal arterial pH is maintained through three systems: buffers, ventilation
changes, and renal response. The ventilatory response involves changes in alveolar
ventilation and CO2 concentrations. The renal response involves reabsorption of
bicarbonate ions or secretion of hydrogen ions. (335)
8. The buffering systems in blood include bicarbonate, hemoglobin, phosphate, and
plasma proteins. The bicarbonate buffering system is the largest contributor
and provides 50% of the total buffering capacity of the body. Hemoglobin is
responsible for about 35% of the total buffering capacity, and phosphate and plasma
proteins account for the remainder. (335)
9. Carbonic anhydrase facilitates the hydration of carbon dioxide in the plasma and in
the erythrocytes into H2CO3, which spontaneously dissociates to Hþ and HCO3
.
The HCO3
 that is formed then enters the plasma to function as a buffer, and the
Hþ that is generated is buffered by hemoglobin. (335)
10. In plasma, hemoglobin exists as a weak acid. It acts as a buffer by binding Hþ
generated by the bicarbonate buffering system. Carbon dioxide can also be
transported by hemoglobin as carbaminohemoglobin. Deoxyhemoglobin has a
greater affinity for carbon dioxide, so venous blood carries more carbon dioxide
than arterial blood. (335-336)
11. Carbon dioxide diffuses across the blood-brain barrier to change CSF pH. Central
chemoreceptors lie on the anterolateral surface of the medulla and respond to
changes in CSF pH. Minute ventilation increases 1 to 4 L/min for every 1 mm Hg
increase in PCO2. Peripheral chemoreceptors are at the bifurcation of the common
carotid arteries and aortic arch. The peripheral chemoreceptors are sensitive to
changes in PO2, PCO2, pH, and arterial perfusion pressure. They communicate with
the central respiratory centers via the glossopharyngeal nerves. The stimulus from
central and peripheral chemoreceptors to either increase or decrease alveolar
ventilation diminishes as the pH approaches 7.4 such that complete correction or
overcorrection is not possible. (336)
12. The kidneys correct for pH changes by reabsorbing filtered HCO3
, excreting
titratable acids, and producing ammonia. (336-337)
13. The buffering system of the blood responds to changes in arterial pH almost
instantly. Compensatory changes in alveolar ventilation in response to changes
in arterial pH occur within minutes. Compensatory changes by the kidneys in
response to changes in arterial pH require 12 to 48 hours and may not be maximal
for up to 5 days. (335)
MEASUREMENT OF
ARTERIAL BLOOD
GASES
14. Venous PCO2 is 4 to 6 mm Hg higher and pH 0.03 to 0.04 lower than arterial values.
Venous blood cannot be used for estimation of oxygenation because venous PO2
is significantly lower than arterial PO2 and the relationship is not linear. (338)
15. Because heparin is acidic, excessive amounts of heparin in the syringe containing
blood for arterial blood gas and pH analysis may result in a falsely decreased
arterial pH reading. Air bubbles in the syringe containing blood for an arterial blood
gas sample could result in the diffusion of oxygen and carbon dioxide between
the air bubble and the blood in the syringe. Typically, this results in a decrease in the
carbon dioxide tensions in the blood sample. The change in oxygen tension
(either falsely higher or lower) depends on the patient’s PO2. (338)
16. A delay in analysis of the blood sample can lead to oxygen consumption and carbon
dioxide production by the metabolically active white blood cells. Usually this
error is small and can be reduced by placing the sample on ice. In some leukemia
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
204
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
patients with markedly elevated white blood cell counts, this error can become
significant. This is known as leukocyte larceny. (338)
17. Decreases in temperature decrease the partial pressure of a gas in solution even
though the total gas content does not change. A blood gas with a pH of 7.4 and PCO2
of 40 mm Hg at 37 C will have a pH of 7.58 and PCO2 of 23 mm Hg at 25 C.
The change in PO2 with respect to temperature depends on the degree that
hemoglobin is saturated with oxygen, but as a guideline, the PO2 is decreased
approximately 6% for every 1 C that the patient’s body temperature is below
37 C. (338)
18. The term alpha stat developed because as the patient’s pH was allowed to drift
with temperature, the protonation state of histidine residues remained “static.”
During cardiopulmonary bypass, an anesthesia provider using alpha stat would
manage the patient based on an ABG measured at 37 C and strive to keep that pH
at 7.4, while the patient’s true pH would be higher. (338)
19. pH stat requires keeping a patient’s pH static at 7.4 based on the core temperature.
During cardiopulmonary bypass, an anesthesia provider using pH stat would
manage the patient based on an ABG that is corrected for the patient’s temperature.
This usually means adding carbon dioxide so that the patient’s
temperature-corrected blood gas has a pH of 7.4. (338)
DIFFERENTIAL
DIAGNOSIS OF
ACID-BASE
DISTURBANCES
20. A primary disturbance in acid-base status is the initial deviation in the arterial
pH secondary to either respiratory or metabolic causes. A compensatory response
occurs in an attempt to reverse the alteration in the arterial pH. Typically the
compensatory response is not able to completely reverse the deviation in
arterial pH. (339)
21. Acidemia usually leads to decreased myocardial contractility. Respiratory acidosis
may produce more rapid and profound myocardial dysfunction than metabolic
acidosis because of the rapid entry of carbon dioxide into the cardiac cells. In the
brain, this rapid rise in carbon dioxide can lead to confusion, loss of consciousness,
or seizures. (339)
22. Severe alkalemia can lead to decreased cerebral and coronary blood flow due to
arteriolar vasoconstriction. The consequences are more prominent with respiratory
than with metabolic causes because of the rapid movement of carbon dioxide across
cell membranes. Acute hyperventilation can produce confusion, myoclonus,
asterixis, depressed consciousness, and seizures. (339)
23. A primary respiratory acidosis is accompanied by a PCO2 above normal, usually
greater than 43 mm Hg. A primary respiratory alkalosis is accompanied by a PCO2
below normal, usually lower than 37 mm Hg. (339-340)
24. Respiratory acidosis may occur secondary to increased carbon dioxide production,
decreased carbon dioxide elimination, or from rebreathing or absorption. Causes
of increased carbon dioxide production include: malignant hyperthermia, sepsis,
or overfeeding. Causes of decreased carbon dioxide elimination include: CNS
depressants, decreased skeletal muscle strength, or intrinsic pulmonary disease.
Causes of rebreathing or absorption include: exhausted soda lime, incompetent
one-way valves, or laparoscopic surgery. (339)
25. Over the course of hours to days, the kidneys will compensate for the acidosis
by increased hydrogen ion secretion and bicarbonate reabsorption. The hallmark of a
chronic respiratory acidosis is an elevated PCO2 with a near normal pH. (339-340)
26. The treatment for a respiratory acidosis is treatment of the underlying disorder.
The use of mechanical ventilation to decrease an acutely increased PCO2 may
be necessary if the pH is less than 7.2. (340)
Acid-Base Balance and Blood Gas Analysis
205
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
27. Respiratory alkalosis may occur with increased minute ventilation or decreased
carbon dioxide production. Causes of increased minute ventilation relative to
carbon dioxide production include: CNS disease, pain and anxiety, sepsis, liver
disease, pregnancy, or hypoxemia. Causes of decreased carbon dioxide production
include: hypothermia and skeletal muscle paralysis. (340)
28. Respiratory alkalosis is compensated for by decreased reabsorption of bicarbonate
ions from the renal tubules and increased urinary excretion of bicarbonate. (340)
29. Treatment for a respiratory alkalosis should be directed at correcting the underlying
cause. Mild alkalemia usually does not require treatment. During general anesthesia,
the minute ventilation may be decreased in order to decrease the elimination of
carbon dioxide. (340)
30. A metabolic acidosis is present when accumulation of any acid other than carbon
dioxide results in a pH lower than 7.35. The HCO3
 concentration is usually
less than 22 mEq/L. A metabolic alkalosis is present when the pH is higher than 7.45
due to gain of bicarbonate ions or loss of hydrogen ions. The HCO3
 concentration
is usually greater than 26 mEq/L. (340-342)
31. The anion gap is the difference between the measured cations (sodium) and
measured anions (chloride and bicarbonate). A normal gap value is 8 to 12 mEq/L
and is mostly composed of albumin. A patient with a low serum albumin will have
a lower anion gap. Each 1 g/dL decrease in serum albumin below 4.4 g/dL will
lower the actual concentration of unmeasured anions by 2.3 to 2.5 mEq/L. (341)
32. The causes of a metabolic acidosis are divided into anion gap and nonanion gap
causes. An increase in the anion gap occurs when the anion replacing bicarbonate
is not one that is routinely measured. The most common unmeasured anions are
lactic and keto-acids. Other common anions include: methanol, ethylene glycol,
uremia, paraldehyde, and aspirin. Metabolic acidosis with a normal anion gap
occurs when chloride replaces the lost bicarbonate, such as with bicarbonate-
wasting processes in the kidney (renal tubular acidosis) or gastrointestinal tract
(diarrhea). Aggressive fluid resuscitation with normal saline will induce a nongap
metabolic acidosis because the chloride administration impairs bicarbonate
reabsorption in the kidneys. (341)
33. Compensatory responses for a metabolic acidosis include increased alveolar
ventilation from carotid body stimulation and renal tubule secretion of hydrogen
ions into urine. Chronic metabolic acidosis is associated with loss of bone mass
because buffers present in bone are used to neutralize the nonvolatile acids. (341)
34. The strong ion approach distinguished six primary acid-base disturbances
(strong ion acidosis and alkalosis, nonvolatile buffer acidosis and alkalosis, and
respiratory acidosis and alkalosis) as opposed to the four differentiated by the
Henderson-Hasselbalch equation (metabolic acidosis and alkalosis, and respiratory
acidosis and alkalosis). The more complex Stewart approach may be similar to the
traditional Henderson-Hasselbalch approach if changes in albumin concentration
are accounted for in the measurement of the anion gap. (341)
35. Treatment for metabolic acidosis is based on whether an anion gap is present or not.
Intravenous administration of sodium bicarbonate can be given for a nongap
acidosis because the problem is bicarbonate loss. Management of an anion gap
acidosis should be guided by diagnosis and treatment of the underlying cause in
order to remove the nonvolatile acids in the circulation. (342)
36. Causes of a metabolic alkalosis are based on whether the underlying cause is
chloride responsive or chloride resistant. Chloride responsive causes include: renal
loss from diuretics, GI loss from vomiting, or alkali administration. Chloride
resistant causes include: hyperaldosteronism, refeeding syndrome, and profound
hypokalemia. (342)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
206
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
37. Compensatory responses for a metabolic alkalosis include increased reabsorption
of hydrogen ions and decreased secretion of hydrogen ions by renal tubule
cells, and alveolar hypoventilation. (342)
38. Treatment of a metabolic alkalosis should be aimed at reducing the acid loss by
stopping gastric drainage or fluid repletion with saline and potassium chloride,
which allows the kidneys to excrete excess bicarbonate ions. Occasionally, a trial
of acetazolamide may be useful in causing a bicarbonaturia. (342)
39. Acute respiratory acidosis can be distinguished from a chronic respiratory acidosis
by the degree of elevation of HCO3
. The renal effects to compensate for a
respiratory acidosis take 12 to 48 hours to take effect and are reflected by a more
marked increase in the plasma HCO3
 concentration. During an acute process, the
pH changes 0.08 for every 10 mm Hg change in PCO2 from 40 mm Hg. During a
chronic process, the pH changes 0.03 for every 10 mm Hg change in PCO2 from
40 mm Hg. (342-343)
40. If an anion gap is present, then a Dgap should be determined. The Dgap is the excess
anion gap added back to the serum bicarbonate level. It is used to determine if
another concurrent metabolic process is present along with an anion gap metabolic
acidosis. If the Dgap is less than 22 mEq/L, then a concurrent nongap metabolic
acidosis exists. If the Dgap is greater than 26 mEq/L, then a concurrent metabolic
alkalosis exits. (342-343)
41. The Winter’s formula is used to determine whether an appropriate respiratory
compensation is present for the metabolic acidosis. If measured PCO2 is greater than
calculated from the Winter’s formula, then the compensation is not adequate and
respiratory acidosis is also present. If the measured PCO2 is less than calculated, then
a respiratory alkalosis is present. For a metabolic acidosis, the calculated PCO2 equals
the serum HCO3
 concentration multiplied by 1.5 plus 8. For a metabolic alkalosis,
the calculated PCO2 equals the serum HCO3
 concentration multiplied by 0.7 plus 21.
(342-343)
42. Step 1: Determine oxygenation
Step 2: Determine acidemia (pH <7.35) or alkalemia (pH >7.45)
Step 3: Determine whether the etiology is from a respiratory (PCO2 change from 40)
or metabolic (HCO3
 – change from 24 mEq/L) process
Step 4: If there is a respiratory abnormality, then assess whether the process is acute
or chronic. If there is a metabolic acidosis, then skip to step 5. If there is a metabolic
alkalosis, then skip to step 7.
Step 5: If there is a metabolic abnormality, determine the anion gap
Step 6: Determine the Dgap.
Step 7: Determine whether there is adequate respiratory compensation for the
metabolic process. (342-343)
OTHER
INFORMATION
PROVIDED BY THE
ARTERIAL BLOOD
GAS
43. The dead space to tidal volume (VD/VT) ratio is the fraction of each tidal volume
that is involved in dead space ventilation. Normal VD/VT is less than 0.3 and is
mostly due to anatomic dead space. An increased dead space will decrease the
efficiency of ventilation. Patients with a pulmonary embolus or chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease are examples of patients who may have an
increased VD/VT ratio. (343)
44. Arterial hypoxemia is caused by a low PO2 in the inhaled gases, hypoventilation, or
venous admixture with or without a decreased mixed venous oxygen content.
An increase in the venous admixture involves blood that passes from the pulmonary
circulation to the systemic circulation without passing by ventilated alveoli. These
right-to-left shunts can be intrapulmonary (atelectasis, pneumonia, one-lung
ventilation) or intracardiac (congenital heart disease). (344)
Acid-Base Balance and Blood Gas Analysis
207
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
45. The alveolar gas equation estimates the partial pressure of alveolar oxygen (PAO2)
by using barometric pressure, water vapor pressure, the inspired oxygen content,
and PCO2. (344-345)
46. The A-a gradient formula calculates the difference in oxygen partial pressure
between alveolar (PAO2) and arterial (PaO2) blood. Calculation of the gradient
provides an estimate of venous admixture as the cause of hypoxia. Normally, the
A-a gradient is less than 15 mm Hg while breathing room air due to shunting via
the thebesian and bronchial veins. Increased inspired FIO2 can lead to a larger
gradient: up to 60 mm Hg while breathing FIo2 of 1.0 in healthy patients. The A-a
gradient can also provide an assessment of the patient’s shunt fraction. To estimate
the amount of shunt present, the shunt fraction is approximately 1% of cardiac
output for every 20 mm Hg difference in the A-a gradient when the PaO2 is higher
than 150 mm Hg. (344-345)
47. The PaO2/FIO2 (P/F) ratio is an alternative to the A-a gradient to communicate
the degree of hypoxia. Patients with acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS)
should have a P/F ratio below 200. (345)
CARDIAC OUTPUT
ESTIMATES
48. Normal mixed venous PO2 (Pvo2) is 40 mm Hg. A true mixed venous PO2 should
reflect blood from the superior and inferior vena cava. It is usually obtained from
the distal port of an unwedged pulmonary artery catheter. Many physicians use the
trend from a venous PO2 obtained from the superior vena cava as a surrogate
number. If tissue oxygen consumption is unchanged, then changes in Pvo2 will
reflect direct changes in cardiac output. (345)
49. The Fick equation is used to calculate cardiac output if PaO2, Pvo2, and hemoglobin
are known. It basically states that the delivery of oxygen in the veins must equal
the delivery of oxygen in the arteries minus the oxygen that is consumed (VO2).
(345-346)
50. The arteriovenous difference is the difference between the arterial and mixed
venous oxygen content. The number is a good estimate of the adequacy of oxygen
delivery. The normal arteriovenous difference is 4 to 6 mL of O2/dL of blood.
When tissue oxygen consumption is constant, an increased arteriovenous difference
means that there is higher oxygen extraction, which can be seen with decreased
cardiac output or congestive heart failure. A lower arteriovenous difference means
there is lower extraction or higher cardiac output, which can occur during cyanide
poisoning or sepsis. (346)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
208
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
Chapter
19 HEMOSTASIS
Greg Stratmann
COAGULATION
1. What is the mechanism of coagulation?
2. What activates platelets to form the initial platelet plug at the site of vascular injury?
3. What is the role of activated platelets in the formation of a blood clot?
4. Where is tissue factor located? What is its role in coagulation at the site of vascular
injury?
5. What physiologic event leads to the secretion of tissue plasminogen activator and
eventually fibrinolysis?
6. How is fibrinolysis affected normally by surgery or massive trauma?
7. What is the potential clinical effect of systemic fibrinolysis? What can be used for
the treatment of systemic fibrinolysis?
COMMON
LABORATORY TESTS
OF HEMOSTASIS
8. Name some laboratory tests of platelet function.
9. How can a difficult blood draw result in an artificially low platelet count number?
10. Which test of platelet function is the single best predictor of functional platelet
disorders?
11. How is a bleeding time test of platelet function performed?
12. What is a normal bleeding time?
13. What are some limitations of the bleeding time test of platelet function?
14. What function of platelets is evaluated by the platelet function analysis test?
15. What are some common causes of platelet dysfunction that can be detected by the
platelet function analysis test?
16. What are platelet aggregation studies of platelet function?
17. What are a benefit and a drawback of platelet aggregation studies over other platelet
function tests?
18. Name some laboratory tests of coagulation.
19. Low levels of which factors will result in a prolonged prothrombin time?
20. What is the international normalized ratio (INR)? What is it useful for?
21. Low levels of which factors will result in a prolonged partial thromboplastin time?
22. What drug therapy can be monitored by the partial thromboplastin time?
23. A low level of which factor will result in a prolonged prothrombin time and a normal
partial thromboplastin time?
24. What is evaluated by the thrombin time test?
25. What is the relationship between the results of the thrombin time test and the results
of the prothrombin time and partial thromboplastin time tests?
26. What is tested by the activated clotting time (ACT)? What is its clinical use?
27. What elements of blood clot formation, consolidation, and lysis are measured by
thromboelastography?
28. Name some laboratory tests of fibrinolysis.
209
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
29. What is suggested by elevated levels of fibrinopeptide or fibrin monomer?
30. What is suggested by elevated levels of fibrin degradation products?
31. What is suggested by elevated D-dimer levels?
DISORDERS
ASSOCIATED WITH
ALTERED
HEMOSTASIS
DURING SURGERY
32. In general, what laboratory values of platelet counts are associated with
uncontrolled intraoperative bleeding?
33. In general, what percent of coagulation factors must be present to prevent
uncontrolled intraoperative bleeding?
34. Name some diseases associated with an increased incidence of bleeding during
surgery.
35. Name some diseases or conditions associated with an increased incidence of
thrombosis during surgery.
36. Name some diseases that are associated with initiating disseminated intravascular
coagulation during surgery.
37. What are some hereditary coagulation and platelet disorders? Which of these is the
most common?
38. How are hereditary coagulation disorders treated?
39. Where is von Willebrand factor stored?
40. Name three important hemostatic functions of von Willebrand factor.
41. How does von Willebrand disease inhibit the formation of fibrin?
42. What are the clinical effects of von Willebrand disease?
43. How can von Willebrand disease be distinguished from factor VIII deficiency?
44. How many types of von Willebrand disease are there? What are they and how are
they inherited?
45. What is the anesthetic management of a patient with von Willebrand disease when
undergoing a surgical procedure?
46. What disease or condition is a contraindication to the administration of
desmopressin acetate tablets (DDAVP)?
47. What are alternative perioperative treatment options of patients with von
Willebrand disease if DDAVP is not available?
48. How does vitamin K support coagulation?
49. Which coagulation factors are vitamin K dependent?
50. How could a patient become vitamin K deficient without fasting?
51. Which coagulation factor is not synthesized in the liver? Where, instead, is this
factor made?
52. Name three reasons for the increased risk of bleeding caused by severe liver
disease.
53. What diseases or conditions are associated with acquired antibodies to coagulation
factor VIII? What is the clinical relevance of this?
54. What are some causes of peripheral platelet destruction?
55. What are some causes of thrombocytopenia that can occur during pregnancy?
56. What percent of platelets are normally sequestered in the spleen? What happens
during pathologic splenic sequestration of platelets?
57. Name some causes of an impaired quality of platelet function despite the adequate
number of circulating platelets.
58. What are some intraoperative conditions that may facilitate bleeding?
59. At what body temperature can hypothermia begin to contribute to intraoperative
bleeding?
60. How can anemia and hemodilution cause a coagulopathy?
DISORDERS
FAVORING
THROMBOSIS
61. What are some inherited factor deficiencies that can lead to a hypercoagulable
state?
62. What is factor V Leiden?
63. What is antiphospholipid syndrome?
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
210
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
64. What percent of patients with systemic lupus erythematosus have circulating lupus
anticoagulant? What is the clinical implication of this?
65. What laboratory analysis values for partial thromboplastin time and prothrombin
time are associated with lupus anticoagulant?
66. What is the classic set of circumstances, sometimes referred to as Virchow triad,
that predisposes patients to perioperative thrombosis?
67. What is disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC)?
68. What coagulation test results would you expect in a patient with DIC?
69. Which conditions have similar laboratory findings as those of DIC? Which lab
finding might help distinguish between DIC and these conditions?
70. What is the treatment for DIC?
ANTICOAGULANTS,
THROMBOLYTICS,
AND ANTIPLATELET
DRUGS
71. What are some common clinical complications associated with perioperative
thrombosis?
72. What categories of drugs are available to prevent and treat perioperative
thrombotic complications?
73. What are some clinically used anticoagulants?
74. What is the mechanism of action of warfarin (Coumadin)?
75. Which of the coagulation factors has the shortest half-life? Why is knowledge of
this factor’s plasma half-life important for warfarin therapy?
76. Why is it necessary to coadminister heparin in the early phases of warfarin
treatment?
77. What laboratory test monitors warfarin therapy? Why is it necessary to monitor
warfarin therapy and not therapy with oral direct thrombin inhibitors?
78. What are some advantages of unfractionated heparin therapy over low-molecular-
weight heparin (LMWH) or pentasaccharide (fondaparinux) drugs?
79. Why does unfractionated heparin therapy need to be closely monitored?
80. Why is it necessary to monitor unfractionated heparin therapy and not therapy
with LMWH or pentasaccharide drugs?
81. What laboratory test is used to monitor unfractionated heparin therapy?
82. What are some procedures in which heparin is administered to prevent blood
clotting? What laboratory test value is the usual end point for heparin therapy in
these procedures?
83. How is heparin anticoagulation during surgery reversed? What is the dose? What is
its mechanism of action?
84. What are some potential negative effects of the administration of protamine to
reverse the anticoagulation effects of heparin?
85. What are some potential disadvantages and/or side effects of the administration of
heparin?
86. What is heparin-induced thrombocytopenia? How many types are there?
87. How is the diagnosis of heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT) type 2 made?
What is its incidence among patients who receive heparin therapy? What is the
mortality rate of patients with HIT type 2?
88. What is the incidence of HIT type 2 among patients who receive heparin therapy?
What is the mortality rate of patients with HIT type 2?
89. What is the management of heparin-induced thrombocytopenia once the
diagnosis is made?
90. What is heparin resistance and what causes it?
91. How is heparin resistance treated?
92. How does heparin differ from both LMWH and pentasaccharide drugs regarding its
effect on thrombin?
93. What is the mechanism of action of LMWH and pentasaccharide drugs for
anticoagulation?
94. What are some advantages and disadvantages of LMWH and pentasaccharide
drugs over heparin for anticoagulation therapy?
95. What are some direct thrombin inhibitor drugs that are in current clinical use?
Hemostasis
211
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
96. What are the drawbacks of direct thrombin inhibitor drugs for intraoperative
anticoagulation?
97. A patient with a recent history of HIT type 2 is scheduled for a semielective
coronary artery bypass graft surgery. If the risk of bleeding associated with
intraoperative direct thrombin inhibitor therapy is considered excessive, what
other management options exist to meet the need for systemic anticoagulation for
cardiopulmonary bypass?
98. What are some thrombolytic drugs currently used in clinical practice?
99. What is the mechanism of action of thrombolytic drugs?
100. How long is surgery contraindicated after thrombolytic therapy?
101. What are some classes of antiplatelet drugs currently used in clinical practice?
What are some examples of drugs in each of these classes?
102. How is platelet function affected by aspirin, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs,
and COX-2 inhibitors?
103. How is platelet function affected by thienopyridine derivatives?
104. What is the duration of the effects of the thienopyridine derivatives clopidogrel
and ticlopidine on platelets after their discontinuation?
105. How is platelet function affected by GPIIb/IIIa antagonists?
106. What is the duration of the effects of GPIIb/IIIa drugs after their discontinuation?
AN APPROACH TO
PATIENTS WHO ARE
ANTICOAGULATED
107. When a patient on warfarin presents for surgery, what are the conflicting risks?
108. Which surgeries are generally associated with high risks of perioperative
thrombosis?
109. Which baseline medical conditions place patients on chronic warfarin therapy at a
high risk of perioperative thrombosis regardless of the type of surgery?
110. Which baseline medical conditions place patients on chronic warfarin therapy at
an intermediate risk of perioperative thrombosis regardless of the type of surgery?
111. Which baseline medical conditions place patients on chronic warfarin therapy at a
low risk of perioperative thrombosis regardless of the type of surgery?
112. Why is it important to stratify the risk of perioperative thrombosis for patients on
chronic warfarin therapy?
113. In what way does the management of patients on chronic warfarin therapy at high
risk for perioperative thrombosis differ from those at intermediate or low risk?
114. In a patient receiving perioperative heparin bridging therapy for warfarin
treatment, when should the intravenous heparin infusion be stopped prior to
surgery and when is it restarted?
115. In a patient receiving perioperative LMWH bridging therapy for warfarin
treatment, when is the last dose of LMWH administered and when is it restarted?
116. In which patients should the administration of perioperative heparin likely be
avoided?
117. How should a patient on chronic warfarin therapy who needs emergency surgery
be managed?
118. Why should the administration of oral vitamin K be considered for the emergency
patient on chronic warfarin therapy who is receiving fresh frozen plasma or
prothrombin complex to reverse the effects of warfarin?
119. How should vitamin K be administered for emergency surgery in patients on
chronic warfarin therapy? Why is this route preferred over the others?
AN APPROACH TO
PATIENTS
RECEIVING
ANTIPLATELET
THERAPY
120. How long do patients with bare metal coronary stents require antiplatelet therapy?
121. How long do patients with drug-eluting coronary stents require antiplatelet
therapy?
122. Why do patients with drug-eluting coronary stents require antiplatelet therapy
much longer than patients with bare metal coronary stents?
123. How should patients with coronary stents that require antiplatelet therapy be
managed in the perioperative period?
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
212
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
NEURAXIAL
INTERVENTIONS IN
PATIENTS BEING
TREATED WITH
ANTICOAGULANT
DRUGS
124. What is the risk of neuraxial interventions in patients who are concomitantly
being treated with anticoagulant drugs? How should these patients be
managed?
AN
INTRAOPERATIVE
APPROACH TO
UNCONTROLLED
BLEEDING
125. In the event of the massive transfusion of blood, and when laboratory testing is
not available, at what volume of blood loss does the dilution of coagulation factors
and platelets warrant the transfusion of fresh frozen plasma or platelets,
respectively?
126. During ongoing blood loss, what laboratory value would indicate the need for
the replacement of coagulation factors with fresh frozen plasma?
127. During ongoing blood loss, what laboratory value would indicate the need for
the replacement of platelets with a transfusion of concentrated platelets?
128. During ongoing blood loss, what laboratory value of fibrinogen would indicate
the need for a transfusion of cryoprecipitate?
129. What are some indications for the transfusion of cryoprecipitate?
130. What is the role of recombinant factor VIIa in perioperative hemorrhage?
131. List some adjuvant hemostatic agents and their mechanism of action.
132. What are some of the indications for DDAVP as an adjuvant hemostatic agent?
ANSWERS*
COAGULATION
1. The traditional thinking regarding the mechanism of coagulation was that there
were two independent pathways, which could independently activate a common
pathway leading to the generation of thrombin, which converts fibrinogen to fibrin.
These two pathways were termed intravascular (intrinsic) and extravascular
(extrinsic). It is now believed that this thinking is flawed; it appears the intrinsic
pathway is not important in physiologic coagulation per se. Instead, the current
understanding is that coagulation is a cell-based process that occurs on the surface
of subendothelial cells and platelets, and that it involves elements of both the
intrinsic and extrinsic systems. Specifically the extrinsic system generates a small
amount of thrombin, which then activates parts of the intrinsic system. The extrinsic
system also activates the intrinsic system directly via a recently discovered link
between the two systems. This then leads to the overwhelming generation of
thrombin (thrombin burst), which causes blood to clot. (349, Figure 22-1)
2. Platelets are activated at the site of vascular injury to form the initial platelet plug by
adhering to collagen or von Willebrand factor. (349)
3. Platelets, once activated, degranulate and release large amounts of calcium and
factors V and VIII. This activates a series of events that eventually leads to a cross-
linked fibrin meshwork that traps activated platelets and red blood cells to form a
blood clot. (349)
4. Tissue factor is located on subendothelial cells. Tissue factor located on the surface
of perivascular subendothelial cells at the site of vascular injury binds with
circulating factor VII to form a complex that leads to coagulation. (349)
*Numbers in parentheses: numbers refer to pages, figures, or tables in Miller RD, Pardo MC: Basics of Anesthesia,
6th ed. Philadelphia, Elsevier Saunders, 2011.
Hemostasis
213
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
5. The secretion of tissue plasminogen activator occurs when the endothelium is
activated by injury. This results in the activation of plasminogen to plasmin, which
degrades fibrin to soluble products such as D-dimers. This normally remains
localized to areas of thrombus. (350)
6. In general, surgery and/or massive trauma results in an elevation of acute phase
reactants that induces both a hypercoagulable state and inhibits the normal process
of fibrinolysis. (350)
7. The potential clinical effect of systemic fibrinolysis is the inability to dissolve
thrombus, or clots, and for continued bleeding. This can occur by unknown
mechanisms in the setting of surgery, cardiopulmonary bypass, or massive trauma.
Systemic antifibrinolytics such as e-aminocaproic acid and tranexamic acid have
been used to treat systemic fibrinolysis in this setting. (350-351)
COMMON
LABORATORY TESTS
OF HEMOSTASIS
8. Laboratory tests of platelet function include the platelet count, bleeding time,
platelet function analysis, and platelet aggregation studies. (351)
9. Platelet counts are quantified by automated instruments. Minimal platelet
clumping, as can occur with a difficult blood draw, can result in an artificially
low platelet count number. To confirm that an automated instrument-measured
low platelet count is valid, the platelet count can be examined visually for
clumping. Most clinical laboratories visually inspect platelet samples when
the results of a platelet count are less than 100,000 cells/mL. (351)
10. The bleeding time is the test of platelet function that is the single best predictor of
functional platelet disorders. (351)
11. The bleeding time test is a standardized test that involves making an incision 9 mm
long and 1 mm deep on the volar surface of the forearm. A blood pressure cuff is
placed on the upper arm insufflated to a pressure of 40 mm Hg. Excess blood is
blotted away every 30 seconds with filter paper while not touching the edge of
the incision. The time is calculated from incision to the end of bleeding, and
this time is the result of the test. (351)
12. A normal bleeding time is less than 11 minutes. (351, Table 22-1)
13. Some limitations of the bleeding time test of platelet function are its required
specific standard for performance, the difficulty with controlling the environment
in which it is performed, the potential for scar formation at the test site, and
that it is not readily available. (351)
14. The platelet function analysis test evaluates for the presence of dysfunctional
platelet adhesion. Platelet adhesion is the sticking of platelets to other surfaces.
Platelet aggregation, or the sticking of platelets to each other, is not evaluated
by this test. (351)
15. Some common causes of platelet dysfunction that can be detected by the platelet
function analysis test include uremia, hereditary platelet disorders such as von
Willebrand disease, postcardiopulmonary bypass platelet dysfunction, and the
presence of antiplatelet medications. (351)
16. Platelet aggregation studies of platelet function test the response of platelets to
aggregating agents such as collagen, adenosine diphosphate (ADP), epinephrine,
and ristocetin. (351)
17. A benefit of platelet aggregation studies over other platelet function tests is the
ability of the test to differentiate between different causes of platelet aggregation
dysfunction. A drawback of platelet aggregation studies over other platelet function
tests is that it cannot be performed intraoperatively and is rarely performed
perioperatively. (351)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
214
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
18. Laboratory tests of coagulation include the prothrombin time, partial
thromboplastin time, thrombin time, fibrinogen levels, ACT, and
thromboelastography. (352)
19. Low levels of factors VII, X, V; prothrombin; and fibrinogen prolong the
prothrombin time. (352)
20. The international normalized ratio (INR) is a number that standardizes reagent
differences between prothrombin time results across different laboratories. The INR
is useful for monitoring oral anticoagulant drug therapy with warfarin. (352)
21. Low levels of factors VIII, IX, XI, and XII will result in a prolonged partial
thromboplastin time. Adequate levels of factors X and V; prothrombin; and
fibrinogen must also be present. (352)
22. Heparin therapy can be monitored by the partial thromboplastin time. (352)
23. A low level of factor VII is the only cause of a prolonged prothrombin time and a
normal partial thromboplastin time. (352)
24. The thrombin time test evaluates the thrombin-fibrinogen interaction and is
prolonged with low levels of fibrinogen, abnormal fibrinogen, and in the presence
of circulating anticoagulants such as heparin. (352)
25. The prothrombin time test and the partial thromboplastin time tests will both be
prolonged if the thrombin time test is prolonged. Adequate fibrinogen levels are
necessary for all three of these tests of coagulation. (352)
26. The ACT measures the amount of time required for whole blood to clot in a test tube.
The ACT test is used clinically to monitor heparin therapy intraoperatively. (352)
27. Thromboelastography measures the time until initial clot formation (clotting
factor concentrations and possible anticoagulant medicine), the time until
clot formation (fibrinogen and platelets), the absolute clot strength (platelet
quantity and aggregation), and the degree of clot lysis (excessive fibrinolysis
or antifibrinolytic therapy). Note that thromboelastography does not measure
platelet adhesion, only platelet aggregation. (352)
28. Laboratory tests of fibrinolysis include fibrinopeptide and fibrin monomer levels,
fibrin degradation products, and D-dimer levels. (352)
29. Elevated levels of fibrinopeptide or fibrin monomer are suggestive of intravascular
coagulation. (352)
30. Elevated levels of fibrin degradation products are suggestive of conditions of
intravascular fibrin deposition with resultant secondary fibrinolysis, such as
disseminated intravascular coagulation. (352)
31. D-dimers are essentially a specific fibrin degradation product and are generated by
the fibrinolytic activity of plasmin. Plasmin cleaves cross-linked fibrin. Fibrin
monomers are cross-linked by factor XIII to form D-dimers. Elevated D-dimer levels
are suggestive of some prior formation of cross-linked fibrin (i.e., clot) such as that
caused by thrombotic or thromboembolic disorders. (352)
DISORDERS
ASSOCIATED WITH
ALTERED
HEMOSTASIS
DURING SURGERY
32. Platelet counts of 50,000 cells/mL can be associated with uncontrolled
intraoperative bleeding. (353)
33. In general, 20% to 30% of coagulation factors must be present to prevent
uncontrolled intraoperative bleeding. (353)
34. Some diseases associated with an increased incidence of bleeding during surgery
include hereditary and spontaneous coagulation factor deficiencies, hereditary
and spontaneous platelet disorders, liver disease, renal disease, HELLP syndrome,
Hemostasis
215
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
acute immune thrombocytopenia, elevated plasma proteins, multiple myeloma,
dysproteinurias, myeloproliferative disorders, coagulation factor inhibitors, and
drugs. Examples of drugs include warfarin, heparin, aspirin, nonsteroidal
antiinflammatory drugs, digitalis, thiazide diuretics, and ethyl alcohol.
(353, Table 22-2)
35. Some diseases or conditions associated with an increased incidence of thrombosis
during surgery include hereditary or spontaneous hypercoagulable states,
anticoagulant or factor mutations, factor V Leiden, homocystinemia,
dysfibrinogenemia, increased platelet turnover, prosthetic heart valves,
antiphospholipid antibody, lupus anticoagulant, anticardiolipin antibody, and
blood stasis and vascular damage. (353, Table 22-2)
36. Some diseases that are associated with initiating disseminated intravascular
coagulation during surgery include crush injury, acute hemolytic transfusion
reaction, abruption placentae, cardiopulmonary bypass, intravascular emboli,
sepsis, liver disease, arterial hypoxemia acidosis, pancreatitis, immune complex
disease, allergic reactions, transplant rejection, and cancer. (353, Table 22-2)
37. Some hereditary coagulation and platelet disorders include von Willebrand disease
and deficiencies in factor VIII (hemophilia A), factor IX (hemophilia B or Christmas
disease), factor XII, and factor XI. Of these, von Willebrand disease is the most
common with a prevalence of 1% to 2% in some populations. (353, Table 22-3)
38. Hereditary coagulation disorders are treated with a specific factor concentrate or
cryoprecipitate,asneeded.Replacementtherapyshouldaimtoachieve50%to100%of
normal factor levels perioperatively until wound healing is complete. (353-354)
39. Von Willebrand factor is stored in platelets. (354)
40. Von Willebrand factor has three important hemostatic functions. First, it
mediates adhesion of platelets to the damaged vessel wall, or the subendothelium.
Second, it is important in the adhesion of platelets to each other (platelet
aggregation). Finally, it protects factor VIII from inactivation and clearance. (354)
41. Fibrin formation requires sufficient levels of factor VIII. If factor VIII levels are
low (e.g., hemophilia A), fibrin formation is impaired. Von Willebrand factor
protects factor VIII levels from clearance and thus factor VIII levels are low in
certain forms of von Willebrand disease. (354)
42. Quantitative or qualitative deficits in von Willebrand factor results in dysfunctional
platelet adhesion, dysfunctional platelet aggregation, and insufficient levels of
factor VIII. The clinical effects of von Willebrand disease therefore are defective
platelet plug formation and defective fibrin formation. (354)
43. Von Willebrand disease can be distinguished from factor VIII deficiency through the
evaluation of the results of a bleeding time electrophoresis of von Willebrand
antigens, ristocetin cofactor, or platelet function analysis tests. (355)
44. There are three types of von Willebrand disease. Type 1 is an insufficient quantity
of von Willebrand factor. This type of von Willebrand disease is the most common,
accounting for 70% to 80% of von Willebrands disease. Type 1 von Willebrand
disease is associated with a decrease in factor VIII levels by 5% to 30%. Type 2 applies
when there is a defect in the quality of von Willebrand factor. Type 3, which is rare,
is when von Willebrand factor is absent entirely. Types 1 and 2 are autosomal
dominant, while type 3 is autosomal recessive. (354, Table 22-4)
45. To most appropriately manage a surgical patient with von Willebrand disease,
the type of disease must be determined. If necessary, a hematology consult should
be obtained. Bleeding in the presence of von Willebrand disease can be treated with
DDAVP, with the exception of type 3 and type 2B. Type 3 von Willebrand disease
requires von Willebrand factor and factor VIII concentrates, as well as a platelet
transfusion. In type 2B von Willebrand disease, DDAVP is actually contraindicated
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
216
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
because of transient thrombocytopenia after its administration. If the patient has a
type of von Willebrand disease that should respond to DDAVP, the dose that should be
administered is 0.3 mg/kg 1 hour before incision. (355)
46. DDAVP should be administered very cautiously or not at all to patients with
unstable coronary artery disease. When DDAVP is administered, there can be an
increase in platelet aggregation at sites of high shear stress, such as at coronary
narrowing. This can precipitate platelet plug formation and thus increase the risk for
myocardial infarction in these patients. (355)
47. There are alternative treatment options of patients with von Willebrand disease if
DDAVP is not available. These include cryoprecipitate and intermediate purity
concentrates of factor VIII. Cryoprecipitate contains large amounts of von
Willebrand factor and factor VIII, both of which are low in patients with von
Willebrand disease. Intermediate purity concentrates of factor VIII used for the
treatment of hemophilia A should also work, since these contain large amounts of
von Willebrand factor. High purity (recombinant) factor VIII preparations that do
not contain von Willebrand factor are not useful. (355)
48. Vitamin K is a cofactor in an enzymatic reaction necessary for the production of
certain coagulation factors. (355)
49. Factors II, VII, IX, and X, as well as protein C and protein S are vitamin K dependent
coagulation factors. (355)
50. If intestinal absorption is impaired (ileitis, celiac disease, etc.) or bacterial
production of vitamin K is decreased (antibiotic therapy), or both of these
circumstances are present, vitamin K deficiency could develop. (355)
51. Factor VIII is made in lung endothelial cells. All other coagulation factors are
synthesized in the liver. (355)
52. Decreased coagulation factor levels, increased fibrinolysis (liver degrades plasmin),
and splenic platelet sequestration in patients with portal hypertension can all
contribute to the increased risk of bleeding in patients with severe liver disease. (355)
53. There are several diseases or conditions that are associated with acquired antibodies
to coagulation factor VIII. Patients with hemophilia A (factor VIII deficiency), who
have undergone longstanding factor VIII replacement, occasionally develop
antibodies against that factor. Also, rheumatoid arthritis, ulcerative colitis, and old
age have all been associated with antibodies against factor VIII. Clinically, these
patients may have severe bleeding after minor injury. (355)
54. Some causes of peripheral platelet destruction include viral infections, chronic
lymphocytic leukemia, lymphoma, colon cancer, collagen vascular disease,
multiple blood transfusions, and drugs such as heparin, quinine, quinidine,
digitoxin, and thiazides. (355, Table 22-5)
55. Some causes of thrombocytopenia that can occur during pregnancy include
gestational thrombocytopenia, preeclampsia, and HELLP syndrome. (355)
56. Normally about one third of platelets are sequestered in the spleen, where they
remain until times of vascular stress when they are released into the circulation.
During pathologic splenic sequestration states, the spleen does not release platelets
into the circulation, and splenomegaly and thrombocytopenia result. (355-356)
57. There are a number of situations in which the number of platelets may be adequate,
but they are defective such that there is an increased risk of bleeding. Impaired
platelet function can be seen in uremia, and in the presence of some drugs such as
aspirin, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory agents, and alcohol. Platelet function is
also impaired when there are high levels of circulating fibrin-fibrinogen split
products, as can occur with severe liver disease, in disseminated intravascular
coagulation, and with therapeutically induced fibrinolysis such as with the
Hemostasis
217
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
treatment with urokinase. Platelet dysfunction also occurs in conditions in which
there are high levels of abnormal serum proteins, such as multiple myeloma,
dysproteinemias, or transfused dextran infusions. (356)
58. Some intraoperative conditions that may facilitate bleeding include hypothermia,
acidosis, anemia, and hemodilution. (356)
59. Hypothermia with temperatures of 34 C or less is associated with poor platelet
function and decreased procoagulant activity. (356)
60. Anemia and hemodilution can both cause a coagulopathy. Increasing anemia
results in decreasing plasma viscosity. The formation and strength of hemostatic
plugs are impaired in the presence of low plasma viscosity. Aggressive intravenous
fluid resuscitation can dilute plasma coagulation factors and platelet numbers
below amounts needed for effective hemostasis. (355)
DISORDERS
FAVORING
THROMBOSIS
61. Some factor deficiencies that are inherited can lead to a hypercoagulable state.
These may include antithrombin, protein C, protein S, or factor V. Inheritance of
these deficiencies may lead to deep vein thrombosis and pulmonary embolism. (356)
62. Factor V Leiden is a disease in which factor V has qualitative abnormalities.
The patients are resistant to activated protein C. Normally protein C activated
by thrombin, in the presence of thrombomodulin, inactivates factor V, limiting
thrombin production. Therefore patients with factor V Leiden are somewhat
hypercoagulable and are prone to thrombosis. (356)
63. Antiphospholipid syndrome is a heterogeneous group of syndromes that manifests
as venous and arterial microvascular thromboses. Antiphospholipid syndrome
describes an autoimmune production of antibodies against phospholipids in cell
membranes. When antiphospholipid syndrome occurs in isolation, it is called
primary antiphospholipid syndrome. Antiphospholipid syndrome most commonly
occurs in conjunction with another autoimmune disease. (356)
64. Lupus anticoagulant is a type of phospholipids antibody. About 5% to 10% of
patients with systemic lupus erythematosus have lupus anticoagulant. These
patients are at an increased risk for perioperative thromboses. (356)
65. In patients with lupus anticoagulant the partial thromboplastin time is prolonged
and the prothrombin time is normal to slightly prolonged. This would suggest
that a bleeding disorder is present (lupus anticoagulant) when, in fact, the patient
is prone to thrombosis. (356)
66. Virchow triad is the combination of venous stasis, hypercoagulability, and
vascular damage. All of these conditions are typically present in the perioperative
period. (356)
67. Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) is an acquired disorder characterized
by uncontrolled intravascular coagulation and fibrinolysis with bleeding and
thrombosis. Generalized intravascular thrombin generation and fibrin deposition in
small blood vessels lead to the formation of microvascular thrombi. Tissue hypoxia
and multiorgan failure follow. Normal regulatory control of thrombin and plasmin
is impaired, thereby allowing these proteolytic enzymes to activate and consume
circulating coagulation factors, fibrinogen, and platelets. (356)
68. The laboratory findings in DIC reflect the pathophysiology of the condition, which is
the concurrence of thrombus formation and fibrinolysis with consumption of
coagulation factors. The combination of a decreased platelet count, decreased
fibrinogen, prolonged PT and PTT, and elevated fibrin degradation products or
D-dimers is present in DIC. Once elevated, D-dimers remain increased for days, thus
making serial test measurements more sensitive and specific than single
measurements. (356)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
218
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
69. Both fibrin degradation products and D-dimers are elevated with trauma or recent
surgery, and with liver and kidney disease. Coagulation test results in patients with
severe liver disease may be similar to those in patients with DIC, although
D-dimer levels may not be as high and platelet counts not as low. Factor VIII activity is
helpful in discriminating between these conditions because factor VIII is consumed in
DIC and factor VIII levels are normal or elevated in liver disease. (356-357)
70. The most definitive treatment of DIC is removal of the stimulus causing DIC.
Other treatment of DIC is a matter of controversy. Generally, treatment is supportive
with replacement of factors and platelets as needed. This has previously been
contested as “fueling the fire” but there is no evidence that factor replacement
worsens DIC and common sense dictates that replacement of consumed products
is necessary to minimize bleeding complications. Heparin has been suggested
as a treatment option with the rationale that DIC, when primarily caused by
uncontrolled coagulation, may be halted when coagulation is inhibited.
This approach is also currently not supported by clinical evidence. (357)
ANTICOAGULANTS,
THROMBOLYTICS,
AND ANTIPLATELET
DRUGS
71. Perioperative thrombotic events include deep vein thrombosis, pulmonary
embolism, stroke, and myocardial infarction. (357)
72. Generally, drugs against perioperative thrombotic complications either prevent
(anticoagulants, antiplatelet drugs) or treat (thrombolytics) thrombus formation.
Since venous thrombosis starts with activation of the coagulation cascade, it seems
logical to aim to prevent thrombus formation by inhibiting some aspect of the
coagulation system with anticoagulants. Since arterial thrombus formation starts
with platelet adhesion, it seems logical to primarily target that process with
antiplatelet drugs. (357)
73. Anticoagulants in clinical use include heparin, LMWH parin, fondaparinux,
warfarin, direct thrombin inhibitors, and a recently FDA-approved oral direct
thrombin inhibitor. These drugs could potentially replace warfarin as oral
anticoagulants. (357)
74. Warfarin is a vitamin K antagonist. Warfarin exerts its effect through the
inhibition of an enzyme that recycles vitamin K (vitamin K epoxide reductase).
Warfarin thus causes a state similar to vitamin K deficiency. (357)
75. Initiation of the anticoagulant and antithrombotic effects of warfarin depends
on the plasma factor VII concentration because factor VII has the shortest half-life
(3 to 6 hours). Several factor half-lives are required to deplete factor VII to the
20% to 30% level needed for effective anticoagulation. Therefore, despite oral
warfarin reaching effective plasma concentrations in 90 minutes, full anticoagulant
efficacy does not develop until several days later. (357)
76. Heparin coadministration during the first 5 days of warfarin therapy is necessary for
two reasons. First, the anticoagulant activity of warfarin does not develop for
several days. Second, since the plasma half-life of protein C is only 6 to 10 hours, a
hypercoagulable state due to uninhibited thrombin formation can initially develop
when warfarin therapy is commenced. This is prevented by heparin
coadministration. (357)
77. Warfarin therapy is monitored with the measurement of the prothrombin time (INR).
Warfarin has a very narrow therapeutic window between bleeding and the
prevention or treatment of thrombosis. In addition, drugs, foods, and alcohol can
profoundly alter the pharmacokinetic profile of warfarin. Therefore, it is necessary
to monitor warfarin therapy. This is in contrast to the more modern anticoagulants
such as oral direct thrombin inhibitors, which require no monitoring. (357)
78. Some advantages of unfractionated heparin therapy over low LMWH or
pentasaccharide (fondaparinux) drugs include its immediate onset, efficacy against
Hemostasis
219
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
thrombin, short half-time of 30 to 60 minutes, and reversibility with protamine.
These characteristics of heparin therapy make it more useful for administration
intraoperatively than LMWH or fondaparinux. (357)
79. Unfractionated heparin therapy needs to be closely monitored because of its
unpredictable pharmacokinetics. Heparin binds to plasma proteins, macrophages,
endothelial cells, and proteins released from activated platelets and endothelial
cells. This variation in the available free heparin in plasma makes its necessary
to monitor heparin therapy with laboratory tests. (357)
80. Unfractionated heparin has unpredictable pharmacokinetics caused by
heparin binding to plasma proteins, macrophages, endothelial cells, and
proteins released from activated platelets and endothelial cells. These properties
are a function of the saccharide chain length, which is greater for
unfractionated heparin than for LMWH or pentasaccharide drugs. Therefore
these shorter drug preparations do not require monitoring with partial
thromboplastin time. (357)
81. The efficacy of unfractionated heparin is monitored using the partial
thromboplastin time. Heparin given intraoperatively can be monitored through
measurement of the ACT. (357)
82. Cardiac surgery, vascular surgery, and percutaneous interventional procedures such
as neuroangiography and cardiac arrhythmic tract ablations are some procedures in
which heparin is administered to prevent clotting. The degree of anticoagulation
required with heparin varies in these procedures. In cardiac surgery, heparin is
administered to achieve a level of anticoagulation that would allow cannulation
for cardiopulmonary bypass without risking clot formation in the bypass circuit.
To achieve this level of anticoagulation 300 to 400 U/kg of unfractionated heparin is
usually required, and the goal for treatment usually requires an ACT of greater than
400 seconds. Most vascular and percutaneous procedures require lower levels of
heparin anticoagulation; for these procedures the goal is to achieve an ACT of twice
baseline or less. (357)
83. Heparin anticoagulation during surgery is reversed through the administration of
protamine. The dose of protamine for this purpose is 1 mg for every 100 units of
heparin that has been administered. Protamine binds to heparin and reverses its
effect. (357)
84. A negative effect of protamine is its potential to cause a significant histamine
release manifested as bronchoconstriction, and a decrease in systemic vascular
resistance resulting in hypotension. Protamine administration can also cause
pulmonary hypertension. The pulmonary hypertension that can result from the
administration of protamine can be severe in rare cases. (357-358)
85. Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia and osteopenia are two potential side effects of
the administration of heparin that are directly related to the number of saccharide
residues and therefore occur with lower frequency or not at all with LMWH or
pentasaccharide drugs. (358)
86. HIT is characterized by a decrease in platelet count after initiation of heparin
therapy. HIT type 1 is not mediated by immunoglobulin G (IgG), is self-limited, and
does not require intervention. HIT type 2 is the most feared nonhemorrhagic
complication of heparin treatment and is usually due to antiplatelet factor 4
antibodies causing platelet aggregation. (358, Table 22-6)
87. HIT type 2 is a clinical diagnosis, which requires a decrease in the platelet count to
less than 100,000 cells/mL or less than 50% of baseline 5 to 10 days after the
initiation of heparin therapy. There is a recovery of the platelet count after
discontinuation of heparin. Heparin-platelet factor 4 antibody testing confirms the
diagnosis. (358)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
220
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
88. HIT type 2 occurs with an incidence of 1% to 3% among patients treated with
heparin. The mortality rate for patients with HIT type 2 is 20% to 30%. (358)
89. Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia type 1 does not require any special
therapeutic intervention, since the condition is self-limiting. Heparin-induced
thrombocytopenia type 2 requires cessation of all heparin, including heparin
flushes or heparin-coated central venous catheters. An alternative form of
anticoagulation must be sought (e.g., direct thrombin inhibitors). (358)
90. Heparin resistance is present when the usual heparin doses do not result in adequate
prolongation of the partial thromboplastin time or ACT. Insufficient antithrombin
or excessive heparin-binding proteins (factor VIII, fibrinogen, and other acute-
phase proteins) are thought to be the cause. (358)
91. Heparin resistance can be treated initially with additional doses of heparin. If
insufficient anticoagulation persists after the administration of additional heparin,
fresh frozen plasma may be used in an attempt to increase plasma concentrations
of antithrombin. (358)
92. LMWH and pentasaccharide drugs, unlike unfractionated heparin, do not directly
inhibit thrombin. Eighteen saccharide subunits (pentasaccharide plus 13 additional
subunits) are required to bridge the gap between antithrombin and thrombin.
LMWH, by definition, is any heparin molecule that does not have the sufficient
saccharide chain length to inhibit thrombin. (358)
93. Any drug containing the pentasaccharide subunit that is shared by unfractionated
heparin, LMWH, and pentasaccharide binds antithrombin. Antithrombin inhibits
factor Xa, regardless of its activity against thrombin. This confers the anticoagulant
efficacy of LMWH and pentasaccharide. (358)
94. LMWH and pentasaccharide drugs have a slower onset time (20 to 60 minutes)
but a longer half-time than heparin. This allows for once or twice a day
administration and it can be administered subcutaneously. In addition, the
predictable pharmacokinetics of LMWH and pentasaccharide drugs makes
laboratory monitoring of its efficacy unnecessary. Thus, these drugs are easier to
manage on an outpatient basis. LMWH and pentasaccharide drugs also have lower
to nonexistent risks of osteopenia and heparin-induced thrombocytopenia. One
disadvantage of LMWH and pentasaccharide drugs is that they have an
increased risk of bleeding complications when compared to unfractionated heparin.
Another disadvantage is the inability to reverse the effects of these drugs with
protamine. (358)
95. There are three intravenous direct thrombin inhibitor drugs in current clinical use.
These are hirudin, argatroban, and bivalirudin. There is also one oral direct
thrombin inhibitor drug, dabigatran, which was FDA approved in October of 2010
for the treatment of atrial fibrillation. (358)
96. Compared to unfractionated heparin at equipotent doses, direct thrombin inhibitors
are associated with an exceedingly high risk of bleeding. In addition, no reversal
agent exists for this group of drugs. (358-359)
97. If systemic anticoagulation is required in a patient with a recent history of HIT
type 2, the surgery could be delayed until such time as the antiplatelet factor
4 antibodies, which are thought to be responsible for the thrombotic complications
of HIT type 2, have disappeared. This will usually take 3 to 4 months. If that is
considered unacceptably long, plasmapheresis can be used in an attempt to
eliminate the antiplatelet factor 4 antibodies. (359)
98. Thrombolytic drugs currently used in clinical practice include streptokinase and
urokinase, alteplase, and tenecteplase. Streptokinase and urokinase are native tissue
plasminogen activators, while alteplase and tenecteplase are exogenous tissue
plasma activators. (359)
Hemostasis
221
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
99. The mechanism of action of thrombolytic drugs is through the activation of
plasmin. Exogenous tissue plasminogen activators are more fibrin sensitive.
All tissue plasminogen activators are both thrombolytics and anticoagulants since
fibrinolysis generates increased amounts of circulating fibrin degradation
products. This inhibits platelet aggregation. (359)
100. Surgery or puncture of noncompressible vessels is contraindicated within a 10-day
period after the administration of thrombolytic drugs. (359)
101. Antiplatelet drugs are classified by their mechanism of action, such as
cyclooxygenase inhibitors, thienopyridine derivates, and GPIIb/IIIa antagonists.
Cyclooxygenase inhibitors include nonselective inhibitors such as aspirin or
nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs, such as ibuprofen, diclofenac, and
naproxen. Selective cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitors include valdecoxib and
celecoxib. Examples of thienopyridine derivatives are ticlopidine and
clopidogrel. Examples of GPIIb/IIIa antagonists are abciximab, eptifibatide,
and tirofiban. (359)
102. Aspirin inhibits platelet granule release irreversibly for the life of the platelet.
Platelet function recovers by means of replacing inhibited platelets with newly
generated and thus functional platelets. Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs
reversibly inhibit platelets with return of normal platelet function within 3 days
after drug administration. Cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitors do not affect platelet
function. (359)
103. The thienopyridine derivatives clopidogrel and ticlopidine inhibit the
binding of platelets to fibrinogen. This results in an inhibition of platelet
aggregation. (359)
104. Platelet functions normalize 7 days after discontinuing clopidogrel, and 14 to
21 days after discontinuing ticlopidine. (359)
105. The platelet GPIIb/IIIa receptor mediates platelet aggregation by allowing the
binding of platelets to fibrinogen or von Willebrand factor. GPIIb/IIIa antagonists
are therefore potent inhibitors of platelet aggregation. (359)
106. Platelet aggregation normalizes 8 hours after discontinuing eptifibatide and
tirofiban, and 24 to 48 hours after discontinuing abciximab. (359)
AN APPROACH TO
PATIENTS WHO ARE
ANTICOAGULATED
107. Patients on warfarin undergoing surgery are challenging to manage
perioperatively. On the one hand, the anticoagulant could predispose to bleeding
complications if it is not discontinued far enough in advance of the surgery.
On the other hand, when the anticoagulant is discontinued, it adds to the overall
risk of thrombotic complications, which can have devastating consequences.
The risk of bleeding is a function of reversal of the drug effect with time, which is
assessed by the INR. The risk for a thrombotic complication after stopping warfarin
therapy depends on the surgical procedure, the original indication for warfarin
therapy, and the degree of the rebound hypercoagulable state associated with
warfarin cessation. This risk is assessed jointly by a multidisciplinary team. (359)
108. Major abdominal and cardiothoracic procedures generally carry the highest risk of
perioperative thrombosis. (359)
109. Patients on chronic warfarin therapy who have had a venous thrombotic or
arterial embolic event within a month before surgery, or who have mitral or cage
valve prosthesis are at a high risk of perioperative thrombosis regardless of the
type of surgery. (359, Figure 22-2)
110. Patients on chronic warfarin therapy who have had a venous thrombosis
less than 2 to 3 months prior, with atrial fibrillation with a history of prior
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
222
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
embolism or with recurrent venous thrombosis, are at an intermediate risk of
perioperative thrombosis regardless of the type of surgery. (360, Figure 22-2)
111. Patients on chronic warfarin therapy who have atrial fibrillation without a history
of prior embolism, or who have a valve prosthesis other than mitral or cage
prosthesis, are at a low risk of perioperative thrombosis regardless of the type of
surgery. (360, Figure 22-2)
112. It is important to stratify the risk of perioperative thrombosis for patients on
chronic warfarin therapy because patients must be managed differently with
regard to anticoagulation in the perioperative period based on their risk of
thrombosis. (359, Figure 22-2)
113. Patients on chronic warfarin therapy at high risk for a perioperative thrombosis
should be managed differently with regard to anticoagulation in the perioperative
period than those at a low or intermediate risk of thrombosis. In either case,
the warfarin is discontinued 5 days before surgery. However, patients at a high risk
for thrombosis receive an intravenous unfractionated heparin infusion that is
closely monitored as an inpatient. All others can receive bridging therapy as an
outpatient using either LMWH or pentasaccharide. Postoperative anticoagulation
starts 12 hours after hemostasis has been achieved in either case, but high-risk
patients receive either an intravenous infusion of unfractionated heparin or
LMWH, or pentasaccharide for a full 5 days while warfarin therapy is reinitiated
early and as an inpatient. Patients with intermediate or low risk for thrombosis
can be treated with subcutaneously injected unfractionated heparin, LMWH, or
pentasaccharide as an outpatient and warfarin can be recommenced electively.
(359-360, Figure 22-2)
114. In a patient receiving perioperative heparin bridging therapy for warfarin
treatment, the intravenous heparin infusion is discontinued 6 hours prior to
surgery and should not be restarted before 12 hours after hemostasis is
achieved. (359)
115. In a patient receiving perioperative LMWH bridging therapy for warfarin
treatment, LMWH is discontinued 12 hours before surgery and restarted
12 hours after hemostasis is achieved. (359)
116. Patients with a high likelihood of perioperative bleeding should likely not be
administered heparin in the perioperative period. This may include patients
with thrombocytopenia or concurrent antiplatelet therapy, or patients with a
history of bleeding in the gastrointestinal, genitourinary, or central nervous
system. (359-360)
117. For the emergency surgical patient on chronic warfarin therapy, the
administration of fresh frozen plasma or prothrombin complex concentrate will
restore the concentration of vitamin K dependent coagulation factors, and thus
reverse the effects of warfarin. Vitamin K dependent coagulation factors are
quickly restored with these products. (360)
118. The administration of oral vitamin K should be considered for the emergency
patient on chronic warfarin therapy who is receiving fresh frozen plasma or
prothrombin complex to reverse the effects of warfarin because of the half-life of
these products. The restoration of vitamin K dependent coagulation factors by
transfusion of these products is immediate, but the duration of the effect is only
4 to 6 hours. Thus oral vitamin K at a dose of 1 mg should be administered
concomitantly. (360)
119. Vitamin K is administered at 1 mg orally in addition to intravenous infusions
of fresh frozen plasma or prothrombin complex concentrate in patients on
warfarin that require emergency surgery. The subcutaneous or intramuscular
Hemostasis
223
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
routes can have prolonged action and can make postoperative warfarin
therapy challenging. Intravenous vitamin K is associated with a greater risk
of anaphylaxis. (360)
AN APPROACH TO
PATIENTS
RECEIVING
ANTIPLATELET
THERAPY
120. Patients with bare metal coronary stents require antiplatelet therapy for at least
4 months after stent placement. (360)
121. Patients with drug-eluting coronary stents require antiplatelet therapy for at least
12 months after stent placement. (360)
122. Drug-eluting coronary stents are designed to retard intimal hyperplasia, but in
so doing they also delay the formation of an antithrombotic intimal layer.
The intimal layer forms very slowly in the area of the drug-eluting stent, and
this intimal layer confers the anticoagulant property of the vessels. Hence patients
with drug-eluting coronary stents are at much greater risk for perioperative
myocardial infarctions when the antiplatelet therapy is stopped than those
with bare metal coronary stents. (360-361)
123. Patients with coronary stents that require antiplatelet therapy should have their
elective surgical procedure postponed until the antiplatelet therapy is no longer
recommended. In cases in which the surgery cannot be postponed, the risks of
bleeding and thrombosis need to be carefully weighed often by a multidisciplinary
approach including the cardiologist, surgeon, and anesthesiologist. If the risk
of thrombosis is high, bridging therapy with a short-acting antiplatelet agent may
be indicated. (361, Figure 22-3)
NEURAXIAL
INTERVENTIONS IN
PATIENTS BEING
TREATED WITH
ANTICOAGULANT
DRUGS
124. There is a risk of bleeding and neurologic injury in patients who are undergoing
neuraxial interventions while receiving anticoagulant drug therapy. The
management of these patients should be guided by the recommendations of the
American Society of Regional Anesthesia, who have provided algorithms for
management for each type of anticoagulant drug. (361, Table 22-7)
AN
INTRAOPERATIVE
APPROACH TO
UNCONTROLLED
BLEEDING
125. In the absence of laboratory testing during the massive transfusion of packed red
blood cells, fresh frozen plasma is generally indicated after the replacement of
about one blood volume. Platelets are generally indicated after the replacement of
about two blood volumes. (361)
126. During ongoing blood loss, a prothrombin time of 1.5 times the normal range or
greater would indicate the need for the replacement of coagulation factors with
fresh frozen plasma. (361)
127. During ongoing blood loss, a platelet count lower than 50,000 to 80,000 cells/mL
would indicate the need for the replacement of platelets with a transfusion of
concentrated platelets. (361-362)
128. During ongoing blood loss, a fibrinogen level of less than 125 mg/dL would
indicate the need for a transfusion of cryoprecipitate. Cryoprecipitate (one
concentrate per 10 kg of body weight) can be used to augment fibrinogen.
However, each fresh frozen plasma and platelet pheresis unit has approximately
twice the amount of fibrinogen contained in one cryoprecipitate concentrate. (362)
129. An indication for the transfusion of cryoprecipitate would be to treat a low
fibrinogen level in small children. Also, a cryoprecipitate transfusion is
appropriate when factor VIII or von Willebrand factor needs to be replaced
specifically. (362)
130. Recombinant factor VIIa has been designed and licensed for the treatment of
bleeding in hemophilia patients. It has also been used off-label in patients with
life-threatening, uncontrolled intraoperative bleeding unresponsive to
conventional therapy. It is of unproven benefit and extremely expensive. (363)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
224
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
131. Other hemostatic drugs used perioperatively include DDAVP and the lysine
analogs antifibrinolytics, e-aminocaproic acid and tranexamic acid. DDAVP
(0.3 mg/kg IV) releases von Willebrand factor from endothelial cells and the lysine
analogues inhibit fibrinolysis. (362)
132. DDAVP has proven useful for the prevention of bleeding in some forms of von
Willebrand disease. It is also useful in mild forms of factor VIII deficiency and for
bleeding associated with uremia. (362)
Hemostasis
225
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
Chapter
20 FLUID MANAGEMENT
Charles J. Fox, Henry Liu, Alan David Kaye
OVERVIEW OF FLUID
AND ELECTROLYTE
PHYSIOLOGY
1. What is the goal of perioperative fluid management?
2. What percentage of body weight is represented by water?
3. In what two compartments is total body water found?
4. What percentage of extracellular fluid volume is occupied by plasma volume?
What are the other constituents of extracellular fluid?
5. How does plasma differ from other components of extracellular fluid?
6. What are the major sources of daily water loss? How does temperature affect daily
water loss?
7. What body compartment has the highest concentration of potassium?
What electrolytes are found in plasma?
8. Which source produces the greatest volume of gastrointestinal fluid? Which source
of gastrointestinal fluid contains the highest concentration of bicarbonate?
FLUID
REPLACEMENT
SOLUTIONS
9. What are the daily water, potassium, and sodium requirements for the average
adult?
10. How are crystalloids grouped? How do crystalloid solutions distribute?
11. What is the composition of a balanced salt solution?
12. What occurs when normal saline is used in large volumes?
13. What group of patients routinely receives normal saline during surgery? Why?
14. What is the sodium concentration of hypertonic saline? What are the potential
benefits of hypertonic saline?
15. What is the advantage of using 5% dextrose water instead of pure water? What are
the clinical indications for use of 5% dextrose water?
16. What are colloids? How should colloids be used to correct blood loss in clinical
practice?
17. What are the differences between 5% albumin and 25% albumin?
18. What is dextran? What is the indication for its intravenous administration?
19. What are hydroxyethyl starches?
20. What are some potential adverse effects of using hydroxyethyl starches or dextran
for volume replacement?
21. What are the arguments for crystalloids versus colloids for perioperative fluid
replacement?
PERIOPERATIVE
FLUID STRATEGIES
22. What is the 4-2-1 rule of perioperative fluid management?
23. What is compensatory intravenous volume expansion?
24. How is fluid deficit corrected?
25. How is blood loss replaced clinically?
226
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
26. What is “third-space loss of fluid”? What is used to replace it?
27. Why might the traditional fluid management strategy cause problems? How might
one restrict the fluid administration?
ANSWERS*
OVERVIEW OF FLUID
AND ELECTROLYTE
PHYSIOLOGY
1. Proper perioperative fluid management requires knowledge of the patients’ surgical
procedure, their preexisting disease states, and the physiologic effects of the
anesthetic plan. Balancing these three factors will allow the anesthesiologist
to maintain the patient’s intravascular volume, cardiac preload, oxygen-
carrying capacity, coagulation status, electrolyte balance, and acid-base
homeostasis. (364)
2. Total body water represents approximately 60% of the body’s total weight in
the average adult. The relative percentage of body water can vary depending on
age, gender, and adiposity. The average 70 kg man contains approximately
600 mL/kg or 40 L of total body water. (364)
3. Total body water is found in the intracellular and extracellular compartments.
The intracellular fluid volume averages 400 to 450 mL/kg and the extracellular fluid
volume averages 150 to 200 mL/kg. (364)
4. The two main components of the extracellular compartment are blood volume,
which averages 60 to 65 mL/kg, and the interstitial fluid volume, which averages
120 to 165 mL/kg. The other constituents of extracellular fluid include pleural fluid,
peritoneal fluid, aqueous humor, sweat, urine, lymph, and cerebrospinal fluid.
(364-365)
5. The difference between plasma and other components of extracellular fluid is the
protein count. Plasma contains a much higher concentration of protein, which
results in a much higher plasma oncotic pressure. This oncotic gradient between the
plasma and interstitial fluid helps maintain intravascular volume. (364-365)
6. The major sources of daily water loss under normal activity and temperature
are urine, sweat, feces, and insensible losses. The average 70 kg man loses
approximately 2300 mL of water per day. The majority of this water loss is from
urine (1400 mL/day) and insensible losses (700 mL/day). However, when body
temperature is increased, daily water loss increases to 3300 mL/day, largely due
to the increase in water loss from sweating (1400 mL/day). (Table 23-1, 365)
7. Potassium concentration is highest in intracellular fluid, which contains 150 mEq/L.
Plasma contains 4 mEq/L of electrolytes, while extracellular fluid is responsible for
4.5 mEq/L. (Table 23-2, 365)
8. A normal adult produces about 6000 to 8000 mL of gastrointestinal fluid per day. The
stomach and ileum can each generate up to 2000 mL/day of gastrointestinal fluid;
however, the jejunum may produce the greatest volume of gastrointestinal fluid
(4000 mL/day). The gastrointestinal fluid generated by the pancreas contains the
highest concentration of bicarbonate (95 to 120 mEq/L). (Table 23-3, 365)
FLUID
REPLACEMENT
SOLUTIONS
9. The average adult needs 1.5 to 2.5 L of water, 50 to 100 mEq of sodium, and 40 to
80 mEq of potassium daily. (365)
*Numbers in parentheses: numbers refer to pages, figures, or tables in Miller RD, Pardo MC: Basics of Anesthesia,
6th ed. Philadelphia, Elsevier Saunders, 2011.
Fluid Management
227
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
10. Crystalloids are fluids that contain water and electrolytes. They are grouped as
balanced, hypertonic, and hypotonic salt solutions. Crystalloid fluids distribute
freely between the intravascular and interstitial compartments. Approximately one
third of intravenously administered crystalloid remains intravascular. (365-366)
11. The most common balanced salt solutions used are lactated Ringer solution,
Plasma-lyte, and Normosol. All balanced salt solutions have a composition similar
to ECF. Their sodium concentrations are considered hypotonic and a buffer is
present that takes the place of bicarbonate. (366)
12. Normal saline (0.9% NaCl) is isotonic, but contains more chloride than ECF.
It contains no other electrolytes or buffer. Large scale fluid replacement with normal
saline results in a nonanion gap metabolic acidosis. (366)
13. Normal saline is commonly used in patients with chronic renal failure. Their inability
to excrete potassium makes normal saline a popular crystalloid choice. (366)
14. Hypertonic salt solutions contain 250 to 1200 mEq/L of sodium. The higher the
sodium concentration, the less volume is needed for resuscitation because
hypertonic salt solutions osmotically shift fluid from the intracellular space to the
extracellular space. The reduced volume needed may reduce tissue edema. This may
prove beneficial for those patients experiencing prolonged bowel surgery,
burns, or brain injuries. (367)
15. Five percent dextrose water (D5W) is considered a free water solution because the
dextrose is metabolized. It is considered iso-osmotic and does not cause hemolysis.
Hemolysis results when pure water is infused intravascularly. D5W is commonly
used to prevent hypoglycemia in diabetic patients taking insulin in the perioperative
period. Also, it is used as a treatment for hypernatremia. (367)
16. Colloids are the fluids containing large molecules, which usually do not cross
capillary membranes and remain in the intravascular space. Commonly used
colloids are albumin, hydroxyethyl starch (hetastarch), and dextran. When used to
correct the perioperative blood loss, colloids are generally administered in a
volume equivalent to the volume of blood loss. Colloids are distributed entirely
intravascularly, so the initial volume is equivalent to plasma volume. The half-life
of albumin in circulation is 16 hours, but it can be as short as 2 to 3 hours. (367-368)
17. Albumin solutions are commercially available mostly in 5% and 25%. Five percent
albumin is also called plasma protein fractions, which has an osmotic pressure
around 20 mmHg (as plasma colloid osmotic pressure). Twenty-five percent
albumin has five times the normal concentration and expands blood volume by five
times after intravenous administration. Infectious agents are eliminated during the
preparation process for all albumin solutions. (367)
18. Dextran is commercially available in Dextran 40 and Dextran 70, which indicate
their mean molecule weight 40,000 Da and 70,000 Da, respectively. Dextran
solutions are water-soluble glucose-polymers that are synthesized by certain
bacteria and degraded enzymatically to glucose. Six percent Dextran 70 is
administered for the same indications as 5% albumin (temporary volume
expansion). However, Dextran 40 is administered for vascular surgery to prevent
thrombosis and is rarely used to expand volume. (367)
19. Hydroxyethyl starches (HES) are synthetic colloid solutions and are characterized
by their concentration, molar substitution, and molecular weight. Solutions with
higher molar substitution and molecular weight hydroxyethyl starches usually have
a more prolonged volume effect, but may experience more side effects. (367)
20. HES and dextran solutions are generally very safe. HES may produce coagulation
disturbances and renal toxicity. HES interfere with von Willebrand factor, factor
VIII, and platelet function. The effects on renal toxicity are controversial but appear
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
228
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
more common in older, higher-molecular-weight solutions. Dextran can potentially
cause anaphylactic or anaphylactoid reactions in about 1 in every 3300
administrations, increased bleeding time caused by decreased platelet adhesiveness
(at doses of 20 mL/kg/24 hours), Rouleaux formation, and noncardiogenic
pulmonary edema in rare cases. (367)
21. Crystalloid solutions are effective plasma volume expanders, which are cheaper
than current colloid preparations, and do not contain the transmission risks
associated with colloid fluids. Also, some studies indicate that albumin enters the
pulmonary interstitial compartment freely and only increases the amount of
albumin cleared by lymphatics. Historically, colloids have shown no advantage over
crystalloid when used for expansion on intravascular volume. Proponents of
colloids argue that continued crystalloid use dilutes plasma proteins and lowers
plasma oncotic pressure. This increase in interstitial fluid supports edema
formation. Lastly, colloid is administered 1:1 for every milliliter of blood loss.
This may lead to a more rapid restoration of filling pressure and arterial blood
pressures. (367-368)
PERIOPERATIVE
FLUID STRATEGIES
22. The 4-2-1 rule provides a very close approximation of the water requirement. This
rule states that the first 10 kg of body weight needs 4 mL/kg/hr and the second 10 kg
of body weight needs 2 mL/kg/hr. After the first 20 kg of body weight, the water
requirement is 1 mL/kg/hr. For example, a 70 kg man requires 110 mL/hr of water,
or 2640 mL/day.
23. Most general and regional anesthetics cause venous and arteriolar dilation, thus
increasing the total vascular capacity. Fluids must be infused to fill the expanded
intravascular space. If not, the patient will potentially have decreased venous return
and decreased preload. This may lead to lower cardiac output and lower organ
perfusion pressure. Perioperatively, administration of intravenous fluids can
maintain venous return, cardiac preload, stroke volume, and cardiac output.
The administration of intravenous fluids to fill the increased vascular capacity due
to anesthesia is called compensatory intravenous volume expansion (CVE).
CVE with 5 to 7 mL/kg of balanced salt solution is advised before or simultaneously
with the onset of anesthesia. (369)
24. The fluid deficit equals the maintenance fluid requirement times the hours since last
intake (“NPO deficit”), plus unreplaced preoperative external and third-space losses.
If hypovolemia is present, sufficient fluid should be infused to restore filling
pressures, heart rate, and arterial pressure to preinduction baseline values.
Fluid deficit is corrected by infusing three to four times the maintenance rate until
the calculated deficit has been corrected. Balanced salt solutions are usually the
most commonly used replacement of fluid deficits. (369)
25. Each milliliter of blood loss is usually replaced with 3 mL of balanced salt solution
or 0.9% sodium chloride solution, 1 mL of colloid solution, or 0.5 mL of packed red
blood cells (PRBC) plus colloid or crystalloid solutions. The general principle for the
replacement of external losses (e.g., blood, ascites) is to maintain normal blood
volume and normal composition of the extracellular fluid volume. Hemoglobin
levels of 7.5 g/dL or higher are usually well tolerated in patients with reasonable
cardiac function and without compromised regional circulations. A formula used to
calculate the red blood cell (RBC) volume is based on a patient’s weight (kilograms),
initial hematocrit, and desired hematocrit. The EBV is estimated blood volume,
whose value is 55 mL/kg in an average adult woman and 70 mL/kg in an average
adult man. (369)
PRBCinfused ¼ Hctdesired  EBV  Weight  Hctobserved  EBV  Weight
ð
Þ=0:60
26. Third-space loss of fluid is the fluid redistributed to spaces inside the patient’s
body but functionally not participating in the intravascular blood circulation
Fluid Management
229
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
(e.g., ascites, pleural effusion, and gastrointestinal tract fluid accumulation).
The composition of third-space losses is usually equivalent to extracellular
fluids (in regard to electrolytes) but contains a lower concentration of proteins.
A balanced salt solution is the most appropriate replacement for third-space fluid
losses. (369)
27. Certain surgical procedures or patient disease states may lend themselves to
restricting fluid administration. For instance, in patients undergoing pulmonary
surgery, the risk of postpneumonectomy pulmonary edema is directly related to
the amount of fluids administered. Patients undergoing liver resection may benefit
from a low central venous pressure to prevent bleeding. Patients with a history
of end-stage renal disease or congestive heart failure may also benefit from
restricted fluid administration. Restrictive fluid management strategies include:
replacing blood loss on a milliliter per milliliter basis with colloid, not replacing
urine or third-space loss during surgery, no fluid loading prior to anesthesia, colloid
bolus for treatment of hypovolemia, postoperative restriction of fluids, and
administration of diuretics for weight gain. (370)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
230
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
Chapter
21 BLOOD THERAPY
Ronald D. Miller, Tula Gourdin
BLOOD THERAPY
PROCEDURES
1. What is the recipient’s blood tested for during the routine typing of blood? What is
the risk of transfusing blood to patients without typing the recipient’s blood?
2. How is the crossmatching of blood accomplished?
3. How does the transfusion of O-negative packed red blood cells in an emergency
situation affect the patient’s subsequent transfusions?
4. What does type-specific blood refer to? What is the chance of a significant
hemolytic reaction with the transfusion of type-specific blood to a patient?
5. What does a type and screen refer to? When is a type and screen typically ordered?
What is the chance of a significant hemolytic reaction with the transfusion of typed
and screened blood to a patient?
6. What is contained in preservative solutions for the storage of blood? What is the
benefit of adding adenine to the preservative solution?
7. How long can blood be stored?
8. What is the temperature at which blood is stored? Why?
DECISION TO
TRANSFUSE
9. What are the considerations when deciding whether to do a blood transfusion?
10. What are the indications for the transfusion of blood?
BLOOD
COMPONENTS
11. Name the components that can be derived from whole blood. What is the advantage
of using components for blood therapy instead of whole blood?
12. What is the hematocrit and total volume in a unit of packed red blood cells?
13. How much will hemoglobin concentration increase with the transfusion of a single
unit of packed red blood cells?
14. What is the indication for the administration of packed red blood cells?
15. What solutions may be used to reconstitute packed red blood cells for
administration?
16. What potential complication associated with the administration of whole blood is
less likely to occur with the administration of packed red blood cells?
17. What is the advantage of using whole blood for massive blood loss
replacement?
18. What is the recommended ratio of packed red blood cells to fresh frozen plasma and
platelets when transfusing for massive blood loss replacement?
19. When is the administration of platelets indicated during surgery?
20. How much will the platelet count increase after the administration of 1 unit of
platelets?
231
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
21. What are some of the risks associated with the administration of platelets?
22. What is fresh frozen plasma? What is contained in fresh frozen plasma?
23. When is the administration of fresh frozen plasma indicated during surgery?
24. What is cryoprecipitate? What is contained in cryoprecipitate?
25. What is cryoprecipitate useful for treating?
COMPLICATIONS OF
BLOOD THERAPY
26. Name some potential complications of blood therapy.
27. What is the risk of the transmission of infectious diseases with the transfusion of
blood?
28. What are the various types of transfusion reactions that may occur with blood
therapy?
29. Why are febrile transfusion reactions thought to occur? How do febrile transfusion
reactions manifest?
30. How are febrile transfusion reactions treated?
31. Why are allergic transfusion reactions thought to occur? How do allergic
transfusion reactions manifest?
32. How are allergic transfusion reactions treated? How are allergic transfusion
reactions distinguished from hemolytic transfusion reactions?
33. Why are hemolytic transfusion reactions thought to occur?
34. What are the clinical signs that a hemolytic transfusion reaction has occurred?
Which of these are masked by anesthesia?
35. What diagnostic tool provides evidence that a hemolytic transfusion reaction has
occurred?
36. What are some consequences that can follow a hemolytic transfusion reaction?
37. What is the treatment for a hemolytic transfusion reaction?
38. What is transfusion-related acute lung injury (TRALI)?
39. Describe the immunosuppression that may accompany blood transfusions.
40. What are some metabolic abnormalities that may accompany blood transfusions?
41. How much does the serum potassium level increase in patients after the transfusion
of blood?
42. How do concentrations of 2,3-diphosphoglycerate change with the prolonged
storage of blood? How does this affect oxygen delivery to the tissues?
43. How does the administration of citrate in blood products affect the recipient’s serum
calcium concentration?
44. What is the potential risk of hypothermia with the administration of blood
products?
45. What are some ways in which massive blood transfusions can result in coagulation
disorders?
46. What is dilutional thrombocytopenia? What is the treatment of dilutional
thrombocytopenia?
47. Which clotting factors may decrease in concentration in the patient’s blood with
massive transfusions? What percent of each of these clotting factors is necessary
to maintain hemostasis during surgery? How can this clotting factor deficiency
be treated?
AUTOLOGOUS
BLOOD
TRANSFUSIONS
48. What is the advantage of the administration of autologous blood over homologous
blood for necessary blood transfusions?
49. What is an acceptable schedule for the collection of predeposited blood for
autologous blood transfusion? How can anemia secondary to the donation of
autologous blood be minimized?
50. What are some complications that can occur with autologous blood transfusions
of predeposited blood?
51. How is the intraoperative salvage of blood for autologous blood transfusions
accomplished? What are some relative contraindications to the intraoperative
salvage of blood?
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
232
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
52. What are some complications that may accompany the intraoperative salvage of
blood for autologous blood transfusions?
53. What is the hemodilution technique for autologous blood transfusions? What are
some advantages of this technique?
CONCLUSIONS AND
FUTURE DIRECTIONS
54. Describe some of the trends for transfusion of blood products.
ANSWERS*
BLOOD THERAPY
PROCEDURES
1. Routine typing of the recipient’s blood tests for the presence of A or B or both A and
B antigens on the recipient’s red blood cells and for the presence of anti-A or anti-B
antibodies in their serum. It also tests for the presence or absence of Rh(D) antigen
on the red blood cell. The purpose of typing the recipient’s blood is to avoid the
transfusion of incompatible blood to the recipient. This may occur if the patient has
antibodies to A or B or to A and B in their serum and they are transfused red blood
cells that have the corresponding antigen on the red blood cells. Likewise, if a
recipient lacks the Rh(D) antigen, the transfusion of the Rh(D)þ blood would be
incompatible. The risk of transfusing patients who have not had this typing done, or
who have had it done incorrectly and the blood is incompatible, is a transfusion
reaction. In this case, the transfusion would result in disastrous, rapid intravascular
hemolysis. (372-373)
2. Crossmatching of blood is done to test for a serious transfusion reaction before the
administration of the blood to the recipient. A crossmatch test is accomplished
by incubating the recipient’s plasma with the donor’s red blood cells. There
are three steps to the process, which in its entirety takes about 45 minutes to
perform. The first phase is the immediate phase, in which the blood is tested for
ABO compatibility at room temperature. It also tests for incompatibilities in the
M, N, P, and Lewis groups. The second phase is the incubation phase, which
tests for the presence of antibodies at 37 C. Albumin or a low ionic strength saline
solution is added to the products of the first phase to cause the agglutination of
weak or incomplete antibodies that are present. The last phase is the antiglobulin
phase, in which antiglobulin is added to the products of the second phase.
Incomplete antibodies in the Rh, Kell, Duffy, and Kidd systems will be detected by
this step. In each phase, incompatible blood will result in agglutination during
the crossmatch test. (372-373)
3. In emergency situations in which acute large blood loss requires rapid
administration of blood, there may be inadequate time to perform a type-and-cross
or even to wait for type-specific blood. In these situations, O-negative packed
red blood cells are administered because they lack the A, B, and Rh(D) antigens.
O-negative red blood cells cannot be hemolyzed by anti-A or anti-B antibodies that
may be present in the patient’s blood and is therefore termed the universal
donor. After the administration of 2 units of O-negative packed red blood cells,
subsequent blood transfusions may have to be continued with O-negative blood.
The concern is that the transfusion of blood that is the patient’s type may result in
major intravascular hemolysis of donor red blood cells by increasing titers of
transfused anti-A and anti-B antibodies. The risk of continued use of O-negative
*Numbers in parentheses: numbers refer to pages, figures, or tables in Miller RD, Pardo MC: Basics of Anesthesia,
6th ed. Philadelphia, Elsevier Saunders, 2011.
Blood Therapy
233
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
packed red blood cells under these conditions is minor hemolysis of donor red blood
cells and hyperbilirubinemia. In most centers, however, the need for O-negative
blood is rare. Subsequent transfusions with the patient’s own blood type is usually
possible and preferred. (372-373)
4. Type-specific blood refers to blood that has only been typed for the A, B, and Rh
antigens. Type-specific blood testing is merely the first phase, or the immediate
phase, of the crossmatch. It requires only about 5 minutes to perform. The chance of
a significant hemolytic reaction with the transfusion of type-specific blood to a
patient is about 1 in 1000. Type-specific blood is most frequently transfused in
emergent situations in which time does not allow for a formal crossmatch.
(372-373)
5. A type and screen refers to a recipient’s blood that, in addition to being typed for
the A, B, and Rh antigens, has been screened for the most common antibodies.
A type and screen is performed by incubating the recipient’s plasma with
commercially prepared type O red blood cells that contain all the antigens able to
cause a hemolytic reaction. Agglutination would designate a positive antibody
screen, and the recipient’s serum is further tested for identification of the antibodies
responsible for the agglutination. If, however, no agglutination results, the patient
is said to be antibody screen negative. In a type and screen the patient’s blood
is not matched to a specific unit of donor blood. This allows for 1 unit of blood to be
available for more than one patient. A type and screen is typically ordered for
surgical procedures in which the risk of transfusion is remote. If the patient
subsequently requires transfusion, the immediate phase of a crossmatch blood test is
performed to exclude blood type incompatibilities before its administration to
the patient. The chance of a significant hemolytic reaction with the transfusion of
typed and screened blood to a patient is 1 in 10,000. (373)
6. Solutions used to preserve blood include phosphate, dextrose, and adenine.
The addition of adenine to the preservative solution of blood allows red blood cells
to resynthesize adenosine triphosphate. This allows red blood cells to continue to
fuel their metabolic requirements and increases their survival time in storage.
Phosphate acts as a buffer, and dextrose provides energy to the red blood cells. (373)
7. Blood can be stored for 21 to 35 days. The duration of the storage of blood is
determined by the requirement that at least 70% of the red blood cells be viable
for more than 24 hours after transfusion. (373)
8. Blood is stored at a temperature of 1 C to 6 C. This slows down the rate of
glycolysis in red blood cells and increases their survival time in storage. (373)
DECISION TO
TRANSFUSE
9. The decision to transfuse should be based on a combination of (1) monitoring for
blood loss, (2) monitoring for inadequate perfusion and oxygenation of vital organs,
and (3) monitoring for transfusion indicators, especially the hemoglobin
concentration. (373)
10. The fundamental indication for the transfusion of blood is to increase the
oxygen-carrying capacity of the blood. The key question is when hypovolemia
exists, what type of fluid should be given? Measurement of actual blood loss and
hemoglobin levels are important. Because there are no direct measures of the
oxygen-carrying capacity, the hemoglobin concentration is usually the basis on
which the decision to transfuse is made. Blood transfusion is almost always justified
when the hemoglobin value is less than 6 g/dL and is rarely justified when the
hemoglobin value is greater than 10 g/dL. Oxygen transport is maximized when the
hemoglobin level is 10 g/dL, such that the transfusion of blood at hemoglobin
levels above 10 g/dL may provide no further benefit to the patient. The threshold for
the transfusion of blood between hemoglobin values of 6 g/dL and 10 g/dL is
further modified by several factors. These include the patient’s age and medical
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
234
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
status, the surgical procedure and the potential for ongoing losses, and the extent to
which the patient’s current anemia is chronic or is due to blood loss that is acute.
For example, patients with coronary artery disease and who are at risk for
myocardial ischemia may benefit from keeping the hemoglobin level no less than
10 g/dL, whereas a young healthy patient may not be transfused until the
hemoglobin level is 6 to 7 g/dL. The decision to transfuse blood must therefore be
made on an individual basis. (373-375)
BLOOD
COMPONENTS
11. Components that can be derived from whole blood include packed red blood cells,
platelet concentrates, fresh frozen plasma, cryoprecipitate, albumin, plasma protein
fraction, leukocyte-poor blood, factor VIII, and antibody concentrates.
The advantage of using components for blood therapy instead of whole blood is that
a patient’s specific deficiency can be directly corrected. It also allows for
prolonged storage, the retention of unnecessary components for other patients who
may need them, and the avoidance of transfusing unnecessary components that
could potentially contain antigens or antibodies. (374-375)
12. In a given unit of packed red blood cells, the total volume is about 250 to 300 mL
and the hematocrit is about 70% to 80%. (374)
13. A single unit of packed red blood cells will increase adult hemoglobin levels by
about 1 g/dL. (374)
14. The administration of packed red blood cells is indicated for the treatment of anemia
(i.e., hemoglobin <10.0 g/dL). The purpose of transfusing packed red blood cells
is to augment the oxygen-carrying capacity of the blood by increasing the
hemoglobin concentration. If available, whole blood may be preferred to also treat
hypovolemia. (374-375)
15. Packed red blood cells can be administered either alone or reconstituted in crystalloid
or colloid. Reconstitution with 50 to 100 mL of saline facilitates the administration of
packed red blood cells. Crystalloid solutions that are hypotonic should not be used
to reconstitute packed red blood cells. Hypotonic solutions can result in red blood
cell swelling and lysis. Examples of hypotonic solutions include glucose-containing
solutions and Plasmanate. The reconstitution of packed red blood cells in solutions
containing calcium (e.g., lactated Ringer solution) may result in clotting. (374)
16. The potential for citrate toxicity that can result from the administration of whole
blood is less likely to occur with the administration of packed red blood cells
simply because there is less volume of citrate infused with each unit of packed red
blood cells. (377)
17. Whole blood transfusion may be advantageous over packed red blood cell transfusion
when blood losses are greater than 30% of the blood volume, or when massive,
as in the case of trauma. Whole blood transfusion under these circumstances is
associated with a decreased incidence of hypofibrinogenemia and possibly
coagulopathies. (374-375)
18. When transfusing blood components to replace massive blood loss as in trauma, the
recommended ratio is 1.5 units packed red blood cells to 1.0 unit of fresh frozen
plasma, and 1.0 unit of platelets for every 6 units of packed red blood cells. (375)
19. The administration of platelets during surgery is usually indicated for platelet
counts less than 50,000 cells/mm3. Both laboratory analysis and the clinical
situation must be taken into consideration. For instance, in cases of surgical trauma
or in cases of bleeding in the brain, eye, or airway the transfusion of platelets
at a higher number may be warranted. (375)
20. The platelet count will increase by 5000 to 10,000 cells/mm3 after the administration
of 1 unit of platelets to a 70-kg adult. (375)
Blood Therapy
235
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
21. Risks associated with the administration of platelets include the transmission
of viral diseases and sensitization to the human leukocyte antigens present on
the platelet cell membranes. Bacterial contamination is more likely than in any
other blood product because they are stored at room temperature. Although the
risk is small (1/5000 to 12,000), platelet-related sepsis should be considered in
a patient who develops a fever a few hours after receiving platelet therapy.
The proper diagnosis can be confused with transfusion-related lung therapy
(TRALI). (375-376)
22. Fresh frozen plasma is the plasma portion of 1 unit of donated blood. The plasma is
frozen within 6 hours of collection. All plasma proteins are contained in fresh frozen
plasma. Included are all the coagulation factors except platelets. This includes
factors V and VIII, which decrease in concentration during the storage of packed red
blood cells. (375)
23. The administration of fresh frozen plasma is indicated during surgery when the
prothrombin time and/or partial thromboplastin times are greater than 1.5 times
normal and there is a clinical indication of the need to transfuse. Other indications
include the need to reverse warfarin therapy or for the correction of known factor
deficiencies. (375)
24. Cryoprecipitate is the plasma fraction that precipitates when fresh frozen plasma is
thawed. Cryoprecipitate contains high concentrations of factor VIII, von Willebrand
factor, factor XIII, fibrinogen, and fibronectin. (375-376)
25. Cryoprecipitate is useful for the treatment of factor VIII deficiency as in hemophilia
A, von Willebrand factor deficiency, and fibrinogen deficiency (e.g., from fresh
frozen plasma). The transfusion of cryoprecipitate should be considered when
fibrinogen levels are less than 100 mg/dL. (375-376)
COMPLICATIONS OF
BLOOD THERAPY
26. Complications of blood therapy include transfusion reactions, metabolic
abnormalities, the transmission of infectious diseases, hypothermia,
coagulation disorders, acute lung injury, and immunomodulation. (376-378)
27. Because of pre-transfusion interviews for identification of risky donors and the
implementation of routine laboratory screening, as well as the use of volunteer
instead of paid donors, the risk of transmission of infectious agents to recipients
of blood is rare. For example, the risk of infectivity with hepatitis in 1980 was
1 in 10 transfusions, whereas now it is about 1 in 1.5 to 2.0 million transfusions.
The risk of infectivity with HIV is now 1 in 1.8 million. Although the risk of
transmission of these viruses is small, the potential for transmission still exists
and must be discussed with the patient as part of informed consent for transfusion.
(374-376, Table 24-2)
28. The types of transfusion reactions that may occur with blood therapy include
febrile, allergic, and hemolytic transfusion reactions. (378)
29. Febrile transfusion reactions are thought to occur as a result of antibodies in
the recipient’s serum interacting with antigens from the donor’s cells. Febrile
transfusion reactions are the most frequently occurring transfusion reaction.
A febrile transfusion reaction may manifest as fever, chills, headache,
myalgias, nausea, and a nonproductive cough occurring after the initiation
of the transfusion of blood. When a fever occurs after a transfusion has been
started, a febrile transfusion reaction can be distinguished from a
hemolytic transfusion reaction by evaluating the serum and the urine for
hemolysis. (378)
30. Febrile transfusion reactions are treated by decreasing the rate of the infusion of
blood and administering antipyretics. Persistent cases may require the termination
of the blood transfusion. (378)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
236
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
31. Allergic transfusion reactions are thought to occur as a result of the presence of
incompatible plasma proteins in the donor blood. Allergic transfusion reactions
manifest as urticaria, pruritus, and occasional facial swelling. (378)
32. The treatment of an allergic transfusion reaction is through the intravenous
administration of antihistamines. There are more severe cases of allergic transfusion
reactions that are anaphylactic without red blood cell destruction. Those cases
are believed to be due to the transfusion of IgA to patients who are IgA
deficient. In such situations the blood transfusion should be discontinued. The
differentiation between allergic reactions and hemolytic reactions can be made by
checking the urine and plasma for free hemoglobin. (378)
33. Hemolytic transfusion reactions are usually a result of the administration of an
erroneous unit of blood to a patient. Transfused donor cells are attacked by the
recipient’s antibody and complement, resulting in intravascular hemolysis. As little
as 10 mL of donor blood can result in a hemolytic transfusion reaction, which
can be fatal. The severity of a transfusion reaction can be proportional to the volume
of transfused blood. (378)
34. Clinical signs of a hemolytic transfusion reaction include fever, chills, chest pain,
hypotension, nausea, flushing, dyspnea, and hemoglobinuria. All of these are
masked by anesthesia except for hemoglobinuria and hypotension. (378)
35. The diagnosis of a hemolytic transfusion reaction can be made by a direct
antiglobulin test and rechecking the labeling of the blood with the blood bank.
Other laboratory analysis should be performed, including plasma and urine
hemoglobin and bilirubin analysis. The plasma bilirubin concentration will peak at
3 to 6 hours after starting the blood transfusion. Hemoglobinuria or hemolysis
in the presence of a transfusion and suspected hemolytic transfusion reaction
should be treated as one until proven otherwise. (378)
36. Hemolytic transfusion reactions can result in renal failure and disseminated
intravascular coagulation. (378)
37. The first step in the treatment of a hemolytic transfusion reaction is to stop the
transfusion and notify the blood bank. Subsequent treatment interventions are
geared toward preventing renal failure by maintaining urine output. It is believed
that renal failure occurs as a result of precipitates in the renal tubules. The urine
output is recommended to be maintained at about 100 mL/hr through the
administration of lactated Ringer solution and mannitol and/or furosemide as
necessary. The urine may also be alkalinized with bicarbonate. Laboratory analysis
should be performed, including diagnostic tests of urine and plasma hemoglobin
concentrations as well as baseline coagulation studies. Finally, unused blood should
be sent to the blood bank along with a sample from the patient for a repeat type and
crossmatch analysis. (378)
38. Transfusion-related acute lung injury (TRALI) is acute, noncardiogenic pulmonary
edema associated with dyspnea and arterial hypoxemia that occurs within 6 hours
of a transfusion. TRALI is the leading cause of transfusion-related deaths in the
United States. If TRALI is suspected, the transfusion should be immediately stopped,
the blood bank notified, and the exudative fluid from the patient’s endotracheal
tube can be evaluated for protein concentration. If platelets have been given,
platelet-induced sepsis is part of the differential diagnosis. Standard supportive
therapy is required. (376, Table 24-3)
39. A nonspecific immunosuppressive effect of homologous blood transfusions has
been established. It appears that this effect is related to the volume of plasma
transfused, because whole blood appears to have a greater immunosuppressive
effect than packed red blood cells. Blood transfusions have a suggested correlation
to an increased risk of the recurrence of tumor or decreased survival in cancer
patients. Overall prognosis may be poorer and postoperative infections increased
Blood Therapy
237
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
in patients who have received blood transfusions. Removing the white blood cells
from blood and platelets, or leukoreduction, is helpful. (376)
40. Metabolic abnormalities that may accompany blood transfusions include increased
levels of serum hydrogen and potassium, decreased 2,3-diphosphoglycerate
levels, metabolic alkalosis, and hypocalcemia. (376-377)
41. Potassium concentrations in blood stored for 21 days may be as high as
20 to 30 mEq/L. Even after the transfusion of large volumes of blood, serum
potassium levels rarely increase with the transfusion of blood. This is in part because
the high concentration of potassium exists in a small volume and the total
potassium content is small. Nevertheless, hyperkalemia resulting from blood
transfusions is occasionally reported. In most cases it was associated with
large volumes of blood rapidly infused, typically given at rates greater than
120 mL/min. (377)
42. Concentrations of 2,3-diphosphoglycerate in erythrocytes decrease with the
prolonged storage of blood. Decreased concentrations of 2,3-diphosphoglycerate
are associated with a shift of the oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve to the left
and an increase in the affinity of hemoglobin for oxygen. This could result in a
decrease in the delivery of oxygen to the tissues. This effect of a decrease in
2,3-diphosphoglycerate could be further compounded by the presence of acidosis
and hypothermia. Although of concern for the effect on oxygen delivery to the
tissues, there appears to be little clinical consequence of the decreased level of
2,3-diphosphoglycerate. (377)
43. The infusion of citrate preservative during the transfusion of blood can result in a
metabolic alkalosis and hypocalcemia. The theory is that the metabolic alkalosis
results from the metabolism of citrate in the liver to bicarbonate. Hypocalcemia can
result from the binding of citrate to calcium in the intravascular space but is usually
attenuated by the mobilization of calcium stores in bone. Hypocalcemia can be
augmented by hypothermia, liver disease, or hyperventilation because these will all
decrease the rate of metabolism of citrate to bicarbonate. Under these
circumstances, the infusion of large volumes of citrate combined with the decreased
metabolism of citrate can result in hypocalcemia. Indeed, serum ionized calcium has
been found to begin to decrease with a rate of infusion of 1 unit of blood every
10 minutes. This syndrome rarely occurs except where the rate of blood transfusion
is more rapid than 50 mL/min, with patients with hypothermia or liver disease, or
neonates with immature liver function. Supplemental calcium may be needed in
these cases. (377)
44. Intraoperative hypothermia can lead to intraoperative cardiac irritability, especially
in the presence of arterial pH abnormalities. Postoperative hypothermia can lead
to shivering and increased myocardial oxygen demand. Because blood being stored
for transfusion is stored at a temperature below 6 C, the administration of
stored blood to a patient can result in decreases in the patient’s body temperature.
This risk can be minimized by administering the blood through warmers. It is
prudent to confirm that the blood is being warmed to an appropriate temperature
of 37 C to 38 C because red blood cells will hemolyze if overheated. Blood warmers
are designed to make this concern not likely. (377)
45. Massive blood transfusions can result in two different coagulation disorders: a
dilutional thrombocytopenia and a dilution of some of the coagulation factors
necessary to clot blood. Either case may manifest clinically as continued frank
bleeding without clotting in the surgical site. It may also manifest as hematuria,
gingival bleeding, and spontaneous oozing from various puncture areas in both
surgical and nonsurgical sites, such as sites of intravenous access. If this clinical
situation is noted, disseminated intravascular coagulation and a hemolytic
transfusion reaction should also be considered as a potential source for the bleeding
abnormalities. (377-378)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
238
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
46. Dilutional thrombocytopenia refers to the dilution of platelets from their baseline
concentration to a decreased concentration by virtue of the loss of platelets during
bleeding without subsequent replacement, as with the administration of crystalloid,
colloid, or non–platelet-containing blood products. This occurs even with the
transfusion of blood because platelet activity has decreased to about 5% of normal
after just 2 days of blood storage. The risk of a dilutional thrombocytopenia is the loss
of the ability of blood to clot. When platelet counts decrease to less than 75,000/mm3,
a bleeding disorder is likely to occur. This level of platelets has been seen to occur
after the transfusion of 10 to 15 units of non–platelet-containing blood products
to previously healthy patients with previously normal platelet counts. Of note is that
patients with chronically decreased platelet counts appear to tolerate
thrombocytopenia better than patients with an acute decrease in platelets.
The treatment of a dilutional thrombocytopenia by transfusing platelets should be
instituted when a combination of clinical status and laboratory analysis confirms
suspicions of a bleeding disorder secondary to insufficient platelets. (377)
47. Factors V and VIII are necessary for normal blood clotting. For normal blood
clotting to occur there must be 5% to 20% of the normal amount of factor V and 30%
of the normal amount of factor VIII. When these factors decrease to below these
levels, abnormal blood clotting may result. This is manifest on laboratory analysis
as a prolongation of the prothrombin time and/or partial thromboplastin time.
The importance of factors V and VIII during the transfusion of blood arises from the
decrease in concentration of these factors in stored blood. After 21 days of blood
storage, the concentration of factors V and VIII is 15% and 50% of their normal
values, respectively. During times of massive transfusions, a decrease in these factors
may contribute to bleeding disorders. This is particularly true if the blood being
transfused has little plasma volume or has been stored for long periods of time. The
treatment of bleeding disorders secondary to a dilution of factors V and VIII is the
administration of fresh frozen plasma, which contains all clotting factors. The
decision to administer fresh frozen plasma is determined by laboratory analysis and
the clinical status of the patient. The administration of fresh frozen plasma is also
indicated when laboratory analysis reveals a prolongation of the prothrombin time
and/or partial thromboplastin time greater than 1.5 times normal, when normal
platelet counts exclude thrombocytopenia as a cause of the bleeding disorder, and
when there is uncontrolled bleeding in the surgical field. (377)
AUTOLOGOUS
BLOOD
TRANSFUSIONS
48. Autologous blood donation should be considered for procedures in which significant
blood loss is likely to occur. An obvious advantage of the administration of
autologous blood rather than homologous blood to patients requiring blood
transfusions is the decreased risk of complications associated with homologous blood
transfusions, including transfusion reactions and the transmission of blood-borne
diseases. In addition, autologous blood donation reserves blood bank stores for other
patients, thus decreasing the strain on blood bank resources. (378-379)
49. The collection of predeposited blood for autologous blood transfusion must be
done in a manner that will not decrease the patient’s hemoglobin level to
unacceptable levels preoperatively. Because of the risk of preoperative anemia,
patients selected for autologous blood donation probably should not have
significant cardiac or neurologic disease. A collection schedule that can be
employed is the donation of 1 unit of blood every 4 days. This can be done for up to 3
units. The final unit of blood must be donated 72 hours or more before the surgical
procedure to ensure that the patient’s plasma volume has been restored. Anemia
secondary to the donation of autologous blood remains a concern. Patients
scheduled to predeposit autologous blood for blood transfusions are typically
prescribed ferrous sulfate. Studies have shown that the administration of
erythropoietin to these patients may be beneficial as well but requires parenteral or
subcutaneous administration and is expensive. (378-379)
Blood Therapy
239
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
50. A significant complication that can occur with autologous blood transfusions is
the risk of clerical error leading to the erroneous blood being transfused to the
patient. Blood should be checked just as meticulously whether autologous or
homologous blood is being transfused. Other complications include sepsis from
bacterial contamination or hypersensitivity to stabilizers. (379)
51. The intraoperative salvage of blood should be considered for surgical procedures
that result in blood loss from a clean wound and will likely lead to the need to
transfuse blood to the patient. Intraoperative blood salvaging is accomplished
by semiautomated systems that collect, wash, and store red blood cells in a reservoir
for their future administration. The hematocrit of blood prepared in this manner
is 50% to 60%, and the pH is alkaline. Relative contraindications to the intraoperative
salvage of blood include malignancy and the presence of blood-borne disease.
Blood that has been contaminated with bowel contents should probably not be
transfused. (379)
52. Complications of intraoperative blood salvaging include a dilutional coagulopathy,
the reinfusion of blood treated with anticoagulants, hemolysis, air embolism, fat
embolism, sepsis, and disseminated intravascular coagulation. (379)
53. Hemodilution for autologous blood transfusion should be considered for patients
who are expected to lose more than 2 units of blood intraoperatively and who
have an adequate preoperative hematocrit. It is probably not appropriate for
patients with anemia or severe cardiac or neurologic disease. The hemodilution
technique involves the removal of venous or arterial blood from the patient just
before or after the induction of anesthesia and restoration of the plasma volume
with crystalloid or colloid. The volume of blood that can be removed from the
patient is dependent on the patient’s preoperative hematocrit, estimated blood
volume, and the lowest hematocrit acceptable for that patient. The blood is stored in
the operating room at room temperature in a sterile container that contains
anticoagulants, and it can be transfused to the patient when it is indicated or after
major blood loss has ceased. The blood does not undergo any other biochemical
transformations. There are several advantages to the hemodilution method of
autologous blood transfusions. This method is less expensive than autologous blood
donations and does not require the patient’s cooperation or time that is required for
the predepositing of autologous blood. In addition, the decreased viscosity and
hematocrit of the blood result in a decrease in the concentration and number of red
blood cells lost during the procedure. Finally, the blood that is transfused to the
patient has platelet and coagulation factor activity that would have been lost in
autologous blood that had been stored. (379)
CONCLUSIONS AND
FUTURE DIRECTIONS
54. Transfusions have become increasingly safer primarily due to the decrease in the
transmission of infectious diseases. There is an increased emphasis on defining
ratios of blood products that should be given (e.g., 1:1 packed red blood cells with
fresh frozen plasma or platelets). Consistent with the practice of medicine overall,
well-designed protocols will increasingly be the basis upon which transfusion
practice is based. (379)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
240
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
Chapter
22 CARDIOVASCULAR
DISEASE
Arthur W. Wallace
CORONARY ARTERY
DISEASE
1. What percent of adult patients undergoing surgery are estimated to have, or be at
risk for, coronary artery disease?
2. What are some components of a routine preoperative cardiac evaluation? What are
some more specialized methods of cardiac evaluation? What is the ultimate
purpose of a preoperative cardiac evaluation?
3. What are some important aspects of the preoperative history taken from patients
with coronary artery disease with respect to their cardiac status?
4. What are some coexisting noncardiac diseases that are frequently present in
patients with coronary artery disease?
5. By what percent can a major coronary artery be stenosed in an asymptomatic
patient?
6. What is the best indicator for a patient’s cardiac reserve?
7. When is angina pectoris considered “stable”?
8. When is angina pectoris considered “unstable”? What is the clinical implication of
unstable angina?
9. What is it likely an indication of when dyspnea follows the onset of angina
pectoris?
10. How does angina pectoris due to spasm of the coronary arteries differ from classic
angina pectoris?
11. What is silent myocardial ischemia?
12. What is the most common symptom of angina in men and women?
13. Approximately what percent of myocardial ischemic episodes are not associated
with angina pectoris? Approximately what percent of myocardial infarctions are
not associated with angina pectoris?
14. Is hypertension or tachycardia more likely to result in myocardial ischemia in the
patient with coronary artery disease? What is the physiologic explanation for this?
15. What is the basis for the common recommendation that elective surgery be delayed
until 6 months or more after a prior myocardial infarction?
16. What is the approximate incidence of perioperative myocardial infarction 6
months after a myocardial infarction? What is the approximate incidence of
perioperative myocardial infarction in patients who have not had a prior
myocardial infarction?
17. What time period after surgery do most perioperative myocardial infarctions
occur?
18. What are some cardiac medications that patients with coronary artery disease are
likely to be taking? What is the recommendation regarding the patient’s
preoperative medicine regimen with regard to their regular cardiac medicines?
19. What information can be gained from a preoperative electrocardiogram?
241
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
20. How might myocardial ischemia appear on the electrocardiogram?
21. Complete the following table:
Electrocardiogram Lead
Coronary Artery Responsible
for Myocardial Ischemia
Area of Myocardium
That May Be Involved
II, III, Avf
V3-V5
I, aVL
22. Name some determinants of myocardial oxygen requirements and delivery.
23. What are some intraoperative goals for the anesthesiologist in an attempt to
decrease the risk of myocardial ischemia in patients at risk?
24. What is the difference between risk stratification and risk reduction?
25. What are the risks of recent percutaneous coronary angioplasty in surgical patients
and how do they differ with bare metal versus drug eluting stents?
26. What are two potential benefits of administering premedication preoperatively to
patients with coronary artery disease?
27. How should anesthesia be induced in patients at risk for myocardial ischemia?
28. Why is there an increased risk of myocardial ischemia during direct laryngoscopy?
What are some things the anesthesiologist may do during this time to minimize this
risk?
29. What are some methods of maintenance of anesthesia that may be employed by the
anesthesiologist for the patient with coronary artery disease?
30. What is coronary artery steal syndrome? What is its clinical significance?
31. What is a concern regarding the administration of a regional anesthetic to patients
with coronary artery disease?
32. What are some considerations an anesthesiologist should take when selecting a
neuromuscular blocking drug for patients with coronary artery disease? What is
unique about pancuronium in this situation?
33. How should neuromuscular blockade be reversed in patients with coronary artery
disease?
34. What are some factors that influence the intensity of intraoperative monitoring by
the anesthesiologist?
35. When might an intraoperative pulmonary artery catheter be useful? What
information does it provide?
36. What is some information that may be provided by an intraoperative
transesophageal echocardiogram?
37. What are some treatment options when myocardial ischemia is detected
intraoperatively?
38. What is the problem with decreases in body temperature that may occur
intraoperatively in patients with coronary artery disease?
39. Why is it important to monitor heart rate in the patient with coronary artery
disease?
VALVULAR HEART
DISEASE
40. What information can be gained from Doppler echocardiography in patients with
valvular heart disease?
41. How should anesthetic drugs and neuromuscular blocking drugs be selected for the
patient with valvular heart disease?
42. When is it important to administer antibiotics to patients with known valvular
heart disease?
43. What is mitral stenosis? How does it affect left atrial and pulmonary venous
pressures? At what chronic left atrial pressure is an increase in pulmonary vascular
resistance likely to be seen?
44. What is the most common cause of mitral stenosis? How does it present?
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
242
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
45. Why are patients with mitral stenosis at an increased risk of atrial fibrillation?
46. Why are patients with mitral stenosis at an increased risk of thrombus formation in
the left atrium?
47. What are some anesthetic considerations for patients with mitral stenosis?
48. How can the maintenance of anesthesia be achieved in patients with mitral
stenosis?
49. How might the adequacy of intravascular fluid replacement be monitored in
patients with mitral stenosis? Why is this important?
50. Why might the mechanical support of ventilation be required postoperatively in
patients with mitral stenosis?
51. What is mitral regurgitation? How is mitral regurgitation reflected on the
recording of pulmonary artery occlusion pressure tracings?
52. What is the most common cause of mitral regurgitation? What other pathologic
process is often present under these circumstances? What are some other causes of
mitral regurgitation?
53. What are some anesthetic considerations for patients with mitral regurgitation?
54. How can the maintenance of anesthesia be achieved in patients with mitral
regurgitation?
55. What is aortic stenosis? How is the severity of aortic stenosis estimated? What is
considered to be hemodynamically significant aortic stenosis?
56. Name at least two causes of aortic stenosis. What is the natural course of aortic
stenosis?
57. Why might patients with aortic stenosis have angina pectoris despite the absence
of coronary artery disease?
58. How is aortic stenosis diagnosed on cardiac auscultation? Why is it
important for the anesthesiologist to rule out aortic stenosis by auscultation
preoperatively?
59. What are some anesthetic considerations for the patient with aortic stenosis?
60. What would result from tachycardia, bradycardia, or decreases in systemic
vascular resistance in the patient with aortic stenosis?
61. How can the maintenance of anesthesia be achieved in patients with aortic
stenosis?
62. How should the intravascular fluid status be managed intraoperatively in patients
with aortic stenosis?
63. In patients with chronic aortic stenosis, why might the pulmonary artery occlusion
pressure not be reflective of the left ventricular end-diastolic volume?
64. How effective are external cardiac compressions in patients with aortic stenosis
during cardiopulmonary arrest?
65. What is aortic regurgitation? What is the effect of chronic aortic regurgitation on
the left ventricle?
66. What is acute aortic regurgitation most likely due to? What is chronic aortic
regurgitation most likely due to?
67. Why might a patient with aortic regurgitation have angina pectoris despite the
absence of coronary artery disease?
68. What are the goals for the anesthetic management of aortic regurgitation?
The anesthetic management of aortic regurgitation resembles the anesthetic
management for which other valvular disease?
69. What is mitral valve prolapse? What percent of the adult population is estimated
to have mitral valve prolapse?
70. What are some other conditions associated with mitral valve prolapse?
71. What symptoms do most patients with mitral valve prolapse have?
72. What are some potential complications of mitral valve prolapse?
73. What is the goal of the maintenance of anesthesia in patients with mitral valve
prolapse? How should the intravascular fluid volume status be managed in patients
with mitral valve prolapse?
74. What is the potential problem with regional anesthesia in patients with mitral
valve prolapse?
Cardiovascular Disease
243
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
DISTURBANCES OF
CARDIAC
CONDUCTION AND
RHYTHM
75. What are some tools available to the clinician for the diagnosis of disturbances in
cardiac conduction and rhythm?
76. What are some types of conduction defects? Are conduction defects above or
below the atrioventricular node usually permanent?
77. Is the placement of a prophylactic artificial cardiac pacemaker before surgery
indicated in a patient with a bifascicular block? Why or why not? What is the
theoretical concern?
78. How is third-degree atrioventricular heart block treated? What are the various
methods by which this can be accomplished? How can third-degree heart
block be treated pharmacologically?
79. What is sick sinus syndrome? How does it present? How is it treated?
80. What are ventricular premature beats? What are the hallmark features of a
ventricular premature beat on an electrocardiogram?
81. When do premature ventricular beats warrant treatment? How are they treated
under these circumstances?
82. What may be some causes of ventricular premature beats?
83. When is ventricular tachycardia diagnosed? How can it be treated?
84. What are preexcitation syndromes?
85. What is Wolff-Parkinson-White (WPW) syndrome? What is the incidence of WPW
syndrome in the general population? How is it characterized on the
electrocardiogram?
86. What is the most common cardiac dysrhythmia associated with WPW syndrome?
How can it be treated?
87. What is the goal of the anesthetic management of a patient with WPW syndrome?
88. What are the various methods by which paroxysmal atrial tachycardia or
fibrillation may be treated in the perioperative period in patients with WPW
syndrome?
89. What is prolonged QT interval syndrome? What adverse events are associated with
a prolonged QT interval? How can they be treated pharmacologically?
90. What is a congenital cause of prolonged QT interval syndrome? How is a stellate
ganglion block thought to work for this?
91. What is the goal of the anesthetic management of a patient with a chronically
prolonged QT interval?
ARTIFICIAL CARDIAC
PACEMAKERS
92. What should be included in the preoperative evaluation of the patient with an
artificial cardiac pacemaker?
93. How should the pacemaker be evaluated by the anesthesiologist preoperatively?
94. What intraoperative monitoring is important in a patient with an artificial cardiac
pacemaker?
95. What can occur if the ground plate for electrocautery is placed too near the pulse
generator of the artificial cardiac pacemaker?
96. How is the selection of drugs or anesthetic techniques altered by the presence of an
artificial cardiac pacemaker in a patient?
97. Why should a magnet be kept in the operating room intraoperatively for a patient
with an artificial cardiac pacemaker undergoing anesthesia?
98. What are some causes of temporary pacemaker malfunction? When is placement of
a pulmonary artery catheter in a patient with an artificial cardiac pacemaker a risk?
ESSENTIAL
HYPERTENSION
99. What is the definition of essential hypertension? What is the benefit of the
long-term treatment of patients with essential hypertension?
100. What should be included in the preoperative evaluation of a patient with essential
hypertension?
101. How should blood pressure medications be managed in the perioperative period in
the patient with essential hypertension?
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
244
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
102. What other medical problems are frequently seen in patients with essential
hypertension? Approximately what percent of patients with peripheral vascular
disease can be assumed to have 50% or greater stenosis of one or more coronary
arteries even in the absence of symptoms?
103. How is the curve for the autoregulation of cerebral blood flow altered in patients
with essential hypertension?
104. What is the value of treating essential hypertension in patients before an elective
procedure?
105. How do patients with essential hypertension frequently respond physiologically to
the induction of anesthesia with intravenous medications? Why is this thought
to occur?
106. How do patients with essential hypertension frequently respond physiologically to
direct laryngoscopy? What are these patients at risk of during this time? How
can this response be attenuated?
107. What is the goal for the anesthetic management of patients with essential
hypertension?
108. How can the maintenance of anesthesia in patients with essential hypertension be
achieved?
109. How might intraoperative hypotension be managed by the anesthesiologist in
patients with essential hypertension?
110. What is the potential problem with regional anesthesia in patients with essential
hypertension?
111. How frequently does hypertension occur in the early postoperative period in
patients with essential hypertension? How can it be managed?
CONGESTIVE HEART
FAILURE
112. What is the correlation between congestive heart failure and postoperative
morbidity? What does this suggest for the patient scheduled for elective surgery
in the presence of congestive heart failure?
113. What is the goal of the anesthetic management of patients with congestive heart
failure who are undergoing urgent or emergent surgery? What medicines may
be useful to achieve this?
114. How does positive-pressure ventilation of the lungs affect patients in congestive
heart failure?
115. For major surgery in patients with congestive heart failure, what monitoring may
be necessary?
116. For peripheral surgery in patients with congestive heart failure, can regional
anesthesia be selected as an anesthetic option?
HYPERTROPHIC
CARDIOMYOPATHY
117. What is another name for hypertrophic cardiomyopathy? What pathophysiology
defines hypertrophic cardiomyopathy? What is the stroke volume in patients
with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy?
118. What is the goal of the anesthetic management of patients with hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy?
119. How can intraoperative hypotension be treated in patients with hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy?
120. How can intraoperative hypertension be treated in patients with hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy?
121. What is the problem with using b agonists for the treatment of hypotension or
using nitrates for the treatment of hypertension in patients with hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy?
COR PULMONALE
122. What is cor pulmonale?
123. What are some signs and symptoms associated with cor pulmonale?
124. What are some treatment methods for cor pulmonale?
Cardiovascular Disease
245
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
125. What is the recommendation for the patient with cor pulmonale who is scheduled
for an elective surgical procedure?
126. What is the goal of the anesthetic management of patients with cor pulmonale?
How can this be achieved?
127. What is the advantage of monitoring pulmonary artery pressure during surgery in
patients with cor pulmonale?
CARDIAC
TAMPONADE
128. What is cardiac tamponade?
129. Name some manifestations of cardiac tamponade.
130. What is the treatment for cardiac tamponade? What are some temporizing
measures for patients with cardiac tamponade awaiting definitive treatment?
131. What is the goal of the anesthetic management of cardiac tamponade?
132. What effect can the induction of anesthesia and positive-pressure ventilation of
the lungs have on patients with cardiac tamponade?
133. What is the recommendation for anesthesia in patients with cardiac tamponade?
134. What pharmacologic agents may be useful in patients with cardiac tamponade?
ANEURYSMS OF THE
AORTA
135. What is the most frequent cause of aortic aneurysms? Do most aortic aneurysms
involve the thoracic or abdominal aorta?
136. What is a dissecting aneurysm?
137. When is elective resection of an abdominal aortic aneurysm recommended?
138. What are some medical problems frequently associated with aortic aneurysms?
139. What is the goal of the anesthetic management of patients undergoing resection of
an abdominal aortic aneurysm? What monitoring is warranted in these
procedures?
140. When are patients with coronary artery disease especially at risk of myocardial
ischemia during surgery for resection of an aortic aneurysm?
141. How should intraoperative fluids be managed during surgery for resection of an
aortic aneurysm?
142. Why does hypotension frequently accompany unclamping of the abdominal aorta
during surgery for the resection of an aortic aneurysm? What are some methods for
minimizing the hypotension?
143. What are some concerns regarding renal function in patients undergoing aortic
aneurysm repair?
144. What are some concerns regarding spinal cord function in patients undergoing
aortic aneurysm repair?
CARDIOPULMONARY
BYPASS
145. How is blood drained from the venae cavae during cardiopulmonary bypass?
146. What are two different types of pumps that are used to return blood to the arterial
system during cardiopulmonary bypass? Which results in less trauma to blood?
147. How is blood kept from entering the heart from the superior and inferior venae
cavae during cardiopulmonary bypass for mitral valve or intracardiac surgery?
148. Under what conditions does the aorta need to be cross-clamped distal to the aortic
valve and proximal to the inflow cannula during cardiopulmonary bypass?
149. How can venous drainage from the inferior and superior venae cavae during
cardiopulmonary bypass be facilitated?
150. What is the required cardiac index delivered by the roller pump on the
cardiopulmonary bypass machine dependent upon? What approximate cardiac
index is usually sufficient?
151. What is the advantage of low flows during cardiopulmonary bypass?
152. What are two different types of oxygenators that are used to oxygenate blood that
is returning to the arterial system during cardiopulmonary bypass?
153. What is the advantage of a bubble oxygenator? What is the disadvantage of a
bubble oxygenator?
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
246
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
154. What is the advantage of a membrane oxygenator? What is the disadvantage of
a membrane oxygenator?
155. How can the patient’s body be heated or cooled by the cardiopulmonary bypass
machine?
156. How is blood loss from the field recirculated to the patient during cardiopulmonary
bypass?
157. What is a problem with the cardiotomy suction used during cardiopulmonary
bypass?
158. Why might the left ventricle need a vent during cardiopulmonary bypass?
How might this be achieved?
159. How are systemic emboli from cellular debris prevented from occurring during
cardiopulmonary bypass?
160. What does priming of the cardiopulmonary bypass system refer to? What is the
cardiopulmonary bypass system primed with?
161. What is the patient’s hematocrit maintained at during cardiopulmonary bypass?
Why is it important to hemodilute the patient’s blood during cardiopulmonary
bypass?
162. Why is it important to remove all air from the cardiopulmonary bypass system
during cardiopulmonary bypass?
163. Why is heparin-induced anticoagulation of the patient’s blood necessary during
cardiopulmonary bypass? What dose of heparin is usually administered? How is
the adequacy of anticoagulation confirmed?
164. What are some explanations for the low mean arterial pressure often seen after the
institution of cardiopulmonary bypass? What blood pressure is typically
considered acceptable?
165. Why does blood pressure slowly rise spontaneously after some time on
cardiopulmonary bypass?
166. What are the dangers of hypertension while on cardiopulmonary bypass? How can
hypertension under these circumstances be treated?
167. What are some methods by which the adequacy of tissue perfusion during
cardiopulmonary bypass can be evaluated?
168. Why is diuresis induced during cardiopulmonary bypass?
169. What may be the cause of an increasing central venous pressure with or without
facial edema while on cardiopulmonary bypass? How can this be confirmed?
170. What may be the cause of increasing abdominal distention while on
cardiopulmonary bypass?
171. What are some complications of extracorporeal circulatory support or
cardiopulmonary bypass?
172. How should ventilation of the lungs be managed during cardiopulmonary
bypass?
173. What is the goal of myocardial preservation during cardiopulmonary bypass?
What are some methods by which this can be achieved?
174. What is the oxygen consumption of a normally contracting heart at 30 C? What is
the oxygen consumption of a fibrillating heart at 22 C? What is the oxygen
consumption of an electromechanically quiet heart at 22 C?
175. How is the effectiveness of cold cardioplegia of the heart measured?
176. What are two potential negative effects of intramyocardial hyperkalemia due to
cold cardioplegia after cardiopulmonary bypass? How can they be treated?
177. What are two potential sources for systemic hyperkalemia during
cardiopulmonary bypass? How can the hyperkalemia be treated if it were to persist
at the conclusion of cardiopulmonary bypass?
178. Why might supplemental intravenous anesthetics be administered during
cardiopulmonary bypass?
179. Why might supplemental neuromuscular blocking drugs be administered during
cardiopulmonary bypass?
180. Is supplemental anesthesia routinely required during rewarming after the
conclusion of cardiopulmonary bypass?
Cardiovascular Disease
247
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
181. What conditions in the patient must be present for cardiopulmonary bypass to be
discontinued?
182. When are the aortic and vena cava cannulaeremoved after cardiopulmonary bypass?
183. What are some potential problems associated with persistent hypothermia after
cardiopulmonary bypass?
184. What special precautions must be taken before discontinuing cardiopulmonary
bypass in patients who have had the left side of the heart opened, as during valve
replacement surgery? What is the potential risk?
185. For each of the following situations, please complete the diagnosis and appropriate
therapy:
Blood Pressure
Atrial Pressure
Cardiac Output
Diagnosis
Therapy
Decreased
Increased
Decreased
—
—
Decreased
Decreased
Decreased
—
—
Decreased
Decreased
Increased
—
—
Increased
Increased
Decreased
—
—
Increased
Decreased
Increased
—
—
186. Why might a patient have posterior papillary muscle dysfunction after
cardiopulmonary bypass? How would this be manifest on the pulmonary artery
occlusion pressure tracing?
187. What is a mechanical addition to the pharmacologic support of cardiac output in
patients with a poor cardiac output after cardiopulmonary bypass? How does it
work? What physiologic alterations may interfere with its efficacy?
188. When is protamine administered after cardiopulmonary bypass? Why?
189. What are some possible side effects of protamine administration?
190. What does the perfusionist do with blood and fluid that remains in the
cardiopulmonary bypass circuit after cardiopulmonary bypass?
191. Why might there be a gradient between central aortic and radial artery blood
pressures in the early period after cardiopulmonary bypass? How long can this
effect persist?
ANSWERS*
CORONARY ARTERY
DISEASE
1. It is estimated that 40% of adult patients undergoing surgery have, or are at risk for,
coronary artery disease. (384)
2. Components of a routine preoperative cardiac evaluation include the history and
physical examination, evaluation of the patient’s electrocardiogram, and
reviewing or ordering more specialized procedures. Specialized methods of cardiac
evaluation include a Holter monitor, exercise electrocardiogram, echocardiogram,
radioisotope imaging, cardiac catheterization, and angiography. The ultimate
purpose of a preoperative cardiac evaluation is to assess the patient’s risk of an
adverse perioperative cardiac event, to determine whether the patient is in optimal
medical condition for surgery, and to reduce operative risk. (384)
3. Important aspects of the preoperative history taken from patients with coronary
artery disease with respect to their cardiac status include their exercise tolerance,
characteristics of their angina, and the presence of a previous myocardial
*Numbers in parentheses: numbers refer to pages, figures, or tables in Miller RD, Pardo MC: Basics of Anesthesia,
6th ed. Philadelphia, Elsevier Saunders, 2011.
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
248
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
infarction. It is also important to learn what cardiac medicines the patient may be
taking and what the potential interactions of these are with anesthetics that may be
administered for surgery. (384)
4. Noncardiac diseases that are frequently present in patients with coronary artery
disease include peripheral vascular disease, chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease, renal dysfunction, chronic hypertension, and diabetes mellitus. (384)
5. A major coronary artery can be stenosed by as much as 50% to 70% in an
asymptomatic patient. (384)
6. The best indicator for a patient’s cardiac reserve is by evaluation of their exercise
tolerance. A limited exercise tolerance in the absence of significant pulmonary
disease gives evidence of a decrease in a patient’s cardiac reserve. Alternatively,
the cardiac reserve of a patient who is able to climb up two to three flights of stairs
without stopping is probably adequate. (384)
7. Angina pectoris is considered “stable” when there has been no change in the patient’s
anginal symptoms for at least 60 days. Factors related to the angina that should
be evaluated include the precipitating factors, frequency, and duration. (384)
8. Angina pectoris is considered “unstable” when there has been a change in the
patient’s anginal symptoms. Changes that should be evaluated include the degree
of activity a patient can do before the onset of angina and the duration of each
anginal episode. Another symptom of unstable angina is chest pain occurring
at rest. The clinical implication of unstable angina is that the patient may be at risk
of an impending myocardial infarction. (384)
9. Dyspnea after the onset of angina pectoris is likely an indication of acute left
ventricular dysfunction due to myocardial ischemia and acute, transient cardiac
failure. (384)
10. Angina pectoris due to spasm of the coronary arteries differs from classic angina
pectoris in that the pain may occur at rest but may not occur during periods of
exertion. Angina of this type is associated with ST segment changes on the
electrocardiogram. This type of angina is referred to as Prinzmetal’s or variant
angina. (384)
11. Silent myocardial ischemia is myocardial ischemia that occurs in the absence of
angina. This type of angina is more common in patients with diabetes mellitus and
carries the same prognosis as myocardial ischemia associated with angina. (384)
12. The most common symptom of angina in men is dyspnea on exertion. Shortness of
breath with climbing stairs is very common. Walking on a flat surface does not
seem to be sufficient to elicit shortness of breath until the symptoms are severe.
Waking from sleep with angina is also a symptom of severe angina. Women
most commonly complain of nonspecific fatigue, making identification of angina
more difficult. (384)
13. Approximately 70% of myocardial ischemic episodes are not associated with
angina pectoris, and myocardial infarctions are not associated with angina
pectoris approximately 15% of the time. (384)
14. Tachycardia is more likely than hypertension to result in myocardial ischemia in
the patient with coronary artery disease secondary to an increased oxygen
consumption with a decreased duration for coronary blood flow to the left
ventricle. Tachycardia results in an increased myocardial oxygen requirement as
oxygen consumption is per beat combined with a decreased myocardial perfusion
time. Myocardial perfusion to the left ventricle, and thus myocardial oxygen
supply, occurs during diastole. Hypertension, on the other hand, leads to an
increased myocardial oxygen requirement, but it is also a simultaneous increase in
myocardial perfusion. (384)
Cardiovascular Disease
249
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
15. The basis for the common recommendation that elective surgery be delayed until
6 months after a prior myocardial infarction is based on numerous epidemiologic
studies. These studies have shown that there is a 5% to 86% reinfarction rate
in the perioperative period if previous myocardial infarction preceded the surgical
procedure by less than 6 months. This rate of myocardial infarction is 1.5 to
10 times higher than if more than 6 months separated the previous myocardial
infarction and the surgical procedure. (385)
16. The approximate incidence of perioperative myocardial infarction 6 months or
more after a myocardial infarction is 5% to 6%, whereas the approximate
incidence of perioperative myocardial infarction in patients who have not had
a prior myocardial infarction is 0.13%. (385, Table 25-1)
17. Most perioperative myocardial infarctions occur in the first 48 to 72 hours
postoperatively. (385)
18. Cardiac medications that patients with coronary artery disease are likely to be
taking include b antagonists, nitrates, calcium channel blockers,
antihypertensives, and diuretics. The recommendation is that patients continue
taking their regular cardiac medicines throughout the perioperative period. (385)
19. Preoperative electrocardiograms may provide evidence of myocardial ischemia,
prior myocardial infarction, cardiac hypertrophy, abnormal cardiac rhythm or
conduction disturbances, and electrolyte abnormalities. (386)
20. Myocardial ischemia may appear as ST segment changes or T wave changes on an
electrocardiogram. (386)
21. (386, Table 25-2)
22. Determinants of myocardial oxygen requirements and delivery are related to
factors that affect myocardial oxygen supply or myocardial oxygen demand.
Myocardial oxygen supply is decreased by tachycardia, hypotension, increased
preload, hypocapnia, coronary artery spasm, anemia, and hypoxemia. Myocardial
oxygen demand is increased by tachycardia, increased wall tension, and increased
myocardial contractility. A goal of the anesthetic management of patients with
coronary artery disease is maintenance of the balance between myocardial oxygen
supply and demand to minimize the risk of myocardial ischemia. (389, Table 25-4)
23. In an attempt to decrease the risk of a perioperative myocardial infarction in
patients at risk, the anesthesiologist should attempt to maintain stable patient
hemodynamics. In general, the desired hemodynamics to minimize the risk of
intraoperative ischemia include slower heart rates, lower filling pressures, and
normal systolic blood pressures. A common recommendation for patients at risk of
myocardial ischemia is that heart rate and blood pressure be maintained within
20% of awake values intraoperatively. Even so, approximately 50% of all new
perioperative myocardial ischemic episodes are not preceded by or associated with
changes in heart rate or blood pressure. Nevertheless, the anesthesiologist may
choose to closely monitor the patient’s more limited hemodynamic status using
Table 25-2
Electrocardiogram
Lead
Coronary Artery Responsible
for Myocardial Ischemia
Area of Myocardium That
May Be Involved
II, III, aVF
Right coronary artery
Right atrium, atrioventricular
node, right ventricle
V3-V5
Left anterior descending coronary
artery
Anterolateral portion of left
ventricle
I, aVL
Circumflex coronary artery
Lateral aspects of the left
ventricle
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
250
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
invasive monitors to achieve these goals. He or she should also be prepared to
intervene quickly with pharmacologic interventions should they become
necessary. (389)
24. Risk stratification is the identification of risk factors in patients that lead to the
determinationofpreoperativerisk.Riskstratificationdoesnotactuallydecreaserisk,it
simply identifies it. Risk reduction requires changing the care provided to the patient
either through medications such as the administration of perioperative blockade, or
through an alteration in the anesthetic or surgical plan. (386-388, Table 25-2)
25. Patients with recent intracoronary stents have an increased risk of myocardial
infarction and death if platelet inhibitors are withdrawn for surgery. Patients with
bare metal stents likely require 3 or more months of antiplatelet therapy and those
with drug eluting stents may require a year or more before risk is acceptable to
discontinue platelet inhibitors for surgery. Many patients who have had
percutaneous intervention should be operated on while on aspirin if surgical
conditions allow. (388)
26. Two benefits of administering premedication preoperatively to patients with
coronary artery disease are the decrease in the secretion of potentially harmful
catecholamines and the potential to prevent the increase in myocardial oxygen
requirements that may occur with tachycardia and hypertension related to
anxiety. (390)
27. The induction of anesthesia in patients at risk for myocardial ischemia is typically
achieved with great care. The patient’s standard daily medications should be
reviewed and administered if there are no specific contraindications. Patients on
b-blockers should receive them. A preinduction intraarterial line may help
recognize hemodynamic perturbations reducing risk. Infusions of phenylephrine
are helpful to reduce hypotension on induction. Careful administration of
intravenous induction agents, narcotics, and inhaled agents, combined with
monitoring and careful vasoconstrictor use, are essential. It is important to avoid
tachycardia with consummate increases in myocardial oxygen requirements. (390)
28. Direct laryngoscopy is associated with an increased risk of myocardial ischemia
because it often produces intense sympathetic nervous system stimulation
leading to tachycardia and hypertension. To minimize this risk, there must be
adequate levels of anesthesia to suppress sympathetic nervous system stimulation.
Volatile anesthetics, intravenous anesthetics other than ketamine, opioids,
and lidocaine may all be used to blunt the response to direct laryngoscopy.
b antagonists may be administered before induction to attenuate the increase
in heart rate and blood pressure that can occur. (390)
29. The maintenance of anesthesia for the patient with coronary artery disease may be
achieved through the administration of volatile anesthetics, propofol,
dexmedetomidine, and opioids, with or without nitrous oxide. (391)
30. Coronary artery steal syndrome is a theoretical risk in which administration of a
coronary artery vasodilator to a patient with coronary artery disease could result in
diversion of blood flow from the ischemic areas, in which stenotic coronary
arteries are maximally dilated, to areas in which the coronary arteries are patent
and able to vasodilate. Isoflurane, of all the volatile anesthetics, is the most
potent coronary vasodilator. It was once thought that isoflurane is the volatile
anesthetic that is most likely to result in this syndrome. Clinically, however, the
administration of isoflurane to patients with coronary artery disease has not been
shown to increase the risk of myocardial ischemia through the coronary artery
steal syndrome. (391)
31. The administration of a regional anesthetic to patients with coronary artery disease
can result in hypotension, which may in turn lead to decreased blood flow
through pressure-dependent stenosed coronary arteries. For this reason it is
Cardiovascular Disease
251
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
important for the anesthesiologist to be prepared to treat decreases in blood
pressure with induction of any anesthetic. An advantage of regional anesthesia for
patients with coronary artery disease is that the anesthesiologist may continue to
monitor the patient for symptoms of angina and treat them accordingly. (391)
32. Considerations in the selection of a neuromuscular blocking drug for patients with
coronary artery disease should take into account the effects of the neuromuscular
blocking drug on the cardiovascular system. For example, a neuromuscular
blocking drug that may lower blood pressure through the release of histamine
should be administered slowly to minimize those effects. Pancuronium causes mild
increases in heart rate and blood pressure that may or may not be beneficial,
depending on the status of the patient. (391)
33. Neuromuscular blockade may be reversed in patients with coronary artery disease
in the usual manner with an anticholinesterase-anticholinergic drug combination.
Care should be taken to avoid tachycardia and subsequent myocardial ischemia
with reversal. Glycopyrrolate has less of a chronotropic effect on the heart, but
either glycopyrrolate or atropine is acceptable for the reversal of neuromuscular
blockade. Alternatively, avoiding reversal by appropriate timing and choice of
nondepolarizing muscle relaxants can reduce the risk of tachycardia and other side
effects of nondepolarizing muscle relaxant reversal. (392)
34. The intensity of intraoperative monitoring the anesthesiologist chooses to
implement for a surgical procedure in a patient with coronary artery disease is
influenced by the type of procedure the patient is undergoing, the severity of the
patient’s disease, the choice of anesthetic technique, and a risk-benefit analysis of
each type of potential monitoring. (392)
35. While no clinical benefit has been shown of the use of a pulmonary artery catheter,
it may be useful in patients with poor left ventricular function, valvular heart
disease, a recent myocardial infarction, or pulmonary vascular disease, in
situations of massive trauma, or in major vascular surgery. Information provided
by a pulmonary artery catheter includes more accurate assessment of cardiac
filling pressures than a central venous monitor in the presence of pulmonary
vascular disease, left-sided heart dysfunction, or potential left-sided heart
dysfunction due to myocardial ischemia. The pulmonary artery catheter can be
used to measure cardiac output and calculate systemic vascular resistance. (392)
36. Information provided by an intraoperative transesophageal echocardiogram
includes both functional and anatomic information including early detection of
myocardial ischemia through the presence of new onset regional wall motion
abnormalities, an assessment of the intravascular fluid volume status of the
patient, an estimation of the cardiac output, an estimation of left ventricular
afterload, and an evaluation of the cardiac valves. (392)
37. The detection of intraoperative myocardial ischemia should promptly lead to the
treatment of any hemodynamic alterations in an attempt to increase myocardial
oxygen supply while decreasing myocardial oxygen demand. Tachycardia may be
treated with a b-adrenergic antagonist. These drugs decrease the demand of the
myocardium for oxygen through its effects of decreases in heart rate and myocardial
contractility. Administration of any medication should be judicious in patients with
left ventricular dysfunction. Hypertension may be treated with a nitrate.
Nitroglycerin may also be used in a situation in which there are ischemic changes on
the electrocardiogram but blood pressure remains normal to high. Intravenous
nitroglycerin administration may lead to reflex tachycardia. Hypotension may
be treated with a sympathomimetic drug and intravascular fluids. (392)
38. Decreases in body temperature that may occur intraoperatively in patients with
coronary artery disease can result in shivering on awakening. Shivering can
significantly increase myocardial and systemic oxygen requirements and can
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
252
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
be especially detrimental to patients with coronary artery disease because it is
often accompanied by tachycardia. (392)
39. It is important to control heart rate to avoid myocardial ischemia. Control of pain,
stress, volume status, and administration of antiischemic agents is essential in the
patient with coronary artery disease. Tachycardia from any cause (including pain,
hypovolemia, atrial fibrillation, and stress) increases myocardial oxygen
requirements and is detrimental to the patient with coronary artery disease. (392)
VALVULAR HEART
DISEASE
40. Information that can be gained from Doppler echocardiography in patients with
valvular heart disease includes the significance of cardiac murmurs, hemodynamic
abnormalities, transvalvular pressure gradients, the orifice area of the cardiac
valve, and the evaluation of prosthetic valve function. (393, Table 25-5)
41. Anesthetic drugs and neuromuscular blocking drugs should be selected for the
patient with valvular heart disease based on the effects they may have on
cardiac rhythm, heart rate, blood pressure, systemic vascular resistance, and
pulmonary vascular resistance. The objective is to choose anesthetic drugs and
neuromuscular blocking drugs that will not compromise cardiac output with their
administration. (393)
42. Antibiotics used to be administered to patients with known valvular heart disease
prophylactically to protect the patient from infective endocarditis. Administration
of prophylactic antibiotics is now only recommended for patients with congenital
heart disease, prosthetic heart valves, patients with a history of infective
endocarditis, or heart transplant patients with a developing cardiac valvulopathy.
Prophylaxis is recommended to minimize the risk of infection from a bacteremic
event, such as surgical or dental procedures. Bacteremia does not seem to occur
with orotracheal intubation, but it may occur with nasotracheal intubation
independent of any surgical event. There are recommended prophylaxis regimens
that vary depending on the site of surgery, mechanism of administration, and any
history of allergies to antibiotics the patient may have. (393, Table 13-8)
43. Mitral stenosis is a mechanical obstruction to left ventricular diastolic filling
secondary to a decrease in the orifice of the mitral valve. Measurement of the mitral
valve area provides for the best indication of the severity of the disease. Mitral
stenosis is classified as severe when the mitral valve area is less than 1 cm2.
Left atrial and pulmonary venous pressures are increased in patients with mitral
stenosis. An increase in pulmonary vascular resistance is likely to be seen when the
left atrial pressure is higher than 25 mm Hg on a chronic basis. (393)
44. The most common etiology for mitral stenosis is rheumatic heart disease. The
mitral valve leaflets often fuse, scar, and fibrose during the healing process of acute
rheumatic carditis. Mitral stenosis presents after a prolonged course of
development, usually about 20 years after the initial episode of rheumatic fever.
Often the disease presents with atrial fibrillation or when there is an increased
demand for cardiac output, as may occur during pregnancy or exercise.
Patients with mitral stenosis may have recurrent episodes of pulmonary edema,
dyspnea, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea, chest pains, palpitations, and
fatigue. (393)
45. Patients with mitral stenosis are at an increased risk of atrial fibrillation secondary
to the distention of the left atrium. (393)
46. Patients with mitral stenosis are at an increased risk of thrombus formation in the
left atrium because of the stasis of blood in that heart chamber. Thrombi in the
left atrium may be ejected from the heart as systemic emboli. (393)
47. Considerations for the anesthetic management of patients with mitral stenosis
include maintenance of a normal sinus rhythm and heart rate, maintenance of
Cardiovascular Disease
253
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
a normal intravascular fluid volume, and the avoidance of increases in pulmonary
vascular resistance. Patients with mitral stenosis have a greater reliance on atrial
contraction for left ventricular filling. Alterations from sinus rhythm should be
promptly treated chemically or with cardioversion. Tachycardia and bradycardia
may both result in decreases in left ventricular filling. The intravascular fluid
volume should be maintained at near-normal or maximally tolerated levels, while
avoiding pulmonary edema. Increases in pulmonary vascular resistance and
pulmonary hypertension may place the patient at an increased risk for pulmonary
artery rupture with placement of a pulmonary artery catheter and repeated wedge
pressure measurements. Care should be taken to avoid overtransfusion or the
head-down position in these patients. Arterial hypoxemia or hypercarbia may
exacerbate pulmonary hypertension and precipitate right ventricular failure and
should be avoided. Central venous pressure monitoring may be useful to detect
changes in the right ventricular pressure. (393)
48. The maintenance of anesthesia can be achieved in patients with mitral stenosis
through the administration of volatile anesthetics, nitrous oxide, and opioids.
Of greater importance is the management of the cardiovascular effects of these
drugs to achieve the goal of the anesthetic management of patients with mitral
stenosis and treatment of the unfavorable effects of these drugs, accordingly.
For example, pancuronium may not be an appropriate choice for neuromuscular
blockade in patients with mitral stenosis secondary to the increased speed of
transmission of cardiac impulses through the atrioventricular node that result from
this drug. This increased speed of transmission may be detrimental to patients
prone to atrial fibrillation. Likewise, the administration of ketamine to these
patients should be avoided. The increase in pulmonary vascular resistance that is
associated with nitrous oxide is not usually sufficient enough to detract from its
utility in patients with mitral stenosis. Drugs that are being administered for heart
rate control should be continued throughout the perioperative period. (393-394)
49. Intraoperative monitoring of the right atrial pressure may be useful in assessing the
adequacy of intravascular fluid replacement in patients with mitral stenosis.
The monitoring of intraoperative fluid therapy in these patients is important
because they are prone to intravascular fluid overload, leading to right heart
failure and pulmonary edema. (394)
50. The mechanical support of ventilation may be required postoperatively in patients
with mitral stenosis because they are susceptible to developing pulmonary edema
and right-sided heart failure. This may be especially true in patients with mitral
stenosis after major thoracic or abdominal surgery. (394)
51. Mitral regurgitation occurs as a result of an incompetent mitral valve.
Physiologically, there is left atrial overload and a decreased left ventricular stroke
volume in these patients. When mitral regurgitation develops over time, left
ventricular dilation and left ventricular hypertrophy develop to maintain the left
ventricular stroke volume. With progression of the disease, however, congestive
heart failure can occur. Patients with chronic mitral regurgitation are frequently in
atrial fibrillation. Acute mitral regurgitation results in acute increases in left atrial
pressure and pulmonary artery pressures and can present as pulmonary
congestion, pulmonary hypertension, and right-sided heart failure. Measurement
of the regurgitant fraction provides for an estimate of the severity of the disease.
For instance, a regurgitant fraction of 0.6 or greater is typically associated with
congestive heart failure. A recording of pulmonary artery occlusion pressure
tracings in a patient with mitral regurgitation would show prominent v waves that
are characteristic of mitral regurgitation. (394, Figure 19-2)
52. The most common cause of mitral regurgitation is rheumatic heart disease.
When mitral regurgitation is secondary to rheumatic heart disease it is often
chronic, is accompanied by mitral stenosis, and progresses over years. The most
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
254
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
common cause of isolated mitral regurgitation is papillary muscle dysfunction,
which is usually acute in onset with a corresponding acute onset of symptoms.
Papillary muscle dysfunction usually occurs after a myocardial infarction or after
rupture of the chordae tendineae secondary to infective endocarditis. (394)
53. Considerations for the anesthetic management of patients with mitral
regurgitation include the avoidance of sudden decreases in heart rate, the
avoidance of sudden increases in systemic vascular resistance, and minimizing
drug-induced myocardial depression, because each of these will increase
regurgitant flow. The size of the v wave on the pulmonary artery catheter tracing
may be monitored as a reflection of mitral regurgitant flow. (394, Table 25-7)
54. The maintenance of anesthesia in patients with mitral regurgitation can be
achieved through the administration of a volatile anesthetic, nitrous oxide, and an
opioid. Of greater importance is the management of the cardiovascular effects of
these drugs to achieve the goal of the anesthetic management of patients with
mitral regurgitation and treatment of the unfavorable effects of these drugs
accordingly. The goals include maintenance of normal to increased heart rate,
normal to reduced systemic vascular resistance, and myocardial contractility.
Nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking drugs, including pancuronium, may be
safely used in patients with mitral regurgitation. The increase in heart rate that can
result from the administration of pancuronium can be beneficial to patients with
mitral regurgitation. (395)
55. Aortic stenosis is the mechanical obstruction to the ejection of blood from the left
ventricle secondary to a decrease in the orifice of the aortic valve. Increased left
ventricular systolic pressure necessarily results from the chronic attempt of this
chamber to maintain an adequate stroke volume through a narrowed aortic valve
in aortic stenosis. The increased thickness of the left ventricular wall that is often
seen in patients with aortic stenosis occurs in response to chronically increased
intraventricular pressures. The severity of aortic stenosis is estimated by the degree
of stenosis of the valve. A pressure gradient across the aortic valve that is in excess
of 50 mm Hg is considered hemodynamically significant aortic stenosis. (395)
56. Two causes of aortic stenosis are rheumatic heart disease and the progressive
calcification and stenosis of a congenitally abnormal valve. The congenital valve
abnormality most often associated with aortic stenosis is a bicuspid valve.
The natural course of aortic stenosis is one of an insidious, long progression of
asymptomatic disease before the onset of symptoms. Symptoms may include
angina, syncope, dyspnea on exertion, and congestive heart failure. (395)
57. Patients with aortic stenosis may have angina pectoris, which typically occurs with
exertion despite the absence of coronary artery disease. Myocardial ischemia and
angina occurs because of an increased demand for and decreased supply of
myocardial oxygen. The increase in myocardial oxygen demand is due to left
ventricular hypertrophy combined with increased left ventricular pressures and
increased myocardial work. The decrease in myocardial oxygen delivery results
from compression of subendocardial coronary blood vessels by increased left
ventricular systolic pressures, as well as the gradient in pressure from the left
ventricle to the coronary ostia caused by the stenotic valve. (395)
58. A systolic murmur heard best in the second right intercostal space characterizes the
murmur of aortic stenosis heard on cardiac auscultation. It is important for the
anesthesiologist to rule out aortic stenosis by auscultation preoperatively to best
manage the patient. For instance, a precipitous drop in systemic vascular
resistance, as may occur with a regional anesthetic or induction of general
anesthesia, could be lethal to the patient with aortic stenosis. (395)
59. Consideration for the anesthetic management of a patient with aortic stenosis
includes the maintenance of a stable blood pressure. Avoiding hypotension and
Cardiovascular Disease
255
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
tachycardia are critical. The goal of the anesthetic management of patients with
aortic stenosis is the maintenance of normal sinus rhythm, normal heart rates, and
normal myocardial contractility, while avoiding sudden decreases in systemic
vascular resistance, or hypovolemia. (395, Table 25-8)
60. Tachycardia in the patient with aortic stenosis increases oxygen consumption
and decreases coronary filling time by shortening diastole. Tachycardia also
decreases the amount of time for left ventricular filling, leading to a decrease in
the stroke volume. Bradycardia can lead to an acute overdistention of the left
ventricle in these patients. Sinus rhythm is desired because the contribution of the
atrial contraction to left ventricular filling is greater in these patients. Decreases
in systemic vascular resistance in patients with aortic stenosis can lead to decreases
in coronary blood flow with myocardial ischemia, with rapid ventricular
decompensation and death. (395)
61. The maintenance of anesthesia in patients with aortic stenosis can be achieved
through the administration of narcotics, volatile agents, or intravenous anesthetics.
Volatile anesthetics administered carefully to avoid excessive decreases in systemic
vascularresistanceandtachycardiaarecommon.Themostimportantpointinpatients
with aortic stenosis is to carefully manage hemodynamics to avoid hypotension,
tachycardia, myocardial ischemia, and ventricular dysfunction. Intraarterial pressure
monitoring prior to the induction of anesthesia is mandatory, as is the availability of
vasoconstrictors, both bolus and infusion, such as phenylephrine. (396)
62. Management of the intravascular fluid status of patients with aortic stenosis
should be geared toward the maintenance of an adequate intravascular volume
through the prompt, liberal correction of blood and fluid losses. (396)
63. The pulmonary artery occlusion pressure may not be reflective of the left
ventricular end-diastolic volume in patients with chronic aortic stenosis secondary
to the decrease in left ventricular compliance seen in these patients. (396)
64. External cardiac compressions administered during cardiopulmonary arrest are
not effective in patients with aortic stenosis because of the greater pressures that
are necessary to create forward flow through the stenosed aortic valve. (396)
65. Aortic regurgitation results from an incompetent aortic valve. Patients with aortic
regurgitation have a decreased left ventricular stroke volume due to regurgitation
of part of the ejected stroke volume from the aorta back into the left ventricle.
This places an increased volume load on the left ventricle. Chronic aortic
regurgitation results in eccentric hypertrophy of the left ventricle in an attempt to
compensate for the regurgitation by increasing the stroke volume. Symptoms may
include dyspnea, fatigue, and palpitations. (396)
66. Acute aortic regurgitation is most likely due to infective endocarditis, trauma,
connective tissue disease, or a dissecting thoracic aortic aneurysm. Chronic aortic
regurgitation is most likely due to prior rheumatic fever, but it may also be due
to hypertension, syphilis, and other causes. (396)
67. Angina pectoris despite the absence of coronary artery disease in a patient with
aortic regurgitation may occur as a result of increased myocardial oxygen
requirements in the presence of a decreased supply. The increase in myocardial
oxygen requirements is due to left ventricular hypertrophy. The decrease in
myocardial oxygen supply is due to a decrease in aortic diastolic pressure, which
decreases coronary blood flow. Coronary blood flow to the left ventricle occurs
during diastole, so lower diastolic pressures compromise it. Angina resulting from
aortic regurgitation is typically a late and dismal sign. (396)
68. The anesthetic management of aortic regurgitation resembles the anesthetic
management for mitral regurgitation. Considerations for the anesthetic
management of patients with aortic regurgitation include the avoidance of sudden
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
256
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
decreases in heart rate, the avoidance of sudden increases in systemic vascular
resistance, and minimizing drug-induced myocardial depression. (396)
69. Mitral valve prolapse is a valvular disease in which the valve prolapses into the left
atrium during contraction of the left ventricle. Valve prolapse is caused by an
abnormality of the valve support structure. Mitral valve prolapse on cardiac
auscultation is characterized by a systolic murmur with a clicking sound. It has
been estimated that 5% to 15% of the adult population has mitral valve prolapse,
also called click-murmur syndrome. Currently, this estimate is believed to be
higher than the true prevalence. The diagnosis of mitral valve prolapse can be
confirmed through echocardiography. (396)
70. Mitral valve prolapse is associated with atrial secundum defects, von Willebrand
syndrome, and polycystic kidney disease, as well as with musculoskeletal
abnormalities such as Marfan syndrome, pectus excavatum, and kyphoscoliosis.
Females are more likely than males to have mitral valve prolapse. (396)
71. Patients with mitral valve prolapse typically are asymptomatic. Symptoms that can
be associated with mitral valve prolapse include palpitations, dyspnea, atypical
chest pain, dizziness, and syncope. (396)
72. Potential complications of mitral valve prolapse include mitral regurgitation,
infective endocarditis, transient cerebral ischemic events, cardiac dysrhythmias,
and sudden death. Sudden death is extremely rare, however. Cardiac dysrhythmias
associated with atrioventricular bypass tracts and preexcitation syndromes are
fairly common in these patients. Transient cerebral ischemic events may lead to the
prescription of aspirin or anticoagulants for patients with mitral valve prolapse.
(395-396)
73. The maintenance of anesthesia in patients with mitral valve prolapse should be
geared toward the avoidance of cardiac emptying. Cardiac emptying results in
increased prolapse of the mitral valve into the left atrium. Avoidance of
sympathetic nervous system stimulation, decreases in systemic vascular resistance,
and the performance of surgery with patients in the head-up or sitting position will
all minimize cardiac emptying. The intravascular fluid volume of the patient
should be maintained at normal or high normal for the same reason. Hypotension
in patients with mitral valve prolapse can be treated with phenylephrine. Cardiac
dysrhythmias that occur intraoperatively should be promptly treated. Ketamine is
not recommended in patients with mitral valve prolapse because of its propensity
to increase myocardial contractility and heart rate. (397)
74. The potential problem with regional anesthesia in patients with mitral valve
prolapse is the decrease in systemic vascular resistance that can be detrimental to
these patients. Appropriate monitoring can make regional anesthesia the preferred
anesthetic approach for some surgical patients with valvular heart disease. (397)
DISTURBANCES OF
CARDIAC
CONDUCTION AND
RHYTHM
75. Tools available to the clinician for the diagnosis of disturbances in cardiac
conduction and rhythm include an electrocardiogram, Holter monitoring, or an
electrophysiology (EP) study. A Holter monitor is an ambulatory
electrocardiogram that can be worn for days to document the occurrence of cardiac
dysrhythmias and to assess the efficacy of treatment interventions. (397)
76. The conduction system of the heart includes the sinoatrial node, atrioventricular
node, the bundle of His, and Purkinje fibers of the right and left bundle branches.
Types of conduction defects include sinus node block, atrioventricular conduction
defects, and intraventricular conduction defects. Atrioventricular conduction
defects are classified as first-, second-, or third-degree heart blocks.
Intraventricular conduction defects include right bundle branch block, left bundle
branch block, and left fascicular hemiblock. Heart block below the atrioventricular
Cardiovascular Disease
257
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
node is usually progressive and permanent, whereas heart block above the
atrioventricular node is usually transient and benign. (397, Table 25-10)
77. The placement of a prophylactic artificial cardiac pacemaker before surgery is not
indicated in a patient with a bifascicular block. The theoretical concern in
preoperative patients with a bifascicular block is that the single remaining intact
fascicle will become compromised by perioperative events, such as changes in
hemodynamics, oxygenation, or electrolytes. This would lead to acute third-degree
atrioventricular heart block. Third-degree atrioventricular block is also referred
to as complete heart block because all the electrical activity from the atria fails
to be conducted to the ventricles. Ventricular contractions in patients with
third-degree atrioventricular block occur at a rate of about 40 beats per minute,
typically too slow to maintain an adequate cardiac output. Fortunately, there is
no evidence that bifascicular blocks proceed to third-degree atrioventricular
block with enough consistency to warrant the prophylactic placement of a
pacemaker. (398)
78. Third-degree atrioventricular heart block is treated by the placement of an
artificial cardiac pacemaker. There are various methods by which this can be
accomplished. An endocardial pacemaker lead may be inserted intravenously, an
epicardial or myocardial lead may be placed by the subcostal approach, or
noninvasive transcutaneous cardiac pacing can be started. The pharmacologic
treatment of third-degree heart block involves a continuous infusion of
isoproterenol, which can act as a medical pacemaker until artificial electrical
cardiac pacing is implemented. (398)
79. Sick sinus syndrome occurs as a result of degenerative changes in the sinoatrial
node and is associated with an inappropriate sinus bradycardia. In sick sinus
syndrome, rapid heart rates inhibit the normal pacemaker activity of the sinoatrial
node and lead to periods of asystole. Sick sinus syndrome therefore usually
presents as bradycardia with episodes of supraventricular tachycardia.
Treatment is by administering medicines to control tachycardia. When these
medicines result in bradycardia, medical management is said to have failed and
artificial cardiac pacemakers become the next line of treatment. Patients with sick
sinus syndrome may be at a high risk for pulmonary embolism and may therefore
be started on anticoagulants. (398)
80. Ventricular premature beats occur as a result of ectopic pacemaker activity at a
level below the atrioventricular node. The premature ventricular contraction then
spreads through the ventricular conducting system. The premature ventricular
contraction often blocks the sinoatrial node’s subsequent depolarization,
leading to a characteristic pause until the next normal sinus beat is generated.
The hallmark features of a ventricular premature beat on an electrocardiogram
are representative of the aberrant conduction associated with the ventricular
contraction. They include a premature occurrence, the absence of a P wave
preceding the QRS complex, a wide and bizarre appearing QRS complex, an
inverted T wave, and a compensatory pause after the premature beat. (398)
81. Premature ventricular beats warrant treatment when they occur more frequently
than six times a minute, are multifocal, occur in a train of three or more, or take
place during the ascending limb of the T wave, that is, during the refractory period
of the ventricle. Treatment is typically with lidocaine at a dose of 1 to 2 mg/kg.
Recurrent premature ventricular beats can be treated with a lidocaine infusion.
Additional therapy, if necessary, may include amiodarone, b antagonists,
bretylium, procainamide, quinidine, verapamil, or overdrive pacing. A search for
an underlying cause of the premature beats should be the primary goal. (398)
82. Causes of ventricular premature beats include myocardial ischemia, arterial
hypoxemia, hypercarbia, hypertension, hypokalemia, and mechanical irritation
of the ventricles. (398)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
258
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
83. Ventricular tachycardia may be diagnosed with the appearance of three or more
consecutive, wide QRS complexes on the electrocardiogram occurring at an
effective heart rate higher than 120 beats per minute. The QRS complexes must be
greater than 0.12 second. The P waves have no fixed relationship to the QRS
complex because the beat originates in the ventricle. The onset of ventricular
tachycardia can be life threatening. Ventricular tachycardia should be treated with
intravenous amiodarone as a bolus followed by an infusion if the patient is
hemodynamically stable. Hemodynamic instability, loss of consciousness, or
myocardial ischemia should prompt immediate electrical cardioversion. (398)
84. Preexcitation syndromes are defined as an activation of a portion of the ventricles
by cardiac impulses that have originated in the atria but were conducted to the
ventricles by an accessory conduction pathway. Activation of the ventricles during
this syndrome occurs sooner than it otherwise would have because of the accessory
pathway, making the QRS complex appear sooner than it would have if sinus
rhythm were maintained. (398)
85. WPW syndrome is the most commonly occurring preexcitation syndrome.
The incidence of this syndrome is 0.3% in the general population. These patients
may have sporadic supraventricular tachycardia or atrial fibrillation. In extreme
cases, the rapid heart rate may be associated with syncope or congestive heart
failure. On the electrocardiogram, WPW syndrome is characterized by a short P–R
interval and a wide QRS complex. There is also a characteristic delta wave that
appears on the electrocardiogram. The delta wave, together with the QRS complex,
represents the composite of cardiac impulses conducted by both the normal and
accessory pathways. (398)
86. The most common cardiac dysrhythmia associated with WPW syndrome is
paroxysmal atrial tachycardia. WPW syndrome is most frequently treated by
catheter ablation of the accessory pathway. Identification of the accessory
pathway is accomplished by electrophysiologic mapping. (398)
87. The goal of the anesthetic management of a patient with WPW syndrome is the
avoidance of any events, such as anxiety or drugs, that can result in sympathetic
nervous system stimulation. Any cardiac antidysrhythmic drugs should be
continued throughout the perioperative period. An adequate depth of anesthesia
should be achieved before direct laryngoscopy to ensure that the patient does not
respond to the noxious stimulus with sympathetic nervous system activity, placing
the patient at an increased risk of tachyarrhythmias. Reduction in the stimulation
of laryngoscopy can be achieved with adequate doses of an intravenous induction
agent such as propofol, thiopental, benzodiazepines, opioids, b-blockers, or with a
bolus of lidocaine just before direct laryngoscopy. Ketamine is not recommended
as it stimulates the sympathetic nervous system. The duration of laryngoscopy
should also be as short as possible. (398)
88. Methods for the treatment of paroxysmal atrial tachycardia or fibrillation that can
occur in the perioperative period in patients with WPW syndrome include the
administration of adenosine or procainamide. Adenosine acts by prolonging the
refractory period of the atrioventricular node, whereas procainamide acts by
increasing the refractory period of the accessory pathways. b-adrenergic
antagonists can be used to control the heart rate. When the tachydysrhythmias
become life threatening, emergent electrical cardioversion is indicated. Of note,
drugs such as verapamil and digitalis may actually result in an increase in
ventricular response during the dysrhythmia by accelerating the conduction in the
accessory atrioventricular pathway. (399)
89. Prolonged QT interval syndrome can be congenital or acquired. Acquired
prolonged QT interval syndrome can be due to quinidine, tricyclic antidepressants,
subarachnoid hemorrhage, hypokalemia, hypocalcemia, or hypomagnesemia.
It may also present in the postoperative period after right radical neck dissection.
Cardiovascular Disease
259
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
The diagnosis of prolonged QT interval syndrome is made when the QT interval is
chronically greater than 0.44 second. Adverse events that are associated with a
prolonged QT interval include ventricular dysrhythmias, syncope, and sudden
death. The pharmacologic treatment of a chronically prolonged QT interval can
include b antagonists or a left stellate ganglion block. These treatments are
empirical. (399)
90. A congenital cause of a prolonged QT interval is thought to be due to an imbalance
of autonomic innervation to the heart caused by decreases in right cardiac
sympathetic nerve activity. A left stellate ganglion block is thought to work by
decreasing left cardiac sympathetic nerve activity, thereby balancing the
autonomic innervation to the heart. (399)
91. The goal of the anesthetic management of a patient with a chronically prolonged
QT interval includes the avoidance of any events or drugs that are likely to cause
sympathetic nervous system stimulation. General anesthesia has triggered
life-threatening ventricular dysrhythmia and cardiac arrest in patients with this
syndrome. b-adrenergic blockade may be instituted preoperatively to minimize
this risk. Although thiopental prolongs the QT interval in normal patients, it has
been used for the induction of anesthesia in patients with the syndrome without
any problems. Direct laryngoscopy should be performed with the patient deeply
anesthetized. Should acute ventricular dysrhythmias occur, they can be treated
with a b antagonist. Procainamide and quinidine are both known to prolong the QT
interval in normal patients and should probably be avoided. Lidocaine, which also
prolongs the QT interval in normal patients, has been used to successfully treat
ventricular dysrhythmias in these patients. Electrical cardioversion may be
necessary in the event of dysrhythmias that become life threatening. (399)
ARTIFICIAL CARDIAC
PACEMAKERS
92. The preoperative evaluation of a patient with an artificial cardiac pacemaker
should include an understanding of the underlying cardiac condition that required
placement of the pacemaker and an assessment of the current function of the
pacemaker, brand, model, make, and magnet mode. (399)
93. A pacemaker should be evaluated by the anesthesiologist preoperatively so that
the anesthesiologist has a good understanding of the pacemaker and its
programming. For instance, the anesthesiologist should be aware of what the default
rhythm is (should the pacemaker not capture), the type of pacemaker, the chamber
paced, the chamber sensed, how to detect deterioration in battery function, who can
reprogram the pacemaker, and the current rate and sensitivity settings of the
pacemaker and magnet mode. A discussion with the electrophysiology service or the
pacemaker company representative can quickly resolve any issues. (399)
94. Intraoperative monitoring that is important in a patient with an artificial cardiac
pacemaker includes the electrocardiogram, pulse oximeter, and possibly an
intraarterial catheter. Intraarterial catheters or a pulse oximeter that are not affected
by electrocautery may allow for diagnosis of interference of the pacemaker by
electrocautery. In a patient with third-degree heart block and no escape rhythm,
intraarterial catheters can be quite helpful. Inhibition of the pacemaker by
electrocautery may lead to pacemaker inhibition and asystole in patients with
third-degree heart block. The intraarterial catheter or pulse oximeter provides a
measure of blood flow and cardiac output during that period allowing rapid
diagnosis of the interference between the electrocautery and the pacemaker. (399)
95. If the ground plate for the electrocautery is placed too near the pulse generator of
the artificial cardiac pacemaker, there could be electromagnetic interference that is
interpreted as spontaneous cardiac activity by the pacemaker. This interference
may result in asystole due to an inhibition of pulse generator activity by the
pacemaker. The ground plate should be placed as far away as possible from the
pulse generator but at least 15 cm away. Other potential sources of mechanical
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
260
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
interference include electroconvulsive shock therapy, succinylcholine-induced
fasciculations, and myoclonic movements. (399)
96. The selection of drugs or anesthetic techniques for a patient should not be altered
by the presence of an artificial cardiac pacemaker. However, patients with
pacemakers or implantable cardiac defibrillators have an increased risk of
coronary artery disease and ventricular dysfunction and should be monitored and
anesthetized with added caution. (399)
97. A “pacemaker” magnet should be kept in the operating room intraoperatively for
patients with artificial cardiac pacemakers to convert the pacemaker modes to an
asynchronous mode, or fixed rate, should it become necessary. For instance, if the
patient’s pacemaker stops functioning intraoperatively, placement of an external
converter magnet over the pulse generator may convert the pacemaker to an
asynchronous mode. The function of the magnet should be reviewed by the
anesthesiologist before surgery. (399)
98. The most common cause of temporary pacemaker malfunction is the disruption of
contact between the pacemaker electrode wires and the endocardium. Some causes
of this disruption include muscular exertion, blunt trauma, cardioversion, and
positive-pressure ventilation. When this occurs, pacemaker spikes will continue to
be seen on the electrocardiogram, although there is no myocardial activity or
pulse. Placement of a pulmonary artery catheter in a patient with an artificial
cardiac pacemaker may disrupt the placement of transvenous endocardial
electrodes if they have been placed in the 2 weeks preceding the procedure. (400)
ESSENTIAL
HYPERTENSION
99. Essential hypertension has been defined as a sustained elevated blood pressure on
more than one reading without any known cause. Systolic blood pressure greater
than 160 mm Hg or diastolic blood pressure greater than 90 mm Hg have been
arbitrarily defined as the limits at which hypertension begins. The benefits of the
long-term treatment of patients with essential hypertension include decreases in
the incidence of cerebrovascular accidents, congestive heart failure, and renal
disease. (400)
100. The preoperative evaluation of a patient with essential hypertension should
include a determination of the adequacy of blood pressure control, a review of the
pharmacology of the antihypertensive drugs, and an evaluation of effects of the
hypertension on other organs. (400)
101. Antihypertensives include angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, calcium
channel blockers, b-adrenergic antagonists, diuretics, and vasodilators. It is
generally recommended that blood pressure medications be administered on their
routine schedule in the perioperative period in the patient with essential
hypertension. This includes medicines on the morning of the surgical procedure.
Withdrawal of medications in the perioperative period can lead to an increase
in complications and should be avoided. (400)
102. Medical problems that are frequently seen in patients with essential
hypertension include congestive heart failure, coronary artery disease, cerebral
ischemia, renal dysfunction, and peripheral vascular disease. Approximately
50% of patients with peripheral vascular disease can be assumed to have 50%
or greater stenosis of one or more coronary arteries, even in the absence of
symptoms. (400)
103. The curve for the autoregulation of cerebral blood flow in patients with essential
hypertension is shifted to the right, such that autoregulation occurs at a higher
pressure than it would for a normotensive patient. This implies that the same
degree of absolute hypotension in patients with a history of hypertension may be
more harmful than the same blood pressure would be for a normotensive patient.
Cardiovascular Disease
261
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
Thus maintenance of blood pressure in the perioperative period should be relative
to what the preoperative resting blood pressure is specific to that patient. (400)
104. Treating essential hypertension in patients before an elective procedure has
been shown to be beneficial in decreasing the risk of intraoperative hypotension
and myocardial ischemia. There have been multiple studies conducted regarding
this topic. Studies have also shown that there is not an increased incidence of
cardiac complications in hypertensive patients in the perioperative period as
long as the diastolic blood pressure was not higher than 110 mm Hg
preoperatively. (400)
105. Patients with essential hypertension frequently respond to the induction of
anesthesia with an exaggerated decrease in blood pressure. This hypotension is
thought to occur as a result of an unmasking of a decreased intravascular fluid
volume status. (400-401)
106. Patients with essential hypertension are especially likely to respond to direct
laryngoscopy with exaggerated increases in blood pressure, placing them at risk
of myocardial ischemia. This response can be attenuated with adequate levels
of anesthesia. It must be done with caution in hypertensive patients, because
an excessive depth of anesthesia may produce hypotension in these patients as
well. Other methods may be used to attenuate the sympathetic nervous system
response to direct laryngoscopy and the associated exaggerated hypertension.
For instance, esmolol or lidocaine may be administered just before direct
laryngoscopy. In addition, the duration of direct laryngoscopy should be
minimized. (401)
107. The goal for the anesthetic management of patients with essential hypertension
is to minimize the fluctuations in blood pressure characteristic of these patients
with anesthetics and antihypertensive medications as appropriate. The patient
should also be continually monitored for evidence of myocardial ischemia via a
continuous electrocardiogram. (401, Table 25-11)
108. The maintenance of anesthesia in patients with essential hypertension can be
achieved through the administration of a volatile anesthetic in conjunction with an
opioid, intravenous agents, or nitrous oxide. An anesthetic dose sufficient to
attenuate hypertensive responses to surgical stimulation should be administered.
The maintenance of normotension intraoperatively may also require the
administration of other medicines, such as b antagonists, vasoconstrictors, or
nitrates. (401)
109. Intraoperative hypotension in patients with essential hypertension can be
managed by the administration of intravenous fluids, by decreasing the
concentration of volatile anesthetics, and by the administration of vasopressors
as necessary. (401-402)
110. Regional anesthesia is frequently an excellent choice in appropriate surgical cases
for patients with cardiovascular disease. The administration of regional anesthesia
in patients with essential hypertension has the theoretical problem of causing
excessive decreases in systemic blood pressure. Hypotension can occur secondary
to vasodilation associated with the sympathetic nervous system blockade in
combination with the decreased intravascular fluid volume status often seen in
patients with chronic hypertension. The anesthesiologist must be prepared to
support the blood pressure as necessary when a regional anesthetic is
administered to these patients. (401)
111. Hypertension occurs frequently in the early postoperative period in patients
with a diagnosis of essential hypertension. Hypertension secondary to inadequate
pain control should be considered. If hypertension persists despite adequate
analgesia, the administration of additional doses of antihypertensives is likely
necessary. (402)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
262
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
CONGESTIVE HEART
FAILURE
112. Congestive heart failure is highly correlated with postoperative morbidity. In fact,
preoperative congestive heart failure is the single greatest preoperative risk
factor for predicting postoperative morbidity. This suggests that the preoperative
patient with congestive heart failure scheduled for elective surgery should not
have his or her surgery until treatment of the congestive heart failure can be
instituted and the patient’s medical status optimized. (402)
113. The goal of the anesthetic management of patients with congestive heart failure who
are undergoing urgent or emergent surgery is the optimization of cardiac output.
Optimal cardiac output in patients with congestive heart failure undergoing
anesthesia may be best achieved with careful hemodynamic management. The
patient’s chronic medications should be given preoperatively if there are no specific
contraindications. Volatile anesthetics may produce a dose-dependent depression of
cardiac muscle function that is greater in patients with congestive heart failure than
in patients without congestive heart failure. In addition, the maintenance of
myocardial contractility may necessitate the continuous administration of b-
adrenergic agonists and vasoactive agents in the perioperative period. Avoidance of
the administration of b-adrenergic agonists, if possible, may reduce overall risk.
(403)
114. Positive-pressure ventilation of the lungs of patients in congestive heart failure
may be beneficial because of its effect of decreasing pulmonary vascular
congestion and improvement in arterial oxygenation. (403)
115. Monitors in the patient with congestive heart failure undergoing major surgery
include an intraarterial catheter. Although there is no evidence to support the use of
pulmonary artery catheters to monitor central filling pressures and cardiac output,
they can be used to monitor the effects of inotropic, vasoactive agents, and volume
status. Transesophageal echocardiography may be more useful than pulmonary
artery catheterization but is not required. Monitors chosen should be influenced by
the patient’s medical status, risk-benefit ratios, and the surgical procedure. (403)
116. Regional anesthesia for peripheral surgery in patients with congestive heart failure
can be administered safely but is not proven to have reliably better outcomes than
general anesthesia for these patients. Mild decreases in the systemic vascular
resistance produced by an epidural or spinal anesthetic may provide for
improvement in cardiac output in the patient with congestive heart failure. Greater
decreases in the systemic vascular resistance should be avoided if possible. (403)
HYPERTROPHIC
CARDIOMYOPATHY
117. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is a genetically transmitted disease also known as
idiopathic hypertrophic subaortic stenosis. The pathology that defines hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy is the obstruction to left ventricular outflow produced by
asymmetric hypertrophy of the intraventricular septal muscle. As a result of the
obstruction to ventricular outflow, left ventricular hypertrophy develops to the
degree that the volume of the left chamber is decreased. As the disease advances, the
increased muscle mass in the subaortic region can lead to complete obstruction of
left ventricular outflow. The stroke volume in patients with hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy remains normal despite the physiologic changes. The normal stroke
volume is reflective of the hypercontractile state of the myocardium. (403)
118. The goal of the anesthetic management of patients with hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy is geared toward decreasing the pressure gradient across the
obstructed left ventricular outflow tract. There are several methods of decreasing
the left ventricular outflow obstruction in patients with hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy. These include decreasing myocardial contractility, as with the
administration of b antagonists; increasing the dose of volatile agents; increasing
preload with increased intravascular fluid volume; and increasing afterload with
a-adrenergic stimulation as is produced by phenylephrine. (403)
Cardiovascular Disease
263
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
119. Intraoperative hypotension in patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy can
be treated with the administration of intravascular fluids as well as
phenylephrine. (404)
120. Intraoperative hypertension in patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy can
be treated with the administration of increased concentrations of volatile
anesthetics. (404)
121. The administration of b agonists for the treatment of hypotension in patients with
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy can result in an increase in myocardial contractility
and a corresponding increase in left ventricular outflow obstruction. Likewise,
the administration of nitrates such as nitroprusside or nitroglycerin to these
patients can increase left ventricular outflow obstruction by decreasing systemic
vascular resistance, making them an unlikely choice for the treatment of
hypertension. (404)
COR PULMONALE
122. Cor pulmonale is right ventricular hypertrophy and cardiac dysfunction that
occurs as a result of pulmonary hypertension. The most likely cause of cor
pulmonale is chronic obstructive pulmonary disease with associated chronic
arterial hypoxemia leading to chronic pulmonary vascular vasoconstriction.
Vascular smooth muscle hypertrophy and permanently increased pulmonary
vascular resistance results from sustained pulmonary vascular vasoconstriction.
When systemic acidosis is also present, there is a synergistic effect between arterial
hypoxemia and acidosis on the pulmonary vasculature. In general, when the cause
of the increased pulmonary vasculature resistance is due to arterial hypoxemia
from chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, the prognosis is somewhat favorable
if the arterial hypoxemia can be reversed with the administration of oxygen.
Other causes of increased pulmonary vascular resistance leading to cor pulmonale,
such as primary pulmonary hypertension or pulmonary fibrosis, have less
favorable outcomes. (404)
123. Symptoms of cor pulmonale are often masked by the symptoms associated with the
existence of coexisting chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. As the right
ventricle becomes increasingly impaired, patients may experience syncope with
exertion. Patients may also have chronic dependent edema, an enlarged liver,
ascites, and dilated neck veins. On the lateral chest radiograph, right ventricular
hypertrophy may present as a decrease in the retrosternal space. There may also be
a decrease in pulmonary vascular markings. Right ventricular hypertrophy on
the electrocardiogram would show peaked P waves in leads II, III, and aVF. Often
there will also be right-axis deviation. On right-sided heart catheterization, the
mean pulmonary artery pressure will be elevated, whereas the pulmonary artery
occlusion pressure is normal. Pulmonary hypertension is considered mild with
mean pulmonary artery pressure between 20 and 35 mm Hg and moderate when
the pressure is greater than 35 mm Hg. (404)
124. The treatment of cor pulmonale is directed toward decreasing right ventricular
work by decreasing the pulmonary vascular resistance. This reduction in
pulmonary vascular resistance may be achieved through the correction of the
patient’s pH and through the administration of oxygen to reverse arterial
hypoxemia if possible. Diuretics may also be administered for patients with
congestive heart failure. Nitroglycerin administration may result in lowering of the
pulmonary artery pressure and a decrease in pulmonary vascular resistance.
Pulmonary vasodilation with prostaglandins, endothelial receptor antagonists,
inhaled nitric oxide, type 5 phosphodiesterase inhibitors, or soluble guanylate
cyclase inhibitors has been tried with variable success. (404)
125. Just as in any other patient, the patient with cor pulmonale who is scheduled for an
elective surgical procedure should be medically optimized before the procedure.
Any pulmonary infections should be treated. Patients should have any
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
264
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
bronchospasm reversed, be well hydrated, and have their electrolytes evaluated
and corrected if necessary. (404)
126. The goal of the anesthetic management of patients with cor pulmonale is the
avoidance of events or drugs that could result in an increase in pulmonary vascular
resistance, thereby worsening right ventricular failure. Events that may result in an
increase in pulmonary vascular resistance include arterial hypoxemia,
hypercapnia, acidosis, and decreases in body temperature. An abrupt or significant
decrease in the systemic vascular resistance should be avoided. Nitrous oxide
should be avoided because of its potential for increasing pulmonary vascular
resistance. Although positive-pressure ventilation may increase pulmonary
vascular resistance, its potential benefit for improving arterial oxygenation likely
outweighs its risk. An intraarterial catheter allows for arterial blood gas analysis to
assess the effects of any interventions on the patient’s arterial oxygenation and pH
and should be considered essential. (404)
127. The advantage of monitoring pulmonary artery and central venous pressure during
surgery in patients with cor pulmonale is the ability of the anesthesiologist to
assess the hemodynamic effects of the surgical procedure and optimize
pharmacologic and hemodynamic management. (404)
CARDIAC
TAMPONADE
128. Cardiac tamponade occurs as a result of increased intrapericardial pressure from the
accumulation of fluid in the pericardial space. The increase in pericardial pressures
causes a decrease in compliance of the right ventricle, reducing right ventricular
filling, stroke volume, and cardiac output, thus causing hypotension. The decrease in
stroke volume results in sympathetic nervous system activation in an attempt to
maintaincardiacoutput. Cardiacoutputandsystemicbloodpressureinthesepatients
become dependent on heart rate and on a central venous pressure that exceeds the
right ventricular end-diastolic pressure. (404)
129. Manifestations of cardiac tamponade include hypotension, tachycardia,
vasoconstriction, equalization of diastolic filling pressures, increased central
venous pressure, and a fixed stroke volume. These patients also have pulsus
paradoxus. Pulsus paradoxus is a decrease in the arterial blood pressure by greater
than 10 mm Hg during inspiration. This change in pressure is the opposite of what
would be expected in normal patients and reflects the decrease in ventricular
stroke volume that occurs with inspiration. On the chest radiograph, there may be a
change in the cardiac silhouette when 250 mL or greater of fluid has accumulated
in the pericardial space. Decreased voltages through all leads may be seen in
patients with cardiac tamponade. Cardiac tamponade is best diagnosed through
echocardiography. (404)
130. The definitive treatment of cardiac tamponade is the drainage of the pericardial
fluid. Drainage can be achieved either percutaneously or by a pericardiotomy in
the operating room under general or local anesthesia. Temporizing measures until
definitive treatment include the expansion of the intravascular fluid volume;
the administration of agents that will increase myocardial contractility, such as
epinephrine, norepinephrine, or dopamine; and the correction of metabolic
acidosis, which may depress myocardial contractility. Definitive care requires
drainage of the pericardial fluid and may be life saving. (404)
131. Prior to the induction of general anesthesia, the patient should be prepped and
draped and the surgeons scrubbed and ready to make an incision. Immediate
hemodynamic collapse may occur with induction of general anesthesia that can
only be resolved with surgical relief of the pericardial tamponade. The goal of the
anesthetic management of patients with cardiac tamponade is the avoidance of
events or drugs that could result in a decrease in cardiac output. Myocardial
contractility, arterial blood pressure, increased heart rate, and venous return must
Cardiovascular Disease
265
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
all be maintained. Rapid surgical drainage of the tamponade is critical to avoid
hemodynamic collapse and death. (405)
132. The induction of anesthesia and positive-pressure ventilation of the lungs of
patients with cardiac tamponade can result in profound, irreversible hypotension.
Hypotension that occurs in response to positive-pressure ventilation of the lungs
of these patients results from anesthetic-induced peripheral vasodilation, direct
myocardial depression, and decreases in venous return from positive intrathoracic
pressure. The recommendation for patients with cardiac tamponade is that, if at
all possible, percutaneous pericardiocentesis be performed under local
anesthesia to relieve some of the tamponade before the induction of anesthesia.
This drainage should be done in the operating room with the patient spontaneously
breathing and continually monitored. If time permits, monitors may include an
intraarterial catheter for continuous arterial blood pressure monitoring and
a central venous catheter to monitor central venous pressures. The ability to
immediately surgically drain the pericardium should be established prior to the
induction of general anesthesia. (404-405)
133. The recommendation for anesthesia in patients with cardiac tamponade is that
percutaneous pericardiocentesis be performed under local anesthesia before the
induction of anesthesia. If that is not possible, an awake orotracheal intubation
should be considered. The patient should have the urgency of the need to perform
the procedure explained, and the airway should be anesthetized topically.
After confirmed orotracheal intubation, the patient can then be gently sedated
while still spontaneously ventilating the lungs. Small doses of ketamine may be
administered to the patient to provide analgesia and sedation during
pericardiocentesis. The induction of anesthesia and positive-pressure ventilation if
required for further surgical exploration should not be instituted until immediate
drainage of the pericardial space can be achieved. (404-405)
134. Sympathetic nervous system stimulants, such as epinephrine, norepinephrine,
dopamine, dobutamine, or isoproterenol, administered as continuous infusions
may be useful in patients with cardiac tamponade although they will not preclude
or prevent hemodynamic collapse and cardiac arrest with loss of ventricular filling.
The pericardium must be drained to allow venous filling and cardiac output. (405)
ANEURYSMS OF THE
AORTA
135. Most aortic aneurysms involve the abdominal aorta. About 95% of abdominal aortic
aneurysms are due to atherosclerosis, in contrast to about 50% of thoracic aortic
aneurysms. Other causes of aortic aneurysms include trauma, mycotic infection,
connective tissue disorders such as Marfan syndrome, and syphilis. Only about 0.5%
of abdominal aortic aneurysms extend into the renal arteries. (405)
136. A dissecting aneurysm occurs when a tear in the intima of the aorta separates the
layers of the wall of the aorta. Blood is then allowed to enter and penetrate
between the intima on one side and the media and adventitia layers on the other,
creating a false lumen. The dissection can then reenter the true lumen through
another tear in the intima, or it may rupture through the adventitia. Acute
dissection may present as excruciating chest pain and patients may appear to be
in shock. Peripheral pulses may be difficult to palpate. The treatment for aortic
dissection is either surgical excision, usually followed by placement of a graft,
or endovascular graft placement. Short-term management until a definitive
treatment can take place may include decreasing blood pressure to the lowest
acceptable level and the relief of pain. (405)
137. The risk of rupture of an abdominal aortic aneurysm is best predicted by the
diameter of the aneurysm, as well as its rate of expansion. Elective resection of an
abdominal aortic aneurysm is recommended when the diameter of the aneurysm is
estimated to be 5 cm or greater. This recommendation is made based on the
dramatic increase in the likelihood of spontaneous rupture of the aneurysm when
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
266
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
the size of the aneurysm exceeds 5 cm. Abdominal aortic aneurysms with a
diameter less than 5 cm are typically followed with serial measurements to
evaluate their rate of expansion. If the aneurysm expands by more than 0.5 cm in a
6-month period, or if the patient becomes symptomatic, surgical repair is
recommended. (405)
138. Medical problems frequently associated with aortic aneurysms include
hypertension, diabetes mellitus, ischemic heart disease, and atherosclerosis. (405)
139. The goal of the anesthetic management of patients undergoing resection of an
abdominal aortic aneurysm is aimed toward the maintenance of cardiovascular
and hemodynamic parameters at or near normal. Aggressive intraoperative
monitoring is necessary to achieve this goal. Patients should have their
intraarterial blood pressure closely monitored throughout the case. Perioperative
administration of b-adrenergic antagonists, statins, and aspirin may reduce
cardiac risk. (405)
140. Patients with coronary artery disease are especially at risk of myocardial ischemia
during surgery for resection of an aortic aneurysm during cross-clamping of the
aorta. Cross-clamping of the aorta at the suprarenal or supraceliac level creates the
greatest increase in systemic vascular resistance and central venous pressure, and a
decrease in cardiac output. On the pulmonary artery catheter, cross-clamping of the
aorta would result in an increase in the pulmonary artery occlusion pressure.
In contrast, cross-clamping the aorta below the level of the renal arteries creates
minimal hemodynamic changes. The hemodynamic response to aortic
cross-clamping is influenced by the patient’s cardiac status, intravascular fluid
volume, and anesthetic drugs and technique. Management of the patient during
aortic cross-clamping should be aimed toward decreasing the systolic blood pressure
and cardiac filling pressures. Pharmacologic agents that could be administered
might include inhaled anesthetic agents, nitroprusside, or nitroglycerin. (405)
141. Intraoperative fluid management during surgery for resection of an aortic
aneurysm is best guided by the data obtained from hemodynamic monitors, either
from arterial pulse pressure variation, stroke volume variation, central venous and
pulmonary arterial pressures, or transesophageal echocardiography. Optimal
fluid management can be administered with appropriate hemodynamic
monitoring. (405)
142. Hypotension frequently accompanies unclamping of the abdominal aorta during
the resection of an aortic aneurysm. The hypotension is believed to occur as a result
of the sudden increase in venous capacitance that accompanies unclamping.
Even when the aortic cross-clamp is infrarenal, unclamping can result in a
decrease in the systolic blood pressure by about 40 mm Hg. Methods for
minimizing the hypotension include adequate volume replacement before
unclamping and the gradual removal of the aortic cross-clamp to allow time for the
pooled venous blood to circulate. It is prudent to use only short-acting
vasodilators, such as inhaled agents, nitroprusside, or nitroglycerin, to treat
increases in the systemic vascular resistance during aortic cross-clamping so that
their effects can be reversed with titration or by discontinuation before
unclamping of the aorta. The systemic vascular resistance may be increased after
unclamping with the administration of phenylephrine if necessary. (405)
143. Renal function may become impaired postoperatively to the extent that
hemodialysis is required after aortic aneurysm repair, particularly if the aortic
cross-clamp was suprarenal. Coexisting renal disease appears to place the patient
at the greatest risk of postoperative renal dysfunction, but other risk factors include
the duration of aortic cross-clamp time, thrombotic or embolic interruption of
renal blood flow, hypovolemia, and hypotension. Hypothermia may protect the
kidneys during periods of ischemia. In an effort to decrease the risk of
postoperative renal dysfunction, the intravascular fluid volume should be
Cardiovascular Disease
267
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
maintained and the urine output should be closely monitored during aortic
aneurysm repair. Mannitol is frequently given just before aortic cross-clamping
to facilitate diuresis and maintain glomerular function. A loop diuretic may be also
be administered in selected cases if the urine output is unsatisfactory.
Alternatively, a continuous dopamine infusion at low doses may be started to
dilate renal blood vessels to maintain renal blood flow and urine output.
Unfortunately, none of these therapies have been definitively demonstrated to
have efficacy for the prevention of renal dysfunction. (405)
144. Spinal cord ischemia and paraplegia can occur after supraceliac aortic
cross-clamping for thoracic aortic aneurysm repair. The mechanism for the ischemia
is most likely due to an interruption of a portion of the blood supply to the
spinal cord. The spinal cord blood supply is from two posterior arteries and one
anterior spinal artery. The greatest contributor to the blood supply of the anterior
spinal artery is the artery of Adamkiewicz, whose origin is between T9 and T12
in 75% of patients. The anterior spinal artery supplies the motor tracts in the spinal
cord. Mechanisms employed to reduce the risk of spinal cord ischemia include
cerebrospinal fluid drainage, intrathecal papaverine injection, naloxone
administration, barbiturate administration, hypothermia, and partial bypass.
Hypothermia is believed to be the most effective method of neuroprotection through
its effects of decreasing oxygen requirements. Cerebrospinal fluid drainage is
thought to improve spinal cord perfusion because the spinal cord perfusion pressure
is the distal mean aortic pressure minus the cerebrospinal fluid pressure.
Cerebrospinal fluid drainage to improve spinal cord perfusion during aortic
aneurysm repair remains controversial. (405)
CARDIOPULMONARY
BYPASS
145. Blood is drained from the venae cavae during cardiopulmonary bypass by siphon
action caused by gravity. The blood then passes from the cardiotomy reservoir,
through a pump, a heat exchanger, an oxygenator, and a filter before it is returned
to the arterial system. (406, Figure 25-3)
146. The two different types of pumps that are used to return blood to the arterial system
during cardiopulmonary bypass are the roller pump and the centrifugal pump.
The roller pump works by compressing the tubing that contains the fluid between
a roller and curved metal back plate, producing flow. In contrast, the centrifugal
pump produces flow and less trauma to blood. The flow rate generated by the
centrifugal pump is affected by the resistance of the tubing and the patient’s
systemic vascular resistance. (406-407)
147. Blood is kept from entering the heart from the superior and inferior venae cavae
during cardiopulmonary bypass for open heart or intracardiac surgery by placing
bothasuperiorandinferiorvenacavalcannulae,aswellasligaturesplacedaroundthe
superior and inferior vena cava proximal to the cannulae, thereby occluding the cava
and preventing flow into the heart. All returning blood from the patient’s venous
systementersthecardiopulmonarybypassmachineviathetwolargecannulae,which
are placed in the superior and inferior venae cavae. (406-407)
148. The aorta is cross-clamped distal to the aortic valve and proximal to the
inflow cannula during cardiopulmonary bypass to allow cardioplegic arrest. An
incompetent aortic valve, in an arrested heart, without this cross-clamp, would allow
blood to flow retrograde from the aorta into the heart, stretching the myocardium,
and causing permanent muscle injury and ventricular dysfunction. (407)
149. Venous drainage from the inferior and superior venae cavae during
cardiopulmonary bypass, which is achieved by gravity, can be facilitated by
raising the operating table to a higher level, creating a larger vertical distance
between the operating room table and the cardiopulmonary bypass machine or by
adding negative pressure or suction to the cardiotomy reservoir. (407)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
268
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
150. The required cardiac index that is delivered to the patient by the roller pump on the
cardiopulmonary bypass machine depends on the patient’s body temperature and
oxygen consumption. A cardiac index of 2 to 2.4 L/min per meter squared is
usually sufficient in the normothermic or slightly hypothermic patient. Flows of
about half these levels have also been used without adverse effects. (407)
151. The advantage of low flows during cardiopulmonary bypass is that less trauma is
sustained to the blood. Less noncoronary collateral blood flow returns to the
heart as well, which may lead to better myocardial protection because less warm
blood is entering the heart and counteracting the cold myocardial preservation
solutions. (407)
152. Two different types of oxygenators that are used to oxygenate blood that is
returning to the arterial system during cardiopulmonary bypass are a bubble
oxygenator and a membrane oxygenator, although bubble oxygenators are rarely
used at the present time. (407)
153. Advantages of a bubble oxygenator over a membrane oxygenator include its
relative simplicity and lower cost. Disadvantages of a bubble oxygenator include
an increase in the amount of turbulence and foaming it produces, and denaturing
of blood proteins by direct contact with gas, resulting in trauma to blood that
increases with the duration of the bypass time. Bubble oxygenators are rarely used
in the current era. (407)
154. An advantage of a membrane oxygenator includes the relatively less trauma
produced to the blood than that produced by a bubble oxygenator by avoiding
direct exposure of blood to gas. Disadvantages of a membrane oxygenator include
its increased complexity and cost. (408)
155. In addition to the usual methods of heating a patient’s body intraoperatively, the
body can also be heated or cooled during cardiopulmonary bypass through the
use of heat exchangers that are incorporated into the extracorporeal circuit.
These heat exchangers are able to heat or cool blood as it circulates through the
extracorporeal circuit via a countercurrent flow system. (408)
156. Blood loss from the field can be recirculated to the patient during cardiopulmonary
bypass by having the blood that is suctioned return to a cardiotomy reservoir.
In the cardiotomy reservoir the blood is filtered, defoamed, and returned to the
oxygenator. The blood is then recirculated to the patient after oxygenation. (408)
157. A problem with the cardiotomy suction used during cardiopulmonary bypass is
that it is a significant contributor to the hemolysis and particulate emboli that
occurs during cardiopulmonary bypass. (408)
158. Venting of the left ventricle may be necessary to prevent harmful left ventricular
distention during cardiac surgery in which the heart is not opened. Persistent
left ventricular distention may lead to permanent damage to the myocardial
contractile elements. There are at least three reasons why the left ventricle might
need a vent during cardiopulmonary bypass. First, incompetence of the aortic
valve can lead to the retrograde flow of blood from the aorta to the heart.
Second, there may be a large degree of blood flow from the coronary sinus and
bronchial circulation back to the heart. Third, surgical positioning may result
in backward flow from the aorta into the heart, or from the heart into the
pulmonary veins. Finally, venting of the ventricle or pulmonary artery can help
reduce risks of elevated pulmonary artery pressures during cardiopulmonary
bypass. Venting of the left ventricle is achieved through the placement of a
catheter into the left ventricle, usually through a pulmonary vein or via the
left atrium. (407)
159. Systemic emboli from cellular debris are prevented from occurring during
cardiopulmonary bypass through the use of filters that are incorporated into
Cardiovascular Disease
269
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
the extracorporeal circuit in the cardiotomy reservoir and downstream after the
oxygenator. (408)
160. Priming of the cardiopulmonary bypass system refers to the filling of the tubing of
the cardiopulmonary bypass system with fluid and sometimes blood. The fluid
consists of an osmotically active substance, an osmotic diuretic, an antibiotic,
and electrolyte supplements. Blood is added if the patient’s hematocrit necessitates
it. (408)
161. Hemodilution of the patient’s blood to a hematocrit of 20 to 25 during
cardiopulmonary bypass lessens the viscosity of the blood. This decrease is
important to facilitate circulation through the small vessels during
hypothermia. (408)
162. It is essential to remove all air from the cardiopulmonary bypass system during
cardiopulmonary bypass to prevent the pumping of air into the arterial system
of the patient. (408)
163. Heparin-induced anticoagulation of the patient is mandatory before the institution
of cardiopulmonary bypass to prevent patient death through clotting of the blood
both in the patient and in the cardiopulmonary bypass machine. The dose of
heparin that is usually administered is 300 to 400 units/kg. The adequacy of
anticoagulation must be confirmed before the placement of the venous and aortic
cannulae used for cardiopulmonary bypass. The adequacy of anticoagulation is
usually confirmed by evaluating the activated clotting time, which should remain
longer than 450 seconds throughout the course of cardiopulmonary bypass. The
activated clotting time should be evaluated periodically during the course of
cardiopulmonary bypass and additional heparin administered as necessary.
After the cannulae are removed from the patient and cardiopulmonary bypass
terminated, the effects of heparin may be reversed with the administration of
protamine. The activated clotting time should return to baseline, typically between
90 to 120 seconds, after the administration of protamine. (408)
164. The low mean arterial pressure often seen after the institution of cardiopulmonary
bypass is believed to be due to the peripheral vasodilation caused by the decreased
viscosity, decreased temperature, and low oxygen content of infused priming
solution. What pressures during cardiopulmonary bypass are sufficient to allow for
coronary and cerebral perfusion is a subject of great debate. Most institutions
prefer the mean arterial pressures to be about 50 mm Hg and to administer
phenylephrine if blood pressure support is needed. Other institutions allow the
mean arterial blood pressure to decrease to 40 mm Hg without any adverse effect.
The perfusion pressures for extracorporeal circulatory support are even lower in
infants and children. (408)
165. Blood pressure slowly rises spontaneously after some time on
cardiopulmonary bypass as a result of vasoconstriction. The vasoconstriction
may be in response to stimulation of the sympathetic nervous system or the
renin-angiotensin system. It may also be an indication of inadequate perfusion
to some tissues. (408)
166. The potential dangers of hypertension while on cardiopulmonary bypass include
aortic dissection, intracerebral hemorrhage, and an increase in coronary and
bronchial artery circulation, leading to increased return of warm blood to the heart
during a time of cold cardioplegia. Hypertension under these circumstances can be
treated by decreasing the systemic vascular resistance with a nitrate or a volatile
anesthetic. Vaporizers have been incorporated into the cardiopulmonary bypass
circuit for the administration of a volatile anesthetic to patients while
on cardiopulmonary bypass. (409)
167. The patient can be monitored for adequate tissue perfusion during
cardiopulmonary bypass several ways. First, urine output can be monitored as
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
270
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
a guide to renal perfusion. A renal output of 1 mL/kg each hour is considered
sufficient. Second, the patient’s acid-base status can be monitored for any evidence
of a progressive metabolic acidosis. Third, the patient’s mixed venous oxygen
tension can be monitored for evidence of excessive oxygen extraction. A mixed
venous PO2 lower than 40 mm Hg is generally regarded as evidence of inadequate
tissue perfusion. Finally, the nasopharyngeal temperature can be compared
with a core temperature such as the bladder, rectum, skeletal muscle, or skin
temperature. Whereas bladder temperature represents core temperature,
the nasopharyngeal temperature is an indicator of perfusion to the brain. The
greater the discrepancy between these two, the greater the indication of poor
cerebral perfusion. Cerebral oximetry using infrared light can monitor adequacy of
cerebral perfusion and may reduce risk of central nervous system injury. (409)
168. Diuresis is induced during cardiopulmonary bypass due to the inclusion of
mannitol in the priming solution, hypothermia which interferes with renal tubular
absorption, and well-perfused renal glomeruli with blood low in oncotic pressure
due to hemodilution. For this reason during cardiopulmonary bypass the
minimally acceptable urine output is 1 mL/kg/hr. Adequate urine output is
important for the excretion of potassium administered in the cardioplegia solution.
When the urine output is less than desired, a mechanical obstruction to urine flow
in the catheter should be considered before instituting methods to increase the
urine output. (409)
169. Causes of an increasing central venous pressure with or without facial edema while
on cardiopulmonary bypass include aortic cannula flow into the carotid artery,
obstruction of the superior vena cava cannula, and obstruction of jugular venous
drainage by either a cannula, head position, or neck compression. Inadequate
venous return from the patient to the cardiopulmonary bypass machine is an
indication that one of these may have occurred. (409)
170. Causes of increasing abdominal distention while on cardiopulmonary bypass
include obstruction of the inferior vena cava cannula, intraabdominal hemorrhage
or ascites, or gastrointestinal distention by gas or fluid. (409)
171. The most serious complications of cardiopulmonary bypass include aortic
dissection, carotid artery dissection, air in the aortic inflow tubing, and clotting of
the bypass circuit. (409)
172. Ventilation of the lungs of a patient is not necessary during cardiopulmonary
bypass. The lungs can be ventilated with oxygen during partial cardiopulmonary
bypass, or when there is partial pulmonary blood flow. Evidence of pulmonary
blood flow is seen as pulsatile pulmonary artery flow on the pulmonary artery
catheter tracing. (409)
173. The goal of myocardial preservation during cardiopulmonary bypass is the
minimization of the effects of ischemia on the heart. Myocardial protection is
achieved in a variety of ways, all of which are aimed toward reducing the myocardial
oxygen requirement of the heart during that period. Myocardial cooling can be
achieved by hypothermic cardiopulmonary bypass, by the direct placement of ice on
the epicardium, through pericardial irrigation with iced fluid, and by the
intracoronary infusion of a cold cardioplegia solution. Myocardial arrest is achieved
by the infusion of cardioplegia solution containing potassium both through a
cannula at the aortic root and by retrograde flow through the coronary sinuses. The
potassium causes cessation of electrical and mechanical cardiac activity by blocking
the initial phase of myocardial depolarization. The prevention of myocardial
rewarming during cardiopulmonary bypass can be achieved by placing a vent in the
left ventricle or by placing a cross-clamp in the aorta distal to the aortic valve. (409)
174. The oxygen consumption of a normally contracting heart at 30 C is 8 to
10 mL/100 g of heart muscle in a minute. The oxygen consumption of a fibrillating
Cardiovascular Disease
271
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
heart at 22 C is 2 mL/100 g per minute, and the oxygen consumption of an
electromechanically quiet heart at 22 C is approximately 0.3 mL/100 g per
minute. (409)
175. The effectiveness of cold cardioplegia of the heart can be measured by placing a
temperature probe in the left ventricle and directly measuring the temperature
of the heart. The absence of any electrical activity on the heart is also a good
indication that the heart muscle is effectively quiescent. (409)
176. Two potential negative effects of the intramyocardial hyperkalemia of the cold
cardioplegia solutions after cardiopulmonary bypass are decreased myocardial
contractility and an increased incidence of atrioventricular heart block while
coming off cardiopulmonary bypass. These can both be treated with the
administration of calcium and, if necessary, insulin with or without glucose.
In addition, the atrioventricular block can be treated through the use of an artificial
cardiac pacemaker. The pacemaker is usually only needed temporarily because the
atrioventricular block typically only lasts for 1 to 2 hours after discontinuing
cardiopulmonary bypass. (409)
177. Two potential sources for systemic hyperkalemia during cardiopulmonary
bypass are the recirculation of cardioplegia solution that has drained into the
blood and decreased renal function. Hyperkalemia that persists at the
conclusion of cardiopulmonary bypass can be treated with the administration
of insulin and glucose in addition to calcium, or by ultrafiltration on the
extracorporeal bypass circuit, or by administration of diuretics such as
furosemide. (410)
178. Although there is a decreased minimum alveolar concentration (MAC) under
hypothermic conditions, the decrease in MAC may not be sufficient to offset the
sudden dilution of anesthetics that occurs when the patient is placed on
cardiopulmonary bypass. For this reason, supplemental intravenous anesthetics
may be needed during cardiopulmonary bypass in some cases to ensure an
adequate depth of anesthesia. (410)
179. There is a sudden dilution of the neuromuscular blocking drug level that occurs
when the patient is placed on cardiopulmonary bypass. Supplemental
neuromuscular blocking drug should be administered just prior to the initiation of
extracorporeal circulatory support or cardiopulmonary bypass to ensure there is a
neuromuscular blocking drug level sufficient to prevent patient movement during
this important portion of the procedure. (410)
180. Although supplemental anesthesia is not routinely required during rewarming
after the conclusion of cardiopulmonary bypass, it is important that the
anesthesiologist be aware that the rewarming patient could be returning to
consciousness in a paralyzed state. Low-dose inhaled agents reduce the risk
of intraoperative awareness. There are a number of choices for post bypass
anesthesia, including dexmedetomidine, propofol, opiates, benzodiazepines,
volatile agents, or a combination of agents. Intravenous infusions allowing
continued sedation into the intensive care unit are commonly chosen. (410)
181. Conditions in the patient that must be present for the discontinuation of
cardiopulmonary bypass include hemodynamic stability; normothermia; the
venting of all arterial air; an adequate cardiac rate, rhythm, and output; normal
acid-base status and electrolyte levels; ventilation of the lungs; and an adequate
intravascular status and hematocrit. (410, Table 25-15)
182. The aortic and vena cava cannulae are removed after an adequate blood pressure
and cardiac output have been maintained by the heart for several minutes. For
optimal safety, the ability to rapidly reestablish cardiopulmonary bypass should be
maintained for some time after the discontinuation of cardiopulmonary
bypass. (412)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
272
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
183. Potential problems associated with persistent hypothermia after cardiopulmonary
bypass include coagulopathy, hypertension, tachycardia and sympathetic
nervous system stimulation, shivering, metabolic acidosis, and difficulty in
defibrillating the heart and maintaining a normal cardiac rhythm. The effects of
persistent hypothermia on the heart are particularly evident at temperatures less
than 34 C. Rewarming a patient’s body can be achieved more rapidly after
systemic vasodilation through the administration of a vasodilator, such as
nitroprusside, or a volatile anesthetic. (410)
184. A special precaution that must be taken before discontinuing cardiopulmonary
bypass in patients who have had the heart opened, as during valve replacement
surgery, is the venting of all air from the heart. This can be accomplished by
surgical massage of the left atrium and ventricle. In addition, rotating the table
from side-to-side simultaneous with the maintenance of positive-pressure
ventilation of the lungs and placement of the patient’s head at a lower level than
the heart may assist in venting any air from the heart. Positive pressure of the lungs
should be maintained during the removal of the left ventricle vent cannula. The
avoidance of nitrous oxide administration after cardiopulmonary bypass might
minimize the potential increase in the size of microemboli that may have
occurred. The potential risk of air remaining in the heart at the conclusion of
cardiopulmonary bypass is the embolization of air to the arterial circulation,
especially the coronary and cerebral circulations. Air is most likely to embolize
from the heart after cardiopulmonary bypass during manipulation of the heart and
alterations in the anatomy, closure of the sternum, and movement of the patient.
(410-412)
185. (411, Table 25-5)
186. Posterior papillary muscle dysfunction after cardiopulmonary bypass can occur as
a result of inadequate cooling of the posterior myocardium during
cardiopulmonary bypass. The posterior myocardium is the portion of the heart
muscle that is most vulnerable to inadvertent warming of the heart from the return
of blood from the coronary and bronchial circulations, as well as any potential
blood that flows retrograde via an incompetent aortic valve. Posterior papillary
muscle function impairment would manifest as mitral regurgitation. In addition,
prominent v waves would be evident on the pulmonary artery occlusion pressure
tracing. (411)
187. In some situations the cardiac output of the patient on discontinuation of
cardiopulmonary bypass is inadequate because of either poor myocardial function
Table 25-5
Blood
Pressure
Atrial
Pressure
Cardiac
Output
Diagnosis
Therapy
Decreased
Increased
Decreased
Left ventricular
dysfunction
Inotrope
Vasodilator
Mechanical assistance
Decreased
Decreased
Decreased
Hypovolemia
Intravascular
fluid administration
Decreased
Decreased
Increased
Vasodilation, low
blood viscosity
Erythrocyte
administration
Increased
Increased
Decreased
Vasoconstriction,
left ventricular
dysfunction
Vasodilator
Inotrope
Increased
Decreased
Increased
Hyperdynamic
Volatile anesthetic
b antagonist
Cardiovascular Disease
273
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
or refractory myocardial ischemia. Under these circumstances the intraaortic
balloon pump is a mechanical addition to the pharmacologic support of cardiac
output. An intraaortic balloon pump is a balloon that is 25 cm long and mounted
on a long plastic catheter. The pump is advanced from the left femoral artery
to the aorta. The pump inflates and deflates timed to the electrocardiogram.
Inflation of the balloon, which occurs during diastole, increases the diastolic blood
pressure and increases the coronary perfusion pressure gradient. Deflation of
the balloon occurs just before systole. This allows for a reduction of afterload and
the pressure against which the heart has to pump. Overall the intraaortic balloon
pump increases coronary blood flow by increasing diastolic pressure while
decreasing the work of the myocardium and thus the myocardial oxygen
requirement. The efficacy of the balloon pump is altered by rapid heart rates,
cardiac dysrhythmias, and aortic insufficiency. (411-412)
188. Protamine administration after termination of extracorporeal circulatory support,
cardiopulmonary bypass, should take place prior the removal of the aortic
cannulae to allow rapid return to extracorporeal circulatory support in the case
of severe protamine reaction. If a protamine reaction occurs and return to
extracorporeal circulatory support is required, additional heparin in doses of
300 to 400 units/kg may be required depending on the dose of protamine
administered. Protamine is administered to reverse the anticoagulant effects
produced by heparin. (412)
189. Side effects associated with the administration of protamine include hypotension
due to vasodilation, myocardial depression, pulmonary hypertension, histamine
release, and, rarely, anaphylactic or anaphylactoid reactions. Anaphylactic and
anaphylactoid reactions can be associated with bronchospasm and pulmonary
edema. These potential effects of protamine call for the careful, slow titration
of protamine administration. (412)
190. Blood and fluid that remain in the cardiopulmonary bypass circuit after
cardiopulmonary bypass are washed, collected, and placed in plastic bags by the
perfusionist. The blood and fluid can then be administered to the patient. (412)
191. A gradient between central aortic and radial artery blood pressures can exist in the
early period after cardiopulmonary bypass. Although the exact mechanism for
this is not known, it is believed to be due to vasoconstriction in the extremity.
The discrepancy can be determined by the surgical placement of a needle in the
aorta and transduction of the pressure. Although the duration of this effect is
typically only about 60 minutes, a femoral artery catheter can be placed for the
transduction of arterial pressure if the discrepancy is large. (412)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
274
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
Chapter
23 CONGENITAL HEART
DISEASE
Isobel A. Russell
FUNDAMENTAL
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
IN CONGENITAL
HEART DISEASE
1. When does shunting occur in congenital heart disease?
2. What is the usual limitation to the direction and amount of shunt flow?
3. When does a left-to-right shunt occur?
4. What is the physiologic effect of a left-to-right shunt on the pulmonary blood flow
(Qp) relative to the systemic blood flow (Qs)?
5. What are the long-term effects of increased pulmonary blood flow that occurs in a
left-to-right shunt?
6. Give an example of a congenital heart defect that results in a left-to-right shunt.
7. When does a right-to-left shunt occur? What is the physiologic effect of this?
8. Give an example of a congenital heart defect that results in a right-to-left shunt.
9. What are mixing lesions in congenital heart disease? How do mixing lesions affect
the systemic arterial oxygen saturation?
10. What determines the Qp:Qs ratio in mixing lesions?
11. What is the ideal Qp:Qs ratio in mixing lesions? Why?
12. What are some factors that can increase systemic vascular resistance?
13. What are some factors that can decrease systemic vascular resistance?
14. What are five factors that increase pulmonary vascular resistance?
15. What are five factors that decrease pulmonary vascular resistance?
16. What is Eisenmenger syndrome?
PERIOPERATIVE
MANAGEMENT
17. What are some ways an anesthesiologist can prepare for a patient requiring surgery
for congenital heart disease?
18. What preexisting conditions might be important to the care of patients with
congenital heart disease?
19. What information might be gained from preoperative echocardiograms or magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI)?
20. What is a risk factor from a previous sternotomy?
21. What are the fasting recommendations for infants and children scheduled for
congenital heart surgery?
22. What is the most important feature of the intravenous administration set up for the
patient scheduled for congenital heart surgery?
23. What are some common side effects of the induction of anesthesia using inhaled
agents, such as sevoflurane or halothane?
24. What are some side effects of an intravenous induction of anesthesia using opioids
such as fentanyl?
25. What are some side effects of an intravenous induction of anesthesia using
ketamine, a drug that preserves sympathetic nervous system tone?
275
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
26. What are some general principles for the induction of anesthesia that might apply to
all patients with congenital heart disease?
27. What are the goals for the anesthetic management in patients with a left-to-right
shunt?
28. Whatarethegoalsfortheanestheticmanagementinpatientswitharight-to-leftshunt?
29. What are some considerations for the ventilatory management in patients with
congenital heart disease?
30. For lesions with excessive pulmonary blood flow such as ventricular septal defects
or atrioventricular septal defects, how should the pulmonary vascular resistance be
managed prior to cardiopulmonary bypass?
31. For critically ill patients such as those with truncus arteriosus, what is an important
feature of ventilator management prior to cardiopulmonary bypass?
32. For the Norwood procedure for hypoplastic left heart syndrome, what is an
important aspect of anesthetic management prior to cardiopulmonary bypass?
33. During the Glenn procedure, what is an important aspect of anesthetic
management?
34. What are poor prognostic factors of a successful Fontan procedure?
35. What are some common congenital lesions that result in inadequate pulmonary
blood flow? What would be an important aspect of ventilatory management of
patients with these lesions?
36. Where is the appropriate placement of an arterial line during surgery for coarctation
of the aorta?
37. During induction of anesthesia for patients with obstructive lesions such as aortic
stenosis, what is the most important to avoid?
38. What are some common abnormalities seen in patients with Williams syndrome?
39. How should the size of the endotracheal tube be selected?
40. What are some monitors that might be required for children undergoing surgery for
congenital heart disease?
41. What are some general requirements for the selection of blood products for infants
requiring cardiac surgery?
42. What are some antifibrinolytic drugs used in congenital heart surgery?
43. How is anesthesia maintained prior to cardiopulmonary bypass?
44. What patients may be able to have early extubation of the trachea?
45. What is a useful way to monitor the cardiac output and circulatory system?
46. How is anticoagulation for cardiopulmonary bypass achieved?
47. What is the target activated clotting time (ACT) value?
48. How are flow rates adjusted during cardiopulmonary bypass for infants and children?
49. How does the perfusionist control oxygenation and ventilation during
cardiopulmonary bypass?
50. How is blood temperature adjusted during cardiopulmonary bypass?
51. How is mechanical quiescence and myocardial protection provided during
cardiopulmonary bypass?
52. What is the lowest acceptable level of anemia during cardiopulmonary bypass?
53. What measures are used to provide cerebral and myocardial protection during
cardiopulmonary bypass?
54. Which surgical repairs require the use of deep hypothermic circulatory arrest?
55. What are some potential negative effects of persistent hypothermia after
cardiopulmonary bypass?
56. How can relative bradycardia and atrioventricular node conduction failure during
separation from cardiopulmonary bypass be treated?
57. How are patients with long-standing excessive pulmonary blood flow treated on
separation from bypass?
58. What is the best approach to the management of a patient who has had a palliative
procedure and is left with a mixing lesion? What is an effective monitoring tool in
these patients?
59. What are some common vasoactive drugs used during separation from
cardiopulmonary bypass?
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
276
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
60. What are some causes of difficulty in separation from cardiopulmonary bypass in
congenital heart surgery?
61. What rescue measure can be used if a patient cannot be weaned from
cardiopulmonary bypass?
62. What are important complications of protamine administration?
63. What are contributors to postoperative coagulopathy in congenital heart surgery?
64. What is the best method to replace blood components in infants?
65. What is a common side effect of the administration of citrated blood products?
66. What agents can be used for refractory bleeding after cardiopulmonary bypass?
67. What are common parameters to be actively managed after pediatric cardiac
surgery in the intensive care unit?
ANSWERS*
FUNDAMENTAL
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
IN CONGENITAL
HEART DISEASE
1. Under normal physiologic conditions, pulmonary blood flow and systemic blood
flow do not mix, and the entire cardiac output flows in one direction. Shunting
occurs when a portion of the venous return is redirected back to the arterial
outflow of the same circulation. The shunt occurs when there is an abnormal
communication between the pulmonary blood flow and systemic blood flow. (418)
2. A shunt occurs when there is an abnormal communication, or defect, between
the pulmonary and systemic circulations. The direction of the shunt flow is dictated
by the relative pressures between the communicating structures. The amount of
shunting is limited by the size of the defect. (418)
3. A left-to-right shunt occurs when part of the pulmonary venous return is redirected
toward the pulmonary arterial system. This can occur through anomalies in the
pulmonary veins, atrial septum, ventricular septum, or at the great vessels. (419)
4. The physiologic effect of a left-to-right shunt is that the total pulmonary blood flow
(Qp) is greater than the systemic blood flow (Qs); that is Qp becomes greater than Qs.
This can result in hypotension and pulmonary edema. (419)
5. Long-term effects of an increase in pulmonary blood flow, as occurs in a
left-to-right shunt, are an increase in pulmonary vascular resistance and abnormal
cardiac chamber dilation. In addition, prolonged hypotension can lead to
circulatory shock and multiple organ failure. (419)
6. An example of a left-to-right shunt congenital heart lesion would be an atrial septal
defect (ASD). (419)
7. A right-to-left shunt occurs when a portion of the systemic venous return is
redirected to the systemic arterial outflow without first circulating through the lung.
Physiologically this would result in desaturated blood returning to the systemic
circulation, and potentially arterial hypoxemia. The degree of hypoxemia would be
dictated by the magnitude of the shunt. (419)
8. An example of a right-to-left shunt congenital heart lesion would be tetralogy
of Fallot. (419)
9. Mixing lesions in congenital heart disease describes a complete blending of the
pulmonary and systemic circulations such that there is identical or nearly identical
oxygen saturations in both circulatory systems. In mixing lesions the systemic
arterial oxygen saturation decreases. (419)
*Numbers in parentheses: numbers refer to pages, figures, or tables in Miller RD, Pardo MC: Basics of Anesthesia,
6th ed. Philadelphia, Elsevier Saunders, 2011.
Congenital Heart Disease
277
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
10. In mixing lesions, the Qp:Qs ratio is determined by the relative resistance of
blood flow in the pulmonary and systemic circulatory systems. That is, in mixing
lesions, the ratio of blood flow is determined by pulmonary vascular resistance and
systemic vascular resistance. (420)
11. The ideal Qp:Qs ratio in mixing lesions is 1. Any preferential flow toward the
systemic circulation would be at the expense of greater desaturation and therefore
less oxygen delivery. Conversely, any preferential flow toward the pulmonary
circulation would be at the expense of cardiac output, and therefore less oxygen
delivery to the tissues. (420)
12. Factors that can increase systemic vascular resistance are light anesthesia,
systemic nervous system activation, administration of a agonists, and physical
manipulations such as flexing the hips of infants and small children.
(420, Table 26-2)
13. Factors that can decrease systemic vascular resistance are deep anesthesia and
the administration of vasodilating drugs, such as nitrates and inhaled anesthetics.
(420, Table 26-2)
14. Five factors that increase pulmonary vascular resistance are alveolar hypoxemia,
hypercapnia, acidosis, light anesthesia, and hypothermia. Other factors include high
lung volumes and pressures, or low lung volumes with atelectasis. (Table 26-2)
15. Five factors that decrease pulmonary vascular resistance are hyperventilation with
resultant hypocarbia, alkalosis, oxygenation, pulmonary vasodilators such as
inhaled nitric oxide, warmth, and bronchodilators such as albuterol. (Table 26-2)
16. Eisenmenger syndrome is a condition that can develop when pulmonary blood
flow is increased over a long period of time, and the direction of the shunt flow
becomes irreversibly left-to-right. This syndrome occurs due to a remodeling of
pulmonary vasculature, an increase in pulmonary vascular resistance, and
ultimately pulmonary hypertension yielding a pulmonary systolic blood pressure
that is higher than systemic systolic blood pressure. (420)
PERIOPERATIVE
MANAGEMENT
17. An anesthesiologist should prepare by understanding the physiology of the
congenital heart lesion and the subsequent effects of the planned surgery.
Aspects of the patient’s condition that can be improved prior to surgery should
be identified. (421)
18. Preexisting conditions that might be important to the care of patients with
congenital heart disease include a history of prematurity, trisomy 21, DiGeorge
syndrome, and chronic illness such as renal dysfunction, pulmonary edema, and
electrolyte abnormalities. In addition, the preoperative evaluation of morning
admission patients scheduled for congenital heart surgery should include the usual
preoperative evaluation of pediatric patients, such as evaluation for new upper
respiratory tract infections. (421)
19. Important preoperative information that could be derived from the magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) and echocardiograms would be anatomic manifestations
of disease, such as an existing ventricular septal defect and concomitant right
ventricular hypertrophy. (421)
20. Risk factors from previous sternotomy include increased operative blood loss and
cardiac trauma during dissection secondary to adhesions that may have formed
adherent to the sternum and chest wall. (421)
21. Fasting recommendations for infants and children scheduled for congenital heart
surgery should follow the standard American Society of Anesthesiologist
guidelines. (421)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
278
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
22. The most important feature of intravenous administration set up for patients
scheduled for congenital heart surgery is to meticulously de-air the system.
The inadvertent introduction of an air bubble into the patient’s vascular system
via the intravenous tubing can result in an air embolus entering the systemic
circulation in a patient with a left-to-right shunt. Although the risk is greater in
patients with right-to-left shunts, patients with left-to-right shunts may have
reversal of their shunt during certain phases of the cardiac cycle, during
cardiopulmonary interventions as during manual manipulation of the heart during
surgery, or with coughing in the awake patient. (421)
23. Some common side effects of induction of anesthesia with inhaled agents, such
as sevoflurane or halothane, include myocardial depression, decreased heart
rate and myocardial contractility, and decreased systemic vascular resistance.
A halothane induction may also have associated myocardial dysrhythmia and
ventricular irritability. (422-424, Table 26-4)
24. Some side effects of an intravenous induction of anesthesia using opioids
such as fentanyl would include bradycardia and loss of sympathetic tone. (425,
Table 26-4)
25. Some side effects of an intravenous induction of anesthesia using ketamine might
include increases in heart rate and myocardial depression. (425, Table 26-4)
26. Some general principles for the induction of anesthesia that might apply to all
patients with congenital heart disease would include the avoidance of dehydration,
maintaining the patient in sinus rhythm, avoiding myocardial depression, and
avoiding air entrapment in the intravenous and pressure tubings. (423, Table 26-5)
27. The goals for the anesthetic management in patients with a left-to-right shunt
are aimed toward the avoidance of hemodynamic changes, such as an increase
in systemic vascular resistance that will increase the magnitude of the shunt.
Decreases in the magnitude of the shunt can be achieved through decreases in
the arterial pressure and increases in the pulmonary vascular resistance, as with
positive-pressure ventilation.
28. The goals for the anesthetic management in patients with a right-to-left shunt are
aimed toward the avoidance of worsening arterial hypoxemia by increasing the
magnitude of the shunt. Decreases in systemic vascular resistance and increases
in pulmonary vascular resistance should be avoided.
29. Ventilatory management of the patient with congenital heart disease depends on
how the circulatory system will be affected by changes in the pulmonary vascular
resistance relative to the systemic vascular resistance. The goal is to minimize
the impact on blood flow across shunts, and the cardiac lesion must be understood
to best manage the patient. Adjustments in the fractional inspired oxygen
concentration, minute ventilation, peak inspiratory pressure, and the possible use of
the positive end-expiratory pressure are all considerations. (425)
30. For lesions with excessive pulmonary blood flow, such as ventricular septal defects
or atrioventricular septal defects, one should avoid decreases in the pulmonary
vascular resistance prior to cardiopulmonary bypass. (Table 26-5)
31. For critically ill patients such as those with truncus arteriosus, an important feature
of ventilator management prior to cardiopulmonary bypass is to closely
manage the ratio of systemic to pulmonary vascular resistance. (Table 26-5)
32. During the Norwood procedure (stage I for hypoplastic left heart syndrome), an
important aspect of anesthetic management prior to cardiopulmonary bypass is to
maintain the infusion of prostaglandins, maintain nearly equal systemic and
pulmonary blood flow, and protect against myocardial depression and air
embolism. (Table 26-5)
Congenital Heart Disease
279
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
33. During the Glenn procedure (stage II procedure for hypoplastic left heart syndrome),
an important aspect of anesthetic management is to maintain a high hematocrit
and recognize that positive-pressure ventilation might decrease pulmonary
blood flow and cardiac output. (Table 26-5)
34. Poor prognostic factors of a successful Fontan procedure (stage III procedure
for hypoplastic left heart syndrome) include high pulmonary vascular
resistance, tricuspid regurgitation, and decreased ventricular function.
(Table 26-5)
35. Common congenital lesions that result in inadequate pulmonary blood flow include
transposition of the great arteries, tetralogy of Fallot, tricuspid or pulmonary atresia,
and total anomalous venous return. An important aspect of the ventilatory
management of patients with these lesions would be to decrease pulmonary
vascular resistance. (Table 26-5)
36. The appropriate placement of an arterial line during surgery for coarctation of the
aorta is in the right arm. (Table 26-5)
37. During induction of anesthesia for patients with obstructive lesions such as aortic
stenosis, it is most important to avoid tachycardia. (Table 26-5)
38. Some common abnormalities seen in patients with William syndrome are
supravalvar aortic stenosis, pulmonary arterial stenosis, and coronary artery
abnormalities. (Table 26-5)
39. The endotracheal tube size should be selected according to the age and size of the
patient. (Table 26-5)
40. Some monitors that might be required for children undergoing surgery for
congenital heart disease would include arterial pressure monitoring and
transesophageal echocardiography. Monitors are selected on a case-by-case
basis and what is standard for the institutional practice. (425)
41. Some general requirements for the selection of blood products for infants
requiring cardiac surgery are that the blood should be the freshest when possible,
that is less than 5 days of storage. Older blood can become significantly hypokalemic
and result in leftward shifting of the oxygen-hemoglobin dissociation curve. (425)
42. Examples of commonly used antifibrinolytic drugs used in congenital heart surgery
are aminocaproic acid and tranexamic acid. (426)
43. Prior to cardiopulmonary bypass, maintenance of anesthesia is usually achieved
with a combination of intravenous agents and volatile anesthetics to avoid
myocardial depression. (426)
44. Early extubation of the trachea may be performed in patients with simple
defects, good cardiac reserve, and those undergoing the Glenn or Fontan
procedure. (426)
45. A useful way to monitor the cardiac output and circulatory system is to conduct
early and repeated arterial blood gas measurements to allow for appropriate
ventilator and acid-base management. (426)
46. Anticoagulation for cardiopulmonary bypass is achieved using unfractionated
heparin (3 to 4 mg/kg). (426)
47. The target activated clotting time (ACT) value is over 400 but the level required
varies in individual practices. (426)
48. Flow rates are adjusted during cardiopulmonary bypass to maintain an age
appropriate mean arterial blood pressure. Parameters used to calculate the flow rate
needed to maintain metabolic function are the patient’s size and estimated blood
volume. (426)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
280
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
49. The perfusionist controls oxygenation and ventilation during cardiopulmonary
bypass by adjusting the blend of air and oxygen (FIO2) and the flow rate (sweep) of
the fresh gas. (426)
50. Blood temperature is adjusted during cardiopulmonary bypass by running cooled or
warmed water through a coil in contact with the blood path. (426)
51. Mechanical quiescence and myocardial protection is provided during
cardiopulmonary bypass through the administration of cold hyperkalemic
crystalloid solution. (426)
52. The lowest acceptable level of anemia during cardiopulmonary bypass varies from
institution to institution, but is commonly in the range of 20% to 30%. (427)
53. During cardiopulmonary bypass, cerebral and myocardial protection is achieved by
mild to moderate systemic hypothermia. Active rewarming is usually initiated
toward the end of cardiopulmonary bypass. (427)
54. Surgical repairs of the aorta and aortic arch require deep hypothermic circulatory
arrest. (427)
55. Potential negative effects of persistent hypothermia after cardiopulmonary bypass
include myocardial ischemia, cardiac dysrhythmias, elevated pulmonary vascular
resistance, coagulopathies, and renal dysfunction. (427)
56. Relative bradycardia or atrioventricular node conduction failure that occurs during
separation from cardiopulmonary bypass can be treated by temporary cardiac
pacing. (427)
57. Patients with long standing excessive pulmonary blood flow may have underlying
pulmonary hypertension, and may benefit from maneuvers that minimize
pulmonary vascular resistance during separation from bypass. (427)
58. When a patient has had a palliative procedure and is left with a mixing lesion, the
best approach to management is to balance the circulatory system so that the
pulmonary vascular resistance and systemic vascular resistance yield a balanced
circulation. An effective monitoring tool in these patients is the pulse oximeter.
A balanced circulatory system in these patients will result in a systemic
oxygen saturation of 80%. Excessive pulmonary blood flow exists when
systemic oxygen saturation is greater than 85% to 90%, whereas when the systemic
oxygen saturation is lower than 70% there may be inadequate pulmonary
blood flow. (427)
59. Some common vasoactive drugs used during separation from cardiopulmonary
bypass in congenital heart surgery are dopamine, epinephrine, norepinephrine, and
milrinone. (427, Table 26-6)
60. Some causes of difficulty in separation from cardiopulmonary bypass in congenital
heart surgery include inadequate pulmonary blood flow (arterial hypoxemia),
inadequate systemic blood flow (hypotension and metabolic acidosis), valvular
dysfunction, decreases in cardiac output, decreased systemic vascular resistance,
cardiac rhythm disturbances, and hypovolemia. (428, Table 26-7)
61. A rescue measure that can be used if a patient cannot be weaned from
cardiopulmonary bypass is extracorporeal life support. (428)
62. Important complications of protamine administration include anaphylactic,
anaphylactoid, hypotensive, or severe pulmonary hypertensive reactions. (428)
63. Contributors to postoperative coagulopathy in congenital heart surgery include
coagulation factor deficiencies, hypothermia, and hypocalcemia. (428)
64. The best method to replace blood components in infants is noting their small
intravascular volume, and administering products carefully in aliquots. (428)
Congenital Heart Disease
281
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
65. A common side effect of the administration of citrated blood products is
hypocalcemia. (429)
66. Refractory bleeding after cardiopulmonary bypass can be treated with recombinant
factor VIIa when conventional hemostatic therapy has failed to stop the bleeding. (429)
67. Common parameters that are actively managed after pediatric cardiac surgery in the
intensive care unit involve the correction of various electrolyte, glucose, and
ventilatory, circulatory, and hematologic parameters. (429)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
282
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
Chapter
24 CHRONIC PULMONARY
DISEASE
Luca M. Bigatello
OBSTRUCTIVE
PULMONARY
DISEASE
1. What are some examples of obstructive pulmonary disease?
2. What is obstructive pulmonary disease?
3. Why does arterial hypoxemia occur in patients with obstructive pulmonary disease?
4. Why does carbon dioxide retention occur in patients with obstructive pulmonary
disease?
5. What are common physical, radiographic, and functional findings in patients with
obstructive pulmonary disease?
ASTHMA
6. What characterizes asthma?
7. How is the diagnosis of asthma made?
8. What are some of the physical examination findings noted in patients with asthma
during periods of normal pulmonary function? What are some of the physical
examination findings noted in patients with bronchial asthma during periods of
exacerbation of their asthma?
9. What are some findings found in the pulmonary function studies and flow-volume
loops during asthma exacerbations?
10. What agents are commonly used for the chronic treatment of asthma?
11. How can an acute asthmatic attack be treated?
12. How should the patient with asthma be assessed preoperatively?
13. How should a patient with asthma be assessed before a thoracic or abdominal
procedure?
14. Is regional anesthesia the preferred anesthetic choice in patients with bronchial
asthma scheduled to undergo surgery on the extremities?
15. What is the goal of the anesthetic management of patients with asthma?
16. What agents may be used for the induction of general anesthesia in patients
with asthma? What is an advantage and a disadvantage of ketamine for these
patients?
17. Which neuromuscular blocking drugs are associated with histamine release? What
is the concern regarding the use of these neuromuscular blocking drugs in patients
with asthma?
18. What is the benefit of using a slow respiratory rate when mechanically ventilating
the lungs of a patient with asthma?
19. What is a benefit of maintaining adequate hydration intraoperatively in patients
with asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)?
20. What are the options for extubation of the trachea that will minimize the degree of
airway hyperreactivity in response to manipulation of the endotracheal tube?
21. How can the reversal of neuromuscular blocking drugs with anticholinesterases
cause bronchospasm?
283
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
22. Name five potential causes of intraoperative bronchospasm.
23. How should intraoperative bronchospasm be treated?
CHRONIC
OBSTRUCTIVE
PULMONARY
DISEASE
24. What characterizes pulmonary emphysema physiologically?
25. What characterizes chronic bronchitis physiologically?
26. How do emphysema and chronic bronchitis differ clinically?
27. Why is the work of breathing increased in patients with pulmonary
emphysema?
28. For patients with COPD scheduled to undergo a surgical procedure, what should the
preoperative evaluation include? When might preoperative pulmonary function
tests be necessary?
29. What are some pulmonary function test and arterial blood gas measurement
results that indicate that the patient is at an increased risk of postoperative
respiratory failure? What are some treatment interventions that may be warranted
by the preoperative evaluation of the patient’s pulmonary function?
30. What are the main considerations for the anesthetic management of patients with
COPD?
31. What are some potential disadvantages of using nitrous oxide as part of a general
anesthetic in patients with COPD?
32. What are two methods by which anesthesiologists may minimize the drying of
secretions in the airways of patients with COPD in the intraoperative period?
33. What ventilatory settings are appropriate for intraoperative mechanical ventilation
of the lungs of patients with COPD?
34. What characterizes chronic bronchitis physiologically? What is the major
predisposing factor to the development of chronic bronchitis?
35. What is the impact of COPD on the postoperative course?
36. What is the clinical significance of an exacerbation of COPD, and what is its
implication on an upcoming surgical procedure?
PULMONARY
HYPERTENSION
37. How is pulmonary hypertension defined? What is the most common form of
pulmonary hypertension?
38. What are the physiologic effects of pulmonary hypertension?
39. How can pulmonary hypertension affect the performance of the left ventricle?
40. What are the main anesthetic considerations for patients with pulmonary
hypertension?
OBSTRUCTIVE SLEEP
APNEA
41. Is obstructive sleep apnea a rare or common disease?
42. What are the physiologic characteristics of sleep apnea that may affect anesthetic
management and outcome?
43. What are the main anesthetic implications of obstructive sleep apnea?
ANESTHESIA FOR
LUNG RESECTION
Preoperative Evaluation and Preparation
44. What are some preoperative considerations for the patient scheduled to undergo
thoracic surgery?
45. What are some specific preoperative history and physical examination findings that
are indicative of an increased risk of postoperative pulmonary complications
after thoracic surgery?
46. What are some preoperative prophylactic measures that may be taken in an attempt
to minimize postoperative pulmonary complications?
47. How does cigarette smoking affect the lungs physiologically?
48. What is the benefit of the preoperative cessation of cigarette smoking? After
what duration of time after the cessation of smoking are these benefits noted
to occur?
49. For which patients are preoperative pulmonary function tests indicated?
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
284
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
50. What values derived from pulmonary function tests are indicative of an increased
risk of postoperative pulmonary morbidity after a pneumonectomy?
51. What are PPO  FEV1 (predicted postoperative FEV1) and PPO – DLCO (predicted
postoperative DLCO)?
Management of Anesthesia
52. What are some benefits of the administration of volatile anesthetics for patients
undergoing thoracic surgery?
53. What is a disadvantage of the administration of nitrous oxide for patients
undergoing thoracic surgery?
54. What is a benefit of the administration of nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking
drugs for patients undergoing thoracic surgery?
ISOLATION OF THE
LUNGS
55. What are some absolute indications for one-lung ventilation during surgery and
anesthesia? What are some relative indications for one-lung ventilation during
surgery and anesthesia?
56. What is the most frequently used double-lumen endotracheal tube used for the
isolation of the right or left lung or for one-lung ventilation during thoracic
surgery?
57. What is the potential problem with an endobronchial tube placed in the right
bronchus for isolation of the right lung? How can this problem be avoided?
58. What size double-lumen endotracheal tube is usually appropriate for adult patients?
What depth in centimeters typically places the endobronchial tube in approximately
the correct position in most adult patients of average height?
59. What is the technique for placement of a left-sided double-lumen endotracheal
tube? How is the proper placement of a double-lumen endotracheal tube best
confirmed?
60. What is the single-lumen Univent tube? What is its potential advantage for
ventilation?
61. What is a Arndt endobronchial blocker?
62. What is a Cohen tip deflecting endobronchial blocker?
63. How does a bronchial blocker compare to a double-lumen endotracheal tube?
GAS EXCHANGE
DURING ONE LUNG
VENTILATION
64. How does the lateral decubitus position during mechanical ventilation of the lungs
affect the ventilation-to-perfusion ratio in the lungs?
65. What are four factors that influence the amount of perfusion that goes to the
nondependent, unventilated lung during ventilation of a patient in the lateral
decubitus position with a double-lumen endotracheal tube?
66. What are the interventions that can be made when arterial hypoxemia is noted in
a patient during ventilation for thoracic surgery?
CONCLUSION OF
SURGERY
67. Why is the placement of chest tubes after thoracic surgery necessary
postoperatively?
68. When should extubation of the trachea after thoracic surgery occur?
POSTOPERATIVE
PULMONARY
COMPLICATIONS
69. What are the common postoperative pulmonary complications after thoracic
surgery?
70. What is the importance of adequate analgesia after thoracic surgery?
MEDIASTINOSCOPY
71. What is the most frequent reason for the performance of a mediastinoscopy?
72. What are the complications associated with mediastinoscopy?
Chronic Pulmonary Disease
285
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
ANSWERS*
OBSTRUCTIVE
PULMONARY
DISEASE
1. Examples of obstructive pulmonary disease include asthma, emphysema, chronic
bronchitis, and cystic fibrosis. Emphysema and chronic bronchitis are
overlapping clinical manifestations of the same disease – COPD. Obstructive
pulmonary disease is characterized by the progressive, persistent obstruction to air
flow, particularly expiratory flow. Asthma is an acute form of obstructive
disease, which is treatable and at least partially reversible even when established. If
asthma persists over time, either because it is untreated or because it is particularly
severe, it may develop irreversible air flow obstruction and become a chronic
disease not significantly different from emphysema and chronic bronchitis. (431)
2. Obstructive pulmonary disease is chiefly characterized by expiratory flow
limitation due to increased airway resistance coupled with the loss of elastic lung
recoil. These factors lead to lung hyperinflation, increased work of breathing,
and impaired gas exchange. Obstructive pulmonary disease is the most frequent
cause of chronic pulmonary disease. (431)
3. Arterial hypoxemia occurs in patients with obstructive pulmonary disease because
of ventilation-perfusion mismatch. Decreased ventilation (which preferentially
leads to hypoxemia) occurs because of the progressive destruction of functional
alveoli. (433)
4. Carbon dioxide retention occurs in patients with obstructive pulmonary disease
because of ventilation-perfusion mismatch. Both decreased ventilation and
decreased perfusion (dead space) lead to hypercarbia. Initially, this is compensated
by hyperventilation. As patients become older and weaker, such compensation fails,
leading to chronic carbon dioxide retention. (433)
5. Patients with obstructive pulmonary disease often appear dyspneic, with a
hyperinflated,“barreled”chest.Uponcarefulexamination,youwillnoticeaprolonged
expiratory phase often terminated by obvious expiratory muscle activity – an
attempt to exhale the whole tidal volume. On chest auscultation, lung sounds are
distant (because of the hyperinflation), sometimes with associated wheezing. On the
chest radiogram the lungs appear very “tall” and the diaphragm flattened. The lung
fields may appear hyperlucent, and the vasculature may be difficult to discern.
Pulmonary function studies in patients with obstructive pulmonary disease will reveal
a decreased volume of the gas that can be forcefully exhaled in 1 second (FEV1).
The vital capacity may also be decreased, but not to as great an extent as the FEV1,
resulting in a decreased FEV1/FVC ratio. (431)
ASTHMA
6. Asthma is characterized by reversible expiratory flow obstruction, airway
hyperreactivity, and chronic inflammation leading to airway edema, secretions,
and progressive thickening. (431)
7. The diagnosis of asthma is made primarily on the clinical history of increasing
coughing and wheezing spells with or without the identification of a supposed
trigger. Common triggers include pollens, medications, cold air temperature,
and exercise. Spirometry shows an obstructive defect (low FEV1) that is partially
reversible (12% to 15%) with inhaled bronchodilators. The sputum taken from
patients with asthma often contains eosinophils, in contrast to the
neutrophils most commonly found in the sputum of patients with bronchitis.
(341, Figure 27-1)
*Numbers in parentheses: numbers refer to pages, figures, or tables in Miller RD, Pardo MC: Basics of Anesthesia,
6th ed. Philadelphia, Elsevier Saunders, 2011.
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
286
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
8. Patients with asthma during periods of normal pulmonary function are typically
devoid of any signs of pulmonary disease, although scattered expiratory wheezing
can still be heard. During periods of exacerbation, typical signs and symptoms
include breathlessness, coughing fits, and chest tightness, associated with the
objective finding of a prolonged expiratory phase and wheezing, sometimes audible
without the aid of a stethoscope.
9. Pulmonary function studies during asthma exacerbations reveal a decrease in the
FEV1 and FEV1/FVC. The FEV1 may be used as a measure of the degree of
obstruction and the effectiveness of interventions. A flow-volume loop during an
asthma exacerbation reveals a downward scooping of the expiratory phase, with a
normal shape of the inspiratory phase. A significantresponse toabronchodilator may
normalize the aspect of the loop that is characteristic of bronchial asthma and
increase the FEV1. An increase of 12% is judged clinically significant, and is used to
separate asthma from COPD by functional criteria. (431-433, Figure 27-1; Table 27-1)
10. Chronic treatment of asthma includes antiinflammatory agents and
bronchodilators. Inhaled corticosteroids (beclometasone and fluticasone) have
potent antiinflammatory effects and are considered a mainstay of chronic asthma
treatment. Long-acting b2-adrenergic agonists (salmeterol and formoterol) and
anticholinergics (tiotropium) are effective bronchodilators used to treat moderate to
severe asthma. Their advantage in respect to the traditional counterparts (see later
discussion) is their longer duration of action that allows single daily administration.
With that, they are also not indicated in the treatment of an acute exacerbation.
Other antiinflammatory agents effective in the chronic (and not in the acute) setting
are the leukotriene antagonists and synthesis inhibitors (montelukast, zafirlukast,
and zileuton). Methylxanthines (aminophylline, theophylline) are no longer
recommended in the treatment of asthma. (431-432)
11. An acute asthmatic attack should be treated with the administration of oxygen,
nebulized b2-agonists and anticholinergics, and intravenous glucocorticoids.
Subcutaneous epinephrine is also rapidly effective, but the side effects need to be
balanced with its need in each patient. Occasionally standard therapy will not be
sufficient, as evidenced by persistent respiratory distress, worsening hypercapnea,
hypoxemia, and mental status changes. In these cases, non-invasive ventilation may
be very effective, as it will support ventilation and avoid fatigue while the
pharmacologic treatment takes its effect. Tracheal intubation has become a rare
occurrence in the acute treatment of asthma, and is reserved for the most severe and
persistent cases and status asthmaticus. In unusual and extreme circumstances,
inhalational anesthetic agents have been successfully administered through an
intubated airway. All halogenated agents (isoflurane, sevoflurane, and desflurane)
have direct bronchodilator properties, independent of catecholaminergic and
cholinergic receptors, thus working as an addition to the ongoing therapy. (432-433)
12. The preoperative assessment of patients with asthma should include a detailed
history, including any recent exacerbation, the occurrence of emergency room visits
and/or hospitalizations, and mechanical ventilation for asthma. Physical
examination may reveal tachypnea, dyspnea, and, on auscultation, expiratory
wheezing. Patients with a benign history and physical examination do not require
any special intervention other than continuing their current medications. If on
inhaled bronchodilators on an “as needed” basis, they should be instructed to use the
bronchodilator on the morning of surgery and to bring it to the operating room.
Patients who are symptomatic or who have suffered a recent exacerbation may
benefit from postponement of elective surgery until their medical status can be
optimized. (432, 434)
13. Open abdominal and thoracic surgery is associated with the highest incidence of
respiratory complications because of a combination of the effects of postoperative
pain, as well as respiratory muscle dysfunction. Hence, additional preoperative
Chronic Pulmonary Disease
287
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
testing may be warranted if the clinical suspicion of severe or untreated respiratory
disease arises. This assessment should be carried out by a pulmonologist familiar
with the perioperative challenges of obstructive pulmonary disease, and may
include the performance of pulmonary function studies. Of particular utility to the
anesthesiologist is to know whether the possible expiratory flow limitation (i.e.,
a low FEV1) is reversible with bronchodilators. (432, 434)
14. Regional anesthesia may be preferred over general anesthesia in patients with
asthma scheduled for surgery on the extremities. It avoids manipulation of the
airway and the risk of bronchospasm. However, modern medications and anesthetic
techniques are safe in patients with less than severe, symptomatic asthma.
Ventilation through a laryngeal mask airway is less stimulating than through an
endotracheal tube; many anesthetic drugs are also bronchodilators, such as
halogenated inhalational agents and propofol. (432)
15. The goal of the anesthetic management of patients with asthma is to avoid
precipitating bronchoconstriction. While regional or neuraxial anesthesia may be
preferable, a well-conducted general anesthetic also has advantages, including
the ability to deliver bronchodilators (volatile anesthetic agents) and to provide
pulmonary toilet by deep tracheal suction and/or bronchoscopy. A sufficient depth
of anesthesia before intubation of the trachea minimizes the risk of acute
bronchospasm at the time of the induction of anesthesia. This can be accomplished
both with intravenous agents and volatile anesthetics. The latter can be used as
the sole induction agent (rarely used in adults because of the length of time needed
for establishing adequate intubating conditions) or by mixing them during an
intravenous induction. (432)
16. Currently available induction agents such as propofol and ketamine have
bronchodilating effects. Propofol is a more manageable agent devoid of potential
psychogenic side effects. On the other hand, ketamine has a substantial analgesic
effect that may turn out to be helpful in particular circumstances where opiate
agents may not be desired. (432)
17. Neuromuscular blocking drugs associated with histamine release include
succinylcholine, atracurium, and mivacurium. Histamine release may precipitate/
aggravate bronchospasm, although this is a rare occurrence. Regardless, the
availability of nonhistamine releasing neuromuscular blocking drugs such as
vecuronium, rocuronium, and cisatracurium allows the anesthesiologist to safely
choose the preferred agent based on individual priorities. (432)
18. A slow respiratory rate during mechanical ventilation of the lungs of a patient with
asthma allows time for maximal exhalation of gases from obstructed airways. (432)
19. Adequate intraoperative hydration of patients with asthma may facilitate the removal
of secretions from the airways by making the secretions less viscous. (432, 434)
20. Extubation of the trachea in the asthmatic patient may be challenging. The presence
of an endotracheal tube in the airway of a sufficiently awake patient may
trigger irritation and bronchospasm. Two different approaches may be used. The
first is to extubate the trachea while the patient is still deeply anesthetized. This
requires that (1) no contraindication to having an unprotected airway, such as
gastroesophageal reflux, upper gastrointestinal surgery, etc., and (2) spontaneous
breathing with no or only partial ventilatory support, to avoid inflation of the
stomach with positive pressure ventilation. Care should be paid to suction the
airway above the tracheal tube cuff before deflating it. Alternatively, the patient can
be allowed to be fully awake before the endotracheal tube is removed. This
approach, however, may trigger bronchospasm, which can be minimized by
administering additional inhaled bronchodilator prior to awakening.
21. The reversal of neuromuscular blocking drugs with an anticholinesterase such as
neostigmine has the potential to cause bronchospasm from cholinergic
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
288
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
stimulation. However, the anticholinesterase is administered in association with an
anticholinergic agent that selectively blocks the muscarinic effects of acetylcholine
(bronchospasm, hyperperistalsis, tachycardia), leaving the nicotinic effects
(neuromuscular junction) intact. Atropine and glycopyrrolate are prototype agents
in this group. (432)
22. Potential causes of intraoperative bronchospasm include acute bronchial asthma,
inadequate depth of anesthesia, endobronchial intubation, aspiration of gastric
contents, pneumothorax, and foreign body in the airways. (432)
23. Intraoperative bronchospasm is rarely due to an acute asthma exacerbation, except
for patients who were already symptomatic preoperatively. Once mechanical causes
are ruled out and treated (e.g., pneumothorax, foreign body in the airways),
intraoperative treatment of bronchospasm does not differ significantly to its
treatment outside the operating room, except for the additional measure of
deepening the level of anesthesia when possible. The first-line drugs are the inhaled
bronchodilators (b2-agonists and anticholinergics), preferably administered with
a spacer that allows collection of the drug and subsequent delivery during
inspiration. Corticosteroids can also be used, although their onset of action is not
immediate. If central venous access is available, a low dose of epinephrine (less than
1 mg/min) can be very effective and mostly devoid of side effects. Alternatively,
epinephrine can be administered subcutaneously. (432-433)
CHRONIC
OBSTRUCTIVE
PULMONARY
DISEASE
24. Pulmonary emphysema is characterized by the loss of elastic recoil of the lungs due
to the progressive destruction of lung parenchyma. The loss of elastic recoil leads
to collapse of relatively small airways during exhalation, and in turn an increase
in airway resistance. This results in hyperinflation of the alveoli, and the
destruction of interalveolar septa with the creation of bullae, and an increase work
of breathing. All these phenomena accelerate the progression of the disease
toward severe COPD. Gas exchange in patients with COPD is characterized by
ventilation to perfusion mismatch leading to hypoxemia, which in turns leads to
polycythemia, pulmonary hypertension, and in severe cases supplemental
oxygen requirements. (433)
25. Chronic bronchitis is characterized by an increased airway resistance due to
excessive mucous secretion in the tracheobronchial tree. Long-standing increased
airways resistance results in increased work of breathing, dynamic hyperinflation
and auto-PEEP, and the predisposition to pulmonary infections such as acute
tracheobronchitis and pneumonia. All these phenomena accelerate the progression
of the disease toward severe COPD. (433)
26. Emphysema and chronic bronchitis constitute two somewhat different ways to
arrive at the same pathologic endpoint: COPD. Emphysema occurs more on the basis
of progressive destruction of the lung parenchyma, particularly elastic fibers, and
loss of expiratory recoil of the lung. Chronic bronchitis occurs more on the basis of
chronic respiratory infection. Hence, the distinction between emphysema and
chronic bronchitis is more academic than clinical and it has faded away in the recent
literature, which considers them variants of the same disease: COPD, with similar
etiologic factors (cigarette smoking), evolution, and complications. (433)
27. The loss of elastic recoil may prevent the lungs to reach functional residual capacity
(FRC) at end expiration as they normally would. Ending expiration at a lung volume
above FRC exerts a pressure in the alveoli higher than atmospheric (which by
convention we call 0 mm Hg). This pressure is often called “intrinsic positive
expiratory pressure” (intrinsic PEEP) or “auto-PEEP” and just like PEEP it is related
to an increased FRC. Unlike externally applied PEEP, however, intrinsic PEEP needs
to be fully overcome before gas flow in the airways becomes negative and
inspiration starts. This occurs at every breath and it may be taxing depending upon
the magnitude of auto-PEEP and the conditions of the patient. (433)
Chronic Pulmonary Disease
289
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
28. The preoperative evaluation of patients with pulmonary emphysema should include
an assessment of the patient’s current symptoms of dyspnea, cough, and sputum
production. Exercise tolerance should also be assessed. Based on the clinical
history, physical examination findings, and the surgical procedure, preoperative
pulmonary function tests and arterial blood gas measurements may be indicated.
These studies may help to determine the extent of disease, whether there are
any reversible components of the disease such as bronchospasm or infection, and
the risk of postoperative respiratory failure. (432-444)
29. The major concern for patients with pulmonary emphysema scheduled to undergo
surgical procedures is the risk of postoperative respiratory failure and the need
for prolonged intubation of the trachea. Pulmonary function test results that
indicate that the patient is at an increased risk for postoperative respiratory failure
include an FEV1 less than 2 L and or less than 50% of predicted, or the presence of
arterial hypoxemia or hypercarbia. A PaCO2 measurement of 50 mm Hg or higher is
an indication that the patient is at an increased risk of postoperative respiratory
failure. Arterial hypoxemia warrants treatment with supplemental oxygen in an
attempt to improve peripheral oxygen availability, as well as decrease pulmonary
vascular resistance and possibly the pressure load of the right ventricle. (434)
30. Intraoperative management of patients with COPD implies similar consideration as
those for asthma patients, except that airway irritability is generally less severe.
Nonetheless, it is advisable to minimize airway stimulation, to use regional
anesthesia if the procedure allows it, to consider extubating the trachea during deep
anesthesia, and to always deliver generous bronchodilation. The latter can be
accomplished by administering inhaled b2-agonists, anticholinergic agents, and
halogenated inhalational agents. When possible, management of the airway by
mask or LMA is preferable to endotracheal intubation. When intubated, the airways
can be thoroughly suctioned with the aid of a bronchoscope to facilitate secretion
clearance in the immediate postoperative period. (433)
31. Disadvantages of using nitrous oxide as part of a general anesthetic in patients with
pulmonary emphysema include the potential for nitrous oxide to diffuse into bullae
and cause its expansion or even rupture, leading to a tension pneumothorax. In
addition, using nitrous oxide obviously limits the inspired fraction of oxygen that
can be administered concurrently. (434)
32. Two methods by which anesthesiologists may minimize the drying of secretions in
the airways of patients with pulmonary emphysema in the intraoperative period
is through the humidification of inspired gases and the maintenance of adequate
hydration. (432, 433)
33. Mechanical ventilation of the lungs of patients with COPD may be complicated by
the presence of significant expiratory flow limitation, which is present in different
degrees at baseline and may be aggravated by intraoperative bronchospasm.
Expiratory flow limitation tends to impede the elimination of CO2, and ultimately
causes hypercapnia and acute respiratory acidosis. Allowing a long expiratory
phase facilitates expiratory emptying of the lungs and CO2 clearance. However, this
strategy may be limited by the necessity to deliver a minute ventilation sufficient to
maintain adequate CO2 clearance. Increasing tidal volume over respiratory rate
may accomplish the goal to a degree, but this also is limited by the potential for
alveolar overdistention and barotrauma. Hence, there is no specific formula for
success, and various combinations of the above may be tried and may work
differently in each individual patient. It is important also to remember the reason for
the expiratory flow limitation (high expiratory resistance, bronchospasm) and treat
it with generous administration of bronchodilators. (432, 433)
34. Chronic bronchitis is a state of chronic inflammation of the airways with excessive
secretions of mucus that causes a progressive increase in airway resistance
to air flow. Predisposition to frequent bronchial infection aggravates the clinical
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
290
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
picture by adding a purulent component to the tracheobronchial secretions and
the general debilitating effects of recurrent infections. The major predisposing
factor to the development of chronic bronchitis, as with pulmonary emphysema, is
cigarette smoking. (433)
35. COPD affects multiple aspects of lung physiology, principally gas exchange and
respiratory mechanics. Hence, they have a much narrower margin of reserve and are
at high risk to develop postoperative respiratory complications including
pneumonia, and the need for prolonged mechanical ventilation. Interventions that
may limit respiratory complications include: (1) preoperative optimization of
symptoms like bronchospasm and excessive secretions; (2) careful intraoperative
management including either a regional anesthetic or a general anesthetic with
generous administration of bronchodilators, retrieval of secretions by deep tracheal
suctioning or bronchoscopy, and sufficient hydration; (3) effective postoperative
pain control, possibly including regional techniques such as epidural analgesia or
continuous peripheral blocks through an indwelling catheter; and (4) a careful
evaluation and control of comorbidities such as ischemic heart disease, arrhythmia,
and gastroesophageal reflux, which may coexist and contribute to the development
of acute respiratory failure. (433)
36. Acute exacerbations of COPD are characterized by acute worsening of dyspnea,
sputum production, and sputum purulence. They generally imply a new or renewed
respiratory infection, and, in the general outlook of the disease, further decline
of respiratory function. When occurring in proximity to a scheduled operation, they
constitute an increased risk factor for postoperative respiratory complications. If
at all possible, surgery should be postponed and the patient treated with established
protocols for COPD exacerbation, including antibiotics, bronchodilators, and
often a corticosteroid taper. (433-434)
PULMONARY
HYPERTENSION
37. Pulmonary hypertension is defined as a mean pulmonary artery pressure greater
than 30 mm Hg. Pulmonary hypertension is most commonly secondary to cardiac
(congestive heart failure, mitral valve disease) and pulmonary (COPD) disease.
Primary pulmonary hypertension is rarer and also more severe. (434)
38. Pulmonary hypertension physiologically leads to an increased pressure in the
pulmonary vascular bed constituting an increased pressure load to the right
ventricle, which initially compensates with dilation and hypertrophy that allow for
the preservation of myocardial stroke volume. As the load to the right ventricle
persists or increases, the right ventricle eventually fails and stroke volume and
cardiac output fall, leading to chronic right-side congestive heart failure or cor
pulmonale. Clinical signs of right ventricular failure include peripheral edema,
hepatomegaly, jugular vein distention, and eventually hypoxemia and dyspnea.
(434, 435)
39. Pulmonary hypertension may affect the performance of the left ventricle via the
development of right ventricular pressure and then volume overload. As the right
ventricle responds to the increased pressure afterload, it first hypertrophies and
then dilates. As this occurs, the right ventricle assumes a spherical shape and pushes
the interventricular septum into the left ventricular cavity. As a result, the volume of
the left ventricle decreases, and diastolic filling is compromised, which in turn
results in a smaller stroke volume and lower cardiac output. (434)
40. Patients with significant pulmonary hypertension are at risk of developing acute
right-side congestive heart failure during anesthesia. Attention must be paid to
minimize stimuli that may further increase pulmonary artery pressure, such as
hypoxemia, hypercarbia, acidemia, and high catecholamine discharge, as it may
occur from acute stress due to light anesthesia. It is important to preserve the
preload to the right ventricle by careful maintenance of circulating volume during
large open procedures or significant blood loss. On the other hand, excessive
Chronic Pulmonary Disease
291
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
volume overload will eventually result in failure of the right ventricle similarly to
what happens with the left ventricle. It is then easy to see how such delicate
equilibrium may need to be monitored closely (with, for example, a pulmonary
artery catheter or a transesophageal echography). Treatment of acute on chronic RV
failure is often disappointing, as few selective pulmonary vasodilators are available
and are not always effective. These include phosphodiesterase inhibitors
(milrinone), inhaled prostacyclin (Flolan), and inhaled nitric oxide. (434, 435)
OBSTRUCTIVE SLEEP
APNEA
41. Obstructive sleep apnea is very common, particularly in the male gender, since
it may affect as many as 25% of men in the United States. Obesity is by far the
most significant risk factor, but obstructive sleep apnea can also occur
independently of airway anatomy (central sleep apnea). (435)
42. Obstructive sleep apnea is generally associated with obesity; hence, all the
cardiorespiratory and metabolic consequences of obesity are often present in
patients with obstructive sleep apnea. When untreated, obstructive sleep apnea
causes frequent periods of severe hypoxemia, with the consequent development of
pulmonary hypertension over time. Most relevant for anesthesia, physiologic
abnormalities of obstructive sleep apnea include a high Mallampati score, low lung
volumes, a decreased functional residual capacity, chronic hypoxemia and
hypercarbia, atherosclerotic and hypertensive cardiovascular disease, congestive
heart failure, gastroesophageal reflux, and metabolic disease, in particular type 2
diabetes mellitus. (435)
43. There are several anesthetic considerations for the patient with obstructive sleep
apnea. These patients may have a more challenging airway due to the large
amount of redundant tissue that may make ventilation and intubation of the
trachea difficult. For this reason it may be preferable to induce general anesthesia
in a rapid sequence, avoiding attempts at ventilation all together, after a
prolonged preoxygenation, possibly in a slight reversed Trendelenburg position,
and prepared with alternative tracheal intubation techniques. Intraoperatively,
attention has to be paid to avoid major alveolar collapse by administering positive
end-expiratory pressure and occasional large breaths. Extubation should be
carried out with the patient wide awake and ready to collaborate with deep
breathing. Pharmacologic management of the patient with obstructive sleep apnea
should be aimed toward the maintenance of a patent airway. Preoperative
benzodiazepines may relax the airway tissues such that pharyngeal space becomes
reduced and hypoventilation ensues. Medications that depress the central
nervous system may augment this effect and lead to hypopnea, arterial
hypoxemia, and hypercapnia both prior to the induction of anesthesia and upon
awakening. Opioids can decrease the respiratory drive and further contribute
to these complications. If the patient used CPAP at home, it should be available in
the postoperative period and used if necessary. (435-436)
ANESTHESIA FOR
LUNG RESECTION
Preoperative Evaluation and Preparation
44. Preoperative considerations for the patient scheduled to undergo thoracic surgery
include the medical management of the pulmonary disease, the evaluation of
coexisting disease and its management, the evaluation of pulmonary function with
pulmonary function tests, the selection of intraoperative anesthetics and
monitors, the effect of ventilation and/or the lateral decubitus position that may be
required intraoperatively, the plan for postoperative pain control, and the potential
need for continued mechanical ventilation of the lungs in the postoperative
period. Perhaps the main purpose of the preoperative evaluation of patients
scheduled to undergo thoracic surgery is to institute perioperative therapy in an
effort to minimize postoperative complications. (436)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
292
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
45. Preoperative history and physical examination findings that are indicative of an
increased risk of postoperative pulmonary complications after thoracic surgery
include dyspnea, cough, sputum production, wheezing, a history of
cigarette smoking, obesity, and advanced age. Another risk factor for
postoperative pulmonary complications after thoracic surgery is an
inexperienced surgeon. (432, 436)
46. Preoperative prophylactic measures that may be taken in an attempt to minimize
postoperative complications include the discontinuation of smoking cigarettes,
treatment of any pulmonary infections, treatment of any reversible component of
increased airway resistance, mobilization of any secretions, and teaching the patient
deep breathing exercises and coughing exercises. These prophylactic measures
should be instituted at least 48 to 72 hours before surgery. (436)
47. Cigarette smoking increases the irritability of the small airways, causes mucus
hypersecretion, and decreases mucociliary transport. Carbon monoxide may also
have negative inotropic effects. The net effect of this for patients scheduled to
undergo thoracic surgery is an increase in the incidence of complications in the
postoperative period. (433, 436)
48. There are many benefits of the preoperative cessation of cigarette smoking. Twelve to
twenty-four hours after the cessation of cigarette smoking, there are significant
decreases in the carboxyhemoglobin level and a decrease in nicotine-induced
tachycardia. The oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve shifts to the right, making more
oxygen available at the tissues. One to two weeks after the cessation of cigarette
smoking,therebeginstobeadecreaseintheamountofmucussecretionsintheairways;
8 to 12 weeks after the cessation of cigarette smoking, there is marked improvement in
mucociliary transport, small airway reactivity, and secretions in the small airways. This
is evidenced by the decrease in postoperative respiratory complications in patients who
have quit smoking cigarettes for at least 8 weeks before surgery. (436)
49. Preoperative pulmonary function tests predict which patients may be at an
increased risk for postoperative pulmonary complications after thoracic surgery.
Patients with a history of chronic pulmonary disease or with severe, limiting
pulmonary symptoms in the presence of abnormal findings on the physical
examination or chest radiograph are candidates for preoperative pulmonary
function studies. (436)
50. The following values from a pulmonary function test are indicative of increased risk
of postoperative pulmonary morbidity after a pneumonectomy: FEV1 less than 2 L
or FEV1 predicted less than 80%. Similarly DLCO less than 80% predicted is also
associated with increased morbidity. A decrease in oxygen consumption, less than
10 mL/kg/min as measured by exercise testing, predicts a postoperative mortality
rate of 25% to 50% and should prompt discussion of alternatives to surgical
resection. (436-37, Figure 27-2)
51. The lung has 42 segments (22 segments on the right and 20 segments on the left).
Depending on the number of segments of the lung that will be resected, an
estimate of the postoperative FEV1 can be obtained. Predicted postoperative FEV1
(PPO FEV1) ¼ Preoperative FEV1  (1  % functional lung tissue removed/100).
A PPO FEV1 of less than 40% is associated with poor outcomes. Similar to FEV1,
the DLCO estimate, based on the number of lung segments to be resected, is the
predicted postoperative DLCO (PPO DLCO). A PPO DLCO of less than 40% carries an
increased risk of postoperative complications. (436, Figures 27-2 and 27-3)
Management of Anesthesia
52. The benefits of the administration of volatile anesthetics for patients undergoing
thoracic surgery include the effect of decreasing airway reflexes, the lack of
influence on regional hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction, a high inspired
Chronic Pulmonary Disease
293
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
concentration of oxygen that may be delivered concurrently, and the ability to be
eliminated postoperatively. (436)
53. Disadvantages of the administration of nitrous oxide for patients undergoing
thoracic surgery include:
• The limited concentration of oxygen that may be administered
• A small decrease in the hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction response of the lung
• The exacerbation of preexisting pulmonary hypertension
Its potential to expand in closed airspace, such as during closure of a
thoracotomy, or expansion of emphysematous bullae leading to pneumothorax.
(434-436)
54. The benefits of the administration of nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking
drugs for patients undergoing thoracic surgery include improved conditions for
endotracheal intubation, improved surgical exposure through rib separation. and
the facilitation of controlled ventilation of the lungs. (436)
ISOLATION OF
THE LUNGS
55. Absolute indications for one-lung ventilation during surgery and anesthesia
include the need to isolate the lungs from each other to avoid contamination from
one lung to the other of infected material or blood, the presence of a
bronchopleural fistula, surgical opening of a major airway, a giant unilateral lung
cyst or bullae, tracheobronchial tree disruption, life-threatening hypoxemia due
to unilateral lung disease, and unilateral lung lavage of pulmonary alveolar
proteinosis. Relative indications for one-lung ventilation during surgery and
anesthesia include improving operating conditions during a lobectomy,
pneumonectomy, resection of a thoracic aneurysm, or operations on the esophagus.
56. The Robertshaw endobronchial tube is the most frequently used double-lumen
endotracheal tube for the isolation of the right or left lung for one-lung ventilation
during thoracic surgery. The left-sided tube has a longer bronchial tube than the
right-sided tube. Several manufacturers produce clear disposable polyvinyl chloride
tubes. (438, Figure 27-5)
57. An endobronchial tube placed in the right bronchus for isolation of the right lung
could potentially obstruct the lumen of the right upper lobe bronchus. This
occurs secondary to the short distance between the carina and the takeoff to the
right upper lobe bronchus. The right-sided double lumen tubes are designed to
incorporate a separate opening in the bronchial lumen to allow ventilation of
the right upper lobe. Proper positioning of a right-sided DLT must include fiberoptic
guidance. (439, Figure 27-9)
58. For most adult women, a size 37 French double-lumen tube is appropriate, and for
most men a 39 French tube is the appropriate size. Endobronchial tube placement is
in the correct position at an average depth of insertion referenced to the corner of
the mouth of 29 cm for patients 170 cm tall. For each 10-cm increase or decrease in
the patient’s height, the average depth of endobronchial tube placement
correspondingly changes by 1 cm. (438)
59. The technique for placement of a left-sided double-lumen endotracheal tube begins
with holding the tube with the distal curve facing anteriorly. Once the bronchial cuff
is inserted past the vocal cords, the stylet is removed, the tube is rotated 90 degrees
to the left, and the tube advanced until moderate resistance is encountered. The
proper placement of a double-lumen endotracheal tube is best confirmed with
fiberoptic visualization through the tracheal portion of the double-lumen tube.
The desired position of the tube corresponds to visualization of the superior portion
of the bronchial cuff, when inflated, just past the bifurcation of the carina.
The bronchial side can be confirmed by its orientation to the tracheal rings, which
are complete anteriorly. Confirmation of endobronchial tube placement by
auscultation alone leads to error in up to 48% of placements. (439, Figure 27-7)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
294
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
60. The Univent tube has two compartments: a main lumen for conventional air passage
and a small lumen embedded in the anterior wall of the endotracheal tube that
permits passage of the movable bronchial blocker. The bronchial blocker is a
relatively stiff catheter that has an internal channel measuring 2 mm through
which oxygen may be insufflated. After tracheal intubation with the bronchial
blocker retracted, initial positioning is accomplished by rotating the tube to the
right or left position, so that the BB is advanced into the corresponding mainstem
bronchus. Fiberoptic visualization should be used to confirm appropriate
mainstem intubation and to guide the depth of insertion. The advantage of the
Univent tube is that it then converts to a single-lumen endotracheal tube with
the withdrawal of the bronchial blocker when isolation of the lungs is no longer
needed. An example in which this may be advantageous is when postoperative
ventilation of the lungs is anticipated and changing a double-lumen tube to a
single-lumen tube at the conclusion of the surgical procedure could be dangerous or
difficult. (441-442, Figures 27-10 and 27-11)
61. The Arndt endobronchial blocker is a wire-guided catheter. The bronchial
blocker is coupled to the bronchoscope through the guide loop after they are
passed through a multiairway adapter. The bronchoscope is advanced to the
desired mainstem bronchus. Since the bronchial blocker is coupled to
the bronchoscope, it is in turn positioned in the desired bronchus.
(442, Figure 27-12)
62. The Cohen tip deflecting endobronchial blocker is introduced into a single-lumen
endotracheal tube. The flexible tip of the bronchial blocker is directed into the
desired bronchus by using the control wheel on the proximal end of the blocker.
(442, Figure 27-13)
63. Bronchial blockers provide equivalent surgical exposure (lung collapse)
when compared with a left-sided double-lumen tube, during left-sided open or
video assisted thoracoscopic surgery. But bronchial blockers require a longer
time to position and need more frequent intraoperative manipulation. (442)
GAS EXCHANGE
DURING ONE-LUNG
VENTILATION
64. A patient in the lateral decubitus position undergoing mechanical ventilation of the
lungs has an increase in pulmonary ventilation-to-perfusion mismatch. The effects
on pulmonary blood flow are primarily due to gravity, lung volume, and regional
vascular resistance. The dependent lung receives proportionally more blood flow
than the nondependent lung. The dependent lung is ventilated relatively less
secondary to the loss of lung volume from compression by the mediastinum,
abdominal contents, and positioning support structures. These factors together
create an increase in pulmonary ventilation-to-perfusion mismatching. The
ventilation-to-perfusion ratio can be improved with the application of PEEP to the
dependent lung. (442-444)
65. Four factors that influence the amount of perfusion that goes to the nondependent,
unventilated lung during ventilation of a patient in the lateral decubitus position
with a double-lumen endotracheal tube include gravity, hypoxic pulmonary
vasoconstriction, direct surgical compression of blood flow, and presence of
pulmonary artery hypertension. (444)
66. Arterial hypoxemia when noted during ventilation for thoracic surgery calls for
confirming proper placement of a double-lumen endotracheal tube using a
fiberoptic bronchoscope. Next, the administration of a low level (5 to 10 cm H2O) of
PEEP to the nondependent lung helps. Sometimes this may interfere with the
surgical dissection. A slow inflation of 2 L/min of oxygen into the nonventilated
lung for 2 seconds and repeated every 10 seconds for 5 minutes until the
saturation rises has been shown to improve oxygenation during ventilation.
Sustained lung inflation of 30 to 40 cm H2O to the dependent lung along with
application of PEEP helps in recruitment of collapsed lung. Although this may
Chronic Pulmonary Disease
295
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
improve arterial oxygenation, it may also cause an increase in the pulmonary
vascular resistance in the ventilated, dependent lung and in turn worsen the
hypoxia. (445, Table 27-2)
CONCLUSION OF
SURGERY
67. Chest tubes are placed after thoracic surgery to ensure continued expansion of the
lung by evacuating fluid and air that may leak from alveoli that have been
incised. Kinking of a chest tube after thoracic surgery places the patient at risk
for a tension pneumothorax. (446)
68. Extubation of the trachea after thoracic surgery should take place at the conclusion
of the surgery to minimize the complications associated with mechanical
ventilation (barotrauma, ventilator-associated pneumonia). (446)
POSTOPERATIVE
PULMONARY
COMPLICATIONS
69. The most common postoperative pulmonary complication after thoracic surgery
is atelectasis. Other common postoperative pulmonary complications include
hypoventilation and arterial hypoxemia. These problems may be related to
intraoperative problems (aspiration, trauma) or problems during the postoperative
period due to the inability to mobilize secretions and effectively expand the
operative lung. Early mobilization after surgery reestablishes physiologic lung
volumes and gas exchange, and seems to be the most effective way to prevent
postoperative pulmonary complications. (446)
70. Adequate analgesia after thoracic surgery is important. Thoracic epidural analgesia
(TEA) provides effective postoperative pain relief, improved pulmonary function,
and prompt mobility. TEA is associated with a lower mortality rate and fewer
respiratory complications. (446)
MEDIASTINOSCOPY
71. The most frequent reason for the performance of a mediastinoscopy is to determine
the diagnosis and/or resectability of lung cancer. (446)
72. The most common complications that can occur after the performance of a
mediastinoscopy include hemorrhage and a pneumothorax. Other potential
complications include a recurrent laryngeal nerve injury, infection, air embolism,
and phrenic nerve injury. (446)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
296
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
Chapter
25 RENAL, LIVER, AND
BILIARY TRACT DISEASE
Anup Pamnani, Vinod Malhotra
RENAL DISEASE
1. What are some essential physiologic functions of the kidneys?
2. Name some factors that place patients at an increased risk of acute renal failure in
the perioperative period.
3. What percent of the cardiac output normally goes to the kidneys? What fraction of
this goes to the renal cortex?
4. Over what range of mean arterial blood pressures do renal blood flow and the
glomerular filtration rate (GFR) remain constant? How is this accomplished by the
kidneys? Why is it important?
5. Even during normal kidney autoregulatory function, what two factors can alter
renal blood flow?
6. What is renin? What is the secretion of renin usually in response to? What effect
does renin have on renal blood flow?
7. What is the physiologic effect of the secretion of renin?
8. What triggers the release of prostaglandins that are produced by the renal medulla?
What is the effect of prostaglandins released by the renal medulla?
9. What is the renal effect of arginine vasopressin released by the hypothalamus?
10. What is glomerular filtration? What is glomerular filtration dependent on?
11. What is the normal hydrostatic pressure of the glomerular capillaries? What is the
normal plasma oncotic pressure in the afferent and efferent arterioles?
12. What is the average normal rate of glomerular filtration?
13. About what percent of the fluid shift from glomerular filtration is reabsorbed from
renal tubules and ultimately returned to the circulation?
14. How is the GFR influenced by the renal blood flow?
15. What are the three mechanisms upon which the renal clearance of drugs depends?
16. Name some tests used for the evaluation of renal function. How sensitive are tests
of renal function?
17. What degree of renal disease can exist before renal function tests begin to indicate
possible decreases in renal function?
18. What is the normal level of blood urea nitrogen (BUN)?
19. What factors may influence the BUN level?
20. Why does the BUN concentration increase in dehydrated states? What is the serum
creatinine level under these circumstances?
21. What do BUN concentrations higher than 50 mg/dL almost always indicate?
22. What is the source of serum creatinine? How is the serum creatinine level related to
the GFR?
23. Why might a normal creatinine level be seen in elderly patients despite a decreased
GFR?
24. Why might normal serum creatinine levels not accurately reflect the GFR in patients
with chronic renal failure?
297
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
25. What is the creatinine clearance a measurement of?
26. Why is the creatinine clearance a more reliable measurement of the GFR than
serum creatinine levels? What is a disadvantage of creatinine clearance
measurements?
27. What are some nonrenal causes of proteinuria?
28. What are the differences in site of action of thiazide, spironolactone, and loop and
osmotic diuretics?
29. What are the differences in pharmacologic action between dopamine and
fenoldopam?
30. What are the systemic changes that frequently accompany end-stage renal disease
(ESRD)?
31. What are some anesthetic considerations for the anesthetic management of patients
with ESRD?
32. Should succinylcholine be avoided in patients with ESRD?
33. What are some causes of prerenal oliguria?
34. What is the treatment for prerenal causes of oliguria?
35. What are some causes of oliguria due to intrinsic renal disease?
36. For oliguria that is secondary to renal causes such as acute tubular necrosis, is
the urine typically concentrated or dilute? Does the urine typically contain
excessive or minimal stores of sodium?
37. What are some causes of postrenal oliguria?
LIVER AND BILIARY
TRACT DISEASE
38. What are some physiologic functions of the liver?
39. What is the blood supply to the liver? What percent of the cardiac output goes to the
liver?
40. What are some determinants of hepatic blood flow?
41. What is hepatic autoregulation? How is hepatic autoregulation affected by surgery
and anesthesia?
42. What is the hepatic arterial buffer response? How is this hepatic response affected by
anesthesia?
43. What results from sympathetic nervous stimulation of the liver?
44. How does positive pressure ventilation of the lungs affect hepatic blood flow?
45. How does congestive heart failure affect hepatic blood flow?
46. How do changes in cardiac output or myocardial contractility affect hepatic blood
flow?
47. How do changes in arterial blood pressure affect hepatic blood flow?
48. How does the liver store glucose?
49. How does the liver maintain glucose homeostasis in times of starvation?
50. Why might patients with cirrhosis be more likely to develop hypoglycemia in the
perioperative period?
51. What role does the liver play in blood coagulation? What is the clinical implication
of this for the patient with liver disease?
52. How significant must liver dysfunction be before abnormal blood coagulation is
noted? How can this be evaluated preoperatively?
53. What is the role of vitamin K in coagulation?
54. How does the liver facilitate the renal excretion of lipid soluble drugs?
55. How does chronic drug therapy affect the metabolism of anesthetic drugs by the
liver?
56. How does chronic liver disease impact drug metabolism?
57. Why may hepatic drug metabolism be accelerated after the administration of certain
medications?
58. What role does the liver play in the excretion of bilirubin? What is the clinical
implication of this for the patient with liver disease?
59. What proteins are synthesized in the hepatocytes?
60. What is the role of the urea cycle in the hepatocytes?
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
298
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
61. What pathophysiologic changes are associated with end-stage liver disease
(ESLD)?
62. What are the hemodynamic changes associated with ESLD?
63. What are some consequences of the portal hypertension seen in ESLD?
64. What are some of the symptoms of portal hypertension?
65. What are some complications that can occur as a result of the portal hypertension
seen in ELSD?
66. What are some pulmonary complications that can be seen in ESLD?
67. What are some reasons why a patient with hepatic cirrhosis may have arterial
hypoxemia? Does the administration of supplemental oxygen increase the oxygen
saturation in these patients?
68. What are some causes of hepatic encephalopathy seen in patients with ESLD?
69. What is the therapy for hepatic encephalopathy? Is it effective?
70. What role does the liver play in drug binding to serum proteins? What is the clinical
implication of this for the patient with liver disease?
71. Why is ascites thought to accumulate in patients with hepatic cirrhosis?
72. What are some complications associated with ascites?
73. What is the treatment for ascites?
74. How might renal function be affected in patients with hepatic cirrhosis?
75. What categories of hepatorenal syndrome have been described? Are there any
therapies?
76. In the absence of surgical stimulation, how do regional and inhaled anesthetics
affect hepatic blood flow?
77. Is there any evidence to suggest one inhaled anesthetic preserves hepatic
autoregulation more than others?
78. What is halothane hepatitis? Are pediatric patients or adult patients more likely to
develop halothane hepatitis?
79. What is the cause of halothane hepatitis?
80. How is the diagnosis of halothane hepatitis made?
81. Can volatile anesthetics, other than halothane, cause hepatotoxicity?
82. What are some commonly ordered liver function tests? What is the utility of liver
function tests in the perioperative period?
83. What are some preoperative findings in patients with liver disease that are
associated with increased postoperative morbidity?
84. What monitoring may be useful intraoperatively for patients with hepatic cirrhosis
undergoing surgical procedures?
85. Why is the intraoperative maintenance of the arterial blood pressure particularly
important in patients with hepatic cirrhosis?
86. When liver function tests become abnormal postoperatively, what is the most
likely mechanism for the postoperative liver dysfunction? In what patients and
types of surgeries are liver function tests most likely to become elevated
postoperatively?
87. What are the most likely causes of postoperative liver dysfunction?
88. What laboratory values indicate an intrahepatic cause of liver dysfunction?
89. What are some causes of postoperative jaundice?
90. What is delirium tremens? How does it usually present?
91. What is the treatment of delirium tremens?
92. What is the mortality associated with delirium tremens? What is the usual cause of
death in these patients?
93. What approximate percent of females and males aged 55 to 65 years are believed to
have gallstones?
94. What is the potential problem with the use of opioids intraoperatively during a
cholecystectomy or common bile duct exploration?
95. How can intraoperative spasm of the sphincter of Oddi be treated?
96. What are some anesthetic considerations for patients undergoing laparoscopic
procedures?
Renal, Liver, and Biliary Tract Disease
299
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
ANSWERS*
RENAL DISEASE
1. Essential physiologic functions of the kidneys include the excretion of metabolic
wastes; the retention of nutrients; the regulation of water, tonicity, and
electrolyte and hydrogen ion concentrations in the blood; and the production
of hormones that contribute to water regulation and bone metabolism. (448)
2. Factors that place patients at an increased risk of acute renal failure in the
perioperative period include advanced age, emergent surgery, liver disease,
high-risk surgery, body mass index, peripheral vascular occlusive disease, and
COPD. (449, Table 28-1)
3. Although the kidneys typically constitute only 0.5% of body weight, about 20%
of the cardiac output normally goes to the kidneys. Of the 20%, more than
two-thirds goes to the renal cortex and the remaining blood flow supplies the renal
medulla. (448)
4. Renal blood flow and the GFR remain constant when mean arterial blood pressures
range between 80 and 180 mm Hg. This autoregulatory function of the kidneys
is accomplished by the afferent arteriolar vascular bed. The afferent arterioles are
able to adjust their tone in response to changes in blood pressure, such that
during times of higher mean arterial blood pressure the afferent arterioles
vasoconstrict, whereas the opposite occurs during times of lower mean arterial
blood pressure. This is important for two reasons. The ability of the kidneys to
maintain constant renal blood flow despite fluctuations in blood pressure ensures
continued renal tubular function in the face of changes, especially decreases, in
blood pressure. In addition, autoregulatory responses of the afferent arterioles
protect the glomerular capillaries from large increases in blood pressure during
times of hypertension, as may occur with direct laryngoscopy. When mean arterial
blood pressures are less than 80 mm Hg or greater than 180 mm Hg renal blood
flow is blood pressure dependent. (448)
5. Even during normal kidney autoregulatory function, renal blood flow can be altered
by sympathetic nervous system activity and by circulating renin. (448)
6. Renin is a proteolytic enzyme secreted by the juxtaglomerular apparatus of
the kidney. There are at least three things that stimulate the release of renin
from the endothelial cells of the afferent arteriole: (1) Sympathetic nervous
stimulation; (2) decreased renal perfusion; and (3) decreased delivery of sodium
to distal convoluted renal tubules. Renin increases efferent renal arterial
arteriolar tone at low levels and causes afferent arteriolar constriction at higher
levels. (449)
7. Renin is the rate-limiting enzyme in the production of angiotensin II. After its
secretion from the juxtaglomerular apparatus of the kidneys, renin acts on
angiotensinogen. Angiotensinogen is a large glycoprotein released by the liver
to the circulation. After being cleaved by renin, angiotensin I is formed from
angiotensinogen. Angiotensin I is in turn cleaved by angiotensin converting
enzyme in the lungs to form angiotensin II. Angiotensin II stimulates the release of
aldosterone from the adrenal cortex and is a potent vasoconstrictor. It also inhibits
renin secretion as part of a negative feedback loop. (449)
8. Prostaglandins are released from the renal medulla in response to angiotensin II,
hypotension and sympathetic nervous system stimulation. Prostaglandins attenuate
the actions of the sympathetic nervous system, arginine vasopressin,
*Numbers in parentheses: numbers refer to pages, figures, or tables in Miller RD, Pardo MC: Basics of Anesthesia,
6th ed. Philadelphia, Elsevier Saunders, 2011.
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
300
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
norepinephrine, and the renin-angiotensin system on the kidney by maintaining
cortical blood flow. Drugs that inhibit prostaglandins, such as nonsteroidal
antiinflammatory agents and aspirin, may impair this protective effect of
prostaglandins. (449)
9. Arginine vasopressin (previously known as antidiuretic hormone) release by the
hypothalamus results in the renal tubular conservation of water, an increased urine
osmolality, and a decrease in plasma osmolality. It is typically secreted in
response to small increases in serum osmolality. (450)
10. Glomerular filtration is the filtration of water and low molecular weight substances
from the blood in the renal afferent arterioles into Bowman’s space through
the glomerulus. Glomerular filtration is dependent on two things: the permeability
of the filtration barrier (the glomerular membrane) and the net difference
between the hydrostatic forces pushing fluid into Bowman’s space and the
osmotic forces keeping fluid in the plasma. (449-450)
11. The normal hydrostatic pressure of the glomerular capillaries is about 50 mm Hg.
The normal plasma oncotic pressure in the afferent and efferent arterioles is 25 mm
Hg and 35 mm Hg, respectively. The increase in oncotic pressure between the
afferent and efferent arterioles reflects the effects of filtration. (449)
12. The average normal rate of glomerular filtration is 125 mL/min. (449)
13. About 90% of the fluids that have been filtered by the glomerulus into
Bowman’s capsule are reabsorbed from renal tubules and ultimately returned
to the circulation. (449)
14. The GFR is decreased during times of decreased renal blood flow or decreased mean
arterial blood pressure. (449)
15. The renal clearance of drugs or their metabolites depends on three things:
glomerular filtration (GFR and protein binding), active secretion by the renal
tubules, and passive reabsorption (favors nonionized compounds) by the
tubules. (450)
16. Tests that are commonly used for the preoperative evaluation of renal function
include a serum creatinine level, a BUN level, creatinine clearance, and urine protein
levels. Tests that are commonly used for the preoperative evaluation of renal
tubular function include the urine specific gravity, urine osmolarity, and urine
sodium excretion. Most tests of renal function are not very sensitive. (450-451)
17. A significant degree of renal disease can exist before it is reflected in renal function
tests. It is estimated that more than a 50% decrease in renal function may exist
before these tests become abnormal. (450-451)
18. The normal BUN level in serum varies among individuals, typically ranging between
10 and 20 mg/dL. Urea is freely filtered by the glomerulus of the kidney, but its
reabsorption from the tubules varies greatly. Although the BUN varies with changes
in GFR, it is influenced by multiple other factors that decrease its utility as a measure
of the GFR and of renal function. (450-452)
19. Factors that may influence the BUN level include dietary protein intake,
gastrointestinal bleeding, decreased urinary flow, hepatic function, and increased
catabolism as during trauma, sepsis, or febrile illness. (451)
20. The BUN concentration increases in dehydrated states as a result of the
corresponding decrease in urinary flow through renal tubules. During low urinary
flow rates, a greater fraction of the urea is reabsorbed by the kidney. During
low urinary flow rates the serum creatinine level remains normal, such that the
ratio of serum BUN to creatinine is increased during times of low urinary flow
associated with hypovolemia. (451)
Renal, Liver, and Biliary Tract Disease
301
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
21. Blood urea nitrogen concentrations higher than 50 mg/dL are almost always
a reflection of decreased GFR. (451)
22. Serum creatinine is a product of skeletal muscle protein catabolism. Serum
creatinine levels are dependent on a patient’s total body water, creatinine
generation rate, and creatinine excretion rate. The generation of creatinine is
relatively constant within an individual, making its release into the circulation
relatively constant as well. Serum creatinine levels are believed to be reliable
indicators of the GFR, because its rate of clearance from the circulation is directly
dependent on the GFR. (451)
23. Elderly patients may have a normal creatinine level despite a decreased GFR
secondary to the decrease in muscle mass that commonly accompanies aging.
For this reason, even mild increases in the serum creatinine level of elderly patients
may be an indication of significant renal dysfunction. (451)
24. Normal serum creatinine levels may not accurately reflect the GFR in patients with
chronic renal failure for two reasons. First, patients with chronic renal failure
may have decreased skeletal muscle mass, resulting in a decrease in creatinine
production. Second, the excretion of creatinine occurs via nonrenal means in these
patients. (451)
25. The creatinine clearance is a measurement of the excretion of creatinine into the
urine after being filtered by the glomerulus. (451-452)
26. The creatinine clearance is a more reliable measurement of GFR than serum
creatinine levels because the clearance does not depend on corrections for age or the
presence of a steady state. A disadvantage of creatinine clearance measurements
is the requirement of accurate, timed urine collections. (451-452)
27. Intermittent proteinuria occurs in healthy individuals after standing for long
periods of time and after strenuous exercise. Proteinuria may also occur during
febrile states and congestive heart failure. (452)
28. Thiazide diuretics cause diuresis by inhibition of reabsorption of sodium and
chloride ions from the early distal renal tubules. Spironolactone, an aldosterone
antagonist, blocks the renal tubular effects of aldosterone. Spironolactone is a
potassium-sparing diuretic. Loop diuretics inhibit the reabsorption of sodium and
chloride, and augment the secretion of potassium primarily in the loop of Henle.
Osmotic diuretics, such as mannitol, produce diureses by being filtered at the
glomeruli but not reabsorbed by the renal tubules. The excess osmolarity of the renal
tubular fluid leads to excretion of water. (452)
29. Dopamine dilates renal arterioles by its agonist action at the DA-1 receptor and
causes adrenergic stimulation leading to an increase in renal blood flow and GFR.
Dopamine therapy when used to augment urine output has not been shown to alter
the course of renal failure. Dopamine also potentially leads to tachydysrhythmias,
pulmonary shunting, and tissue ischemia. Fenoldopam is a dopamine analog
which also possesses DA-1 agonist activity, but lacks the adrenergic activity of
dopamine. (453)
30. There are several systemic changes that accompany end-stage renal disease (ESRD).
Cardiovascular disease is the predominant cause of death in patients with ESRD.
Systemic hypertension is very common and can be severe and refractory to therapy.
Acute MI, cardiac arrest/dysfunction and cardiomyopathy account for more than
50% of deaths in patients maintained on dialysis. Diabetes mellitus frequently
presents concomitantly with ESRD. Electrolyte abnormalities also occur commonly
as patients develop difficulty excreting their dietary fluid and electrolyte loads.
A normochromic normocytic anemia is frequently present because of decreased
erythropoiesis. Uremia-induced platelet dysfunction can lead to clinical
coagulopathy. (453)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
302
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
31. There are several considerations for the anesthetic management of patients with
ESRD. These patients may benefit from extensive monitoring, such as direct arterial
blood pressure monitoring and perhaps central venous pressure monitoring
depending on the surgical case, comorbidities, and other factors. Hypotension
can commonly occur in patients with ESRD, particularly after hemodialysis.
Patients with arteriovenous fistulas should have the presence of the thrill monitored
during positioning and intraoperatively. Patients with gastroparesis should be
considered at increased risk for the aspiration of gastric contents. Electrolytes,
especially potassium, should be evaluated preoperatively and intraoperatively if
necessary. Finally, drugs or their metabolites that are renally excreted should be
administered judiciously or avoided if possible. (453-454)
32. Succinylcholine is not contraindicated in patients with ESRD. The increase in serum
potassium after a large dose of succinylcholine is approximately 0.6 mEq/L for
patients both with and without ESRD. This increase can be tolerated without
imposing a significant cardiac risk, even in the presence of an initial serum
potassium concentration higher than 5 mEq/L. (454)
33. Prerenal oliguria is indicative of a decrease in renal blood flow, the most common
causes of which include a decrease in the intravascular fluid volume and a decrease
in the cardiac output. Another cause may be surgical compression of the renal
arteries leading to obstructed blood flow to the kidneys, either directly through
clamping or inadvertently through retraction or manual traction. Whatever the
cause, the duration of oliguria should be minimized to decrease the risk of acute
renal failure. (454, Table 28–6)
34. The treatment of prerenal causes of oliguria is dependent on whether the cause is
secondary to a decrease in intravascular fluid volume or in cardiac output. A
crystalloid fluid bolus would result in a brisk diuresis if in fact the cause was
hypovolemia. A lack of response to the fluid bolus would indicate that perhaps the
cause of the oliguria is a decrease in cardiac output or is a result of the secretion of
antidiuretic hormone in response to surgical stress. A small dose of furosemide,
0.1 mg/kg intravenously, will lead to diuresis if the cause of the oliguria is
antidiuretic hormone secretion. If there is no response to the intravenous
administration of furosemide, a determination should be made as to whether the
patient remains hypovolemic or there is a decrease in cardiac output. If the patient
is at risk for a decrease in cardiac output, it may be worthwhile to monitor
cardiac filling pressures to guide intravascular fluid replacement. If the cardiac
filling pressures is high, a cause for the decrease in cardiac output should be
sought. (454-455)
35. Acute tubular necrosis, glomerulonephritis, and acute interstitial nephritis are
intrinsic renal causes of oliguria. (454, 455, Table 28-6)
36. Oliguria due to acute tubular necrosis is characterized by urine that is typically
dilute and contains excessive sodium. (454, 455, Table 28-6)
37. Causes of postrenal oliguria include ureteral obstruction, bladder outlet obstruction,
and obstruction or kinking of the Foley catheter. Postrenal causes of oliguria
are frequently reversible. (455)
LIVER AND BILIARY
TRACT DISEASE
38. Physiologic functions of the liver include protein synthesis, drug metabolism, fat
metabolism, hormone metabolism, bilirubin formation and excretion, and
glucose homeostasis. (455)
39. The liver receives its blood supply via the portal vein (70%) and hepatic artery
(30%). Approximately 25% of the cardiac output goes to the liver. While the portal
vein supplies 70% of hepatic blood supply, it only contributes 50% of the liver’s
oxygen supply. The remaining 50% of the liver’s oxygen supply comes from
the hepatic artery. (455)
Renal, Liver, and Biliary Tract Disease
303
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
40. Total hepatic blood flow is directly proportional to the perfusion pressure across the
liver and is inversely proportional to splanchnic vascular resistance. There are many
determinants of hepatic blood flow. Determinants intrinsic to the liver include
hepatic autoregulation, metabolic control, and the hepatic arterial buffer response.
Determinants extrinsic to the liver include sympathetic nervous system activity,
surgical stimulation, and humoral factors. (455)
41. Hepatic autoregulation refers to the ability of the hepatic artery to alter its resistance
in response to changes in arterial pressure to maintain hepatic artery blood flow.
For example, hepatic artery resistance may decrease to maintain perfusion to
the liver when portal vein flow is reduced. Of note, there does not appear to be
autoregulation of the portal venous system. Instead portal venous blood flow
parallels cardiac output. Surgery and anesthesia impair hepatic autoregulation
and typically result in reduced hepatic perfusion. (455)
42. The hepatic arterial buffer response refers to the capacity of the liver to increase or
decrease hepatic artery blood flow in response to decreases or increases in portal
venous flow. For example, when portal venous flow decreases, the resistance of
the hepatic artery decreases and hepatic artery blood flow increases. This reciprocal
relationship allows for the hepatic oxygen supply and total hepatic blood flow
to be maintained despite alterations in portal venous flow. This compensatory
mechanism does not completely compensate for changes in portal venous flow,
however. In addition, the hepatic arterial buffer response can be disrupted by several
factors, including neural, humoral, and metabolic changes. This hepatic response
is also disrupted by hepatic cirrhosis and volatile anesthetics. (455)
43. Innervation of the liver is by both the parasympathetic nervous system and
the sympathetic nervous system. Generalized sympathetic nervous system
stimulation, as can occur with arterial hypoxemia or hypercarbia, pain or surgical
stress, results in an increase in the splanchnic vascular resistance. The increase
in splanchnic vascular resistance yields a decrease in liver blood flow and blood
volume. (455)
44. Positive pressure ventilation of the lungs decreases hepatic blood flow through
its increase in hepatic venous pressure. Hepatic blood flow is decreased further
by the application of positive end-expiratory pressure through the same
mechanism. (455)
45. Congestive heart failure, particularly right-sided heart failure, decreases hepatic
blood flow through its increase in hepatic venous pressure. (455)
46. Decreases in cardiac output or myocardial contractility result in decreases in hepatic
blood flow. (455)
47. Decreases in arterial blood pressure result in decreases in hepatic blood flow. (455)
48. The liver stores glucose as glycogen in the hepatocytes. (456)
49. Glucose homeostasis is maintained during times of starvation by the breakdown
of the glycogen to glucose in the hepatocytes. Glucose is then released into the
circulation. The glycogen stores of the liver correspond to 24 to 48 hours of glucose
supply during times of starvation. Prolonged starvation that results in the
depletion of the glycogen stores requires that the liver convert lactate, glycerol, and
amino acids to glucose. This is termed gluconeogenesis. (456)
50. Patients with cirrhosis may be more likely to develop hypoglycemia in the
perioperative period as gluconeogenesis may be impaired. (456)
51. A normal liver synthesizes most of the proteins responsible for the coagulation of
blood. A diseased liver may therefore manifest as coagulopathy in the patient. (456)
52. Bleeding can be prevented with only 20% to 30% of normal levels of clotting
factors, so that abnormal blood coagulation manifests only after significant liver
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
304
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
disease. The coagulation status of a patient can be evaluated preoperatively by
checking the patient’s prothrombin time, partial thromboplastin time, and bleeding
time. Indeed, the prothrombin time is frequently used as an evaluation of the
synthetic function of the liver. (456)
53. Vitamin K plays an important role in the catalysis of some of the procoagulant
proteins to produce factors II, VII, IX, and X. (456)
54. The liver facilitates the renal excretion of lipid soluble drugs by converting
the drugs to more water soluble forms via mechanisms such as conjugation. (456)
55. Chronic drug therapy can inhibit anesthetic drug metabolism by inhibiting hepatic
enzymes. Conversely, they can also enhance drug metabolism by inducing
hepatic enzymes (particularly cytochrome P isoforms). (456)
56. Chronic liver disease may interfere with the metabolism of drugs because of the
decreased number of enzyme-containing hepatocytes or the decreased hepatic
blood flow that typically accompanies cirrhosis of the liver. (456)
57. Accelerated drug metabolism may be noted after the administration of certain
drugs such as phenytoin. It is believed that exposure of the microsomal
enzymes to these drugs causes an up-regulation, or induction, of their own
synthesis. (456)
58. The conjugation of bilirubin with glucuronic acid takes place in the liver through
the action of glucuronyl transferase. The conjugation of bilirubin allows it to
become water soluble for renal excretion. Impairment of this function of the liver,
as with liver disease, can lead to increased serum levels of unconjugated bilirubin.
The liver is also responsible for the excretion of conjugated bilirubin into bile.
This explains the elevated serum levels of conjugated bilirubin in the presence of
liver disease. (456)
59. All proteins are synthesized in hepatocytes except for gamma globulins and factor
VIII. (456)
60. The urea cycle is used by hepatocytes to convert the end products of amino acid
degradation, such as ammonia and other nitrogenous waste products, to urea
which is readily excreted by the kidneys. (456)
61. End-stage liver disease (ESLD) is associated with portopulmonary hypertension,
hepatopulmonary syndrome (shunting due to impairment of hypoxic pulmonary
vasoconstriction), atelectasis, pleural effusions, hepatic encephalopathy,
impaired drug binding, coagulopathy, ascites, and renal dysfunction (due to
various factors including the hepatorenal syndrome). (457)
62. Severe liver disease that has advanced to cirrhosis is associated with a
hyperdynamic circulation. Patients typically have normal to low systemic blood
pressure, increased cardiac output and decreased systemic vascular resistance due to
vasodilation and shunting. (457)
63. Portal hypertension, as seen in ESLD, is the high resistance of blood flow through
the liver. This results in an accumulation of blood in the vascular beds that normally
drain to the liver, and these vessels become dilated and hypertrophy. Vessels
draining the esophagus, stomach, spleen, and intestines are affected, resulting in
varices. (457)
64. Some of the symptoms of portal hypertension include anorexia, nausea, ascites,
esophageal varices, spider nevi, and hepatic encephalopathy. (457)
65. Complications that can occur as a result of the portal hypertension seen in
ELSD include increased susceptibility to infection, renal failure, mental status
changes, and massive hemorrhage through the rupture of the engorged dilated
submucosal veins. Gastroesophageal varices are at the greatest risk of rupture. (457)
Renal, Liver, and Biliary Tract Disease
305
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
66. Pulmonary complications that can be seen in ESLD include pulmonary
arteriovenous communications that are not ventilated, the impairment of hypoxic
pulmonary vasoconstriction, atelectasis, and restrictive pulmonary disease due
to ascites and pleural effusions. In less than 5% of patients with ESLD
portopulmonary hypertension develops, whose cause is not well established. (457)
67. Patients with hepatic cirrhosis may have arterial hypoxemia for several
reasons. Often, patients with hepatic cirrhosis have right-to-left pulmonary
shunting in response to the portal vein hypertension. Patients with ascites
and hepatomegaly may also have impairment of diaphragmatic excursion due
to the weight of the abdominal contents, particularly in the supine position.
In patients with significant ascites, pleural effusions may impair lung expansion.
In the early stages of ESLD, supplemental oxygen may improve arterial
hypoxemia, but as the disease progresses oxygen therapy may not be
effective. (457)
68. The cause of hepatic encephalopathy seen in patients with ESLD is multifactorial.
Hepatic encephalopathy is in part due to increased serum concentrations of
chemicals normally cleared by the liver, especially ammonia. Other factors include
disruption of the blood–brain barrier, increased central nervous system inhibitory
neurotransmission, and altered cerebral energy metabolism. (457)
69. Therapy for hepatic encephalopathy revolves around reducing the production
and absorption of ammonia. Neomycin is used to reduce ammonia production
by urease-producing bacteria and lactulose is administered to reduce ammonia
absorption. Some symptoms of hepatic encephalopathy are reversible with
flumazenil therapy. These therapies are not completely effective because multiple
other etiologic factors are associated with hepatic encephalopathy. It is also
important to rule out other causes of altered mental status in the patient with
ESLD. Other causes may include intracranial bleeding, hypoglycemia, or a postictal
state. (457)
70. The liver synthesizes albumin, which binds drugs in the plasma. The binding of
drugs to albumin decreases the free, or pharmacologically active, portion of the
drug. When the liver is diseased the synthesis of albumin becomes impaired,
decreasing the albumin available in the plasma for binding. As a result there is
an increased concentration of free, unbound drug in the plasma. Patients
with liver disease may manifest a more pronounced drug effect than patients
with normal liver function after an intravenous injection of a specific drug
dose. Increased drug effect secondary to a decrease in protein binding is more
likely to be seen when the serum albumin concentration is less than 2.5 g/dL.
(456-457)
71. Ascites affects 50% of patients with hepatic cirrhosis. Ascites is thought to
accumulate secondary to a decrease in plasma oncotic pressure, a corresponding
increase in the hydrostatic pressure in the hepatic sinusoids, and an increase in
sodium retention by the kidneys due to increased circulating levels of antidiuretic
hormone. (457)
72. Complications associated with ascites include marked abdominal distention that
can lead to atelectasis and restrictive pulmonary disease, spontaneous bacterial
peritonitis, and circulatory instability due to compression of the inferior vena cava
and right atrium. (457)
73. The treatment for ascites is initially fluid restriction, reduced sodium intake, and
diuretic therapy. In severe cases abdominal paracentesis temporarily effectively
reduces abdominal distention and restores hemodynamic stability. (457)
74. Patients with hepatic cirrhosis tend to have a decrease in arterial blood volume,
and consequently a decrease in renal blood flow and the GFR. Because of this
patientswithhepaticcirrhosisareatriskofdevelopinghepatorenalsyndrome,aserious
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
306
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
complication that is often fatal. The syndrome is characterized by intravascular
fluid depletion, intrarenal vasoconstriction, worsening hyponatremia, hypotension,
and oliguria. (457-458)
75. Two types of hepatorenal syndrome have been described. Type 1 hepatorenal
syndrome presents as rapidly progressing prerenal failure. It is associated with
a poor prognosis in the absence of therapeutic intervention. Type 2 hepatorenal
syndrome presents with a milder degree of renal dysfunction. Treatment with
octreotide, glucagon, and midodrine have shown promise at reversing type 1
hepatorenal syndrome. (457-458)
76. In the absence of surgical stimulation, regional and inhaled anesthetics decrease
hepatic blood flow by 20% to 30%. Changes in hepatic blood flow in response to
regional and inhaled anesthetics are believed to result from decreases in cardiac
output, mean arterial pressure, or both. Volatile anesthetics may also decrease
hepatic blood flow by impairing intrinsic hepatic mechanisms to maintain hepatic
blood flow to varying degrees. (458)
77. There is some evidence to suggest that isoflurane inhibits hepatic autoregulation
less than other inhaled anesthetics. (458)
78. There are two different forms of hepatotoxicity that can result from the
administration of halothane. Halothane hepatitis typically refers to the more
severe hepatotoxicity that can result in hepatic necrosis and death. Halothane
hepatitis is extremely rare. Adult patients are more likely to develop halothane
hepatitis than pediatric patients. Patients most likely to be affected are middle-
aged, obese women who have had repeated administration of halothane
anesthesia. (458)
79. Although the exact cause of halothane hepatitis is unclear, it is believed to be due to
an immunologic response to a toxic metabolite of halothane. (458)
80. The diagnosis of halothane hepatitis is made after other causes of hepatitis
have been excluded. Its rare incidence and the disappearance of halothane in
modern clinical practice make the likelihood of halothane hepatitis extremely
unlikely. (458)
81. The administration of all volatile anesthetics can result in a mild, self-limited form
of hepatotoxicity. It can be seen in up to 20% of patients, but is associated with
minimal sequelae. (458)
82. Commonly ordered liver function tests include serum bilirubin, aminotransferase
enzymes, alkaline phosphatase, albumin, and the prothrombin time. Liver tests
are very nonspecific, and significant liver dysfunction must occur before it is
reflected in the majority of tests. Despite this, liver function tests have some utility
in the perioperative period. Liver function tests may be useful preoperatively in
detecting the presence of liver disease. Perioperatively, liver dysfunction may be
classified as prehepatic, intrahepatic, or posthepatic through the evaluation of the
results of the various liver function tests. (458-459, Table 28-7)
83. Preoperative findings in patients with liver disease that are associated with
increased postoperative morbidity include marked ascites, markedly elevated
prothrombin time and serum bilirubin level, markedly decreased serum albumin
level, and encephalopathy. (459, Table 28–8)
84. Intraoperative monitoring for patients with hepatic cirrhosis should be guided by
the surgical procedure. In general, monitoring of the arterial blood pressure
with an intra-arterial catheter may be useful. This allows for monitoring of the
arterial blood gases, pH, coagulation status, and glucose as well as the blood
pressure. In addition, the urine output should be closely monitored due to the risk of
postoperative renal dysfunction that can occur in patients with severe liver
Renal, Liver, and Biliary Tract Disease
307
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
disease. Central venous pressure or pulmonary artery catheter monitoring might be
useful in the fluid management of patients with cardiomyopathy and congestive
heart failure. The intravascular fluid balance of patients with liver disease and
especially ascites can be difficult to manage. Finally, the use of an intraoperative
transesophageal echocardiogram may be useful to monitor myocardial function and
intravascular fluid status, but in patients with esophageal varices there exists
a risk of bleeding with its insertion. (458-459)
85. The intraoperative maintenance of the arterial blood pressure is particularly
important in patients with hepatic cirrhosis because these patients are dependent on
hepatic arterial blood flow to provide oxygen to the hepatocytes. In the presence
of portal hypertension, hepatic arterial blood flow is typically reduced from
normal levels. The addition of anesthetics and the surgical procedure can exacerbate
this reduction in hepatic blood flow and may contribute to postoperative liver
dysfunction. (459)
86. Liver function tests are most likely to become abnormal secondary to an
inadequate supply of oxygen to the hepatocytes intraoperatively. This is the
most likely mechanism for mild, self-limited postoperative liver dysfunction.
Abnormal postoperative liver function tests are most likely to occur in
patients with preexisting liver disease whose hepatic oxygenation was marginal
preoperatively or after surgery in which the operative site was in close proximity
to the liver. (458)
87. The most likely causes of postoperative liver dysfunction include drugs, arterial
hypoxemia, sepsis, congestive heart failure, cirrhosis, and a history of preexisting
hepatic viruses. (457-58)
88. Elevated aminotransferase enzymes, decreased albumin, and a prolonged
prothrombin time are all indicative of an intrahepatic cause of liver
dysfunction. These alterations are reflective of direct hepatocellular damage.
(460, Table 28-9)
89. Operations on the liver or biliary tract, multiple blood transfusions, resorption
of surgical hematoma, antibiotics and other perioperative drugs and metabolic and
infectious causes can all lead to postoperative jaundice. Rarely, inhaled anesthetic
agents may be implicated. (459-460, Table 28-9)
90. Delirium tremens is a severe withdrawal syndrome in patients with a history of
chronic alcohol abuse. The onset of delirium tremens is typically 48 to 72 hours after
cessation of the ingestion of alcohol. Delirium tremens presents clinically as
tremulousness, hallucinations, agitation, confusion, disorientation, and increased
activity of the sympathetic nervous system. Increased activity of the sympathetic
nervous system in these patients is manifest as diaphoresis, fever, tachycardia,
and hypertension. In severe cases the syndrome may progress to seizures and
death. (460)
91. The treatment of delirium tremens is primarily with the administration of central
nervous system depressants, usually a benzodiazepine. If necessary, a b-adrenergic
antagonist may be administered to offset sympathetic nervous system
hyperactivity. The trachea may be intubated if indicated for airway protection.
Other treatment is supportive as necessary, including hydration and the correction
of electrolyte disorders. (460)
92. The mortality associated with delirium tremens can be as high as 10%. The usual
cause of death in these patients is cardiac dysrhythmias or seizures. (460)
93. Approximately 20% of women and 10% of men aged 55 to 65 years are believed to
have gallstones. Elevated serum bilirubin and/or alkaline phosphatase levels in
these patients imply the presence of a stone in the common bile duct causing
obstruction to the flow of bile. (460)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
308
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
94. Opioids such as morphine, meperidine, and fentanyl may produce spasm in the
sphincter of Oddi. This increases the pressure in the common bile duct in a
dose-dependent manner and may be painful to an awake patient. The
administration of these medicines intraoperatively could hinder the passage of
contrast medium for exploration of the common bile duct. In clinical practice,
however, the administration of opioids to these patients rarely results in difficulty
with intraoperative cholangiograms. (460)
95. Intraoperative spasm of the sphincter of Oddi can be treated with naloxone,
glucagons, or nitroglycerin. (461)
96. Anesthetic considerations for patients undergoing laparoscopic procedures are
multiple. Included are the insufflation of the abdomen with carbon dioxide and the
possible impairment of ventilation of the lungs in the presence of increased
ventilatory requirements, the probable placement of the patient in the
Trendelenburg position, the risk of puncture of bowel or vessels, and the potential
for nitrous oxide to expand bowel gas. (460-461)
Renal, Liver, and Biliary Tract Disease
309
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
Chapter
26 NUTRITIONAL AND
GASTROINTESTINAL
DISEASE
Steve Hyman, William R. Furman
OBESITY
1. What is a desired body mass index (BMI)? What BMI defines morbid obesity? What
BMI defines “super obese”? What BMI defines “super-super obese”?
2. What organ systems can be affected by obesity?
3. What is the metabolic syndrome and what is its significance?
4. How is the diagnosis of metabolic syndrome made?
5. What are the contributory factors to morbid obesity?
6. What are four main considerations when anesthetizing a morbidly obese patient?
7. What were some of the complications with the older weight loss operations such
as jejunoileal bypass?
8. What are three significant and beneficial effects of modern gastric bypass?
MALNUTRITION
9. What is the definition of malnutrition? Why might malnutrition be present in
surgical patients?
10. Is enteral or intravenous nutrition preferable for most patients who require
supplemental feedings? Why?
11. What is refeeding syndrome? What is the pathophysiology of refeeding syndrome?
What are the signs of refeeding syndrome?
12. What are four perioperative considerations for the malnourished patient? What are
the considerations for the critically ill enterally fed patient?
INFLAMMATORY
BOWEL DISEASE
13. What is the presumed pathophysiology of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD)? What
are some of the factors that are associated with IBD?
14. What are the major differences between ulcerative colitis and Crohn’s disease?
15. What is the preferred anesthetic technique for a patient with IBD?
16. How do drugs used in the treatment of IBD interact with anesthetic drugs?
GASTROESOPHAGEAL
REFLUX DISEASE
17. What is the definition of gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD)?
18. What is the pathophysiology of GERD?
19. What are the signs and symptoms of GERD?
20. What is the risk of pulmonary aspiration on induction of anesthesia?
21. Does the rapid sequence induction (RSI) with cricoid pressure (Sellick maneuver)
prevent pulmonary aspiration? Why or why not?
22. What is the mechanism of development of subcutaneous emphysema,
pneumomediastinum, or pneumoperitoneum after a Nissen fundoplication?
310
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
DIABETES MELLITUS
23. What is the definition of diabetes? What types of complications are associated with
long-term poorly controlled diabetes?
24. What is autonomic neuropathy? What perioperative risks are associated with
autonomic neuropathy?
25. Why are the historical classifications of insulin-dependent and noninsulin-
dependent diabetes inferior to type 1 and type 2 diabetes?
26. What is the major treatment goal in both types of diabetes?
27. What are the four categories of oral hypoglycemic agents?
28. What is hemoglobin A1C (glycosylated hemoglobin)? What is its significance in the
management of diabetes?
29. What is the recommended management of preoperative diabetes medicines?
30. What blood glucose levels should be maintained perioperatively? What are some
potential complications of severe perioperative hyperglycemia?
31. At what level of preoperative glucose should an operation be postponed?
HYPERTHYROIDISM
(THYROTOXICOSIS)
AND THYROID
STORM
32. What is the definition of hyperthyroidism?
33. What are some common causes of hyperthyroidism?
34. What is Graves’s disease?
35. What are the signs and symptoms of hyperthyroidism?
36. What is the difference between hyperthyroidism and thyroid storm?
37. What are the signs and symptoms of thyroid storm?
38. What conditions may cause a thyrotoxic patient to develop thyroid storm?
39. What medications are used in the management of thyroid storm?
40. What is the Wolfe-Chaikoff effect?
41. What are the anesthetic considerations for a patient with hyperthyroidism?
42. How should perioperative thyroid storm be managed?
HYPOTHYROIDISM
43. What is the definition of hypothyroidism?
44. What are the causes of hypothyroidism?
45. What are the signs and symptoms of hypothyroidism?
46. What is the difference between primary and secondary hypothyroidism?
47. What are the airway considerations (both preoperative and postoperative) in a
patient undergoing thyroid surgery?
48. Is it necessary to delay surgery in hypothyroid patients and achieve a euthyroid state
before operating?
49. What is intraoperative laryngeal nerve monitoring and what is its impact on the
anesthetic plan?
PHEOCHROMO-
CYTOMA AND
PARAGANGLIOMA
50. What is the embryologic cell of origin of the pheochromocytoma and what is the
difference between it and a paraganglioma?
51. What hormones are produced by these tumors and what are their common signs
and symptoms?
52. How common are pheochromocytomas and paragangliomas tumors?
53. How should perioperative hypertension and tachycardia associated with
pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma be managed?
MULTIPLE
ENDOCRINE
NEOPLASIA AND
NEUROENDOCRINE
TUMORS
54. What is the MEN-1 (multiple endocrine neoplasia-1) syndrome? What is its
inheritance pattern?
55. What is the MEN-2 (multiple endocrine neoplasia-2) syndrome? What is its
inheritance pattern?
56. What specific tumors are commonly found in patients with MEN-1?
57. What are the subtypes of MEN-2?
58. What are the anesthetic implications of MEN-1 and MEN-2?
59. What are carcinoid and neuroendocrine tumors and what hormones do they produce?
311
Nutritional and Gastrointestinal Disease
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
60. Why are midgut carcinoid tumors often asymptomatic? When do they become
symptomatic?
61. What is carcinoid syndrome? What is the usual treatment for a carcinoid crisis?
62. What are the perioperative implications of carcinoid and neuroendocrine tumors?
ADRENAL
INSUFFICIENCY
AND STEROID
REPLACEMENT
63. What are the principal hormones of the adrenal cortex?
64. What is the mechanism by which stress stimulates the release of cortisol?
65. What is the function of cortisol in the body?
66. What is Addison’s syndrome? What are the symptoms?
67. What is the difference between primary and secondary (or tertiary) adrenocortical
insufficiency?
68. What are the frequent causes of primary adrenocortical insufficiency?
69. What are the frequent causes of secondary or tertiary adrenocortical insufficiency?
70. What is addisonian crisis (acute adrenal failure)? What are its symptoms and causes?
71. What are the common causes of pituitary apoplexy? What are the signs, symptoms,
and treatment of pituitary apoplexy?
72. What is the effect of etomidate on adrenal function?
73. What is the general approach to perioperative steroid replacement in the patient
who has steroid-induced adrenal insufficiency?
74. What is critical illness-related corticosteroid insufficiency (CIRCI)?
CUSHING’S
SYNDROME
75. What is Cushing’s syndrome? What are the signs and symptoms of Cushing’s
syndrome and how is it diagnosed?
76. What is the difference between primary and secondary (or tertiary) Cushing’s
syndrome?
77. What is the difference between Cushing’s syndrome and Cushing’s disease?
78. What are the common causes of secondary Cushing’s syndrome?
79. What are the anesthetic considerations in a patient with Cushing’s syndrome?
ANSWERS*
OBESITY
1. A desirable BMI is generally considered to be 18 to 25. Morbid obesity is a BMI of
40 or more. Super obese is a BMI of 50 or more and super-super obese is a BMI
of 60 or more. (463)
2. Morbid obesity can affect virtually any organ system of the body. Commonly
affected systems are cardiovascular (hypertension, stroke, right heart failure),
endocrine (reproductive hormonal imbalances, impaired fertility, diabetes), and
gastrointestinal (hiatal hernias and gastroesophageal reflux from increased
intraabdominal pressure). Involvement of the pulmonary system can include low
residual volumes, rapid desaturation, restrictive lung disease, and obstructive sleep
apnea. Skeletal problems may include back pain and osteoarthritis, particularly
of the knees. Some malignancies (colon and breast) are associated with obesity
as are some psychological disorders such as depression. (463)
3. Metabolic syndrome is a term that applies to the combined complications of obesity.
There are six components of the metabolic syndrome: abdominal obesity,
atherogenic dyslipidemia, elevated blood pressure, insulin resistance (glucose
intolerance), a proinflammatory state, and a prothrombotic state. Diagnosis and
*Numbers in parentheses: numbers refer to pages, figures, or tables in Miller RD, Pardo MC: Basics of Anesthesia,
6th ed. Philadelphia, Elsevier Saunders, 2011.
312
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
treatment is important because it alone predicts approximately 25% of all
new-onset cardiovascular disease. (463-464)
4. Diagnosis of metabolic syndrome is made by the presence of three out of five of the
following: abdominal obesity, elevated triglycerides, low HDL, elevated blood
pressure, elevated fasting glucose. (463)
5. The causes of obesity are multifactorial. They include genetic, environmental,
metabolic, and psychosocial factors. While caloric consumption is important, the
urge to eat (or overeat) can be modulated by hormones. Fasting releases several
orexigenic (appetite-stimulating) hormones and can cause inflammation. (464)
6. Four major considerations in the anesthetic management of the morbidly obese
patient include the risk of aspiration of gastric contents, securing the airway, the
logistics of caring for a large patient, and emergence technique.
In the 1970s, it was suggested that fasted obese patients might have larger than
normal gastric volumes with a lower than normal pH. This assertion was not
supported with strong scientific evidence. More recent studies appear to show that
nondiabetic obese patients actually may have less volume at a higher pH than
do lean nondiabetic patients.
The most basic tasks may be difficult in the obese patient. Peripheral intravenous
line placement may be difficult and central venous catheterization may be required.
Blood pressure monitoring may be difficult because of the conical shape of the
upper arm. Most blood pressure cuffs are designed for a more cylindrical profile and
may not remain in position or function optimally on a cone-shaped arm.
Practical options include a cuff on the forearm or calf, or an intraarterial catheter.
Positioning is difficult because obese patients may be wider than the horizontal
surface of the operating table. Also, the table must be able to support the patient’s
weight and move into required positions for surgical access. Extreme positions of
tilt demand that the patient be well secured and that potential pressure points be
addressed.
Obesity is reported to increase the risk of a difficult laryngeal intubation. One
recent study found the intubation difficulty score to be higher in obese patients, but
time to intubation and SpO2 levels to be the same as in lean patients. However,
there is evidence that difficult intubation correlates better with male gender and
a higher Mallampati airway evaluation score, as in the general population.
During intubation, diminished functional residual capacity may lead to rapid
desaturation. A reverse Trendelenburg position (head up) can reduce atelectasis
in dependent lung areas and can help move chest, and breast tissue caudally,
allowing easier access to the mouth for intubation.
No induction or maintenance drug has a distinct advantage in the obese patient.
Emergence can be slow because of a reduced rate of elimination of volatile
anesthetic agents from adipose tissues. (464)
7. Unlike current operations that restrict the gastrointestinal tract, the jejunoileal
bypass developed in 1954, was a malabsorptive operation developed for the
treatment of hyperlipidemia, atherosclerosis, and obesity. It was abandoned by the
1980s because it causes unacceptable complications, including uveitis, kidney
dysfunction, intestinal bacterial overgrowth, and liver damage. (464)
8. Gastric bypass patients generally have improvements in quality of life and
comorbidities. There is improvement in hypertension, diabetes, and/or obstructive
sleep apnea. Several orexigenic (appetite stimulating) hormones are diminished by
bariatric surgery. Ghrelin secretion by the gastric fundus and proximal small intestine
is increased after nonsurgical weight loss but is unchanged or decreased after bariatric
surgical procedures. Other intestinal hormones that regulate appetite and glucose
metabolism also are affected favorably by surgery. These include glucagon-like
peptide-1, glucose-dependent insulinotropic peptide, and peptide YY. (464)
313
Nutritional and Gastrointestinal Disease
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
MALNUTRITION
9. Malnutrition may be present when there is weight loss of 10% to 20% over a short
time, when weight is less than 90% of ideal body weight, or when BMI is less
than 18.5. Healthy patients may quickly become malnourished after an accident or
acute illness and critically ill patients develop malnutrition if they are not fed.
Malnutrition can occur quickly when caloric requirements exceed intake due to
decreased intake, impaired absorption, or an increased metabolic rate. (464-465)
10. Enteral nutrition is the preferred method of feeding because it is believed to
maintain the absorptive gastrointestinal villi and reduce transmucosal bacterial
transfer into the blood stream. It results in improved patient outcomes, less
infection, less ventilator days, and less intensive care unit days. Long-term feeding
usually requires a gastrostomy or jejunostomy. Postpyloric (jejunal) placement
is frequently preferred as a means to limit regurgitation and the risk of aspiration,
although the risk of aspiration with gastric feeding tubes is low. In patients who
have pancreatitis, jejunal placement is favored in order to avoid stimulation
of pancreatic enzyme secretion. In contrast, intravenous feeding (total parental
nutrition or TPN) is preferred for patients who do not have a functioning
gastrointestinal tract. TPN is considered acceptable for short-term feedings. Risks
of long-term TPN include central venous catheter sepsis, thrombosis,
hyperglycemia, iatrogenic hypoglycemia, and fatty liver. (465)
11. Refeeding syndrome is caused by rapid, acute nutritional replacement of a
malnourished patient. It is characterized by increased ATP production, a significant
fall in plasma phosphate, respiratory failure, and cardiac failure. Metabolic rate is
increased with a significant rise in carbon dioxide (CO2) production and respiratory
acidosis. The syndrome may be prevented by slowly increasing the nutritional
intake toward caloric goals. (465)
12. Perioperative considerations for the malnourished patient include muscle weakness,
immunocompromise, preoperative fasting, and perioperative glucose monitoring.
Muscle weakness may lead to respiratory failure and immunocompromise may
predispose patients to infection. Preoperative fasting is often an issue in enterally
fed critically ill patients, particularly burn and trauma patients. One must weigh
the risk of aspiration on induction against the benefit of keeping nutrition at
maintenance levels. In the absence of definitive studies, expert opinion generally
supports efforts to continue nutrition as much as possible. However, preliminary
data supports the safety of a short fast (45 minutes) when the feeding tube is located
beyond the ligament of Treitz. Perioperative glucose monitoring is necessary in
patients receiving TPN, because insulin is typically included. Blood glucose should
be monitored for procedures more than 2 hours in duration. (465)
INFLAMMATORY
BOWEL DISEASE
13. IBD is believed to result from an aberrant response by the bowel mucosal immune
system to normal luminal flora. The precise trigger for the activation of the immune
system in IBD is unclear and likely multifactorial. Patients typically present with
complaints of abdominal pain, fever, and diarrhea. There may be a genetic basis
since there is an increased risk in close family members. Caucasians are more
susceptible to IBD and Jewish people are at greater risk for Crohn’s disease.
Environmental factors may include smoking, appendectomy, antibiotics, oral
contraceptives, and NSAIDs. (465)
14. There are two categories of inflammatory bowel disease: ulcerative colitis and
Crohn’s disease. Ulcerative colitis is restricted to the large intestine and manifests
itself as inflammation and loss of colonic mucosa. Crohn’s disease can affect any
part of the digestive tract and may cause transmural inflammation leading to
abscesses or granulomatous disease. Although they are distinct entities, distinction
between the two may be difficult to make when Crohn’s manifests itself by only
affecting the colon. (465)
314
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
15. Specific anesthetic agents are neither preferred nor contraindicated for patients with
IBD. Patients taking steroids should continue prior to surgery and may require
supplementation because of iatrogenic adrenal insufficiency. (465)
16. Certain medications prescribed to treat IBD may have anesthetic implications.
Interactions between anesthetic and antineoplastic agents are not fully documented
in the literature. Cyclosporine is reported to increase the minimum alveolar
concentration of volatile agents and to be additive with barbiturates or fentanyl in
an animal model. Phosphodiesterase effects of azathioprine may partially
antagonize nondepolarizing neuromuscular blockade, although this is
controversial. Cyclosporine, infliximab, and aminoglycosides potentiate the
nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking agents. (465-466)
GASTROESOPHAGEAL
REFLUX DISEASE
17. GERD is the retrograde movement of gastric contents through the lower esophageal
sphincter (LES) into the esophagus. If gastric contents also move past the upper
esophageal sphincter into the pharynx, pulmonary aspiration of gastric acid
and particulate matter may result. Pulmonary aspiration of gastric contents is
a serious, potentially life-threatening complication. (466)
18. Reflux occurs when the lower esophageal sphincter is incompetent or when LES
pressure is less than intraabdominal (or intragastric) pressure. This may result from
esophageal dysmotility or from a hiatal hernia, where the LES may be displaced
cephalad into the thoracic cavity. The LES loses the diaphragmatic contribution
to its function and the diaphragm can also obstruct the esophagus. Associated
conditions include pregnancy, obesity, obstructive sleep apnea, gastric
hypersecretion, gastric outlet obstruction, gastric neuropathy, and increased
intraabdominal pressure. (466)
19. GERD is an extremely common syndrome in which 20% of people have
heartburn (the most reliable symptom) at least once per week. Four to ten
percent have heartburn daily. Other problems include noncardiac chest pain,
dysphagia, pharyngitis, cough, asthma, hoarseness, laryngitis, sinusitis,
and dental erosions. (466)
20. The risk of pulmonary aspiration on induction of anesthesia is not well-established.
Significant GERD occurs in at least 30% to 50% of pregnant women; however,
the incidence of aspiration is low. The mechanism is primarily a progesterone-mediated
relaxation of LES tone, with possible contributions from elevated intraabdominal
pressure, delayed gastric emptying, and decreased bowel transit. (466)
21. The customary approach to induction is RSI with cricoid pressure (CP, also
called Sellick’s maneuver) to obstruct the potential flow of gastric contents into the
pharynx and trachea. However, the putative benefits of the RSI and CP remain
controversial.
Cricoid pressure can be ineffective if not properly applied. Some undesired side
effects of CP include increased risk of regurgitation and failed intubation. Based on
studies of the radiographic anatomy, improperly performed CP may not align
the cricoid and esophagus properly with the solid cervical spine underneath. If the
cricoid and esophagus are displaced laterally, they may overlie muscle and the
upper esophagus may not be occluded. The significance of this failure of alignment
is by no means a settled issue. The exact opposite view, that lateral displacement
does not impair barrier function, has also been articulated. Complications are
more likely in the elderly, children, pregnant women, patients with cervical injury,
patients with difficult airways, and patients where there is difficulty palpating
the cricoid cartilage. (466, Table 29-1)
22. Nissen fundoplication surgery may be associated with subcutaneous air in the
neck and chest, but is benign and self-limited because carbon dioxide (CO2)
gas is rapidly resorbed by the body. Likewise, pneumoperitoneum and
315
Nutritional and Gastrointestinal Disease
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
pneumomediastinum are common, occurring in up to 86% of patients due to
dissection of the phrenoesophageal ligament. Pneumothorax, in contrast, is
not a normal consequence of laparoscopic surgery. (466-467)
DIABETES MELLITUS
23. Diabetes mellitus is elevated blood glucose levels due to a relative lack of endogenous
insulin. It is the most common endocrine disease and affects 15 to 20 million
Americans (7% to 8% of the American population). It is associated with complications
in most organ systems resulting largely from microangiopathy and macroangiopathy.
Risk of complications of diabetes increases with increasing hemoglobin A1C
levels. Large and small vessel coronary artery disease is common and was originally
advanced as an indication for perioperative b-blockade in the original papers on
the subject. Diabetic renal failure in young and middle-aged adults is the leading
cause of renal failure requiring hemodialysis. Retinopathy occurs in 80% to 90%
of those who require insulin for at least 20 years. Autonomic neuropathy occurs in
20% to 40% of patients with long-standing diabetes, particularly those with
peripheral sensory neuropathy, renal failure, or systemic hypertension.
Cardiac autonomic neuropathy may mask angina pectoris and obscure the
presence of coronary artery disease. Gastroparesis, which may cause delayed
gastric emptying, is a sign of autonomic neuropathy affecting the vagus
nerves. (467)
24. Autonomic neuropathy is a dysfunction of the autonomic nervous system, which
occurs as a result of damage to small nerve fibers. This results in loss of vagally
controlled heart rate, a decrease in peripheral sympathetic nervous system tone
resulting in orthostatic hypotension, decreases in peripheral blood flow, and
diminished sweating. These patients are at an increased risk of delayed gastric
emptying, perioperative hemodynamic instability, cardiac arrhythmias, silent
myocardial infarction, impaired respiration, and cardiopulmonary arrest. In
addition, these patients have a blunted response to atropine, making the early
treatment of bradycardia essential. (467)
25. The historical classification of diabetes was made in terms of the presence or
absence of insulin requirement. This was unsatisfactory because nearly all
diabetics develop a need for insulin at some point. The current classification is Type
1 (T1DM) and Type 2 (T2DM) diabetes. T1DM is typically characterized by the
absence of any insulin production from the pancreas. T2DM involves a relative lack
of insulin plus resistance to endogenous insulin. (467)
26. Blood glucose control is the major treatment goal in both types of diabetes.
T1DM always requires insulin to prevent hyperglycemia and ketoacidosis. It is
commonly heralded at an early age by a dramatic episode of ketoacidosis. Type 2
diabetics may require insulin, but often only require oral hypoglycemic agents,
weight loss, or dietary management. The onset of T2DM usually is more insidious
and constitutes the majority of diabetics. They are often overweight, so dietary
control and weight loss is important, but the cornerstone of management of both
types is pharmacologic. (467)
27. There are four categories of oral hypoglycemic agents based on their function. Some
increase pancreatic insulin production (glyburide and repaglinide). Some reduce
glucose load by decreasing hepatic production (metformin). Some reduce intestinal
absorption of glucose (acarbose) and others increase glucose uptake by fat and
muscle (rosiglitazone). (467)
28. Glycosylated hemoglobin (hemoglobin A1C), or glycohemoglobin, is formed
during hyperglycemia. Glucose can permanently combine with hemoglobin in
erythrocytes and form hemoglobin A1C. Since the erythrocyte life span is 120 days,
hemoglobin A1C levels give an indication of how well the diabetes is being
controlled over time. Normal hemoglobin A1C levels are less than 6%. (467)
316
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
29. A well-controlled diabetic may not require special treatment before and during
surgery. It is common in those on insulin treatment to reduce the morning dose by
30% to 50% to prevent hypoglycemia due to fasting. Sulfonylurea drugs may be
continued until the evening before surgery, but these drugs may also produce
hypoglycemia in the absence of morning caloric intake and are generally
recommended to be held the morning of surgery.
Biguanides (phenformin) are associated with lactic acidosis and were replaced
by metformin. On the basis of case reports, the common recommendation in
the 1990s was to withhold metformin for 48 hours to avoid fatal lactic acidosis.
This recommendation has not been studied scientifically and was called into
question on the basis of a recent meta-analysis. (467-468)
30. The optimal level of glucose control in the perioperative and critical care setting
remains controversial. Attempts to maintain glucose levels below 108 mg/dL in
critically ill patients may result in excess cardiovascular mortality compared with
those patients in whom the level was controlled in the 140 to 180 mg/dL range.
There are several formulas for sliding scale insulin administration, maintenance
infusions of 5% dextrose, and periodic blood glucose monitoring for the
perioperative management of insulin-dependent diabetics. Some potential
complications of severe perioperative hyperglycemia include ketoacidosis,
dehydration, hyperosmolar nonketotic coma, secondary effects on neurologic
outcome after cerebral ischemia, and the risk of surgical wound infection. (468)
31. There is no established standard to apply to the question of how high a preoperative
glucose level is too high for surgery. (468)
HYPERTHYROIDISM
(THYROTOXICOSIS)
AND THYROID
STORM
32. Hyperthyroidism is the condition caused by elevated circulating levels of the
unbound thyroid hormones triiodothyronine (T3), and tetraiodothyronine
(thyroxine, or T4). (468)
33. Some common causes of hyperthyroidism include Graves’ disease, struma ovarii
(thyroid tissue in an ovarian teratoma), a human chorionic gonadotropin hormone
(hCG)-secreting hydatidiform mole, pregnancy (hCG has weak thyroid stimulating
activity), and administration of iodinated contrast dye to a susceptible patient.
Amiodarone can lead to both hypothyroidism and hyperthyroidism. (468)
34. Graves’ disease is the most common cause of hyperthyroidism. It is an autoimmune
condition where thyrotropin receptor antibodies continuously mimic the effect
of thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH). (468)
35. Mild to moderate hyperthyroidism is manifested by cardiac, neurologic,
constitutional, and gastrointestinal signs and symptoms. Thyroid hormone increases
cardiac sensitivity to catecholamines, causing hypertension, tachyarrhythmias,
high-output congestive heart failure, and angina, even in the absence of coronary
plaques. Patients may exhibit tremor, hyperreflexia, irritability, and periodic paralysis
(hypokalemia and proximal muscle weakness). Constitutional signs may include
fever and heat intolerance. Gastrointestinal symptoms may include nausea, vomiting,
diarrhea, hepatic dysfunction, and jaundice. Hyperthyroidism is confirmed by
demonstrating elevated thyroid hormone levels in blood. (468)
36. The difference between hyperthyroidism (thyrotoxicosis) and thyroid storm is
a matter of degree. Thyroid storm is the most severe form of the disorder. It is a
life-threatening, emergent clinical syndrome with a mortality rate of approximately
30% despite treatment. (468)
37. Worsening signs and symptoms of thyrotoxicosis characterize thyroid storm. There
may be severe cardiac dysfunction, hyperglycemia, hypercalcemia,
hyperbilirubinemia, hyperthermia, hypovolemia, altered mental status, seizures,
or coma. (468)
317
Nutritional and Gastrointestinal Disease
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
38. Thyroid storm may be triggered in a thyrotoxic patient by any of several stresses,
includinginfection,stroke,ortrauma,especiallytothethyroidgland.Itmayalsooccur
with surgery, diabetic ketoacidosis, or incorrect antithyroid drug discontinuation.
The administration of certain drugs including pseudoephedrine, aspirin, excess iodine
intake, contrast dye, or amiodarone may also trigger thyroid storm. (468)
39. The initial medical treatment of thyroid storm is to reduce thyroid hormone synthesis.
Thionamides, such as propylthiouracil (PTU) and methimazole (MMI), inhibit
thyroid peroxidase (TPO), which catalyzes the incorporation of iodide into
thyroglobulin to produce T3 and T4. At least an hour after giving the thionamide, large
doses of stable iodide are given. b-blocking drugs are used to reduce adrenergic
symptoms. Although propranolol is the traditional choice, other b-blockers (atenolol,
metoprolol, or esmolol) have been used. Propranolol additionally inhibits peripheral
conversion of T4 to the more potent hormone T3. Corticosteroids should also be
administered since these patients usually have relative adrenal insufficiency.
Finally, plasmapheresis may be a useful adjunct to reduce circulating thyroid
hormone levels by removing T3 and T4 from the blood stream. (468)
40. The Wolfe-Chaikoff effect is a paradoxical effect whereby large doses of iodide
suppress gene transcription of thyroid peroxidase rather than incorporate
additional iodide into thyroglobulin. The large doses of iodine thus reduce the
gland’s capacity to produce and release hormone. This benefit is temporary, lasting
about a week. (468)
41. There is limited evidence-based literature for operative anesthetic management
of patients with hyperthyroidism, and no comparative data. Itis usually recommended
to favor agents that do not cause increased heart rate or sympathetic activation;
however, this advice has never been subjected to testing. It is generally advisable to
undertake only that which cannot be delayed until thyroid hormone secretion has
been controlled by medical management or by radioiodine ablation. (468)
42. Although thyroid storm associated with surgery can occur intraoperatively, it is
most likely to present 6 to 18 hours after the surgical procedure. Perioperative
thyroid storm treatment is aimed toward decreasing the amount of circulating
thyroid hormone and toward decreasing the increase in sympathetic nervous system
stimulation. An esmolol infusion can be started and titrated to the desired
hemodynamic and cardiovascular effects. Dexamethasone may be administered to
block the release of thyroid hormone as well as from the thyroid gland and the
peripheral conversion of T4 to T3. Propylthiouracil may be administered to block the
uptake of iodine from the thyroid gland, after which iodine may be administered to
inhibit the release of thyroid hormone from the thyroid gland. Treatment should
also be supportive, with the monitoring and treatment of abnormalities in the
patient’s intravascular fluid status, electrolytes, glucose, and body temperature.
Thyroid storm may be difficult to distinguish from other hypermetabolic states,
including malignant hyperthermia, pheochromocytoma, neuroleptic malignant
syndrome, and sepsis. Dantrolene can be beneficial and should be considered if
there is suspicion of malignant hyperthermia. (469)
HYPOTHYROIDISM
43. Hypothyroidism is the condition caused by decreased circulating levels of the
unbound thyroid hormones triiodothyronine (T3) and tetraiodothyronine
(thyroxine, or T4). (469)
44. Hypothyroidism is either congenital (cretinism) or acquired. Acquired
hypothyroidism may be due to an absence of dietary iodine (so-called “endemic
goiter”) or inflammation. Hashimoto’s thyroiditis is a chronic autoimmune disease
characterized by progressive destruction of the thyroid gland. Hypothyroidism may
also be iatrogenic (from the medical or surgical treatment of hyperthyroidism).
At least half of patients who receive radioactive iodine treatment for hyperthyroidism
318
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
are hypothyroid 10 years later. Hypothyroidism may also occur after hypothalamic
or pituitary disease or surgery. (469)
45. The onset of hypothyroidism is usually insidious and the symptoms often
nonspecific. There may be easy fatigability, lethargy, cold intolerance, periorbital
edema, weakness, weight gain, dry skin, or brittle hair. There may be myxedema
in severe cases with reduced cardiac output, attenuated deep tendon reflexes, and
nonpitting pretibial edema. Untreated, there may be electrolyte disturbances,
hypoventilation, hypothermia, or coma. (469)
46. Primary hypothyroidism is present if there are low T3 and T4 levels but an elevated
TSH. In secondary hypothyroidism, all three thyroid-related hormones are reduced.
Subclinical primary hypothyroidism is present in about 5% of the American
population. It has a prevalence of more than 13% in otherwise healthy elderly
patients, especially women.
47. Patients undergoing thyroid surgery may have physical or functional obstruction of
the airway. An enlarged thyroid gland may deviate or compress the trachea, causing
difficulty breathing when sleeping supine or during the induction of general
anesthesia. Postoperative obstruction may occur if the patient develops a neck
hematoma or tracheomalacia. Tracheomalacia can occur from chronic compression
of the tracheal rings by a goiter. Deep extubation is sometimes used to minimize
coughing, minimize straining, and reduce the theoretical likelihood of elevations of
venous and arterial pressures in the neck. Functional obstruction may occur due to
surgical trauma to the recurrent laryngeal nerves. Unilateral laryngeal nerve injury
produces voice impairment, but is not a threat to airway function. Bilateral recurrent
laryngeal nerve injury compromises the function of the posterior cricoarytenoid
muscles, the muscles responsible for separating the cords during breathing. This can
lead to life-threatening inspiratory airway obstruction, which may only be relieved
by intubation or tracheostomy. Paralyzed vocal cords do not abduct during the
respiratory cycle and may appear apposed in the midline when seen during direct
laryngoscopy. Accidental removal of the parathyroid glands can occur in patients
undergoing a total thyroidectomy. Clinically this can manifest as laryngospasm or
inspiratory stridor secondary to the sensitivity of the laryngeal muscles to
hypocalcemia. Signs of hypocalcemia after this complication do not usually
manifest until 24 to 72 hours after the procedure. (469)
48. Asymptomatic mild to moderate hypothyroidism does not place a patient at an
increased risk of perioperative morbidity. There is no unusual sensitivity to inhaled
anesthetics, sedatives, or narcotics. Symptomatic or severe hypothyroidism
should necessitate surgical delay for thyroid hormone replacement until resolution
of neurologic and cardiovascular abnormalities. (469)
49. Some surgeons request the use of a laryngeal nerve monitoring (NIMS endotracheal
tube) as a safety measure during thyroid surgery. These are specialized
endotracheal tubes with electrodes positioned in the immediate vicinity of the vocal
cords. They send an EMG signal to a receiver whenever the vocal cords contract,
so if the surgeon stimulates a laryngeal nerve an audible signal provides a warning.
With the NIMS tube, no muscle relaxant should be used. (469)
PHEOCHROMO-
CYTOMA AND
PARAGANGLIOMA
50. A pheochromocytoma is a catecholamine-secreting adrenal medullary tumor.
The cell of embryologic origin is the neural crest cell. Paraganglioma is the name
given to these tumors when they occur outside the adrenal gland. (469-470)
51. These tumors typically produce the adrenal medullary hormones dopamine,
norepinephrine, and/or epinephrine. The most common symptoms are headache,
palpitations, sweating, and tremulousness. The most common sign is hypertension.
Severehypertensionduringanesthesiaandsurgicalmanipulationsisawell-recognized
manifestation of pheochromocytoma; 8% to 10% of tumors are asymptomatic.
319
Nutritional and Gastrointestinal Disease
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
The diagnosis is made by analyzing a 24-hour urine collection of catecholamine or
catecholamine metabolite levels. (469-470)
52. The prevalence of pheochromocytomas and paragangliomas in the general
population has been reported to be as high as 1 in 2000. (470)
53. For the perioperative management of pheochromocytomas and paragangliomas, the
nonspecific a-blocking agent phenoxybenzamine might not be the agent of choice.
Since a2-agonists generally produce bradycardia, sedation, and lower blood
pressure, phenoxybenzamine (with a2-blocking properties) could increase blood
pressure and increase pulse. Phenoxybenzamine, however, remains the agent most
often recommended by authors of review articles and case series and is the agent
with which there is the greatest clinical experience worldwide. It has a long
pharmacologic half-life but is very expensive because it has no other clinical
application. It is useful for the chronic treatment of patients with unresectable
catecholamine secreting tumors.
Less costly alternatives prior to adrenalectomy include a1-selective blockers
(prazosin, doxazosin, and terazosin), calcium channel blockers, ACE inhibitors,
angiotensin receptor blockers, b-blockers, and a2-agonists.
Intraoperative hypertension and tachycardia may still require infusions of
vasodilators, esmolol, and magnesium for treatment. Dexmedetomidine may be
useful as well because of its a2-agonist activity. (470)
MULTIPLE
ENDOCRINE
NEOPLASIA AND
NEUROENDOCRINE
TUMORS
54. Multiple endocrine neoplasia-1, described by Wermer in 1954, is characterized by
a triad of tumors of the pancreas, parathyroid, and pituitary. Its inheritance is
autosomal dominant. (470)
55. MEN-2 is characterized by autosomal dominant inherited medullary thyroid
carcinoma and other associated tumors, including pheochromocytomas and
parathyroid tumors. (471)
56. In MEN-1, pancreas tumors usually secrete gastrin (50%), insulin, glucagon,
vasoactive intestinal polypeptide, or pancreatic polypeptide. Pituitary tumors are
usually secreting adenomas (prolactin 60%, growth hormone 25%) although some are
nonfunctioning adenomas. Parathyroid adenomas are present in 95%, are the most
common tumor in the syndrome, and usually present as hypercalcemia. All four
parathyroid glands usually must be removed surgically because all are involved by
the disease. Other tumors may include adrenal cortical adenomas, carcinoids,
neuroendocrine tumors, lipomas, angiofibromas, and collagenomas. (470)
57. There are two subtypes of MEN-2: MEN-2a, described by Sipple in 1961, and
MEN-2b, described by Williams et al in 1966. MEN-2a includes pheochromocytoma,
medullary thyroid carcinoma, and parathyroid adenoma. MEN-2b includes
mucosal neuromas, pheochromocytoma, and medullary thyroid carcinoma. (471)
58. There are no specific anesthetic implications of MEN-1. Anesthetic implications
of MEN-2 relate to its components and associated conditions. MEN-2 may be
associated with pheochromocytomas or with Von Hippel-Lindau syndrome, which
in turn may include cerebellar tumors. (470-471)
59. Carcinoids and neuroendocrine tumors are dispersed cells of neural crest embryologic
origin. These tumors produce serotonin or other peptide hormones. When these
tumors arise in the midgut, they are called carcinoid tumors; but when they arise
elsewhere in the body, the current terminology is for them to be called
neuroendocrine tumors. (471)
60. Midgut carcinoids are usually asymptomatic until they cause bowel obstruction
or appendicitis because their venous drainage is via the portal vein to the liver,
which detoxifies the excess serotonin they produce. (471)
320
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
61. Carcinoidsyndromeisaconstellationofsystemicsymptomsofserotoninexcess.These
include diarrhea, flushing, palpitations, and bronchoconstriction. It results from
tumors outside the hepatic portal drainage field or when there is extensive metastatic
liver disease. Octreotide may help ameliorate these symptoms. (471)
62. Perioperative considerations of carcinoid and neuroendocrine tumors result
from the direct hemodynamic effects of serotonin. These are not problematic in
the context of perioperative anesthetic care and an escalation of hemodynamic
monitoring is seldom required as a consequence of the endocrine activity
of the tumor. There should be a high index of suspicion in the face of right-sided
valvular heart disease or right heart failure. Echocardiography should be considered
as a diagnostic tool. Right heart failure is due to the sclerosing effect of serotonin on
the tricuspid and pulmonic valves. It may be the cause of death in 50% of patients
with carcinoid syndrome. (471)
ADRENAL
INSUFFICIENCY
AND STEROID
REPLACEMENT
63. The principal hormones of the adrenal cortex are cortisol and aldosterone. (471)
64. Cortisol production in the adrenal cortex is stimulated by adrenocorticotropic
hormone (ACTH) released from the pituitary gland. ACTH is secreted in response
to hypothalamic corticotropin releasing hormone (CRH). Stress stimulates the
hypothalamus to release CRH, which increases blood cortisol levels. Cortisol
exerts negative feedback influence on the production of both CRH and ACTH. (471)
65. Cortisol is responsible for the conversion of norepinephrine to epinephrine in the
adrenal medulla. It also maintains homeostasis of the cardiovascular system,
especially in the presence of stress. It maintains vascular tone and endothelial
integrity, preserving intravascular volume by reducing vascular permeability. It
also potentiates the vasoconstrictor effects of catecholamines. When cortisol levels
are deficient, systemic vascular resistance and myocardial contractility are
decreased. Cortisol also plays an important role in gluconeogenesis, sodium
retention, potassium excretion, and antiinflammatory effects. (471)
66. Addison’s syndrome is chronic insufficient cortisol production and secretion, with
or without aldosterone insufficiency. The symptoms of adrenal insufficiency are
nonspecific. They include fatigue, malaise, lethargy, weight loss, anorexia,
arthralgia, myalgia, nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, diarrhea, and fever. (471)
67. Primary adrenocortical insufficiency is the nonfunctioning of the adrenal glands.
Patients may also have hyponatremia and hyperkalemia along with aldosterone
deficiency. Secondary adrenocortical insufficiency is the failure of the pituitary
to stimulate the adrenals. Tertiary insufficiency is the failure of the hypothalamus to
stimulate the pituitary, and thus the adrenals. (471)
68. The etiology of primary adrenocortical insufficiency is usually immunologic
(an autoantibody), malignant, or infectious. Malignant causes are generally
metastatic cancer, commonly from lung or breast. Infectious causes include
tuberculosis. (471)
69. Secondary or tertiary adrenocortical insufficiency usually stems from exogenously
administered steroids. Aldosterone production, under the stimulus of the
renin-angiotensin system, is unimpaired. (471)
70. Acute adrenal failure (addisonian crisis) is circulatory shock caused by cortisol
deficiency. It generally occurs in patients with primary adrenal insufficiency along
with a superimposed acute stress, such as trauma, surgery, or infection. Symptoms
include hyponatremia, hyperkalemia, hypovolemic shock, and myocardial and
vascular unresponsiveness to catecholamines. (471)
71. Pituitary apoplexy generally occurs after acute pituitary hemorrhage, swelling,
or infarction of a large pituitary adenoma. It may also occur following
321
Nutritional and Gastrointestinal Disease
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
cardiopulmonary bypass or postpartum hypotension (Sheehan’s syndrome). It is
also associated with diabetes, hypertension, sickle cell anemia, and acute shock.
Signs and symptoms of pituitary apoplexy may include sudden total loss of all
anterior and posterior pituitary hormonal secretion, severe hypoglycemia,
severe hypotension, central nervous system hemorrhage, cerebral edema, vision
loss (often bitemporal hemianopsia), severe headache, meningeal irritation,
ophthalmoplegia, cardiovascular collapse, or loss of consciousness. Diagnosis
is made by computed tomography or magnetic resonance imaging.
Corticosteroid replacement is the first line of treatment for both the resulting
adrenal insufficiency and brain swelling. Acute surgical decompression of brain
swelling may be necessary when there is significant visual loss and mental
status alteration. (472)
72. Etomidate is associated with significant but transient (<24 hours) suppression of
adrenal cortical function, even after a single dose of the drug. This is especially
clinically significant in setting of CIRCI. (472)
73. Steroid-induced adrenal suppression is highly variable and its duration is
unpredictable, from days to perhaps years. Since the consequences of a short course
of steroids are minimal, anticipatory treatment is generally safe. The dosage for
replacement therapy should be adequate but not excessive. The scientific
foundation is based on surgical research in primates where administering
supplements 10 times the normal cortisol production rates was not superior to
simply replacing the normal daily production of cortisol. The daily cortisol
production rate is between 20 and 30 mg/day. In surgical patients, the
recommended approach is to begin at the time of surgery with a dose between 1 and
5 times the daily production, no more than 100 to 150 mg of cortisol equivalent per
day with a tapered replacement over 48 to 72 hours. The potential risks of the
administration of supplemental doses of corticosteroid to patients in the
perioperative period are few. Of concern are impaired wound healing and an
increased rate of infections. (472)
74. The term CIRCI recently has been applied to clinical situations where there is prior
steroid treatment and the adrenal response to critical illness and other stresses
is inadequate. The patient may not otherwise meet traditional criteria for
adrenocortical dysfunction. One hundred to three hundred milligrams per day
of IV hydrocortisone eliminates a preexisting need for vasopressors. Signs and
symptoms include unexplained vasopressor-dependent refractory hypotension, a
discrepancy between the anticipated severity of the patient’s disease and the present
state of the patient, or high fever without apparent cause or not responding to
antibiotics. There may also be hypoglycemia, hyponatremia, hyperkalemia,
neutropenia, or eosinophilia. (472)
CUSHING’S
SYNDROME
75. Cushing’s syndrome is the presence of elevated cortisol levels in the blood. Patients
with Cushing’s syndrome have a typical physical appearance characterized by
rounding of the face, truncal obesity, thin extremities, an upper thoracic fat pad
(“buffalo hump”), purple abdominal striae, and thinning of the skin. Physiologic
effects of chronic elevated corticosteroid levels include weight gain, hypertension,
hypercoagulability, muscle weakness, glucose intolerance, gonadal dysfunction,
and osteoporosis. Diagnosis is confirmed by an elevated 24-hour urinary free
cortisol. (472-473)
76. Primary Cushings is hypercortisolism independent of pituitary adrenocorticotropic
hormone (ACTH) secretion, usually due to a hyperfunctioning adrenal gland or
an adrenal adenoma. Secondary and tertiary disease occur from elevated circulating
levels of ACTH or an ACTH-like substance. (472)
322
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
77. Cushings disease usually refers to one specific form of secondary Cushing’s, that
of adrenal cortical hyperfunction due to excess production of ACTH by a
pituitary adenoma. This accounts for 60% to 70% of patients with Cushing’s
syndrome. (472)
78. After Cushing’s disease, the remainder of secondary Cushing’s syndrome patients
have ectopic sources of ACTH. These may include primary cancers of the adrenal or
metastatic cancers such as lung (usually small-cell), thyroid, prostate, pancreas,
or intrathoracic neuroendocrine tumors. Secondary Cushing’s may also occur
with exogenous administration of cortisol-like medications or synthetic ACTH.
(472-473)
79. Cushing’s syndrome patients may be more susceptible to the effects of muscle
relaxants than normal, leading to prolonged muscle relaxation and weakness.
Because of this, Cushing’s patients may be subject to unanticipated postoperative
respiratory failure, even after laparoscopic surgery. (473)
323
Nutritional and Gastrointestinal Disease
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
Chapter
27 CENTRAL NERVOUS
SYSTEM DISEASE
Alana Flexman, Pekka Talke
NEUROANATOMY
1. What is the arterial blood supply to the brain?
2. In what proportion of human brains is the classic depiction of the circle of Willis
found?
3. What makes up the blood-brain barrier?
4. Name conditions in which the blood-brain barrier may be disrupted.
NEUROPHYSIOLOGY
5. Name some factors that influence cerebral blood flow.
6. What is normal cerebral blood flow?
7. What is the relationship between cerebral metabolic rate and cerebral blood flow?
8. For every 1 C decrease in temperature below normal body temperature, what is the
corresponding decrease in cerebral blood flow?
9. Define cerebral perfusion pressure.
10. Within what range of mean arterial pressures will cerebral blood flow remain
relatively constant?
11. What is the time course within which cerebral vasculature changes in response to
alterations in mean arterial pressure? What is the clinical implication of this?
12. What are factors that impair the autoregulation of cerebral blood flow?
13. Describe the relationship between PaCO2 and cerebral blood flow.
14. How much does cerebral blood flow change for every 1 mm Hg increase or decrease
in PaCO2 from 40 mm Hg?
15. What is a potential risk of prolonged, aggressive hyperventilation to a PaCO2 of less
than 30 mm Hg?
16. Below what PaO2 will cerebral blood flow increase?
17. What are the effects of volatile anesthetics on cerebral blood flow and intracranial
pressure?
18. What are the effects of nitrous oxide on cerebral blood flow and intracranial
pressure?
19. What are the effects of ketamine on cerebral blood flow and intracranial pressure?
20. What are the effects of thiopental on cerebral blood flow and intracranial pressure?
21. What are the effects of propofol on cerebral blood flow and intracranial pressure?
22. What are the effects of etomidate on cerebral blood flow and intracranial pressure?
23. What are the effects of dexmedetomidine and clonidine on cerebral blood flow and
intracranial pressure?
24. What are the effects of benzodiazepines on cerebral blood flow and intracranial
pressure?
25. What are the effects of opioids on cerebral blood flow and intracranial pressure?
26. What are the effects of neuromuscular blocking drugs on cerebral blood flow and
intracranial pressure?
324
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
INTRACRANIAL
PRESSURE
27. What is a normal intracranial pressure?
28. How does the body compensate for increasing intracranial pressure? What
implications does this have clinically?
29. How do drug-induced increases in cerebral blood flow affect the intracranial
pressures of normal patients and of patients with intracranial tumors?
30. Name some methods used to decrease elevated intracranial pressure.
31. Name some signs and symptoms that may be noted preoperatively that provide
evidence that a patient may have an increased intracranial pressure.
NEUROPROTECTION
32. What is the current recommendation regarding the use of induced hypothermia
for neuroprotection?
33. What is the current recommendation regarding the use of intravenous anesthetics
for neuroprotection?
ANESTHESIA FOR
NEUROSURGERY
34. What monitors are typically used for intracranial neurosurgery?
35. What two devices can be used to measure the intracranial pressure?
36. What measures can an anesthesiologist undertake to attenuate increases in arterial
blood pressure and intracranial pressure during direct laryngoscopy?
37. How is maintenance anesthesia usually achieved in patients undergoing
intracranial neurosurgery?
38. What minimum alveolar concentration (MAC) of volatile anesthetic should be
administered when used for maintenance anesthesia in patients undergoing
intracranial neurosurgery?
39. What is the desired range of PaCO2 to optimize cerebral blood flow intraoperatively?
40. What is a potential problem of the administration of positive end-expiratory
pressure (PEEP) during mechanical ventilation of the lungs in patients undergoing
intracranial neurosurgery?
41. How do peripheral vasodilators affect cerebral blood flow? What is the
recommendation regarding the use of these drugs intraoperatively in patients
undergoing intracranial neurosurgery?
42. Why might neuromuscular blockade be maintained throughout intracranial
surgical procedures?
43. How can cerebral swelling be treated intraoperatively?
44. What are some potential problems that can occur with the administration of
mannitol?
45. How should intravenous fluid administration be managed intraoperatively in
patients undergoing intracranial neurosurgery?
46. Why should glucose-containing intravenous solutions be avoided in neurosurgical
patients?
47. Why should coughing and straining by patients awakening from anesthesia be
avoided after intracranial surgery? What are some methods by which these
responses by the patient can be avoided?
48. Why is rapid awakening desirable in neurosurgical procedures?
49. How should delayed recovery after intracranial surgery be evaluated? When should
tension pneumocephalus be considered as a possible cause of postoperative delayed
recovery?
50. What drug is commonly used to treat hypertension on emergence from anesthesia
for intracranial neurosurgery?
51. Why are patients undergoing neurosurgical procedures at an increased risk for
venous air embolism?
52. Describe the pathophysiology of a venous air embolism. What percent of adult
patients have a probe patent foramen ovale?
53. What are methods by which a venous air embolism can be detected? Which of these
is the most sensitive?
54. What are some signs of a clinically significant venous air embolism?
Central Nervous System Disease
325
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
55. What is the treatment for a venous air embolism?
56. Why should nitrous oxide administration be discontinued in the presence of a
venous air embolism?
57. What are the advantages of a pulmonary artery catheter in the presence of a venous
air embolism?
58. How efficacious is the use of PEEP in the prevention of a venous air embolism?
59. What typically causes death in a fatal venous air embolism?
INTRACRANIAL
MASS LESIONS
60. What are some of the presenting signs and symptoms of patients with an
intracranial tumor?
61. What are the anesthetic goals for patients undergoing surgical resection of an
intracranial tumor?
62. Why is it important to limit drug-induced depression of ventilation with
preoperative medicines in patients who are scheduled to undergo surgical resection
of an intracranial tumor?
63. How is the induction of general anesthesia in patients undergoing surgical resection
of an intracranial tumor achieved?
64. What are the advantages and disadvantages of the sitting position for the resection
of intracranial tumors?
65. Name some anesthetic considerations that are unique to posterior fossa tumors.
INTRACRANIAL
ANEURYSMS AND
ARTERIOVENOUS
MALFORMATIONS
66. How do patients with ruptured intracranial aneurysms usually present?
67. What is the goal of the anesthetic management of a patient undergoing resection
of an intracranial aneurysm or arteriovenous malformation?
68. What are the major complications of intracranial aneurysm rupture?
69. How might the electrocardiogram of patients with a ruptured intracranial aneurysm
appear?
70. When is vasospasm after cerebral aneurysm rupture most likely to occur? How is it
diagnosed?
71. What is the treatment for vasospasm after cerebral aneurysm rupture?
72. What are the different treatment options for intracranial aneurysms?
73. What are the different treatment options for intracranial arteriovenous
malformations?
74. What are special considerations during temporary clip placement during resection
of intracranial aneurysms?
CAROTID DISEASE
75. What are the indications for carotid endarterectomy?
76. How should patients scheduled for a carotid endarterectomy be evaluated
preoperatively?
77. What are the anesthetic goals for patients undergoing a carotid endarterectomy?
What is the critical period during this surgery?
78. How should the arterial blood pressure be managed during a carotid
endarterectomy?
79. How should the PaCO2 be managed during a carotid endarterectomy?
80. What is the purpose of intraoperative neurologic monitoring during a carotid
endarterectomy? What are some methods of intraoperative neurologic monitoring?
81. Does local or general anesthesia have better outcomes for carotid endarterectomy?
82. How is local anesthesia for a carotid endarterectomy achieved? What is an
advantage of local anesthesia for this procedure?
83. How is general anesthesia for a carotid endarterectomy usually achieved? What is
an advantage of general anesthesia for this procedure?
84. What are some potential postoperative complications after carotid endarterectomy?
85. What are the consequences of postoperative hypertension after carotid
endarterectomy?
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
326
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
ANSWERS*
NEUROANATOMY
1. The arterial blood supply to the brain is from three blood vessels, including the right
and left internal carotids and the vertebrobasilar artery. Anastomoses between
these vessels form the circle of Willis, and provide for a collateral blood supply for
cerebral protection against ischemia. (476)
2. The classic depiction of the circle of Willis is found in less than half of human
brains and collateralization may not be complete in all individuals. (476-477,
Figure 30-1)
3. The blood-brain barrier is composed of capillary endothelial cells with tight
junctions. This barrier allows the passage of lipid-soluble substances such as carbon
dioxide, oxygen, and some anesthetic agents but prevents the passage of large
macromolecules such as proteins. (476)
4. The blood-brain barrier may be disrupted in conditions such as acute systemic
hypertension, head trauma, infection, arterial hypoxemia, severe hypercapnia,
intracranial tumors, and sustained seizure activity. (476)
NEUROPHYSIOLOGY
5. Factors that influence cerebral blood flow include the cerebral metabolic rate,
cerebral perfusion pressure and autoregulation, the PaO2, the PaCO2, and
anesthetic drugs. (477)
6. Normal cerebral blood flow is 50 mL per 100 g of brain tissue per minute and
represents approximately 15% of cardiac output. Although the brain is a very small
percent of body weight, its high metabolic rate and inability to store energy account
for the high percent of cardiac output it receives. (477)
7. The cerebral metabolic rate directly affects cerebral blood flow through cerebral
flow-metabolism coupling. Increases or decreases in metabolic rate result in
a proportional increase or decrease in cerebral blood flow. (477)
8. For every 1 C decrease in temperature below normal body temperature there is
a corresponding decrease in cerebral blood flow by about 7%. This effect is due to the
decrease in the cerebral metabolic rate caused by the decrease in temperature. (477)
9. Cerebral perfusion pressure is defined as the difference between mean arterial
pressure and central venous pressure or intracranial pressure, whichever is
greater. (478)
10. In healthy, normotensive individuals cerebral blood flow remains relatively
constant between cerebral perfusion pressures of 50 to 150 mm Hg. Within this
range the cerebral vasculature is able to vasodilate or vasoconstrict in response to
changes in mean arterial blood pressure to maintain a constant cerebral blood flow.
Below a cerebral perfusion pressure of 50 mm Hg (mean arterial pressure of
about 65 mm Hg assuming an intracranial pressure of 15 mm Hg) cerebral blood
flow decreases proportionally to mean arterial pressure. Above a cerebral perfusion
pressure of about 150 mm Hg, cerebral blood flow increases proportionally to
the mean arterial pressure. This response of the cerebral vasculature to alterations in
the mean arterial pressure to maintain a constant cerebral blood flow is termed
“autoregulation.” (478)
11. The time course within which cerebral vasculature changes in response to
alterations in mean arterial pressure is 1 to 3 minutes. That is, within 1 to 3 minutes
of an alteration in the mean arterial pressure, the cerebral vasculature is able to
*Numbers in parentheses: numbers refer to pages, figures, or tables in Miller RD, Pardo MC: Basics of Anesthesia,
6th ed. Philadelphia, Elsevier Saunders, 2011.
Central Nervous System Disease
327
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
respond appropriately to maintain a constant cerebral blood flow. In the interim,
with drastic increases or decreases in mean arterial pressure, there may be a
brief period of respective cerebral hyperperfusion or hypoperfusion. (478)
12. Autoregulation of cerebral blood flow may be impaired in the presence of
intracranial mass lesions, head trauma, intracranial surgery, subarachnoid
hemorrhage, severe hypothermia, or volatile anesthetics. Chronic arterial
hypertension or sympathetic nervous system stimulation results in a shift of the
autoregulatory curve to the right, such that cerebral blood flow is maintained
between pressures higher than 60 to 150 mm Hg. This effect is believed to occur
after 1 to 2 months of hypertension. (478)
13. Cerebral blood flow is linearly related to the PaCO2, such that increases in the PaCO2
result in increases in cerebral blood flow and vice versa. This effect of the PaCO2
occurs as a result of the effect of the arterial carbon dioxide tension on the pH
of the cerebrospinal fluid. An increase in PaCO2 leads to acidosis, which in turn leads
to cerebral vascular vasodilation. The duration of this effect is 6 to 8 hours,
after which cerebral blood flow normalizes through the transfer of bicarbonate out
of the cerebrospinal fluid. This effect is only in response to respiratory acidosis.
The cerebral vasculature is not affected by metabolic acidosis, owing to the
blood-brain barrier protection against the diffusion of hydrogen ions from the
vascular space. (477-478, Figure 30-2)
14. Cerebral blood flow increases by 1 mL/100 g of brain tissue per minute for every
1 mm Hg increase in the PaCO2 from 40 mm Hg. Conversely, cerebral blood flow
decreases by 1 mL/100 g of brain tissue per minute for every 1 mm Hg decrease
in the PaCO2 from 40 mm Hg. The impact of this can be marked, given that a decrease
in the PaCO2 from 40 to 25 mm Hg can lead to approximately a 33% decrease in
cerebral blood flow. (478)
15. A potential risk of prolonged, aggressive hyperventilation to a PaCO2 of less than
30 mm Hg is cerebral ischemia. Prolonged aggressive hyperventilation following
traumatic brain injury has been shown to be associated with a poorer neurologic
outcome. (478)
16. Cerebral blood flow increases dramatically when the PaO2 falls below 50 mm Hg.
(478, Figure 30-2)
17. Volatile anesthetics are potent cerebral vasodilators. At concentrations above
0.5 MAC, these anesthetic agents increase cerebral blood flow in a dose-dependent
manner, most likely through the direct relaxation of vascular smooth muscle
leading to vasodilation. In contrast, volatile anesthetics decrease the cerebral
metabolic oxygen requirement profoundly. Normally, a reduction in cerebral
metabolic rate would produce a reduction in cerebral blood flow through
flow-metabolism coupling. However, the net effect of volatile anesthetics is to
increase cerebral blood flow, particularly at high doses. Therefore, volatile
anesthetics uncouple the normal physiologic relationship between cerebral blood
flow and metabolism. These effects may lead to increases in intracranial pressure
and cerebral edema. (478)
18. Nitrous oxide increases cerebral blood flow through cerebral vasodilation. The
effect of nitrous oxide appears to be blunted in the presence of intravenous
anesthetics and increases cerebral blood flow less than the volatile anesthetics.
Limitation of the inspired concentration of nitrous oxide to less than 0.7 MAC
minimizes its effect of cerebral vasodilation and intracranial pressure. (478)
19. The effect of ketamine on cerebral blood flow and intracranial pressure is
controversial. In isolation, ketamine appears to increase PaCO2, cerebral blood
flow, and intracranial pressure, limiting its use for patients with increased
intracranial pressure. These effects appear to be attenuated, however, in the
presence of other anesthetic agents and controlled ventilation. (478)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
328
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
20. Thiopental decreases cerebral blood flow via cerebral vasoconstriction. It also
decreases cerebral metabolic oxygen requirements and reliably decreases the
intracranial pressure. (478)
21. Propofol decreases cerebral blood flow via cerebral vasoconstriction in a manner
similar to thiopental. It also decreases cerebral metabolic oxygen requirements and
reliably decreases the intracranial pressure. (478)
22. Etomidate decreases cerebral blood flow and cerebral metabolic oxygen
requirements in the absence of myoclonus or seizure activity. (478)
23. Dexmedetomidine and clonidine decrease cerebral blood flow through reductions
in mean arterial pressure and cerebral perfusion pressure. They have minimal
effect on cerebral metabolic rate and intracranial pressure. (478)
24. Benzodiazepines minimally decrease cerebral blood flow and cerebral metabolic
rate and do not appear to cause an increase in intracranial pressure. (478)
25. Studies evaluating the effects of opioids on cerebral blood flow and intracranial
pressure have yielded inconsistent results. Opioids either very minimally decrease
cerebral blood flow and intracranial pressure or produce no effect at all in the
absence of respiratory depression and elevated PaCO2. (478)
26. Succinylcholine may increase intracranial pressure through stimulation of
muscle spindles, which then increases cerebral metabolic rate and cerebral blood
flow. These effects are not consistent, and may be attenuated through a deep level
of anesthesia during the administration of succinylcholine. Nondepolarizing
neuromuscular blocking drugs do not generally affect intracranial pressure except
through the potential release of histamine, leading to cerebral vasodilation. (479)
INTRACRANIAL
PRESSURE
27. Normal intracranial pressure is lower than 15 mm Hg. (478)
28. The intracranial pressure is determined by the intracranial contents occupying
a fixed space. The intracranial compartment is composed of brain tissue,
cerebrospinal fluid, and blood. Increases in brain tissue or fluid, such as by brain
tumor and edema, are space occupying and could potentially increase the
intracranial pressure. Initially, the displacement of cerebrospinal fluid from the
cranium compensates for increases in the space-occupying mass, but as the mass
enlarges an increase in intracranial pressure becomes apparent clinically.
The relationship between the intracranial volume and intracranial pressure is such
that after compensatory mechanisms are exhausted, minimal increases in the
intracranial volume result in marked increases in the intracranial pressure. Increases
in a patient’s intracranial pressure can interfere with cerebral perfusion and
result in cerebral ischemia. (478-479, Figure 30-3)
29. Although drug-induced increases in cerebral blood flow do not greatly affect
the intracranial pressure of normal patients, patients with intracranial space-
occupying lesions are not able to compensate for the changes in cerebral blood flow
and are vulnerable to developing increased intracranial pressure. (478-479)
30. Reductions in elevated intracranial pressure are achieved through reductions in
cerebral spinal fluid, cerebral blood volume, and cerebral edema. Cerebral spinal
fluid may be drained through an external ventricular or lumbar drain, or its
production decreased by drugs such as furosemide and acetazolamide. Methods of
reducing cerebral blood volume include positioning of the head to facilitate
venous drainage, avoidance of high ventilatory pressures and PEEP, avoidance
of hypertension, and hyperventilation. Finally, osmotic diuretics such as
mannitol, as well as surgical resection of space-occupying lesions and
decompressive craniectomy, may reduce intracranial pressure from cerebral
edema. (479, Table 30-1)
Central Nervous System Disease
329
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
31. Signs and symptoms of an increased intracranial pressure include nausea and
vomiting, hypertension, bradycardia, personality changes, altered levels
of consciousness, altered patterns of breathing, papilledema, and seizures.
(480, Table 30-2)
NEUROPROTECTION
32. The use of induced hypothermia in neurosurgical procedures was widespread based
on laboratory studies. An international multicenter study in 2005 of 1001 patients
did not show any benefit in neurologic outcome, however. Because there has
been no verifiable benefit ascribed to hypothermia for neuroprotection in humans,
the routine use of hypothermia in neurosurgery is no longer recommended. Indeed,
the routine use of hypothermia in neurosurgery is unlikely to continue. (480)
33. Although intravenous anesthetics have been shown to decrease the cerebral
metabolic rate and intracranial pressure, there has not been any evidence to prove that
neurologic outcome is improved with their use. A concern with the use of intravenous
anesthetics such as propofol or barbiturates for this purpose is that the moderate
benefit they may provide for neuroprotection can be readily offset by alterations in
the cardiovascular or hemodynamic status of the patient. When these drugs are being
administered, vigilance is required to avoid exacerbation of cerebral injury, thus
limiting their usefulness. Rather it is recommended that other physiologic parameters
(cerebral perfusion pressure, oxygenation, normocapnia, temperature, and control
of hyperglycemia) are attended to for maximal neuroprotection. (480)
ANESTHESIA FOR
NEUROSURGERY
34. In addition to standard monitors, continuous monitoring of systemic blood pressure
is commonly employed using a peripheral arterial catheter to monitor the
hemodynamic changes that occur around induction of anesthesia, laryngoscopy,
application of Mayfield head frame, surgery, and emergence from anesthesia.
Abnormally low or high systemic blood pressure may compromise cerebral
perfusion or increase cerebral swelling, respectively. In addition, these catheters
permit blood sampling and accurate determination of PaCO2. Other monitors should
include a peripheral nerve stimulator to monitor the level of paralysis and a
bladder catheter, particularly if diuretics are used. Central venous catheters are
not routinely employed but may be considered for patient or surgical indications.
(480-481, Table 30-3)
35. An external ventricular device or a subdural bolt placed through a burr hole can be
used to measure the intracranial pressure. The external ventricular device has the
additional advantage of also allowing for drainage of cerebral spinal fluid. (480)
36. Before direct laryngoscopy and intubation of the trachea, there are several measures
that can be taken to attenuate increases in arterial blood pressure and intracranial
pressure. Neuromuscular blockade should be confirmed with a peripheral nerve
stimulator. This ensures that dangerous rises in intracranial pressure due to
coughing or bucking in response to direct laryngoscopy do not occur. The
administration of an additional dose of propofol, thiopental, opioids, deeper levels
of a volatile agent, a bolus of intravenous lidocaine, or a short-acting b-adrenergic
antagonist (e.g., esmolol) prior to direct laryngoscopy are all methods that may
be used to attenuate an increase in intracranial pressure. Finally, the duration
of direct laryngoscopy should be minimized. (481)
37. Maintenance anesthesia in patients undergoing intracranial neurosurgery is often
achieved with the administration of a low concentration of volatile anesthetic in
conjunction with nitrous oxide and an opioid. The volatile anesthetic contributes to
decreased awareness and the blunting of sympathetic nervous system responses.
The disadvantage of volatile anesthetics during the resection of an intracranial
tumor is its potential to increase cerebral blood flow. Alternatively, anesthesia may
be maintained with a combination of intravenous anesthetic agents, most
commonly propofol in conjunction with an opioid such as fentanyl or remifentanil.
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
330
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
The use of intravenous anesthesia may be preferred in patients with elevated
intracranial pressure due to a reduction of cerebral blood flow associated with these
agents, as well as their compatibility with intraoperative neuromonitoring with
evoked potentials. (481-482)
38. To limit the degree of increase in cerebral blood flow associated with its
administration, the MAC of volatile anesthetic administered should not exceed
0.5 MAC when administered for maintenance anesthesia in patients undergoing
intracranial neurosurgery. It may be prudent to avoid the administration of volatile
anesthetics altogether in patients with elevated intracranial pressure, since
even slight increases in cerebral blood flow and intracranial pressure are potentially
harmful. Likewise, the administration of a volatile anesthetic should be
discontinued intraoperatively if cerebral swelling develops. (481)
39. The PaCO2 should be maintained between 30 and 35 mm Hg to optimize cerebral
blood flow intraoperatively. Below a PaCO2 of 30 mm Hg there is no evidence
of any additional benefit. (481)
40. Excessive use of PEEP during mechanical ventilation of the lungs in patients
undergoing intracranial neurosurgery may lead to an increase in intracranial
pressure by increasing the central venous pressure and impairing cerebral venous
drainage. (481)
41. Peripheral vasodilators may increase cerebral blood flow by causing cerebral
vascular vasodilation while simultaneously decreasing mean arterial blood pressure
and cerebral perfusion pressure. Examples include nitroglycerin, nitroprusside,
adenosine, calcium channel blockers, and hydralazine. The use of these drugs is not
recommended for use in neurosurgical patients, particularly before the dura is
open in patients with elevated intracranial pressure. (481)
42. Neuromuscular blockade is commonly maintained throughout intracranial surgical
procedures to minimize the risk of patient movement, coughing, or bucking
that may result in dangerous increases in intracranial pressure. Patient movement
may also result in an increase in operative site bleeding and bulging of the brain
into the operative site with difficult surgical exposure. (481-482)
43. Cerebral swelling occurring intraoperatively can be treated a number of ways.
First, it should be confirmed that the maximal benefit is being derived from
hyperventilation of the lungs with a PaCO2 between 30 and 35 mm Hg. Next, drugs
that will cause cerebral dehydration may be administered. Mannitol at a dose of
0.25 to 1 g/kg or furosemide at a dose of 0.5 to 1 mg/kg is frequently used for this
purpose. Intermittent injections of an intravenous anesthetic such as thiopental
or propofol may also be administered. If surgically possible, placing the patient
in a head-up position may improve venous drainage and reduce swelling.
Discontinuing volatile anesthetic agents and using intravenous agents such as
propofol should be considered to reduce cerebral blood flow. (482)
44. Mannitol is an osmotic diuretic whose onset of action is within 5 to 10 minutes, and
whose maximum benefit lasts for 2 to 4 hours. There are some potential problems
that can occur with the administration of mannitol, however. If given rapidly,
hypotension through peripheral vasodilation combined with a short-term increase
in intravascular fluid volume can lead to a decrease in the cerebral perfusion
pressure. If large doses of mannitol are administered, there is a risk of acute
mannitol toxicity, manifested by hyponatremia and a high measured serum
osmolality. (482)
45. Maintenance of euvolemia with isotonic intravenous fluids, such as normal saline
or lactated Ringer solution, during intracranial neurosurgery is recommended.
Hypotonic solutions are not recommended due to increases in free water and
possible cerebral edema. Colloids such as 5% albumin are acceptable but no
improvement in outcome has been demonstrated. (482)
Central Nervous System Disease
331
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
46. Glucose-containing solutions should be avoided as hyperglycemia augments
ischemic neuronal cell damage in the brain. (482)
47. Coughing and straining in patients awakening from anesthesia after intracranial
surgery can result in dangerous increases in the intracranial pressure, increases in
cerebral edema, and precipitate postoperative bleeding. A small dose of opioid,
intravenous lidocaine, or both at the conclusion of the procedure may decrease
the likelihood of coughing during extubation. The emergence from anesthesia is
better timed to follow placement of the head dressings because movement of
the head at the conclusion of surgery in the lightly anesthetized patient can
stimulate coughing on the endotracheal tube. (482)
48. Rapid awakening is desirable in neurosurgical procedures to allow for a timely
assessment of neurologic status after surgery. (482)
49. Delayed recovery as well as worsening neurologic function after intracranial
surgery without obvious cause warrant evaluation by computed tomography or
magnetic resonance imaging. A tension pneumocephalus may be considered as
a possible cause of postoperative delayed recovery when nitrous oxide was
administered intraoperatively, particularly after posterior fossa surgeries in the
sitting position. Tension pneumocephalus occurs as a result of air entering the
subdural cavities and the treatment is burr hole removal of the gas. (482)
50. Labetalol is commonly used to treat hypertension on emergence from anesthesia
for intracranial neurosurgery due to its ability to reduce mean arterial blood
pressure without causing cerebral vasodilation and with rapid onset. (482)
51. Patients undergoing neurosurgical procedures are at an increased risk for a venous
air embolism due to positioning of the patient’s head above the level of the heart.
In addition, veins that are opened intraoperatively in the cranial vault may
remain tented open unlike in other body sites. Patients undergoing posterior fossa
craniotomies in the sitting position are at particular risk of an intraoperative venous
air embolism. For this reason, many neurosurgeons prefer to do posterior fossa
craniotomies with the patient in the prone or park bench position. (480-481)
52. A venous air embolism is characterized by entry of air into the venous circulation
and the right heart. After entry into the heart, the air may take three paths. First, it
may stay in the right ventricle, interfering with blood flow into the pulmonary
artery. Second, it may enter the pulmonary circulation and precipitate acute
pulmonary hypertension as well as traverse the pulmonary circulation and enter the
arterial circulation. Finally, from the right atrium it could enter the left atrium
through a patent foramen ovale, which is present in approximately 25% of adults.
Arterial emboli in the cerebral and coronary circulation can lead to neurologic and
coronary infarctions, respectively. (482-483)
53. Methods by which a venous air embolism can be detected include transesophageal
echocardiography, precordial Doppler ultrasound transducer, an acute decrease
in the exhaled carbon dioxide concentration, increased end-tidal nitrogen
concentration, and changes in pulmonary and systemic pressures. In response to a
pulmonary embolus, patients may have bronchoconstriction, pulmonary edema,
elevated right atrial or pulmonary artery pressure, and elevated peak inspiratory
pressure. The most sensitive method to detect a venous air embolism is through
the use of transesophageal echocardiography. It is also beneficial in that it allows
for the identification of right-to-left air shunting. The drawbacks of routine
transesophageal echocardiography monitoring for venous air embolism are its
invasiveness, bulk, and cost. An acceptable alternative to transesophageal
echocardiography for monitoring is through the combined use of a precordial
Doppler transducer and monitoring exhaled concentrations of carbon dioxide.
The transducer should be placed between the second or third intercostal spaces to
the right of the sternum. The Doppler transducer is able to recognize small volumes
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
332
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
of intracardiac air, but it is not able to distinguish between small volumes and large
volumes of air. (482)
54. Signs and symptoms of a clinically significant venous air embolism include a
decrease in end-tidal carbon dioxide, hypotension, hypoxemia, tachycardia, cardiac
dysrhythmias, cyanosis, and a characteristic “mill wheel” murmur. The awake
patient may experience anxiety, chest pain, and coughing. (482-483)
55. The treatment for a venous air embolism includes the prompt administration
of 100% oxygen and the discontinuation of nitrous oxide administration. The
surgeons should be asked to irrigate the operative field with fluid and to occlude
the bone edges to prevent the further entry of air. Lowering the operative field
(Trendelenburg position) in conjunction with aggressive volume resuscitation may
also prevent further entrainment of air and improve hemodynamics. Gentle
compression of the jugular veins can be instituted. In addition, if a central venous
catheter is in place, aspiration on the catheter to retrieve the air may be attempted
to confirm the diagnosis. Other treatment methods of a venous air embolus are
supportive as needed for hypotension, decreased cardiac output,
bronchoconstriction, or other manifestations. (483)
56. Nitrous oxide administration should be discontinued in the presence of a venous air
embolism. The diffusion of nitrous oxide into the air embolus could potentially
increase its size and worsen its clinical effects. Some clinicians choose to avoid the
administration of nitrous oxide in patients at risk for a venous air embolus. (482)
57. Although a pulmonary artery catheter is not useful for aspirating air from the
venous circulation because of its small catheter size, it may detect increases in
pulmonary artery pressure caused by a pulmonary air embolus. In practice,
pulmonary artery catheters are rarely used. (483)
58. PEEP has not been shown to be efficacious in the prevention of a venous air
embolism. (483)
59. Death occurring as a result of a venous air embolism is usually due to an obstruction
of forward flow from the right side of the heart. Acute cor pulmonale,
cardiovascular collapse, and arterial hypoxemia result. (483)
INTRACRANIAL
MASS LESIONS
60. Presenting signs and symptoms of patients with an intracranial tumor are typically
reflective of an elevated intracranial pressure due to a space-occupying mass.
Manifestations of elevated intracranial pressure include nausea and vomiting,
hypertension, bradycardia, personality changes, altered levels of consciousness,
altered patterns of breathing, and papilledema. Patients may also present with
seizures depending on the location of the tumor. New-onset seizures in a previously
asymptomatic adult are suggestive of an intracranial tumor. (480, Table 30-2)
61. The anesthetic goals in patients undergoing surgical resection of an intracranial
tumor are to reduce intracranial pressure using medications, and avoid drugs or
events (e.g., hypercarbia) that will cause undesirable changes in cerebral blood flow
or intracranial pressure. (483, Table 30-3)
62. Preoperative sedative medications may result in depression of ventilation and
increases in PaCO2 in patients with an intracranial tumor. This in turn could lead
to an increase in cerebral blood flow and a corresponding increase in the
intracranial pressure. (480, Table 30-3)
63. The induction of general anesthesia in patients scheduled to undergo surgical
resection of an intracranial tumor can be achieved with the administration of
thiopental or propofol to produce adequate anesthesia and minimize increases in
intracranial pressure with direct laryngoscopy. Cerebral perfusion pressure must be
maintained, however, to prevent cerebral ischemia in compromised patients.
Etomidate may be useful in situations in which patients have a suspected elevated
Central Nervous System Disease
333
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
intracranial pressure but are also hemodynamically unstable or hypovolemic, such
as trauma patients. (481, Table 30-3)
64. The sitting position facilitates surgical exposure of posterior fossa tumors and reduces
retraction of brain structures, potentially preventing unwanted trauma. The high
risk of venous air embolism (>25%), however, limits the use of the sitting position and
many surgeons prefer the prone position instead. Other disadvantages of the
sitting position include upper airway edema as a result of venous obstruction from
cervical flexion and quadriplegia from spinal cord compression and ischemia. (481)
65. There are some anesthetic considerations that are unique to posterior fossa tumors.
Posterior fossa tumors place the patient at a higher risk for venous air embolism.
In addition, resection of tumors in this area may injure vital brainstem structures
and result in intraoperative hemodynamic fluctuations as well as respiratory
depression in the postoperative period. Finally, injury to the cranial nerves may result
in a loss of protective airway reflexes that necessitates postoperative ventilation. (483)
INTRACRANIAL
ANEURYSMS AND
ARTERIOVENOUS
MALFORMATIONS
66. Ruptured intracranial aneurysms have a mortality of 40% to 50%. Patients with
ruptured intracranial aneurysms usually present with a sudden, severe headache,
nausea, vomiting, focal neurologic signs, hypertension, and a depressed level of
consciousness. Many of these symptoms are indications of an elevated intracranial
pressure. The immediate management of patients with a ruptured intracranial
aneurysm is to treat elevations in the intracranial pressure. (483, Table 30-4)
67. The goals of the anesthetic management of a patient undergoing resection of an
intracranial aneurysm are (1) avoidance of sudden increases in systemic arterial
blood pressure, and therefore transmural pressure of the aneurysm, which could
result in rupture; and (2) facilitate surgical exposure and access to the aneurysm.
Exaggerated increases in arterial blood pressure during direct laryngoscopy
and surgical frame pinning must be attenuated. The anesthetic goals for resection or
embolization of arteriovenous malformations are similar to those of aneurysms with
a few distinct considerations. These vascular abnormalities are low pressure and
high flow, and therefore increases in systemic blood pressure are less likely to result
in rupture of the lesion. Hypertension should still be avoided, however, due to the
high incidence of aneurysms associated with arteriovenous malformations. In
addition, prolonged arteriovenous malformation resection has been associated with
massive blood loss and severe cerebral swelling. (483-484, Table 30-4)
68. Major complications of intracranial aneurysm rupture include death, rebleeding,
and vasospasm. Early treatment has been shown to reduce the incidence of
rebleeding but may be technically more difficult due to swelling and inflammation.
Other complications of aneurysm rupture include seizures, acute and chronic
hydrocephalus, and systemic complications, such as neurogenic pulmonary edema
and hyponatremia. (483)
69. Theelectrocardiogramofpatients with a rupturedintracranialaneurysm oftenappears
abnormal and may mimic myocardial ischemia. These changes are usually due to
a neurologic mechanism and are not usually related to underlying coronary artery
disease. Changes frequently seen on the electrocardiogram of these patients include
arrhythmias, Q waves, U waves, T wave inversion, prolonged QT intervals, and ST
segment depression or elevation. Mild elevations in cardiac enzymes are common
but usually do not correlate with significant myocardial dysfunction. (483)
70. A major cause of mortality and morbidity after rupture of an intracranial aneurysm
is vasospasm of the cerebral arteries. Vasospasm occurs in about 70% of these
patients and typically has onset 3 to 5 days after rupture of an intracranial
aneurysm, but may occur as late as 12 days after rupture. Drowsiness is the most
common clinical sign of vasospasm, and transcranial Doppler ultrasound or
radiologic studies can confirm its presence. (483)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
334
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
71. Vasospasm that occurs after cerebral aneurysm rupture is treated with “Triple H”
therapy (hypertension, hypervolemia, and hemodilution) through an increase
in cardiac output and the administration of intravenous fluids. Administration of
the calcium channel blocker nimodipine has been shown to decrease the morbidity
and mortality from vasospasm. Finally, cerebral vasospasm may be treated using
the selective injection of vasodilators into the cerebral circulation or angioplasty
in the interventional radiology suite. (483)
72. Intracranial aneurysms may be treated using endovascular coiling or surgical
resection. Outcomes are similar between patients treated surgically and with
endovascular insertion of coils. Certain patients may be unsuitable candidates for
endovascular coiling due to the anatomy and location of their aneurysms; these
patients require surgery. (483)
73. Arteriovenous malformations may be treated expectantly, with open resection,
endovascular embolization, or with stereotactic radiosurgery (gamma knife).
Preoperative embolization is often used prior to open resection to reduce blood loss
and facilitate surgical resection. (484)
74. Temporary clips are often applied to a major feeding artery of an aneurysm to
facilitate resection and permanent clip placement. These clips may create regional
hypoperfusion to the areas perfused by these vessels. Anesthetic management
during temporary clip placement should involve maintenance of normal or slightly
increased systemic arterial blood pressure to maintain perfusion through the
collateral circulation. Drugs such as thiopental or propofol may be used to
achieve burst suppression on the electroencephalogram in the hope that this
provides some protection from ischemia. Rarely, hypothermic circulatory arrest
may be required for very large or complex aneurysms. (484)
CAROTID DISEASE
75. Carotid endarterectomy is indicated in symptomatic patients with 70% to 99%
stenosis of the carotid artery. Carotid endarterectomy may be beneficial in
asymptomatic patients. However, the perioperative risk of stroke and death
(approximately 4% to 7%) must be taken into account given a reduced benefit.
Data suggest carotid endarterectomy should be optimally performed within 2 weeks
of symptom onset. (484)
76. Patients undergoing a carotid endarterectomy often have coexisting coronary
artery and other atherosclerotic disease. The perioperative risk of myocardial
ischemia should be evaluated preoperatively and medically optimized. The range
of normal blood pressures for the patient should be determined. Neurologic
symptoms and deficits should be documented preoperatively to prevent any
dysfunction noted postoperatively from being incorrectly attributed to the surgical
procedure or intraoperative events. (484, Table 30-5)
77. The goals of the anesthetic management for patients undergoing a carotid
endarterectomy include (1) prevention of cerebral ischemia through maintenance of
adequate cerebral perfusion pressure and (2) prevention of myocardial ischemia
through avoidance of acute peaks in blood pressure and heart rate. The critical
period of the procedure occurs intraoperatively while the carotid artery is clamped.
Mean arterial pressure should be maintained above the patient’s baseline blood
pressure (within 20%) to ensure adequate blood flow through the circle of Willis.
Finally, rapid emergence from anesthesia is recommended to facilitate early
neurologic assessment. (484, Table 30-5)
78. During a carotid endarterectomy procedure, the arterial blood pressure should
be maintained in a normal or slightly elevated range specific to that patient.
It may be helpful to blunt sympathetic nervous system responses to direct
laryngoscopy to avoid acute hypertension. A high-normal range of mean arterial
pressures should be maintained during carotid artery clamping to increase
Central Nervous System Disease
335
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
collateral blood flow and prevent cerebral ischemia, particularly when there is
no intraluminal shunt in place. Intraoperative hypotension is often treated with
phenylephrine. (484, Table 30-4)
79. During a carotid endarterectomy the PaCO2 should be maintained near normal,
between 35 and 40 mm Hg. Hypocarbia should be avoided given the risk of cerebral
vasoconstriction and ischemia. (484)
80. The purpose of intraoperative neurologic monitoring during a carotid
endarterectomy is to identify cerebral ischemia and the potential need for an
intraluminal shunt placed for perfusion to the ipsilateral brain while the diseased
carotid artery is clamped. Several methods of monitoring for cerebral ischemia have
been used, including stump pressure measurement (blood pressure in the carotid
artery distal to the placement of the surgical clamp as an indication of adequate
collateral flow), electroencephalogram, and somatosensory evoked potentials,
direct measurement of cerebral blood flow, and transcranial Doppler
ultrasonography. Alternatively, an intraluminal shunt is routinely placed regardless
of whether cerebral ischemia is detected. (484-485)
81. The administration of either local or general anesthesia for carotid endarterectomy
is acceptable. Neither has been shown to have better outcomes or reduced
morbidity or mortality. (484)
82. Local anesthesia for a carotid endarterectomy is achieved with the administration of
a deep and superficial cervical plexus block. A deep cervical plexus block provides
anesthesia to the C1-C4 nerve roots and blocks the greater auricular, lesser occipital,
transverse cervical, and supraclavicular peripheral nerves. The superficial
cervical plexus block anesthetizes the cutaneous nerves. The advantages of local
anesthesia for this procedure include a more accurate assessment of the patient’s
neurologic status intraoperatively and improved hemodynamic stability.
Neurologic status is typically monitored using the patient’s contralateral grip
strength, level of consciousness, and quality of prompted speech. Disadvantages of
this technique include the need for a cooperative and motionless patient. (484)
83. The induction of general anesthesia for a carotid endarterectomy is usually achieved
with the administration of an opioid, an intravenous induction agent, and a
neuromuscular blocking drug. The maintenance of anesthesia is typically achieved
by the administration of a volatile anesthetic in conjunction with nitrous oxide
and an opioid. Neuromuscular blockade is usually maintained throughout the course
of the procedure to minimize the risk of intraoperative movement. Advantages of
general anesthesia include the ability to manipulate cerebral blood flow and the
cerebral metabolic oxygen requirement, as well as the security of a protected airway.
General anesthesia may also be advantageous when patients are unable to
communicate or when their neck anatomy appears difficult for the administration of
local anesthesia. Disadvantages include reliance on surrogate indicators to monitor
neurologic status and greater hemodynamic instability. (484, Table 30-5)
84. Potential postoperative complications after a carotid endarterectomy include
recurrent laryngeal nerve injury, hemodynamic instability, airway compression
secondary to neck hematoma, loss of carotid body function, myocardial infarction,
and neurologic dysfunction. Neurologic dysfunction after carotid endarterectomy is
usually due to intraoperative embolization or hypoperfusion during carotid artery
clamping. (485)
85. Postoperative hypertension is common after a carotid endarterectomy as the majority
of patients undergoing carotid endarterectomy have chronic hypertension.
Hypertension may also occur secondary to the loss of function of the carotid sinus
or the loss of innervation to the carotid sinus during surgery. Hypertension may
result in an increased incidence of postoperative complications such as neck
hematoma, myocardial ischemia, and hyperperfusion syndrome, and should be
strenuously avoided. (485)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
336
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
Chapter
28 OPHTHALMOLOGY AND
OTOLARYNGOLOGY
Steven Gayer, Howard D. Palte
OPHTHALMOLOGY
1. What is normal intraocular pressure (IOP)?
2. How is IOP created and maintained?
3. Why and to what extent does IOP increase during coughing or vomiting?
4. What factors during the course of a general anesthetic increase IOP?
5. What physiological factors (CO2, temperature) during the course of a general
anesthetic decrease IOP?
6. How does ketamine affect intraocular pressure? What other attributes of ketamine
make it a less than ideal choice for anesthesia in patients undergoing
ophthalmologic procedures?
7. How much does IOP increase with the intravenous administration of
succinylcholine? What is the duration of this effect?
8. What is the mechanism for the increase in IOP following administration of
succinylcholine?
9. What maneuvers may attenuate the rise in IOP associated with succinylcholine use
for laryngoscopy and intubation?
10. How do paralyzing doses of nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking drugs affect
intraocular pressure?
11. How do inhaled anesthetics affect IOP? What is the effect on IOP of most
intravenous anesthetics?
12. How do changes in arterial blood pressure affect IOP?
13. What topical ophthalmic medicines may be absorbed sufficiently to exert systemic
effects?
14. What systemic effects have been attributed to the use of topical ophthalmic
b-adrenergic blocking medications?
15. What are the systemic effects of topical phospholine iodide (echothiophate)?
16. Why is phenylephrine administered as a topical ophthalmic medicine? What
systemic effect has been attributed to the topical ophthalmic application of this
drug?
17. Why are carbonic anhydrase inhibitors, such as acetazolamide, administered as
topical ophthalmic medicines? What systemic effects have been attributed to the
topical ophthalmic application of this drug?
18. What is the oculocardiac reflex? What is its reported incidence? When is it most
likely to occur?
19. When is the oculocardiac reflex most often encountered?
20. What cardiac rhythms are likely to result from the oculocardiac reflex?
21. How does arterial hypoxemia or hypercarbia affect the oculocardiac reflex? How
does the depth of general anesthesia affect the oculocardiac reflex?
22. What is the first line of treatment of the oculocardiac reflex? What measures may
be taken if the reflex persists?
337
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
23. Is prophylactic use of anticholinergics fully effective in preventing the
oculocardiac reflex? What problems may arise from use of an anticholinergic?
24. What are some important demographic characteristics of patients scheduled
for eye surgery?
25. Should antiplatelet or anticoagulant medications be discontinued prior to
surgery?
26. What is a key anesthetic consideration for the patient scheduled for ophthalmic
surgery with uncontrolled cough, untreated Parkinsonian tremor, severe
claustrophobia, or pathological anxiety?
27. What are the anesthetic options for patients having eye surgery?
28. What is the significance of the extraocular muscle cone for eye blocks?
29. What is the ultimate needle tip position for a retrobulbar (intraconal) block?
30. What is the rationale behind extraconal (peribulbar) anesthesia? Where is the
ultimate needle tip position?
31. What are some complications of a retrobulbar block?
32. What is the differential diagnosis of altered physiological status (blood pressure,
heart rate) after a needle-based ophthalmic regional eye block?
33. How does a sub-Tenon block differ from a needle-based eye block?
34. Which patients are at high risk for retinal detachment?
35. What are the anesthetic considerations for patients undergoing surgery to repair
a retinal detachment?
36. When must nitrous oxide be avoided as maintenance anesthetic for patients
undergoing surgery to repair a retinal detachment? What is the risk associated
with this?
37. What is glaucoma? What are its variants?
38. What are the anesthetic goals in the management of glaucoma patients?
39. What are some special anesthetic considerations in children undergoing
strabismus surgery?
40. What is the most common reason for an inpatient admission for children following
strabismus surgery?
41. What factors must be considered in the anesthetic management of patients with
traumatic eye injuries?
42. Why is “awake” endotracheal intubation hazardous for patients with open globe
injuries?
43. What anesthetic maneuvers may attenuate increases in IOP in traumatic eye
injury?
44. Is regional anesthesia contraindicated in traumatic eye injuries?
45. What is the most common ocular complication following general anesthesia for
non-ophthalmologic surgery? What other condition can mimic it?
46. Why are patients who are undergoing a surgical procedure via general anesthesia
at risk for corneal abrasion?
47. What are clinical signs of corneal abrasion?
48. What are some measures that can be taken to reduce the risk of corneal abrasion
in patients under general anesthesia? What are some of the potential problems
with routine use of ophthalmic ointment?
49. Which surgical procedures are associated with increased risk of postoperative
visual loss?
50. What action(s) should be taken if the patient complains of postoperative
visual loss?
OTOLARYNGOLOGY
51. What special airway considerations pertain to ENT surgery?
52. Why are posterior pharyngeal packs used during ENT surgery and what
precautions are required with their use?
53. What supplemental airway devices may be needed for a difficult airway during
ENT surgery?
54. What is laryngospasm? How is the reflex mediated?
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
338
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
55. What is the treatment for laryngospasm?
56. Why are children at particular risk for laryngospasm?
57. Should scheduled ENT surgery be postponed if the child has an upper respiratory
infection (URI)? What are the risks associated with proceeding with anesthesia
in a child with an active upper respiratory infection?
58. What risks are associated with general anesthesia in a patient with massive
epistaxis?
59. What are some symptoms that may alert the anesthesiologist to the presence of
obstructive sleep apnea (OSA)?
60. What features may be noted in the airway examination of a patient with OSA?
61. What are the anesthetic implications of OSA?
62. What elements are necessary to generate an airway fire?
63. Are airway fires possible with monitored anesthesia care (MAC)?
64. What are the main anesthetic considerations for middle ear surgery?
65. What effects may nitrous oxide (N2O) exert during ear surgery?
66. How is surgical identification of the facial nerve performed intraoperatively in
patients undergoing otologic surgery? How might this affect the anesthetic
management?
67. Why do otolaryngologists use epinephrine intraoperatively? What are the
anesthesia implications of its use?
68. What concentration of epinephrine is considered safe in ear microsurgery?
69. During otolaryngology surgery how can bleeding in the surgical field be
minimized?
70. What is an optimal anesthetic plan for emergence from general anesthesia in the
patient who has undergone middle ear surgery?
71. Why are patients who have undergone middle ear surgery at risk for postoperative
nausea and vomiting?
72. What anesthetic strategies minimize postoperative nausea and vomiting after ear
surgery?
73. What factors contribute to airway obstruction in children undergoing
tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy?
74. What is negative pressure pulmonary edema?
75. Why is blood loss often underestimated during and after tonsillectomy and
adenoidectomy?
76. What are some considerations for the anesthetic management of patients who
return to surgery because of significant bleeding after tonsillectomy and
adenoidectomy?
77. What organism is frequently responsible for acute epiglottitis?
78. What are the clinical features of acute epiglottitis?
79. What anesthetic precautions are necessary in acute epiglottitis management?
80. What are the clinical features of foreign body aspiration into the airway?
81. What anesthesia precautions are necessary in addressing the patient with an airway
foreign body?
82. What postoperative measures are necessary after the removal of a foreign body from
the airway?
83. Why has cocaine been used for nasal surgery?
84. What are the disadvantages of using cocaine? Are there alternatives?
85. What considerations are important for general anesthesia emergence in nasal and
sinus surgery?
86. What preoperative investigations may be useful in a patient undergoing endoscopic
surgery?
87. What techniques may be used to maintain ventilation and oxygenation during
airway endoscopy?
88. What risk is associated with the use of a manual high-pressure jet ventilator
(Sanders’ injector apparatus)?
89. What is a laser? What advantages does it offer for surgical procedures?
90. Name some hazards that are associated with laser surgery.
Ophthalmology and Otolaryngology
339
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
91. What is the purpose of a smoke evacuator used during laser surgery?
92. What measures can be taken during laser surgery to minimize the risk of an
endotracheal tube fire?
93. WhyshouldtheETT cuffbefilledwithsalineoranindicatordyeduring lasersurgery?
94. What medical issues are frequently encountered in patients undergoing radical
neck dissection?
95. How does a history of radiation to the larynx, pharynx, or oral cavity affect
anesthetic management?
96. What arrhythmias may be precipitated during radical neck dissection, and why?
97. What known injuries may be encountered postoperatively after radical neck
dissection?
98. What catastrophic postoperative event may occur after neck surgery?
99. How may hypocalcemia present after thyroid surgery?
100. The patient is unable to grimace after a parotidectomy. Why? What monitor(s)
may help prevent this complication?
ANSWERS*
OPHTHALMOLOGY
1. Intraocular pressure ranges between 10 to 22 mm Hg. In the intact normal eye there
is a typical diurnal variation of 2 to 5 mm Hg. Small changes can occur with
each cardiac contraction and with closure of the eyes, mydriasis, and changes in
posture. (487)
2. Intraocular pressure is primarily a balance between the production of aqueous
humor and its drainage. Aqueous humor is actively secreted from the posterior
chamber’s ciliary body and flows through the pupil into the anterior chamber
where it becomes mixed with aqueous fluids, which are passively produced by
blood vessels on the iris’s forward surface. (487)
3. Any obstruction of venous return from the eye to the right side of the heart can
raise IOP. Coughing or straining can increase intraocular pressure by 40 mm Hg
or more. (487)
4. Any maneuver that increases venous congestion will increase IOP. These include:
Trendelenburg positioning, tight cervical collar, straining, retching, vomiting,
and coughing. Direct laryngoscopy and intubation also increase intraocular
pressure. (487)
5. During general anesthesia hyperventilation and hypothermia decrease IOP. (487)
6. Ketamine can induce a rotatory nystagmus, cycloplegia, and blepharospasm (tight
squeezing of the eyelids). Additionally, it is proemetic and increases secretions.
Anticholinergic agents may be administered with ketamine to diminish secretions.
There is controversy surrounding the effect of ketamine on IOP. (487)
7. Succinylcholine can produce an increase in intraocular pressure of about 9 mm Hg
1 to 4 minutes after intravenous administration. This effect can last up to 7
minutes. (487)
8. Increases in IOP secondary to the administration of succinylcholine are due to a
number of mechanisms including tonic contraction of the extraocular muscles,
relaxation of the orbital smooth muscle, choroidal vascular dilation, and
cycloplegia, which impedes aqueous outflow. (487)
*Numbers in parentheses: numbers refer to pages, figures, or tables in Miller RD, Pardo MC: Basics of Anesthesia,
6th ed. Philadelphia, Elsevier Saunders, 2011.
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
340
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
9. Pretreatment with a small dose of nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocker,
lidocaine, b-blocker, or acetazolamide may attenuate increases in IOP associated
with use of succinylcholine prior to direct laryngoscopy and endotracheal
intubation. (487)
10. Nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking drugs will decrease IOP by relaxing the
extraocular muscles. (487)
11. Both inhaled and most intravenous anesthetics produce dose-related reductions in
intraocular pressure. This is probably due to multiple mechanisms including
central nervous system depression, decreased production of aqueous humor,
enhanced outflow of aqueous humor, and relaxation of the extraocular muscles.
The effect of ketamine on IOP is controversial. (487)
12. Arterial hypertension has minimal influence on IOP. Venous drainage is the key
factor affecting IOP. (487)
13. Topical ophthalmic agents can be absorbed systemically via the conjunctiva or
drain down the nasolacrimal duct and be absorbed through the nasal mucosa.
These agents include acetylcholine, anticholinesterases, cyclopentolate,
epinephrine, phenylephrine, and timolol. (487, Table 31-1)
14. Topical ophthalmic b-adrenergic blocking medications may produce atropine
resistant bradycardia and bronchospasm, and exacerbate congestive heart failure.
(487, Table 31-1)
15. Phospholine iodide (echothiophate) is a miosis-inducing anticholinesterase
that profoundly interferes with metabolism of succinylcholine. Patients
with low levels of plasma cholinesterase are at risk for prolonged paralysis.
(487, Table 31-1)
16. Phenylephrine is an a-adrenergic that causes mydriasis (pupil dilation). Systemic
absorption of phenylephrine can induce transient malignant hypertension. (487,
Table 31-1)
17. Acetazolamide inhibits the production of aqueous humor. Its systemic effects
include diuresis and hypokalemic metabolic acidosis. (487, Table 31-1)
18. The oculocardiac reflex is a vagal-mediated response that manifests with an
abrupt, profound decrease in heart rate. It occurs in response to extraocular muscle
traction or external pressure on the globe. The reported incidence varies widely
from 15% to 80%. (487)
19. The oculocardiac reflex is most often encountered during strabismus surgery.
However, it can arise during any type of ophthalmic surgery as well as some
otolaryngology procedures. A regional anesthetic eye block can ablate it.
Paradoxically, it may be triggered during the administration of this block. (487)
20. The oculocardiac reflex can manifest as a variety of dysrhythmias including
junctional or sinus bradycardia, atrioventricular block, ventricular bigeminy,
multifocal premature ventricular contractions, ventricular tachycardia, and
asystole. (487-488)
21. Hypercarbia, hypoxemia, and light planes of general anesthesia all augment the
incidence and severity of the oculocardiac reflex. (488)
22. Prompt removal of the surgical stimulus often results in rapid recovery. At the first
sign of any dysrhythmia, surgery must stop and all pressure on the eye or
traction on extraocular muscles must be discontinued. Other measures that can
be taken include the administration of a parasympatholytic such as atropine or
glycopyrrolate. Consider increasing the depth of general anesthesia (provided that
the patient is hemodynamically stable). Alternatively, infiltration of local
anesthetic attenuates recurrence of the reflex. (488)
Ophthalmology and Otolaryngology
341
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
23. The prophylactic use of an anticholinergic is not 100% effective in preventing
the oculocardiac reflex. Side effects that may result from the use of an
anticholinergic include persistent tachycardia. This may have serious
consequences in geriatric patients and those with a history of heart disease. (488)
24. Eye surgery patients are often at the extremes of age, and range in age from
premature newborns to nonagenarians. Age-specific considerations such as
altered pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics apply. The elderly, syndromic
pediatric patients, and premature infants commonly have comorbidities that carry
important anesthesia implications. (488)
25. The cessation of antiplatelet or anticoagulant drugs prior to ophthalmic surgery is
controversial. One must weigh the risks of intraocular bleeding versus the risks
of perioperative stroke, myocardial ischemia, or deep venous thrombosis. (488)
26. An important component of the preoperative assessment is to gauge the likelihood
of patient movement during surgery. An inability to remain supine and
relatively still during eye surgery under monitored anesthesia care may result
in eye injury with devastating long-term visual consequences. (488)
27. The anesthetic options for ophthalmic procedures include general anesthesia,
retrobulbar (intraconal) block, peribulbar (extraconal) anesthesia, sub-Tenon
block, and topical analgesia. (488)
28. The extraocular muscle cone separates the intraconal from the extraconal
space and determines whether the local anesthetic is delivered as a retro- or
peribulbar block. (489, Fig. 31-1)
29. A retrobulbar block is accomplished by inserting a steeply angled needle into
the muscle cone such that the tip of the needle is behind (retro) the globe (bulbar).
(489, Fig. 31-1)
30. The boundary separating the intraconal from extraconal space is porous. Local
anesthetics injected outside the muscle cone diffuse inward, resulting in anesthesia
of the eye. An extraconal block is achieved by directing a needle with minimal
angulation to a shallow depth, such that the tip remains outside the muscle cone.
(489, Fig. 31-1)
31. Complications of needle-based ophthalmic regional anesthesia include superficial
or retrobulbar hemorrhage, elicitation of the oculocardiac reflex, intraocular
injection of local anesthetic, penetration or puncture of the globe, optic nerve
trauma, intravenous injection of local anesthetic solution and resultant
convulsions, central retinal artery occlusion, brainstem anesthesia, and blindness.
(489, Table 31-3)
32. Intravenous sedation is the most common cause of altered physiologic status
(blood pressure, heart rate, rhythm, ventilation) after a needle-based eye block.
More sinister complications are brainstem anesthesia and local anesthetic toxicity
secondary to intravascular injection. (489, Table 31-4)
33. A sub-Tenon block is performed using a blunt cannula inserted into the space
between the globe’s sclera and surrounding the Tenon capsule. Local anesthetic
injected into this space blocks the optic and ciliary nerves as they penetrate the
capsule. (490, Fig. 31-2)
34. Diabetics and patients with severe myopia are at particular risk for retinal
detachment. (490)
35. Retinal surgery is often prolonged and associated with greater manipulation of
the eye. Patients may require deeper planes of general anesthesia or a dense
regional block. Perfluorocarbons such as sulfur hexafluoride are relatively
insoluble gases that are surgically instilled in order to tamponade the retina; these
may take up to 28 days to resorb. (490)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
342
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
36. Nitrous oxide is 100 times more diffusible than sulfur hexafluoride and, therefore,
can expand the size of a gas bubble. This will raise IOP and may result in retinal
ischemia with permanent loss of vision. (490)
37. Glaucoma is a condition characterized by raised IOP, optic nerve injury, and
gradual loss of vision. It is thought that a sustained increase in IOP results in
diminished perfusion of the optic nerve. Variants include closed angle (or acute)
glaucoma and open angle (or chronic) glaucoma. (491)
38. The key anesthetic goals in the management of glaucoma patients include
avoiding mydriasis (by ensuring miotic drops are continued), understanding the
interactions between glaucoma medications and anesthetic agents, and preventing
increases in IOP associated with the induction, maintenance, and emergence
from anesthesia. (491)
39. Special considerations for children undergoing strabismus surgery include an
awareness of the high incidence of intraoperative oculocardiac reflex, an increased
risk for malignant hyperthermia, and the high incidence of postoperative
nausea and vomiting. (491)
40. The most common reason for pediatric inpatient admission following strabismus
surgery is postoperative nausea and vomiting (PONV). (491)
41. The anesthetic plan for patients with traumatic eye injuries must balance the
specific risks of increasing IOP and exacerbating the ocular insult versus
anesthetizing a non fasted patient at risk for aspiration upon the induction of
general anesthesia. Increasing IOP via a tightly applied facemask, laryngoscopy
and intubation, or from coughing or bucking may result in extrusion of vitreous,
and jeopardize ultimate visual outcome. A rapid sequence induction is indicated
for the non fasted patient. (491)
42. Awakeendotracheal intubation may be appropriateinpatients with difficult airways.
However, in the setting of a disruptive globe increases in IOP can lead to adverse
visual outcomes. The risks associated with rises in IOP produced by an awake
intubation must be weighed againsttheinherent dangersof the difficultairway. (491)
43. It is important to avoid maneuvers that increase IOP in patients with a
traumatic eye injury. The patient should be positioned in a slight anti-
Trendelenburg tilt. If no airway problems are anticipated, consider the rapid
sequence induction of anesthesia with a large dose of nondepolarizing
neuromuscular blocking agent. The systemic hypertension and rise in IOP that
follows the administration of succinylcholine can be attenuated by the
preinduction administration of intravenous medications such as lidocaine and
opioids. Also, pretreatment with a small dose of a nondepolarizing neuromuscular
blocking agents is useful. (491)
44. Regional anesthesia may be an option for select injuries, and in patients at higher
risk from general anesthesia. (491)
45. The most common ocular complication following general anesthesia for
non-ophthalmologic surgery is corneal abrasion. It is important to remember
a painful eye may also be a manifestation of acute glaucoma.
46. Mechanical damage to the eye can occur during the induction of anesthesia. It can
be caused by dangling eye tags, anesthesia masks, drapes, or other objects
that come in contact with the open eye. Abrasions can also occur secondary to
the loss of the blink reflex with subsequent drying from exposure to the
atmosphere and diminished tear production. (491)
47. The clinical signs of corneal abrasion include conjunctivitis, tearing, and foreign
body sensation. (491)
Ophthalmology and Otolaryngology
343
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
48. Preventative measures include gently taping the eyelid shut during mask
ventilation, intubation, and thereafter. Ointments may cause an allergic reaction
or blur post-emergence vision. Protective goggles may be beneficial. (491)
49. The risk of postoperative visual loss is higher in prolonged spine surgery in the
prone position, and cardiac surgery. (492)
50. Early consultation with an ophthalmologist is essential when a patient complains
of postoperative visual loss. Funduscopic and visual field examinations may
aid in diagnosis. (492)
OTOLARYNGOLOGY
51. Since ENT surgery takes place around the head, the airway becomes relatively
inaccessible to the anesthesia provider. Furthermore, there is a real possibility of
encountering a difficult airway because of anatomic factors, surgical issues, or
underlying pathology. Attention should be directed to establishing and securing
the airway, preferably with an endotracheal tube. Also, the airway may become
compromised in the perioperative period by undetected bleeding, edema, or
surgical manipulation. (492)
52. Posterior pharyngeal packs minimize the risk of aspiration by sealing the larynx
from blood that reaches the pharynx. It is vital to alert operating room personnel
of their placement, and to confirm their removal prior to extubation. (492)
53. Supplemental airway devices include the video-laryngoscope or fiber-optic
bronchoscope. A tracheostomy kit may be necessary for the gravely compromised
airway. Ancillary equipment should be readied prior to the commencement of
anesthesia. (492)
54. Laryngospasm is an abrupt, intense, and often prolonged closure of the larynx that
leads to compromises in ventilation and oxygenation. The reflex is mediated
through vagal stimulation of the superior laryngeal nerve. It may be precipitated
by instrumentation of the endolarynx, blood or secretions on the vocal cords,
and surgical manipulation at inadequate depths of anesthesia. (492)
55. Prompt recognition and intervention is key to the treatment of laryngospasm.
Treatment modalities include administration of 100% oxygen via positive-
pressure facemask ventilation, placement of oral or nasal airways, and deepening
of anesthesia with intravenous or inhalational agents. In refractory cases, a
small dose of succinylcholine may be required. (492)
56. In neonates, infants, and small children even brief laryngospasm is perilous. In this
group peripheral oxygen saturation drops rapidly because of a small functional
residual capacity and relatively high cardiac output. (492)
57. The child with an URI is at increased risk of airway issues, notably breath holding,
oxygen desaturation, and postoperative croup. However, not all children with
an URI need their ENT surgery postponed. An assessment of the benefits of
surgery vs. the risk of airway compromise should be made. For example,
the performance of a myringotomy with placement of ventilation tubes requires
minimal airway manipulation. (492)
58. Massive epistaxis is often associated with ongoing hemorrhage and concealed
swallowing of blood. These patients are at high risk for regurgitation and aspiration.
Clinically, they are anxious, hypovolemic, and hypertensive. The preoperative
placementofalarge-boreperipheralintravenouscannulaandadequaterehydration
are vital. Hypertension and continued hemorrhage should be anticipated. (492)
59. OSA is characterized by upper airway obstruction and disordered breathing
patterns during sleep. Symptoms include snoring, early morning headache, sleep
disturbances, daytime somnolence, and personality changes. In children
there may be behavioral and growth disturbances as well as poor school
performance. (492-493)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
344
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
60. Many patients with OSA are obese. The combination of limited mouth
opening and a large tongue may make visualization of the pharynx difficult. In
adult men the neck circumference is large, often exceeding 17 inches. (492-493)
61. One must anticipate difficult airway management in the OSA patient. Mask
ventilation, laryngoscopy, and intubation are often challenging. Intraoperative
hypertension is common. OSA patients are exquisitely sensitive to the effects
of hypnotics and narcotics, and may require prolonged recovery room monitoring.
(492-493)
62. There are three key elements needed to produce an airway fire:
a.
Heat or source of ignition (laser or electrosurgical unit)
b.
Fuel (paper drapes, gauze swabs)
c.
Oxidizer (O2, air, N2O) (493)
63. During monitored anesthesia care the danger of an airway fire exists because
the heat and fuel elements are still present. It is important to remove the source of
oxidation, and discontinue delivery of supplemental oxygen. (493)
64. There are five primary anesthetic concerns for middle ear surgery:
a.
N2O—increases middle ear pressure and causes serous otitis
b.
Facial nerve monitoring—avoid intraoperative neuromuscular blockade
c.
Epinephrine—may precipitate acute hypertension and tachyarrhythmia
d.
Smooth emergence—avoid coughing, bucking, and acute hypertension
e.
Postoperative nausea and vomiting—institute prophylactic measures (493)
65. Nitrous oxide is more soluble than nitrogen in blood and diffuses into
air-filled cavities. The increases in middle ear pressure may disrupt
tympanoplasty grafts. Also, the acute discontinuation of N2O may produce serous
otitis. Nitrous oxide should be administered in moderate concentrations (<50%),
if at all. (493)
66. The surgeon frequently uses a facial nerve monitor to prevent trauma or accidental
incision of the facial nerve and its branches. The use of neuromuscular
blocking drugs should be curtailed in order to prevent attenuation of the monitor’s
twitch response. Succinylcholine or a single small dose of an intermediate-acting
non depolarizing neuromuscular blocking agent is preferred. (493)
67. Epinephrine is injected during ear microsurgery to decrease bleeding and improve
visualization within the surgical field. Systemic uptake may precipitate
hypertension, tachycardia, and dysrhythmias. (493)
68. Epinephrine concentrations should be limited to 1:200,000 in ear
microsurgery. (493)
69. Maneuvers to limit bleeding in the surgical field include use of topical or
injected epinephrine, moderate reverse Trendelenburg (head-up) positioning, and
volatile anesthetics to decrease arterial blood pressure (within an acceptable
range). The use of potent vasoactive drugs and controlled hypotension is
controversial. (493)
70. The risk of graft disruption or acute hemorrhage is minimized by the smooth
emergence from general anesthesia. Episodic coughing and bucking will produce
hypertension that may result in poor surgical outcome. In the uncomplicated
airway, extubation of the trachea at a deep plane of anesthesia with spontaneous
respiration may be beneficial. (493)
71. Postoperative nausea and vomiting is common after middle ear surgery because
of manipulation of the vestibular apparatus. Factors that contribute to PONV
include anesthesia technique (use of nitrous oxide and narcotics), inadequate
hydration, and postoperative movement. (493)
Ophthalmology and Otolaryngology
345
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
72. The number of agents used to prevent PONV after ear surgery is guided by a
relative risk analysis. Prophylactic agents include corticosteroids, 5HT3-receptor
antagonists, neurokinin-1 receptor antagonists, scopolamine patches, and
low-dose propofol. Gastric decompression is useful if blood has been swallowed.
Scopolamine crosses the blood-brain barrier and may cause confusion,
particularly in the elderly. (493)
73. Children undergoing tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy have upper airway
obstruction that often only manifests during sleep. The routine use of premedication
is controversial. Furthermore, airway obstruction is accelerated by large masses
of tonsillar or adenoidal tissue, and loss of pharyngeal tone associated with the
induction of anesthesia. Also, manipulation of the airway during light planes
of anesthesia may result in acute airway obstruction. (493-494)
74. Negative pressure pulmonary edema clinically manifests when the patient inhales
forcefully against a closed glottis. This effort generates marked negative
intrathoracic pressures that are transmitted to the pulmonary interstitial tissue, and
promotes fluid transition from the pulmonary circulation into the alveoli. (494)
75. Blood loss during tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy is either overt (into the
suction bottle) or covert (swallowed). Blood loss is underestimated because the
covert loss is not seen. (493-494)
76. Anesthesia considerations for the post-tonsillectomy bleed include the possibility of
undetected and prolonged hemorrhage, concomitant hypovolemia, and
regurgitation of blood swallowed into the stomach. Measures required include
rehydration, rapid sequence induction of general anesthesia, protection of the
airway with a cuffed endotracheal tube (minimize risk of aspiration), and drainage
of gastric contents. (494)
77. Acute epiglottitis is an infectious disease caused by Haemophilus influenzae type B.
It most often affects children between the ages of 2 and 7. (494)
78. There is a history of sudden onset of fever and dysphagia. Symptoms progress
rapidly and the child may transition from an acute pharyngitis to complete airway
obstruction and respiratory failure within a few hours. The clinical picture is
of an agitated, drooling child leaning forward and holding the head in an extended
position. The child becomes exhausted from the work of breathing against an
almost fully occluded airway. (494)
79. Acute epiglottitis is an airway emergency. Direct visualization of the glottis should
not be attempted because stimulation and struggling may produce acute airway
obstruction. Emergency airway equipment should be readied. A surgeon adept
at rigid bronchoscopy and tracheostomy should be present at the bedside.
An inhaled induction of anesthesia maintaining spontaneous respiration is
preferred. Atropine may dry secretions and prevent bradycardia. (494)
80. Tracheal aspiration of a foreign body is an airway emergency. Clinical features
include sudden dyspnea, dry cough, hoarseness, and wheezing. (494)
81. A preoperative plan and mutual intraoperative cooperation between the anesthesia
provider and surgeon are vital in order to avoid inadvertent distal displacement
of the foreign body. Removal of the foreign body can be accomplished by
either direct laryngoscopy or rigid bronchoscopy. The surgeon should be prepared
for an emergency cricothyrotomy or tracheostomy in the event of acute airway
occlusion. Total intravenous anesthesia with maintenance of spontaneous
ventilation can eliminate operating room pollution. (494)
82. After the removal of a foreign body, postoperatively the patient should receive
humidified oxygen and remain under close observation for development of airway
edema. (494-495)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
346
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
83. Cocaine is an effective topical anesthetic agent. Since it is also a potent vasoconstrictor,
it reduces bleeding in the surgical field and shrinks the nasal mucosa. (495)
84. The disadvantages of cocaine include altered sensorium (euphoria and dysphoria)
and untoward cardiac arrhythmias. For these reasons, cocaine has been
surpassed by the “pseudo-cocaine” solution containing a local anesthetic and
vasoconstrictor. (495)
85. The removal of posterior pharyngeal packs should be confirmed. Protective airway
reflexes should be present prior to extubation because of possible airway edema and
ongoing bleeding. (495)
86. Bronchoscopy, laryngoscopy, and microlaryngoscopy involve direct manipulation
of the airway. In these procedures, the airway should be assessed carefully
paying special attention to the presence of stridor (indicator of compromise).
Preoperative investigations such as blood gas analysis, flow-volume loops,
radiographic studies, and magnetic resonance imaging may be useful. (495)
87. A variety of techniques can be employed to provide oxygenation and ventilation
during endoscopy. The trachea may be intubated with a small diameter pediatric
endotracheal tube but this may impair visualization of the posterior commissure. An
alternative technique, jet ventilation, utilizes high-flow oxygen insufflation
through a small-gauge catheter placed in the trachea. (495)
88. The use of the manual high-pressure jet ventilator carries risks of pneumothorax
and pneumomediastinum. (495, Fig. 31-4)
89. Laser is an acronym for light amplification by stimulated emission of radiation.
It produces an intense focused light beam that allows for precise and controlled
coagulation, incision, and vaporization of tissues. Advantages of laser include
its ability to target difficult-to-reach lesions, provide hemostasis, produce minimal
edema, and promote rapid healing. (495)
90. Hazards associated with laser surgery include atmospheric contamination by fine
particles of vaporized tissues, misdirected laser energy, venous gas embolism,
and ocular (retina) injury. There is also risk of endotracheal tube (ETT) fire during
airway surgery. (495-496)
91. During laser surgery an efficient smoke evacuator, as well as special masks, is
necessary because small, vaporized particles are easily inhaled. (495)
92. Preoperative:
a.
Arrange surgical drapes to avoid accumulation of combustible gases
b.
Use appropriate laser-resistant ETT
c.
Moisten gauze and sponges in the vicinity of the laser
Intraoperative:
a.
Alert surgeon and OR personnel to risk
b.
Assign specific roles to each OR member in case of fire
c.
Reduce inspired O2 to minimal values
d.
Replace N2O with air
e.
Wait a few minutes after changes in gas concentration before activating laser
(495-496, Figure 31-5, Table 31-5)
93. The purpose of filling the ETT cuff with saline or an indicator dye during laser
surgery is to help dissipate laser heat. Furthermore, leaking dye is an indicator of
cuff rupture. (496)
94. Radical neck dissection is indicated for removal of a malignancy. These
patients frequently have a history of tobacco and alcohol abuse. An extensive
preoperative work-up is necessary because pulmonary and cardiac disease is
prevalent. (496)
Ophthalmology and Otolaryngology
347
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
95. A history of prior radiation therapy to the larynx, pharynx, or oral cavity may
produce marked tissue indurations, scarring, and limitation of mobility. These
may cause difficulties with airway management, particularly endotracheal
intubation. (496)
96. Traction or pressure on the carotid sinus may provoke acute arrhythmias.
These include prolongation of the QT interval, bradydysrhythmias, and asystole.
Treatment includes early detection, cessation of the surgical stimulus, and
administration of an anticholinergic agent. Another option is local anesthetic
infiltration of the carotid sinus. (496)
97. Injuries to the facial (VII) nerve, recurrent laryngeal nerve, and phrenic nerve may
all be encountered postoperatively after radical neck dissection surgery. (496)
98. Hematoma formation in the neck may compress the airway leading to acute
obstruction. If tracheotomy is not performed during the initial surgery, then the
patient requires close monitoring (for laryngeal or upper airway obstruction)
in the postoperative phase. (496)
99. Hypocalcemia after thyroid surgery may present in many forms. Clinical signs may
include tetany (carpal spasm), peripheral and circumoral paresthesia, QT
interval prolongation, and laryngospasm. (497)
100. The inability to perform a symmetrical grimace after parotid surgery is indicative
of facial nerve injury or traction. Since the parotid gland is traversed by the
facial nerve, it is customary to monitor the facial nerve function with a facial nerve
monitor. Occasionally, the facial nerve may need to be sacrificed. It is then
reconstructed with a graft from the greater auricular nerve. (497)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
348
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
Chapter
29 ORTHOPEDICS
Andrew D. Rosenberg, Thomas J.J. Blanck
RHEUMATOLOGIC
DISORDERS
1. Is rheumatoid arthritis (RA) just a disease of the joints and adjacent connective
tissue?
2. What are some of the clinical manifestations of RA?
3. What are some airway abnormalities that can occur in patients with rheumatoid
arthritis?
4. Why might the normal mouth opening be decreased in patients with rheumatoid
arthritis?
5. What occurs to the developing mandible in patients with juvenile rheumatoid
arthritis that makes it more difficult to intubate the trachea in this patient
population?
6. What are some of the clinical manifestations of cricoarytenoid arthritis?
7. Can neck movement in patients with RA result in cervical spine injury?
What is the clinical implication of this?
8. What percent of patients with RA have involvement of their cervical spine?
9. What are three abnormal movements of the cervical spine that may be manifest in
patients with rheumatoid arthritis?
10. What is atlantoaxial subluxation?
11. What pathology in RA patients can lead to atlantoaxial subluxation?
12. How is the degree of atlantoaxial subluxation measured? What is this measurement
called?
13. What test can be used to determine the atlas-dens interval?
14. What degree of motion between the atlas and dens, or at what atlas-dens
interval, is the patient considered to be at risk for spinal cord injury?
15. In the case of pure transverse axial ligament disruption, does flexion or extension
increase the atlas-dens interval?
16. If a patient is asymptomatic with neck flexion and extension preoperatively
can the anesthesiologist be reassured of an atlas-dens interval of
less than 4 mm?
17. What is subaxial subluxation? What is its clinical significance?
18. What is superior migration of the odontoid? What are the potential clinical
manifestations?
19. What is the surgical treatment for superior migration of the odontoid?
20. What effect does rheumatoid arthritis have on the trachea?
21. What is the pathology in ankylosing spondylitis?
22. What is the hallmark neck position in patients with ankylosing spondylitis?
23. Ankylosing spondylitis is associated with which HLA type?
24. What are some considerations for the anesthetic management of patients with
ankylosing spondylitis?
349
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
SPINE SURGERY
25. What are some considerations for the anesthetic management of patients
undergoing spine surgery?
26. What are the various surgical approaches to spine surgery? What are the clinical
implications of this?
27. What kind of endotracheal tubes can be employed to provide one-lung ventilation
for thoracic spine surgery?
28. What is an advantage of a bronchial blocker to provide one-lung ventilation for
thoracic spine surgery?
29. What newer technique do surgeons employ during thoracoscopic spine surgery to
move the lung from the operative field that does not require one-lung ventilation?
30. Why is intraoperative awareness a possible complication of spine surgery?
31. Is it mandatory to employ a monitor for intraoperative awareness in patients
undergoing spine surgery?
32. Name some methods to help decrease blood loss in patients undergoing spine
surgery.
33. What pharmacologic methods exist to diminish blood loss in patients undergoing
spine surgery? Why is aprotinin not used?
34. What are some considerations for patients placed in the prone position?
35. Why is spinal cord integrity monitored during spine surgery?
36. What are various methods used to monitor the spinal cord during spine surgery?
37. What are somatosensory evoked potentials (SSEPs)? What part of the spinal cord do
they monitor?
38. What changes in latency and amplitude are considered abnormal when monitoring
SSEPs during spine surgery?
39. What anesthetic technique should be employed in patients being monitored with
somatosensory and/or motor evoked potentials?
40. What are some surgically related conditions that can interfere with spinal cord
monitoring waveform acquisition?
41. Why are some areas of the spinal cord more prone to ischemia?
42. What are some factors that can affect intraoperative spinal cord monitoring
waveform acquisition?
43. During spine surgery, what is the time course in which changes in the SSEP
waveforms manifest after the loss of spinal cord integrity?
44. What is the appropriate management of a patient during spine surgery once
significant changes are noted in the spinal cord monitoring waveforms?
45. What area of the spinal cord is monitored by transcranial motor evoked potentials?
46. How does paralysis with neuromuscular blocking drugs affect transcranial motor
evoked potentials?
47. Why might masseter muscle contraction occur during transcranial motor evoked
potentials monitoring? What is the clinical implication of this?
48. What special precautions should be taken for patients undergoing transcranial
motor evoked potentials monitoring during spine surgery?
49. How are intraoperative electromyelograms used to determine if a pedicle screw has
been placed too close to a nerve root?
50. Canneuromuscularblockadebeineffectwhenelectromyelogramsarebeingobtained?
51. What is the role of the intraoperative wake-up test?
52. How is an intraoperative wake-up test performed?
53. Name potential complications of the intraoperative wake-up test.
54. What considerations are important at the conclusion of a spine procedure?
55. How can postoperative pain be managed in the patient after spine surgery?
56. Which patients are at the greatest risk of postoperative visual loss? What are some
other possible factors that contribute to postoperative visual loss?
57. What are some aspects associated with the prone position that may contribute to
postoperative visual loss?
58. How much of postoperative visual loss is due to ischemic optic neuropathy?
59. What are the determinants of the ocular perfusion pressure? What is the clinical
implication of this?
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
350
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
60. What intraoperative factors has the American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA)
registry determined to be present in the vast majority of postoperative visual loss
patients?
61. According to the ASA practice advisory regarding patients at high risk for
postoperative visual loss during spine surgery, is the use of deliberate hypotension
associated with postoperative visual loss?
62. According to the ASA practice advisory regarding patients at high risk for
postoperative visual loss during spine surgery, what type of fluid should be
administered with crystalloid in these cases?
63. According to the ASA practice advisory regarding patients at high risk for
postoperative visual loss during spine surgery, is there a defined transfusion trigger
at which the risk of postoperative visual loss is eliminated?
64. According to the ASA practice advisory regarding patients at high risk for
postoperative visual loss during spine surgery, how should the patient’s head and
the operating room table be positioned when the patient is prone?
SURGERY IN THE
SITTING POSITION
65. What neurologic postoperative complications have been noted in patients who
undergo surgery in the sitting position?
66. When devastating neurologic postoperative complications occur after surgery in the
sitting position, what is the implicated cause?
67. Is the systemic arterial blood pressure at the level of the heart the same as that at the
level of the circle of Willis when patients are anesthetized and placed in the sitting
position?
68. What calculation more accurately determines the arterial blood pressure at the level
of the circle of Willis when one knows the arterial blood pressure at the level of the
heart when patients are anesthetized and placed in the sitting position?
69. What superficial landmark correlates with the circle of Willis?
70. What is the potential risk of hypotension in patients that are anesthetized and placed
in the sitting position?
FRACTURED HIP
71. Name several factors that predispose a person to a hip fracture.
72. What is the mortality rate associated with a hip fracture?
73. How do comorbidities in the patient with a fractured hip affect their postoperative
outcome?
74. Does it make sense to delay surgery in a patient with a fractured hip and significant
comorbidity to improve the patient’s medical status prior to surgery?
75. When should patients with a recent myocardial infarction and a fractured hip be
scheduled for surgery?
76. What are some considerations for the anesthetic management of patients
undergoing hip surgery?
77. Does choice of anesthetic technique—spinal or general anesthesia—play a role in the
outcome of patients who have fractured their hip?
78. What are the pros and cons of regional or general anesthesia in the patient with a
fractured hip?
79. How are the elderly affected by the use of narcotics in the perioperative period?
TOTAL JOINT
REPLACEMENT
80. Use of methylmethacrylate cement is associated with what side effects?
81. What is the etiology of the systemic reaction to methylmethacrylate cement?
82. Which patients are at high risk for a systemic reaction to methylmethacrylate
cement?
83. What is an appropriate tourniquet inflation pressure for lower extremity surgery?
84. What is the upper limit of tourniquet time before it should be deflated?
85. If tourniquet time exceeds 2 hours and the procedure is not completed, then the
tourniquet should be deflated for how long before it is reinflated and why?
86. What are some complications associated with tourniquet use?
Orthopedics
351
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
87. When does the major amount of blood loss occur during total knee replacement
surgery?
88. What are current recommendations for performing a neuraxial block in patients
who received enoxaparin?
89. When can redosing of enoxaparin occur after removal of an epidural catheter?
90. What are the current recommendations for performing a neuraxial block in patients
taking clopidogrel?
ANSWERS*
RHEUMATOLOGIC
DISORDERS
1. RA is a chronic inflammatory disease, which initially destroys joints and adjacent
connective tissue and then progresses to a systemic disease affecting major organ
systems. (499, Figure 32-1)
2. Systemic manifestations of RA are widespread. They may include pulmonary
involvement with interstitial fibrosis and cysts with honeycombing, gastritis and
ulcers from aspirin and other analgesics, neuropathy, nephropathy, muscle wasting,
vasculitis, and anemia. Ultimately the anatomy of the airway is damaged and
altered in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. (499, Figure 32-1)
3. Some airway abnormalities that can occur in patients with rheumatoid arthritis
include decreased mouth opening, a hypoplastic mandible, cricoarytenoid arthritis,
and cervical spine abnormalities. (499-500)
4. Normal mouth opening may be decreased in patients with rheumatoid arthritis as a
result of temporomandibular arthritis. (499)
5. The patient with juvenile rheumatoid arthritis often has a hypoplastic mandible as a result
of early fusion. This results in the noticeable overbite in some patients with RA. (499)
6. As with other joints, the cricoarytenoid joint may be affected by rheumatoid
arthritis. Cricoarytenoid arthritis may result in shortness of breath and snoring. RA
patients have been misdiagnosed as having sleep apnea when in fact they have
cricoarytenoid arthritis. Patients with cricoarytenoid arthritis may present with
stridor on inspiration. This may present in the postanesthesia care unit (PACU) while
the patient is recovering from anesthesia. Acute subluxation of the cricoarytenoid
joint, as a result of tracheal intubation, can cause stridor as well, and it is not
responsive to racemic epinephrine. (500)
7. Yes, movement of the neck in patients with RA can result in cervical spine injury.
The patient must be carefully evaluated for both the complexity and the risk of
endotracheal intubation because of difficulty in visualizing the airway as a result of
the anatomic changes that occur. Normal endotracheal intubation maneuvers with
neck movement may result in an increased risk of cervical spine injury due
to destruction of the bones and ligaments of the cervical spine. These can place the
cervical spinal cord at risk. Many cervical spine abnormalities may occur in patients
with RA. (499)
8. The cervical spine is affected in up to 80% of patients with RA. (500)
9. Three abnormal movements of the cervical spine that may be manifest in patients
with rheumatoid arthritis include atlantoaxial subluxation, subaxial subluxation,
and superior migration of the odontoid. (500, Figure 32-2).
*Numbers in parentheses: numbers refer to pages, figures, or tables in Miller RD, Pardo MC: Basics of Anesthesia,
6th ed. Philadelphia, Elsevier Saunders, 2011.
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
352
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
10. Atlantoaxial subluxation is the abnormal movement of the C1 cervical vertebra
(the atlas) on C2 (the axis). (500)
11. Normally, the transverse axial ligament holds the odontoid process, (also referred to
as the dens), which is the superior projection of the vertebra of C2, in place
directly behind the anterior arch of C1. With destruction of the transverse axial
ligamentbyRA,movementoftheodontoidprocessisnolongerrestricted.Astheneck
is flexed and extended, the C1 vertebra can sublux on the C2 vertebra. This can
result in impingement of the spinal cord, placing it at risk for damage. (500-501,
Figure 32-3)
12. Subluxation of C1 on C2, referred to as atlantoaxial subluxation, can be
quantified by a measuring the distance between the back of the anterior arch
of C1 and the front of the dens or odontoid. This distance is referred to as the
atlas-dens interval. (501)
13. Flexion and extension radiographs of the cervical spine are obtained to determine
the distance between the atlas and dens, or the atlas-dens interval, and thus the
degree of subluxation. (501, Figure 32-4)
14. If the atlas-dens interval is 4 mm or more atlantoaxial instability is present, the
amount of subluxation is considered significant, and the patient is considered to be
at risk for spinal cord injury. (501)
15. In a situation in which the transverse axial ligament is disrupted, extension of the
neck minimizes the atlas-dens interval and increases the safe area for the spinal
cord. Conversely, flexion of the neck increases the atlas-dens interval and decreases
the safe area for the spinal cord, making flexion a more frequent risk position. Still,
rheumatoid arthritis affects more than just the transverse axial ligament; therefore,
all neck movements in patients with rheumatoid arthritis have to be evaluated
carefully as extension of the neck can also lead to problems. (501, Figure 32-5)
16. Patients with rheumatoid arthritis can be asymptomatic with neck flexion and
extension preoperatively while awake, and still have an atlas-dens interval of
greater than 4 mm and be at risk for cervical spine injury. These patients are able to
compensate for their cervical spine instability through local muscle. Once
anesthetized and the muscles are relaxed, atlantoaxial subluxation may occur.
Therefore the anesthesiologist should not be falsely reassured by asymptomatic
flexion and extension in the awake patient. (502)
17. Subaxial subluxation is the subluxation of 15% or more of one cervical vertebra
on another at any level below C2. Subaxial subluxation most commonly occurs at
the C5-C6 level. Patients with subaxial subluxation are at risk for spinal cord
impingement with neck movement. Minimal neck movement is recommended in
these patients. (502)
18. Superior migration of the odontoid is a condition where an intact odontoid process
projects up through the foramen magnum and into the skull. This occurs because
of inflammation and bone destruction that results in cervical spine collapse with
sparing of the odontoid process. This can occur because not all areas of the cervical
spine are equally affected in any given patient. If the odontoid is spared, the
intact odontoid can impinge on the brainstem and patients may suffer
neurologic symptoms including quadriparesis or paralysis. (502, Figure 32-6)
19. Surgical treatment for superior migration of the odontoid involves removal of the
odontoid to decompress the spinal cord and brainstem. A complicated surgical
procedure, referred to as a transoral odontoidectomy, may be performed to
accomplish this and involves an incision in the posterior pharyngeal wall, followed
by removal of the arch of C1 and then removal of the odontoid and pannus, to relieve
neurologic symptoms. With completion of the transoral portion of the procedure, the
cervical spine is very unstable, necessitating a posterior spinal fusion. (503)
Orthopedics
353
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
20. Although the cervical spine is affected by rheumatoid arthritis and may collapse
from bone destruction, the trachea is usually spared. This results in the trachea
twisting in a characteristic manner as the cervical spine collapses, only serving
to increase the difficulty of intubating the trachea of these patients. Tracheal
intubation aids such as a fiber optic bronchoscope, Glidescope, Airtraq, or
intubating LMA should be available for assistance in endotracheal intubation
of these patients should it be required. (503)
21. Ankylosing spondylitis is a rheumatologic disorder in which repetitive minute
bone fractures followed by healing results in the characteristic bamboo spine,
disease of the sacroiliac joint, fusion of the posterior elements of the spinal column,
and fixed neck flexion that is characteristic of this patient population.
22. The hallmark of patients with ankylosing spondylitis is a fused neck in flexion. (503)
23. There is an association between ankylosing spondylitis and HLA-B27, although not
all HLA-B27 positive patients are affected with ankylosing spondylitis. (503)
24. Patients with ankylosing spondylitis typically have a rigid cervical spine and neck
fused in flexion, which makes endotracheal intubation difficult. Airway
manipulation should be performed only after careful assessment, and an intubation
assist device can help secure the airway. Patients with ankylosing spondylitis
may also develop thoracic and costochondral involvement, which may result in
a rapid shallow breathing pattern. (503)
SPINE SURGERY
25. There are several considerations for the anesthetic management of patients
undergoing spine surgery, and much depends on the level of the spine in which the
surgery will take place, as well as the surgical approach. Preoperative assessment of
the patient for underlying neurologic deficits and chronic pain issues are important.
For patients in whom the approach may be thoracic, pulmonary function tests may
be indicated. In general, spine surgery can be long and complex with significant
blood loss and hemodynamic alterations. Intravascular access and intraoperative
monitoring should be adjusted accordingly, and blood products may need to be
ordered. In the event that there will be intraoperative monitoring of the spinal cord
with evoked potentials, the anesthesia administered for the surgery may need to be
modified so as not to interfere with the acquisition of waveforms. (503-504)
26. Spine surgery may have anterior, posterior, lateral, and thoracic approaches. In
some cases, two approaches may be used during the same surgery. Preoperative
discussion with the surgeon is crucial: (1) to determine the surgical approach as
it may influence the location of intravascular access and monitoring placement,
(2) to ensure proper positioning and padding accessories, and (3) because there may
be a need to provide lung isolation and one-lung ventilation. A thoracic surgical
approach may involve open thoracotomy or thoracoscopic techniques. High
thoracic and thoracoscopic procedures frequently require one-lung ventilation
to ensure adequate visualization. (503)
27. A double-lumen endotracheal tube or a bronchial blocker can be employed to
provide one-lung ventilation for thoracic spine surgery. (503)
28. A bronchial blocker can be used with a single-lumen endotracheal tube to provide
one-lung ventilation for thoracic spine surgery. An advantage of the bronchial
blocker is the avoidance of the need to change the tube between different stages of
the procedure or at the end of the operation. With the bronchial blocker, deflating
the cuff and withdrawing the catheter back into its casing and recapping the
proximal end returns the endotracheal tube to its single-lumen tube characteristics.
If extubation of the trachea at the end of the surgical procedure is not indicated, the
endotracheal tube does not have to be changed, thereby avoiding the issue of
changing an endotracheal tube in the presence of potentially significant airway
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
354
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
edema. Make certain that the PACU staff is properly educated as to the various ports
of the bronchial blocker. (503, Figure 32-7)
29. Some surgeons are using carbon dioxide insufflation as the sole means of moving
the lung away from the surgical field even in high thoracic spine surgical
procedures. This obviates the need for one-lung ventilation, and allows for the
use of a single-lumen endotracheal tube for the entire procedure. (504)
30. Patients undergoing spine surgery appear to be at an increased risk for
intraoperative awareness as a result of the requirement that the anesthetic
technique administered to them be modified to allow for obtaining adequate
intraoperative neurophysiologic monitoring waveforms to assess spinal cord
integrity. Therefore, some advocate the use of brain function monitoring in
these patients to help avoid intraoperative awareness. (504)
31. Awareness monitoring is not a standard and, as noted in the Practice Advisory for
Intraoperative Awareness and Brain Function Monitoring, a decision should be
made on a case-by-case basis by the individual practitioner for selected patients
(e.g., light anesthesia). There was a consensus in the advisory that brain function
monitoring is not routinely indicated for patients undergoing general anesthesia as
the “general applicability of these monitors in the prevention of intraoperative
awareness had not been established.” In fact, Avidan and associates demonstrated
that awareness is not decreased with use of brain function monitoring. The need for
brain monitoring is still not clear. (504)
32. Methods to decrease blood loss in spine surgery patients include predonation,
hemodilution, wound infusion with a dilute epinephrine solution, hypotensive
anesthesia techniques, red blood cell salvage, positioning to diminish venous
pressure, careful surgical hemostasis, and the administration of
antifibrinolytics. (504)
33. Medications to decrease blood loss during surgery include the antifibrinolytics
aprotinin, tranexamic acid, and E-aminocaproic acid. Aprotinin, a serine protease
inhibitor, effectively decreased blood loss in cardiac patients and has been
demonstrated to be efficacious in patients undergoing spine surgery as well. The
negative side effects of aprotinin in cardiac patients include an increased risk of
myocardial infarction (MI) or heart failure by approximately 55%, nearly double the
risk of stroke, increased risk of long-term mortality, and a higher death rate in
patients receiving aprotinin as demonstrated in a study over a 5-year period
comparing aprotinin and lysine analogs in high-risk cardiac surgery. The study was
terminated early and resulted in relabeling and ultimately withdrawing aprotinin
from the market so that it is no longer available. The synthetic lysine analogs,
tranexamic acid and E-aminocaproic acid, have also been employed in spine surgery
as well as in patients undergoing orthopedic surgery. Tranexamic acid can be
administered by an initial bolus injection of 10 mg/kg over 30 minutes followed by
a continuous infusion of 1 mg/kg/hr. (504)
34. Spine surgery is often performed with the patient in the prone position. Careful
positioning is crucial to avoid patient injury. Movement to the prone position
should be performed in a carefully coordinated manner with the surgical team. The
neck should not be hyperextended or hyperflexed but placed in the neutral position.
The endotracheal tube is positioned so it is not kinked, contact areas are padded, and
the face and eyes are protected. Pressure and stretch on nerves is avoided by proper
padding and avoiding any extension over 90 degrees. The abdomen needs to be
hanging free to avoid increased venous pressure and thereby increased venous
bleeding. The prone position alters pulmonary dynamics, so pulmonary function
must be reassessed in this position. (504)
35. Monitoring spinal cord integrity is an important component of major surgical
procedures involving distraction and rotation of the spine such as occurs with major
Orthopedics
355
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
anteroposterior spinal fusions and scoliosis surgery. Spinal cord monitoring is
employed to detect, and hopefully reverse in a timely manner, any adverse effects
on the spinal cord noted during the operative period. (505)
36. There are a variety of methods to monitor the spinal cord during spine surgery.
These include SSEPs; motor evoked potentials, including transcranial motor evoked
potentials, electromyograms (EMGs), or a wake-up test. (505)
37. SSEPs are sensory evoked potential waves generated in the extremities by repetitive
stimulation that propagate up through the dorsum or sensory portion of the
spinal cord and into the brain, where these signals or waveforms are detected via
electrodes placed over the scalp. Specific areas on the scalp coincide with the brain’s
sensory areas for the upper and lower extremities and proper signal acquisition
obtained over these sites indicates an intact sensory or dorsal portion of the spinal
cord. The SSEP waveform generated from multiple repetitive stimulations is
analyzed for its latency and amplitude (505, Figure 32-8)
38. An increase in latency of greater than 10% or a decrease in amplitude of 60% or
more, as well as the inability to obtain a proper waveform or signal, may be
indicative of spinal cord dysfunction or disruption. (505)
39. If SSEPs alone are being monitored, an inhaled anesthetic, equivalent to a small
percentage of 1 MAC, can be administered. Volatile anesthetics may interfere with
signal acquisition in patients monitored with transcranial motor evoked potentials
and may have to be discontinued, if used at all, if adequate signals cannot be
obtained. Intravenous anesthetics will need to be administered in these surgical
cases. While neuromuscular blockade may be used to facilitate tracheal intubation,
paralysis should not be maintained if transcranial motor evoked potentials are being
continuously monitored. If the patient is having pedicle screws placed, then the
neuromuscular blockade needs to be terminated before the EMGs are obtained so
that testing can be properly performed. A small dose of ketamine can be given in the
perioperative period as an additional pain relief modality to provide analgesia for
major surgery including spine surgery. (504)
40. Surgically related conditions that can result in interference of waveform acquisition
during spinal cord monitoring include direct injury or trauma to the cord or
impairment of the blood supply. Distraction, rotation, excessive bleeding, and
severing or clamping of arterial blood supply can result in ischemia to the cord
and neurologic injury. (505)
41. Some areas of the spinal cord are more vulnerable and therefore more prone to
ischemia because their blood supply is dependent on watershed blood flow. (505)
42. Many factors can alter intraoperative spinal cord monitoring waveforms unrelated
to surgery. These should be properly detected and eliminated. These may include
hypotension, hypothermia, high concentrations of volatile anesthetics,
benzodiazepines, hypercarbia or hypocarbia, and anemia. Only a small
concentration of volatile anesthetic should be employed when SSEP monitoring
is used. Midazolam and other benzodiazepines are avoided because they may
interfere with obtaining a waveform. Some anesthesiologists even avoid nitrous
oxide and use a combination of air in oxygen. (505)
43. Direct injury to the spinal cord results in immediate changes in SSEP waveforms. In
contrast, if surgery impairs blood supply and thus renders the spinal cord ischemic,
the change in SSEP waveforms may take up to half an hour to manifest. (505)
44. Once a significant change in intraoperative spinal cord monitoring waveforms is
noted, specific maneuvers should be used to restore spinal cord blood flow, such as
releasing the rotation and distraction of the spine if applicable. In addition, as a
result of spinal cord manipulation there may be insufficient blood supply to the
spine. Therefore the mean arterial blood pressure should be increased in an effort
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
356
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
to restore adequate blood flow to the spine. All variables such as hemoglobin,
temperature, arterial carbon dioxide concentration, and arterial blood pressure
should be considered. Once these are all evaluated, a wake-up test may be necessary
if the waveforms do not improve. (506)
45. Transcranial motor evoked potentials allow for monitoring the patient’s spinal
cord motor pathways throughout the entire procedure. Stimulation over the motor
cortex of the brain generates a waveform, which is propagated down the motor
pathways and detected distally in the arm or leg. This stimulation results in a
characteristic waveform. (506, Figure 32-9)
46. To generate transcranial motor evoked potentials, the patient cannot have residual
neuromuscular blockade. (506)
47. The electrical current causing the stimulus over the motor cortex during
transcranial motor evoked potentials monitoring also stimulates muscles directly
in the area of the electrodes placed in the scalp—the masseter muscle and muscles
of mastication. This muscle contraction may result in a strong bite, which can
potentially injure the tongue, lip, and endotracheal tube. Instances of significant
tongue lacerations and damage to endotracheal tubes can occur and this can
develop into emergency situations, especially with the patient in the prone
position. (506)
48. Special precautions should be taken for patients undergoing transcranial motor
evoked potentials monitoring during spine surgery. The tongue should not protrude
through the teeth. Placing a bite block made of tongue depressors and gauze in
the back of the mouth along the teeth line bilaterally will help prevent injury.
In the prone position, any motion may allow for the tongue to slip and fall between
the teeth, rendering it vulnerable to laceration. Each stimulus is associated with
a masseter muscle contraction, so the patient is at risk as long as waveforms
are being generated. (506)
49. Intraoperative electromyelograms are used to determine if a pedicle screw has
been placed too close to a nerve root. An electric current is sent through the screw
and the electromyelogram is measured distally. If a low milliamp current can
stimulate the nerve root, then the screw is too close to the nerve root. In general,
a current greater than 7 mA is considered safe enough to know that the pedicle
screw is not too close to the nerve root. (506)
50. For accurate electromyelogram testing, residual neuromuscular blockade must be
terminated or reversed. (506)
51. The wake-up test was traditionally used to assess spinal cord integrity in many
scoliosis cases. Development of sophisticated spinal cord monitoring is now
standard in many hospitals and the wake-up test is generally reserved for those
situations in which monitoring is unobtainable or a significant intraoperative
change in spinal cord monitoring waveforms is noted. (506)
52. The intraoperative wake-up test is performed as follows: turn off all inhaled
anesthetics, reverse any neuromuscular blocking drug present, and stop infusions
such as dexmedetomidine, propofol, narcotics, or ketamine. If spontaneous
respirations do not begin, inject naloxone, 0.04 mg at a time, to reverse any residual
narcoticeffect.Thepatient’sheadshouldbeheldtoreducetheriskofself-extubation.
Prior to assessing lower extremity function, there should be confirmation of upper
extremity function. Patient compliance denotes adequate recovery from general
anesthesia. Then, while someone is observing the feet, ask the patient to wiggle his or
her toes. A rapid-acting anesthetic such as propofol should be ready to be
administered as soon as the assessment is complete, so the patient can rapidly be
reanesthetized. If the wake-up test is not successful in demonstrating adequate motor
movement, further surgical intervention may be warranted and the patient may
require transport to the radiology suite for additional imaging studies. (507)
Orthopedics
357
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
53. There are some potential complications of an intraoperative wake-up test. These
include increased bleeding, venous air embolism, and even inadvertent extubation
of the trachea in the prone position with the wound exposed. (506)
54. At the conclusion of a spine procedure, the patient is placed in the supine position. All
lines and tubes are secured so that intravenous line, arterial line, and airway access are
not lost at this crucial time. Carefully reassess the patient for hemodynamic status,
intravascular fluid volume status, hematocrit, blood loss, degree of fluid and blood
replacement, temperature, and the potential for airway edema. Premature extubation
mustbe avoided. Also, facial edema, respiratory effort, the amount ofpain medication,
and the presence of splinting and pain should be evaluated before extubating the
trachea. After tracheal extubation, the patient may be transported to the PACU.
Supplemental oxygen should be administered in the PACU. Electrolytes, hemoglobin,
and clotting studies should be ordered as indicated. (507)
55. Postoperative pain management may prove complicated after spine surgery
because some patients may have been taking pain medications preoperatively,
particularly opioids. Patient-controlled analgesia (PCA) may be effective, with the
dose tailored to the patient’s needs. Some centers use ketamine as an analgesic
adjunct. The use of nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), particularly
ketorolac, needs careful consideration because it is a medication that interferes with
bone formation and therefore should be avoided in patients who just underwent
spinal fusion. NSAIDs may be appropriate when bone healing is not a factor. Other
oral medications that are helpful may include acetaminophen, anticonvulsants
(e.g., gabapentin and pregabalin), antispasmodics that work at the spinal cord level
(e.g., baclofen, tizanidine), antiinflammatory medications, and opioids. (507)
56. Although its etiology is unclear, patients undergoing prolonged spine surgery
(>6 hours) in the prone position who have large blood loss (>1 L) are particularly at
risk. Yet, patients with small blood loss and short procedures also have had visual
loss. Perioperative factors such as anemia, hypotension, prolonged surgery, blood
loss, increased venous pressure from positioning in the prone position, edema, a
compartment syndrome within the orbit, and resistance to blood flow, such as from
direct pressure on the eye, as well as systemic diseases such as diabetes,
hypertension, and vascular disease, are all possible etiologic factors. One recent
study entitled Risk Factors Associated with Ischemic Optic Neuropathy
(Anesthesiology 2012;116:15-24) has reported that that male sex, obesity, use of a
Wilson frame, longer cases, greater estimated blood loss, and a decreased percent of
colloid are associated with an increased incidence of postoperative visual loss. (507)
57. There are several aspects of the prone position that may contribute to postoperative
visual loss. These include increased venous pressure from positioning in the
prone position, edema, a compartment syndrome within the orbit, and resistance
to blood flow such as direct pressure on the eye. (507)
58. Ischemic optic neuropathy is a major cause of postoperative visual loss. Variations
in the blood supply to the optic nerve may play a role in the development of
ischemic optic neuropathy including reliance on a watershed blood supply to
critical areas of the optic nerve.
59. Ocular perfusion pressure (OPP), or the blood pressure supplying blood flow to the
optic nerve, is a function of the mean arterial pressure (MAP) and intraocular pressure
(IOP) such that OPP¼MAP  IOP. Increases in IOP or decreases in MAP can have a
negative impacton the ocular perfusion pressure.The prone position isassociated with
increases inintraocular pressure,which can decreasethe ocularperfusion pressureand
lead to ischemia. The prone position allows edema to develop in the orbit and this
increase in venous pressure may impact arterial blood flow. (507)
60. A visual loss registry has been established by the ASA to facilitate establishing the
etiology of postoperative visual loss. Also, an ASA practice advisory points to
ischemic optic neuropathy as the most likely cause of postoperative visual loss.
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
358
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
Of the 93 cases reported in the registry publication, 83 resulted from ischemic optic
neuropathy, with the remainder attributed to central retinal artery occlusion.
Central retinal artery occlusion may be embolic in nature or the result of direct
pressure on the eyeball and tends to be unilateral. Most patients in the registry were
healthy and positioned prone for spine surgery. Blood loss of more than 1 L and
procedures of 6 hours or longer were present in 96% of cases. (507, Table 32-1)
61. According to the ASA practice advisory regarding patients at high risk for
postoperative visual loss during spine surgery, the use of deliberate hypotension has
not been shown to be associated with postoperative visual loss. (507, Table 32-1)
62. According to the ASA practice advisory regarding patients at high risk for
postoperative visual loss during spine surgery, colloid should be administered in
addition to crystalloid to maintain intravascular volume. (507, Table 32-1)
63. According to the ASA practice advisory regarding patients at high risk for
postoperative visual loss during spine surgery, there is no defined transfusion
trigger at which the risk of postoperative visual loss is eliminated. (507, Table 32-1)
64. According to the ASA practice advisory regarding patients at high risk for
postoperative visual loss during spine surgery, when in the prone position the
patient’s head should be positioned level with or higher than the heart when possible.
Also, when possible, maintain the head in a neutral forward position without
significant neck flexion, extension, lateral flexion, or rotation. (507, Table 32-1)
SURGERY IN THE
SITTING POSITION
65. Postoperative complications that have been noted in the patient undergoing surgery
in the sitting position are rare but significant and devastating. These neurologic
complications include stroke, ischemic brain injury, and vegetative states. (507)
66. When devastating neurologic postoperative complications occur after surgery in the
sitting position, the implicated cause is a decrease in cerebral perfusion pressure
resulting in insufficient blood supply to the brain. (508)
67. No, the systemic arterial blood pressure is not the same at the level of the heart as it is
at the level of the circle of Willis when patients are anesthetized and placed in the
sitting position. This is due to the arterial blood pressure gradient that develops
between the heart and brain in this position. (508)
68. When patients are anesthetized and placed in the sitting position, one can more
accurately determine the arterial blood pressure at the circle of Willis through
the following calculation: for each centimeter of head elevation above the level of the
heart there is a decrease in arterial blood pressure of 0.77 mm Hg. Therefore, arterial
blood pressure measured at the level of the heart is not the blood and perfusion
pressure at the brain. Indeed, a 20-cm difference in height between the heart and the
circle of Willis calculates to approximately a 15- to 17-mm Hg gradient. (508)
69. A convenient point for measuring height difference between the heart and brain is
the external auditory meatus, which is at the same level as the circle of Willis. Even
so, there is still a significant amount of brain tissue above this level. (508)
70. When patients are anesthetized and placed in the sitting position, the mean arterial
blood pressure should be maintained to avoid decreases in the cerebral perfusion
pressure and to potentially avoid devastating neurologic injury. Thus, hypotension
in these patients should be avoided. This is particularly true in the elderly or in patients
with chronic hypertension in whom the cerebral autoregulatory curve is altered. (508)
FRACTURED HIP
71. Factors predisposing a person to a hip fracture include medical comorbidities,
osteoporosis, lower limb dysfunction, visual impairment, increasing
age, Parkinson’s disease, previous fracture, stroke, female gender, dementia,
institutionalized patients, excess alcohol or caffeine consumption, cold climate,
and use of psychotropic medications. (508)
Orthopedics
359
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
72. Mortality rates can range up to 14% to 36% in the first year after fracture. (508)
73. Medical status affects morbidity and mortality. One example is the number of
comorbidities from which the patient suffers, as in one study the presence of four to
six comorbidities is associated with increased mortality rate when compared to
patients with less comorbidity. Roche and associates, in studying 2448 patients,
reported that the presence of three or more comorbidities was a strong preoperative
risk factor with the postoperative development of chest infection or heart failure
being associated with a high mortality rate. White and associates reported that ASA
I and II patients had mortality rates equal to age-matched control subjects, but ASA
III and IV patients had higher mortality rates (49% vs. 8%) after a hip fracture.
Moran and colleagues, in a study of 2660 hip fracture patients with an overall
mortality rate of 9% at 30 days, 19% at 90 days, and 30% at 12 months, noted that
healthy patients did well as long as surgery was performed within 4 days. Patients
with comorbidities had a nearly 2.5 times increased mortality rate at 30 days as
compared with healthy patients. (508)
74. Generally, when significant comorbidities that need correction exist, patients
benefit from a delay in surgery while their medical status improves. The mortality
rate in high-risk patients in one study decreased from 29% to 2.9% when time
was taken to correct physiologic abnormalities. This was also demonstrated by
Kenzora and co-workers, who noted a higher mortality rate (34% vs. 6.9%) in
patients who went immediately into surgery as compared to those who were
delayed 2 to 5 days to improve their medical status. Also, patients admitted to the
hospital immediately after fracture did better than those admitted more than
a day later. (508)
75. The management of a patient with a recent myocardial infarction (MI) and hip
fracture illustrates how evaluations and management have changed. Previously,
surgery was delayed up to 6 months following a myocardial infarction, but now the
tendency is to risk-stratify patients based on the severity of their myocardial
infarction to determine wait time until surgery. The recent MI needs to be evaluated
on a risk-benefit ratio comparing the risk of surgery after a recent MI with the
negative side effects of keeping a patient bed bound with its attendant risks of
pneumonia, pulmonary embolism, pain, loss of ability to walk, and decubitus ulcers.
Factors to consider are the extent of the MI, additional myocardium that may be at
risk, if the patient suffers from postinfarct angina, and the presence of congestive
heart failure (CHF). Although ongoing angina or the presence of CHF may preclude
early surgery, a small subendocardial MI with a minimal increase in cardiac
enzymes and normal echocardiogram and stress test would allow consideration for
an earlier intervention. A fractured hip usually prevents the patient from
undergoing a normal exercise stress test. Therefore, if indicated, a pharmacologic
stress test may be needed. (508)
76. Considerations for the anesthetic management of patients undergoing hip surgery
include the patient’s intravascular fluid volume status and the potential for
significant perioperative blood loss, patient positioning and proper padding on the
fracture table, maintaining normothermia, and whatever additional comorbidities
may be present as these patients are typically elderly. (509)
77. For patients undergoing hip surgery, there is no clear advantage of one anesthetic
technique over another. Therefore, choice of spinal or general anesthesia should be
made on a case-by-case basis taking the patient’s specific medical issues into
consideration. (508-509)
78. Although no one anesthetic technique has proven to be superior, the pros and cons
of both spinal and general anesthesia must be considered when choosing the
anesthetic technique for a given patient. Advantages of regional anesthesia, such as
provided by a spinal anesthetic, are that (1) it avoids endotracheal intubation and
airway manipulation and the medications that need to be administered to
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
360
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
accomplish this, (2) it decreases the total amount of systemic medication the
patient receives throughout the procedure, and (3) it may play a role in decreasing
the risk of thromboembolism. The vasodilatory effect of the spinal anesthetic may
help the patient with CHF. However, intravascular fluid still should be given
cautiously because CHF may worsen as the intravascular vasodilatory effect of the
spinal anesthesia recedes. General anesthesia, in contrast, is easy to administer,
particularly in patients in whom movement and positioning for a regional
anesthetic may be painful. In addition, in a patient who may be hypovolemic,
general anesthesia may be preferred to avoid a precipitous decrease in arterial blood
pressure that may occur as a result of the decrease in systemic vascular resistance
that accompanies regional anesthesia. (509)
79. The dose and frequency of pain medication given to elderly patients in the
perioperative period may need to be decreased, and should be given cautiously
because of an increased circulation time, and the cumulative effect of administered
opioids may become evident when not expected. (509)
TOTAL JOINT
REPLACEMENT
80. The use of methylmethacrylate cement is associated with cardiopulmonary side
effects such as hypoxia, bronchoconstriction, hypotension, cardiovascular collapse,
and even death. (510)
81. The systemic reaction to methylmethacrylate cement may result from the liquid
methylmethacrylate cement monomer itself, which is used in producing the cement
for cementing the prosthesis, or may be due to air, fat, or bone marrow elements
being forced into the circulation. The higher the liquid content of the liquid
monomer in the mix with the polymer methylmethacrylate cement at the time of
insertion, which occurs from not adequately mixing or not waiting long enough for
mixing to occur, the more frequently side effects are noted. (510)
82. Patients who are at high risk for a reaction to methylmethacrylate cement include
those who are hypovolemic at the time of cementing, hypertensive patients, and
patients with significant preexisting cardiac disease. (510)
83. In the lower extremity surgery, the tourniquet is inflated to approximately 100 mm Hg
above the systolic blood pressure, as this will prevent arterial blood from entering
the exsanguinated limb. (510)
84. As tourniquets render the limb ischemic, there is a limit to inflation time before the
ischemia can result in permanent limb damage. The safe upper limit of ischemia
time is considered to be 2 hours. The surgeon should be informed of tourniquet
inflation time at 1 hour and then as the tourniquet approaches the 2-hour limit so it
can be deflated in a timely manner. (511)
85. If the total tourniquet time will exceed the 2-hour limit, the tourniquet should be
deflated at 2 hours for a period of at least 15 to 20 minutes before it is reinflated.
This will allow for the “wash-out” of acidic metabolites from the ischemic limb as
the limb is reperfused with oxygenated blood. Recirculation of the ischemic limb
with release of the tourniquet is noted by a decrease in blood pressure and an
increaseinend-tidalcarbondioxideastheacidproductsrecirculate.Thehypotension
usually responds to intravascular fluid administration and vasopressors if
necessary. (510)
86. Complications associated with tourniquet use include nerve damage, vessel
damage especially in patients with atherosclerosis, pulmonary embolism, and skin
damage. One source of skin damage is the antiseptic prep solution, if it is allowed
to seep under the tourniquet and tourniquet padding at the time of skin prep,
causing a chemical burn. Additional concerns at the time of tourniquet deflation
are pulmonary embolism and a decrease in core temperature as the isolated
extremity is reperfused. (510)
Orthopedics
361
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
87. During total knee replacement surgery a tourniquet is used, and in the operating
room blood loss is usually not significant. However, if much blood loss occurs into
drains in the PACU, hypotension may result. Some surgeons do not deflate
the tourniquet until the wound is closed and the dressing is on the patient. In this
situation blood loss is usually less but there is a risk of bleeding. (510)
88. Consensus statements from the American Society of Regional Anesthesia and Pain
Medicine (ASRA) addressed the issue. Recommendations included waiting at least
10 to 12 hours before neuraxial needle placement in a patient who received a
preoperative dose of enoxaparin. (511)
89. Consensus statements from the American Society of Regional Anesthesia and Pain
Medicine recommend waiting 2 hours prior to dosing enoxaparin after an
epidural catheter is removed. Patients on warfarin should have their catheter
removed only when the international normalized ratio (INR) is below 1.5, and
care should be taken to avoid other anticoagulants and antiplatelet medications
when low-molecular-weight heparin is being used and an epidural catheter is
in place. (511)
90. Current recommendations in the ASRA Practice Advisory, Anticoagulation,
3rd edition, 2010, suggest that clopidogrel be discontinued for 7 days prior to
performing a neuraxial block. However, the article quotes labeling as
recommending this while the PDR section for clopidogrel actually recommends that
for elective surgery it only be discontinued for 5 days. The executive summary
for the Anesthetic Management of the Patient Receiving Antiplatelet Medication, as
part of the third edition, states, “On the basis of labeling and surgical reviews, the
suggested time interval between discontinuation of thienopyridine therapy and
neuraxial blockade is 14 days for ticlopidine and 7 days for clopidogrel. If a
neuraxial block is indicated between 5 and 7 days of discontinuation of clopidogrel,
normalization of platelet function should be documented.” In patients who need
to be maintained on clopidogrel or who have not discontinued it for an
adequate time period, other anesthetic techniques should be considered. The
guidelines for some of the antiplatelet medications will probably undergo revision
as physicians gain experience with the use of medications such as
clopidogrel in the perioperative period. (511)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
362
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
Chapter
30 OBSTETRICS
Mark Rollins, Jennifer Lucero
PHYSIOLOGIC
CHANGES IN
PREGNANT WOMEN
1. How do the maternal intravascular fluid, plasma, and erythrocyte volumes change
during pregnancy?
2. How does the coagulation status change during pregnancy?
3. What is the average maternal blood loss during the vaginal delivery of a newborn?
What is the average maternal blood loss during cesarean delivery?
4. How does the maternal cardiac output change from nonpregnant levels?
5. In an uncomplicated pregnancy, what changes occur in blood pressure, systemic
vascular resistance, and central venous pressure?
6. What is the supine hypotension syndrome? What symptoms accompany the
syndrome?
7. What compensatory mechanisms do most women have that prevents them from
experiencing supine hypotension syndrome and how can maternal hypotension be
minimized?
8. What are some aspects of the upper airway that undergo physiologic change
in pregnancy? What are the clinical implications of these changes?
9. How is minute ventilation changed during pregnancy from nonpregnant levels?
How does the resting maternal PaCO2 change as a result of the change in minute
ventilation?
10. How do the binding characteristics of hemoglobin change during
pregnancy?
11. What are the changes in maternal lung volumes that occur with pregnancy? What
are the anesthetic implications of these changes?
12. How does maternal PaO2 change during pregnancy?
13. What are the gastrointestinal changes in pregnancy that render the woman
vulnerable to regurgitation of gastric contents? What clinical implication does this
have?
14. How do the epidural and subarachnoid spaces change in pregnancy? How is the
sensitivity to local anesthetics different in the pregnant versus nonpregnant
patient? How are the dosing requirements for neuraxial anesthesia affected by
these changes?
15. How do renal blood flow and glomerular filtration rate change in pregnancy?
At what gestational month of pregnancy is this change at a maximum? How does
this affect the normal upper limits of creatinine and blood urea nitrogen in
pregnant patients?
16. Does hepatic blood flow change during pregnancy? How are plasma protein
concentrations and plasma cholinesterase activity altered by pregnancy?
363
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
PHYSIOLOGY OF
UTEROPLACENTAL
CIRCULATION
17. How are maternal and fetal blood delivered to the placenta?
18. What is uterine blood flow (UBF) at term?
19. What are the determinants of UBF?
20. What factors affect the transfer of oxygen between the mother and fetus?
21. What factors affect placental exchange of drugs and other substances? What is the
most reliable way to minimize fetal transfer of a drug?
22. What common drugs used in anesthesia have limited ability to cross the placenta?
Which readily cross the placenta?
FETAL UPTAKE AND
DISTRIBUTION OF
DRUGS
23. How does the pH of fetal blood affect the transfer of drugs? What is ion trapping?
24. What characteristics of the fetal circulation are protective against the distribution
of large doses of drugs to vital organs?
STAGES OF LABOR
25. Name the stages of labor and what events define each stage.
26. What is an “active phase arrest”? What is an “arrest of descent”?
ANATOMY OF
LABOR PAIN
27. In the first stage of labor, describe the associated sensory levels and where the end
organ afferent nerve impulses are initiated.
28. In the second stage of labor, describe the associated sensory levels and where the
end organ afferent nerve impulses are initiated.
29. For each stage of labor, describe which analgesic techniques benefit the pregnant
woman and why.
METHODS OF LABOR
ANALGESIA
Nonpharmacologic Techniques and Systemic Medications
30. Describe the different nonpharmacologic techniques used for labor and the
efficacy of each.
31. List the different systemic medications used for labor analgesia and their active
metabolites, if any.
32. What is “morphine sleep”?
33. How is remifentanil used as a labor analgesic and what are the indications for its
use?
34. Are benzodiazepines used in pregnancy and if so, when?
35. When is ketamine used in labor and delivery and what additional benefits does
it provide for pain control?
Neuraxial Analgesia and Neuraxial Techniques
36. List the different types of neuraxial analgesia?
37. When would you use each type of neuraxial analgesia for labor pain?
38. Should laboring women remain “nothing per oral (NPO)” after placement of an
epidural or combined spinal and epidural (CSE)?
39. What is a walking epidural and what are the associated risks?
40. What drugs are used or being evaluated as adjuvant neuraxial drugs for labor
analgesia?
41. Name the tissue layers and ligaments encountered when placing an epidural and in
what order the anesthesiologist encounters each.
42. The American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) recommendations regarding
aseptic technique for placement of neuraxial block include what specific
precautions?
364
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
43. What are the interspaces where the neuraxial block for labor analgesia is placed
and what are the risks of placing the neuraxial block higher or lower than this
range of interspaces?
44. What is a “test dose” and what does it assess?
45. Can a test dose be used with a CSE?
46. What type of needle is used in placement of spinal analgesia and why?
47. What is a “saddle block” and when is it used during labor and delivery?
CONTRAINDICATIONS
AND COMPLICATIONS
OF NEURAXIAL
ANESTHESIA
48. What are the contraindications to neuraxial procedures?
49. Is known infection with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) a contraindication
to epidural placement?
50. List the potential complications of a neuraxial block.
51. What is the occurrence rate of postdural puncture headache (PDPH)? What are the
treatment options for PDPH?
52. What is the treatment for systemic local anesthetic toxicity of bupivacaine?
53. What physiologic effects do you expect to see with a high spinal or high epidural?
54. What are the important differences in performing advanced cardiac life support
(ACLS) for a pregnant woman compared to a nonpregnant patient?
55. What is the rate of hypotension after neuraxial blockade?
56. What is the first-line pharmacologic treatment of hypotension after a neuraxial
block?
57. How does epidural analgesia affect maternal body temperature?
OTHER TECHNIQUES
FOR LABOR
ANALGESIA
58. Where is local anesthetic injected to achieve a paracervical block? What are the
disadvantages of a paracervical block?
59. When is the pudendal block useful? What are the disadvantages of this type of
block?
60. Can inhaled nitrous oxide be administered safely for labor and delivery analgesia?
ANESTHESIA FOR
CESAREAN
DELIVERY
61. What are some benefits of regional anesthesia over general anesthesia for cesarean
delivery?
62. What are the benefits of general anesthesia over regional anesthesia for cesarean
delivery?
63. What are some advantages and disadvantages of spinal anesthesia for cesarean
delivery compared to an epidural block?
64. What dermatome level of spinal anesthesia ensures patient comfort adequate for
cesarean delivery? How can this be achieved?
65. What are some advantages and disadvantages of epidural anesthesia for cesarean
delivery compared to spinal anesthesia?
66. Which local anesthetics, and corresponding doses, are typically administered to
achieve an adequate density and dermatomal level of epidural anesthesia for
cesarean delivery?
67. What is the advantage of the administration of morphine into the epidural space
for cesarean delivery? What are some of the negative side effects that may
accompany this route of morphine administration?
68. What are some indications for general anesthesia for cesarean delivery? What are
some benefits of general anesthesia for cesarean delivery?
69. What are the main causes of increased morbidity and mortality associated with
general anesthesia during pregnancy?
70. How should difficulty with endotracheal intubation be managed by the
anesthesiologist?
71. What is the level of exposure of the fetus to thiopental after the administration of
induction doses for general anesthesia? Is there an advantage to using propofol for
the induction of general anesthesia?
365
Obstetrics
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
72. What are some of the advantages and disadvantages of inducing general
anesthesia for cesarean delivery with etomidate?
73. What are the effects of using volatile anesthetics for cesarean delivery on the fetus?
74. What neuromuscular agents are typically used for cesarean delivery with general
anesthesia? Do they result in neuromuscular blockade of the fetus or relaxation
of the uterus?
ABNORMAL
PRESENTATIONS
AND MULTIPLE
BIRTHS
75. What percent of live births are twins and why is the number increasing? What are
the complications that develop with multiple gestations?
76. What are the modes of delivery for twin pregnancies? What anesthetic techniques
can be used to optimize delivery?
77. Describe external cephalic version and the associated risks.
78. What is a shoulder dystocia? What are the risk factors associated with the
development of a shoulder dystocia? What are the risks to the fetus during a
shoulder dystocia?
HYPERTENSIVE
DISORDERS OF
PREGNANCY
79. At what gestational age does gestational hypertension present?
80. What is the percent of preeclampsia in the general population? What are the risk
factors for developing preeclampsia?
81. What are the criteria for the diagnosis of preeclampsia?
82. What are the criteria for severe preeclampsia?
83. What is HELLP syndrome?
84. What is the mechanism of preeclampsia?
85. How should patients with preeclampsia be managed for labor? What is the
definitive treatment of preeclampsia?
86. How is magnesium sulfate infusion used and why? What are the signs of and
treatment of magnesium sulfate toxicity?
87. What are the typical antihypertensive drugs used in preeclampsia?
HEMORRHAGE IN
PREGNANT WOMEN
88. What are some causes of hemorrhage in the pregnant patient? When do these
typically manifest?
89. What is placenta previa? What are the associated risk factors?
90. If a massive postpartum hemorrhage is not controlled with standard measures (i.e.,
uterine massage, uterotonics), what invasive options can be considered by the
obstetrician?
91. What is abruptio placentae? What are some risk factors for abruptio placentae?
92. What are some risk factors for uterine rupture? What is the incidence of uterine
rupture associated with vaginal birth after a previous cesarean delivery?
93. What approximate percent of vaginal deliveries are associated with some amount
of retained placenta? What are some options for the anesthetic management
of patients with retained placenta?
94. What are some risk factors for uterine atony?
95. What medications are used to manage uterine atony? What are their side effects?
96. Define placenta accreta, increta, and percreta.
97. In a patient with known placenta previa, how does the risk of placenta accreta
change with the number of prior cesarean deliveries?
AMNIOTIC FLUID
EMBOLISM
98. What is the clinical presentation of an amniotic fluid embolism? What are some
conditions that may mimic amniotic fluid embolism and must therefore be
ruled out?
99. How is the definitive diagnosis of an amniotic fluid embolism made? What is the
treatment of an amniotic fluid embolism?
366
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
ANESTHESIA FOR
NONOBSTETRIC
SURGERY DURING
PREGNANCY
100. What are common nonobstetric surgeries that occur during pregnancy?
101. When should nonobstetric surgeries be performed during pregnancy?
102. What anesthetics are teratogenic?
103. How can intrauterine fetal hypoxia and acidosis be prevented?
104. When should fetal heart rate monitoring be done during nonobstetric surgery?
105. What is the usual etiology of premature labor that presents in the pregnant
patient after having undergone nonobstetric surgery? How can premature labor
be treated?
106. Can laparoscopic surgery be performed safely during the third trimester?
DIAGNOSIS AND
MANAGEMENT OF
FETAL DISTRESS
107. Describe the frequency of normal uterine contractions and tachysystole. What is
the treatment for tachysystole?
108. What is the normal baseline fetal heart rate (FHR)?
109. Define FHR variability in terms of absent, minimal, moderate, and marked.
110. What is the definition of a FHR acceleration?
111. What are late decelerations indicative of in the fetus?
112. What is a variable deceleration indicative of in the fetus?
113. What was fetal heart rate monitoring designed to assess?
EVALUATION OF THE
NEONATE AND
NEONATAL
RESUSCITATION
114. Define the values of each Apgar score category.
115. What are normal blood gas values for the umbilical artery and vein?
116. During neonatal evaluation and resuscitation, when is it appropriate to give
positive pressure ventilation?
117. What is the dose of epinephrine given for neonatal resuscitation?
118. Should naloxone be given in the delivery room for neonatal resuscitation?
119. In neonates delivered with meconium-stained amniotic fluid, when should
suctioning below the cords be instituted?
120. What have been significant advances in the prevention of meconium aspiration
syndrome?
ANSWERS*
PHYSIOLOGIC
CHANGES IN
PREGNANT WOMEN
1. During pregnancy the maternal intravascular fluid volume increases from its
prepregnancy volume. The increase in intravascular volume begins in the first
trimester of pregnancy. By term, the intravascular fluid volume has increased by
about 35% above the prepregnancy state. The plasma volume increases by
approximately45%atterm.Theerythrocytevolumeinthepregnantpatientincreases
by approximately 20%. Because the plasma volume increases by over twice as
much as the erythrocyte volume, the woman has a relative physiologic anemia.
That is, the hematocritof the pregnantpatientisrelativelyless than her prepregnancy
state. This is termed the physiologic anemia of pregnancy. (515, Table 33-1)
2. The pregnant woman at term is in a hypercoagulable state secondary to increases
in factors I, VII, VIII, IX, X, and XII, and decreases in factors XI, XIII, and
Antithrombin III. This results in an approximately 20% decrease in prothrombin
time (PT) and partial thromboplastin time (PTT). Platelet count may remain normal
or decrease 10% by term. (515)
*Numbers in parentheses: numbers refer to pages, figures, or tables in Miller RD, Pardo MC: Basics of Anesthesia,
6th ed. Philadelphia, Elsevier Saunders, 2011.
367
Obstetrics
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
3. The average maternal blood loss during vaginal delivery of a newborn is 300 to
500 mL. The average maternal blood loss during the delivery of a newborn by
cesarean delivery is 800 to 1000 mL, but blood loss during a cesarean delivery
is greatly variable. The increase in intravascular fluid volume and the
hypercoagulable state of the mother help to counter the blood losses incurred
during this time. The contracted uterus after either type of delivery creates an
autotransfusion of approximately 500 mL of blood, which decreases the overall
effect of the blood loss on the mother. (515)
4. Maternal cardiac output increases 10% by the tenth week of gestation, and at term
pregnancy increases by approximately 40% to 50% of its prepregnancy value.
Cardiac output is equal to the product of stroke volume and heart rate. The increase
in cardiac output is primarily due to an increase in stroke volume. The increase
in heart rate during pregnancy is less and is therefore only a minimal contributor
to the increase in cardiac output. Labor is associated with further increases in
cardiac output with output above prelabor values by 10% to 25% during the first
stage and 40% in the second stage. The greatest increase in cardiac output
occurs just after delivery, when it increases by as much as 80% above prelabor
values. This is the maximal change in cardiac output in the woman. Cardiac
output decreases substantially toward prepregnant values by 2 weeks postpartum.
(515, Table 33-1)
5. The systolic blood pressure of the woman having an uncomplicated pregnancy
does not exceed her prepregnancy blood pressure and typically decreases
secondary to a 20% reduction in systemic vascular resistance at term. Systolic,
mean, and diastolic blood pressure may all decrease 5% to 15% by 20 weeks
gestational age and gradually increase toward prepregnant values as the
pregnancy progresses towards term. Central venous pressure does not change
during pregnancy despite the increased plasma volume because venous
capacitance increases. (515-516, Table 33-1)
6. Supine hypotension syndrome, as the name implies, is the decrease in blood
pressure seen when the pregnant patient lies in the supine position after
midgestation. The supine hypotension syndrome occurs because of a decrease
in cardiac output by approximately 10% to 20%. When the pregnant woman is
in the supine position, the gravid uterus compresses the inferior vena cava,
resulting in decreased venous return and decreased preload for the heart.
Symptoms that accompany the hypotension include diaphoresis, nausea,
vomiting, and possible changes in cerebration. Symptoms must be present for
the patient to be considered susceptible to supine hypotension syndrome.
(516, Figure 33-1)
7. Most pregnant women, when lying in the supine position, are able to compensate
for the possible decrease in blood pressure that results from the compression of
the inferior vena cava by the gravid uterus. One compensatory mechanism
includes maintaining venous return by diverting blood flow from the inferior vena
cava to the paravertebral venous plexus. The blood then goes to the azygos
vein and returns to the heart via the superior vena cava. Dilation of the epidural
veins may make unintentional intravascular placement of an epidural catheter
more likely. A “test dose” is given before dosing an epidural catheter to decrease
the likelihood of an unrecognized intravascular placement before initiating
neuraxial blockade.
Another compensatory mechanism is an increase in peripheral sympathetic
nervous system activity. This increases peripheral vascular tone and helps to
maintain venous return to the heart. Regional anesthesia, however, can interfere
with these compensatory mechanisms by causing sympathetic nervous system
blockade, rendering the pregnant woman at term more susceptible to decreases
in blood pressure. The gravid uterus can also compress the lower abdominal aorta
and lead to arterial hypotension in the lower extremities, but maternal symptoms
368
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
or decreases in systemic blood pressure as measured in the arms are often not
reflective of this decrease. The major clinical significance of the aortocaval
compression is the decrease in placental and uterine blood flow that results.
The decrease in blood flow through the uteroplacental unit leads to a decrease
in blood flow to the fetus. The aortocaval compression can be minimized by
having the woman lie in the lateral position. Uterine displacement can also be
used, typically with displacement being to the left because the inferior vena
cava sits just to the right of and anterior to the spine. Left uterine displacement
is easily accomplished by table tilt or the placement of a wedge or folded
blanket under the right hip, elevating the hip by 10 to 15 cm. (516-517,
Figures 33-1 and 33-2)
8. There is significant capillary engorgement of the mucosal layer of the upper
airways and increased tissue friability during pregnancy. There is increased risk of
obstruction from tissue edema and bleeding with instrumentation of the upper
airway. Additional care is needed during suctioning, placement of airways
(avoid nasal instrumentation if possible), direct laryngoscopy, and intubation.
In addition, because the vocal cords and arytenoids are often edematous,
smaller-sized cuffed endotracheal tubes (6.0 to 6.5 mm internal diameter) may
be a better selection for intubation of the trachea for these patients. The presence
of preeclampsia, upper respiratory tract infections, and active pushing with
associated increased venous pressure further exacerbate airway tissue edema,
making both intubation and ventilation more challenging. (517)
9. During pregnancy, the minute ventilation increases to about 50% above
prepregnancy levels. This change occurs in the first trimester of pregnancy and
remains elevated for the duration of the pregnancy. An increase in tidal volume is
the main contributor to the increase in minute ventilation seen, with only small
increases in respiratory rate from prepregnancy. During the first trimester, as a
result of the increase in minute ventilation, the resting maternal PaCO2 decreases
from 40 mm Hg to about 30 or 32 mm Hg. Arterial pH, however, remains only
slightly alkalotic (7.42 to 7.44) secondary to increased renal excretion of
bicarbonate ions. (517, Table 33-1)
10. Maternal hemoglobin has less of an affinity for binding oxygen during
pregnancy, which facilitates downloading oxygen to the tissues and the fetus.
The hemoglobin dissociation curve is thus shifted to the right with the P-50
increasing from 27 to approximately 30 mm Hg. (517)
11. Maternal lung volumes start to change in the second trimester. This is a result of
mechanical compression by the gravid uterus as it enlarges and forces the
diaphragm cephalad. This leads to a decrease in the woman’s functional residual
capacity by approximately 20% at term. This decrease is a result of approximately
equal decreases in both the expiratory reserve volume and residual lung volume.
This can result in a functional residual capacity less than closing capacity and
increased atelectasis in the supine position. There is no significant change in
vital capacity seen during pregnancy. The rates of change in the alveolar
concentration of inhaled anesthetics during induction and emergence from
anesthesia are both increased secondary to the increase in minute ventilation and
decrease in functional residual capacity. Clinically this, along with the decrease
in MAC that accompanies pregnancy, leads to a more rapid achievement of an
anesthetized state than when the patient is not pregnant. Apnea in the woman
rapidly leads to arterial hypoxemia. There are at least two explanations for this.
First, a decreased functional residual capacity and subsequent decreased oxygen
reserve are contributors. Second, aortocaval compression and decreased venous
return leading to decreases in cardiac output may also contribute. The decrease in
cardiac output would lead to an increase in overall oxygen extraction and
therefore decrease the level of oxygenation of blood returning to the heart. Third,
maternal oxygen consumption is increased by 20% at term, with further
369
Obstetrics
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
increases noted during labor. Because of the rapid decrease in maternal PaO2 with
apnea or hypoventilation, preoxygenation with 100% O2 for 3 minutes or four
maximal breaths over the 30 seconds just prior to the induction of emergent
general anesthesia is recommended. (517, Table 33-1)
12. Maternal PaO2 changes during the progression from early gestation to term.
Early in gestation, the PaO2 in the mother is slightly increased over prepregnancy
values to over 100 mm Hg breathing room air. This is secondary to maternal
hyperventilation and subsequent decreased PaCO2 during this time. As the
pregnancy progresses, the PaO2 is normal or even slightly decreased. The decrease
in PaO2 during the course of pregnancy likely results from airway closure and
associated intrapulmonary shunt. (517)
13. There are at least four gastrointestinal changes in pregnancy that render the
woman significantly vulnerable to the regurgitation of gastric contents beyond
midgestation. The enlarged uterus acts to displace the stomach and pylorus
cephalad from its usual position. This repositions the intraabdominal portion of
the esophagus into the thorax and leads to relative incompetence of the
physiologic gastroesophageal sphincter. The tone of the gastroesophageal
sphincter is further reduced by the higher progesterone and estrogen levels of
pregnancy. Gastric pressure is increased by the gravid uterus. Gastrin secreted by
the placenta stimulates gastric hydrogen ion secretion. The pH of the woman’s
gastric fluid is predictably low as a result. Reflux and subsequent esophagitis are
common during pregnancy. During labor, gastric emptying is delayed and
intragastric fluid volume tends to be increased as a result. (Epidural analgesia
alone does not alter gastric emptying.) Anxiety, pain, and the administration of
opioids can further decrease gastric emptying. Clinically, this means that the
pregnant patient must always be treated as if she has a full stomach. Regardless
of what amount of time has elapsed since her last ingestion of solids, she is at
increased risk of regurgitation and aspiration of gastric contents. This includes
the routine use of nonparticulate antacids, rapid sequence induction, cricoid
pressure, and cuffed endotracheal intubation as part of general anesthesia
induction sequence in a pregnant woman after approximately 20 weeks
gestational age.
Pharmacologic interventions that are recommended in the woman to help
minimize the risks of pulmonary aspiration are aimed at decreasing the severity of
acid pneumonitis should aspiration occur. The administration of antacids to
pregnant women before the induction of anesthesia is common practice. This is as
an attempt to increase the pH of gastric contents. Sodium citrate is the antacid
commonly used. Of note, the antacid must be nonparticulate, because aspiration
of particulate matter contained in some antacids is in itself a hazard.
Metoclopramide can be useful for decreasing the gastric fluid volume of pregnant
women in active labor who require general anesthesia. It can significantly
decrease gastric volume in as little as 15 minutes, although gastric hypomotility
associated with prior opioid administration reduces the effectiveness of
metoclopramide. H2 receptor antagonists increase gastric fluid pH in pregnant
women approximately one hour after administration without producing adverse
effects, and are additionally recommended by some. (517-518)
14. During pregnancy, both the epidural and intrathecal spaces are decreased in
volume from their prepregnancy state. This occurs because of the engorgement of
epidural veins and the increased intraabdominal pressure resulting from the
progressive enlargement of the uterus. However, CSF pressure does not increase
with pregnancy. The decrease in the epidural space decreases the required
volume of local anesthetic necessary to achieve a particular level of anesthesia by
facilitating its spread in the epidural space. The decreased intrathecal space
also facilitates the spread of spinal anesthetic and decreases the dose required
from prepregnancy values.
370
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
There appears to be an increased sensitivity to local anesthetics by women who
are pregnant. The decreased local anesthetic requirement in pregnant women
appears to have a biochemical component to it as well as a mechanical one.
This is based on the observation of decreased neuraxial local anesthetic doses
as early as the first trimester, before significant uterine enlargement.
15. Renal blood flow and glomerular filtration rate in the woman are both increased.
By the third month of pregnancy the increase is about 50% to 60%. This results
in a decrease in what is considered the normal upper limit of both the blood
urea nitrogen and serum creatinine concentrations during pregnancy to about
50% of what it was in the prepregnancy state. (518)
16. Liver blood flow does not change significantly with pregnancy. Plasma protein
concentrations are reduced in pregnancy secondary to dilution. The decreased
albumin levels can create increased blood levels of highly protein bound drugs.
Plasma cholinesterase, or pseudocholinesterase, decreases in activity by about
25% during pregnancy. This decrease in activity is first noted by about the tenth
week of gestation and persists for as long as 6 weeks postpartum. There is no
clinical manifestation of this change in plasma cholinesterase activity, and no
significant change in the duration of action of succinylcholine. (518)
PHYSIOLOGY OF
UTEROPLACENTAL
CIRCULATION
17. The function of the placenta is to unite maternal and fetal circulations. The
union allows for the physiologic exchange of nutrients and waste. Maternal blood
is delivered to the placenta by the uterine arteries. Fetal blood is delivered to
the placenta by the two umbilical arteries. Nutrient rich blood is returned from
the placenta to the fetus via a single umbilical vein. The two most important
determinants of placental function are uterine blood flow and the characteristics
of the substances to be exchanged across the placenta. (519)
18. Uterine blood flow increases during gestation from approximately 100 mL/min
before pregnancy to 700 mL/min at term. Adequate uterine blood flow must be
maintained to ensure placental circulation is adequate and therefore guarantee
fetal well-being. About 80% of the uterine blood flow perfuses the placenta
and 20% supports the myometrium. (519)
19. During pregnancy uterine blood flow has limited autoregulation, and the uterine
vasculature is essentially maximally dilated under normal pregnancy conditions.
Uterine blood flow is proportional to the mean blood perfusion pressure to the
uterus and inversely proportional to the resistance of the uterine vasculature.
Decreased perfusion pressure can result from systemic hypotension secondary
to hypovolemia, aortocaval compression, or decreased systemic resistance from
either general or neuraxial anesthesia. Uterine blood flow also decreases with
increased uterine venous pressure. This can result from vena caval compression
(supine position), uterine contractions (particularly uterine tachysystole as may
occur with oxytocin administration), or significant abdominal musculature
contraction (Valsalva during pushing). Additionally, extreme hypocapnia
(PaCO2 <20 mm Hg) associated with hyperventilation secondary to labor pain can
reduce UBF to the point of fetal hypoxemia and acidosis. Epidural or spinal
anesthesia does not alter UBF as long as maternal hypotension is avoided.
Endogenous catecholamines induced by stress or pain and exogenous vasopressors
have the capability of increasing uterine arterial resistance and decreasing UBF,
although both ephedrine or phenylephrine are used clinically in moderate
amounts to maintain uterine perfusion pressure when the pregnant patient is
hypotensive. (519)
20. Transfer of oxygen to the fetus is dependent on a variety of factors including the
ratio of maternal to fetal umbilical blood flow, the oxygen partial pressure
gradient, the respective hemoglobin concentrations and affinities, the placental
371
Obstetrics
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
diffusing capacity, and the acid-base status of the fetal and maternal blood
(Bohr effect).
21. Transfer of drugs and other substances less than 1000 Da from the maternal
circulation to the fetal circulation and vice versa is primarily by diffusion. Some
factors that affect the exchange of substances from the maternal circulation to the
fetus include the concentration gradient of the substance across the placenta,
maternal protein binding, molecular weight, lipid solubility, and degree of
ionization of the substance. The most reliable way to minimize the amount of drug
that reaches the fetus is by minimizing the concentration of the drug in the
maternal blood. (519)
22. Nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking drugs have a high molecular weight and
low lipid solubility. These two characteristics together limit the ability of
nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking drugs to cross the placenta.
Succinylcholine is highly ionized, preventing it from diffusing across the placenta
despite its low molecular weight. Additionally, both heparin and glycopyrolate
have significantly limited placental transfer. Placental transfer of barbiturates,
local anesthetics, and opioids is facilitated by the relatively low molecular weights
of these substances. (519)
FETAL UPTAKE AND
DISTRIBUTION OF
DRUGS
23. Fetal blood is slightly more acidic than maternal blood, with a pH about 0.1 unit
less than maternal blood pH. The lower pH of fetal blood facilitates the fetal
uptake of drugs that are basic. Weakly basic drugs, such as local anesthetics and
opioids that cross the placenta in the nonionized state, become ionized in the fetal
circulation. This results in an accumulated concentration of drug in the fetus for
two reasons. First, once the drug becomes ionized it cannot readily diffuse back
across the placenta. This is known as ion trapping. Second, a concentration
gradient of nonionized drug is maintained between the mother and the fetus. In the
case of lidocaine administration, this may mean that if the fetus was distressed and
acidotic and lidocaine was given in sufficient doses to the woman, lidocaine may
accumulate in the fetus. (519)
24. First, about 75% of the blood that is coming to the fetus via the umbilical vein
passes through the liver. This allows for a significant amount of metabolism of
the drug to take place before going to the fetal arterial circulation and delivery
to the heart and brain. Second, drug contained in the umbilical vein blood
enters the inferior vena cava via the ductus venosus. This blood is diluted by drug-
free blood returning from the lower extremities and pelvic viscera of the fetus,
resulting in a decrease in the concentration of the drug that is in the inferior vena
cava. In addition, despite decreased liver enzyme activity in comparison to
adults, fetal/neonatal enzyme systems are adequately developed to metabolize
most drugs. (520)
STAGES OF LABOR
25. Labor is a continuous process divided into three stages. The first stage is the onset of
labor until the cervix is fully dilated. This first stage is further divided into the
latent and active stage. The active phase begins at the point when the rate of cervical
dilation increases (often between 3 and 5 cm.). The second stage of labor begins
when the cervix is fully dilated and ends when the neonate is born. This stage is
referred toas the“pushingandexpulsion”stage.Thethird andfinalstage begins once
the neonate is delivered and is completed when the placenta is delivered. (520)
26. If a woman fails to dilate adequately in the active phase despite pharmacologic
interventions, it is considered active phase arrest and will result in cesarean delivery.
During the second stage of labor, the patient may not be able to “push” the
neonate out of the pelvis. This is termed arrest of descent. If the neonate is low
enough in the pelvis, the obstetrician can perform an instrumented vaginal delivery
via vacuum or forceps, otherwise a cesarean delivery is required. (520)
372
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
ANATOMY OF
LABOR PAIN
27. During the first stage of labor (cervical dilation), the majority of painful stimuli result
in afferent nerve impulses from the lower uterine segment and cervix. This pain is
typically visceral in nature (dull, aching, poorly localized). The nerve cell bodies
are located at the dorsal root ganglia of T10 to L1 level. (520, Figure 33-3)
28. In the second stage of labor, afferents innervating the vagina, perineum, and pelvic
floor travel primarily via the pudendal nerve to the dorsal root ganglia of the
S2 to S4 levels. This pain is typically somatic in nature (sharp and well localized).
(520, Figure 33-3)
29. The first and second stages of labor can employ neuraxial techniques such as an
epidural or combined spinal epidural (CSE). Although used less frequently, a
paracervical block can also be used during the first stage of labor. A single shot
spinal or pudendal block can be used for the second stage of labor. Typically,
the obstetrician performs both the paracervical and pudendal block. (520)
METHODS OF LABOR
ANALGESIA
Nonpharmacologic Techniques and Systemic Medications
30. A variety of nonpharmacologic techniques for labor analgesia exist. These include
hypnosis, the breathing techniques described by Lamaze, acupuncture,
acupressure, the LeBoyer technique, transcutaneous nerve stimulation, massage,
hydrotherapy, vertical positioning, presence of a support person, intradermal
water injections, biofeedback, and many others. A meta-analysis reviewing the
effectiveness of a support individual (e.g., doula, family member) noted that
women with a support individual used less pharmacologic analgesia methods,
had a decreased length of labor, and a lower incidence of cesarean delivery.
In a 2006 retrospective survey, nonpharmacologic methods of tub immersion and
massage were rated more or equally effective in relieving pain compared to use of
opioids in labor. (521)
31. Fentanyl is commonly used for labor analgesia because it is short acting with no
active metabolite. Morphine was used more frequently in the past, but currently is
rarely used. Its active metabolite (morphine-6-glucuronide) has a prolonged
duration of analgesia, the half-life is longer in neonates compared to adults, and it
produces significant maternal sedation. Meperidine is still one of the most frequently
used opioids worldwide. Maternal half-life of meperidine is 2 to 3 hours with half-
life in the fetus and newborn significantly greater (13 to 23 hours) and more variable.
In addition, meperidine is metabolized to an active metabolite (normeperidine) that
can significantly accumulate after repeated doses. With increased dosing and
shortened time between doses, there are increased neonatal risks. (521-522)
32. In latent labor, obstetrical providers may use intramuscular morphine combined
with phenergan for analgesia, sedation, and rest termed “morphine sleep.”
This produces analgesia for approximately 2.5 to 4 hours with an onset of 10 to
20 minutes. (521)
33. Remifentanil patient controlled analgesia (PCA) has been considered for women
who have contraindications to neuraxial blockade. Although pain was improved
with remifentanil compared to those without pharmacologic intervention, a
randomized control trial comparing epidural analgesia to remifentanil PCA had
overall pain scores that were lower in the epidural group. More sedation and
hemoglobin desaturation were noted during remifentanil analgesia, but there was
no difference between groups in fetal and neonatal outcome measures. (522)
34. Diazepam is used in obstetrics; however, it will readily cross the placenta and yield
roughly equal maternal and fetal blood levels. Since neonates have a limited
ability to excrete the active metabolites, use of diazepam has been associated with
neonatal respiratory depression. Midazolam is a shorter acting anxiolytic, but
also rapidly crosses the placenta, and large induction doses have been associated
with profound neonatal hypotonia. Their use has been controversial given
373
Obstetrics
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
their amnestic properties. In specific obstetrical situations, use of midazolam in
small doses may be beneficial. (522)
35. During labor ketamine can be administered for urgent situations in divided IV
doses (10 to 20 mg) totaling less than 1 mg/kg. Ketamine in these doses will
provide rapid analgesia, and is useful for vaginal delivery and episiotomy. It has a
rapid onset (30 seconds) and minimal duration of action (<5 minutes). When
given with opioids, ketamine can act synergistically to reduce the amount of opioid
necessary to produce adequate analgesia. (522)
Neuraxial Analgesia and Neuraxial Techniques
36. Neuraxial analgesia typically involves the administration of local anesthetics,
often with the coadministration of opioid analgesics or other adjunctive
analgesics. Bupivacaine and ropivacaine are the most commonly used local
anesthetics. Epidural, spinal, and combined spinal and epidural (CSE) are the
techniques typically used for labor analgesia. (522)
37. Anytime a woman in labor without contraindications requests neuraxial analgesia,
regardless of the stage of her labor, a neuraxial blockade may be placed. The
timing of placement does not depend on an arbitrary cervical dilation. A single
shot spinal analgesic has a finite analgesic duration depending on the local
anesthetic and this should be taken into account when using this technique.
For example, a single shot spinal analgesic is ideal if an obstetrician is performing
an instrumented vaginal delivery in a woman without previous neuraxial
block. The other neuraxial techniques employ catheter delivery techniques
and can be extended throughout the length of the labor. (523)
38. Otherwise healthy women in labor may have modest amounts of clear liquids.
However, ina complicated labor(e.g.,by morbidobesity, difficultairway, concerning
fetal status), the decision to restrict oral intake should be individualized. (523)
39. Placing opioids alone in the epidural or intrathecal space (if placing a CSE) is
considered a walking epidural. The local anesthetic solution, while providing
analgesia, has minimal effects on sympathetic or motor nerves. This allows the
woman to ambulate after tests for motor blockade indicate that she is not at risk
of falling. Even so, the woman should be closely monitored and ideally should only
ambulate when accompanied because proprioception and balance may be
impaired. Use of neuraxial opioids is associated with dose-related maternal side
effects including pruritus, sedation, and nausea. In addition, the administration of
intrathecal opioids can result in fetal bradycardia independent of hypotension. The
mechanism for fetal bradycardia is unclear, but may result from uterine
hyperactivity following the rapid onset of analgesia. (522)
40. Clonidine and neostigmine are epidural adjuncts to local anesthetics and have
been evaluated for use in neuraxial blockade. They prolong the blockade and limit
the dose of local anesthetic infusion. Neostigmine is still undergoing evaluation for
its use in obstetric anesthesia and currently is not recommended for standard
practice. It increases acetylcholine binding within the spinal cord stimulating
nitric oxide to produce analgesia. Neostigmine also produces refractory nausea
and vomiting if given intrathecally, but minimal nausea and vomiting if given
epidurally. Clonidine inhibits the release of substance P in the dorsal horn and
produces analgesia. It also increases the level of acetylcholine in the cerebral spinal
fluid. Intrathecal clonidine can produce excellent analgesia, but sedation and
hypotension are common. (522-523)
41. When placing an epidural, the needle traverses the skin and subcutaneous tissues,
supraspinous ligament, interspinous ligament, the ligamentum flavum, and is
advanced into the epidural space. (523, Figures 33-4 and 33-5)
374
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
42. Aseptic technique should be used during neuraxial procedures, including
(1) jewelry removal (e.g., rings and watches), hand washing, and use of caps,
masks, and sterile gloves; (2) use of individually packaged chlorhexidine
(preferred) or povidone-iodine (preferably with alcohol) for skin preparation,
allowing for adequate drying time; (3) sterile draping; and (4) use of sterile
occlusive dressings at the catheter insertion site. (523)
43. For neuraxial analgesia the needle is normally inserted between L1 and L4. If the
needle is placed too high, there is a risk of puncturing the conus medullaris if
the needle inadvertently punctures the dura. In addition, coverage of sacral roots
needed during the second stage may be inadequate. If the catheter is placed
lower than L4, the neuraxial block may not adequately cover the nerves that
innervate the uterus and may not provide the necessary labor analgesia for uterine
contractions and cervical dilation. (523)
44. Prior to the infusion of local anesthetic through an epidural catheter a test dose
typically composed of 3 cc of 1.5% lidocaine with 1:200,000 epinephrine is
administered. The anesthesia provider waits 3 minutes to confirm that the needle
is not intravascular with no increase in heart rate or blood pressure, and no
systemic symptoms of lidocaine infusion have resulted such as tinnitus or perioral
tingling. Additionally, the patient is asked to move her lower extremities to
confirm that the bolus was not placed intrathecally, which would result in motor
blockade. (524-526)
45. A test dose can and should be used with the CSE. The test dose will both confirm
whether the catheter is intravascular by changes in heart rate and blood
pressure, and unintended intrathecal catheter placement can still be assessed
as the patient should still be able to move her lower extremities after
typical spinal local anesthetic doses in the spinal portion of the CSE. (524-526)
46. A 24 to 26-gauge “pencil point” spinal needle is commonly selected for CSE to
reduce the risk of a postdural puncture headache. (526)
47. If primarily perineal anesthesia is needed (i.e., forceps delivery, perineal laceration
repair), the patient may be left in the sitting position for 2 to 3 minutes after
intrathecal injection with hyperbaric local anesthetic to concentrate the sensory
block in the perineal region (“saddle block”). A true saddle block anesthetic
(requiring more time in the sitting position) does not produce complete uterine
pain relief because the afferent fibers (extending to T10) from the uterus are not
blocked. (526)
CONTRAINDICATIONS
AND COMPLICATIONS
OF NEURAXIAL
ANESTHESIA
48. Certain conditions contraindicate neuraxial procedures. These include: (1) patient
refusal, (2) infection at the needle insertion site, (3) significant coagulopathy,
(4) hypovolemic shock, (5) increased intracranial pressure from mass lesion, and
(6) inadequate provider expertise. Other conditions such as systemic infection,
neurologic disease, and mild coagulopathies are relative contraindications and
should be evaluated on a case-by-case basis. (526)
49. Neither HIV nor hepatitis virus infection are contraindications to placement
of neuraxial anesthesia. (526)
50. Possible complications of a neuraxial block include inadequate block,
hypotension, intravascular catheter placement, systemic toxicity of local
anesthetic, unintentional intrathecal catheter placement, excessive blockade,
postdural puncture headache, epidural hematoma, epidural abscesses, meningitis,
and nerve or spinal cord injury. Other side effects include pruritus, nausea,
shivering, urinary retention, motor weakness, low back soreness, and a prolonged
block. (526)
375
Obstetrics
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
51. The rate of accidental dural puncture during epidural catheter placement is
approximately 1% to 2%, and approximately half of these will result in a severe
headache. PDPH are typically managed with analgesics, hydration, rest, caffeine,
and an epidural blood patch, if necessary. (526)
52. If a local anesthetic overdose occurs, in addition to following standard ACLS
algorithms for pregnancy, consider use of a 20% IV lipid emulsion to decrease
toxicity. (527)
53. A high spinal (total spinal) can result from an unrecognized epidural catheter
placed subdural, migration of the catheter during its use, or an overdose of local
anesthetic in the epidural space (i.e., high epidural). Both high spinals and high
epidurals can result in severe maternal hypotension, bradycardia, loss of
consciousness, and blockade of the motor nerves to the respiratory muscles. (526-527)
54. ACLS guidelines for pregnancy include use of left uterine displacement, avoidance
of lower extremity vessels for drug delivery, chest compressions positioned
slightly higher on the sternum, and no modifications to the defibrillation protocol
except removal of fetal and uterine monitors prior to shock. In any situation of
maternal cardiac arrest with unsuccessful resuscitation, the fetus should be
emergently delivered if the mother is not resuscitated within 4 minutes of the
arrest. This guideline for emergent cesarean delivery increases the chances of
survival for both the mother and neonate. Typically, at 20 weeks or greater
gestational age, an emergent cesarean delivery will be performed to help save the
life of the mother. Less than 24 to 25 weeks gestational age, the fetus is not viable,
but in the setting of ACLS the delivery of the fetus regardless of viability improves
the chances of survival for the woman. (527)
55. Hypotension (decrease in systolic BP >20%) secondary to sympathetic blockade is
the most common complication of neuraxial blockade for labor analgesia with rates
between 10% and 24%. Left uterine displacement and hydration are used to decrease
hypotension associated with the initiation of neuraxial blockade. (527)
56. Small vasopressor boluses of either phenylephrine or ephedrine can be used
to treat hypotension after a neuraxial block. Although ephedrine was historically
used primarily, phenylephrine is now preferred as first-line treatment because
it is associated with less fetal acidosis. If treated promptly, maternal
hypotension does not lead to fetal depression or neonatal morbidity. (527)
57. During the first 5 hours of epidural analgesia, there is no significant rise in body
temperature. Temperature increases at about 0.10 C/hr, and may reach 38 C in as
many as 15% of women with a labor epidural compared with 1% without
an epidural. Although the etiology of the maternal temperature rise remains
uncertain, it does not increase the rate of neonatal sepsis and need not affect
neonatal septic workup. (527)
OTHER TECHNIQUES
FOR LABOR
ANALGESIA
58. For achievement of a paracervical block, local anesthetic must be injected
submucosal, lateral and posterior to the uterocervical junction bilaterally. Sensory
fibers that come from the uterus, cervix, and upper vagina travel through this
area. Therefore, this block is most effective to help provide analgesia during the
first stage of labor and is usually not effective for the second stage of labor.
The major disadvantage of a paracervical block is potential fetal bradycardia. In
approximately 15% of laboring women who receive this block, fetal bradycardia
develops 2 to 10 minutes after the local anesthetic solution is injected.
Although the definitive cause of the bradycardia is not known, it is often associated
with fetal acidosis. The bradycardia is normally limited to less than 15 minutes
with supportive treatment as needed. (527)
59. A pudendal nerve block is useful for anesthesia of the lower vagina and perineum
as needed for delivery with an episiotomy or low forceps delivery. The obstetrician
376
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
typically performs this block, which is done transvaginally with the woman in
the lithotomy position. The failure rate is high and complications include local
anesthetic toxicity, ischiorectal or vaginal hematoma, and rarely, fetal injection
of local anesthetic. (527)
60. The inhaled anesthetic that is most often used for analgesia in the pregnant woman
is 50% nitrous oxide administered in a blend with oxygen. The other inhaled
anesthetics are rarely used for this purpose. The inhalation of nitrous oxide for
analgesia during labor and delivery should be self-administered after appropriate
patient instruction. Optimal results from the administration of nitrous oxide during
labor are obtained by having the woman inhale the nitrous oxide between
contractions, so that an effective concentration of nitrous oxide is achieved for the
uterine contraction. About 45 seconds of continuous breathing of the nitrous
oxide are necessary for optimal labor analgesia with contractions. Maternal
cardiovascular and respiratory depression is minimal, uterine contractility is not
affected, and neonatal depression does not occur regardless of the duration of
nitrous oxide administration. (527-528)
ANESTHESIA FOR
CESAREAN
DELIVERY
61. Benefits of regional anesthesia over general anesthesia for cesarean delivery
include the avoidance of the risks of general anesthesia, such as a decreased risk
of pulmonary aspiration, difficult airway, decreased fetal depression from and
exposure to anesthetic agents, the placement of neuraxial opioids for
postoperative pain, and the maintenance of maternal awareness. No differences in
neonatal outcome after cesarean delivery with regional anesthesia or
general anesthesia have been shown. (528)
62. Benefits of general anesthesia over regional anesthesia for cesarean delivery
include rapid and dependable onset, secure airway, controlled ventilation, and the
potential for less hemodynamic instability. (528)
63. Advantages of spinal anesthesia for cesarean delivery include its technical ease
of administration, low levels of systemic medication that decrease the risk of
systemic toxicity and fetal drug levels, its low failure rate, and its rapid onset time.
Disadvantages of spinal anesthesia for cesarean delivery include the finite
duration of anesthesia provided, and its higher incidence of hypotension.
It can be safely used in preeclamptic patients. (528)
64. Spinal anesthesia with a sensory level of T4 is usually sufficient for patient comfort
during cesarean delivery. Exteriorization of the uterus or traction of the abdominal
viscera may still lead to discomfort in the woman. A T4 sensory level can be
achieved with the administration of hyperbaric bupivacaine 10 to 15 mg. The
medication will flow with the spinal curvature to a position near T4. (528)
65. Advantages of epidural anesthesia for cesarean delivery include the ability to
extend the duration of anesthesia if necessary, to control block height, and to
slowly titrate the dose to avoid precipitous maternal hypotension. Disadvantages
of epidural anesthesia for cesarean delivery include the potential for intravascular
injection of toxic levels of local anesthetic and its technical difficulty, longer onset
time, less reliability, and increased perception of visceral pain with peritoneal
manipulation. (528)
66. An approximate volume of 15 to 20 mL of local anesthetic solution must be
delivered in the epidural space to achieve the T4 sensory level of anesthesia
necessary for cesarean delivery. Before the administration of such high volumes
of local anesthetics a test dose for epidural catheter placement should be
administered. Local anesthetics that can be administered for cesarean delivery
by epidural catheter placement include 2% lidocaine, 0.5% bupivacaine, 0.5%
ropivacaine, and 3% 2-chloroprocaine. Each of these should be administered in
increments to further minimize the risk of accidental intravenous administration
377
Obstetrics
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
of toxic levels of local anesthetic. Addition of epinephrine (1:200,000) or
fentanyl (50 to 100 mg) can enhance the intensity and duration of the block. For the
rapid onset of analgesia with a lumbar epidural catheter, as in an urgent cesarean
delivery, 2-chloroprocaine 3% has the most rapid onset. (528)
67. The administration of preservative-free morphine into the epidural space during
cesarean delivery extends the duration of analgesia by up to 24 hours into the
postoperative period. The dose of morphine commonly administered is 3 to 5 mg.
Some negative effects of morphine that may accompany this route of
administration include pruritus, nausea and vomiting, and, on rare occasions,
delayed respiratory depression. (522, 528)
68. Indications for general anesthesia for cesarean delivery include fetal distress and
required emergent delivery to prevent poor fetal outcome, maternal hemorrhage,
and contraindications to regional anesthesia such as maternal coagulopathy
ormaternalrefusal.Benefitsofgeneralanesthesiaforcesareandeliveryincludeamore
reliable and rapid onset of anesthesia, less hypotension and hemodynamic instability
than regional anesthesia, and control of the airway and ventilation. (529)
69. The main cause of maternal morbidity and mortality with general anesthesia are an
eightfold increased risk of failed endotracheal intubation (approximately 1 in 500)
and a threefold increased risk of pulmonary aspiration (1 in 650) compared
with nonpregnant patients undergoing general anesthesia. Appropriate airway
examination, preparation, and familiarity with techniques and an algorithm for
the difficult airway are critical for providing a safe anesthetic. (528, Figure 33-6)
70. A major cause of morbidity and mortality for the woman with regard to general
anesthesia is failed or difficult intubation of the trachea. Contributing factors
include inadequate time for preoperative evaluation of the airway, unpredicted
airway edema, and emergency situations. If a difficult airway is suspected
preoperatively, an awake fiberoptic intubation of the trachea should be
considered. The anesthesiologist must have a difficult airway algorithm to follow
should she or he be confronted with a difficult or failed intubation. There
should be equipment immediately available for the difficult airway, such as a
variety of functioning laryngoscope blades, several sizes of endotracheal
tubes, laryngeal mask airways, a fiberoptic bronchoscope, and the means to
perform a cricothyrotomy. Extra help should be solicited. Numerous attempts
at laryngoscopy should be avoided to prevent increasing airway edema and
bleeding. If hypoxia should occur during attempted laryngoscopy, the patient
should be hand ventilated with bag and mask while cricoid pressure is
maintained. If intubation attempts fail, the cesarean delivery may proceed if the
anesthesiologist communicates that she or he can reliably ventilate the mother
with either facemask or laryngeal mask airway (LMA). Other options may include
allowing the patient to resume spontaneous ventilation, waking the patient
and doing an awake fiberoptic intubation of the trachea, or, in dire circumstances
of inadequate ventilation and hypoxemia, proceeding to a surgical airway.
(529, Figure 33-6)
71. The level of exposure of the fetus to thiopental after the administration of
thiopental for the induction of general anesthesia is generally low as long as the
dose administered to the woman is less than 6 mg/kg. It peaks in the umbilical
vein blood in 1 minute and in the umbilical artery blood in 2 to 3 minutes, and
has no significant clinical effect on neonatal well-being. The lack of neonatal
effects in standard doses is unclear, but may be due to first pass metabolism as (1)
the drug is partially cleared as it passes through the liver of the fetus before
reaching the fetal heart, (2) there is rapid redistribution into maternal vascular rich
tissue beds, (3) there is higher fetal brain water content, and (4) there is additional
dilution by the fetal circulation as the blood reaching the fetal heart from the
placenta is diluted by the blood from the fetal viscera and lower extremities.
However, doses of 8 mg/kg can result in neonatal depression. Propofol is not
378
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
superior to thiopental in maternal or neonatal outcome. Induction doses of 2.5 mg/
kg have no significant effect on neonatal behavior scores, while larger doses (9 mg/
kg) are associated with neonatal depression. (529)
72. Like thiopental, etomidate has a rapid onset because of its high lipid solubility, and
redistribution results in a relatively short duration of action. At typical induction
doses (0.3 mg/kg), unlike thiopental and propofol, etomidate has minimal
cardiovascular effects, but is painful on injection, can cause muscle tremors, has
higher rates of nausea and vomiting, and has increased risk of seizures in
patients with decreased thresholds. (529)
73. Maintenance of anesthesia for cesarean delivery often includes the inhalation of a
low concentration (<0.75 MAC) of halogenated anesthetic in combination with
either nitrous oxide or propofol. The volatile anesthetic is an important component
to decrease the incidence of maternal recall. Uterine tone after delivery is
maintained when the concentration of volatile anesthetic used is low. Maternal
blood loss is minimized, the uterine response to oxytocin is not altered, and little
neonatal depression is seen. Placental transfer of volatile anesthetics is rapid
because they are nonionized, highly lipid-soluble substances of low molecular
weight. Fetal concentrations depend on the concentration and duration of
anesthetic administered to the mother. There is no evidence to show that neuraxial
anesthesia is superior to general anesthesia for neonatal outcome. However,
emergent delivery of a depressed fetus often results in a depressed neonate. A long
time from induction to delivery may result in a lightly anesthetized, but not an
asphyxiated neonate. If excessive concentrations of volatile anesthetics are
administered for prolonged periods, neonatal effects of these drugs, as evidenced
by flaccidity, cardiorespiratory depression, and decreased tone, may be
anticipated. It is important to recognize that if neonatal depression is due to
transfer of anesthetic drugs, the infant is merely anesthetized and should respond
easily to simple treatment measures such as assisted ventilation of the lungs to
facilitate excretion of the volatile anesthetic. Rapid improvement of the infant
should be expected, and if it does not occur, it is important to search for other
causes of depression. (530-531)
74. Succinylcholine remains the neuromuscular blocking drug of choice for
obstetric anesthesia because of its rapid onset and short duration of action.
Because it is highly ionized and poorly lipid soluble, only small amounts cross
the placenta. It is normally hydrolyzed in maternal blood by the enzyme
pseudocholinesterase and does not generally interfere with fetal neuromuscular
activity. If large doses are given (2 to 3 mg/kg), it results in detectable levels in
umbilical cord blood, and extreme doses (10 mg/kg) are needed for the transfer
to result in neonatal neuromuscular blockade. Rocuronium is an acceptable
alternative. It provides adequate intubating conditions in approximately 60
seconds at doses of 1.2 mg/kg. Unlike succinylcholine it has a much longer
duration of action, potentially decreasing maternal safety in the event the
anesthesiologist is unable to intubate or ventilate the patient. Uterine smooth
muscle is not affected by neuromuscular blockade. Under normal circumstances,
the poorly lipid-soluble, highly ionized, nondepolarizing neuromuscular
blockers do not cross the placenta in amounts significant enough to cause
neonatal muscle weakness. This placental impermeability is only relative and
when large doses are given over long periods, neonatal neuromuscular blockade
can occur. (531)
ABNORMAL
PRESENTATIONS
AND MULTIPLE
BIRTHS
75. Currently twin pregnancy accounts for 3.4 % of the live births in 2006. The vast
majority of multiple gestations are twin (97% to 98%). Higher order multiples
account for only 0.1% to 0.03% of the births. Multiple pregnancies account for a
significant risk to both the mother and the fetuses, with a higher rate of preterm
labor, preeclampsia, gestational diabetes, preterm premature rupture of
379
Obstetrics
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
membranes, intrauterine growth restriction, and intrauterine fetal demise. The
United States is seeing an increase in multiple gestations with the expanded use of
artificial reproductive technologies. (531-532)
76. The majority of twin pregnancies have vertex-vertex positioning of the fetuses,
and can be delivered vaginally. If the second twin is breech, it is important to
discuss the mode of delivery with the obstetricians and perinatologists as an
emergent cesarean delivery might be required if the second twin changes position
after delivery of the first or develops fetal bradycardia. Placement of an epidural
can facilitate delivery and extraction of the second twin if it becomes necessary for
the obstetrician to perform an instrumented delivery of the second twin. At the
late second stage of delivery, a more concentrated local anesthetic will optimize
the perineal anesthesia and relaxation during this critical portion of the delivery.
At this time, the potential for head entrapment or fetal bradycardia is highest
and a denser block allows for possible transition to cesarean delivery. (532)
77. Singleton breech presentation occurs in about 3% to 4 % of all pregnancies.
External cephalic version (ECV) has a mean success rate of approximately 60%.
The procedure involves rotating the fetus via external palpation and pressure of the
fetal parts. Neuraxial analgesia may improve success of the ECV. The risks of ECV
include placental abruption, fetal bradycardia, and rupture of membranes. The
anesthesia provider should be immediately available if an ECV is performed in case
an urgent or emergent cesarean delivery is needed. (532)
78. A shoulder dystocia is an obstetric emergency analogous to a difficult airway in
anesthesia. After delivery of the fetal head, further expulsion of the infant is
prevented by impaction of the fetal shoulders with the maternal pelvis. It occurs in
approximately 1% to 1.5% of all deliveries. Risk factors include: macrosomia,
diabetes, obesity, history of dystocia, labor induction, and instrumented delivery.
Fetal pH declines 0.04 units/min between delivery of the head and trunk. Cases
of shoulder dystocia 7 minutes or longer are associated with a significant increase
in risk of neonatal brain injury. The final maneuver of the obstetrician is to push
the fetus back into the uterus and proceed to emergent cesarean delivery. Among
the fetal injuries and sequelae of shoulder dystocia are brachial plexus injury,
neurologic injury from asphyxia, and broken clavicle. Often these neurologic
injuries improve over time with roughly less than 10% having a permanent
Erb’s palsy. (532)
HYPERTENSIVE
DISORDERS OF
PREGNANCY
79. Gestational hypertension is diagnosed in previously normotensive women who
develop elevated blood pressure (SBP >140 or DBP >90) after 20 weeks gestational
age without evidence of proteinuria. (532)
80. Preeclampsia affects 5% to 7% of pregnant women. Risk factors include
primigravida, chronic hypertension, gestational/preexisting diabetes, obesity,
preeclamptic family history, multiple gestation, and use of assisted reproductive
technology. (532-533)
81. The diagnosis of preeclampsia requires both of the following: a blood pressure
of 140 mm Hg systolic or higher, or 90 mm Hg diastolic or higher that occurs after
20 weeks of gestation in a woman with previously normal blood pressure, and
proteinuria defined as urinary excretion of 0.3 g protein or higher in a 24-hour
urine specimen ( 1 þ urine dip). (533, Table 33-3)
82. Preeclampsia is considered severe if one or more of the following criteria are
present:
▪Blood pressure of 160 mm Hg systolic or higher or 110 mm Hg diastolic or
higher on two occasions at least 6 hours apart while the patient is on bed rest.
▪Proteinuria of 5 g or higher in a 24-hour urine specimen or 3þ or greater on
two random urine samples collected at least 4 hours apart.
380
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
▪Oliguria of less than 500 mL in 24 hours
▪Cerebral or visual disturbances
▪Pulmonary edema or cyanosis
▪Epigastric or right upper quadrant pain
▪Impaired liver function
▪Thrombocytopenia
▪Fetal growth restriction (533, Table 33-3)
83. A subcategory of severe preeclampsia is HELLP syndrome, which is a constellation
of Hemolysis, Elevated Liver enzymes, and Low Platelet count. (533)
84. Although the exact cause remains unknown, preeclampsia begins with the
pathogenic maternal/fetal interface. During placental formation there is failure of
complete trophoblast cell invasion of the uterine spiral arteries. The failure of spiral
artery remodeling creates decreased placental perfusion, which may ultimately
lead to early placental hypoxia. Ultimately there is upregulation of cytokines and
inflammatory factors as seen in sepsis. (533)
85. The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists prefer neuraxial
analgesia for labor in preeclamptics. Special concerns for neuraxial analgesia in
this patient population include maintaining the uterine perfusion pressure through
the avoidance of hypotension, and evaluation of the patient’s coagulations status
and platelet levels both with the placement of the epidural and prior to pulling out
the epidural catheter. Currently, the definitive treatment of preeclampsia is
delivery. If the pregnancy is remote from term in the presence of severe
preeclampsia, a determination must be made whether to deliver or expectantly
manage. This requires repeated evaluation of the mother and fetus. It is critical for
the anesthesiologist on labor and delivery to be aware of these patients and their
clinical course, as they can rapidly deteriorate and require urgent or emergent
delivery. (533)
86. Magnesium sulfate is used for seizure prophylaxis in preeclamptic women. The
infusion usually is performed by loading 4 to 6 g over 20 to 30 minutes then
continued magnesium sulfate infusion of 1 to 2 g/hr until 12 to 24 hours after
delivery. The therapeutic blood level range for seizure prophylaxis is between 6 to
8 mg/dL. Monitoring for magnesium sulfate toxicity is important in all patients,
but is especially important in patients with impaired renal function, since
magnesium sulfate is renally excreted. Loss of deep tendon reflexes occurs at
10 mg/dL with prolonged PQ intervals and widening QRS on ECG. Respiratory
arrest occurs at 15 to 20 mg/dL, and asystole occurs when the level exceeds 20 to
25 mg/dL. If toxicity occurs, IV calcium chloride (500 mg) or calcium gluconate
(1 g) should be administered. (533)
87. Initial antihypertensive therapy for preeclampsia normally includes hydralazine
and labetalol. In refractory severe hypertension, nitroglycerin and sodium
nitroprusside may be used in the acute situation to prevent intracerebral
hemorrhage. Current guidelines recommend treating SBP >160. (533-534)
HEMORRHAGE IN
PREGNANT WOMEN
88. Placenta previa, abruptio placentae, and uterine rupture are major causes of
bleeding in the third trimester and during labor. Postpartum hemorrhage occurs in
3% to 5% of all vaginal deliveries and is typically due to uterine atony, retained
placenta, placenta accreta, or lacerations involving the cervix or vagina. (534)
89. Placenta previa is an abnormal uterine implantation of the placenta in front of the
presenting fetus. The incidence is approximately 1 in 200 pregnancies. Risk factors
include advanced age, multiparity, assisted reproductive techniques, prior
hysterotomy, and prior placenta previa. Placenta previa classically presents as
painless vaginal bleeding. This usually occurs around the thirty-second week
381
Obstetrics
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
of gestation when the lower uterine segment is beginning to form. The diagnosis of
placenta previa can be confirmed by ultrasound examination of the placenta. (534)
90. If hemorrhage is not controlled with standard measures, the obstetrical team
can consider (1) uterine artery ligation, (2) B-Lynch sutures, (3) an intrauterine
balloon, (4) use of arterial embolization by interventional radiology if the
patient is stable for transport, or (5) hysterectomy. (534)
91. Abruptio placentae is separation of the placenta after 20 weeks of gestation,
but before delivery. The incidence is approximately 1 in 100 pregnancies. Risk
factors include advanced age, hypertension, trauma, smoking, cocaine use,
chorioamnionitis, premature rupture of membranes, and history of prior
abruption. The woman often has painful, frequent uterine contractions. The
separation can involve only the placental margin, presenting as vaginal bleeding.
Abruptio placentae can also occur without vaginal bleeding. In these cases,
blood can accumulate in large volumes and be entirely sequestered within the
uterus. Therefore, the degree of vaginal bleeding may not reflect the total
amount of blood loss from the placenta. (535)
92. Risk factors for uterine ruptures include prior uterine scar, rapid spontaneous
delivery, motor vehicle trauma, trauma from instrumented vaginal delivery, large
or malpositioned fetus, and excessive oxytocin stimulation. After previous
cesarean delivery, vaginal birth is associated with a 0.4% to 1% incidence of
uterine rupture. The presentation is variable, but may include vaginal bleeding,
cessation of contractions, FHR deceleration, and abdominal pain normally not
masked by neuraxial analgesia. Unfortunately, pain is not always a diagnostic
finding. (535)
93. Retained placenta occurs when some portion of the placenta has not been
spontaneously delivered within 1 hour of delivery of the fetus. Uterine bleeding
continues due to the inability of the uterus to contract around adherent placenta.
Approximately 1% of all vaginal deliveries are associated with some retained
placenta. The treatment involves manual exploration of the uterus for the removal
of retained placental parts. The anesthetic management of patients with retained
placenta has as its goal uterine relaxation, as well as decreasing the pain and
anxiety of the patient. Anesthetic methods that may be used to initially accomplish
this typically include intravenous sedation (keeping airway reflexes intact) or
dosing of a preexisting epidural catheter. If uterine relaxation is necessary,
nitroglycerin (50 to 150 mg IV) is normally effective. Additionally, relocation to the
operating room and placement of neuraxial analgesia may be beneficial for
thorough evaluation. Rarely, induction of general anesthesia with endotracheal
intubation and administration of a volatile anesthetic to provide uterine relaxation
will be necessary. (535)
94. Risk factors for postpartum uterine atony include retained products, long labor,
high parity, macrosomia, polyhydramnios, excessive oxytocin augmentation,
and chorioamnionitis. (535)
95. The treatment of uterine atony is by the administration of agents that increase
uterine tone. Oxytocin (20 to 40 U/L) is normally the initial treatment. This dilute
solution of oxytocin exerts minimal cardiovascular effects, but rapid intravenous
injection is associated with tachycardia, vasodilation, and hypotension.
Methylergonovine (0.2 mg IM) is an ergot derivative. Due to the significant
vasoconstriction, it is relatively contraindicated in preeclamptics and patients with
cardiac disease. The prostaglandin F2a (0.25 mg IM) is associated with nausea,
tachycardia, pulmonary hypertension, desaturation, and bronchospasm. It should
be avoided in asthmatics. Prostaglandin E1 (600 mg oral/sublingual/rectal) has no
significant cardiac effects, but may cause hyperthermia. (535)
96. Placental implantation beyond the endometrium gives rise to (1) placenta
accreta vera, which is implantation and adherence onto the myometrium;
382
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
(2) placenta increta, which is implantation into the myometrium; and (3) placenta
percreta, which is penetration through the full thickness of the myometrium.
With placenta percreta, implantations may occur onto bowel, bladder, ovaries,
or other pelvic organs and vessels. (535-536, Figure 33-7)
97. In patients with placenta previa and no previous cesarean delivery, the
incidence of accreta is approximately 3%. However, the risk of placenta accreta
associated with placenta previa increases with the number of previous cesarean
deliveries. With one previous uterine incision, the incidence of placenta
accreta has been reported to be 11%, with two previous uterine incisions the rate
is 40%, and with three or more prior uterine incisions, the incidence rises to
more than 60%. (536)
AMNIOTIC FLUID
EMBOLISM
98. The incidence of amniotic fluid embolism (AFE) is estimated between 1:20,000 and
1:80,000. Clinical features of AFE include the sudden onset of hypotension,
respiratory distress, hypoxia, disseminated intravascular coagulopathy, altered
mental status, and eventual maternal collapse. These signs must be differentiated
from other more common morbidities of pregnancy and delivery, such as
inhalation of gastric contents, air embolism, pulmonary thromboembolism, high
spinal, anaphylaxis, and local anesthetic toxicity. (536)
99. The exact cause and pathogenesis of AFE remains uncertain, but it is thought to be
a type of anaphylactoid reaction. The diagnosis of AFE is a clinical diagnosis
of exclusion. Although in the past it had been believed that aspirating amniotic
fluid debris such as fetal squamous cells from the maternal pulmonary circulation
was diagnostic, the presence of fetal squames has been demonstrated in
asymptomatic pregnant women, and no diagnostic laboratory test for AFE
currently exists. Definitive diagnosis is extremely difficult or impossible, even
with postmortem examination. There is no treatment of AFE other than
supportive. (536)
ANESTHESIA FOR
NONOBSTETRIC
SURGERY DURING
PREGNANCY
100. The overall incidence of nonobstetric surgery during pregnancy is 1 in 50 to 1
in 100, with trauma, appendicitis, and cholecystitis being the most frequent
causes. (536)
101. Elective procedures should be delayed until 6 weeks postpartum. When possible,
nonelective operations should be delayed until after the first trimester to
minimize teratogenic effects on the fetus or spontaneous abortion. The second
trimester is considered the optimal time for surgical intervention, because the risk
of preterm labor is lowest. In the case of acutely urgent surgical procedures,
their timing should mimic that of nonpregnant patients. (536-537)
102. The critical gestational period for organogenesis occurs between 15 and 56 days of
gestation. This is important because drugs that are teratogenic will exert their
most disastrous effects when they are administered to the pregnant woman during
this period. Most data regarding the administration of anesthetics to pregnant
women in the first trimester are retrospective. There is no evidence that any of the
currently used anesthetics, administered during pregnancy, are teratogenic with
the exception of cocaine. Neurodegeneration and widespread apoptosis following
exposure to anesthetics has been clearly established in developing animals,
and a few studies demonstrate cognitive impairment in adult animals after
neonatal anesthetic exposure. Currently there are no data to extrapolate these
animal findings to humans, and this phenomenon is difficult to study in humans
as clinical evidence is still scarce and amounts to an associative and not causal
relationship. (537)
103. Intrauterine fetal hypoxia and acidosis has been associated with maternal
hypotension, arterial hypoxemia, and excessive changes in the PaCO2. Both
383
Obstetrics
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
hypercapnia and hypocapnia result in reduced uterine blood flow and fetal
acidosis. During surgery, normocarbia should be maintained (30 mm Hg end-tidal
CO2), adequate uterine perfusion pressure maintained using fluids and
vasopressors, and uterine displacement maintained if after 20 weeks gestational
age to optimize uterine blood flow and fetal well-being. It is recommended that
the maternal inhaled concentration of oxygen should be at least 50%. High oxygen
consumption of the placenta plus the uneven distribution of maternal and
fetal blood flow in the placenta prevent fetal PaO2 from exceeding about 60 mm Hg
even with high maternal arterial oxygen levels. (537)
104. FHR monitoring via Doppler is possible at 16 to 18 weeks gestational age, but
variability as a marker of well-being is not established until 25 to 27 weeks.
Fetal monitoring can display fetal compromise and allows further optimization of
the maternal and fetal condition with in utero resuscitation maneuvers.
Currently there is no evidence for the efficacy of FHR monitoring. In addition,
interpretation is difficult since most anesthetics reduce FHR variability, placement
and signal acquisition may be challenging, and a trained person is needed for
interpretation. The decision of whether or not to monitor the fetal heart rate during
nonobstetric surgery should be individualized case by case in discussion with an
obstetrician and other perioperative team members. (537)
105. The usual cause of premature labor that presents in the pregnant woman after
having nonobstetric surgery is the underlying pathologic process that led to the
need for surgery and not the anesthetic technique. Postoperative monitoring that
should be done in these circumstances, in addition to the routine monitoring,
includes continuous fetal heart rate monitoring and monitoring of maternal
uterine activity. Premature labor can be treated through the administration of
tocolytics in consultation with an obstetrician. Common tocolytics include
terbutaline, magnesium, indomethacin, and nifedipine. (537)
106. Laparoscopic surgery is as safe as an open approach during any trimester, and the
indications for its use are the same as nonpregnant patients. A recent review which
compared laparascopic surgery to open surgery found that the trimester did not
influence the complication rate, the conversion to open was low (1%), there was a
slightly higher fetal loss rate, but there was a lower preterm delivery rate. Most
studies comparing laparoscopic to open techniques note no difference in fetal or
maternal outcomes. (538)
DIAGNOSIS AND
MANAGEMENT OF
FETAL DISTRESS
107. Normal uterine activity is five contractions or less in 10 minutes, averaged over a
30-minute window. Tachysystole while tachysystole is defined as more than five
contractions in 10 minutes, averaged over a 30-minute window. If a tonic
contraction or period of tachysystole occurs during labor, treatment with either
sublingual or IV nitroglycerin can briefly relax the uterus and restore fetal
perfusion. In addition, the obstetrician can give subcutaneous terbutaline. (538,
Table 33-4)
108. The normal baseline FHR is between 110 and 160 beats/min.
109. Baseline variability is determined by examining fluctuations that are irregular in
amplitude and frequency during a 10-minute window excluding accelerations and
decelerations. Variability is classified as follows:
▪Absent FHR variability: amplitude range undetectable.
▪Minimal FHR variability: amplitude range greater than undetectable and
5 beats/min or less.
▪Moderate FHR variability: amplitude range 6 to 25 beats/min.
▪Marked FHR variability: amplitude range more than 25 beats/min. (538)
110. A FHR acceleration is an abrupt increase in FHR defined as an increase from the
acceleration onset to the peak in greater than 30 seconds. In addition, the peak
384
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
must be 15 beats/min or greater, and last 15 seconds or longer from the onset to
return. Before 32 weeks of gestation, accelerations are defined as having a peak
of 10 beats/min or more and a duration of 10 seconds or longer. (538)
111. Late decelerations are a result of uteroplacental insufficiency, causing relative
fetal brain hypoxia during a contraction. The change results in sympathetic
response and increased peripheral vascular resistance in the fetus, elevating the
fetal blood pressure, which is detected by the fetal baroreceptors and results in
slowing in the FHR. (539; Table 33-5)
112. Variable decelerations are generally synonymous with umbilical cord
compression. (539; Table 33-5)
113. Intrapartum fetal monitoring was designed to detect hypoxia in labor and allow
the clinicians to intervene prior to acidosis and long-term fetal CNS damage.
The fetal brain responds to peripheral and central stimuli: (1) chemoreceptors,
(2) baroreceptors, and (3) direct effects of metabolic changes within the CNS. FHR
monitoring was developed as a crude, nonspecific method of tracking fetal
oxygenation and distress. (538)
EVALUATION OF THE
NEONATE AND
NEONATAL
RESUSCITATION
114. Apgar scoring system:
Characteristic
Score ¼ 0
Score ¼ 1
Score ¼ 2
Heart rate
(beats/min)
Absent
<100
>100
Breathing
Absent
Slow
Irregular, crying
Reflex irritability
No response
Grimace
Cry
Muscle tone
Limp
Flexion of the
extremities
Active
Color
Cyanotic
Body pink Extremities
cyanotic
Pink
(539-541, Table 33-6)
115. Umbilical cord blood gas values:
Mean Artery
Mean Vein
pH
7.27
7.34
PCO2
50
40
PO2
20
30
Bicarbonate
23
21
Base excess
3.6
2.6
(539, Table 33-6)
116. When evaluating the neonate, if breathing and crying does not occur, then clearing
of the airway (mouth then nose) and repeated stimulation should be performed.
Following this, the 1-minute Apgar score is determined with evaluation of the
respirations, heart rate, and color. In the event of apnea or heart rate less than 100,
positive pressure hand ventilation should be provided with 21% or up to 100%
oxygen using a properly fitted facemask (avoiding excessive inspiratory
pressure >30 cm H2O). Based on the current 2005 neonatal resuscitation
385
Obstetrics
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
guidelines, if the clinician begins with room air, it is recommended that
supplemental oxygen be given if no improvement is seen within 90 seconds
after birth. (540-541, Figure 33-9)
117. The dose of epinephrine for neonatal resuscitation is 0.1 to 0.3 mL/kg of a 1:10,000
solution given rapidly intravenously through an umbilical artery catheter inserted
just below the abdominal skin (preferred) or via the trachea. The dose may be
repeated every 3 to 5 minutes, if necessary. (541)
118. Naloxone is no longer recommended for use in newborns in the delivery room.
Should the newborn manifest respiratory depression in the delivery room,
appropriate ventilation should be maintained until the neonate is transported
to the intensive care nursery, where naloxone can be given if determined to be
necessary. (542)
119. Currently, neonates at delivery with meconium-stained amniotic fluid (MSAF)
who are at term and vigorous should not be suctioned at the perineum, and once
delivered do not require intubation. Intubation and suctioning should be
performed in MSAF neonates if they are not vigorous (heart rate <100, decreased
muscle tone, and ineffectual respirations). (542)
120. The most significant advances in the prevention of meconium aspiration syndrome
are improved estimation of gestational age and use of an earlier gestational
age for postdates induction. (542)
386
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
Chapter
31 PEDIATRICS
Erin A. Gottlieb, Dean B. Andropoulos
DEVELOPMENTAL
PHYSIOLOGY
1. How does the oxygen consumption of a neonate compare with that of an adult?
2. How does the cardiac output of a neonate compare with that of an adult?
3. Are changes in the cardiac output of a neonate more dependent on changes in the
heart rate or stroke volume?
4. How does the position of the oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve in a neonate
compare with that of an adult? Describe how this affects the affinity of oxygen for
hemoglobin. At what age does the curve approximate that of an adult?
5. How does the hemoglobin level of a neonate compare with that of an adult? How
does the hemoglobin level change as the infant progresses to 2 years old?
6. What hemoglobin level is worrisome in the newborn? What hemoglobin level is
worrisome in infants older than 6 months of age?
7. At what age does the foramen ovale close? What percent of adults have a probe
patent foramen ovale?
8. How well do neonates reflexively respond to hemorrhage as compared with adults?
9. How does alveolar ventilation in neonates compare with that of adults?
10. How does the tidal volume per weight in neonates compare with that of adults?
11. How does the respiratory rate in neonates compare with that of adults?
12. How does carbon dioxide production in neonates compare with that of adults?
How does the PaCO2 in neonates compare with that of adults?
13. How does the PaO2 change in the first few days of life?
14. How predictable is the neonate’s response to hypoxia?
15. What percent body weight in neonates is contributed by the extracellular fluid
volume? How does this compare with an adult?
16. What are some ways in which infants and children maintain normal body
temperature? Why is maintenance of normal body temperature more difficult in
neonates and children than in an adult?
17. How effective is kidney function at birth? When does kidney function become
approximately equivalent to that of an adult?
18. After fluid restriction, what is the maximum urine osmolarity possible for term
neonates at birth? At what age are adult levels of urine concentrating abilities
achieved?
PHARMACOLOGIC
DIFFERENCES
19. What are some physiologic characteristics of neonates that explain the
pharmacologic differences between pediatric and adult responses to drugs?
20. How is the uptake and distribution of inhaled anesthetics different in neonates and
infants when compared with adults?
21. How does the minimum alveolar concentration (MAC) of inhaled anesthetics
change from birth to puberty?
387
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
22. What is the effect of intracardiac shunting on the rapidity of anesthesia induction
with halogenated anesthetic gases?
23. What physiologic factors increase the sensitivity of neonates to the effects of
intravenous anesthetics?
24. How does the dose of thiopental change between neonates and adults?
25. How does the rate of plasma clearance of opioids differ between neonates and
adults?
26. Are neonates more or less sensitive to nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking
drugs than adults? How does the initial drug dose differ between these two
groups?
27. How does the duration of action of nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking drugs
differ between neonates and adults?
28. How does the dose of neostigmine necessary to antagonize neuromuscular
blockade in the neonate compare with the dose necessary in the adult? How does
this affect clinical practice?
29. How does the dose of succinylcholine necessary to produce neuromuscular
blockade in the infant and neonate compare with the dose necessary in the adult?
FLUIDS AND
ELECTROLYTES
30. What is the recommendation for fluid maintenance and replacement in the
pediatric population?
31. What is the goal for urine output when monitoring the intraoperative volume
status of the pediatric patient?
32. When should glucose administration be considered in the pediatric population?
33. What is the preferred crystalloid fluid to replace intraoperative losses and
compensate for any preoperative fluid deficit?
34. What is a reasonable approach to replace preoperative fluid deficits in pediatric
patients?
35. How are third-space losses and fluid replacement estimated according to the
degree of invasiveness of the surgery? How does this contribute to an overall fluid
management strategy for pediatric patients?
TRANSFUSION
THERAPY
36. What formula can be used to help guide the anesthesiologist with blood loss
replacement?
37. What is the transfusion threshold for packed red blood cells (PRBC) in pediatric
patients? What is the expected hemoglobin increase with PRBC transfusion? What
special precautions are needed for PRBC transfusion in neonates and young
infants?
38. What is the indication for a platelet transfusion in pediatric patients, and what is
the expected response to platelet transfusion?
39. What is the usual indication for transfusion of fresh frozen plasma (FFP) in
pediatric patients? What is the expected response to FFP administration?
40. What is the usual indication for administration of cryoprecipitate in pediatric
patients? What is the expected response to cryoprecipitate administration?
41. What are some other pharmacologic agents that will either reduce blood loss or
help achieve hemostasis with major blood loss surgery in pediatric patients?
THE PEDIATRIC
AIRWAY
42. What is the leading cause of difficult airway management in infants and young
children? What are some genetic syndromes that cause this condition?
43. What is the general approach to the difficult pediatric airway, and how does it
differ from the adult difficult airway?
PREANESTHETIC
EVALUATION AND
PREPARATION
44. What history should be obtained from a preoperative evaluation of a pediatric
patient? What are some considerations that are specific to the pediatric population
with regard to the history and physical examination?
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
388
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
45. What preoperative laboratory data may be important in the pediatric population?
46. What are the recommendations for the preoperative ingestion of solids and clear
liquids for pediatric patients?
47. What are some considerations regarding the choice of premedicant in the pediatric
patient? What are some drugs and their routes of administration for preoperative
medication in the pediatric population?
INDUCTION AND
MAINTENANCE OF
ANESTHESIA
48. How can the induction of anesthesia be achieved in pediatric patients without an
intravenous catheter in place?
49. What are some risks of an inhaled induction of anesthesia?
50. What is the indication for the placement of an intravenous catheter in the pediatric
patient undergoing a surgical procedure?
51. How can the anesthesiologist regulate the intravenous fluids to be administered
in the pediatric patient?
52. How can the induction of anesthesia be achieved in pediatric patients with an
intravenous catheter in place?
53. How can the induction of anesthesia be achieved in pediatric patients without an
intravenous catheter in place and in whom an inhalation induction is not
possible?
54. What is the concern regarding the use of succinylcholine in pediatric patients?
What are some alternatives that may be used?
55. Under what circumstances is succinylcholine accepted for use for neuromuscular
blockade in the pediatric population?
56. What are some physiologic characteristics of the pediatric airway that differ from
the adult airway?
57. Why has the classic teaching that uncuffed endotracheal tubes should be used for
intubating the trachea of pediatric patients under the age of 8 years changed?
58. What is the benefit of the administration of heated and humidified gases or using
a condenser humidifier in children undergoing prolonged operations?
59. What are some signs the clinician may use to determine the adequacy of the depth
of anesthesia for surgery in the pediatric population?
60. When hypotension accompanies the administration of volatile anesthetics to
neonates, what is it likely to be indicative of?
61. How does intraoperative monitoring in the pediatric population differ from
intraoperative monitoring in the adult population?
62. What problem may be encountered with the monitoring of end-tidal carbon
dioxide concentrations in pediatric patients?
63. How should the size of a blood pressure cuff be selected? What errors in blood
pressure measurement may be encountered with an erroneously sized cuff?
64. What veins may be used to monitor the central venous pressure in the neonate?
In infants? In children?
65. What are some regional anesthetic blocks that can be administered in the pediatric
population?
66. What local anesthetic and what dose is commonly used in a caudal anesthetic?
What is the approximate duration of the postoperative pain relief obtained from
this caudal anesthetic? How is the length of the dural sac different in children and
adults?
THE
POSTANESTHESIA
CARE UNIT
67. Are most pediatric patients extubated “awake” or “deep”? What are some of the
clinical implications of awake and deep extubation techniques?
68. What is emergence delirium?
69. How can pain be assessed in pediatric patients in the postanesthesia care unit?
70. What are some risk factors for postoperative nausea and vomiting in the pediatric
population?
Pediatrics
389
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
MEDICAL AND
SURGICAL DISEASES
THAT AFFECT
PEDIATRIC
PATIENTS
71. What is respiratory distress syndrome?
72. What are some physiologic complications that result from respiratory distress
syndrome?
73. How should neonates with respiratory distress syndrome be managed
intraoperatively?
74. What is bronchopulmonary dysplasia? What are some characteristic findings in
these patients?
75. What is retinopathy of prematurity? What is another name for this pathologic
finding?
76. What is a risk factor for retinopathy of prematurity? At what age does the risk of
retinopathy of prematurity become negligible?
77. What PaO2 should be maintained during anesthesia in the premature neonate to
minimize the risk of retinopathy of prematurity?
78. Patients of what age are at risk of apnea spells in the postoperative period? What is
the recommendation for these patients in the postoperative period?
79. Which pediatric patients are at risk of hypoglycemia?
80. What are some manifestations of hypoglycemia in this population? How do these
manifestations change with general anesthesia? What is the immediate treatment
of hypoglycemia in these patients?
81. Which pediatric patients are at risk of hypocalcemia?
82. When might hypocalcemia occur intraoperatively? How might intraoperative
hypocalcemia manifest?
83. What is the incidence of malignant hyperthermia in the pediatric population?
What is the incidence in the adult population?
84. What is the association between malignant hyperthermia and the calcium ion
channel?
85. What are some anesthetic triggering drugs for malignant hyperthermia?
86. What are some clinical signs of malignant hyperthermia?
87. What is the treatment of malignant hyperthermia?
88. How can the patient at risk for malignant hyperthermia be identified
preoperatively?
89. Which anesthetic regimen is reliably safe for patients susceptible to malignant
hyperthermia? Name some drugs used in anesthesia that have not been shown to
trigger malignant hyperthermia.
90. What preparations must take place before the administration of anesthesia to
patients susceptible to malignant hyperthermia?
91. Is regional anesthesia considered safe for patients at risk for malignant
hyperthermia?
92. What is a congenital diaphragmatic hernia? How is a congenital diaphragmatic
hernia manifest in the neonate at birth?
93. What are some comorbid conditions associated with congenital diaphragmatic
hernias?
94. How is the diagnosis of a congenital diaphragmatic hernia made?
95. What is the immediate treatment for the neonate with a congenital diaphragmatic
hernia? What is the risk of hand ventilation with bag and mask in these neonates?
96. What is the risk of positive pressure ventilation of the lungs of the neonate with a
congenital diaphragmatic hernia?
97. What inhaled anesthetics should be avoided in neonates with a congenital
diaphragmatic hernia?
98. What clinical circumstance leads to suspicion of a tracheoesophageal fistula in a
neonate?
99. What are some other congenital anomalies associated with a tracheoesophageal
fistula?
100. How should neonates with a tracheoesophageal fistula be managed?
101. What is pyloric stenosis? What is the incidence of pyloric stenosis per live birth?
102. How does the neonate with pyloric stenosis typically present?
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
390
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
103. What electrolyte imbalances are seen in infants with pyloric stenosis?
104. Is the surgical correction of pyloric stenosis in infants an elective or emergent
procedure?
105. How should the induction of anesthesia in infants with pyloric stenosis proceed?
106. What is necrotizing enterocolitis, and which patients are at risk?
107. How is necrotizing enterocolitis treated, and what are some of the anesthetic
considerations for this disease?
108. What are gastroschisis and omphalocele? What are the similarities and differences
between these conditions?
109. How are gastroschisis and omphalocele treated surgically in the modern era? What
are some of the anesthetic considerations for these conditions?
110. What is the significance of a patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) in the premature
infant? What are the medical and surgical approaches to treatment?
111. What are some anesthetic considerations and pitfalls for PDA closure in the
premature neonate?
112. What is myelomeningocele, and how is it managed surgically? What are some of
the anesthetic considerations?
SPECIAL
ANESTHETIC
CONSIDERATIONS
113. In what remote locations are pediatric anesthetics commonly performed? Are the
requirements for preanesthetic evaluation, monitoring, and recovery the same for
these anesthetics?
114. What is the ex utero intrapartum therapy (EXIT) procedure, and what are the
indications for its use? What are some of the anesthetic considerations?
115. What are some indications for fetal surgery, and what are some anesthetic
considerations?
116. What anesthetic and sedative agents have been implicated in developmental
neurotoxicity in animal models? Is there clinical evidence to change the practice of
pediatric anesthesia?
117. What is a major consideration for former premature infants who present for
surgery? How should these infants be managed postoperatively?
ANSWERS*
DEVELOPMENTAL
PHYSIOLOGY
1. The oxygen consumption of a neonate is about twice that of an adult. In neonates
the oxygen consumption increases from 5 mL/kg per minute at birth to about
7 mL/kg per minute at 10 days of life and 8 mL/kg per minute at 4 weeks of
life. Oxygen consumption gradually declines over the subsequent months.
(548, Table 34-1)
2. The cardiac output of a neonate is 30% to 60% higher than that of adults. This helps
to meet the increase in oxygen demand neonates have as compared with
adults. (549)
3. Changes in the cardiac output of a neonate or infant are dependent on changes
in the heart rate, because stroke volume is relatively fixed by the lack of
distensibility of the left ventricle in this age group. The neonate’s myocardium
depends heavily on the concentration of ionized calcium, such that hypocalcemia
can significantly depress myocardial function. (549)
*Numbers in parentheses: numbers refer to pages, figures, or tables in Miller RD, Pardo MC: Basics of Anesthesia,
6th ed. Philadelphia, Elsevier Saunders, 2011.
Pediatrics
391
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
4. In neonates, the oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve is shifted to the left. This
reflects a P50 lower than 26 mm Hg, meaning that less of a PaO2 is required for a
50% saturation of hemoglobin. Conversely, the oxygen is more tightly bound to
hemoglobin in neonates, necessitating a lower PaO2 for release of oxygen to the
tissues. This occurs as a result of fetal hemoglobin. The position of the
oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve becomes equal to that of adults by 4 to 6
months of age. (550)
5. The hemoglobin level of a neonate is approximately 17 g/dL. This, along with the
increase in cardiac output, helps to offset the increase in oxygen requirements
characteristic of neonates. At 2 to 3 months of age the hemoglobin of infants
decreases to about 11 g/dL during the time period when fetal hemoglobin is being
replaced by adult hemoglobin. This is termed the physiologic anemia of infancy,
which may persist for a few months. During the remainder of the first year of
life the hemoglobin level gradually increases and continues to do so until puberty,
when hemoglobin levels approach adult hemoglobin levels. (550)
6. A hemoglobin level of 13 g/dL or less is worrisome in the newborn. In infants older
than 6 months of age, a hemoglobin level less than 10 g/dL is worrisome. (550)
7. The foramen ovale closes between 3 and 12 months of age. Twenty to thirty percent
of adults have a probe patent foramen ovale. (549)
8. Because of the decreased ability of neonates to vasoconstrict in response to
hypovolemia, neonates are less able to tolerate hemorrhage with vasoconstrictive
responses. (549)
9. Alveolar ventilation in neonates is 4 to 5 times higher than that of adults. (547,
Table 34-1)
10. Tidal volume per weight in neonates is similar to that of adults. (547, Table 34-1)
11. The respiratory rate in neonates is three to four times higher than that of adults.
(547, Table 34-1)
12. Carbon dioxide production in neonates is higher than that of adults. The PaCO2
in neonates is similar to that of adults, despite the increase in production.
This is due to the increase in alveolar ventilation in neonates when compared with
adults. (547, Table 34-1)
13. The PaO2 inthe first few days after birth increases rapidly. Theinitially low PaO2 is due
to a decrease in the functional residual capacity and to the perfusion of alveoli
filled with fluid. The functional residual capacity of neonates increases over the first
few days of life until it reaches adult levels at about 4 days of age. (547, Table 34-1)
14. The neonate’s response to hypoxia is somewhat unpredictable, owing to the
immaturity of the central nervous system’s regulatory centers for ventilation in
this age group. Neonates have decreased ventilatory responses to hypoxemia and
hypercarbia. (547)
15. Extracellular fluid volume accounts for approximately 40% of the body weight of
the neonate at birth. This compares with approximately 20% of body weight in
adults being accounted for by extracellular fluid volume. The proportion of
extracellular fluid volume to body weight in neonates approaches the adult
proportion by 18 to 24 months of age. (552)
16. Some ways in which infants and children maintain normal body temperature
include the metabolism of brown fat, crying, and vigorous movements. The
metabolism of brown fat is stimulated by circulating norepinephrine. Children and
infants, unlike adults, do not shiver to maintain their body temperature.
Maintenance of normal body temperature is more difficult in neonates and infants
than in adults because of their larger body surface area-to-volume ratio, as well
as the relative lack of fat for insulation. (556)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
392
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
17. Kidney function at birth is immature. There is a decreased glomerular filtration
rate, decreased sodium excretion, and decreased concentrating ability relative
to that of an adult. Kidney function progressively matures over the first 2 years of
life. Initially, in the first 3 months of life, kidney function increases rapidly to
double or triple the glomerular filtration rate possible at birth. Kidney function
then matures more slowly from 3 months to 24 months, when adult levels of
kidney function are reached. (550)
18. After fluid restriction, the term neonate at birth can only concentrate urine to
a maximum osmolarity of about 525 mOsm/kg. After 15 to 30 days of age,
neonates are able to concentrate their urine to a maximum osmolarity of about
950 mOsm/kg. Adult levels of urine concentrating ability are achieved by 6 to
12 months of age. (550)
PHARMACOLOGIC
DIFFERENCES
19. Some physiologic characteristics of neonates that explain the pharmacologic
differences between pediatric and adult responses to drugs include an increased
extracellular fluid volume, increased metabolic rate, decreased renal function,
and decreased receptor maturity. (550, 551)
20. The uptake and distribution of inhaled anesthetics is more rapid in neonates than
in adults. This is most likely due to a smaller functional residual capacity per
body weight in neonates, as well as to greater tissue blood flow to the vessel-rich
group. The vessel-rich group of tissues includes the brain, heart, kidneys, and
liver. This group comprises approximately 22% of total body volume in neonates,
as compared with the 10% of total body volume in adults. (551)
21. The minimum alveolar concentration (MAC) of inhaled anesthetics changes
from birth to puberty. Preterm neonates have a lower MAC than term neonates,
whose MAC is approximately 0.87% that of adults. The MAC of inhaled
anesthetic agents is highest in infants 1 to 6 months old. The MAC is 30% less in
full-term neonates for isoflurane and desflurane. Sevoflurane MAC at term is
the same as at age 1 month. (551)
22. Patients with right-to-left intracardiac shunting have a slower inhaled induction
of anesthesia, due to the volume of blood bypassing the lungs and not increasing
its anesthetic level. This results in a slower rise in the arterial level of the
anesthetic and a slower induction. This effect is most pronounced with
less-soluble agents, such as desflurane and sevoflurane, and less pronounced with
more-soluble agents, such as halothane and isoflurane. Left-to-right intracardiac
shunts have little or no effect on the rapidity of induction. (551)
23. Physiologic factors that make neonates more sensitive to the effects of
intravenous anesthetics include an immature blood-brain barrier and a decreased
ability to metabolize drugs. They are more sensitive to highly protein-bound
drugs because of the lower serum albumin and protein concentrations in
neonates. In many cases the increased extracellular fluid volume and volume
of distribution present in neonates offsets the increased sensitivity to intravenous
drugs when compared with adults, thereby approximately equalizing the dose
of initial intravenous injection of drug to achieve a given result. (550-551)
24. The dose of thiopental required to produce loss of lid reflex is similar in neonates,
children, and adults. (551)
25. The rate of plasma clearance of opioids is decreased in neonates when compared
with adults. (551)
26. Neonates are more sensitive than adults to nondepolarizing neuromuscular
blocking drugs. This means that a lower plasma concentration of drug is
required to produce similar pharmacologic results. Because of an increased
extracellular fluid volume and increased volume of distribution in neonates when
Pediatrics
393
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
compared with adults, the initial dose of nondepolarizing neuromuscular
blocking drug in these two age groups is similar. This is true despite the increased
sensitivity to the drug for neonates. (551)
27. The duration of action of nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking drugs in
neonates may be prolonged while the mechanisms for clearance are still
immature in the neonate. For example, the clearance of d-tubocurarine parallels
the glomerular filtration rate at various ages. There exists a great deal of
variability among pediatric patients with regard to the duration of effect of
nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking drugs. Monitoring of the
neuromuscular junction with a peripheral nerve stimulator is recommended when
nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking drugs are administered to this
population. (551)
28. The dose of neostigmine necessary to antagonize neuromuscular blocking drugs
in the neonate is less than that of adults, although clinically the same dose may be
used. (551)
29. The dose of succinylcholine per body weight necessary to produce neuromuscular
blockade in the neonate and infant is increased from the adult dose. This is
presumed to be due to the increase in extracellular fluid volume and increase in
volume of distribution in neonates and infants. (551)
FLUIDS AND
ELECTROLYTES
30. Fluid maintenance and replacement in the pediatric population is based on the
patient’s age and metabolic rate, underlying disease process, type and extent of
surgery, and anticipated fluid translocation. The maintenance rate of pediatric
patients is related to their metabolic demand, which in turn is related to the
ratio of body surface to weight. Hourly fluid requirements are estimated to be
4 mL/kg for children up to 10 kg, an additional 2 mL/kg for each kilogram of body
weight between 10 kg and 20 kg, and an additional 1 mL/kg for each kilogram
of body weight above 20 kg. Additional fluid replacement may be required for
the patient’s initial fluid deficit, third-space losses, or other losses. Fluid
replacement can be guided by the patient’s systemic blood pressure, tissue
perfusion, and urine output. (552, Table 34-3)
31. A goal for urine output when monitoring the intraoperative volume status in the
pediatric patient is 0.5 to 1 mL/kg/hr. (552)
32. Glucose administration in the pediatric patient can be considered in patients
who are at a high risk for hypoglycemia. Pediatric patients at a high risk for
hypoglycemia include newborns of diabetic mothers or neonates whose
hyperalimentation has been discontinued. Maintenance fluids of 5% dextrose in
0.45 normal saline can be administered to these patients intraoperatively as a
piggy-back infusion by pump with care not to bolus glucose-containing solutions.
(552-553)
33. Nonglucose containing isotonic fluids are most appropriate to replace losses. These
include lactated Ringer solution and Plasma-lyte A, which both contain
physiologic levels of sodium and potassium. Normal saline can be used, but
with supraphysiologic levels of sodium and chloride, a hyperchloremic,
hypernatremic, metabolic acidosis can occur with the administration of large
volumes. (552)
34. Preoperative fluid deficits in the pediatric patient can be estimated by multiplying
the number of hours the patient has been NPO by the hourly maintenance
fluid requirement based on the 4-2-1 rule. Replace 50% of this deficit in the first
hour, and the remaining 50% in the second hour. Minimizing preoperative
fluid deficits by allowing clear liquids to be ingested orally up to 2 hours before
surgery is an effective strategy to minimize preoperative deficits. (552)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
394
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
35. For minimally invasive surgery, third-space losses are estimated to be 0 to
2 mL/kg/hr. This includes superficial surgery such as strabismus repair. For mildly
invasive surgery such as ureteral reimplantation, these losses are estimated at 2 to
4 mL/kg/hr. For moderately invasive surgery such as elective bowel reanastomosis,
fluid losses are estimated at 4 to 8 mL/kg/hr; and for maximally invasive surgery
such as bowel resection for necrotizing enterocolitis, fluid losses are estimated to
be 8 to 10 mL/kg/hr or greater. To this hourly fluid administration is added the
maintenance fluid requirement according to the 4-2-1 rule, the preoperative fluid
deficit as noted previously, and replacement for blood loss. The latter is replaced
with 3 mL of isotonic crystalloid for each milliliter of estimated blood loss, or 1 mL
of colloid such as 5% albumin for each milliliter blood loss, or milliliter for milliliter
of blood product such as packed red blood cells. (552-553, Table 34-3)
TRANSFUSION
THERAPY
36. A formula that may be used by the anesthesiologist to help guide blood loss
replacement is:
MABL mL
ð
Þ ¼ EBVðmLÞ  ðpatient Hct  minimum acceptable HctÞ=patient Hct
MABL, maximum allowable blood loss; EBV, estimated blood volume; Hct,
hematocrit. The estimated blood volume is between 70 mL/kg at about 5 years of
age to 100 mL/kg in the premature newborn. This formula should be applied to the
pediatric patient prior to surgery so that when the threshold is reached, it is
immediately recognized and the transfusion initiated. (553)
37. The pediatric patient’s transfusion threshold varies greatly according to the
patient’s underlying physiology, age, nature of the surgery, and anticipated
ongoing blood loss, and must be individualized. For patients with cyanotic
heart disease, a hemoglobin threshold of 12 to 13 g/dL is often used. For
otherwise healthy acyanotic patients, a lower threshold of 7 to 8 g/dL is often used;
10-15 mL/kg of PRBC should increase hemoglobin by 2 to 3 g/dL. Leukocyte
reduction and irradiation of PRBCs minimizes the risk of cytomegalovirus
transmission, graft versus host reaction, and HLA allosensitization. These
procedures are used for infants less than 4 months, immunocompromised patients,
and transplant or potential transplant recipients. (553)
38. The usual indication for platelet transfusion in a pediatric patient is a platelet count
below 50,000 to 100,000/dL, accompanied by surgical bleeding; 5 to 10 mL/kg of
platelet concentrate transfusion should increase platelet count by 50,000 to
100,000/dL. (553)
39. Indications for FFP administration in pediatric patients include massive
transfusion resulting in markedly reduced levels of coagulation proteins and
hemodilution from cardiopulmonary bypass in small infants. Ten to fifteen
milliliters per kilogram of FFP will increase most coagulation factors by 15% to
20%, which is often sufficient to improve hemostasis. (553)
40. Indications for cryoprecipitate administration in pediatric patients most often are
low fibrinogen concentrations from massive hemorrhage or dilution from
cardiopulmonary bypass. One unit of cryoprecipitate administered per 5 kg of
patient weight is normally sufficient to restore adequate fibrinogen levels. (553)
41. The lysine analogs E-aminocaproic acid and tranexamic acid reduce fibrinolysis by
inhibiting plasmin. Recombinant factor VIIa is used for patients with factor VII
deficiency or hemophiliacs with inhibitors to factors VIII and IX. It is also used
in cases of massive hemorrhage such as cardiac surgery or trauma, as a life-
saving measure to reduce bleeding. This agent causes a “thrombin burst” when
exposed to tissue factor, resulting in massive activation of the coagulation
cascade. Thrombotic complications have been reported with recombinant factor
VIIa. (553)
Pediatrics
395
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
THE PEDIATRIC
AIRWAY
42. Micrognathia is the single most common cause of difficult mask ventilation and
tracheal intubation in young pediatric patients. The preoperative airway
assessment in children should involve visual inspection for micrognathia, as
well as midface hypoplasia or other cranio-facial abnormalities. Pierre-Robin
sequence, Goldenhar, and Treacher-Collins syndromes are the most commonly
encountered conditions resulting in micrognathia. (554)
43. The approach to the difficult pediatric and adult airway is generally similar: maintain
spontaneous respiration; use adjuncts such as the laryngeal mask airway,
videolaryngoscope, or fiber-optic bronchoscope to secure the airway; awaken
the patient ifpossibleif the airway cannot be secured; avoid neuromuscular blockade
until the airway is secured; and have surgical backup for emergency tracheostomy
for particularly difficult cases. The major difference between managing the pediatric
versus adult airway is that young pediatric patients will not tolerate an “awake”
intubation with topical anesthesia of the airway; they must have some level of
moderate to deep sedation or general anesthesia. Also, cricothyrotomy is technically
difficult in small patients and ventilation via this method ineffective. Thus, this
method cannot be used in young pediatric patients. (554)
PREANESTHETIC
EVALUATION AND
PREPARATION
44. The preoperative history in the pediatric patient often comes from a parent. The
history obtained should include such things as congenital anomalies, allergies,
bleeding tendencies, and any recent exposure to communicable diseases. A special
consideration for the pediatric population is whether the patient has had any
recent upper respiratory tract infection, which makes it more likely that the
patient will have increased secretions and airway hyperreactivity with anesthesia.
Elective surgeries may be delayed in the presence of an upper airway infection. With
regard to the airway examination, the presence of loose teeth should be evaluated,
and removal of the loose tooth or teeth before airway manipulation should be
considered. (555)
45. Laboratory data are typically unnecessary in the routine pediatric patient.
Laboratory data should be ordered based on abnormalities in the history and
physical examination. Urine pregnancy testing is practiced for menstruating
females in many institutions. (555)
46. The recommendations for the preoperative consumption of solids and clear liquids
are now standardized. Clear liquids are generally allowed up to 2 hours before
induction of anesthesia, breast milk up to 4 hours before induction, and milk or
formula allowed up to 6 hours before induction. Solid foods should not be
ingested sooner than 6 to 8 hours before anesthesia. These guidelines apply to all
ages of pediatric patients. (555-556)
47. Premedication of the pediatric patient should take into consideration the age of the
patient, the patient’s underlying medical condition, the length of surgery, the
mode of induction of anesthesia, and whether the patient will be staying in the
hospital after the procedure. Infants younger than 6 months old typically do not
require premedication, whereas patients between 9 months and 5 or 6 years old
may benefit from premedication before separation from their parents.
Premedicants may be administered orally, intravenously, intramuscularly,
rectally, sublingually, transmucosally, or intranasally; however, the oral route
is strongly preferred. One drug available and commonly used for premedication
in the pediatric population is oral midazolam. (556)
INDUCTION AND
MAINTENANCE OF
ANESTHESIA
48. In the pediatric patient without an intravenous catheter, anesthesia can be induced
via inhalation. An inhalation induction can be achieved by initially having
the child breathe 70% nitrous oxide and 30% oxygen, followed by incremental
increases in the concentration of a volatile anesthetic. The only volatile anesthetic
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
396
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
available for inhalation induction in the United States is sevoflurane, because it is
much less pungent than the other volatile anesthetics. Other adjuncts that may be
used to decrease patient anxiety and facilitate the induction of anesthesia under
these circumstances include having the parents present during the time of
induction, flavoring the anesthesia mask with pleasant scents, and maintaining a
constant monotone conversation with the patient. A story can be told by the
anesthesiologist to distract the patient during induction. (557)
49. An inhaled induction of anesthesia has some inherent risks. First, while the
pediatric patient is being induced, the anesthesiologist often increases
concentrations of the volatile anesthetic to dangerous inspired concentrations of
volatile anesthetic if maintained. Once anesthesia is induced it is important to
reduce the inspired concentrations of volatile anesthetic to routine maintenance
levels. This is especially true just before intubating the trachea, because connection
of the circuit and ventilating the intubated patient with high inspired
concentrations of volatile anesthetic while potentially distracted with
endotracheal tube positioning is a risk. High inspired concentrations of volatile
anesthetic, if continued, can lead to myocardial depression that is difficult to
reverse. Another risk of an inhaled induction of anesthesia is that of laryngospasm.
Laryngospasm, along with coughing, vomiting, and involuntary movement, can
occur in stage 2 (the excitement phase) of induction of anesthesia. Laryngospasm is
accompanied by a rocking-boat motion of the chest and abdomen as the patient
attempts to inspire against a closed glottis. Laryngospasm should be treated by
closing the pop-off valve and creating positive-pressure of about 10 cm H2O
against the glottis. If necessary, positive pressure ventilation can be attempted. In
most circumstances these will reverse the laryngospasm and the patient will
spontaneously ventilate. Should these two interventions not reverse the
laryngospasm, succinylcholine can be administered intravenously or
intramuscularly. Succinylcholine is the neuromuscular blocking drug of choice
under these circumstances. (557)
50. The placement of an intravenous catheter should be done in every pediatric patient
undergoing a surgical procedure other than for very short surgical procedures.
(557)
51. The administration of intravenous fluids in pediatric patients can be regulated
by the use of a calibrated drip chamber yielding 60 drops/mL, and filled with
only 50 to 100 mL of IV fluid, so as to minimize the risk that excessive amounts of
fluid are accidentally administered. (552)
52. In the pediatric patient with an intravenous catheter, the induction of anesthesia
can be achieved by the intravenous administration of an induction agent
such as thiopental or propofol. This is the induction method of choice in patients at
risk for the aspiration of gastric contents. (557)
53. Another method of induction in the pediatric patient without an intravenous
catheter and in whom an inhalation induction is not possible is by the
intramuscular administration of ketamine. This method of induction is used
most commonly in developmentally delayed or severely uncooperative
children. (557)
54. There are multiple concerns regarding the use of succinylcholine in pediatric
patients. First, the administration of succinylcholine can result in cardiac
arrhythmias, including bradycardia and, rarely, cardiac sinus arrest. The
pretreatment of pediatric patients with atropine may reduce succinylcholine-
induced bradycardia. Second, it is believed that in patients who have been
administered succinylcholine and have subsequent masseter muscle rigidity, there
may be impending malignant hyperthermia. Finally, there have been reports of
pediatric patients who were otherwise healthy and went into irreversible cardiac
arrest after the administration of succinylcholine. Many of these patients had
Pediatrics
397
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
hyperkalemia, rhabdomyolysis, and acidosis. It is postulated that these pediatric
patients may have had undiagnosed myopathies. Postmortem muscle biopsies
have shown many of them to have muscular dystrophy. The group at highest risk of
this catastrophic event are males 8 years of age or younger. Because of these
concerns, there is now a “black box warning” by the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration prohibiting routine use of succinylcholine in pediatric patients. It
is only indicated for airway emergencies, such as laryngospasm or rapid sequence
induction. Some alternatives that may be used are the nondepolarizing
neuromuscular blocking drugs, such as larger doses of vecuronium or rocuronium.
(557)
55. Succinylcholine is accepted for use for rapid onset neuromuscular blockade in
pediatric patients for the treatment of laryngospasm and in patients at high risk for
aspiration of gastric contents in whom rapid sequence induction/intubation is
indicated. (557)
56. There are multiple physiologicdifferences between the pediatric airway and the adult
airway. Pediatric patients tend to have a larger tongue relative to the size of their
mouths. Particularly true in neonates is that the occiput is larger, so that placing the
head intheneutralpositionnaturally placestheheadinaposition favorablefordirect
laryngoscopy.Extendingthehead canmakedirectlaryngoscopy difficult. Thelarynx
is more cephalad in pediatric patients, with the cricoid cartilage opposing the C4
vertebra rather than the C6 vertebra as in adults. The larynx is also more anterior. The
epiglottisislonger,stiffer,andUshapedandhasmoreofahorizontallie.Thenarrowest
point of the airway is at the level of the cricoid cartilage in the presence of
neuromuscularblockade.Thesedifferencesbetweenthepediatricairwayandtheadult
airwayarepresentuntilabouttheageof8years,afterwhichthedifferencebetweenthe
pediatric airway and the adult airway is mainly just a difference in size. (554)
57. Because the narrowest point of the pediatric airway is at the level of the cricoid
cartilage, it was believed that an endotracheal tube that passes easily through the
larynx may cause ischemia or damage to the trachea distally. However, recent
imaging studies challenge this notion, and the difference in diameter between
the larynx and subglottis in younger children is minimal. Historically, uncuffed
tubes were the standard of care in children younger than 8 years of age owing
to concerns about subglottic stenosis and postextubation stridor. However, with
the introduction of tubes with high volume–low pressure cuffs, recent studies
suggest that there is no increased risk of airway edema with cuffed endotracheal
tubes and that the use of cuffed endotracheal tubes may decrease the number
of laryngoscopies and intubations due to inappropriate tube size. The risk of
postintubation tracheal edema is greatest in children between 1 and 4 years of age,
whether a cuffed or uncuffed ETT is used. Postintubation tracheal edema/croup can
be treated with humidified gases and aerosolized racemic epinephrine.
Dexamethasone has also been administered intravenously for the treatment of
postintubation tracheal edema. (554)
58. Because of their larger surface area to weight ratio, infants tend lose body heat
much more rapidly than adults. This is particularly true in a cold operating room
environment. The administration of heated and humidified gases or use of a
condenser humidifier in children undergoing prolonged operations is useful in
decreasing intraoperative heat loss and in avoiding decreases in body temperature.
Warming the operating room, the use of radiant warmers, and warmed intravenous
fluids are other methods of maintaining normothermia. (554)
59. Signs for the adequacy of depth of anesthesia for surgery are the same for neonates,
infants, and children as they are in adults. Those signs include blood pressure,
heart rate, and skeletal muscle movement. Processed electroencephalographic
technologies may be used as in the adult population, but are less reliable in
younger children. (556)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
398
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
60. Hypotension in the neonate that accompanies the administration of volatile
anesthetics is likely to be indicative of hypovolemia. (552)
61. Intraoperative monitoring in the pediatric population is not any different from
intraoperative monitoring in the adult population undergoing comparable surgical
procedures. Routine monitors should include blood pressure, heart rate,
electrocardiogram, peripheral oxygen saturation, capnography, anesthetic gas
concentration, and temperature monitoring. (556)
62. The monitoring of end-tidal carbon dioxide concentrations in small children,
infants, and neonates may be complicated by large dead space introduced
between the CO2 sampling line and the trachea by endotracheal tube connectors,
condenser humidifiers, and elbow connectors at the end of the Y-piece of the
anesthesia circuit. The small tidal volumes of these patients exacerbate the
problem and can result in falsely low end-tidal CO2 readings. In addition,
congenital heart disease patients with right-to-left shunting will have a falsely low
end-tidal CO2 due to the blood bypassing the lungs. (556)
63. An appropriately sized blood pressure cuff is one that is greater than one third
of the circumference of the limb. A blood pressure cuff that is too small will
result in artificially high blood pressures. The opposite is also true, that a blood
pressure cuff that is too large will result in artificially low blood pressures. (556)
64. Central venous pressure can be monitored in the neonate via an umbilical vein
catheter. The internal jugular vein, femoral vein, or subclavian vein can be used
for central venous pressure monitoring in neonates, infants, and children. (549)
65. There are several procedures in which regional anesthetic techniques can be
considered in the pediatric population. For circumcision or hypospadias repair,
a penile block may be used. For inguinal hernia repair an ilioinguinal and
iliohypogastric block may be used. For femur surgery, a fascia iliaca compartment
block may be used. For arm and wrist surgery a brachial plexus block may be used.
Intravenous regional anesthesia may also be used in the pediatric patient for tendon
laceration repairs or extremity fractures. Caudal anesthesia is a common form of
anesthesia and is used for postoperative pain relief in the pediatric population in
whom the surgical site is below the level of the diaphragm. Conversely, a lumbar
epidural anesthetic may also be used in the pediatric patient. (557, 558)
66. For caudal epidural anesthesia, the local anesthetic most commonly used is
bupivacaine at a concentration of 0.125% to 0.25%, and ropivacaine at 0.1% to
0.2%. The volume is 0.5 to 1 mL/kg, up to a maximum of 20 mL. The duration of pain
relief provided by this dose of local anesthetic in the caudal epidural space is 4 to
6 hours, therefore possibly providing some postoperative pain relief. The dural sac
extends more caudad in children than in adults, making inadvertent intrathecal
injection a possibility. The risks of caudal epidural anesthesia are minimal. (557)
THE
POSTANESTHESIA
CARE UNIT
67. It is common practice in pediatric anesthesia to extubate the trachea of the patient
during deep anesthesia. The advantage of extubating the trachea during deep
extubation is that emergence from anesthesia without a tracheal tube in place
avoids coughing and straining on surgical suture lines, as removal of
the endotracheal tube is prior to the return of airway reactivity. The decision of
when to extubate the trachea is made on a case-by-case basis, however. In some
cases airway reflexes are preferred to have returned prior to tracheal extubation,
as in patients at risk for the aspiration of gastric contents or with blood and
secretions in the airway. (557)
68. Emergence delirium refers to a dissociated state of consciousness that occurs
while waking from anesthesia. It occurs more frequently in the pediatric
population after anesthesia with sevoflurane or desflurane. During this time the
pediatric patient is inconsolable, irritable, incoherent, and/or uncooperative.
Pediatrics
399
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
The patient may be crying, moaning, kicking, and restless. During this time there
may be accidental removal of intravenous catheters, surgical bandages, and drains.
During emergence delirium, children usually do not recognize or identify
familiar and known objects or people. Emergence delirium is generally
self-limiting, and typically lasts only about 5 to 15 minutes. (558)
69. The assessment of pain in postoperative pediatric patients can be particularly
difficult as these patients may be nonverbal. There are several scales for assessing
pain, including scales that monitor for facial expressions, movement, crying,
and consolability. (558)
70. Risk factors for postoperative nausea and vomiting in the pediatric patient
population include age 3 years or older, strabismus surgery, duration of surgery,
and previous history of postoperative nausea and vomiting in the patient or in a
parent or sibling. (558)
MEDICAL AND
SURGICAL DISEASES
THAT AFFECT
PEDIATRIC
PATIENTS
71. Respiratory distress syndrome, also referred to as hyaline membrane disease, is a
syndrome affecting preterm neonates who at birth have a deficiency of surfactant.
Surfactant is necessary to maintain alveolar stability, so that without it alveoli
collapse. Surfactant is a surface active phospholipid in the alveoli that can now
be administered into the lungs of neonates for the treatment or prevention of
respiratory distress syndrome. The compliance of the lung and arterial
oxygenation often improve rapidly after its administration. The administration of
surfactant has decreased the morbidity and mortality resulting from this
syndrome. (563-565)
72. With the alveolar collapse associated with respiratory distress syndrome, there
is resultant right-to-left intrapulmonary shunting, arterial hypoxemia, and
metabolic acidosis. (563-565)
73. Neonates with respiratory distress syndrome should have their arterial
oxygenation closely monitored intraoperatively. The PaO2 the anesthesiologist
should try to maintain in these patients is the PaO2 level the patient had before
surgery. This may require high inspired concentrations of oxygen and
positive end-expiratory pressure. The PaO2 should ideally be monitored from a
preductal artery. If the surgical procedure is short and intraarterial monitoring
is not feasible, oxygenation may be monitored by pulse oximetry. These
neonates are at an increased risk for pneumothorax with positive-pressure
ventilation. Neonates with respiratory distress syndrome should be well hydrated.
It may be prudent to maintain the hematocrit near 40% to optimize the delivery
of oxygen to the tissues. (564)
74. Bronchopulmonary dysplasia is a chronic pulmonary disorder in infants and
children who had prolonged respiratory disease at birth, defined as the need for
supplemental oxygen beyond 30 days of life after a diagnosis of respiratory
distress syndrome. It is thought to result from the required high inspired
concentrations of oxygen and mechanical ventilation with high peak airway
pressures for a prolonged period of time as treatment for the respiratory disease.
Some characteristic findings in patients with bronchopulmonary dysplasia are
increased airway resistance, increased airway reactivity, decreased arterial
oxygenation due to ventilation-to-perfusion mismatch, and recurrent pulmonary
infections. A chest radiograph in these patients may show large lung volumes,
fibrosis, and atelectasis. These patients may have chronic hypercarbia as well.
The incidence of bronchopulmonary dysplasia has decreased since the advent of
surfactant therapy in neonates at risk. (565)
75. Retinopathy of prematurity, also referred to as retrolental fibroplasia, is a
condition in which the retinal vasculature becomes neovascularized and scarred.
Permanent visual impairment can result. (564)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
400
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
76. A risk factor for retinopathy of prematurity is a PaO2 greater than 80 mm Hg or an
oxygen saturation greater than 94% in the presence of prematurity. Retinopathy of
prematurity has occurred in neonates whose PaO2 was maintained at about
150 mm Hg for 2 to 4 hours. Neonates whose birth weights are lower than 1500 g
are especially at risk. The risk of retinopathy of prematurity becomes negligible 44
weeks after conception. (564)
77. A PaO2 between 50 and 70 mm Hg or an oxygen saturation between 88% and 93%
should be maintained during anesthesia in the premature neonate to minimize the
risk of retinopathy of prematurity. (564)
78. Apnea spells that result in the cessation of breathing for 20 seconds or longer can
lead to cyanosis and bradycardia. Especially at risk are preterm infants
younger than 50 weeks postconception. It is estimated that 20% to 30% of preterm
infants have apnea spells during their first month of life. Apnea spells may be
increased in the neonate in the postoperative period secondary to the residual
effects of inhaled and injected anesthetics that affect the control of breathing.
The recommendation for these patients is that apnea and bradycardia monitors
be used after surgery that will sound an alarm if apnea or bradycardia is detected in
the patient. These patients are not candidates for outpatient surgery because of
the risk of apnea occurring at home where health care providers are not available
to respond. An alternative is to postpone nonessential surgery until infants are
older than 50 weeks postconception. Treating anemia and administering a
single dose of IV caffeine citrate will reduce the incidence and severity of
postanesthetic apnea in this population. (565)
79. Neonates are at risk of developing hypoglycemia, particularly neonates of diabetic
mothers. Hypoglycemia is defined by a plasma glucose concentration less than
40 mg/dL in the preterm neonate, less than 50 mg/dL for the term neonate younger
than 3 days old, and less than 60 mg/dL in the term neonate older than 3 days of
age. Neonates are at risk of hypoglycemia secondary to their poorly developed
system for the maintenance of adequate plasma glucose concentrations. In
addition, patients receiving total parenteral nutrition with high dextrose
concentrations are at risk for hypoglycemia if the infusion is interrupted. Also,
patients with poor nutritional status or liver disease often have inadequate hepatic
glycogen stores and are also at risk. (552-553)
80. Manifestations of hypoglycemia in neonates include irritability, seizures,
bradycardia, hypotension, and apnea. These clinical manifestations may be
masked by general anesthesia, making perioperative vigilance very important;
frequent analysis of blood glucose is important in patients at risk. The immediate
treatment of hypoglycemia in neonates is the intravenous administration of
0.5 to 1 g/kg of glucose. (552-553)
81. Preterm neonates are at risk of developing hypocalcemia. Hypocalcemia in the
neonate is defined by a plasma ionized calcium concentration less than about
1.1 mEq/dL. Fetuses develop their calcium stores during the third trimester, so that
the preterm neonate has inadequate calcium stores at birth. (549)
82. Hypocalcemia might occur intraoperatively as a result of citrated blood
transfusions or during an exchange transfusion. The rapid infusion of citrate that
occurs with citrated blood or fresh frozen plasma transfusions can result in
hypotension secondary to hypocalcemia. The hypotension can be minimized by
the administration of calcium gluconate, 1 to 2 mg intravenously for every 1 mL
of blood transfused. (553)
83. The incidence of malignant hyperthermia in the pediatric population has been
reported to be as high as 1 in 12,000 pediatric anesthetics. However, with the
virtual disappearance of the use of two of the most potent triggering agents,
halothane and succinylcholine, in the pediatric population, this incidence is
Pediatrics
401
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
now believed to be significantly lower. The incidence of malignant hyperthermia
in the adult population is approximately 1 in 40,000 adult anesthetics. (555)
84. The calcium channel is important in the pathophysiology of malignant
hyperthermia. There is a defect in the calcium release channel in the sarcoplasmic
reticulum of the skeletal muscle, specifically the ryanodine receptor (RYR1 gene
mutation is the leading cause). This defect allows for higher concentrations of
calcium to be sustained in the myoplasm, resulting in persistent skeletal muscle
contractions when a patient at risk for developing malignant hyperthermia is
exposed to inciting anesthetic agents or drugs. The genetic coding site for
malignant hyperthermia is the ryanodine receptor. (555)
85. Anesthetic triggering drugs for malignant hyperthermia include succinylcholine
and volatile anesthetics, halothane being by far the most potent agent. (555)
86. Clinical signs of malignant hyperthermia are related to some of the consequences of
sustainedskeletalmusclecontraction.Theseincludetachycardia,arterialhypoxemia,
metabolic acidosis, respiratory acidosis, and increases in body temperature. Early
signs of malignant hyperthermia include tachycardia and an increase in the exhaled
concentration of carbon dioxide that are otherwise unexplained. A late sign of
malignant hyperthermia is the increase in body temperature. (555)
87. The primary treatment for malignant hyperthermia is dantrolene. Dantrolene
inhibits the release of calcium from the sarcoplasmic reticulum. The dose of
dantrolene to be administered is 2 to 3 mg/kg intravenously and repeated every
5 to 10 minutes until the symptoms are controlled. Other treatment interventions
for malignant hyperthermia are directed toward supportive management. First,
the inhaled anesthetic being administered should be immediately discontinued.
The lungs should be hyperventilated with oxygen. For the hyperthermia, active
cooling should be initiated. Active cooling may include cold saline, 15 mL/kg
intravenously every 10 minutes. Gastric lavage with cold saline and surface
cooling may also be used. For the severely acidotic patient, sodium bicarbonate
may be administered at a dose of 1 to 2 mEq/kg intravenously, and guided by
arterial pH. Diuresis of the patient should also be considered, either by hydration,
mannitol, or furosemide. (555)
88. The patient at risk for malignant hyperthermia may be identified preoperatively by a
detailed preoperative medical history and by a family history that especially notes
any problems with anesthesia. Preoperative testing of the level of creatinine kinase is
not always useful, because only about 70% of patients who are susceptible to
malignant hyperthermia have increased resting levels of creatinine kinase. The
definitive diagnosis of a patient’s susceptibility to malignant hyperthermia requires
a skeletal muscle biopsy. The skeletal muscle is then tested in vitro for isometric
contracture in response to exposure to caffeine or halothane or both. This test has the
highest sensitivity and specificity for MH. Recently, genetic testing for the ryanodine
receptor abnormality (RYR1 mutation) has become available. This test is not as
sensitive as the contracture test but is highly specific. (555)
89. No anesthetic regimen is known to be reliably safe for administration to patients
who are susceptible to malignant hyperthermia. Some drugs that are used in
anesthesia that have not been shown to trigger malignant hyperthermia include
barbiturates, opioids, benzodiazepines, propofol, etomidate, nitrous oxide, local
anesthetics, and nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking drugs. (555)
90. It is now the consensus of many that preoperative dantrolene is not necessary in
susceptible patients because general anesthesia with nontriggering agents has
proven to be mostly uneventful. There are multiple preparations for the operating
room before anesthetizing a patient at risk for malignant hyperthermia. The
vaporizers may be removed or sealed. The soda lime should be changed, and the
fresh gas outlet hose may be changed. High fresh gas flows should be maintained for
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
402
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
at least 20 minutes prior to the induction of anesthesia, and an expired gas analyzer
should be used to confirm that traces of anesthetic gases have been purged. (555)
91. Regional anesthesia is considered safe for patients at risk for malignant
hyperthermia. (555)
92. A congenital diaphragmatic hernia is a congenital defect in the diaphragm that
results in the herniation of abdominal viscera into the chest. Almost all the
abdominal viscera can be in the chest, including the liver and spleen. It results from
the incomplete closure of the diaphragm in an embryologic stage of development
of the fetus. The defect in the diaphragm is usually on the left through the foramen
of Bochdalek. In the presence of a congenital diaphragmatic hernia, there is an
associated hypoplasia of the lung on the ipsilateral side. The degree of hypoplasia
depends on the gestational age at which the herniation occurred. Manifestations at
birth include a scaphoid abdomen, respiratory distress, acidosis, and profound
arterial hypoxemia. The incidence of congenital diaphragmatic hernia is about 1 in
every 5000 live births. (562-563)
93. Some comorbid conditions associated with congenital diaphragmatic hernia
include polyhydramnios, congenital heart disease, and pulmonary hypertension.
(562-563)
94. The diagnosis of a congenital diaphragmatic hernia can be made in utero during
ultrasonography of the fetus. The diagnosis at birth is confirmed by the clinical
manifestations of the anomaly, by auscultation of intestines and decreased breath
sounds over the affected lung area, and by chest radiograph. On the chest
radiograph, loops of intestine are seen in the affected thorax, as well as a shift of
the mediastinum to the opposite side. (562-563)
95. The immediate treatment of a congenital diaphragmatic hernia in a neonate involves
decompression of the stomach with a nasogastric tube, endotracheal intubation
minimizing hand ventilation of the lungs, and the administration of oxygen.
Positive pressure when ventilating by hand with bag and mask can increase the
volume of the gastrointestinal tract with air, further compromising pulmonary
function by direct mechanical compression. This can lead to hypotension as well as
worsening hypoxemia. The lungs should be ventilated with small tidal volumes at a
rate of 60 to 150 breaths/min. Hyperventilation of the lungs with oxygen can
improve pulmonary blood flow by reversing the hypoxia and acidosis. High
frequency oscillatory ventilation and inhaled nitric oxide are frequently used to
improve gas exchange and reduce pulmonary artery pressures. The neonate with a
congenital diaphragmatic hernia in whom arterial oxygenation is difficult may
require extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) for stabilization before
surgical intervention. ECMO support of these neonates has led to a decrease in the
mortality of neonates with congenital diaphragmatic hernia. Surgery is often
delayed in the critically ill neonate with a congenital diaphragmatic hernia while the
pulmonary vascular resistance decreases. Surgery may be accomplished while on
ECMO or on high-frequency oscillatory ventilation. (562-563)
96. Positive-pressure ventilation of the lungs of a neonate with a congenital
diaphragmatic hernia can result in a pneumothorax on the contralateral side of the
affected lung if peak airway pressures exceed 25 to 30 cm H2O. Expansion of
the hypoplastic lung after surgical correction of the congenital diaphragmatic
hernia should not be attempted because of the risk of pneumothorax or other
damage to the normal lung. (562-563)
97. The anesthetic management of neonates with a congenital diaphragmatic hernia
undergoing a surgical procedure should include monitoring of arterial
oxygenation and the avoidance of nitrous oxide. Nitrous oxide should be avoided
because it can diffuse into the loops of intestine in the chest and expand the
intestines further, leading to more pulmonary compromise. (562-563)
Pediatrics
403
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
98. A tracheoesophageal fistula should be suspected when soon after birth a neonate
develops cyanosis and coughing during oral feedings. The clinician should also
suspect the presence of a tracheoesophageal fistula when an oral catheter
cannot be passed into the stomach. The severity of illness in these patients can
range from mild to severe. (561)
99. Thirty to forty percent of neonates with a tracheoesophageal fistula have
associated congenital heart disease, including ventricular septal defect, tetralogy
of Fallot, and coarctation of the aorta. Tracheoesophageal fistula is also a
component of the VACTERL association (V for vertebral defects; A for imperforate
anus, C for cardiac defects, TE for TE fistula, R for renal anomalies, and L for limb
anomalies). Prematurity accompanies tracheoesophageal fistulas about 40% of the
time. (561)
100. Neonates with a tracheoesophageal fistula are at risk for pulmonary aspiration,
gastric distention, and difficulty with ventilation. These neonates should have a
catheter placed in the esophagus to drain secretions and prevent the accumulation
of fluids in the esophageal pouch. Manual positive-pressure ventilation of the
lungs with a mask should be kept at a minimum to lessen the risk of gastric
distention and pulmonary aspiration. When intubating the trachea of an infant
with a tracheoesophageal fistula, the anesthesiologist must be careful to place the
endotracheal tube distal to the level of the fistula. This can be confirmed through
the auscultation of decreased breath sounds over the stomach. Some surgeons
or anesthesiologists will perform a rigid or flexible bronchoscopy to diagnose the
location of the fistula to aid in endotracheal tube placement. Care should be taken
to avoid endobronchial intubation as well. Attention to breath sounds, chest
movement with ventilation, peak inspiratory pressures, and oxygen saturation
should continue throughout the surgical procedure because small movements
in the endotracheal tube can lead to its malposition. (562)
101. Pyloric stenosis occurs as a result of hypertrophy of the pyloric smooth muscle.
This muscle hypertrophy, in combination with edema of the pyloric mucosa,
results in progressive obstruction of the pylorus. The incidence of pyloric stenosis
is 1 in every 500 live births. (564)
102. The usual clinical scenario of an infant with pyloric stenosis is one of persistent
vomiting in a male infant at 2 to 8 weeks of age. (564)
103. The electrolyte imbalances that are commonly seen in infants with pyloric stenosis
occur as a result of the loss of hydrogen ions that is associated with persistent
vomiting. These electrolyte imbalances include hyponatremia, hypokalemia,
hypochloremia, and metabolic alkalosis. There is often a compensatory respiratory
acidosis. (564)
104. Concerns for the anesthesiologist caring for the patient with pyloric stenosis
include the metabolic abnormalities, severe dehydration, and full stomach, often
with barium after a radiologic study. These all place the infant at an increased
risk for morbidity perioperatively. Although pyloric stenosis is a medical
emergency, surgical correction of pyloric stenosis is an elective procedure.
The corrective procedure for these infants can be done after 24 to 48 hours of
intravenous fluid rehydration, the correction of their electrolyte abnormalities,
and suctioning on a catheter placed in the stomach. (565)
105. The induction of anesthesia in infants with pyloric stenosis should be preceded
by the emptying of stomach contents with a catheter to minimize the risk of
the pulmonary aspiration of gastric contents. Induction should then be done in
a rapid sequence fashion with cricoid pressure. Alternatively, an awake
intubation may be performed, although this is rarely practiced in the modern era.
Extubation of the trachea after the procedure should only be performed when
the infant is awake and vigorous because postoperative depression of ventilation is
frequently seen in these infants. This may be partially due to an increase
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
404
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
cerebrospinal fluid pH which decreases the respiratory drive. In fact, these patients
should be monitored for 12 to 24 hours postoperatively for apnea. (565)
106. Necrotizing enterocolitis is a common surgical emergency in the neonate,
primarily in premature newborns. It is an intestinal mucosal ischemic injury
sometimes resulting in bowel necrosis. It is seen in premature infants, with
incidence inversely proportional to gestational age. Reduced mesenteric blood
flow from a patent ductus arteriosus, bacterial infection, and the institution of
enteral feeding all have a role in the etiology of necrotizing enterocolitis. (559)
107. Medical treatment of necrotizing enterocolitis includes bowel rest, antibiotics, and
serial abdominal examinations and radiographs. Surgical treatment may be emergent,
laparotomy,withdrainage,bowelresection,andreanastomosisorcreationofostomies.
Patients are often unstable and critically ill with sepsis, acidosis, coagulopathy, and
pulmonary morbidity. Availability of colloids and blood products, invasive
monitoring, inotropic agents, and frequent measurement of blood gases, electrolytes,
ionized calcium, glucose, lactate, and hemoglobin are important anesthetic
considerations in managing patients with necrotizing enterocolitis. (559-560)
108. Gastroschisis and omphalocele are both abdominal wall defects usually diagnosed
in utero by ultrasound, requiring treatment in the neonatal period. Gastroschisis is
a defect where the intestines usually protrude to the right of the umbilicus
and do not have a covering peritoneal sac. Infants with gastroschisis usually
do not have additional associated anomalies. Omphalocele is a midline defect
covered by the peritoneal sac with the umbilical cord incorporated into the defect.
Patients with omphalocele often have other associated anomalies. (560)
109. Large or giant defects are now managed with a staged approach, whereby the
intestines are partially reduced into the peritoneal cavity, and the edges of the
defect are sutured to a synthetic “silo.” The intestines are then reduced into the
peritoneal cavity in several steps over days to weeks. This is followed by final
surgical closure of the defect. The former approach of one stage repair has been
abandoned because of the high incidence of intestinal ischemia and respiratory
morbidity associated with this strategy. Anesthetic considerations include
awareness of associated defects with omphalocele patients, especially congenital
heart disease. Covering the defect with moist gauze, administering adequate
intravenous fluid to account for very large third-space losses with exposed viscera,
providing appropriate muscle relaxation, and careful attention to ventilator status
as the intestines are reduced are important anesthetic considerations. (560)
110. A patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) is most often seen in premature infants, and can result
in pulmonary edema, which complicates respiratory distress syndrome and
prevents weaning from mechanical ventilator support. It also may “steal” systemic
blood flow resulting in mesenteric ischemia and increasing the risk for necrotizing
enterocolitis, hypotension, and cardiac failure from the large left-to-right shunt.
Indomethacin treatment is often attempted, but this may result in platelet and renal
dysfunction. (563)
111. PDA ligation is often performed at the bedside in the neonatal intensive care unit,
and full monitoring including capnography must be provided. Transport to a
distant operating room has a significant risk for cardiopulmonary instability.
Anesthesia is usually provided with fentanyl, 25 to 50 mg/kg, with an intravenous
amnestic agent or low-dose volatile anesthetic. Because the PDA is so large, it
can be mistaken for the descending thoracic aorta, and the aorta may be
inadvertently ligated. The anesthesiologist must monitor lower extremity perfusion,
most commonly via pulse oximeter on the foot, to detect this problem. (563)
112. Myelomeningocele is a defect in the development of the neural tube, resulting in an
open neural placode covered only by a thin membrane and cerebrospinal fluid.
It is diagnosed in utero with ultrasound, and ranges from small lumbosacral defects
with minimal neurologic sequelae, to large thoracolumbar defects with high
Pediatrics
405
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
paraplegia. After birth, the infant is managed prone so as not to rupture the
sac. Anesthesia induction involves either intubation in the lateral decubitus
position or brief supine positioning on a padded gel doughnut to protect the sac.
A nonlatex environment, including surgical gloves, is crucial to avoid latex
sensitization. Muscle relaxants are avoided so the surgeon can evaluate motor
function during the repair. The patient is managed prone during the initial days
after surgery. (564)
SPECIAL
ANESTHETIC
CONSIDERATIONS
113. Anesthesia and sedation are delivered in the cardiac catheterization laboratories,
magnetic resonance imaging and computed tomography scanners, gastrointestinal
and pulmonary procedure suites, interventional radiology, radiation therapy,
dental clinics, and many other locations. Magnetic resonance image (MRI)
scanning in particular has undergone explosive growth and greatly increased the
need for remote sedation and anesthesia services. Requirements for preanesthetic
evaluation, monitoring, and recovery are identical to those for operating room
surgical anesthesia. MRI-compatible anesthesia machines and monitors are
available and full monitoring must be used. In particular, capnography for
nonintubated, sedated patients via divided nasal cannula should be used for all
sedation cases. (565)
114. The ex utero intrapartum therapy (EXIT) procedure involves partial delivery of the
head, chest, and arms of the fetus to manage a severe airway or pulmonary
anomaly. The fetus remains connected to the placental circulation to provide
oxygenation and carbon dioxide removal during the procedure to secure the
airway or manage the airway or lung mass. Indications include large airway, neck,
or chest masses such as cystic hygroma, teratoma, and congenital adenomatoid
malformation. Two anesthesiologists are required, one for the mother and one
for the fetus. The mother requires deep inhalational general anesthesia to reduce
uterine tone during the fetal procedure to prevent placental separation. The fetus
receives intravenous or intramuscular fentanyl or morphine for analgesia.
Resection of the mass or securing the airway by rigid bronchoscopy or
tracheostomy is the primary goal. Then, the fetus is delivered. (565-566)
115. Multiple trials of open fetal surgery have been attempted, including congenital
diaphragmatic hernia, posterior urethral valves, lung masses, and
myelomeningocele. In open fetal surgery mother and fetus are anesthetized, a
hysterotomy is done, the fetus exteriorized, the surgery done, and then the fetus
returned to the uterus to be delivered as close to term as possible. Two
anesthesiologists are required, one for the mother and one for the fetus. Most trials
of fetal surgery have not resulted in improved outcomes. However,
meningomyelocele repair in utero results in better overall functional outcomes,
and so is likely to be increasingly performed. (566)
116. In animal models, agents that bind to g-aminobutyric acid (GABA) receptors as
agonists and to N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors as antagonists, have been
implicated in neuronal cell death caused by apoptosis. GABA agonists
include volatile anesthetics, propofol, and benzodiazepines. NMDA antagonists
include ketamine. Most experts agree that there are not sufficient clinical data as of
this writing to change clinical practice. (566)
117. Former premature infants who present for surgery are at an increased risk for
postanesthetic apnea. This risk increases with increased prematurity at birth and
younger age at the time of the anesthetic. The current recommendation is that
former premature infants should have their elective surgery delayed until
50 weeks postconceptual age or greater to minimize this risk. Prior to this, and in a
case-by-case basis, infants may need to be admitted postoperatively for
24 hours of apnea monitoring. (565)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
406
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
Chapter
32 ELDERLY PATIENTS
Sheila R. Barnett
WHY GERIATRIC
ANESTHESIOLOGY
IS IMPORTANT
1. What are some of the challenges encountered when taking care of elderly patients?
2. Is advanced chronologic age a risk factor?
Morbidity and Mortality Rates
3. What are some of the factors influencing mortality rates in the geriatric patient
population?
4. How does a postoperative complication impact outcome in very old patients?
Medications to Avoid in the Geriatric Population
5. What are some medications that should be avoided in elderly patients?
Age-Related Physiologic Changes
6. How is organ function affected by aging? How might this affect the elderly patient
in the perioperative period?
7. What age-related changes in systolic blood pressure, heart rate, cardiac output,
stroke volume, and cardiac conduction occur in the elderly?
8. Why are elderly patients more susceptible to congestive heart failure when
subjected to fluid overload than younger counterparts?
9. How do drug-induced heart rate changes in the elderly compare with the heart rate
response seen in younger patients administered the same drugs?
10. How do reflex-mediated heart rate increases in response to hypotension differ
between elderly and younger patients?
11. What age-related changes in gas exchange, the alveolar-to-arterial oxygen
gradient, and the ventilation-to-perfusion ratio occur in the elderly?
12. What age-related changes in vital capacity, forced exhaled volume in 1 second,
residual volume, and functional residual capacity occur in the elderly?
13. How do ventilatory responses to hypoxia and hypercapnia change with age?
Why is this particularly important to the anesthesiologist?
14. Why does pneumonia occur at an increased frequency in elderly patients?
15. What age-related changes in renal blood flow, glomerular filtration rate, and
urine-concentrating ability occur in the elderly? What clinical implications do these
have?
16. How do plasma concentrations of creatinine change with age?
17. What age-related change in hepatic blood flow occurs in the elderly? What clinical
implication does this have?
407
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
18. How does the production of albumin change with age? What clinical implication
does this have?
19. What age-related changes in esophageal and intestinal motility and
gastroesophageal sphincter tone occur in the elderly? What clinical implications do
these have?
20. What clinical relevance do the age-related loss of collagen and decreases in skin
elasticity have for the anesthesiologist caring for the elderly patient?
21. What clinical relevance do osteoporosis, osteoarthritis, and rheumatoid arthritis
have for the anesthesiologist caring for the elderly patient?
22. What age-related changes in the central and peripheral nervous systems occur in the
elderly? How does this affect the minimum alveolar concentration (MAC) of
anesthesia in the elderly patient?
23. What physiologic changes occur with aging that predispose the elderly patient to
hypothermia?
PERIOPERATIVE
CARE IN THE
ELDERLY
24. Why is it important to inquire about functional status in the elderly patient?
25. What are some elements of the preoperative evaluation that are of particular
relevance to elderly patients?
26. What are some examples of activities of daily living (ADL) and instrumental ADLs
(IADL)?
27. Should preoperative testing include a routine electrocardiogram (ECG) based on an
age cutoff in elderly patients?
28. What are some of the challenges when obtaining a preoperative assessment in an
institutionalized patient?
29. Why should certain antihypertensive medications be held on the morning of
surgery?
30. What are some of the physiologic consequences that might be observed in elderly
patients taking diuretic medications?
31. How are pharmacodynamic changes in the elderly reflected with regard to inhaled
anesthetics and opioids?
32. How are pharmacodynamic changes in the elderly reflected with regard to
nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking drugs?
33. What pharmacokinetic changes in the elderly make them susceptible to cumulative
drug effects and adverse drug reactions?
34. What age-related changes in the elderly result in a decreased clearance of drugs?
Give some examples of drugs whose elimination times may be affected.
35. What age-related changes in the elderly result in changes in the volume of
distribution? Give some examples of drugs whose pharmacokinetic properties may
be altered.
CHOICE OF
ANESTHESIA
36. What is an advantage that regional anesthesia may have over general anesthesia for
hip surgery in elderly patients?
37. In an awake, elderly patient, what is the significance of orthostatic hypotension
without an associated increase in heart rate?
38. What is the potential significance of mental status changes that occur with
extension and rotation of the head?
39. Why should preoperative anxiolytics be used sparingly in the elderly population?
What can be used as a substitute?
40. Why might hand ventilation by bag and mask be difficult in the edentulous patient?
41. Why might endotracheal intubation be difficult in a patient with poor dentition or
cervical arthritis?
42. How should the induction dose of anesthetic be altered in the elderly patient?
43. Are there any unique risks to the elderly with the reversal of nondepolarizing
neuromuscular blocking drugs with anticholinesterase drugs?
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
408
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
44. What are some postoperative risks that elderly patients are more prone to than
younger patients?
45. What types of procedures that elderly patients are likely to undergo might warrant
regional anesthesia as an alternative to general anesthesia?
46. What is the advantage to maintaining consciousness in the elderly patient during a
regional anesthetic for a surgical procedure?
47. What are some reasons why elderly patients may be more sensitive to regional
anesthesia than younger patients?
48. How might the hypotensive effects of a sympathectomy resulting from regional
anesthesia be attenuated?
49. What advantage does epidural anesthesia have over spinal anesthesia that can be
of particular benefit in the elderly population?
POSTOPERATIVE
CARE
50. What are some of the consequences of untreated postoperative pain in the elderly
patient?
51. What are some examples of adjuvant nonopioid medication that can be used to treat
pain in the elderly patient?
52. What are some of the advantages of postoperative epidural analgesia in elderly
patients?
53. How should a regional technique be altered in an elderly patient?
54. What are the most common postoperative neurologic events in elderly patients?
55. When is postoperative delirium in the elderly patient most likely to present?
56. What are some possible clinical manifestations of postoperative delirium in
the elderly patient?
57. What are some causes of postoperative delirium in elderly patients?
58. What are some of the consequences of delirium in elderly patients?
59. How is postoperative cognitive dysfunction different from delirium?
ANSWERS*
WHY GERIATRIC
ANESTHESIOLOGY
IS IMPORTANT
1. The elderly population represents a heterogeneous group of individuals with widely
varying functional and reserve capacity. In some patients there may be a wide
disparity between the chronologic and physiologic age. In all individuals, aging is
associated with a gradual deterioration of organ function. Even though the rate may
vary between individuals, some age-related changes are inevitable. Elderly patients
may also exhibit atypical symptoms leading to delays in diagnosis and more
advanced disease at presentation. Other challenges include polypharmacy, the high
prevalence of dementia and cognitive dysfunction in the very elderly, and the
difficulty in estimating functional reserve in patients with limited mobility and
multiple comorbid conditions. (568, Table 35-1)
2. Advanced age is a risk factor for surgical morbidity and mortality. Elderly patients
who require surgery are also at a greater risk of perioperative complications
than their younger counterparts. This is due to a combination of the effects of
chronic disease and generalized age-related decreases in organ function. Some
examples of common age-related changes include a generalized decrease in
maximal breathing capacity, vital capacity, glomerular filtration rate, and basal
metabolic rate. In addition, decreases in the elderly patient’s level of activity
may lead to deconditioning and a subsequent inability of the cardiovascular
*Numbers in parentheses: numbers refer to pages, figures, or tables in Miller RD, Pardo MC: Basics of Anesthesia,
6th ed. Philadelphia, Elsevier Saunders, 2011.
Elderly Patients
409
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
system to respond to perioperative stressors. Overall the comorbid conditions found
in elderly patients are the most significant contributors to the development of
perioperative complications or perioperative death, rather than the age of the
patient itself. (568, Figure 35-1)
Morbidity and Mortality Rates
3. The need for emergency surgery is one of the most important predictors for
mortality following surgery in older patients. The circumstances of the emergency
itself may be compromising the patient’s physiologic status, such as with
hemorrhage or dehydration. In these circumstances the older patient with poor
baseline function and organ reserve may not be able to respond rapidly to this acute
alteration in physiologic state. In addition, emergency cases preclude the
preoperative time necessary to control coexisting diseases and maximize organ
function. The lack of optimization impacts the ability to withstand the stress
imposed by surgery. Other important factors influencing the outcomes in elderly
patients include delayed presentation of a condition, high ASA physical status,
partial or complete immobility, intracavitary surgery, and congestive heart failure.
Older patients tend to present later with more advanced disease and thus be more
compromised physiologically at presentation. (569)
4. Complications may be poorly tolerated in very old patients. Patients over 80 years
old who developed a postsurgical complication had a fourfold increase in mortality.
Complications are also associated with an increase in length of hospital stay and
morbidity. The most significant complications include cardiac arrest, renal failure,
and myocardial infarction. Avoiding even minor complications is one of the
cornerstones of management of geriatric patients undergoing anesthesia and
surgery. (569)
Medications to Avoid in the Geriatric Population
5. Aging is associated with decreased central cholinergic reserve, and in elderly
patients with dementia this may be significant. Scopolamine is a tertiary quaternary
amine and as such crosses the blood-brain barrier. The central anticholinergic
effects of scopolamine may lead to significant delirium in elderly patients.
Other medications that can similarly cause delirium through central anticholinergic
effects include atropine, chlorpheniramine, diphenhydramine, and
promethazine. (570)
Age-Related Physiologic Changes
6. Organ function, in general, declines with age. The decline in organ function associated
with aging in the elderly has been characterized as a decline in the ability of the elderly
patient’s organs to adapt, or compensate, in response to acute stressors. The
perioperative period is associated with stressors on numerous organs, leaving elderly
patients vulnerable to develop worsening organ dysfunction in the perioperative
period. Age-related declines in organ function may be difficult to measure
preoperatively and the stress associated with surgery may expose previously
underappreciated deficiencies. For example, the presence of mild renal insufficiency
with normal laboratory testing may predispose the elderly patient to perioperative
renal failure, or previously asymptomatic diastolic dysfunction may predispose the
elderly patient to postoperative congestive heart failure. (570, Table 35-2)
7. Age-related changes in the cardiovascular system of elderly people include an
increase in stiffness of the vasculature and an increase in the presence of diastolic
dysfunction. In the absence of cardiac disease per se, the cardiac output and stroke
volume are largely preserved. Alterations in the conduction system are common
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
410
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
and older patients are predisposed to developing arrhythmias and heart block.
Systemic blood pressure steadily increases with age as a result of the decrease in
compliance of arterial walls. Alterations in the cardiac sympathetic nervous system
result in a diminished ability to increase heart rate in response to stress. In elderly
patients a sedentary lifestyle and deconditioning may lead to diminished cardiac
output and reserve capacity. The decrease in cardiac output does not appear to occur
in elderly patients who have maintained physical fitness. (571)
8. Aging is associated with increased ventricular stiffening that contributes to delayed
left ventricular relaxation during diastole. This is referred to as diastolic dysfunction
and leads to a decrease in diastolic filling. Approximately one third of older
individuals with normal left ventricular function have diastolic dysfunction.
Diastolic dysfunction limits a patient’s capacity to handle excess intravascular fluid,
and thus excess fluid loading can lead to the rapid development of congestive heart
failure. (571, Figure 35-2)
9. The plasma concentration of adrenergic agents required to produce a specific
cardiovascular response is increased in the elderly. When adrenergic drugs such
as isoproterenol are administered to elderly patients, the change in heart rate is
less prominent than the changes in heart rate seen when isoproterenol is
administered to younger patients. This is believed to be due to a decrease in the
elderly patient’s responsiveness at the b-adrenergic receptor. The decrease in
responsiveness may occur secondary to a reduced affinity of b-adrenergic agents
for the receptor and/or the impairment of adenylate cyclase activation. This same
effect of decreased cardiovascular response has also been noted with the
administration of atropine and a-adrenergic agonists. The reduction in
parasympathetic tone is also reflected in the reduction in beat to beat variability.
The levels of circulating norepinephrine rise steadily with aging, supporting a
reduction in the sensitivity of the receptor. (571)
10. When hypotension occurs in younger patients, there is a baroreflex-mediated
increase in heart rate that occurs to help offset the physiologic effects of the
hypotension. In the elderly patient, the reflex-mediated increase in heart rate in
response to hypotension is much less pronounced and as a result elderly patients are
prone to develop orthostatic hypotension. The decline in baroreceptor sensitivity
and cardiac autonomic function has been termed the dysautonomia of aging. It
appears to be due to a combination of a decrease in sensitivity of the baroreflexes
themselves and a decrease in the ability of the adrenergic receptors to respond,
limiting the reflex increase in heart rate. (571)
11. There is an age-related decrease in gas exchange in the elderly patient. The most
significant age-related change in the lung of the elderly patient is a deterioration of
lung elastin. As a result of the degenerative changes in the lungs, there is a
breakdown of alveolar septa. This is accompanied by an increase in both anatomic
and alveolar dead space and an increase in ventilation-to-perfusion mismatch.
These are reflected by an increase in the alveolar oxygen pressure and a decrease
in the PaO2 by about 0.5 mm Hg per year after 20 years of age. There are no
age-related changes in the PaCO2. (571)
12. Age-related changes in the pulmonary system of elderly people include a decrease
in vital capacity, a decrease in the forced exhaled volume in 1 second, an increase in
residual volume, and an increase in functional residual capacity. These occur as
a result of the decreased elasticity of the lungs and increased stiffness of the
thorax. (571)
13. Elderly patients have a decreased ventilatory response to hypercapnia and hypoxia.
When compared with younger patients, this response can be decreased by about one
half. It is important that the anesthesiologist be cognizant of this, because this
response is further decreased by the administration of opioids and inhaled
anesthetics. (571-572)
Elderly Patients
411
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
14. Elderly patients have decreases in pulmonary reserves; a decreased level of
laryngeal, pharyngeal, and airway cough reflexes; and an increased propensity to
aspirate pharyngeal secretions. Elderly patients also have depressed immune
function, probably due to involution of the thymus gland and altered function of
T lymphocytes. Together these may explain the increased risk of pulmonary
aspiration and an increased incidence of pneumonia in elderly patients when
compared with younger patients. (571)
15. Decreases in renal blood flow, glomerular filtration rates, and urine-concentrating
abilities accompany aging. These changes are due to alterations in the renal
vasculature and may be at least partially due to the age-related decrease in cardiac
output. There are also progressive decreases in the total number of nephrons and
glomeruli units with age. Clinically, this has some implications for the
anesthesiologist caring for the elderly patient. First, elderly patients may be more
sensitive to, and less able to adapt to, fluid deprivation or fluid overload. Second, the
elderly may be at an increased risk for renal ischemia in the perioperative period.
Third, elderly patients have limited ability to concentrate urine and are therefore
predisposed to hyponatremia. Finally, drugs that are cleared renally may have a
prolonged duration of effect, thereby decreasing the dose requirements of these
drugs in the elderly patient. (571)
16. Although renal function decreases with age, in the absence of concomitant
renal disease, plasma creatinine concentrations do not change with age. This is
because the increase in creatinine that would be expected to accompany the
age-related decline observed in the glomerular filtration rate (GFR) is offset by
the decrease in muscle mass. There is a decreased production of creatinine
secondary to this decrease in muscle mass. (572)
17. Decreases in hepatic blood flow are seen in the elderly as a direct result of decreases
in hepatic tissue mass and decreases in cardiac output. Clinically, a delayed
clearance of hepatically cleared drugs may result from the decrease in hepatic blood
flow in elderly patients. Drugs that may be affected include opiates, barbiturates,
benzodiazepines, propofol, etomidate, and most nondepolarizing neuromuscular
blocking drugs. (572)
18. The production of albumin is decreased in the elderly, and this may be
exacerbated by poor nutrition. Clinically, the reduced albumin may result in a
decrease in the binding of drugs administered to elderly patients, and an increase in
the free, active portion of the drug. A low preoperative albumin level has been
associated with increased mortality after surgery. (572)
19. Esophageal and intestinal motility decrease with age, as does gastroesophageal
sphincter tone. Clinically, these age-related changes in gastrointestinal function
may lead to an increased risk of pulmonary aspiration in elderly patients
undergoing general anesthesia. (572)
20. A loss of collagen and decreases in the elasticity of the skin of elderly people
put them at an increased risk of sustaining injury to their skin during surgical
procedures, particularly during prolonged procedures. Elderly patients are
vulnerable to sustaining decubitus ulcers and injury during the removal of
adhesive electrocardiogram pads or tape.
21. Osteoporosis, osteoarthritis, and rheumatoid arthritis occur most frequently in
elderly people. These diseases must be considered while positioning the patient
for a surgical procedure, as well as while positioning the head and neck for
intubation of the trachea. Intubation of the trachea may be more difficult as a
result of these diseases.
22. Age-related changes occur in both the central and peripheral nervous systems of
elderly people. In the central nervous system there is a progressive decline in central
nervous system activity and a loss of neurons. This is especially marked in the
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
412
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
cerebral cortex and is reflected as a reduction of brain size in radiographic studies.
Cerebral blood flow decreases in proportion to decreases in cerebral mass. The
autoregulation of cerebral blood flow remains intact. In the peripheral nervous
system, there is a decrease in the conduction velocity of peripheral nerves and
possibly a decrease in the number of fibers in the spinal cord tracts as well. This is
reflected in the increase in the thresholds for the perception of stimuli from virtually
all the senses, including pain. These physiologic changes in the central and
peripheral nervous systems of elderly people result in a decrease in the MAC by as
much as 30% from young adult values. This corresponds to a decreased dose of
volatile anesthetic required to achieve a given physiologic central nervous system
response in elderly patients. (572)
23. There are several factors which together predispose the elderly to hypothermia in
the perioperative period. The reduction in metabolic rate that occurs with aging
results in a reduction in heat production. Peripheral vasoconstriction is also less
efficient in the elderly person, leading to a diminished ability to conserve heat
through redistribution. Shivering is also diminished, and when it occurs it may lead
to increased oxygen consumption that may not be tolerated in patients with
significant cardiac disease. (572)
PERIOPERATIVE
CARE IN THE
ELDERLY
24. Establishing baseline functional status is one of the most important aspects of the
preoperative evaluation of elderly patients. Elderly patients with an excellent
functional capacity have a reduced risk of postoperative complications. (572)
25. The preoperative evaluation of the elderly patient scheduled to undergo a
surgical procedure should include the routine preoperative elements for any other
patients. An additional goal of the preoperative evaluation of elderly patients is
to stratify and minimize risk. The preoperative evaluation should include some
key elements that are more relevant to patients in this age group in order to achieve
this goal. The patient’s functional capacity is one of the most important aspects
of the elderly patient’s preoperative assessment. This includes an evaluation of
the patient’s physical fitness, as well as their ability to perform their activities of
daily living. In addition, a brief assessment of cognition can be used to identify
if a patient is at increased risk for developing postoperative cognitive problems
such as delirium. A careful inventory of all medications, including over-the-
counter drugs, should be documented. For patients on multiple medications it can be
helpful to have the patient bring the vials to the hospital on the day of surgery or
admission. Polypharmacy is common in the older population and can lead to
negative drug interactions perioperatively. Drug and alcohol dependence must also
be considered in the elderly patient scheduled for surgery. Finally, the
preoperative visit provides an opportunity to begin a discussion on advanced
health care directives. (573)
26. Activities of daily living describe common behaviors that allow an assessment of an
elderly person’s function within their living situations. The basic five ADLs are
bathing, dressing, toileting, transferring, and eating. Instrumental activities of daily
living (IADLS) describe more advanced activities that would be expected in persons
living independently. These include the ability to use the telephone and public
transport, do shopping, prepare a meal, do basic housekeeping and budgeting, and
the ability to manage one’s own medications. (573, Table 35-3)
27. Routine preoperative testing based on age cutoffs leads to unnecessary testing
and the risk of false positive and unchecked results. Although it has been popular in
the past to use an age cutoff for preoperative ECGs, this approach is not
recommended. The preoperative ECG should be ordered when the patient’s history
or symptoms suggest significant cardiac disease. Since cardiovascular disease is
common in older patients, ECGs will still probably remain one of the most
commonly ordered preoperative tests. Elderly patients frequently have abnormal
Elderly Patients
413
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
baseline ECGs and part of the preoperative evaluation will need to include
comparisons to prior ECGs to establish if the observed changes are new
findings. (573)
28. Chronically institutionalized patients can present a unique challenge with
regard to their preoperative assessment. These patients frequently have complex
medical and medication histories, and in addition may have limited ability to
communicate. It may not be practical to request a separate visit to a
preoperative clinic for these patients. In these cases a thorough review of the
medical record may be performed before the surgery. In all cases, it is important
to establish who will be providing consent for the surgery and anesthesia prior
to the surgery date. (573)
29. Although most antihypertensive medications are recommended to be taken on the
morning of surgery, persistent and difficult to treat postinduction hypotension has
been observed in patients treated with ACE inhibitors. For that reason it is
recommended that ACE inhibitors be withheld the morning of surgery or for
10 to 12 hours preoperatively. Other antihypertensive medications should generally
be continued on the day of surgery. (573)
30. Diuretic medications, in combination with decreases in organ function, may result
in electrolyte abnormalities in elderly patients. Common abnormalities include
hypokalemia, mild hyponatremia, and contraction alkalosis. These abnormalities
can be detected in preoperative laboratory tests. (573)
31. Pharmacodynamic changes in the elderly lead to an increase in sensitivity to certain
medications and necessitate a decrease in recommended doses in these patients. The
plasma concentration of inhaled anesthetics, opioids, and the benzodiazepine
midazolam that is required to produce a specific effect in an elderly person is
decreased compared to younger counterparts. For example, the dose of fentanyl and
alfentanil required to achieve a given effect in an elderly patient may be decreased
by as much as 50% compared to a young adult. The increased sensitivity to
anesthetics seen in elderly patients parallels the decrease in cerebral cortex
tissue mass and cerebral metabolic rate. This is subsequently reflected as a decrease
in the MAC of anesthesia in elderly patients. (574-575, Table 35-5)
32. The plasma concentration of nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking drugs
required to produce a specific twitch response effect is similar in both elderly
and younger people. This implies that the sensitivity of elderly patients
to nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking drugs does not change with age. (575)
33. Pharmacokinetics, the absorption, distribution, metabolism, clearance, and
excretion of a drug, accounts for the concentration of a drug at the end-organ site or
receptor level. Pharmacokinetic changes in the elderly include decreases in drug
clearance and changes in the volume of distribution, making the elderly more
susceptible to cumulative drug effects and adverse drug reactions. The plasma
concentrations of thiopental, propofol, and etomidate required to produce a
specific response are similar in both elderly people and younger people. However,
age-related pharmacokinetic changes, especially with respect to distribution,
may necessitate a reduction in the initial dose of these medications. (574)
34. A decreased clearance of drugs in the elderly can be attributed to decreases in
renal blood flow, decreases in the glomerular filtration rate, decreases in
hepatic blood flow, and decreases in hepatic microsomal enzyme activity. Decreases
in renal blood flow and decreases in the glomerular filtration rate together may
result in the prolongation of the effects of pancuronium, digoxin, and several
antibiotics in elderly patients. Likewise, decreases in hepatic blood flow and
decreases in hepatic microsomal enzyme activity together may result in the
prolongation of the effects of vecuronium, lidocaine, propofol, and propranolol
in elderly patients. (574)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
414
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
35. The volume of distribution can be divided into the central volume of
distribution and the peripheral volume of distribution. The central volume of
distribution refers to the volume of the heart and great vessels, and the venous
volume. A decreased central volume of distribution in the elderly produces an
increased initial concentration of drug in the plasma after a bolus injection. The
decrease in the central volume of distribution has been thought to be due to
decreases in total body water in elderly patients. More recently, this theory has come
under scrutiny. Nevertheless, higher initial plasma concentrations of drug after the
initial bolus of conventional doses of the drug are seen in elderly patients.
Drugs that are affected in this manner include thiopental, propofol, and
etomidate when administered for the induction of anesthesia, as well as the initial
bolus of opioids. In fact, it has been estimated that elderly patients require
about 15% less of a drug dose of thiopental or propofol as a bolus for the induction
of anesthesia. The peripheral volume of distribution includes additional volumes
of distribution attached to the central volume. The peripheral volume of
distribution in elderly patients is increased due to a relative increase in body fat and
a decrease in the amount of drug bound by protein. The increased peripheral
volume of distribution may also be reflected as a delay in the rate of elimination of
lipid-soluble drugs that are stored in fat, such as opioids and the volatile
anesthetics. (574)
CHOICE OF
ANESTHESIA
36. Regional anesthesia may be advantageous over general anesthesia for hip surgery in
elderly patients. Regional anesthesia may be associated with decreases in
perioperative blood loss and decreases in the incidence of deep venous thrombosis.
There is no evidence, however, that one method of anesthesia is safer than the other.
(576)
37. In an awake, elderly patient being evaluated for orthostatic hypotension, the lack of
an increase in heart rate upon assuming the upright position in the presence
of hypotension may reflect autonomic dysfunction. Other signs of autonomic
dysfunction include a lack of beat-to-beat heart rate variability or an absence of
sinus arrhythmia with respiration. Autonomic dysfunction may occur secondary to
aging and vascular stiffening, coexisting diseases such as diabetes or renal failure,
or drug effects. (571)
38. The elderly patient who experiences changes in mental status with extension and
rotation of the head may have vertebrobasilar insufficiency or cervical
osteoarthritis. In the case of vertebrobasilar insufficiency, cerebral ischemia may
result. It is therefore useful to evaluate the elderly patient for symptoms with
extension and rotation of the head should this position be necessary for the surgical
procedure. (574)
39. Preoperative anxiolytics should be used sparingly in the elderly population
because they can cause undesirable levels of sedation and confusion in these
patients. In addition, the residual effects of these medicines may persist even
after the surgical case has been completed. In lieu of the preoperative anxiolytic
medicines, a detailed explanation of the events that will occur before and after
the surgical procedure may be a useful anxiolytic substitute. (575)
40. Hand ventilation by bag and mask may be difficult in the edentulous patient
secondary to a poor mask-to-face fit. It is often easier to hand ventilate by bag and
mask when the edentulous patient’s dentures are left in place or an oral airway
is used. (574)
41. Endotracheal intubation may be difficult in a patient with poor dentition or cervical
arthritis. Difficulty in patients with poor dentition arises because of the need to
avoid loose teeth during direct laryngoscopy to avoid dislodgment of the teeth.
Patients with cervical arthritis may be difficult to endotracheally intubate because
of the decreased range of motion, especially extension, of the neck. (574)
Elderly Patients
415
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
42. The induction dose of an anesthetic should be reduced for an older patient compared
to a younger patient. The reduction appears to be mostly due to pharmacokinetic
changes. Aging leads to a reduction in the central volume of distribution and
clearance of an induction agent such as propofol. The net result is that the drug
administered for induction exerts its pharmacologic effects in the circulation for a
longer amount of time and the receptors are exposed to a larger initial
concentration. The induction dose of anesthetic in the elderly patient is not
decreased for pharmacodynamic reasons, because the plasma concentration of
induction drug required to produce a desired effect is equal in elderly and younger
patients. (574-575)
43. The reversal of nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking drugs in the elderly patient
does not warrant any special considerations for the anesthesiologist, because there
are not any unique risks of this in the elderly patient population. The incidence of
cardiacdysrhythmiasaftertheadministrationofglycopyrrolateorneostigminemaybe
increased in elderly patients who have cardiovascular disease. (575)
44. Several postoperative complications are more common in older patients compared
to younger patients. These include cardiovascular events such as myocardial
infarction and congestive heart failure, especially from diastolic dysfunction. This is
most likely related to the frequency of cardiovascular disease in the elderly
population and underlying age-related changes. Central nervous system
complications are the next most commonly encountered postoperative
complication in the elderly patient. Although cerebral vascular accidents are
more common in older patients than in younger patients, they are still uncommon
and usually occur in a patient with preexisting cardiac or vascular disease. More
common central nervous system events are postoperative delirium and
postoperative cognitive dysfunction. These are especially common in older patients
with preexisting dementia, depression, and cognitive impairment, for example
patients who have had a cerebral vascular accident in the past. Pulmonary
complications include postoperative hypoxia and pneumonia. It is possible that
early ambulation may minimize some of the pulmonary risks. (576-577)
45. Regional anesthesia is an alternative to general anesthesia for elderly patients
undergoing surgical procedures such as transurethral resection of the prostate,
gynecologic procedures, inguinal hernia repair, or the treatment of hip fractures.
Regional techniques such as peripheral nerve blocks are becoming increasingly
popular and may be a valuable adjuvant to general anesthesia in elderly patients.
They may reduce the amount of anesthesia needed and improve postoperative pain
control. (576)
46. An advantage to maintaining consciousness in the elderly patient during a regional
anesthetic for a surgical procedure is that the anesthesiologist is able to
communicate with the patient during the procedure. Changes in mental status can
herald the onset of a developing adverse event. For example, confusion during a
transurethral resection of the prostate may be an early warning sign of the
development of hyponatremia or fluid overload. Similarly, a patient may complain
of chest pain or shortness of breath signaling the presence of myocardial ischemia.
Additionally, there may be decreased immediate postoperative confusion in
elderly patients after having received a regional anesthetic as compared with
a general anesthetic. (576)
47. Elderly patients may be more sensitive than younger patients to regional anesthesia,
especially spinal anesthesia. Possible reasons why this may be true include
decreased vascular absorption from the spinal space, decreases in vertebral column
length, and a decreased reflex compensatory sympathetic nervous system response.
Together, these may manifest as a prolonged duration of action, increased
anesthesia level, and exaggerated decreases in blood pressure following a spinal
anesthetic. (576)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
416
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
48. Attenuation of the hypotensive effects of a regional anesthetic may be achieved by
the prophylactic administration of an intramuscular dose of ephedrine before
administering the spinal anesthetic. Adequate hydration minimizes the effects of a
sympathectomy on blood pressure, but does not consistently eliminate the
hypotensive effects of spinal anesthesia in elderly patients. (576)
49. Epidural anesthesia is advantageous over spinal anesthesia in that it may be
administered more slowly than a spinal anesthetic, with the onset of the resulting
sympathectomy being more gradual. This may result in a more gradual decrease in
the elderly patient’s blood pressure than that seen with a spinal anesthetic. (576)
POSTOPERATIVE
CARE
50. Untreated postoperative pain in elderly patients is associated with serious
consequences in elderly patients. These include increased length of hospital
stay, morbidity, pulmonary complications, and delirium. (576)
51. Acetaminophen can be used to reduce opioid requirements in elderly patients.
NSAIDs can also lead to lower narcotic requirements, but the dose must be adjusted
to reduce the risk of renal insufficiency or gastrointestinal side effects such as
bleeding. Gabapentin is another medication that can be used in the perioperative
period to reduce opioid use. It is renally excreted and the dose should be reduced
in older patients. (576)
52. Postoperative epidural analgesia in elderly patients has been associated with
improved pulmonary function, reduced atelectasis, easier extubation of the trachea,
and shorter ICU stays in patients that have had thoracic and upper abdominal
surgeries. (576)
53. The metabolism and excretion of local anesthetic drugs is reduced in the elderly.
When administering a regional anesthetic in elderly patients, the overall dose
should be reduced. (576)
54. The most commonly encountered neurologic events in elderly patients are
delirium and postoperative cognitive dysfunction. Postoperative delirium has
been estimated to occur in at least 10% to 15% of elderly patients undergoing
surgical procedures. It may occur in as many as 40% to 60% of patients
undergoing acute repair of a hip fracture. (576-577)
55. Postoperative delirium is most likely to present one or more days after surgery in
elderly patients. This type of delirium is termed interval delirium. This is in contrast
to emergence delirium commonly seen in pediatric patients that occurs within
minutes after the emergence from anesthesia. (576-577)
56. Clinical manifestations of postoperative delirium in elderly patients may include
alterations in attention, cognition, and sleep-wake cycles; a reduced level of
consciousness; and increases or decreases in psychomotor behavior. These
patients are often disoriented to time, place, and person. Close monitoring of
these patients is essential to prevent patients from harming themselves by
attempting to get out of bed or by pulling out catheters. (577)
57. Causes of postoperative delirium in the elderly patient include drug toxicity, fluid
and electrolyte imbalances, and underlying medical problems, such as myocardial
ischemia, congestive heart failure, infection, pain, or depression. Antiparkinsonian
drugs, antihypertensives, and anticholinergic and psychotropic medications tend to
increase the risk of drug interactions with anesthetics and postoperative analgesics
to produce postoperative delirium. A deficiency of neurotransmitters such as
acetylcholine and dopamine is hypothesized to be the underlying physiologic
cause of postoperative delirium. (577)
58. Delirium in elderly patients has been associated with increased mortality, length
of hospital stay, and loss of independence evidenced by an increased risk of transfer
Elderly Patients
417
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
to an assisted living and nursing home. Delirium can persist for weeks or even
months in elderly hospitalized patients. (576)
59. Postoperative cognitive decline is a subtle alteration in cognitive function and
mental ability. Unlike delirium, postoperative cognitive dysfunction is not
associated with acute confusion or agitation. Neuropsychological testing is
required for its diagnosis. (577)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
418
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
Chapter
33 ORGAN
TRANSPLANTATION
Randolph H. Steadman, Victor W. Xia
1. What are the most commonly transplanted organs?
2. How does donation after brain death differ from donation after cardiac death?
3. What conditions preclude transplantation?
4. What is the most common cause of death in organ transplant recipients?
5. Most transplant candidates are screened for comorbidities prior to being waitlisted.
What additional beneficial preoperative measures can be undertaken once a donor
is identified?
KIDNEY
TRANSPLANTATION
6. Who is a candidate for renal transplantation?
7. What is the major cause of death in dialysis patients?
8. What differs between an extended criteria donor kidney and a standard criteria
donor graft?
9. Where is the donor kidney transplanted in the recipient patient? From where does it
derive its vascular supply? Where is the ureter anastomosed?
10. What are the preoperative considerations for the patient scheduled to undergo renal
transplantation?
11. How is preoperative ischemic heart disease ruled out prior to transplant listing?
12. What is the usual general anesthetic regimen administered for renal
transplantation?
13. What consideration must be made when selecting a neuromuscular blocking drug
for patients undergoing renal transplantation?
14. Why is optimal hydration important during renal transplantation? What type
of crystalloid solution should be used for hydration? What monitoring
method may be used to help guide hydration intraoperatively for renal
transplantation?
15. Is dopamine of benefit during renal transplant procedures?
16. Why is mannitol administered intraoperatively during renal transplant
procedures?
17. Cardiac arrest after completion of the renal artery anastomosis is thought to be
secondary to what?
LIVER
TRANSPLANTATION
18. Who is a candidate for liver transplantation?
19. How are liver transplant recipients prioritized for organ allocation?
20. What is the 1-month mortality for a waitlisted candidate with a high model for
end-stage liver disease (MELD) score (score >30)?
419
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
21. What physiologic disturbances are often present in patients before liver
transplantation?
22. What is the best screening test for portopulmonary hypertension?
23. What is hepatopulmonary syndrome? Why is it significant?
24. What types of monitoring may be used intraoperatively during liver
transplantation?
25. What types of intravenous access are typically established preoperatively
for liver transplant procedures? Why should placement be
supradiaphragmatic?
26. Why are cell-saver devices used intraoperatively for liver transplantation?
27. Why is calcium administration often required during liver transplantation?
28. What are the three stages of liver transplant procedures?
29. What are the characteristic physiologic derangements of the preanhepatic stage of
liver transplant procedures?
30. What are the characteristic physiologic derangements of the anhepatic stage of
liver transplant procedures?
31. What is the “piggy-back” technique and why is it used in some patients?
32. What are the characteristic physiologic derangements that occur with reperfusion
of the donor graft during liver transplant procedures?
33. Which coagulopathies can occur during liver transplantation?
34. Why is nitrous oxide avoided for maintenance anesthesia during liver
transplantation?
35. Why do some anesthesiologists prefer cisatracurium as the nondepolarizing
neuromuscular blocking drug for liver transplantation?
36. What signs of donor graft function can be assessed intraoperatively after graft
reperfusion?
37. When is extubation of the trachea after liver transplant surgery performed?
HEART
TRANSPLANTATION
38. Who is a candidate for heart transplantation? What ejection fraction is commonly
seen in patients undergoing heart transplantation?
39. What are the goals for the induction and maintenance of anesthesia for heart
transplant patients?
40. What vessels are transected and anastomosed during heart transplant
surgery? What does this mean with regard to a central venous or pulmonary
artery catheter?
41. What is the indication for isoproterenol during heart transplantation?
42. Does the transplanted heart react better to catecholamines that are direct or
indirect acting?
43. Name the physiologic conditions that should be optimized prior to weaning from
cardiopulmonary bypass.
44. Name three conditions that may worsen pulmonary hypertension.
LUNG
TRANSPLANTATION
45. What type of endotracheal tube is used in lung transplant procedures?
46. What are some intraoperative problems the anesthesiologist may encounter during
lung transplant procedures?
47. Why are lung transplant patients predisposed to developing pneumonia in the
transplanted lung?
PANCREAS
TRANSPLANTATION
48. Who is a candidate for pancreas transplantation?
49. What other organ is often transplanted simultaneously along with the
pancreas?
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
420
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
ANSWERS*
1. Organs that may be transplanted in humans include the heart, kidneys, liver, lungs,
pancreas, and intestines. The bone marrow may also be transplanted for certain
forms of cancer. (580)
2. The diagnosis of brain death is based on the loss of cerebral cortical and brainstem
function. The loss of cerebral cortical function is implied from unconsciousness,
the lack of spontaneous movement, and unresponsiveness to external stimuli.
The loss of brainstem function is implied from apnea and absent cranial nerve
reflexes. Clinical studies that may be performed to provide supporting evidence
include an electroencephalogram or cerebral blood flow studies. Irreversibility of
the diagnosis of brain death should also be established. This is usually achieved by
the lack of any improvement in 12 to 24 hours after the diagnosis. Other
derangements that must be excluded include central drug effects, postictal states,
cardiovascular or metabolic instability, or hypothermia. The diagnosis of brain
death is always made before a donor procedure and never in the operating room.
However, in the absence of brain death, but in the presence of a devastating and
irreversible brain injury, the patient’s family may elect to withdraw life support.
In the event the family consents to organ donation, withdrawal of support is
typically done in the operating room. If the patient succumbs as a result of the
withdrawal of life support—experiences cardiac death—organs may be
harvested. Under these conditions, the organs undergo a period of ischemia at
normal body temperature (termed “warm ischemia”), a condition which
necessitates rapid cooling, preservative administration, and procurement to
minimize ischemic injury. (580)
3. Untreated systemic infection, incurable malignancy, untreated substance abuse, and
lack of sufficient social support to comply with post-transplant care are
contraindications to transplantation. (580)
4. The most common cause of death in transplant recipients is infections due to chronic
immunosuppression. All physicians, including anesthesiologists, caring for the
transplant patient should adhere to strict aseptic technique. (587)
5. Because of the long wait times between listing and transplantation (not
infrequently a year or more), preoperative screening tests may need to be repeated
particularly when prior results are equivocal. Most important are tests for
ischemic heart disease (postoperative cardiovascular mortality is second in
frequency to infection), assessment of laboratory results such as electrolytes and
hemoglobin, and, if needed, preoperative dialysis. (580)
KIDNEY
TRANSPLANTATION
6. Kidneys are the most commonly transplanted major organ. Patients who have
end-stage renal disease and are being considered for (or are currently receiving)
dialysis are candidates for renal transplantation. Transplantation has led to
lower overall morbidity and mortality than dialysis and to improved survival.
The most common cause of end-stage renal disease leading to chronic dialysis
dependence is diabetes mellitus, followed by hypertension. (581)
7. Cardiovascular disease is responsible for over 50% of deaths in patients receiving
dialysis. (581)
8. Extended criteria donors are older donors, donors with diabetes, and grafts with
prolonged preservation times (acceptable times vary by organ; for the kidney >24 to
*Numbers in parentheses: numbers refer to pages, figures, or tables in Miller RD, Pardo MC: Basics of Anesthesia,
6th ed. Philadelphia, Elsevier Saunders, 2011.
Organ Transplantation
421
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
36 hours of cold ischemia is considered prolonged, for the liver >8 to 12 hours).
Organs donated after cardiac death incur additional warm ischemia and
are considered as a subcategory of extended criteria grafts. (581)
9. The kidney is transplanted on one side of the recipient’s iliac fossa. The
vascular supply for the transplanted kidney is derived from the iliac vessels.
The ureter of the transplanted kidney is anastomosed directly to the recipient’s
bladder. (581)
10. Preoperative considerations for the patient scheduled to undergo a renal transplant
are similar to any other surgical procedure in which the patient has chronic
renal failure. This includes scheduling of hemodialysis prior to surgery to optimize
the patient’s volume status, electrolytes (particularly potassium), and acid-base
balance. The serum glucose levels of the patient with diabetes mellitus
should also be evaluated before and during surgery. (581)
11. Preoperative ischemic heart disease should be ruled out preoperatively. Stress
echocardiography is probably better than thallium imaging in predicting
postoperative cardiac events. Coronary angiography should be considered in
high-risk patients. (581)
12. The usual general anesthetic regimen for renal transplant procedures is
balanced anesthesia: a combination of volatile anesthetic and short-acting
opioid. Nitrous oxide is avoided because it causes bowel distention. (582)
13. When selecting a neuromuscular blocking (NMB) drug, consideration should
be given to the method of clearance. A NMB that does not rely primarily on renal
clearance should be selected. Cisatracurium is particularly attractive because
its metabolism is independent of both the kidney and liver. (582)
14. Optimal hydration is important to improve the early function of the transplanted
kidney. The crystalloid solution used for hydration intraoperatively should not
contain potassium (e.g., normal saline). Monitoring the patient’s central venous
pressure may be a useful guide to the patient’s state of hydration. (582)
15. Dopamine is often administered intraoperatively during renal transplant in an
effort to increase renal blood flow and kidney perfusion. However, no studies
support this practice. Other methods of ensuring adequate renal perfusion
are the maintenance of systemic blood pressure near normal and the provision
of adequate hydration. (582)
16. Mannitol is often administered intraoperatively during renal transplant procedures
to facilitate an osmotic diuresis. However, controlled studies supporting an
improved outcome are lacking. (582)
17. Reperfusion of the newly transplanted graft can lead to hyperkalemia; however,
this life-threatening complication is less frequently seen during kidney
transplantation than with liver graft reperfusion. A potassium-containing
solution is used to preserve the kidney before transplantation. The washout of this
solution and accumulated acid metabolites is believed to be the cause of the
hyperkalemia. (584)
LIVER
TRANSPLANTATION
18. Patients with acute hepatic failure, chronic end-stage liver disease, tumors (in the
absence of extrahepatic spread), and metabolic abnormalities affecting their
liver are candidates for liver transplantation. (582)
19. Patient acuity, as determined by the MELD score, is used to allocate organs.
The MELD score predicts 90-day mortality in the absence of transplantation. (582)
20. A patient with a MELD score greater than 30 has a 30% probability of dying or
becoming too ill for transplant within a 30-day period. (582)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
422
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
21. Physiologic disturbances in patients with end-stage liver disease affect virtually
every organ system. The patient may have encephalopathy, ranging from mild
confusion to coma; hyperdynamic circulation due to decreased systemic vascular
resistance and an increased cardiac output; decreased plasma volume; and
ascites. Arterial hypoxemia may be due to pulmonary effusions, atelectasis, or
hepatopulmonary syndrome. Renal dysfunction and oliguria may be present.
Patients may have anemia, thrombocytopenia, and coagulopathy. Electrolyte
abnormalities that may be present include hypokalemia, hypocalcemia, and
hyponatremia. Finally, these patients may have glucose intolerance or frank
diabetes. As the age of patients undergoing liver transplantation increases, the
proportion with coronary artery disease has increased. (583)
22. Portopulmonary hypertension is defined as pulmonary hypertension (mean
pulmonary artery pressure >25 mm Hg) in the presence of portal hypertension.
Resting echocardiography is a useful screening test because it identifies nearly
all patients with the condition. In patients with an estimated right ventricular
systolic pressure greater than 50 mm Hg on echo, right heart catheterization
is used to confirm or rule out the diagnosis. There is significant
perioperative mortality associated with mean preoperative PA pressure greater than
35 mm Hg. (583)
23. Hepatopulmonary syndrome (HPS) consists of arterial hypoxemia (PaO2 <70 mm
Hg on room air) in the presence of an intrapulmonary shunt. Liver transplantation
cures HPS, albeit over a variable time course. There is, however, an increased risk of
perioperative mortality in patients with significant HPS (PaO2 <50 mm Hg on room
air). (583)
24. Monitors that facilitate the anesthetic management of patients undergoing liver
transplant procedures include invasive arterial blood pressure monitoring and
monitoring of cardiac filling pressures using a pulmonary artery catheter. These
monitors are useful because major shifts in the intravascular volume and
hemodynamic instability almost always occur. Arterial blood pressure is best
monitored from an artery above the level of the diaphragm because the aorta may be
cross-clamped during the portion of the procedure in which anastomosis of the
hepatic artery takes place. Transesophageal echocardiograms are useful to monitor
the volume status and cardiac function, and to detect emboli. A Foley catheter is
used to measure urine output. (583)
25. Peripheral intravenous access should be established preoperatively using several
large-bore catheters to allow for the ability to transfuse blood products rapidly.
Intravenous catheters should be placed above the level of the diaphragm because
the inferior vena cava is typically cross-clamped during the procedure. (584)
26. Cell-saver devices are often used intraoperatively during liver transplant
procedures because of the massive amounts of blood loss and massive fluid
requirements during the procedure. (584)
27. Calcium administration is often required during liver transplantation because of
the frequency of citrate toxicity, caused when the citrate in banked blood
binds with ionized calcium, which can cause myocardial depression. This condition
is more frequent during liver transplantation, particularly the anhepatic stage,
as the liver is unavailable to metabolize citrate. (584)
28. The preanhepatic, anhepatic, and neohepatic stage comprise the stages of the
surgical procedure. The preanhepatic stage involves the dissection of the portal
venous structures and mobilization of the native liver. The anhepatic stage
begins when the native liver’s blood supply is interrupted by clamping of the
suprahepatic and infrahepatic inferior vena cava and the portal vein. The
neohepatic stage begins with the return of vascular supply to the graft, usually
via the inferior vena cava and portal vein. (584)
Organ Transplantation
423
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
29. The preanhepatic stage of liver transplant procedures is characterized by
cardiovascular instability due to sudden decreases in the intraabdominal pressure,
and the exacerbation of chronic hypovolemia due to loss of ascites and hemorrhage.
Metabolic and electrolyte abnormalities can occur during this stage, including
metabolic acidosis and hypocalcemia. Hemorrhage, often requiring the rapid
infusion of fluids and blood products, is related to the degree of portal hypertension
and adhesions from prior abdominal surgery. (584)
30. The anhepatic stage of liver transplant procedures is characterized by precipitous
decreases in venous return and cardiac output. For this reason, cardiac inotropic
drugs and sympathomimetic drugs are often administered during this portion of
the liver transplant procedure to maintain cardiac output. Hypocalcemia and
metabolic acidosis commonly occur during this stage. (584)
31. The piggy-back technique involves the anastomosis of the donor hepatic veins
to the recipient vena cava, followed by portal anastomosis. The piggy-back
technique is preferred by some centers because it avoids transection of the inferior
vena cava, which may preserve venous return. An alternative to the piggy-back
technique is the use of venovenous bypass, which involves rerouting blood from
the inferior vena cava to the superior vena cava, which can augment venous
return. It is not universally used as it prolongs surgery and has unique
complications, including air embolism.
32. The neohepatic stage of liver transplant procedures is characterized by the potential
for precipitous hyperkalemia, acidosis, and hypothermia due to the cold ischemic
effluent from the graft entering the central circulation. The systemic vascular
resistance drops, and emboli of blood or air can occur. Hyperkalemia is exacerbated
by the washout of the potassium-containing solution used to preserve the liver, in
addition to unclamping of the inferior vena cava and portal vein. Hypotension,
arrhythmias, and cardiac arrest may potentially occur during this time. (584,
Table 36-5)
33. Coagulopathies that can occur during a liver transplant procedure include
thrombocytopenia, decreased levels of multiple coagulation factors (due to
decreased synthesis and dilution), and fibrinolysis. (584)
34. Nitrous oxide is often avoided for maintenance anesthesia during liver
transplantation because it may cause bowel distention. Additionally, nitrous oxide
may increase the size of embolized air, and it may increase pulmonary vascular
resistance in a population prone to pulmonary hypertension. (583)
35. Cisatracurium is often selected as the nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking
drug, because its elimination is by spontaneous Hofmann elimination and ester
hydrolysis, which are independent of liver function. (583)
36. Signs of graft function include improvement in metabolic acidosis (due to
metabolism of citrate to bicarbonate), a reduced calcium requirement (again,
due to the liver’s ability to metabolize citrate), and a rising body temperature
(due to exothermic reactions in the liver). Hepatorenal syndrome may occur, as
noted, by increasing urine output.
37. The trachea generally remains intubated at the conclusion of the transplant
until the patient is hemodynamically stable, bleeding is controlled, and the graft
appears to be functioning well. (584)
HEART
TRANSPLANTATION
38. Patients with end-stage heart disease are candidates for heart transplantation.
Patients with pulmonary hypertension and end-stage heart disease are candidates
for heart-lung transplant procedures. Patients undergoing a heart transplant
procedure usually have heart disease secondary to coronary artery disease or
a cardiomyopathy. The ejection fraction generally seen in these patients is
less than 20%. (585)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
424
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
39. The induction of anesthesia for cardiac transplantation may include a
benzodiazepine and an opioid. The maintenance of anesthesia may be opioid
based as well. The goal of the anesthetic induction and maintenance is to provide
good endotracheal intubating conditions while preserving cardiac function. The
potential risk of volatile anesthetics during a heart transplant procedure is
myocardial depression, vasodilation, or both. (585)
40. Vessels that are transected and anastomosed during heart transplant procedures
include the aorta, pulmonary artery, and left and right atria. These are done
during cardiopulmonary bypass. A central venous or pulmonary artery catheter
that is in place at the onset of surgery must be pulled back into the internal
jugular vein when the patient’s heart is excised. (585)
41. Isoproterenol is indicated for the maintenance of myocardial contractility and
heart rate in the denervated donor heart during and after weaning from
cardiopulmonary bypass. Isoproterenol also decreases pulmonary vasculature
resistance. (585)
42. The transplanted heart reacts better to direct-acting catecholamines. Indirect acting
drugs including atropine, which work via the autonomic nervous system, are
ineffective due to denervation of the graft. (585)
43. Prior to weaning from cardiopulmonary bypass, patients should be normothermic,
and free from acid-base and electrolyte disturbances. The lungs are ventilated and
the cardiac chambers free from air.
44. Pulmonary hypertension is exacerbated by hypoxemia, hypercarbia, and elevated
cardiac output, pulmonary vessel spasm, and emboli. (585)
LUNG
TRANSPLANTATION
45. Double-lumen endotracheal tubes are used for intubation of the trachea for
lung transplant surgery. This allows isolated ventilation of either the left or
right lung, so that one lung may be ventilated while the other is being
transplanted. (586)
46. Intraoperative problems during lung transplant procedures may include arterial
hypoxemia and pulmonary hypertension. Arterial hypoxemia may occur
during one-lung ventilation. Pulmonary hypertension may occur secondary to
pulmonary artery clamping, particularly in patients with preexisting elevation
of pulmonary pressure. (586)
47. Lung transplant patients are predisposed to pneumonia due to disruption of
lymphatic drainage, poor mucociliary function, obstruction of bronchi from clots in
the bronchial suture lines, and loss of the cough reflex. Immunosuppression
exacerbates the risk of infection. (586)
PANCREAS
TRANSPLANTATION
48. Patients with diabetes mellitus are candidates for pancreas transplantation. (586)
49. Most (65%) pancreas transplants are performed simultaneously with kidney
transplants because of the advanced nature of the diabetes, which is associated
with renal failure. Simultaneous pancreas-kidney transplant recipients
experience the best graft survival rates. The success of a pancreas transplant is
measured by monitoring blood glucose levels after surgery; blood glucose
concentrations may return to normal within hours. (587)
Organ Transplantation
425
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
Chapter
34 OUTPATIENT ANESTHESIA
Douglas G. Merrill
HISTORY OF
OUTPATIENT
SURGERY AND KEYS
TO SUCCESS
1. Who created the first outpatient surgery center? When, where, and why?
2. What are the four most important areas to focus on to ensure success in outpatient
anesthesia and surgery?
3. What are the primary determinants of predictability of duration and quality of
surgical procedures in the ambulatory surgery center?
4. In comparison to hospital practice, is patient safety training usually less of a
concern in an outpatient surgery setting, since patients are healthier and procedures
are less invasive?
5. Is there value in monitoring of outcomes and the use of that data to support standard
care practice (algorithms) and have these techniques been useful in creating higher
quality care and improved patient safety?
PREOPERATIVE
CONSIDERATIONS
6. What factors should determine the choice of preoperative laboratory and other
testing prior to elective ambulatory surgery?
7. Is a patient who had a myocardial infarction within the past 3 months a candidate
for surgery in a freestanding surgery center?
TECHNIQUES OF
ANESTHESIA FOR
OUTPATIENT
SURGERY
8. Monitored anesthesia care (MAC) may provide just as much risk as general
anesthesia. What risk may be greater for MAC than general?
9. Use of regional anesthesia can result in what process improvements in the
outpatient surgery suite?
10. Does neuraxial anesthesia delay discharge of outpatients, particularly elderly
males?
11. Should neuraxial anesthesia be avoided because it has a high incidence of
postoperative urinary retention?
12. The use of general anesthesia, when compared to regional anesthesia or MAC,
increases the likelihood of which four negative outcomes in outpatient anesthesia
and surgery?
13. Avoidance of what three anesthetic techniques will increase patient satisfaction,
and decrease the likelihood of postoperative nausea and vomiting and postoperative
cognitive dysfunction?
426
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
TOPICS OF
IMPORTANCE IN
OUTPATIENT
ANESTHESIA
14. What preoperative Hb A1c level indicates that it is “safe” for outpatient surgery to
proceed?
15. What is the “rule of 1800” for dosing insulin and how is it useful on the day of
surgery?
16. Is the use of dexamethasone appropriate to decrease the risk of postoperative nausea
and vomiting in the patient with diabetes?
17. Is it true that treated hypertension is not a predictor of perioperative morbidity?
18. What are the considerations for deciding to provide anesthesia for a patient with a
known or suspected personal history of malignant hyperthermia in a freestanding
ambulatory surgical center?
19. Which risks are associated with obstructive sleep apnea (OSA)?
20. Of what value is preoperative evaluation and treatment of OSA?
21. What factors would lead to a patient with OSA being cared for in a hospital setting
rather than a freestanding ambulatory surgery center?
22. What is the most common cause of perioperative injury associated with remote-site
(e.g., office-based) surgery?
23. What factors increase the risk of perioperative trouble in the office setting?
24. What are the advantages of using multimodal analgesia in the outpatient surgery
setting?
25. What postoperative plan should cause the team to reconsider the outpatient venue
for a case?
26. How soon does tonsillectomy relieve moderate or severe obstructive sleep apnea in
pediatric patients and what implication does that have for when and where this
procedure should be performed in this patient population?
27. What postoperative complication do outpatient surgery patients rank the
prevention of as high as they do the prevention and treatment of pain?
28. Use of the Apfel score to predict postoperative nausea and vomiting has proven
valid only for which time period after surgery?
29. What regimen of prophylaxis can virtually eliminate both early and late
postoperative and postdischarge nausea and vomiting (PONV/PDNV) in even the
highest risk patients?
30. If PONV occurs after the use of ondansetron in the operating room, what should
be used to treat it?
31. When should the presence of an upper respiratory infection lead to cancellation
of an elective surgical procedure?
32. How should the availability of 23-hour stay facilities affect patient selection for
outpatient surgery?
33. Should all patients remain at least 2 hours on site in a free-standing surgery
center once in the recovery room (postanesthesia care unit [PACU])?
ANSWERS*
HISTORY OF
OUTPATIENT
SURGERY AND KEYS
TO SUCCESS
1. In 1917, after 100 years of hospital-based surgery made that venue the norm,
Dr. Ralph Waters opened the first modern ambulatory surgery center in
downtown Sioux City, Iowa. The name of his center (and the article he published
describing it) emphasized the value of its practice to both patients and
surgeons: “The Downtown Anesthesia Clinic.” His motivation was convenience
and cost savings for patients, their families, and surgeons. (589)
*Numbers in parentheses: numbers refer to pages, figures, or tables in Miller RD, Pardo MC: Basics of Anesthesia,
6th ed. Philadelphia, Elsevier Saunders, 2011.
Outpatient Anesthesia
427
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
2. The four most important areas to focus on to ensure success in outpatient anesthesia
and surgery are:
a. Selection criteria for cases and patients that create a predictable environment
b. Attention to safety that exceeds that applied in the hospital setting, in which
there are many more redundant support systems
c. Careful monitoring of patient outcomes and the literature to discover the “best
practices” to consistently leave postoperative patients clear-headed and as free of
nausea and pain as possible
d. Codification of those best practices into “standard work,” which consists of
algorithms that direct care so as to increase the predictability of successful
outcomes. (589)
3. The careful selection of patients and procedures, as well as the team that works in an
operating suite is a primary determinant of the predictability of procedures in the
outpatient surgery setting. (589)
4. Since there are fewer redundant systems in an outpatient center than in a hospital,
it is more important that practitioners in the outpatient center are more highly
trained and practiced in a wider variety of skill sets than would be true in the
hospital. (589-590)
5. Evidence exists that the decrease in variation in care based on outcome
measurement has provided improved quality of health care. (590)
PREOPERATIVE
CONSIDERATIONS
6. Laboratory and other testing should be used only if there is an aspect of a
particular patient’s medical history that indicates such a need. For instance, the only
patients who should have an ECG performed prior to outpatient surgery are those
who are older than 65 years or who have a history of congestive heart failure,
previous myocardial infarction, angina, high cholesterol, significant valvular
disease, or a family history of sudden death. (591)
7. A myocardial infarction sustained within the past 3 months may not preclude a
patient from having elective surgery in a freestanding surgery center, unless:
a. The patient continues to have ongoing pain or evidence of at-risk myocardium
b. The patient has unstable dysrhythmias
c. The patient had a drug-eluting coronary stent placed within the last year or a
bare-metal stent within the past month, or
d. The patient also has evidence of three or more of the following conditions:
a history of congestive heart failure, insulin-dependent diabetes, chronic
renal insufficiency (creatinine >2 mg/dL), a transient ischemic attack,
or cerebrovascular accident (stroke). (591)
TECHNIQUES OF
ANESTHESIA FOR
OUTPATIENT
SURGERY
8. MAC frequently involves the use of “blow by” oxygen and the close proximity
of electrocautery or laser used by the surgeon, which increases the likelihood
for fire. If a patient requires obtundation such that augmented inspiratory oxygen is
required, and if electrocautery or laser will be in proximity to the airway, then
the use of general anesthesia with a closed airway device (laryngeal mask
airway or endotracheal tube) may well be safer than MAC. (592)
9. Regional anesthesia can decrease overall anesthesia time and do so without
increasing turnover time duration. PACU time can also be decreased. (592)
10. Neuraxial anesthesia, particularly with the use of a low-dose or short-acting agent
(such as 2-chloroprocaine), does not delay discharge when compared to general
anesthesia. (592)
11. Postoperative urinary retention (POUR) is associated less with anesthesia technique
since both neuraxial and general anesthesia impact the autonomic system.
Assuming reasonable choices of drugs and doses are made with each, POUR is
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
428
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
associated more with the nature of the patient (age, preexisting benign prostatic
hyperplasia, neurologic disease) and procedure (duration, rectal, urinary, or
inguinal procedures). An algorithm for the management of POUR should be created
and include the use of ultrasound evaluation of the bladder volume. (612)
12. The use of general anesthesia for outpatient surgery increases the risk of
PONV/PDNV, postoperative cognitive dysfunction, and delayed discharge when
compared to MAC or regional anesthesia. (592)
13. PONV and postoperative cognitive dysfunction can be diminished by avoiding
(1) preoperative and intraoperative opioid in lieu of multimodal analgesia,
(2) general anesthesia instead of or in addition to regional anesthesia, and
(3) inhaled anesthetics in lieu of total intravenous anesthesia. (593)
TOPICS OF
IMPORTANCE IN
OUTPATIENT
ANESTHESIA
14. There is no evidence that a specific Hb A1c level indicates any guarantee of
safety, but a level of 7 or lower is an indication that a patient with diabetes has it in
good control. A higher level, combined with other indications of comorbidity,
should be a concern to the anesthesiologist consultant that risk is higher.
The highest value of the lab test is to provide guidance to the patient’s primary
physician to adjust medication doses to improve control, far enough in advance
to potentially improve the level of risk incurred by the patient in the
perioperative period. (593)
15. The rule of 1800 is a good approach to dosing insulin on the day of surgery.
In this paradigm, the number 1800 is divided by the patient’s normal daily
insulin dose (i.e., the total daily dose of all forms of insulin, including basal and
boluses, or long and shorter acting, taken in a typical 24-hour period). The result
determines the probable change in glucose level (mg/dL) that would be
anticipated by the use of a single unit of regular insulin. (593)
16. One must alert the patient to the likelihood of blood sugar elevations after any
surgical procedure, with or without the use of dexamethasone. It is unusual that
antiemetic doses of dexamethasone would elevate the blood glucose to a degree
notable apart from the elevation induced by the surgical procedure itself. (594)
17. Hypertension, treated or untreated, is an independent variable that correlates
positively with perioperative morbidity. (594)
18. Prior to deciding that a freestanding facility is the appropriate venue to provide
anesthesia for a patient with a known or suspected personal history of malignant
hyperthermia, the requirement should be that the center can replicate exactly the
standard of care for treatment of a malignant hyperthermia episode. This would
include more than 36 vials of dantrolene (more than 36 are needed in view of the
increased incidence of obesity), blood gas capability, and ready availability of
intensivists, respiratory therapists, and ventilators such that early stabilization and
transfer to the hospital will be of equivalent safety to the care that would be
provided in the hospital (595)
19. Patients with OSA are at increased risk for cerebrovascular events, myocardial
infarction, bleeding, and perioperative respiratory events (e.g., difficult intubation).
(595)
20. The value of preoperative evaluation and delineation of OSA severity is that patients
with OSA can be treated with continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) for a
few weeks and thereby decrease their risk. CPAP therapy can induce decreases in
blood pressure readings, tongue and hypopharyngeal muscle size, and result
in less bleeding in the postoperative period. (595)
21. Recognition of moderate or severe OSA combined with a need for general anesthesia
and a likely need for moderate doses of opioid should lead to a decision to
Outpatient Anesthesia
429
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
provide overnight or hospital care in view of the high risk for respiratory
impairment due to the unobserved use of opioids. (596)
22. Inadequate monitoring is the most frequent cause of injury associated with
anesthesia provided at off-site locations. (596)
23. Factors associated with increased risk of perioperative mishap in the office
setting include the use of unqualified providers for either surgery or anesthesia
and a lack of appropriate equipment and training for resuscitation and other
emergencies, as well as inadequate access (delayed transfer) to hospitals. (596)
24. The various therapies used for multimodal analgesia provide high patient
satisfaction and opportunities for fast-tracking. They decrease acute and chronic
postoperative pain and therefore the need for postoperative opioids. They also
decrease PONV, time to discharge, and reduce immune suppression and tumor
metastasis. (596)
25. Anticipation of a requirement for significant opioid doses for postoperative
analgesia is a good reason to redirect the case to the inpatient setting. (596)
26. Pediatric tonsillectomy performed for moderate or severe obstructive airway disease
actually results in increased obstruction, not relief, in the first 24 hours after
surgery. This is the reason that both ENT and anesthesiology professional society
guidelines recommend against performance of tonsillectomy in children 36 months
or younger as outpatients (597)
27. PONV is a postoperative complication that patients rank as high as they rank
postoperative pain. (597)
28. The Apfel score is predictive for the incidence of onsite PONV but not for
PDNV. (597)
29. A regimen of both IV dexamethasone 8 mg and ondansetron 4 mg intraoperatively,
followed by oral tablets of 8 mg ondansetron at discharge and on postoperative
days 1 and 2, can virtually eliminate early and late PONV/PDNV in even the
highest risk patients. (597)
30. If nausea or vomiting occurs in the PACU despite use of IV ondansetron
intraoperatively, it is more effective to use small doses (6.25 mg) of intravenous
promethazine rather than repeat the use of ondansetron. (597)
31. The presence of an upper respiratory infection should lead to cancellation of an
elective outpatient surgical case if the planned surgical procedure requires
endotracheal intubation, the patient has underlying cardiac or pulmonary
comorbidities, or the procedure will directly impact the airway. Irrespective of
comorbidities or the type of procedure to be done, the presence of systemic
symptoms (fever, malaise), wheezing, or dyspnea should also lead to
postponement. (598)
32. The presence of 23-hour overnight stay facilities onsite should potentially
increase the variety of surgical procedures that can be done, but not affect the
patient health criteria for admission to an outpatient surgery center. Whereas
such facilities can provide the option to manage surgical-related issues (e.g., drains,
IV PCAs) they do not change the safety equation regarding patients with unstable
cardiovascular conditions or obstructive sleep apnea, for example. (606)
33. Use of the postanesthetic discharge scoring system (PADSS) allows patients
to be discharged safely without a minimum time requirement in the recovery
room. (612)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
430
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
Chapter
35 PROCEDURES
PERFORMED OUTSIDE
THE OPERATING ROOM
Lawrence Litt
CHARACTERISTICS
OF REMOTE
LOCATIONS
1. What are some fundamental capabilities available in the operating room that must
also be available for the delivery of anesthesia in remote locations?
2. What are some special challenges facing the anesthesiologist when delivering
anesthesia and at the conclusion of anesthesia in remote locations?
3. What are some safety concerns facing the anesthesiologist delivering anesthesia in
remote locations?
RADIATION SAFETY
4. Why might patients require anesthesia for diagnostic and therapeutic radiologic
procedures?
5. How might the anesthesiologist limit his or her exposure to radiation during
diagnostic and therapeutic radiologic procedures?
ALLERGIC
REACTIONS
6. What are some side effects associated with intravenously administered contrast
agent? What prophylaxis may be administered to patients at risk of a serious
adverse reaction to intravenously administered contrast agent?
NONINVASIVE
X-RAY PROCEDURES
7. What is magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)? For what evaluations is it useful?
8. What are some contraindications to undergoing MRI?
9. What are some features of MRI that make it difficult for the patient to tolerate?
10. How should the patient be monitored when undergoing an anesthetic for MRI?
11. How must anesthetic equipment and monitors in the MRI center be altered for
MRI compatibility? What are the risks of using standard operating room monitors?
12. How must accidental extubation of the trachea during MRI be managed?
13. Why is there an increased risk of hypothermia for patients in the MR imager?
14. What is computed tomography?
15. How does the management of anesthesia for patients undergoing computed
tomography compare with the management of anesthesia for patients undergoing
MRI?
INVASIVE X-RAY
PROCEDURES
16. Why more so in interventional radiology procedures than in diagnostic radiology
procedures can there be a need for the anesthesiologist to suddenly change
to the management of blood coagulation parameters by giving medications or
taking new actions?
17. What drug should be immediately available for injection, and at what dose, in
invasive radiology procedures where there has been administration of a full
anticoagulation dose of heparin?
431
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
18. Patients taking antiplatelet drugs are often asked to stop taking those drugs several
days before a surgical procedure to allow the body to generate new platelets
unaffected by the drugs. However, interventional radiology procedures must
sometimes be done in such patients before the effects of antiplatelet drugs have
completely worn off. What action must the anesthesiologist take if serious bleeding
occurs before antiplatelet agents have worn off, and the international normalized
ratio, prothrombin time, partial prothrombin time, and fibrinogen are all normal?
RADIATION
THERAPY
19. Why might patients require anesthesia for radiation therapy?
20. Why must remote monitoring devices be used for patients undergoing radiation
therapy under anesthesia?
ELECTROCONVULSIVE
THERAPY
21. What patients are candidates for electroconvulsive therapy (ECT)? How is ECT
accomplished?
22. What are some cardiopulmonary effects of ECT? In what sequence might these
effects occur?
23. What are the most common causes of mortality after ECT?
24. How is cerebral blood flow affected by ECT?
25. How is intragastric pressure affected by ECT?
26. What are some contraindications and relative contraindications to ECT?
27. What are some post-ECT manifestations in the patient?
28. What is the recommendation for the ingestion of solids and liquids before the
performance of ECT?
29. Why is preoperative medication not recommended for the patient who is to
undergo ECT?
30. What agents might be used for the induction of anesthesia in a patient
undergoing ECT?
31. After unconsciousness results from the induction of anesthesia, why might
succinylcholine be administered to the patient? Before this is done, why might a
tourniquet be applied to an extremity of the patient?
32. How can the airway of the patient undergoing ECT be managed? What equipment
should be available to the anesthesiologist?
33. What monitors should be used during the administration of an anesthetic for ECT?
CARDIAC
CATHETERIZATION
34. Why might patients require anesthesia for cardiac catheterization? What adverse
effects might the anesthetic have on cardiac function during these procedures?
35. What PaCO2 should be maintained during anesthesia for cardiac catheterization?
36. What complications can occur as a result of cardiac catheterization procedures?
37. How might anxiety be allayed during cardiac catheterization procedures?
38. Why might the onset of action of inhaled or injected anesthetics be altered in
patients undergoing cardiac catheterization procedures?
CARDIOVERSION
39. Why does a patient undergoing elective cardioversion require sedation and
amnesia? How might this be accomplished?
40. How can the patient’s airway be maintained during anesthesia for cardioversion?
41. What monitors should be used during anesthesia for a patient undergoing
cardioversion?
EXTRACORPOREAL
SHOCK WAVE
LITHOTRIPSY
42. What is extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy (ESWL)?
43. What are the shock waves timed with during ESWL to avoid cardiac dysrhythmias?
44. Why is anesthesia required for patients undergoing ESWL?
45. What are some advantages of general anesthesia for patients undergoing ESWL?
46. What sensory level of regional anesthesia is recommended for patients undergoing
ESWL with this anesthetic technique?
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
432
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
47. Why is intravenous fluid administration important during ESWL?
48. What are some contraindications to ESWL?
DENTAL SURGERY
49. What patients might require anesthesia for a dental procedure?
50. Why might an anticholinergic be administered to a patient before a dental
procedure?
51. What agents can be used for the induction of anesthesia in patients requiring
anesthesia for a dental procedure? What agent can be used in uncooperative
patients when there is no intravenous access before the induction of anesthesia?
52. How is tracheal intubation usually accomplished to facilitate the dentist’s ability
to perform dental procedures in patients requiring general anesthesia for the
procedure?
53. What are some special concerns for the patient during emergence and in the
recovery period after having undergone a dental procedure under general
anesthesia?
ANSWERS*
CHARACTERISTICS
OF REMOTE
LOCATIONS
1. Fundamental capabilities for monitoring, the delivery of supplemental oxygen,
mechanical ventilation of the lungs, the delivery and scavenging of inhaled
anesthetics, anesthesia equipment, and the availability of suction must all be
available for the delivery of anesthesia in remote locations. (618)
2. Special challenges facing the anesthesiologist when delivering anesthesia in remote
locations include limited access to the patient’s airway, poor availability of
accessory help, and the potential difficulty in quickly obtaining emergency
equipment. Special challenges facing the anesthesiologist at the conclusion of
anesthesia in remote locations are based on the greater amount of distance the
anesthesiologist must transport the patient before reaching the postanesthesia care
unit. These may include a greater need for a supplemental oxygen supply and
continuous monitoring. (618-619)
3. Some safety concerns that may face the anesthesiologist delivering anesthesia in
remote locations include the possibility of exposure to increased radiation and the
scavenging of waste anesthetic gases. (618-619)
RADIATION SAFETY
4. Patients, usually children, who cannot remain still or who cannot cooperate
with instructions are most likely to require general anesthesia or sedation for
diagnostic and therapeutic radiologic procedures. Adults may also require sedation
or general anesthesia for radiologic procedures, especially patients who are
developmentally delayed or have sustained trauma. (620)
5. The anesthesiologist should attempt to limit his or her exposure to radiation by
wearing a lead apron and thyroid shield, through the use of movable lead glass
screens, and by remaining as far away as possible from the radiation source,
preferably at least 1 to 2 m. (619)
ALLERGIC
REACTIONS
6. Common side effects associated with the administration of intravenous contrast
agents are nausea and vomiting, a perception of warmth, headache, and mild
urticaria. Severe reactions may include vomiting, rigors, feeling faint,
*Numbers in parentheses: numbers refer to pages, figures, or tables in Miller RD, Pardo MC: Basics of Anesthesia,
6th ed. Philadelphia, Elsevier Saunders, 2011.
Procedures Performed Outside the Operating Room
433
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
bronchospasm, chest pain, arrhythmias, and renal failure. Life-threatening
reactions include severe bronchospasm, glottic edema, pulmonary edema,
arrhythmias, seizures, and cardiac arrest. The newer nonionic contrast dyes of lower
osmolarity tend to be associated with fewer incidences of allergic reactions. Even so,
patients at risk for an adverse reaction to a contrast agent should be pretreated with
medicines to minimize the reaction to the contrast agent. Prednisolone can be
administered at a dose of 50 to 100 mg intravenously both the night before and the
morning of the procedure. Diphenhydramine, 50 mg, should also be given
intravenously just before the procedure. Adequate hydration is necessary in these
patients to maintain their intravascular volume because the intravenous contrast
medium also acts as an osmotic load for the patient, inducing diuresis. (619-620)
NONINVASIVE
X-RAY PROCEDURES
7. MRI is a radiologic technology that provides digitalized tomographic images of the
body by exposing the body to a very high-strength constant magnetic field and
high-frequency alternating electric and magnetic fields. MRI does not produce any
ionizing radiation. These studies are useful for the evaluation of neurologic and soft
tissues, because they can distinguish between fat, vessels, and tumor. (620)
8. MRI is contraindicated in patients who have any implanted metals that are attracted
or repelled by a magnetic field, or easily heated by alternating electromagnetic
fields. Examples of metallic items include artificial cardiac pacemakers, aneurysm
clips, some intravascular clips, and some biologic pumps. Contraindicated items
with metals that can be dangerously heated and cause injury are standard pulse
oximeter probes, standard electrocardiogram electrodes, temperature probes,
pulmonary artery catheters containing wires, and epidural catheters containing
wires. (621)
9. MRI is difficult for the patient to tolerate based on the positioning of the patient
during the study. The patient must lie on a long thin table and then be moved into a
long thin tube that has walls close to the face of the patient. Patients during MRI
may become claustrophobic. In addition, the MR imager makes loud booming
noises that may augment a patient’s discomfort. (621)
10. The patient undergoing an anesthetic during MRI should have his or her blood
pressure, pulse oximeter oxygen saturation, and cardiac rhythm continually
monitored with special MRI-compatible equipment. Capnograph monitors may also
be used to detect end-tidal carbon dioxide, especially when monitoring from a
distance. Extensions must be placed on all monitoring equipment because the
patient moves into the MR imager during the study. (621)
11. Standard operating room monitors and anesthetic equipment must not be used.
Special MRI-compatible monitoring equipment, such as a fiber-optic pulse
oximeter, must be available for use in the MRI center. No ferromagnetic components
are allowed for use near the scanner, because any ferromagnetic material will be
forcefully attracted by the magnet and may cause injury to individuals in or near the
scanner. Plastic, nonmagnetic steel, and aluminum components replace metal ones
within special anesthetic machines, monitoring and intravenous infusion
equipment, and ventilators specially made for compatibility with the MR imager.
Aluminum gas cylinders must be used instead of standard iron gas cylinders.
Again, traditional pulse oximeters must not be used in the MR imager, because
they can cause very serious burns to the patient. (621)
12. Accidental extubation of the patient’s trachea during MRI must be managed by
immediate discontinuation of imaging, removing the patient from the imager,
and rapidly controlling the patient’s airway. In the event that resuscitative
equipment is necessary in an emergency, the patient must be moved far enough
away from the MR imager to prevent metal components of the resuscitative
equipment from becoming attracted to the magnet. (621)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
434
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
13. The airflow through the MR imager increases the amount of heat loss from the
patient, placing the patient at an increased risk of hypothermia. This risk is of
particular concern for pediatric patients undergoing MRI. (621-622)
14. Computed tomography (CT) is a radiologic imaging study that produces a two-
dimensional image from data obtained by rotating an x-ray beam around the
subject. Thus CT scanners emit ionizing radiation. (620)
15. Anesthesia for CT scanning is similar to that for MRI. That is, access to the patient is
limited and monitoring is remote. Unlike with the MR imager, the avoidance of
ferromagnetic equipment is not necessary. (620-621)
INVASIVE X-RAY
PROCEDURES
16. Interventional radiology cases can require sudden management changes in
coagulation parameters because unforeseen bleeding in an anticoagulated patient
can occur suddenly as a complication. If this occurs, the anticoagulation may need
to be immediately reversed. If the bleeding is intracerebral, reversal of the
coagulation can be essential for saving the patient’s life. (622-623)
17. When interventional radiology patients are heparinized during a procedure, the
anesthesiologist must have protamine immediately available, preferably already
drawn up and at a port where it can be injected safely and followed by a flush
injection. (622-623)
18. If adequate platelet function prevents the cessation of bleeding in patients
medicated with long-acting antiplatelet medications, then platelet transfusions are
needed. There are no drugs available for suddenly reversing the effects of long-
acting antiplatelet drugs. (622-623)
RADIATION
THERAPY
19. Patients undergoing radiation therapy may require anesthesia for immobilization
during the procedure. Immobilization during radiation therapy is important because
large doses of radiation are focused on specific target sites, and movement during
the procedure can result in tissue damage to areas inadvertently radiated. The
duration of the procedure is very brief, requiring that the patient must remain
immobile for only a brief amount of time. (620)
20. Remote monitoring devices must be used for patients being sedated or anesthetized
while undergoing radiation therapy because high doses of radiation require that all
individuals must leave the area during the treatment period. (623)
ELECTROCONVULSIVE
THERAPY
21. Patients who have severe clinical depression that is refractory to medicines, patients
who have become acutely suicidal, patients who are acutely psychotic or
schizophrenic, and patients with acute mania are all candidates for
electroconvulsive therapy (ECT). ECT is accomplished by administering an electric
stimulus to the patient that is sufficient to induce a grand mal seizure. The
mechanism for the short-term benefit derived from ECT is unknown, but is thought
to be due to either the release or reestablishment of neurotransmitter levels.
Controversy remains regarding the long-term benefit of ECT. (624)
22. Cardiopulmonary effects of ECT are reflected as stimulation of the parasympathetic
nervous system followed by stimulation of the sympathetic nervous system.
Initially, the anesthesiologist may see bradycardia and hypotension, followed by an
increase in heart rate, an increase in blood pressure, and cardiac dysrhythmias.
Apnea may also be seen during ECT. (624-625)
23. The most common causes of mortality after ECT are myocardial infarction and
cardiac dysrhythmias. (625-626)
24. Dramatic increases in cerebral blood flow occur during ECT. (625-626)
25. Intragastric pressure is increased during ECT. (625)
Procedures Performed Outside the Operating Room
435
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
26. Contraindications and relative contraindications to ECT include
pheochromocytoma, increased intracranial pressure, recent cerebrovascular
accident, cardiovascular conduction defects, high-risk intrauterine pregnancy,
and aortic or cerebral aneurysms. (624-626)
27. After ECT, and the resultant grand mal seizure, the patient is likely to be postictal.
Headache, confusion, agitation, cognitive impairment, and apnea may all be present
after the procedure. (625-626)
28. Before the performance of ECT the patient must have fasted from solids and
liquids just as a patient would before general anesthesia. This is to minimize the risk
of the pulmonary aspiration of gastric contents, because protective airway
reflexes will be lost with the induction of anesthesia and potentially during the
seizure activity. (625)
29. Preoperative medication is not recommended before an ECT procedure because the
duration of the preoperative medicine would likely be longer than the duration of
the procedure itself. This may cause a delay in the awakening of the patient and a
delay in the recovery of the patient from the procedure. An intravenous
anticholinergic drug may be administered to a patient undergoing ECT before the
administration of anesthesia to prevent the parasympathetic nervous system–
mediated bradycardia that is frequently seen early in ECT. The anticholinergic drug
would therefore have to be given 1 to 2 minutes before the induction of anesthesia.
The routine administration of an anticholinergic is not recommended, however,
because the duration of the bradycardia is typically brief. (625)
30. Most induction agents for general anesthesia may be used to induce anesthesia in
patients undergoing ECT. These include propofol (1 to 1.5 mg/kg intravenously
[IV]), thiopental (1.5 to 3 mg/kg IV), and methohexital (0.5 to 1 mg/kg IV). Careful
hemodynamic monitoring must accompany the induction of anesthesia for ECT and
continue throughout the entire procedure. (625)
31. After the induction of anesthesia and the onset of unconsciousness, succinylcholine
is often administered in subclinical doses (0.3 to 1.0 mg/kg IV) to the patient
undergoing ECT. The goal of succinylcholine administration is to attenuate the
effects of seizure activity on skeletal muscle, mainly the tonic-clonic muscular
contractions that may cause some harm to the patient. Because the administration of
succinylcholine before ECT may mask the seizure activity that results from ECT,
isolation of an extremity with a tourniquet is often done before succinylcholine
administration. Physiologically, this prevents the administered succinylcholine
from reaching the neuromuscular junctions in the isolated extremity distal to
the tourniquet. Clinically, this allows for the physician to confirm that seizure
activity has resulted from the ECT by observing the muscular contractions in
the isolated extremity. (625)
32. The airway of the patient undergoing ECT can be managed by hand with a
mask provided the patient is not at risk for the aspiration of gastric contents.
Before the induction of anesthesia the patient must be well preoxygenated.
The anesthesiologist must be prepared to ventilate by hand with bag and
mask using supplemental oxygen before the onset of seizure activity and also in the
postseizure period, given that apnea may follow seizure activity even after the
termination of the effects of succinylcholine. The anesthesiologist must have
all equipment needed to intubate the trachea of the patient should it
become necessary. Suction must also be available in the event that the
regurgitation of gastric contents or excessive oral secretions should occur.
(625-626)
33. Routine monitors must be used during an ECT procedure, including pulse oximetry,
blood pressure monitoring, and a continuous electrocardiogram. In addition to
these, a peripheral nerve stimulator may be useful to confirm neuromuscular
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
436
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
blockade and the recovery of skeletal muscle from neuromuscular blockade. An
electroencephalogram may also be used to confirm grand mal seizure activity
during ECT. (625)
CARDIAC
CATHETERIZATION
34. Adults may undergo cardiac catheterization for a variety of procedures, including
percutaneous valve procedures, pacemaker and/or implanted cardiac defibrillators
(ICD), and angioplasty with or without stent placement. Anesthesia for these cases can
be very challenging given that cardiac function may be severely compromised. In
addition, the cardiologist may induce fibrillation during a procedure for ICD implant to
test the new device. Children undergoing cardiac catheterization for the diagnosis of
congenital cardiac lesions might require anesthesia for the procedure. The anesthetic
employed must not have any significant effect on existing cardiac shunts so as not
to interfere with the results of the study. The administration of anesthesia may cause
myocardial depression or a decrease in preload by decreasing venous return, so care
must be taken by the anesthesiologist to minimize these cardiovascular changes. (626)
35. The PaCO2 that should be maintained during anesthesia for patients undergoing
cardiac catheterization should be equal to the patient’s resting PaCO2 so as not
to influence myocardial activity or pulmonary pressure. (626)
36. Complications that can occur as a result of cardiac catheterization include bleeding
at the vascular access site, perforation of the heart wall or great vessels, embolism,
cardiac dysrhythmias, and heart block. In addition, thrombosis may occur in
patients with a high hematocrit. (626)
37. Anxiety during cardiac catheterization procedures may be allayed by the
administration of a benzodiazepine, possibly in combination with a short-acting
opioid. This may be important in patients with coexisting cardiopulmonary
problems because of the potential for the exacerbation of their underlying disease
by the anxiety. (626)
38. The onset of action of inhaled or injected anesthetics may be altered in patients
undergoing cardiac catheterization secondary to the influence of left-to-right or
right-to-left shunts that may be present in this patient population. A left-to-right
shunt causes the arterial partial pressure of an inhaled anesthetic to be higher
than it otherwise would be because the blood that has passed ventilated alveoli does
not pass through tissues before returning to the heart. Although the clinical
effect of a left-to-right shunt is negligible, a right-to-left shunt can be serious
because it has the opposite effect. A right-to-left shunt causes the arterial partial
pressure of an inhaled anesthetic to be lower than it otherwise would be secondary
to the dilutional effect of the blood that enters the systemic circulation without
passing by ventilated alveoli after returning from the tissues. The rate of
induction, and subsequent onset of action, of inhaled anesthetics may
therefore be slowed in the presence of a right-to-left shunt. (626)
CARDIOVERSION
39. Elective cardioversion can be painful during the electric shock, requiring the patient
to have sedation and amnesia for a brief period during the administration of the
shock. This can be accomplished by the intravenous injection of a short-acting
induction drug such as etomidate or propofol after preoxygenation and just before
the administration of the electric shock. (626-627)
40. The patient’s airway can be maintained during anesthesia before and after the
cardioversion by hand with a mask provided the patient has fasted before the
procedure. Equipment that should be available to the anesthesiologist providing
anesthesia for cardioversion include a bag and mask for the support of ventilation, a
supplemental oxygen source, suction, and the appropriate equipment for emergent
intubation of the trachea. (626-627)
Procedures Performed Outside the Operating Room
437
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
41. Monitoring of blood pressure, pulse oximetry, and the electrocardiogram should be
the standard during anesthesia for cardioversion. (626-627)
EXTRACORPOREAL
SHOCK WAVE
LITHOTRIPSY
42. Extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy (ESWL) is a noninvasive method using shock
waves for the disintegration of renal stones. All lithotripters have an energy source,
a system to focus the shock wave, and a system to visualize and localize the renal
stone. The first lithotripters required that patients be immersed in a water bath
supported in a seated position. The immersion itself altered the patient’s physiology.
For example, the central venous pressure often increased and the patient often
became hypotensive after being immersed in warm water. Newer lithotripters do not
require a water bath, are on multifunctional tables where cystoscopy and ureteral
stent placement may also take place, and provide more focused shock waves to
minimize pain at the entry site. (627)
43. Shock waves in ESWL are timed with the patient’s heart rate and are triggered by the
R wave on the patient’s electrocardiogram. The shock waves are subsequently
delivered during the refractory period of the heart muscle, thus minimizing the risk
of cardiac dysrhythmias. Despite this, atrial and ventricular premature complexes,
atrial fibrillation, and supraventricular tachycardia have all been reported. (627)
44. Anesthesia is required for patients undergoing ESWL for two reasons. First, the
impact of the shock waves on the patient can be painful, especially in the immersion
bath model of shock wave lithotripters. Second, immobilization of the patient is
important for the success of the procedure. The shock waves are focused on the renal
stones, and any movement of the patient can displace the focus of the shock wave so
that it is no longer effectively targeting the renal stones. (627)
45. Advantages of general anesthesia for patients undergoing ESWL include rapid
onset, better patient immobilization, and the control of ventilatory parameters to
minimize stone movement with respiration. (627)
46. For a patient undergoing ESWL with a regional anesthetic, a T6 sensory level is
necessary to ensure patient comfort during the procedure. Unfortunately this high
level of anesthesia and sympathetic nervous system blockade may be associated
with hypotension. This may be exacerbated by the sitting position necessary for
some lithotripters. (627)
47. Intravenous fluid administration is important during ESWL for the maintenance of
an adequate urine output. This helps facilitate the passage of stones that have been
disintegrated by the shock waves. (627)
48. Contraindications to ESWL include pregnancy, coagulopathy, morbid obesity, and
aortic aneurysms. Patients with pacemakers may undergo ESWL provided the
pacemaker is placed above the diaphragm and not in the abdomen. (627)
DENTAL SURGERY
49. Anesthesia for a dental procedure is usually required for patients who are very
young or developmentally delayed and unable to tolerate the procedure. (628)
50. An anticholinergic may be administered to a patient before a dental procedure for its
antisialagogue effect. (628)
51. Any of the induction agents used to induce general anesthesia may be used for
patients undergoing dental procedures, including methohexital, thiopental,
propofol, and etomidate. When there is no intravenous access available, and the
patient is uncooperative, the anesthesiologist may use intramuscular ketamine for
the induction of anesthesia. (628)
52. Tracheal intubation is usually accomplished nasally to facilitate the dentist’s
ability to perform dental procedures on those patients requiring general anesthesia
for the procedure. (628)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
438
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
53. During the emergence from general anesthesia for dental procedures the
anesthesiologist must exercise caution with regard to the patient’s airway. The
patient must have intact laryngeal reflexes for the safe extubation of the trachea.
Oral bleeding and secretions that occurred intraoperatively may have led to
gastric distention and irritation. Ongoing oozing and secretions may also place the
patient at a greater risk for laryngospasm. The removal of oropharyngeal
packing must be confirmed. In the recovery area, the patient’s airway must be
closely observed by personnel with the appropriate equipment for airway
management, including suction. (628)
Procedures Performed Outside the Operating Room
439
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
Chapter
36 POSTANESTHESIA
RECOVERY
Theodora K. Nicholau
1. What is the postanesthesia care unit (PACU)?
2. What are the requirements for monitoring in the PACU?
3. What are the American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) practice guidelines for
post anesthesia care?
4. What are some postoperative physiologic disorders that may manifest in the PACU?
AIRWAY
OBSTRUCTION
5. What is the usual mechanism of airway obstruction in the post general anesthesia
patient? How does it present clinically?
6. What is the initial intervention to deal with airway obstruction?
7. How may residual neuromuscular blockade manifest in an awake patient?
8. How is residual neuromuscular blockade assessed in an awake patient?
9. What are some factors that contribute to prolonged nondepolarizing neuromuscular
blockade in the PACU?
10. What are some factors that contribute to prolonged depolarizing neuromuscular
blockade in the PACU?
11. What operative factors may result in life-threatening airway edema in the
immediate postoperative period?
12. What leak tests can be performed to evaluate airway patency in patients at risk for
airway edema prior to extubation of the trachea?
13. What are some special considerations for patients with obstructive sleep apnea for
postanesthesia care?
HYPOXEMIA IN
THE PACU
14. What are some potential causes of hypoxemia in the PACU? Which of these is most
common?
15. What are some potential causes of postoperative hypoventilation?
16. What is the ventilatory response to carbon dioxide?
17. In the PACU, how can hypoxemia secondary to hypercapnia be reversed?
18. What is diffusion hypoxia?
19. Describe the hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction (HPV) response and list the
conditions and medications that may inhibit it.
20. What is the significance of an increased venous admixture in the PACU?
PULMONARY EDEMA
IN THE PACU
21. What are the typical causes of noncardiogenic pulmonary edema in the PACU?
22. What is postobstructive pulmonary edema?
23. What is transfusion-related acute lung injury (TRALI)? When is it likely to present?
24. How is TRALI distinguished from transfusion-associated circulatory overload?
440
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
OXYGEN
SUPPLEMENTATION
25. What is the FIO2 that can be delivered through simple nasal cannula? What are some
other options for oxygen delivery in the PACU?
26. What is a high flow nasal cannula? What is its advantage?
27. Is there a role for continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) and noninvasive
positive-pressure ventilation (NIPPV) in the PACU?
HEMODYNAMIC
INSTABILITY
28. What is the significance of hypertension in the PACU?
29. What are some factors associated with significant hypertension in the PACU?
30. What are some causes of hypotension in the PACU?
31. How is myocardial ischemia detected in the PACU?
32. What are some factors which may contribute to cardiac arrhythmias in the PACU?
33. What are some possible causes of sinus tachycardia in the PACU?
34. How should new-onset atrial fibrillation be managed in the PACU?
35. What drugs may contribute to ventricular tachycardia in the PACU?
36. What are some possible causes of bradycardia in the PACU?
DELIRIUM
37. What is the incidence of postoperative delirium in patients older than 50 years of age?
38. What are some risk factors and causes of postoperative delirium?
39. What is emergence excitement?
RENAL
DYSFUNCTION
40. What is the differential diagnosis of postoperative renal dysfunction?
41. How is oliguria defined? What are some causes of oliguria in the PACU?
42. What are the risk factors for postoperative urinary retention?
43. What are some specific causes of oliguria presenting in the PACU that require
immediate attention to prevent ongoing injury?
BODY
TEMPERATURE AND
SHIVERING
44. What is the incidence of postoperative shivering? How should it be treated?
45. What are some adverse effects of postoperative hypothermia?
POSTOPERATIVE
NAUSEA AND
VOMITING
46. What are some factors associated with an increased incidence of postoperative
nausea and vomiting (PONV)?
47. What is the simplified risk score for identifying patients at risk for PONV?
How can PONV be prevented and/or treated?
DELAYED
AWAKENING
48. What are some common causes of delayed awakening in the PACU?
DISCHARGE
CRITERIA
49. What are the principles used to determine PACU discharge criteria?
50. What are the components of the Aldrete scoring system?
ANSWERS*
1. The postanesthesia care unit (PACU) is the area equipped and staffed to monitor and
care for patients as they emerge from general anesthesia and surgery. Clinical
monitoring in the unit is focused on the cardiopulmonary system, with vigilant
attention to airway patency and protection, oxygenation, and ventilation, as well as
hemodynamic stability. Vital signs are recorded at the minimum every 15 minutes.
*Numbers in parentheses: numbers refer to pages, figures, or tables in Miller RD, Pardo MC: Basics of Anesthesia,
6th ed. Philadelphia, Elsevier Saunders, 2011.
Postanesthesia Recovery
441
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
The unit is located adjacent to the operating room to allow for prompt intervention
by anesthesia and surgical staff if needed. (632)
2. Standards and practice parameters for postanesthesia care have been adopted by the
ASA. The Standards for Postanesthesia Care is a document that delineates the
minimal requirements for monitoring and care in the unit. These are minimal
standards that are to be exceeded when deemed appropriate by the judgment of
the anesthesia caregiver.
There are five standards that address each of the following in a general manner:
(1) appropriate staffing and equipment of the unit, (2) transportation to the
PACU by the anesthesia caregiver, (3) transfer of care from the anesthesia provider
to the PACU nurse, (4) evaluation and monitoring of the patient in the unit, and
(5) discharge of the patient from the unit. (632, 648)
3. Unlike the general ASA standards, the ASA practice guidelines for postanesthesia
care provide specific recommendations for clinical evaluation and therapeutic
intervention for physiologic disorders that may present in the PACU. (632)
4. A number of postoperative physiologic disorders may manifest in the PACU. These
include nausea and vomiting, oliguria, hypoventilation, bleeding, hypothermia,
delirium, pain, and delayed awakening. Not surprisingly, data from the U.S.
closed claims database show that the most devastating outcomes are the result of
airway, respiratory, or cardiovascular compromise. Hypertension or hypotension,
cardiac arrhythmia, airway obstruction, hypoventilation, and hypoxemia
require immediate attention and intervention. (632, Table 39-1)
AIRWAY
OBSTRUCTION
5. Airway obstruction in the PACU is most often due to the loss of pharyngeal tone
resulting from the residual depressant effects of inhaled and intravenous
anesthetics and/or the persistent effects of neuromuscular blocking drugs. In awake
patients, the pharyngeal muscles contract synchronously with the diaphragm.
This activity serves to pull the tongue forward and tent the airway open as the
diaphragm creates the negative pressure for inspiration. In the PACU, this
pharyngeal muscle activity may be lost and the resultant compliant pharyngeal
tissue collapses with negative inspiratory pressure causing obstruction. When this
occurs there is a characteristic paradoxic breathing pattern consisting of
retraction of the sternal notch and exaggerated abdominal muscle activity. This
rocking motion becomes more prominent with increasing airway obstruction.
Airway obstruction can be associated with arterial hypoxemia and desaturation
on pulse oximetry. (632)
6. Airway obstruction can usually be treated by the jaw thrust maneuver. When this is
not sufficient to relieve the obstruction, CPAP can be applied via face mask. If
necessary, this can be followed by placement of nasal and oral airways, and in
extreme cases laryngeal mask airway or endotracheal tube placement. (632)
7. Residual neuromuscular blockade in the awake patient may manifest as a struggle
to breathe. In a patient whose mental status is not clear enough to communicate
clearly the patient may appear agitated. (633)
8. Clinical assessment of residual neuromuscular blockade is preferred to the
application of the train-of-four ratio and titanic stimulation in awake
patients, as both are painful interventions. Clinical evaluation includes grip
strength, tongue protrusion, the ability to lift the legs off the bed, and the ability to
lift the head off the pillow for a full 5 seconds. Of these, the sustained head lift
most directly reflects the ability of the patient to maintain and protect the
airway. An extubated patient’s ability to oppose and fix the incisor teeth
against a tongue depressor is another clinically reliable indicator to
pharyngeal tone. This maneuver correlates with an average train-of-four
ratio of 0.85. (633)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
442
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
9. Factors which may contribute to prolonged nondepolarizing neuromuscular
blockade include drugs, diseases, and metabolic states. Drugs which prolong
neuromuscular blockade include residual inhaled anesthesia, local anesthetics
(lidocaine and other sodium channel blockers), cardiac antiarrhythmic drugs
(procainamide), antibiotics (aminoglycosides most commonly), calcium channel
blockers, furosemide, and corticosteroids. Metabolic states which may prolong
neuromuscular blockade include hypothermia, respiratory acidosis, renal or hepatic
failure, hypermagnesemia, and hypocalcemia. Of these, hypothermia and
respiratory acidosis are easily recognized and reversible. (633, Table 39-2)
10. Factors which may contribute to prolonged depolarizing neuromuscular blockade
include excessive doses of succinylcholine, reduced plasma cholinesterase activity,
inhibited cholinesterase activity, and atypical plasma cholinesterase which is a
genetic variant. Plasma cholinesterase activity may be reduced due to decreased
plasma levels, extremes of age, disease states (hepatic failure, malnutrition, uremia),
pregnancy, plasmapheresis, glucocorticoids, and contraceptives. Inhibited
cholinesterase activity may be reversible (neostigmine, edrophonium) or
irreversible (echothiophate). (633, Table 39-2)
11. Operative factors which may result in life-threatening airway edema in the
immediate postoperative period include prolonged procedure in the prone or
Trendelenburg position; aggressive fluid resuscitation; surgical procedures on
tongue, pharynx, and neck (most common examples are thyroidectomy, carotid
endarterectomy, and cervical spine procedures); and hematoma at the surgical site
(again, common examples include thyroidectomy and carotid endarterectomy).
In the case of volume resuscitation and procedures requiring prone or trend
positioning, airway edema may be accompanied by facial and/or scleral edema.
In cases such as neck dissection, carotid endarterectomy, and thyroidectomy, life-
threatening airway edema may be the result of increased pressure from a
hematoma that is not evident on external physical examination. (634)
12. Leak tests can be performed to evaluate airway patency in patients at risk for
airway edema prior to extubation of the trachea. One leak test evaluates the patient’s
ability to breathe around an occluded endotracheal tube (ETT) with the cuff deflated.
One can also measure the intrathoracic pressure required to produce an audible
leak around the ETT with the cuff deflated. Another method is to measure the
exhaled tidal volume before and after the ETT cuff is deflated. (634)
13. There are some special considerations for patients with obstructive sleep apnea for
postanesthesia care. These patients should not be tracheally extubated until they are
fully awake. Because of their increased risk for airway obstruction, one should
minimize the use of opioids and avoid benzodiazepines or any drugs that
depress respiratory drive or promote sleepiness. To this end, the application of
continuous regional anesthetic techniques should be used whenever possible.
Patients should have CPAP available postoperatively. The patient’s home CPAP or
BiPAP (bilevel positive airway pressure) device should be placed on the patient
upon admission to the unit. The time in the PACU should be used to evaluate the
patient to determine the appropriate degree of monitoring required once discharged
from the unit. As a general rule, patients should be monitored with continuous
pulse oximetry on the surgical ward. However, because pulse oximetry will not
detect carbon dioxide retention in a patient that is receiving supplemental
oxygen, many patients with sleep apnea will require intensive care unit level
monitoring. (634)
HYPOXEMIA IN
THE PACU
14. There are multiple potential causes of hypoxemia in the PACU. These include
shunting, V/Q mismatch, congestive heart failure, pulmonary edema, alveolar
hypoventilation, diffusion hypoxia, aspiration of gastric contents, pulmonary
embolus, pneumothorax, posthyperventilation hypoxia, increased oxygen
Postanesthesia Recovery
443
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
consumption (as from shivering), acute lung injury (e.g., sepsis or transfusion
related), advanced age, and obesity. Of these, atelectasis (shunt) and alveolar
hypoventilation are the most common causes of postoperative hypoxemia in the
PACU. (635, Table 39-3)
15. Among the potential causes of postoperative hypoventilation is anesthetic drugs,
residual neuromuscular blocking drugs, impaired ventilatory muscle mechanics,
increased levels of carbon dioxide production, and coexisting pulmonary disease.
Each of these causes of alveolar hypoventilation leads to a corresponding
increase in arterial partial pressure of carbon dioxide (PaCO2). In a patient breathing
room air at sea level, hypoventilation to a PaCO2 of 80 will result in hypoxemia, even
when the patient has normal lungs without significant A-a gradient. This is
demonstrated through the alveolar gas equation. Alveolar oxygen pressure
(PaO2) in this scenario is 50. Supplemental oxygen can mask alveolar
hypoventilation by leading to normal saturation of oxygen detected by pulse
oximetry. (635, Table 39-4, Figure 39-1)
16. Minute ventilation increases in response to elevated PaCO2. Normally minute
ventilation increases by approximately 2 L/min for every 1 mm Hg increase in
arterial PCO2. In the PACU, this linear response to PCO2 may be depressed by residual
vapor or intravenous anesthetics in addition to the administration of narcotics and
benzodiazepines. (635)
17. Reversal of hypercapnic hypoxemia can be achieved by the addition of or increase
in the concentration of supplemental oxygen and/or the normalization of PCO2.
Normalization of PCO2 can be accomplished by stimulation of the patient to
wakefulness, the pharmacologic reversal of the effects of narcotics, benzodiazepines
and muscle relaxants, or in some cases control of the airway and initiation of
positive-pressure ventilation. (636)
18. Diffusion hypoxia refers to the rapid diffusion of nitrous oxide into the alveoli at the
end of a nitrous oxide anesthetic. Nitrous oxide dilutes the alveolar gas producing a
transient decrease in alveolar oxygen pressure that can persist for up to 5 to 10
minutes after discontinuation of nitrous oxide. In the absence of supplemental
oxygen, arterial hypoxemia may ensue. (636)
19. The hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction (HPV) response is the attempt of normal
lungs to optimally match ventilation and perfusion by constricting vessels that
perfuse poorly ventilated alveoli. This vasoconstrictive response shifts blood flow to
well-ventilated regions of the lung. The HPV response is inhibited by agents that
produce pulmonary vasodilation: inhaled anesthetics, Nipride, and dobutamine to
name a few. Physiologic conditions that inhibit this response include pneumonia
and sepsis. (636)
20. Increased venous admixture refers to the contribution of mixed venous blood to
arterial hypoxemia. This effect is typically significant only in cases of low cardiac
output where blood returns to the heart in a severely desaturated state. In the normal
lung only, 2% to 5% of the cardiac output is shunted through the lungs, but
conditions that increase shunt fraction may significantly increase the effect of
venous admixture to hypoxemia. In the PACU, conditions that may increase
pulmonary shunt fraction include atelectasis, pulmonary edema, and the aspiration
of gastric contents. (636)
PULMONARY
EDEMA IN THE PACU
21. Pulmonary edema in the immediate postoperative period is most often due to
cardiogenic causes. Noncardiogenic causes of pulmonary edema in the PACU
include pulmonary aspiration, sepsis, and transfusion-related lung injury. (637)
22. Postobstructive pulmonary edema is a transudative edema that results from the
exaggerated negative pressure generated by inspiration against an obstructed
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
444
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
airway. This negative intrathoracic pressure further promotes venous return,
which additionally contributes to transudation of fluid. Young muscular healthy
males are most at risk due to their increased muscle mass and ability to generate
significant inspiratory force. The most common cause of postobstructive
pulmonary edema is laryngospasm. Objective data include hypoxemia and
associated bilateral diffuse infiltrates. The diagnosis depends on clinical
suspicion once other causes of pulmonary edema are ruled out. (637)
23. TRALI refers to pulmonary edema associated with fever and systemic hypotension
after the transfusion of plasma containing blood products. Although fresh frozen
plasma and whole blood are the obvious culprits, packed red blood cells and
platelets also contain plasma and can trigger TRALI. Typically the physiologic
effects of TRALI are manifest within 1 to 2 hours after transfusion, but can occur up
to 6 hours after transfusion. A complete blood count obtained with the onset of
symptoms would reveal an acute decrease in the white blood cell count reflecting
the sequestration of granulocytes within the lung and exudative fluid. The diagnosis
is made by an increased alveolar-to-arterial oxygen difference and bilateral
pulmonary infiltrates in a chest radiograph. If TRALI is suspected, the transfused
blood container bag should be returned to the blood bank for evaluation. (637)
24. TRALI may be difficult to differentiate from transfusion-associated circulatory
overload since both manifest as pulmonary edema after the transfusion of blood
products. They can be distinguished by the fever and hypotension associated
with TRALI, as well as by the characteristics of the resulting edema fluid; exudative
in the case of TRALI and transudative in the case of transfusion-associated
circulatory overload. In either case treatment is supportive, including
supplemental oxygen and diuresis. (637)
OXYGEN
SUPPLEMENTATION
25. As a general rule, each liter per minute of oxygen flow through simple nasal cannula
will increase the FIO2 by 0.04. The delivery of oxygen by this method is limited by
lack of humidification and temperature correction of the gas. The maximum rate of
6 L/min results in approximately 0.44 FIO2. Other options for oxygen delivery in
the PACU include a face mask, non-rebreather face mask, high flow nebulizers, and
high flow nasal cannula. Other than the high flow nasal cannula, each of these
oxygen delivery methods are limited in the FIO2 they can provide secondary to
the entrainment of room air when the patient inhales. (637)
26. High flow delivery systems, such as the high flow nasal cannula, can deliver
oxygen at a rate of 40 L/min. Patients tolerate such high flows because the inspired
gas is humidified and warmed to 99.9% relative humidity and 37 C. These
devices deliver oxygen directly to the nasopharynx throughout the respiratory
cycle, and the high flow may enhance the FIO2 by a CPAP effect. (638)
27. The decision to use noninvasive modes of ventilation in the PACU must be guided
by careful consideration of both patient and surgical factors. Hemodynamic
instability, refractory hypoxemia, and the inability to protect the airway due to
altered mental status are standard contraindications to NIPPV. Additional
contraindications to consider in this setting include an increased risk of aspiration
due to the surgical procedure (i.e., esophagectomy), inability to properly apply
the nasal or facemask delivery apparatus because of facial surgery (sinus surgery),
or the need to avoid oropharyngeal and gastric distention by positive-pressure
ventilation (esophageal and gastric operations, etc.). With the above
considerations in mind, home settings of CPAP are recommended routinely for
patients with obstructive sleep apnea in the PACU. In the appropriate patient
population, application of CPAP in the PACU has been shown to reduce the
incidence of intubation, pneumonia, and sepsis in patients who undergo
abdominal surgery. (638)
Postanesthesia Recovery
445
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
HEMODYNAMIC
INSTABILITY
28. Hypertension and tachycardia in the PACU have been shown to be predictive of
unplanned admission to the critical care unit. (638)
29. Patients with essential hypertension are at greatest risk for postoperative
hypertension in the immediate postoperative period. Some additional factors to
consider include pain, emergence excitement, hypercarbia, gastric distention,
drug withdrawal, increased intracranial pressure, and urinary retention. Craniotomy
and carotid endarterectomy are surgical procedures that place the patient at
increased risk. (638, Table 39-5)
30. A combination of one or more of the following physiologic derangements may
account for hypotension in the PACU. These include a decrease in preload, a
decrease in afterload, or intrinsic pump failure.
Decreased preload may be due to inadequate volume resuscitation in patients
who undergo preoperative bowel preparation and/or whose surgical procedure
results in ongoing translocation of fluid (most often major intraabdominal
procedures), unrecognized or ongoing blood loss, or loss of sympathetic tone
as a result of neuraxial blockade (spinal or epidural).
Intrinsic pump failure often results from exacerbation of preexisting cardiac
conditions, such as cardiomyopathy, valvular disease, arrhythmias, or coronary
artery disease. Cardiac tamponade, pulmonary embolus, and tension pneumothorax
should be ruled out in at-risk patients, such as those who undergo intraoperative
central line placement, intrathoracic or mediastinal invasion, or total hip
arthroplasty.
Decreased afterload can be attributed to iatrogenic sympathectomy. This may
be due to high neuraxial blockade (spinal or epidural), or blunting of sympathetic
drive by narcotics and residual intravenous anesthetics (propofol or
dexmedetomidine) in patients who rely on sympathetic tone to maintain blood
pressure (examples include sepsis and patients with pericardial disease). Other
causes include frank sepsis and anaphylaxis.
A high spinal anesthetic is an example of all three, because it results in a
sympathectomy that dilates venous and arterial vasculature to produce
decreased preload and afterload. It also affects the cardioaccelerator fibers
of T4, resulting in intrinsic cardiac failure secondary to bradycardia. (638-639,
Table 39-6)
31. It is difficult to reliably detect myocardial ischemia in the PACU, because patients
are often unable to identify or communicate symptoms of cardiac ischemia in
the immediate postoperative period. Patients with postoperative myocardial
infarction complained of chest pain less than 20% of the time. Often PACU patients
will attribute cardiac pain to incisional pain or vice versa. Furthermore,
interpretation of the postoperative EKG must be done with the patient’s cardiac
history and risk index in mind. In low-risk patients, ST segment changes do not
usually reflect myocardial ischemia. Relatively benign causes of ST segment
changes in low-risk patients include anxiety, esophageal reflux, hyperventilation,
and hypokalemia.
Routine postoperative 12-lead EKG monitoring is reserved for patients with
known or suspected coronary artery disease that undergo intermediate- or high-risk
surgery. Intermediate-risk surgeries include intraabdominal and thoracic surgery,
carotid endarterectomy, head and neck surgery, orthopedic surgery, and prostate
surgery. High-risk surgeries include major emergency surgery, aortic and other
major vascular surgery, and unanticipated prolonged procedures with large fluid
shifts or blood loss. In contrast to low-risk patients, ST segment and T wave changes
in high-risk patients can be significant and must be taken seriously even in the
absence of typical signs and symptoms. In high-risk patients, ST changes suggestive
of ischemia should prompt further evaluation to rule out myocardial ischemia by
monitoring serum troponins. (639)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
446
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
32. Factors which may contribute to cardiac arrhythmias in the PACU may include
hypoxemia, hypercarbia, pain, agitation, electrolyte abnormalities, myocardial
ischemia, endogenous or exogenous catecholamines, hypertension, fluid overload,
anemia, drug withdrawal, hyperthermia, and hypothermia. (640, Table 39-7)
33. Possible causes of sinus tachycardia in the PACU include pain, agitation, fever,
hypercarbia, hypovolemia, anemia, and shivering. Less common and more ominous
causes include the onset of cardiogenic or septic shock, pulmonary embolism,
thyroid storm, and malignant hyperthermia. (640)
34. New-onset atrial fibrillation which presents in the PACU should be rapidly treated.
If the patient is hemodynamically unstable, prompt cardioversion is indicated.
Control of the heart rate is a goal of treatment in these patients and can be achieved
with b-adrenergic blockers or calcium channel blocking drugs. Diltiazem is the
calcium channel blocker of choice in this circumstance. Often rate control is enough
to convert the heart rhythm from new-onset atrial fibrillation to sinus rhythm in
the PACU. If chemical conversion is indicated, an amiodarone loading dose
can be initiated. (640)
35. Premature ventricular contractions and ventricular bigeminy are common in the
PACU. They are most often a result of increased sympathetic tone as may
accompany pain or hypercarbia. Ventricular tachycardia is rare in the PACU, and
is indicative of underlying cardiac abnormality. In the case of torsades de pointes,
the administration of drugs that prolong the QT interval, such as amiodarone,
procainamide, droperidol, and serotonin uptake inhibitors to name only a few,
may contribute to the cardiac abnormality. (640)
36. Bradycardia in the PACU is often iatrogenic. Drug related causes include the
administration of b- or calcium channel blockers, anticholinesterase reversal of
neuromuscular blockade, narcotic administration, and sedation with
dexmedetomidine. Procedure-related and patient-related causes include bowel
distention, increased intracranial pressure or intraocular pressure, and high spinal
anesthesia that blocks the cardioaccelerator fibers originating from T1 to T4.
Underlying conduction abnormalities and myocardial ischemia are indications for
emergent intervention. (641)
DELIRIUM
37. The incidence of postoperative delirium in patients older than 50 years old is
approximately 10%. The incidence is highest in patients undergoing joint
replacement. (641)
38. Postoperative delirium may be patient-related, iatrogenic, or surgery-related.
The most significant predictors of postoperative delirium are advanced age,
preoperative cognitive impairment, decreased functional status, alcohol abuse,
and previous history of delirium. Intraoperative factors that are predictive of
postoperative delirium include surgical blood loss, hematocrit less than 30, and
the number of intraoperative transfusions. Some additional causative factors
include arterial hypoxemia, hypercapnia, pain, sepsis, inadequate hydration,
medications, and electrolyte abnormalities. (641)
39. Emergence excitement is a transient confusional state that is associated with the
emergence of general anesthesia. It is more common in children than adults, with a
peak incidence in children between the ages of 2 and 4 years. More than 30% of
children will experience delirium at some period during their PACU stay. It typically
resolves quickly and is followed by an uneventful recovery. (641)
RENAL
DYSFUNCTION
40. The differential diagnosis of postoperative renal dysfunction includes preoperative,
intraoperative, and postoperative causes. Frequently the cause is multifactorial, and
a preexisting renal insufficiency may be exacerbated by an intraoperative insult.
Postanesthesia Recovery
447
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
For example, preoperative infection, contrast radiologic studies, or hepatic
dysfunction may put patients at risk for decompensation of renal function from
intravascular volume depletion intraoperatively. In the PACU, diagnostic efforts
should focus on the identification and treatment of readily reversible causes of
oliguria. (642)
41. Oliguria is defined as a urine output of less than 0.5 mL/kg/hr. Postoperative
oliguria may be due to prerenal, renal, or postrenal causes. Prerenal causes include
hypovolemia due to bleeding, sepsis, third space fluid loss, inadequate volume
resuscitation, hepatorenal syndrome, low cardiac output, renal vascular
obstruction, or intraabdominal hypertension. Intrarenal causes include acute
tubular necrosis, radiographic contrast dyes, rhabdomyolysis, tumor lysis, and
hemolysis. Postrenal causes include urinary retention, surgical injury or obstruction
to the ureters, or mechanical obstruction to the urinary catheter. The most common
cause of oliguria postoperatively is the depletion of intravascular volume.
(642, Table 39-9)
42. Postoperative urinary retention refers to the inability to void despite a bladder
volume of more that 500 to 600 mL. Risk factors include age over 50, male gender,
intraoperative volume resuscitation, duration of surgery, bladder volume on
admission, and type of surgery, in particular anorectal procedures or joint
replacement. Other contributors include perioperative medications such as
anticholinergics, b-blockers, and narcotics. (642)
43. Three causes of oliguria presenting in the PACU that should be immediately treated
to prevent ongoing injury include intraabdominal hypertension, rhabdomyolysis,
and contrast nephropathy. Intraabdominal hypertension should be ruled out by
measuring the bladder pressure in any oliguric patient with a tense abdomen
postoperatively. Persistently elevated intraabdominal pressure impedes renal
perfusion and leads to renal ischemia.
Rhabdomyolysis should be diagnosed and treated in oliguric patients who
have suffered a major crush or thermal injury, including intraoperative
thermoablation of tumors. Rhabdomyolysis should also be ruled out in morbidly
obese patients who undergo prolonged surgical procedures. Volume loading and
treatment with mannitol and loop diuretics can be used to flush renal tubules
and prevent ongoing renal tubular damage.
Contrast nephropathy should be considered in patients who have undergone
angiography with intravascular stent placement. These patients often have chronic
renal insufficiency, and are at increased risk to develop renal failure secondary to an
IV contrast load. Perioperative hydration with normal saline and alkalization with
sodium bicarbonate have been shown to be effective renal protective measures.
Sodium bicarbonate infusions at 1 mL/kg/hr should be continued for 6 hours after
contrast exposure. (642-643)
BODY
TEMPERATURE AND
SHIVERING
44. The incidence of postoperative shivering may be as high as 65% after general
anesthesia. Postoperative shivering is not always associated with a decrease in body
temperature; shivering in normothermic patients is thought to result from
uninhibited spinal reflexes manifested as clonic activity. Postoperative shivering
can be treated with opioids and clonidine. Meperidine is the most effective
treatment for postoperative shivering. (643)
45. Adverse effects of postoperative hypothermia include shivering, inhibition of
platelet function, coagulation factor activity, and drug metabolism. These may
result in exacerbation of postoperative bleeding, prolonged neuromuscular
blockade, and delayed awakening. Forced air warmers can be used to warm patients
with postoperative hypothermia. (643)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
448
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
POSTOPERATIVE
NAUSEA AND
VOMITING
46. Patient-related factors associated with an increased incidence of postoperative
nausea and vomiting (PONV) include female gender (postpuberty), nonsmoking
status, childhood (past infancy), and history of motion sickness or PONV. Anesthetic
factors include use of volatile anesthetics or nitrous oxide, administration of large
doses of neostigmine, and perioperative opioids. Significant surgical factors include
type of procedure, such as eye muscle or middle ear surgery, gastric distention as in
swallowed blood, and duration of surgery. (643)
47. There is a simplified risk score for identifying patients at risk for PONV. It is a four
point score that allots a single point for each of the following factors: (1) female
gender, (2) history of motion sickness or PONV, (3) nonsmoking, (4) use of
postoperative opioids. A score of 0, 1, 2, 3, or 4 correlates to an incidence of 10%,
21%, 39%, 61%, and 79%, respectively. Although prophylactic measures to prevent
PONV are more effective than rescue drugs administered in the PACU, some patients
have PONV despite prophylaxis. There are several drugs available for the treatment
of PONV, including scopolamine, hydroxyzine, promethazine, droperidol,
metaclopromide, ondansetron, dolasetron, and dexamethasone. Dexamethasone
is most effective when given prophylactically at the start of surgery, and
ondansetron is most effective when given 30 minutes before the end of
anesthesia. (643-644)
DELAYED
AWAKENING
48. Residual effects of anesthetic or sedating drugs are the most common cause of
delayed awakening in the PACU. If narcotic or benzodiazepines are suspected, then
careful titration of the reversal drugs, naloxone and flumazenil, can be used. For
example, in adults 20- to 40-mg increments of naloxone are used to avoid abrupt
reversal of analgesia and associated hypertension and tachycardia. The use of
flumazenil should be done with caution to avoid precipitation of seizures. Both
naloxone and flumazenil have short half-lives, so the patient should be carefully
observed for resedation. Rarely physostigmine may be used to reverse the CNS
effects of anticholinergic drugs. Hypothermia and hypoglycemia should also be
considered as potential causes of delayed awakening postoperatively. (644)
DISCHARGE
CRITERIA
49. PACU discharge criteria are based on the principles that patients must be observed
until they are no longer at risk for respiratory depression and their mental status has
returned to baseline. No specific length of stay is required and hemodynamic
parameters are based on the patient’s baseline measurements. (645)
50. The Aldrete scoring system is an objective measure assigning points, or a score, to a
patient to determine readiness for discharge. Components of the Aldrete scoring
system include an activity, breathing, circulation, consciousness, and oxygen
saturation. The patient must be able to breathe comfortably, clear secretions, and
oxygenate adequately. (645)
Postanesthesia Recovery
449
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
Chapter
37 PERIOPERATIVE PAIN
MANAGEMENT
Meredith C.B. Adams, Robert W. Hurley
1. What factors correlate with the severity of postoperative pain?
2. What are some potential adverse physiologic effects of acute postoperative pain?
3. What are some potential benefits of the effective management of acute
postoperative pain?
4. What are the principles of multimodal perioperative analgesia?
5. What are the goals of an acute pain management service?
NEUROPHYSIOLOGY
OF PAIN
6. What is nociception?
7. What are nociceptors? How are they stimulated?
8. What is the neurologic pathway of afferent pain impulses?
9. Where along the neurologic pathway of afferent pain impulses can modulation of
the painful stimulus occur?
10. Howcanthemodulationofpainfulstimulioccurintheperiphery?Whatpharmacologic
agentsmaybeparticularlyusefulforthemodulationofpainfulstimuliintheperiphery?
11. How can the modulation of painful stimuli occur at the level of the spinal cord?
12. How can the modulation of painful stimuli occur above the level of the spinal cord?
13. Name some excitatory and inhibitory neurotransmitters believed to have a role in
the modulation of painful stimuli.
14. What is the difference between preemptive analgesia and preventative analgesia?
ANALGESIA
DELIVERY SYSTEMS
15. Name some routes for the administration of analgesic drugs.
16. Whatisthelimitationoftheoraladministrationofanalgesicagentsforthemanagement
of acute postoperative pain? When is this route of administration appropriate?
17. What benefit does the intramuscular administration of analgesic agents have over
oral administration? What are some problems with this method of administration?
18. Does ketamine have a role in the perioperative period? What are the side effects of
low dose ketamine therapy?
19. How is a patient taking oral buprenorphine managed preoperatively,
intraoperatively, and postoperatively?
20. What are the advantages and disadvantages of the subcutaneous, transdermal, and
transmucosal administration of opioids?
21. Describe patient-controlled analgesia (PCA). What is the lockout interval?
22. What are some of the advantages of patient-controlled analgesia?
23. How do neuraxially administered opioids exert their effect?
24. Whataresomeofthepotentialbenefitsofneuraxialopioidsforpostoperativeanalgesia?
25. What are some of the potential adverse effects of neuraxial opioids for postoperative
analgesia? What different potential adverse effects may be caused by neuraxial
infusion of local anesthetics?
450
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
26. What is the early depression of ventilation that may be seen with the neuraxial
administration of an opioid believed to be due to?
27. What is the delayed depression of ventilation that may be seen with the neuraxial
administration of an opioid believed to be due to? Why might this effect be more
pronounced with morphine than with fentanyl?
28. Which patients may be most at risk for delayed depression of ventilation from the
administration of a neuraxial opioid?
29. What characteristic of an opioid administered into the intrathecal space determines
its time of onset and its duration of action?
30. What are the disadvantages of a single-dose administration of opioid in the
intrathecal space for the management of acute postoperative pain?
31. What may be the reason for the clinical impression that the incidence of side effects
associated with intrathecally administered opioid is higher than the incidence of side
effectsassociatedwiththeepiduraladministrationofopioidforpostoperativeanalgesia?
32. Why does the epidural administration of opioid require more drug than the
intrathecal administration of the same opioid? What dose of epidural opioid is
equipotent to the same opioid administered in the intrathecal space?
33. Why is it believed that fentanyl produces a more segmental band of anesthesia than
morphine when administered in the epidural space?
34. How do the resulting plasma concentrations of fentanyl compare when the same
dose of fentanyl is administered intravenously versus epidurally?
35. Why might a local anesthetic be added to the opioid for administration in the
epidural space for the management of postoperative pain?
36. What is the concern regarding the concurrent use of neuraxial analgesia and
anticoagulants? What are some general concepts regarding this issue covered in the
American Society of Regional Anesthesia guidelines?
37. What factors increase the risk of postoperative epidural abscess associated with
epidural analgesia?
ALTERNATIVE
APPROACHES
TO MANAGEMENT
OF ACUTE
POSTOPERATIVE
PAIN
38. What is an advantage and a disadvantage of peripheral nerve blocks for the
management of acute postoperative pain?
39. What are the advantages and disadvantages of the intraarticular administration of
analgesics?
40. Are there any unique benefits of the paravertebral blockade technique?
41. What are the advantages of perioperative continuous perineural catheters in both
upper and lower extremity surgeries?
42. What is the role of clonidine as an adjuvant in peripheral nerve blockade?
43. How is intrapleural regional analgesia achieved? What is an advantage and a
disadvantage of this technique for the management of acute postoperative pain?
44. What are the indications for a transverse abdominis plane block? What advantages
does this peripheral block offer?
ANSWERS*
1. Factors that positively correlate with severity of postoperative pain include
preoperative opioid intake, anxiety, depression, pain level, and the duration of
surgery. Factors that are negatively correlated include the patient’s age and the
level of the surgeon’s operative experience. A perioperative plan should be
developed that encompasses these factors to lessen the severity of the patient’s
postoperative pain. (650)
*Numbers in parentheses: numbers refer to pages, figures, or tables in Miller RD, Pardo MC: Basics of Anesthesia,
6th ed. Philadelphia, Elsevier Saunders, 2011.
Perioperative Pain Management
451
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
2. Potential adverse physiologic effects of acute postoperative pain include
hypoventilation, atelectasis, ventilation-to-perfusion mismatching in the lungs,
hypercapnia, pneumonia, systemic hypertension, tachycardia, cardiac
dysrhythmias, myocardial ischemia, deep vein thrombosis, decreased immune
function, ileus, nausea and vomiting, urinary retention, hyperglycemia, sodium
and water retention, insomnia, fear, and anxiety. Poorly controlled postoperative
pain may also be a factor in developing chronic postsurgical pain. (650-651,
Table 40-1)
3. Some potential benefits of the effective management of acute postoperative pain
include improvement in patient comfort, a decrease in perioperative morbidity,
enhanced postoperative rehabilitation, and a possible decrease in chronic
postsurgical pain. It may also reduce cost by shortening the time spent in
postanesthesia care units, intensive care units, and hospitals. (650)
4. The goals of multimodal analgesia include sufficient diminution of the patient’s
pain to instill a sense of control over their pain, enable early mobilization,
allow early enteral nutrition, and attenuate the perioperative stress response.
The secondary goal of this approach is to maximize the benefit (analgesia) while
minimizing the risk (side effects of the medication being used). (653-654)
5. The goals of an acute pain management service are to evaluate and treat
postoperative pain to minimize the period of recuperation, decrease duration of
hospital stay, improve patient satisfaction, and to inhibit the development of
chronic (persistent) pain through early intervention. (653-654)
NEUROPHYSIOLOGY
OF PAIN
6. Nociception is used to describe the recognition and transmission of painful stimuli.
Pain is described as an unpleasant sensory and emotional experience caused by
actual or potential tissue damage. (652)
7. Nociceptors are the free nerve endings of afferent myelinated A-delta and
unmyelinated C nerve fibers. Nociceptors are stimulated by thermal, mechanical,
or chemical tissue damage. (652)
8. Nociceptors, on stimulation, send axonal projections to the dorsal horn of the
spinal cord and synapse on second-order neurons there. The axonal projections of
the second-order neurons cross to the contralateral half of the spinal cord and
ascend the spinothalamic tract to the thalamus in the brain. In the thalamus, these
second-order neurons synapse with third-order neurons that send axonal
projections to the sensory cortex. Before reaching the thalamus, the second-order
neurons divide and also send axonal branches to the reticular formation and
periaqueductal gray matter. (652)
9. Modulation of the painful stimulus can occur at almost every level along the
afferent neurologic pain pathway. It can occur at the site of stimulation of the
nociceptors or at any synapse. In addition, modulation of nociception can even
occur by the inhibition of the afferent sensory pathways by descending inhibitory
pathways originating at the level of the brainstem. (652)
10. Modulation of painful stimuli can occur in the periphery by decreasing or
eliminating the endogenous mediators of inflammation in the vicinity of the
nociceptor. Examples of endogenous mediators of inflammation include
prostaglandins, histamine, bradykinin, serotonin, acetylcholine, lactic acid,
hydrogen ions, and potassium ions. These endogenous inflammatory mediators
sensitize and excite nociceptors, leading to the conduction of the painful stimulus.
Pharmacologic agents that are particularly useful for the modulation of painful
stimuli in the periphery are aspirin and nonsteroidal antiinflammatory agents
(NSAIDs). These agents modulate painful stimuli by decreasing the synthesis of
prostaglandins. (652, Table 40-2)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
452
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
11. The modulation of painful stimuli can occur at the level of the spinal cord through
the effects of excitatory or inhibitory neurotransmitters in the dorsal horn of the
spinal cord. (652)
12. The modulation of painful stimuli can occur above the level of the spinal cord
through the effects of a descending inhibitory pathway that originates in the
brainstem. The descending inhibitory pathway synapses in the substantia gelatinosa
region of the spinal cord. There are at least two types of descending inhibitory
pathways, the opioid and a-adrenergic pathways. The opioid descending pathway
releases endorphins and enkephalins, whereas the a-adrenergic descending
pathway releases norepinephrine. Both these pathways work by hyperpolarizing the
nerve fibers of the ascending pain pathway and potentially negate the action
potential that would otherwise have resulted from the stimulation of the nerve
by the painful stimulus. Neurotransmitters or second messenger effectors (e.g.,
substance P, protein kinase C-g) may also play important roles in spinal cord
sensitization and chronic pain. (652, Table 40-3)
13. Examples of pain modulating neurotransmitters include glutamate, aspartate,
vasoactive intestinal polypeptide, cholecystokinin, gastrin-releasing peptide,
angiotensin, and substance P. Examples of inhibitory neurotransmitters that
are believed to modulate painful stimuli include enkephalins, endorphins, and
somatostatin. (652, Table 40-3)
14. The precise definition of preemptive analgesia is one of the major controversies in
perioperative pain medicine, and contributes to the confusion regarding its clinical
relevance. The concept is that the development of central or peripheral sensitization
of pain transmission after a traumatic injury can result in amplification of the pain
response in the postoperative period. Preemptive analgesia can be defined as an
analgesic intervention initiated before the noxious stimulus develops in order to
block peripheral and central pain transmission. Preventive analgesia can be
functionally defined as an attempt to block pain transmission prior to the injury
(incision), during the noxious insult (surgery itself), and after the injury and
throughout the recovery period. Unfortunately, few trials have examined the
concept of preventive analgesia in a rigorous fashion. Confining the definition of
preemptive analgesia to only the immediate preoperative or early intraoperative
(incisional) period may not be clinically relevant or appropriate because the
inflammatory response may last well into the postoperative period and continue
to maintain peripheral sensitization. (654)
ANALGESIA
DELIVERY SYSTEMS
15. Routes for the administration of analgesic drugs include oral, transmucosal,
transdermal, intramuscular, intrapleural, intravenous, subcutaneous, rectal,
neuraxial, and by injection to block a peripheral nerve. (654, Table 40-4)
16. The limitation of the oral administration of analgesic agents for the management of
acute postoperative pain is the lack of ability to titrate it effectively to pain and the
prolonged amount of time it takes to reach its peak effect. Patients are also limited
by their perioperative NPO status. The oral route of administration for analgesic
agents is appropriate when the pain the patient is experiencing has decreased and
there is no longer a need for rapid adjustments in the level of analgesia. (655-656)
17. The intramuscular injection of analgesic agents has a more rapid onset and more
rapidly reaches its peak effect than the oral route of administration of analgesic
agents. There are some problems with the intramuscular administration of
analgesics, however. Following intramuscular administration, the plasma
concentration of the drug can vary among patients by three to five times, making
dosing of the drug difficult. The use of this route has been replaced primarily by
intravenous patient-controlled analgesia dosing, which provides a more
standardized dosing interval. (656)
Perioperative Pain Management
453
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
18. Ketamine can be effective in small doses for postoperative analgesia partly due to its
NMDA antagonistic properties, which can attenuate central sensitization and opioid
tolerance. Low-dose ketamine infusions have a low incidence of hallucinations
or cognitive impairment. Ketamine is comparable to opioids with regard to its
side effects of dizziness, itching, nausea, or vomiting. The use of ketamine in
patients at high risk for the development of chronic postsurgical pain should
be considered. (656)
19. Buprenorphine is commonly used for detoxification or maintenance therapy for
patients with opioid abuse disorders (addiction). It is now more frequently being
prescribed for the treatment of pain in non-addicts as well. It poses additional
challenges to the anesthesiologist in the operative setting because of its
pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics. Buprenorphine is a partial agonist at the
m-opioid receptor, and when used with a full agonist, such as morphine or fentanyl,
it acts as an antagonist. Therefore the analgesia the patient experiences is less than
what the patient would normally experience for a given dose of morphine or
fentanyl. The pharmacokinetics of buprenorphine are somewhat unpredictable,
making it hard to predict when its partial agonist properties will have worn off after
the last dose of buprenorphine taken prior to surgery. This uncertainty leads to the
risk of unexpected respiratory depression from the full opioid agonist as the
buprenorphine unbinds from the opioid receptor.
There are numerous ways in which to handle the perioperative analgesic care of a
buprenorphine patient. The simplest is to maintain the buprenorphine therapy
throughout the perioperative setting by converting the oral dose to intravenous and
continuing to administer it intraoperatively and postoperatively while the patient is
NPO. Any additional analgesic needs made necessary by the surgical operation can
be addressed with an additional full agonist opioid. In this manner, the complex
pharmacokinetic properties of buprenorphine can be avoided. (656)
20. Opioids can be administered through subcutaneous, transdermal, and transmucosal
routes. Subcutaneous delivery can be an effective method for patients without
intravenous access or who need long-term access at home. Subcutaneous therapy is
primarily used for cancer patients. Transdermal fentanyl results in a variable range
of serum concentrations and analgesic response across patient populations and
requires 24 to 48 hours to reach peak levels. These limitations can lead to adverse
outcomes for patients in the perioperative period because of side effects such as
respiratory depression. The primary indication for transmucosal opioid therapy is
for an adult opioid-tolerant oncology patient for breakthrough pain. (656-657)
21. Patient-controlled analgesia (PCA) is a method of delivering an opioid for
analgesia to a patient. In this form of analgesic delivery, the patient controls his
or her own administration of the opioid by pressing a button connected to a pump.
The pump is programmed to deliver a preset small intravenous dose of opioid
when triggered by the patient. The lockout interval is the interval of time that must
pass after the last self-administered dose before the patient can deliver another
small dose of opioid to himself or herself. (654)
22. There are several advantages of patient-controlled analgesia. These include high
patient acceptance and for patients a sense of control, improved titration of drug,
and subsequent patient comfort with less total drug administered, less sedation,
improved sleep at night, and a more rapid return to physical activity after surgery.
(654-655)
23. The analgesic site of action of the neuraxial administration of opioids can be
primarily spinal or systemic, depending on their lipid solubility. There are
mechanistic differences between continuous epidural infusions of lipophilic
(e.g., fentanyl, sufentanil) and hydrophilic (e.g., morphine, hydromorphone)
opioids. For continuous epidural infusions of lipophilic opioids the analgesic site of
action is not clear, although several randomized clinical trials suggest that it is
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
454
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
systemic. Hydrophilic opioid epidural infusions have a primarily neuraxial
mechanism of action. (657)
24. Potential benefits of the neuraxial administration of opioids for postoperative
analgesia include superior pain control, improved postoperative pulmonary
function, decreases in cardiovascular complications, decreases in infectious
complications, and decreases in total hospital costs. (657)
25. Potential adverse effects of the neuraxial administration of opioids for
postoperative analgesia include pruritus, urinary retention, nausea and vomiting,
sedation, and early and delayed depression of ventilation. Local anesthetic infusions
are more likely to cause hypotension and motor block than opioid infusions.
(657-658)
26. The early depression of ventilation that is seen with the neuraxial administration of
opioids usually occurs in the first 2 hours after the administration of the opioid.
Early respiratory depression is believed to occur as a result of vascular uptake and
redistribution of the opioid. (657-658)
27. The delayed depression of ventilation that is seen with the neuraxial administration
of opioids usually occurs 6 to 24 hours after the administration of the opioid. It is
believed to be due to the cephalad spread of the opioid in the cerebrospinal fluid to
the medullary centers of the brain. The medullary centers are in the area of the
fourth cerebral ventricle. This effect may be more pronounced with the less lipid-
soluble opioids, such as morphine, than with the more lipid-soluble drugs, such
as fentanyl. The more lipid soluble the opioid is, the more readily it will attach to
opioid receptors on the spinal cord. This makes less medication available for
diffusion to the brain. The opposite occurs with the less lipid-soluble drug, leaving
more drug available for diffusion to the medullary centers. (657-658)
28. Patient characteristics contribute to the risk of depression of ventilation from the
administration of neuraxial opioid. Factors that increase the risk for the
depression of ventilation include larger dose, geriatric age group, concomitant
administration of systemic opioids or sedatives, the possibility of prolonged or
extensive surgery, the presence of comorbidities, and thoracic surgery. (657-658)
29. The lipid solubility of intrathecally administered opioids is the primary
determinant of its time of onset and duration of action. The onset time is shorter with
more lipid-soluble drugs, and the duration of action is shorter. Conversely, less
lipid-soluble drugs have a longer onset time and a prolonged duration of
action. (657)
30. Typically, the intrathecal administration of opioid is administered as a single dose
in conjunction with a local anesthetic block for a surgical procedure.
Disadvantages of a single dose intrathecal administration of opioid for the
management of acute postoperative pain include the lack of titratability and the
need for other analgesic options after the initial intrathecal opioid effect
subsides. (657)
31. The clinical impression that intrathecal opioid results in a higher incidence of side
effects when compared with the epidural administration of the same opioid
probably comes as a result of the administration of excessive doses of opioid in
the intrathecal space. The same receptors are being stimulated in both cases,
so theoretically equipotent doses at the receptor should result in similar desired
and undesired effects. (657)
32. The epidural administration of opioid requires more medication to be administered
than if it were administered intrathecally because the drug must diffuse across
the dura to reach the spinal cord and exert its effect. In addition, fat, connective
tissue, and the epidural veins all take up opioid that is deposited in the epidural
space. In contrast, the intrathecal administration of opioid places the opioid directly
Perioperative Pain Management
455
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
at its site of action. The dose of epidurally administered opioid is approximately
10 times the dose of intrathecally administered opioid to produce an equipotent
effect. (657)
33. Fentanyl administered in the epidural space is believed to produce a more segmental
band of anesthesia than morphine because of its increased lipid solubility. The
increased lipid solubility of fentanyl causes it to bind to opioid receptors in the
spinal cord adjacent to the area in which it enters the intrathecal space. Morphine,
being more hydrophilic, binds less readily and instead diffuses in the intrathecal
space. This results in a wider distribution of anesthesia with morphine than with
fentanyl when administered in the epidural space. (657)
34. The plasma concentration of fentanyl when administered intravenously is similar to
the plasma concentration of fentanyl when the same dose is administered
epidurally. This is thought to occur from the systemic absorption of fentanyl from
the epidural space by the vasculature in the epidural space. This implies that at least
part of the analgesic effect of fentanyl administered epidurally is through its
systemic effects. (657)
35. Local anesthetic added to the opioid solution for administration in the epidural
space results in a synergistic analgesic effect. This is believed to occur because of the
blockade of painful stimuli at two different sites at the spinal cord. The opioid
administered acts by binding to opioid receptors. The local anesthetic administered
acts at the nerve roots and in the dorsal root ganglia by blocking the
transmission of afferent impulses. The synergistic effect of these two classes of
drugs allows for a decreased dose of each to be administered to the patient.
This has the added benefit of a decreased risk of the potential side effects of
both drugs. (657)
36. The concern regarding the concurrent use of neuraxial analgesia and
anticoagulants is for the formation of a spinal or epidural hematoma. The incidence
of spinal or epidural hematoma related to neuraxial analgesia is rare, but can be
catastrophic and requires immediate surgical attention. General concepts for the
management of neuraxial analgesia with anticoagulation include: (1) the timing
of neuraxial needle or catheter insertion or removal should reflect the
pharmacokinetic properties of the specific anticoagulant, (2) frequent neurologic
monitoring is essential, (3) concurrent administration of multiple
anticoagulants may increase the risk of bleeding, and (4) the analgesic regimen
should be tailored to facilitate neurologic monitoring, which may be
continued in some cases for 24 hours after epidural catheter removal. (658)
37. Factors that increase the risk of postoperative epidural abscess associated with
epidural analgesia include a longer duration of anesthesia and the presence of
coexisting immunocompromising or complicating disease such as malignancy or
trauma. The overall incidence of postoperative epidural abscess associated with
epidural analgesia is extremely rare, however. (658)
ALTERNATIVE
APPROACHES TO
MANAGEMENT OF
ACUTE
POSTOPERATIVE
PAIN
38. An advantage of peripheral nerve blocks for the management of acute postoperative
pain is their ability to provide good management of postoperative pain while not
affecting the patient systemically. Thus the patient is not at risk for any of the
negative effects of systemic opioids. A disadvantage of peripheral nerve blocks for
postoperative pain is their relatively short duration of action. (659)
39. Intraarticular injection of opioids may provide analgesia for up to 24 hours
postoperatively and prevent the development of chronic postsurgical pain.
However, superiority of this delivery method over systemic administration has
not been demonstrated. Continuous intraarticular administration of bupivacaine
has been associated with chondrolysis in the glenohumeral joint. (659)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
456
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
40. Paravertebral blockade has been directly correlated with improved outcomes for
patients undergoing breast surgery. This technique has also been found to decrease
the development of chronic postsurgical pain, as well as the acute pain associated
with the procedure. (659)
41. Continuous perineural catheters for upper extremity procedures have been
associated with increased pain relief with minimal opioid supplementation with
increased patient satisfaction and sleep quality. Continuous catheters for major
foot and ankle surgery are also associated with an earlier discharge. (659-660)
42. Clonidine is beneficial in extending the duration of preoperative blockade, but
has less utility with perineural catheters. The mechanism is most likely peripheral
a2-adrenergic receptor-mediated and dose-dependent. Clonidine is a better
preemptive analgesic when added to a local anesthetic block than when used as
a single drug. Side effects, including hypotension, bradycardia, and sedation,
are less likely to occur with lower doses. (659)
43. Intrapleural regional analgesia is most frequently used for the management of acute
postoperative pain after a thoracotomy. It is achieved by the injection of a local
anesthetic solution through a catheter placed in the intrapleural space. The catheter
is often placed intraoperatively by the thoracic surgeon one interspace lower than
that of the surgical incision. The local anesthetic diffuses to the intercostal nerves
and produces a multilevel, unilateral intercostal nerve block. Unfortunately, this
technique provides little analgesia for patients unless it is actually placed in the
paravertebral space from the intrathoracic approach. An advantage of this
technique for postoperative pain management is the potential for pain relief without
hemodynamic changes associated with epidural analgesia. A disadvantage of this
technique is that the local anesthetic may be lost through the pleural drainage tubes
that are placed after a thoracotomy. Complications associated with this technique
include pneumothorax and high plasma concentrations of local anesthetic. The
majority of local anesthetic infused into the intrapleural space flows to the
dependent aspect of the patient, which is most often the lung bases where analgesia
is not needed. The efficacy of this technique for postoperative pain management is
therefore highly variable and has mostly been abandoned. This technique is less
frequently used than epidural catheters or paravertebral blocks. (Chapter 40, 10)
44. The transverse abdominis plane block has been used for many abdominal
procedures, including abdominal hysterectomy, cesarean section, and laparoscopic
cholecystectomy. Theoretical advantages of this technique over other modalities
include avoidance of both neuraxial involvement and lower extremity blockade,
decreased urinary retention, and decreased systemic side effects. Ultrasound
guidance has made this a more reliably achieved peripheral blockade. (660)
Perioperative Pain Management
457
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
Chapter
38 CRITICAL CARE
MEDICINE
Lundy Campbell, Michael A. Gropper
MECHANICAL
VENTILATION
1. List the typical indications for mechanical ventilation in the ICU.
2. What are some common causes of respiratory failure?
3. What are some common causes of ventilatory failure?
4. What are some indications for the need for airway protection?
5. What are some common modes of mechanical ventilation?
6. Describe the key ventilator settings in continuous mandatory ventilation (CMV)
mode.
7. How can the inspiratory and expiratory time be adjusted in CMV mode?
8. What effect does a patient’s breathing effort have when mechanically ventilated in
CMV mode?
9. Describe the key ventilator settings in synchronized intermittent mandatory
ventilation (SIMV) mode.
10. What effect does a patient’s breathing effort have when mechanically ventilated in
SIMV mode?
11. Describe the key ventilator settings in pressure support ventilation (PSV) mode.
12. What is positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP)?
13. How does PEEP improve oxygenation?
14. What are some possible adverse effects of PEEP?
15. What are some criteria that must be met before a patient can be considered ready for
a trial of weaning from mechanical ventilation?
16. What is the preferred method of protocol-driven weaning from mechanical
ventilation?
NONINVASIVE
POSITIVE-PRESSURE
VENTILATION
17. What is noninvasive positive-pressure ventilation (NIPPV)? What are two modes of
NIPPV?
18. What is continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP)? What are some benefits of
CPAP?
19. What is bilevel positive airway pressure (BiPAP)?
20. What are some advantages of NIPPV?
21. What are some indications for NIPPV?
22. What are three contraindications to noninvasive mechanical ventilation?
ACUTE
RESPIRATORY
DISTRESS
SYNDROME
23. What are the American-European Consensus Conference Definitions for acute lung
injury (ALI) and the acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS)?
24. List three direct causes and three indirect causes of acute respiratory distress.
25. What are the basic principles for the treatment and the management of mechanical
ventilation of patients with ALI or ARDS?
458
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
SEDATION AND
ANALGESIA IN THE
INTENSIVE CARE
UNIT
26. What are some indications for patient sedation in the intensive care unit (ICU)?
27. What are the components of the Ramsay sedation scoring system?
28. What are the common side effects of the use of opioids for the sedation of critically
ill patients?
29. What are the common side effects of the use of benzodiazepines for the sedation of
critically ill patients?
30. What are the common side effects of the use of propofol for the sedation of critically
ill patients?
31. List the common clinical findings in propofol infusion syndrome.
32. What are the advantages of ketamine as a sedative in the ICU?
33. What is the mechanism of action of dexmedetomidine? What are its hemodynamic
effects?
SHOCK
34. What defines shock?
35. List three major categories of shock. How can they be differentiated using central
venous pressure (CVP) and cardiac output (CO) measurements?
36. What are some common causes of hypovolemic shock?
37. What are the common clinical findings of hypovolemic shock?
38. What is the treatment for hypovolemic shock?
39. What are the causes of cardiogenic shock?
40. What are the common clinical findings in cardiogenic shock?
41. What is the treatment for cardiogenic shock?
42. What are some common causes of vasodilatory shock?
43. What are the common clinical findings of vasodilatory shock?
44. What is the treatment for vasodilatory shock?
45. Upon which receptor subtypes does dopamine have agonist activity?
46. Upon which receptor subtypes does epinephrine have agonist activity?
47. What are the advantages of norepinephrine use in septic shock?
48. Upon which receptor does phenylephrine have agonist activity?
49. What are the hemodynamic effects of dobutamine infusion?
50. How does vasopressin differ in its mechanism of action when compared to
norepinephrine?
ACUTE RENAL
FAILURE
51. What clinical signs may be an indication of acute renal failure (ARF)?
52. How should ARF be evaluated?
53. What are some indications for acute hemodialysis in the setting of ARF?
DELIRIUM
54. How is delirium defined?
55. What is the incidence of delirium in the adult ICU population?
56. How is mortality impacted by the presence of delirium in the critically ill?
57. What are some common causes of delirium in a patient in the ICU?
58. What is the common method of delirium assessment in the ICU?
59. What is the treatment for delirium in a patient in the ICU?
NUTRITIONAL
SUPPORT
60. What are some important clinical benefits of providing optimal nutrition to patients
in the ICU?
61. What are the advantages and disadvantages of enteral versus parenteral nutrition?
RAPID RESPONSE
TEAMS
62. How might rapid response teams improve outcomes?
INTENSIVE INSULIN
THERAPY
63. What is the current understanding of the effectiveness of intensive insulin therapy?
What are the risks of this intervention?
Critical Care Medicine
459
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
END-OF-LIFE ISSUES
64. What is the role of the physician intensivist when a patient’s family has elected to
stop treatment of a critically ill patient?
ANSWERS*
MECHANICAL
VENTILATION
1. Mechanical ventilatory support is typically initiated for the treatment of respiratory
failure due to impaired oxygenation, impaired carbon dioxide excretion
(ventilatory failure), and airway protection. Patients receive mechanical ventilatory
support to (1) reduce the work of breathing, (2) reverse progressive respiratory
acidosis or hypoxemia, (3) reduce the risk for aspiration, or (4) ensure a patent
airway with severe neck and facial swelling or trauma. (666)
2. Common causes of respiratory failure may include trauma, ARDS, sepsis,
pneumonia, and cardiogenic and noncardiogenic pulmonary edema. (666)
3. Ventilatory failure may be due to chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD),
asthma, and/or drug intoxication. (666)
4. Airway protection indications are usually limited to conditions such as altered
mental status, head and neck trauma or swelling, or significant neuromuscular
disorders. (666)
5. Common modes of mechanical ventilation include continuous mandatory
ventilation, synchronized intermittent mandatory ventilation, pressure support
ventilation, and PEEP. (666-667)
6. In CMV mode, the ventilator is programmed to deliver a set tidal volume at a set
respiratory rate, thereby resulting in the delivery of a predictable minute
ventilation. The ventilator will deliver its preset tidal volume at its preset time. (666)
7. To regulate the amount of time that the ventilator spends cycling in inspiration
and expiration, the inspiratory flow rate is set. By increasing inspiratory flow,
the set tidal volume is delivered in a shorter time, which allows more time
for exhalation. (666)
8. The patient’s breathing efforts are unsupported in CMV mode. The ventilator
continues to deliver its preset tidal volume at its preset time regardless of patient
effort. (666)
9. In SIMV mode, the ventilator is programmed to deliver a set tidal volume and
respiratory rate. In SIMV mode, however, the ventilator attempts to synchronize
mandatory breaths to the patient’s own spontaneous breaths. If the patient does not
initiate a breath within a set time, the ventilator delivers the set tidal volume as
in CMV mode. Therefore a minimum minute ventilation is maintained in
SIMV mode. (666)
10. If a patient initiates a breath during the preset time for a mandatory breath, a
preset tidal volume will be delivered. Additional breaths initiated by the patient
beyond those set in the SIMV mode are supported by the ventilator with an
augmentation of the tidal volume by a preset pressure. It is therefore
a pressure-supported breath. (666)
11. In pressure support ventilation, the ventilator does not deliver a preset tidal
volume but, instead, relies on the patient’s intrinsic respiratory drive. Typically, the
*Numbers in parentheses: numbers refer to pages, figures, or tables in Miller RD, Pardo MC: Basics of Anesthesia,
6th ed. Philadelphia, Elsevier Saunders, 2011.
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
460
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
amount of pressure support is set between 5 and 20 cm H2O pressure to ensure
adequate tidal volume and minute ventilation. In this mode, tidal volume will vary
with patient effort. To use pressure support ventilation, the patient must possess
an intact respiratory drive, and no residual skeletal muscle paralysis can be
present. (666)
12. PEEP is positive airway pressure that is applied at the end of expiration during
mechanical ventilation. The typical PEEP range is between 5 and 20 cm H2O
pressure. (667)
13. PEEP functions to increase mean airway pressure and thereby minimize atelectasis.
PEEP increases the functional residual capacity of the lungs and, in patients with a
lung injury, results in improved pulmonary compliance. The recruitment of alveoli,
or the inflation of previously collapsed alveoli, by PEEP can lead to improved
oxygenation in a mechanically ventilated patient. (667)
14. Excessively high levels of PEEP can overdistend and damage alveoli. Excessive
PEEP may also cause hemodynamic collapse by reducing preload to both the right
and the left ventricles with a resultant fall in cardiac output. Finally, if there is
inadequate time allowed for the exhalation of the delivered tidal volume, there
can be a buildup of end-expiratory pressure that can lead to hemodynamic
collapse. (667)
15. To consider weaning from mechanical ventilation, a patient must have recovered
from the process that originally required mechanical ventilatory support, be
hemodynamically stable, be able to manage their pulmonary secretions, and be able
to protect their airway against the aspiration of gastric contents with an intact
mental status and gag reflex. The patient should be maintaining adequate
oxygen saturation with an inspired oxygen concentration of 40% or less, be able to
initiate breaths, and be strong enough to generate an adequate tidal volume.
The patient’s respiratory strength is usually considered sufficient for weaning if the
patient is able to generate a negative inspiratory force of at least 20 cm H2O or
a vital capacity of at least 10 mL/kg. In normal tidal breathing, a tidal volume of
at least 5 mL/kg and a minute ventilation of no more than 10 L/min should be
observed to ensure readiness for weaning from mechanical ventilation.
In general, higher tidal volumes and lower respiratory rates predict success in
weaning from mechanical ventilation. (667)
16. Protocol-driven weaning has been shown to reduce the length of time that patients
remain on mechanical ventilatory support when compared to traditional physician
weaning methods. Typically, protocol-driven weaning is managed by bedside
providers (nurses and respiratory therapists) without the need for continuous
physican input. In this method, patients are weaned from mechanical ventilation via
a standard protocol, and when a patient meets the criteria for extubation, a
physician is notified and the patient is extubated if the physician agrees. From
multiple clinical trials, it has been shown that the fastest and most cost-effective
weaning method is once-daily CPAP or T-piece weaning trials that are protocol
driven by nurses and respiratory therapists. (667-668)
NONINVASIVE
POSITIVE-PRESSURE
VENTILATION
17. NIPPV is the application of positive pressure to provide support of oxygenation
and ventilation without an endotracheal tube. Two modes of NIPPV are (1) CPAP
and (2) BiPAP. (668)
18. CPAP is constant positive airway pressure that is applied throughout both the
inspiratory and expiratory phases of ventilation. CPAP improves oxygenation
and ventilation by recruitment of collapsed alveoli, helps maintain a patent airway
in the setting of airway obstruction such as sleep apnea, and increases mean
airway pressure in patients with COPD.
Critical Care Medicine
461
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
19. BiPAP is similar to pressure support with PEEP ventilation because the ventilator
cycles between two sets of positive-pressure settings. Positive pressure is delivered
throughout the respiratory cycle, with a higher positive pressure being applied
during inspiration. With BiPAP, a “backup” ventilator rate may be set. (668)
20. When compared to mechanical ventilation with an endotracheal tube,
noninvasive positive-pressure ventilation has a reduced risk of ventilator-
associated pneumonia, can be rapidly and easily applied with a properly fitted face
mask, and can be used during short periods only, as during sleep. (668)
21. Noninvasive mechanical ventilation, or noninvasive positive-pressure
ventilation (NIPPV) is indicated in a patient who has a potentially rapidly reversible
pulmonary process that requires ventilatory support. In patients with acute
exacerbations of COPD, there is strong evidence that NIPPV is an effective treatment
that can reduce the need for subsequent endotracheal intubation and reduce
mortality. NIPPV has been used successfully to treat other forms of acute respiratory
failure such as pneumonia, congestive heart failure, and postsurgical respiratory
failure. NIPPV may be just as effective as conventional ventilation with respect
to oxygenation and removal of carbon dioxide in these patients, and it is
associated with fewer serious complications and a shorter ICU stay. (668)
22. There are specific contraindications to the use of NIPPV. The most frequently
encountered problem is lack of patient compliance. Because NIPPV requires a
tight-fitting mask for effective ventilation, many patients find it uncomfortable and
it is poorly tolerated by those who are claustrophobic. There is also a subset of
patients in whom NIPPV will not be effective in reversing their respiratory and/or
ventilatory failure. It has been well-shown in the medical literature that continued
use of NIPPV is harmful in this patient subset. In addition, NIPPV provides no
airway protection, so it should not be used in patients with altered mental status
since they may not be able to protect their own airway against aspiration.
The same is also true for any patients who may have other reasons for an inability
to protect their own airway, such as neuromuscular weakness or facial trauma
or swelling. (668)
23. The American-European Consensus Conference defines ALI and ARDS as follows:
The lung injury must have an acute onset.
There must be bilateral infiltrates present on chest radiographs.
The pulmonary artery occlusion pressure must be 18 mm Hg or less, or there must
be clinical absence of left atrial hypertension.
There must be a defined gas exchange problem as evidenced by arterial to
inspired measured oxygen levels (PaO2/FIO2 ratio). For ALI this ratio must be less
than or equal to 300 (PaO2/FIO2300), and for ARDS this ratio must be less than
or equal to 200 (PaO2/FIO2200). (669, Table 41-1)
ACUTE
RESPIRATORY
DISTRESS
SYNDROME
24. Direct causes of acute lung injury include pneumonia, the aspiration of stomach
contents, pulmonary contusion, reperfusion pulmonary edema, amniotic fluid
embolus, and inhalational injury. Indirect causes of acute lung injury include
sepsis, severe trauma, cardiopulmonary bypass, drug overdose, acute
pancreatitis, near drowning, and transfusion-related acute lung injury (TRALI).
(669, Table 41-2)
25. The treatment of ARDS generally remains supportive. The use of low tidal
volume ventilation in patients with ALI or ARDS (6 mL/kg) versus the traditional
standard tidal volumes (12 mL/kg) has been shown to decrease mortality. Lower
tidal volumes function to “protect” the lung by preventing overdistention of
remaining normal lung regions. Patients who are ventilated with lower tidal
volumes tend to have lower arterial oxygen tension and higher arterial carbon
dioxide tension. This is termed permissive hypercapnia and hypoxemia, in
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
462
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
recognition of the fact that to normalize arterial blood gas, significantly more
harmful mechanical ventilation may be required. (669)
SEDATION AND
ANALGESIA IN THE
INTENSIVE CARE
UNIT
26. Indications for patient sedation in the ICU include the provision of analgesia,
anxiolysis, or amnesia and to protect the patient from removing intravenous lines,
catheters, drains, or tubes. In certain circumstances sedation may be administered to
prevent seizures, decrease intracranial pressure, treat for the withdrawal from
substances such as ethanol, and to sedate while administering concomitant
neuromuscular blocking drugs. (669)
27. The RASS is a widely used tool to help quantify the level of sedation of a patient in
the ICU. It is a linear scale from 1 to 6 that describes a patient’s ability to respond
to stimulation while under sedation. The stimulation provided to the patient is
either a verbal command or a light glabellar tap. The response to this stimulation
varies from a RASS score of 1: “Anxious and agitated or restless, or both,” to a
RASS score of 6: “No response to a light glabellar tap.” The RASS score of 3:
“Responding to commands only” is usually considered to be the optimum
sedation level. (669-670, Table 41-3)
28. Opioids may be useful for sedation in the critically ill patient when the patient
has pain either as a result of surgery, from indwelling catheters, or for sedation
during a painful procedure, such as chest tube placement. The most dangerous side
effect of opioids is that of respiratory and central nervous system sedation that
can be synergistic when combined with other sedatives, such as benzodiazipines.
Other side effects of opioids when used for sedation include constipation,
urinary retention, and tolerance. (670-671)
29. Due to their mechanism of action on GABA receptors, benzodiazepines have
multiple side effects. These include significant CNS depression (especially when
combined with opioids), accumulation of drug or active metabolites when
administered over a prolonged period, and life-threatening withdrawl if removed
too quickly in patients who have become tolerant of their effects. In addition,
when sedation with benzodiazepines is compared to dexmedetomidine, patients
receiving benzodiazepines appear to have longer duration of mechanical
ventilation, as well as an increased risk of delirium. (671)
30. Despiteitseaseofuse,propofolhasmanysignificantsideeffectswhichmaylimititsuse
in the ICU. Propofol causes hypotension by decreasing myocardial contractility
and reducing systemic vascular resistance. In hemodynamically unstable patients
with low cardiac output or low afterload (or both), propofol must be used with caution.
Propofol is also a profound respiratory depressant. Although most patients who
receive propofol in the ICU are intubated and maintained on mechanical ventilation,
occasionally propofol may beusedinnonintubated patients. Inthesepatients, extreme
caution must be exercised to prevent severe respiratory depression with profound
respiratory acidosis. Propofol is formulated in a lecithin base and therefore has a high
fat content. Patients who are receiving long-term infusions of this drug must be
periodically checked for hypertriglyceridemia. There have been many case reports of
patients developing severe pancreatitis after prolonged propofol administration. (671)
31. This is a rare syndrome that is associated with the prolonged use of propofol as a
sedative agent in the ICU setting. Generally, propofol infusion syndrome is defined
as a relatively sudden onset of metabolic acidosis with cardiac dysfunction and at
least one of the following findings: rhabdomyolysis, hypertriglyceridemia, and
renal failure. Some studies have also used hepatomegaly due to fatty liver
infiltration and lipemia as additional criteria. The early cardiac findings include
bradycardia and right bundle branch block. If propofol infusion syndrome is
suspected, the propofol infusion should be discontinued immediately and another
sedative agent should be chosen, as the mortality of this syndrome has been
reported to be as high as 80%. (671)
Critical Care Medicine
463
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
32. Ketamine has proved to be useful in the ICU because of its ability to produce
profound analgesia without significant respiratory depression. This makes ketamine
an excellent choice for patients with chronic pain who may require excessively large
doses of opioids for pain relief, or in patients who are already on large doses of
narcotics and in whom a further increase of narcotics will have minimal effects due
to tolerance. Ketamine is also useful for patients who need to undergo brief, painful
procedures in the ICU. Ketamine also has intrinsic sympathomimetic properties that
increase systemic blood pressure and heart rate during its infusion. This may be
useful when sedation and analgesia are required for a hemodynamically unstable
patient. Ketamine is often combined with propofol in such patients to counteract the
reduced blood pressure associated with propofol while providing adjuvant
analgesia. Ketamine may not be useful in neurosurgical patients because it increases
intracranial pressure, increases cerebral metabolic oxygen requirements, and
decreases the seizure threshold. (671-672)
33. Dexmedetomidine acts by binding to a2 receptors both centrally and peripherally.
Central a2-binding at presynaptic neurons inhibits the release of norepinephrine.
The central effects of these drugs produce analgesia, sedation, anxiolysis, and
hypotension. At the level of the spinal cord, a2-activation is thought to modulate
pain pathways, and this is the probable site of action for the analgesic effects of
this drug. With increasing doses, dexmedetomidine begins to bind peripheral a1 and
a2 receptors, inducing vasoconstriction and hypertension at very high doses.
Overall, in the recommended dosage range, the effect is to decrease systemic
blood pressure by means of a decrease in both systemic vascular resistance and
heart rate. (672)
SHOCK
34. Shock is a clinical condition in which there is inadequate tissue perfusion and
oxygenation to end organs such as the brain, heart, liver, kidneys, and abdominal
viscera. Early in its course, shock may be reversible, but ongoing shock results in
multiorgan system failure and ultimately death. (673)
35. The major categories of shock include hypovolemic, cardiogenic, and septic (or
other forms of vasodilatory shock). In hypovolemic shock, both CO and CVP are
reduced due to decreased venous return. In contrast, cardiogenic shock is typified
by a decrease in CO due to poor pump function, but CVP is usually increased.
Finally, in septic shock, CVP is usually decreased due to profound vasodilation and
pooling of blood in the splanchnic beds, but CO is typically increased in early
sepsis. However, CO may be normal or even depressed in later more
advanced septic shock. (673, Table 41-5)
36. The most common cause of hypovolemic shock is major blood loss, as can occur in
trauma, surgery, or with massive gastrointestinal hemorrhage. (673)
37. Hypovolemic shock is caused by inadequate circulating blood volume, and
therefore decreased preload and cardiac output. There is usually a baroreceptor-
mediated reflex tachycardia and an increase in systemic vascular resistance.
Gluconeogenesis is induced, as is sodium reabsorption from the kidneys. In addition
to being hypotensive, the patient may appear cool, clammy, and pale with increased
plasma glucose levels and decreased urine output. (673)
38. The treatment for hypovolemic shock requires adequate intravenous access and
aggressive fluid therapy to restore circulating blood volume. Fluid resuscitation can
be guided by the use of a central venous monitor or arterial blood pressure variation,
as well as laboratory analysis of metabolic variables. Vasopressor therapy can be
used to increase systemic blood pressure, but is generally not effective until
circulating blood volume is restored. (673-674)
39. Cardiogenic shock occurs when the heart is not able to pump an adequate cardiac
output. The most common cause of cardiogenic shock is myocardial infarction.
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
464
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
Other causes include severe myocarditis, endocarditis, or a tear or rupture of a
portion of the heart. (674)
40. If the right ventricle is the initial site of failure, the increased right-sided preload
will be noted as increased CVP, detected clinically as distended neck veins,
peripheral edema, or hepatic congestion. If the left ventricle fails, the increased
preload can be detected as increased pulmonary capillary wedge pressure, which
causes cardiogenic pulmonary edema and rales on physical examination. In either
scenario, cardiac output is low, and systemic blood pressure is therefore reduced.
On physical examination, a patient in cardiogenic shock appears cool and pale
secondary to the high systemic vascular resistance and shunting of blood away
from the skin and skeletal muscle beds. (674)
41. The goal for treatment of cardiogenic shock is to improve cardiac output and
decrease afterload to reduce myocardial demand. Resuscitation should be guided
by the use of central venous monitors, direct arterial blood pressure measurements,
and echocardiography. Vasodilator therapy can be used to reduce preload and
afterload. Dobutamine therapy may also be useful. Treatment with diuretics must be
done with extreme caution. In cardiogenic shock refractory to treatment an
intraaortic balloon counterpulsation (IABP) or ventricular assist device (VAD)
may be indicated. (674)
42. The most common cause of vasodilatory shock is sepsis. Other causes of
vasodilatory shock include anaphylaxis, stroke, and spinal shock as from a high
spinal cord injury. Vasodilatory shock is also the final common pathway for
late-shock stages of cardiogenic and hypovolemic shock. (674)
43. Intheinitialstagesofvasodilatoryshockanincreaseincardiacoutputmaycompensate
for the decrease in systemic vascular resistance and the patient may appear warm and
vasodilated. With worsening metabolic acidosis myocardial perfusion becomes
impaired, and the patient will become increasingly cool and clammy. (674)
44. The treatment for vasodilatory shock involves adequate fluid volume resuscitation
in conjunction with possible vasopressor therapy. The underlying cause of the
disorder should also be treated. In septic shock early identification of the source
of the infection and treatment with broad-spectrum antibiotics is necessary.
(674-675)
45. Dopamine has both direct and indirect agonist activity at the dopamine1 (DA1),
b1, and a1 receptors. Its pharmacologic action varies with dose and within individuals.
At low doses (0 to 5 mg/kg/min), dopamine has predominantly DA1 receptor agonist
activity. This causes dilation of the renal arterioles and promotes diuresis. At moderate
doses (5 to 10 mg/kg/min), the b-effects of dopamine begin to dominate. These b1-
effects cause an increase in myocardial contractility, heart rate, and cardiac output. At
highdoses(10to20 mg/kg/min),thea1-agonisteffectspredominateanddopamineacts
toincreasevascularsmoothmuscletone,which increasessystemicvascularresistance.
This causes a decrease insplanchnicand renalblood flow similar tothe effectsof high-
dose phenylephrine. (675)
46. Epinephrine causes direct stimulation of a1, b1, and b2 receptors. At lower doses,
epinephrine acts primarily as a b receptor agonist, whereas at higher doses, it has
increasing a1 receptor effects. Increases in heart rate, myocardial activity, and
cardiac output reflect b1 receptor effects. The principal b2-effects are bronchial
and vascular smooth muscle relaxation. At higher doses, the a1-effects of
epinephrine act to increase systemic vascular resistance and reduce splanchnic
and renal blood flow while maintaining both cerebral and myocardial
perfusion pressure. (675-676)
47. Norepinephrine is a direct-acting adrenergic agonist with activity at both the
a1 and b1 receptors. As a result, norepinephrine increases blood pressure through its
a1-effects on increasing systemic vascular resistance. The b1-effects of
Critical Care Medicine
465
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
norepinephrine also contribute to increased myocardial contractility and cardiac
output. There has been renewed interest in norepinephrine specifically for the
treatment of septic shock. It is thought that this b1-activity may help offset the
myocardial dysfunction associated with severe sepsis and septic shock. Both
preclinical and limited clinical data suggest that norepinephrine is the pressor of
choice for patients in septic shock. (676)
48. Phenylephrine is a direct-acting, highly selective a1 receptor agonist which
increases systemic vascular resistance and arterial blood pressure. Phenylephrine
can cause a reflex bradycardia, which can decrease cardiac output. Phenylephrine
can be used to increase systemic vascular resistance in shock, but in high doses
higher than 200 mg/min it has little additional therapeutic effect and may cause
splanchnic ischemia. (676)
49. Dobutamine is a mixed b1 and b2 receptor agonist. As a result, the primary effect of
dobutamine is to increase both heart rate and myocardial contractility.
Dobutamine also relaxes vascular smooth muscle via binding at b2 receptors. This
combination acts to increase cardiac output by improving ventricular function
(b1-effect) and decreasing systemic vascular resistance (b2-effect). Because of its
b2-effects, some patients may become hypotensive, particularly those with
decreased intravascular volume. (676)
50. Vasopressin is a potent vasoconstrictor that does not work via the adrenergic
receptor system as do most other vasopressors and inotropes. Rather, vasopressin
binds to peripheral vasopressin receptors to induce potent vasoconstriction via
phosphodiesterase inhibition. In contrast to norepinephrine, vasopressin has no
intrinsic inotropic effects. However, vasopressin remains efficacious as a
vasoconstrictor even in the setting of severe acidosis. As such vasopressin may
provide a useful alternative to catecholamines, which do not function well in
the setting of profound acidemia. (676)
ACUTE RENAL
FAILURE
51. The definition of ARF varies, but it is often described as an abrupt decrease in renal
function, which is defined as urine output less than 0.5 mL/kg/hr or a 50% increase
in serum creatinine over a 24-hour period. (676-677)
52. Acute renal failure is normally categorized as prerenal (inadequate renal perfusion
pressure), intrarenal (vascular, glomerular, or interstitial dysfunction), or postrenal
(usually obstructive). In the management of ARF, it is essential to recognize and treat
prerenal failure by ensuring adequate fluid resuscitation and systemic blood pressure,
as well as to identify any postrenal obstruction through the use of ultrasound or other
imaging techniques. If the ARF has been determined to be intrarenal, it most likely
represents acute tubular necrosis. In addition to the history, which may include
exposure to nephrotoxic drugs or prolonged hypotension, examination of urinary
sediment may show renal tubular epithelial cells or granular casts. (676-677)
53. Indications for acute hemodialysis include excessive intravascular fluid volume,
hyperkalemia, acidemia, uremia, toxins, or other electrolyte abnormalities. (677)
DELIRIUM
54. Delirium is defined by the DSM-IV as a disturbance of consciousness with
reduced ability to focus or sustain attention that is associated with a change in
cognition or perceptual disturbances that are not accounted for by a preexisting
dementia. (677)
55. Delirium is widespread in the adult ICU population with estimates of an incidence
between 48% and 87%, depending on the acutal population studied. Because
there are two forms of delirium, the hyperactive and hypoactive subtypes, the
diagnosis is difficult to make and the actual incidence of delirium is frequently
underestimated. Hyperactive delirium is usually quite obvious when present,
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
466
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
because patients are typically combative and have profound altered mental status.
Hypoactive delirium on the other hand is much more incidious, since patients are
typically quiet and may appear calm and content on casual examination. (677)
56. Delirium is not a benign condition. Numerous studies have shown an increased risk
of mortality among ICU patients who develop delirium. These risks vary from a
greater than threefold increase in 6-month mortality to a 10% increase in the risk of
death for every day spent in a state of delirium in the ICU. Delirium is associated
with an increased number of days a patient will spend mechanically ventilated, as
well as increased days in the ICU and hospital. In addition, delirium is associated
with an increased risk of developing dementia in later life. It is unclear whether
delirium may actually cause dementia, or if patients who are at greatest risk of
dementia or have an early subclinical form of dementia are more likely to have
episodes of delirium in the ICU. (677)
57. The causes and conditions assciated with delirium in the ICU setting are
numerous. They include preexisting cognitive impairment, advanced age,
increasing severity of illness, multiorgan dysfunction, sepsis, immobilization, sleep
deprivation, pain, mechanical ventilation, and the use of psychoactive drugs,
particularly benzodiazepines. (677)
58. To actively treat delirium, it must be diagnosed first. The most widely used method
of monitoring for delirium is the CAM-ICU assessment for delirium. CAM stands for
confusion assessment method, and this tool should be used daily to assess for
delirium in all ICU patients except those who are deeply sedated or comatose. (677)
59. Delirium in a patient in the ICU setting should be treated by first searching for
an underlying cause and correcting the cause. Attempts should be made to
actively orient the patient to their surroundings. If delirium still occurs,
haloperidol may be helpful in improving orderly thought processes. (677)
NUTRITIONAL
SUPPORT
60. Providing optimal nutrition to patients in the ICU is important for wound healing, to
maintain skeletal muscle mass and strength, and for the prevention of infection.
Optimal nutrition may facilitate weaning from mechanical ventilation and
rehabilitation. (677)
61. Patients may be fed either enterally (usually by a nasojejunal feeding tube) or
parenterally (intravenously). If possible, it is always preferable to feed enterally.
Advantages of enteral feeding include decreased cost, ease of administration,
maintenance of normal gastrointestinal physiology, and less risk for infection.
Parenteral nutrition formulas are easily infected, which greatly increases the risk
for catheter-related blood stream infections. Additionally, without enteral feeding,
the normal gastrointestinal tract begins to atrophy. Such atrophy causes loss of
mucosal thickness, alteration of pH, and loss of gastrointestinal tract–associated
lymphoid tissue. These changes can result in replacement of normal gastrointestinal
tract flora with more pathologic organisms and increased translocation of these
organisms across the increasingly atrophic gastrointestinal tissue, leading to an
increased risk of sepsis. Parenteral nutrition is usually reserved for those
patients in whom enteral feeding is not possible. This includes patients with
bowel obstruction or ischemia, short gut syndrome, or other malabsorption
problems. (678)
RAPID RESPONSE
TEAMS
62. Rapid response teams frequently use ICU professionals, including physician
intensivists, critical care nurse practitioners, ICU nurses, and respiratory therapists.
These teams form a multidisciplinary group to evaluate and treat patients early in
the course of a physiologic decline, and make interventions which will hopefully
avert an impending cardiopulmonary arrest. (678)
Critical Care Medicine
467
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
INTENSIVE INSULIN
THERAPY
63. Recently, there has been considerable controversy regarding the optimum method
of blood glucose control in critically ill patients. Initially, it was thought that
intensive insulin therapy to achieve a blood glucose level between 80 to 100 mg/dL
would improve survival in ICU patients. This notion has been questioned, and
recent studies have shown that intensive insulin therapy to keep very tight glucose
control does not improve survival, but increases the risks of significant
hypoglycemia and actually increases mortality. This is in part due to increased
episodes of hypoglycemia associated with strict control. Currently, the best level
at which blood glucose should be maintained in critically ill patients has not
been elucidated, but the evidence would support maintaining a blood glucose level
in a moderate range between 140 to 180 mg/dL. This level minimizes the risks
of severe hypoglycemia (less than 40 mg/dL) and hyperglycemia
(greater than 200 mg/dL). (678)
END-OF-LIFE ISSUES
64. The physician intensivist should not regard death as a failure, but rather as a normal
course of life. Indeed, the physician may be called upon for his or her professional
opinion when the family is making its decision. Once a family has elected to
stop treatment of a critically ill patient, the physician should attempt to make the
passing of life as dignified as possible. Mechanical ventilatory support can be
terminated and either T-piece ventilation or extubation of the trachea should take
place. Vasopressor therapy and hemodialysis may be discontinued. In addition,
patients should be given adequate sedation for the relief of discomfort, but not
to “hasten” death. (678-679)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
468
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
Chapter
39 TRAUMA, BIOTERRORISM,
AND NATURAL DISASTERS
Eric Y. Lin
ACUTE
MANAGEMENT OF
TRAUMA PATIENTS
1. Trauma is the most common cause of death in what age group?
2. What resources are available at hospitals specializing in trauma (e.g., “level 1”
trauma centers)?
3. In reference to traumatic injuries, what is “The Golden Hour”?
4. What are the management priorities when caring for a trauma patient?
5. What is ATLS? What is its relevance to all trauma providers?
6. What are the “ABCDEs” of trauma?
7. A motor vehicle accident victim arrives with an endotracheal tube in situ, a blood
pressure of 80/60, heart rate 120, and an obvious right ankle deformity with
exposed bone. What is the first step in management of this patient?
8. List the indications for endotracheal intubation after life-threatening trauma.
9. Prior to the arrival of a trauma patient, what should providers do to prepare for
possible endotracheal intubation?
10. What intravenous medications are most commonly used to intubate the trachea in
severely injured patients?
11. In the context of traumatic brain injury, what is a plateau wave?
12. How should a trauma patient’s head be positioned for asleep endotracheal
intubation if the stability of the cervical spine is unknown?
13. In the event of airway obstruction and an inability to perform endotracheal
intubation, how should the airway be secured?
14. How is shock defined in trauma care? What blood pressure and heart rate values are
consistent with shock?
15. What are the most sensitive and specific markers of shock in trauma patients?
16. Into what three anatomic spaces can a trauma patient massively hemorrhage? How
would identification of orthopedic injuries limit internal bleeding?
17. What degree of chest tube output requires operative intervention?
18. What does persistent hematuria in a trauma patient indicate?
19. What is the treatment for hypovolemic shock following injury?
20. What is the definition of massive transfusion? What is the significance of blood
product ratios in massive transfusion?
21. What is the Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) and how is it used to evaluate a trauma
patient? What GCS score is considered “severe”? Why do patients with severe
traumatic brain injury (TBI) require endotracheal intubation, even if protecting their
airway?
22. What secondary insults should be avoided in patients with traumatic brain injury?
23. At what intracranial pressure (ICP) is treatment frequently recommended? Name
some methods used to treat an increased ICP.
24. What osmotic diuretic is commonly used to decrease an elevated ICP?
469
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
25. Why should glucose-containing intravenous solutions be avoided in patients with
traumatic brain injury?
26. Should corticosteroids be administered to a patient with traumatic brain injury and
signs of an elevated ICP?
27. When should hyperventilation be performed to decrease ICP? What is the danger of
excessive hyperventilation?
28. When does a trauma patient require cervical spine stabilization at the time of initial
assessment? How do trauma providers “clear” a patient’s cervical spine?
29. How is the “E” of the “ABCDEs” addressed in the initial evaluation of a trauma
patient?
30. How does the initial evaluation of a burn injury patient differ from other trauma
patients?
31. What are some indications for endotracheal intubation in the trauma patient with a
burn injury? What is the danger of delaying endotracheal intubation in a patient
with suspected inhalational injury?
32. How is the percentage of body surface area burned estimated in an adult?
33. Why should burn patients be initially placed on 100% oxygen, regardless of pulse
oximetry reading?
34. Why do burn patients require larger than typical amounts of fluid resuscitation?
What volume of intravenous fluid should be initially ordered?
35. What type of fluid should be used to resuscitate burn patients? Why do burn patients
often receive a different volume over the first 24 hours than that initially
calculated?
36. How should providers evaluate a patient with a suspected closed-head injury?
37. What is a plateau wave in the ICP wave tracing?
EMERGENCY
SURGERY FOR
TRAUMA
38. How does the time since a patient’s last meal affect the initial airway management of
a trauma patient?
39. How does the maintenance of general anesthesia differ in emergency trauma
surgery compared to elective outpatient surgery?
40. How can movement during surgery be prevented if a trauma patient is too unstable
to tolerate high levels of general anesthetic agents?
41. What are the basic principles of intraoperative fluid management for trauma
patients needing emergency surgery?
42. What diagnostic tests are used to guide intraoperative fluid therapy?
43. What preparations are needed prior to surgical opening of the peritoneum in an
exploratory laparotomy for abdominal injuries?
44. What injuries might result from trauma to the abdomen? How is the diagnosis of
intraabdominal hemorrhage made in a trauma patient?
45. What is “damage control” surgery and how does it benefit trauma patients?
46. What is the treatment for a hypotensive motorcycle accident victim with pelvic
instability on examination and presumed pelvic bleeding?
47. What is the definition of abdominal compartment syndrome?
MASS CASUALTY
DISASTERS
48. What types of mass casualty disasters are possible? What are intentional disasters?
49. How long should hospitals be prepared to manage mass casualty disasters before
state and national resources arrive?
50. What roles do anesthesia providers play during mass casualty events?
51. What are the goals of mass casualty triage? How are patients classified? What is an
“expectant” mass casualty patient?
52. Where does decontamination of mass casualty patients occur?
53. What are the advantages of ketamine, when compared to other anesthetic agents, in
facilitating surgical procedures during mass casualty scenarios?
54. What are the risks of neuraxial blockade in mass casualty patients?
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
470
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
NUCLEAR
EXPOSURE
55. How does the initial assessment of a trauma patient differ if the injuries occurred
during a nuclear power plant explosion?
56. How are nuclear disaster patients decontaminated?
57. What are the typical findings in acute radiation syndrome and what can be done to
prevent it?
CHEMICAL AND
BIOLOGIC
TERRORISM
58. What are “category A” agents, with respect to bioterrorism?
59. The appearance of five young patients in the emergency department with low-grade
fever and myalgias for several days, who all now present with severe substernal
chest pain and severe hypoxemia, should raise suspicions of exposure to what
bioterrorism agent? What finding on chest radiograph would support this
diagnosis? What else should be done for these patients and exposed individuals?
60. How do the cutaneous manifestations of smallpox and varicella zoster differ?
61. How long is aerosolized plague viable if released in weaponized form? How is a
patient with pneumonic plague managed?
62. A group of travelers were exposed to an unknown vapor during a terrorist attack.
Twelve hours later, several of those exposed experience difficulty breathing and
progressive weakness, with decreased salivation and urinary retention. What
category A bioterrorism agent is the most likely cause of these symptoms? What
treatment is available, and what precautions should a care provider take? How
would the presumed agent differ if those exposed had increased salivation and
urinary incontinence?
63. What is a nerve agent?
64. What is the treatment for Sarin-exposed individuals? How does pretreatment with
pyridostigmine provide protection from nerve gas exposure?
ANSWERS*
ACUTE
MANAGEMENT OF
TRAUMA PATIENTS
1. Trauma is the leading cause of death among those younger than 45 years old. An
estimated 5 million people worldwide die each year from injuries. (681)
2. Specialized trauma centers maintain the staff, space, and supplies required to
provide immediate trauma care. This includes a number of different physician
specialties (emergency medicine, trauma surgery, anesthesiology, neurosurgery,
diagnostic and interventional radiology, orthopedic surgery), nursing staff,
dedicated patient care areas in the emergency department, operating rooms,
intensive care unit (ICU), immediate diagnostic resources, and a blood bank. In the
United States, a hospital designated as a level 1 trauma center must be able
to provide such services on an immediate basis 24 hours a day. (681)
3. “The Golden Hour” refers to the first hour after a patient sustains major injuries.
Most trauma-related deaths occur during this first hour, usually as a result of
uncontrolled hemorrhage. Early recognition and treatment of shock is therefore
a major priority in acute trauma care. (681)
4. The immediate priorities in acute management of trauma patients are to keep the
patient alive, identify life-threatening injuries, stop any ongoing bleeding, and
provide definitive treatment as early as possible. (681)
*Numbers in parentheses: numbers refer to pages, figures, or tables in Miller RD, Pardo MC: Basics of Anesthesia,
6th ed. Philadelphia, Elsevier Saunders, 2011.
Trauma, Bioterrorism, and Natural Disasters
471
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
5. ATLS is the acronym for the Advanced Trauma Life Support course that is
administered worldwide through the American College of Surgery’s Committee on
Trauma. ATLS is important to trauma providers because it provides a standardized
algorithm that can be universally applied to all trauma patients, regardless of a
provider’s background or available resources. While trauma providers may vary
from the basic ATLS algorithm based on availability of certain resources, knowledge
of ATLS is useful to all trauma providers because it establishes a baseline for trauma
management and a universal language (e.g., primary survey, secondary survey,
ABCDEs) that providers all share. (682)
6. The “ABCDEs” of trauma refers to the appropriate sequence of priorities in trauma
management: Airway, Breathing, Circulation, Disability (neurologic status),
Exposure/Environment. Providers must immediately assess the ABCDEs, in
sequence, when initially evaluating a trauma patient. Compromise at any step
should be corrected before moving on to the next. (681-685, Table 42-1)
7. Acute management of any trauma patient must begin with confirmation of a patent
airway, therefore the first step in managing this patient is to confirm proper position
of the endotracheal tube (ETT). Capnography, auscultation of bilateral breath
sounds, pulse oximetry, direct laryngoscopy, arterial blood gases, and fiber-optic
bronchoscopy are all commonly used to confirm that an “in situ” ETT is, in fact,
in the trachea. (682)
8. Indications for endotracheal intubation after life-threatening trauma include
inadequate airway protection, impending loss of airway (e.g., inhalational injury,
expanding neck hematoma), laryngeal or tracheal injury, inadequate ventilation or
oxygenation, severe head injury, and need for surgery under general anesthesia.
(682, Table 42-2)
9. Management of a trauma patient should include prior preparation of functioning
suction, oxygen delivery devices (oxygen source, breathing circuit, ventilator),
airway equipment (face mask, oral/nasal airways, intubation equipment),
pharmaceuticals (for intubation of the trachea and management of hemodynamics),
intravenous access with fluids and tubing, monitors, and personal protective
equipment. Assistants to help with cervical spine and aspiration precautions
should be designated, as well as equipment and personnel needed for a
surgical airway if endotracheal intubation cannot be performed. (682-683,
Table 42-3)
10. Etomidate or ketamine are most often used as the intravenous induction agent for
severely injured patients, given the risk of hypovolemic shock and hemodynamic
instability with induction. Propofol can be used for induction of stable patients
without signs of shock. Succinylcholine is the most commonly used neuromuscular
blocking agent to quickly provide optimal conditions for rapid sequence intubation
of the trachea. Succinylcholine can be safely used in trauma and burn patients
within the first 24 hours after injury, provided no other contraindications exist.
(682-683)
11. A plateau wave is an abrupt and sustained increase in intracranial pressure that can
occur in patients with traumatic brain injury, often in response to painful
stimulation. This severe intracranial hypertension can last for 20 minutes before
resolving, often dropping rapidly to a level lower than the previous baseline.
(683, Figure 42-1)
12. If a patient’s cervical spine stability is unknown and the airway must be secured,
asleep endotracheal intubation should proceed with the patient’s head stabilized
in the neutral position on a flat, rigid surface. Such manual, in-line
stabilization should be performed by an assistant whose goal during intubation
is to prevent atlanto-occipital extension during direct laryngoscopy.
(683-684, Table 42-3)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
472
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
13. Inability to mask ventilate or intubate the trachea necessitates immediate invasive
intervention such as emergency cricothyrotomy or tracheotomy. (683)
14. Shock is defined as inadequate perfusion to vital organs. Low, normal, and high
blood pressure and heart rate can be seen in patients with shock. Compensatory
mechanisms and other factors, such as pain and agitation, allow patients with shock
to maintain normal or even elevated blood pressure and/or heart rate.
Decompensated hypovolemic shock, or late shock, will lead to profound
hypotension and tachycardia. Spinal shock is characterized by hypotension and
bradycardia. Clinicians should therefore maintain a high level of suspicion for
shock in patients with severe injuries, regardless of a normal blood pressure and
heart rate. (683)
15. Abnormal base deficit and lactate are the best independent markers of shock after
trauma. The degree of base deficit also correlates with the severity of shock, volume
deficit, morbidity, and nonsurvival. One or both markers should be checked in all
trauma patients with risk of shock. (683)
16. Massive hemorrhage can occur into the thoracic, abdominal, or pelvic cavities.
Estimated blood loss must therefore take into account both visible hemorrhage
(at the injury scene and hospital) and potential hemorrhage into one of these three
cavities. Significant blood volume can also be lost into the thigh with certain
femoral injuries. Identification of pelvic injuries or femur fractures, with subsequent
placement of pelvic binders or long bone splints, helps to limit hemorrhage into
the pelvis and thigh, respectively. (683)
17. Operative intervention is required if more than 1500 mL of blood comes out at the
time of thoracostomy tube placement, or 200 mL per hour thereafter. This degree of
chest tube output suggests active intrathoracic hemorrhage and is defined as a
massive hemothorax. Massive hemothorax should also be assumed, until proven
otherwise, in any patient with a penetrating thoracic injury that is
hemodynamically unstable. (683)
18. Persistence of hematuria in a trauma patient may be an indication of bladder injury
or injury to the genitourinary system. (683)
19. The primary treatment of hypovolemic shock is to stop any active bleeding.
Delays in identification and control of hemorrhage can be deadly and should
therefore be avoided. Fluid resuscitation is the mainstay of supportive therapy
for patients with hypovolemic shock after injury. Warmed isotonic crystalloid can
be used initially for volume resuscitation, but patients with persistent shock should
be given blood products to maintain minimum perfusion pressures until
hemorrhage is controlled. Vasopressors may be helpful in patients not responding
to fluid therapy or to induce higher blood pressure for spinal cord or cerebral
perfusion. (683-684)
20. Massive transfusion is traditionally defined as: greater than or equal to 10 units
of blood transfused in 24 hours, equivalent to the replacement of one blood
volume in an average size patient. The unit ratios of blood products transfused may
affect the likelihood of hemorrhage control and survival in injured patients
requiring massive transfusion. During a massive transfusion, many trauma
centers use blood product ratios to help providers administer fluids that more
closely replace the functions of a patient’s lost blood. (684)
21. The GCS is used during the initial assessment of a trauma patient to rapidly
evaluate neurologic status. The GCS is calculated by assigning points based on a
patient’s eye opening (1 to 4), verbal response (1 to 5), and motor response (1 to 6)
to compute a total score between 3 (worse) to 15 (best). The GCS can then be
used to categorize the severity of traumatic brain injury (TBI). A GCS score of
8 or less is classified as “severe” TBI. Patients with severe TBI have a high likelihood
Trauma, Bioterrorism, and Natural Disasters
473
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
of intracranial hypertension, possibly with midline shift or brain herniation.
Endotracheal intubation and control of ventilation is therefore needed to
quickly diagnose and treat any life-threatening intracranial hemorrhage.
(684, Table 42-4)
22. Hypotension, hypoxia, hyperthermia, and sustained intracranial
hypertension should be avoided in traumatic brain injury patients, as these
secondary insults are associated with worse outcomes in brain-injured
patients. Hyperglycemia is also neurotoxic in models of brain injury and
should be avoided. (684)
23. Treatment of an elevated ICP is frequently recommended when the pressure exceeds
20 mm Hg for a sustained period of time. There are several methods by which
elevations in ICP can be treated. These include positioning of the head up and
neutral, hyperosmolar therapy, osmotic and loop diuretics, cerebrospinal fluid
drainage, and the administration of drugs such as barbiturates that decrease both
cerebral blood flow and cerebral metabolism. (684)
24. Mannitol is the osmotic diuretic that is most frequently administered to decrease
ICP. Osmotic diuretics decrease ICP by drawing water out of tissues and into the
intravascular space. Osmotic diuretics do so by transiently increasing the osmolarity
of plasma. The dose of mannitol that is administered is 0.25 to 1.4 g/kg over
15 to 30 minutes. (684)
25. Glucose-containing intravenous solutions should be avoided in traumatic brain
injury patients because of the potential for hyperglycemia and hypotonicity, both of
which can be neurotoxic. (684)
26. Though corticosteroids are often administered to patients with an elevated ICP, they
are most effective in decreasing focal cerebral edema such as that which
develops after brain tumor resection. Steroids have no demonstrated benefit in
traumatic brain injury patients, increase the risk of hyperglycemia, and should not
be given routinely to TBI patients. (684)
27. Deliberate hyperventilation should only be instituted if there is ongoing or
imminent brain herniation and rescue measures are needed prior to
decompressive craniectomy. Prolonged hyperventilation (PaCO2 25 to 30 mm Hg) is
associated with worse outcomes in TBI patients. Excessive hyperventilation in
adults (<25 mm Hg) and children (<20 mm Hg) creates even greater
potential for cerebral ischemia, as cerebral blood flow decreases in response to
alkalosis. (684)
28. All trauma patients with a loss of consciousness, an unclear history, or a mechanism
of injury suggestive of neck injury should be placed in a rigid cervical spine collar at
the time of initial assessment, if not already done. Mechanisms of injury with a
higher likelihood of cervical spine injury include: front-end motor vehicle accident
without a seat belt, head-first fall, and blunt maxillofacial trauma. “Clearing” the
cervical spine (i.e., declaring that cervical spine stabilization is no longer
necessary) occurs when a patient reliably denies pain with neck palpation and neck
movement. This should not be done if the patient has a distracting injury or
altered mental status. If physical examination is unreliable, computed tomography
and MRI are commonly used to diagnose cervical spine fractures and ligamentous
injuries. (683-685)
29. The final component of the “ABCDEs” of trauma assessment is Exposure/
Environment. This begins with the removal of all clothing and prehospital dressings,
a practice that allows for a complete examination of the entire body to ensure that
no injuries are missed. Contaminated and cold clothing are also removed at the same
time, transitioning to a safer and warmer environment for the patient. Once
examined, a hypothermic patient should be rewarmed with blankets, forced
air blankets, and warmed intravenous fluids. (685)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
474
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
30. Special considerations for a burn injured patient include the administration of
100% oxygen regardless of airway examination due to risk of carbon monoxide
poisoning, calculation of total body surface area burned, and assessment for signs
of inhalational injury (e.g., singed nasal hair, voice changes, carbonaceous
sputum). (682, 685)
31. For the burn injury patient arriving to a trauma center, a history of closed space
fire or explosion, and the presence of facial burns, singed nasal hair or
eyebrows, and/or carbonaceous sputum are all risk factors for significant
inhalational injury and need for endotracheal intubation. Stridor, hoarseness, or
visualized periglottic swelling/soot are signs of imminent loss of airway and
indications for immediate endotracheal intubation. Patients with inhalational
injury can rapidly develop facial and glottic edema that completely obstructs the
airway, making oral intubation of the trachea difficult or impossible. (685)
32. A patient’s percentage of body surface area (BSA) burned is estimated using the
“rule of nines”: (685)
Head and neck region:
9%
Upper extremities:
18% (left and right: each 9%)
Lower extremity:
36% (front and back: each 9%)
Torso:
18% (front and back: each 9%)
Perineal area
1%
Total:
100%
33. Burn injury victims may have suffered from smoke inhalation injury with
associated carbon monoxide inhalation, particularly if the patient had been exposed
to smoke in a closed space. Carbon monoxide has a binding affinity for hemoglobin
that is about 200 times greater than that of oxygen. The presence of high carbon
monoxide levels therefore creates a functional anemia by reducing the oxygen
content and delivery of a patient’s hemoglobin, despite the presence of a normal
PaO2. In addition, the binding of carbon monoxide to hemoglobin shifts the
oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve to the right, making the remaining oxygen bind
more tightly to hemoglobin and decreasing the ability of hemoglobin to unload
oxygen at the tissues. A pulse oximeter will have normal readings despite carbon
monoxide toxicity. Carbon monoxide toxicity should be treated with the
administration of 100% oxygen. A high PaO2 will lead to the removal of carbon
monoxide from hemoglobin with greater rapidity. (685)
34. The burn injury patient often requires large volumes of fluid for volume
resuscitation after his or her injury secondary to huge volume shifts into burned
tissue, increased vascular permeability, evaporative losses, and increased
metabolism. The Consensus formula (traditionally known as the Parkland formula)
is used to calculate the initial rate of fluid administration. Lactated Ringer
solution should be given at 4 mL/kg in the first 24 hours for every 1% of the patient’s
body surface area that is burned, with one half of the calculated volume
administered in the first 8 hours after injury. The remaining half should be
administered in the subsequent 16 hours, though the fluid rate should be
continually adjusted to maintain adequate organ perfusion. (685)
35. Warmed isotonic solution such as lactated Ringer solution should be used for fluid
resuscitation in burn patients. Colloids have no demonstrated advantage over
crystalloid and may actually worsen outcomes. While the Consensus formula is used
to determine the initial fluid requirements of burn patients, the fluid rate is typically
adjusted continuously, based on a urine output goal of 0.5 mL/kg/hr, to avoid
overresuscitation or underresuscitation of patients. (685)
Trauma, Bioterrorism, and Natural Disasters
475
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
36. Patients suspected of having a closed-head injury can be evaluated by history,
physical examination, and radiologic studies. The hallmark clinical sign of a closed-
head injury is loss of consciousness. A GCS score should be calculated based on eye
opening and verbal and motor responses. A noncontrast computed tomographic
scan of the head should be performed as early as possible to assess for intracranial
hypertension or a need for emergent operative intervention. Midline shift, brain
herniation, skull fractures, and any intracranial bleeding can be quickly assessed
with computed tomography. (684, Table 42-4)
37. A plateau wave in the ICP wave tracing refers to an abrupt increase in the ICP
observed during continuous monitoring. This can occur following painful
stimuli even in an otherwise unresponsive patient. The plateau wave is usually
sustained for 10 to 20 minutes, followed by a rapid decrease in the ICP. The presence
of plateau waves on an ICP wave tracing may indicate that the intracranial
compliance is low. Some providers administer opioids and/or lidocaine to blunt this
effect, though the efficacy of such measures is unclear. (683, Figure 42-1)
EMERGENCY
SURGERY FOR
TRAUMA
38. In general, rapid sequence intubation of the trachea should be performed for all
emergency trauma procedures, so the time since a patient’s last meal has no impact
on airway management. Because gastrointestinal motility decreases following
trauma, providers assume that all trauma patients have full stomachs and are at risk
for the aspiration of gastric contents. Rapid sequence intubation of the trachea
reduces this risk by minimizing the time between loss of airway reflexes and
placement of a secure airway. (682, 686, Table 42-3)
39. In emergency surgery for trauma, the risks of preexisting hypovolemia, massive
hemorrhage, and hemodynamic instability are higher; therefore general anesthesia
is maintained with lower than usual doses of inhaled volatile anesthetics or
benzodiazepines to optimize hemodynamic stability. Ketamine can also be used for
this purpose. Nitrous oxide is generally avoided in patients with a potential for
pneumothorax or for abdominal procedures. (682-683, 686)
40. If a trauma patient is unable to tolerate high levels of general anesthetics,
neuromuscular blocking drugs are needed to prevent skeletal muscle movement
and facilitate the surgical procedure. Small doses of a benzodiazepine or
scopolamine can be used under these circumstances in an attempt to prevent recall.
Under these critical conditions, patients may experience some recall of the
intraoperative events, making it important for the anesthesiologist to
communicate with the patient during and after the procedure. (686)
41. Intraoperative fluid management for trauma patients follows the same principles
as the initial management of the acute trauma patient, with the goals of
maintaining adequate circulating volume while optimizing conditions for
hemorrhage control. Fluid resuscitation may be initiated with isotonic crystalloid
solutions, with early transition to blood products and permissive hypotension if
hemorrhaging is uncontrolled. Hypothermia, coagulopathy, and severe acidosis
should be actively prevented and corrected. Rapid fluid infusion, fluid warmers,
and autotransfusion systems should be used if appropriate and available.
(683-684, 686, Table 42-5)
42. Arterial blood gases, hematocrit and platelet count, coagulation tests, and
electrolytes are followed regularly to assess the progress of resuscitation and
surgery. Invasive monitoring, such as arterial pressure variability, central venous
pressure, and echocardiography, is also commonly used to guide therapy.
Use of newer technologies such as thromboelastography and central venous
oxygen saturation can also provide real-time measurements of coagulopathy
and shock, respectively. (683-684, 686, Table 42-5)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
476
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
43. Opening of any anatomic compartment containing recent blood loss can remove
external pressure on injured vessels and precipitate uncontrolled hemorrhage.
Opening of the peritoneum in a patient with recent intraabdominal hemorrhage
should not occur until the preparations have been made for adequate large-bore
intravenous access, monitoring, fluid products, and vasoactive medications.
Surgical equipment such as vascular clamps and wound packing supplies should
also be immediately available. The same principles apply to opening of the dura
during craniotomies, opening of the pleura during thoracotomies, etc. (686)
44. Injuries that may be sustained in abdominal trauma include soft tissue
contusions or avulsions, rupture of visceral organs, or laceration of the spleen or
liver. Injury to the spleen or liver can result in significant hemorrhage. The diagnosis
of intraabdominal hemorrhage is made by FAST (focused assessment with
sonography in trauma) examination, peritoneal lavage, and/or computed
tomography. (683, 686)
45. “Damage control” surgery for trauma patients refers to the practice of focusing the
initial surgical intervention on hemorrhage control and abbreviated surgery, with a
plan to delay extensive examination and definitive repair of all injuries until after
the patient is fully resuscitated and stabilized in the ICU. This practice allows for
shorter operating and general anesthesia time initially, achieves hemorrhage
control and shock reversal sooner, and reduces the risk of developing acidosis,
coagulopathy, and hypothermia. (686)
46. After establishing that the airway and breathing are stable, the pelvic ring should be
initially closed with a pelvic binder device, followed by angioembolization of pelvic
vessels in the interventional radiology suite. If interventional radiology services are
not available, extraperitoneal packing can be performed to achieve hemorrhage
control, with external fixation of the pelvis performed once the patient is fully
resuscitated and hemodynamically stable. (687)
47. Abdominal compartment syndrome is defined as an intra abdominal pressure
greater than 20 mm Hg with associated organ dysfunction. Trauma patients with
abdominal injury and/or large volume resuscitation should be closely monitored for
abdominal compartment syndrome. (687)
MASS CASUALTY
DISASTERS
48. Mass casualty disasters are events that require more resources than the local
community can provide. Disasters can be natural (e.g., floods and earthquakes),
unintentional (e.g., industrial or multivehicle accidents), or intentional. Intentional
disasters are acts of terrorism or warfare, and can be explosive, nuclear,
biologic, or chemical disasters. (687, Table 42-6)
49. Additional resources are unlikely to arrive for at least 24 to 72 hours after a disaster,
so hospitals should have enough resources within the local community to respond
for this period of time. Community emergency preparedness plans should be in
place and coordinated among local health care providers, law enforcement
agencies, fire and rescue services, and local governments. (687-688, Table 42-8)
50. In the event of a mass casualty disaster, anesthesia providers may be required to
fulfill many roles including assistance with triage, stabilization of patients in the
emergency department, resuscitation and life support in the intensive care unit,
as well as intraoperative patient management. Like all clinicians, anesthesia
providers should also be able to fulfill their duties within the local emergency
response plan, recognize and report any suspected cases of mass casualty events,
and be familiar with available exposure prophylaxis. (687, Table 42-9)
51. The goals of patient triage in mass casualty events are to quickly prioritize
injuries based on severity of injury and likelihood to survive, so that limited
resources can be used to achieve the greatest population benefit. This concept of
Trauma, Bioterrorism, and Natural Disasters
477
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
population-based resource allocation can be difficult for providers used to utilizing
every possible resource for each patient under their care. While multiple mass
casualty triage systems exist, nearly all divide patients into groups requiring
immediate, delayed, minimal, or no treatment. “Expectant” patients are those who
are expected to die of their injuries, even if life-saving surgery were attempted.
Expectant patients are separated from the main patient flow and placed in a quiet
area with an emphasis on analgesia and comfort. (688-689, Table 42-10)
52. Decontamination of mass casualty patients is typically performed at the scene
before transportation. Hospitals set up a secure area outside of the main hospital
area to complete decontamination and triage of patients. Out-of-hospital
decontamination reduces ongoing exposure injuries and minimizes the risk of
secondary exposure to health care providers and other patients. (689)
53. Mass casualty events create situations where patients outnumber resources,
including airway equipment and ventilators. Maintaining spontaneous ventilation
and hemodynamic stability can therefore be critical in such patients. Ketamine is a
useful and commonly used anesthetic agent in such scenarios—including
prehospital procedures such as limb amputation—because it provides analgesia
and hypnosis with minimal depression of respiratory or cardiovascular
function. (689)
54. Neuraxial blockade (i.e., epidural or spinal anesthesia) is generally avoided in mass
casualty patients due to the risk of severe hypotension due to hypovolemia and
underlying injury. Coagulopathy and need for immobilization are also common
reasons to avoid neuraxial blockade for emergency trauma surgery. (690)
NUCLEAR
EXPOSURE
55. Transmission of radioactive material from victim to health care provider is low, so
standard trauma protocols should be followed during the initial evaluation of a
nuclear exposed trauma patient, progressing from “A” through “D”: airway,
breathing, circulation, disability (neurologic status). Decontamination is then
performed as part of the assessment and treatment of “E,” or exposure. (690)
56. As part of the exposure assessment, nuclear disaster victims are externally
decontaminated by removing all clothing and rinsing the skin with warm soapy
water. Once stabilized and externally decontaminated, internal decontamination is
performed with methods such as gastric lavage, emetics, laxatives, and diuretics, as
well as copious irrigation of any open wounds. These measures are necessary to
prevent continued injury from retained nuclear material. (690)
57. Acute radiation syndrome is characterized by thrombocytopenia, granulocytopenia,
nausea, and vomiting. Once stabilized, the patient should be monitored
continuously for such signs. Prevention involves minimizing the duration of
exposure through both external and internal decontamination. Medications can
be given to facilitate renal excretion and chelation. Potassium iodide can also be
given within the first 24 hours to prevent radiation-induced thyroid
abnormalities. (690)
CHEMICAL AND
BIOLOGIC
TERRORISM
58. Category A bioterrorism agents, as classified by the United States Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention, are agents thought to be mass-engineered by terrorist
groups, easily disseminated or transmitted to victims, have a high mortality rate,
and/or create public panic if released. Examples of category A agents are anthrax,
smallpox, and Ebola virus. (691, Table 42-12)
59. Any clustering of unusual illness should be treated as victims of bioterrorism until
proven otherwise. In this case, the history of flulike symptoms followed by chest
pain and profound respiratory distress suggests inhalational anthrax. Shock and
meningitis may also be present. A widened mediastinum, due to mediastinal
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
478
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
adenopathy, can be seen on chest radiograph of inhalational anthrax patients. When
profound dyspnea develops, death can ensue within 2 days; therefore treatment and
supportive measures should be instituted immediately (e.g., antibiotic therapy,
endotracheal intubation, and mechanical ventilation). Either ciprofloxacin or
doxycycline can be used to effectively treat weaponized anthrax. Although
inhalational anthrax presents little to no risk of secondary spread from patients with
established infection, such patients should initially be isolated and health care
officials should be notified. Prophylaxis for exposed individuals can be done with
either a fluoroquinolone alone for 60 days or a vaccination plus a fluoroquinolone
for 30 days. (691-692, Table 42-13 through Table 42-16, Figure 42-2)
60. Smallpox produces cutaneous lesions 72 to 96 hours after a fever, whereas
patients with varicella zoster infection, or “chickenpox,” develop their rash at the
same time as a fever. In addition, smallpox lesions appear all at once and will
therefore all be at the same stage. In contrast, chickenpox lesions appear at different
times, so physical examination reveals lesions with different stages of lesion
development (papules, vesicles, pustules, scabs). (692)
61. Aerosolized plague (Yersinia pestis) is viable for approximately 60 minutes. If an
individual develops pneumonic plague, management includes strict isolation and
exposure precautions because pneumonic plague is highly contagious. Early
antibiotic treatment is also critical, as the mortality of untreated individuals
approaches 100%. Streptomycin, gentamicin, tetracycline, and chloramphenicol are
all effective therapies for plague. (692, Table 42-18)
62. Clostridium botulinum toxin is a category A agent that causes skeletal muscle
weakness between 12 to 36 hours after ingestion or inhalation of the toxin. Botulism
results from inhibition of acetylcholine release, and can be treated with trivalent
antitoxin. Endotracheal intubation and mechanical ventilation may also be
required. The toxin is not contagious, however, therefore health care providers do
not need to follow any additional special precautions. While botulism leads to
decreased salivation, ileus, and urinary retention, nerve agents (e.g., sarin) are
acetylcholinesterase inhibitors and cause cholinergic effects in addition to skeletal
muscle weakness. (691, 693-696, Table 42-12, Table 42-20, Table 42-22)
63. Nerve agents are military-grade chemicals that act, similar to organophosphate
pesticides, by inhibiting acetylcholinesterase and produce cholinergic effects
including muscle fasciculations, weakness, incontinence, and hypersecretion.
They are typically lipophilic clear liquids that vaporize at room temperature and
are absorbed through the skin, mucous membranes, lungs, or gastrointestinal
tract. (695)
64. Sarin is a potent nerve agent that has been used recently in chemical terrorist
attacks. It is also referred to by the two-letter NATO military code “GB.” Like
other nerve agents, exposure to sarin should be treated with atropine (2 to 6 mg IM)
and pralidoxime (600 to 1800 mg IM), with atropine redosed every 5 to 10 minutes
until secretions begin to decrease. Pyridostigmine is a medication that reversibly
binds to AChE. Administration of pyridostigmine 30 minutes before exposure
therefore provides protection by occupying the binding sites that the nerve
agents target. It then dissociates from the AChE enzyme after the exposure
risk has passed. (695-696, Table 42-22)
Trauma, Bioterrorism, and Natural Disasters
479
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
Chapter
40 CHRONIC PAIN
MANAGEMENT
Pankaj Mehta, James P. Rathmell
MULTIDISCIPLINARY
CHRONIC PAIN
MANAGEMENT
1. Why is multidisciplinary teamwork necessary for managing chronic pain? What are
the components of such a multidisciplinary team? How are patients usually referred
to a pain clinic?
2. How should the initial evaluation of a patient be carried out in the pain clinic? How
is a treatment plan established for a patient evaluated in a chronic pain clinic?
3. Name some treatment modalities for the management of chronic pain.
4. List some of the psychological components of the chronic pain disease process.
What is the potential value of the Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory
when evaluating patients with chronic pain?
COMMON PAIN
SYNDROMES
5. What is meant by the term low back pain? What is the usual pattern of recovery for
patients presenting with low back pain?
6. How does the typical patient with low back pain present to a pain physician?
7. What are the pathophysiologic mechanisms which commonly contribute to low
back pain?
8. How can chronic low back pain arising from the lumbar facet joints be distinguished
from lumbar radiculopathy?
9. What are some warning signs on the initial history and physical when evaluating a
patient with low back pain that may indicate significant physical comorbidity that
should be promptly investigated?
10. How should a physician approach medical therapy for the most common
presentations of low back pain?
11. What are the socioeconomic considerations of low back pain and its treatment?
What are some risk factors for developing chronic low back pain?
12. What is neuropathic pain? What are some of the typical signs and symptoms of
neuropathic pain?
13. What is postherpetic neuralgia?
14. What treatment modalities have been used for the treatment of postherpetic
neuralgia?
15. What are some of the side effects of tricyclic antidepressants that may limit their
usefulness in elderly patients with postherpetic neuralgia?
16. What is diabetic peripheral neuropathy? How does it present?
17. What is complex regional pain syndrome? What differentiates type I and type II
complex regional pain syndromes?
18. What are the clinical manifestations of complex regional pain syndrome?
19. How is the diagnosis of complex regional pain syndrome of the upper or lower
extremity made?
480
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
20. What is the treatment for complex regional pain syndrome? How does the time
delay to diagnosis and treatment affect treatment outcome?
21. What pharmacologic agents are commonly used for intravenous regional
sympathetic nerve blockade? How is this technique believed to work?
CANCER-RELATED
PAIN
22. What are the various ways in which cancer can cause pain? What is the primary
treatment for cancer pain?
23. What are some oral analgesics used to treat persistent cancer pain? What is the
World Health Organization stepwise approach to managing cancer-related pain?
24. When oral intake by patients is limited, what are some alternative routes of
analgesic drug delivery used to manage persistent cancer pain?
25. What are some neurosurgical procedures for the treatment of chronic pain that may
be useful in cancer patients in whom less invasive procedures have been
unsuccessful in providing pain control?
26. Which is the most common uniformly efficacious neurolytic block for visceral
malignancy? What are the limitations of such a block?
PHARMACOLOGIC
MANAGEMENT OF
CHRONIC PAIN
27. What are some of the pharmacologic agents used for pain management?
28. What are simple analgesics and how can they be useful in chronic pain
management? How are cyclooxygenase-2 selective drugs useful for chronic pain
management and how do they differ from nonselective drugs?
29. How do antidepressants exert their actions? List some antidepressants commonly
used for pain management and their side effects.
30. Which anticonvulsants are commonly used for pain management? What are the
most common side effects associated with each agent? What are the first-line
treatments for neuropathic pain?
31. What potential problems are encountered by physicians when prescribing opioids?
32. What basic principles guide the use of opioids in terminally ill patients as compared
with those with nonmalignant chronic pain?
33. What are the current guidelines for the stepwise pharmacologic management of
neuropathic pain?
INTERVENTIONAL
PAIN THERAPIES
34. What is meant by the term interventional pain therapy? Name some of the
commonly performed interventional procedures used to treat pain.
35. How is an epidural steroid injection useful as an interventional therapeutic
procedure? What side effects should patients be informed about?
36. What are the different techniques used to inject steroids into the epidural space?
What is the rationale for using one technique over another?
37. When should a physician suspect the facet joint as a cause of low back pain?
How can a facet joint block be useful as a diagnostic tool?
38. What is the role of radiofrequency ablation in the long-term management of
persistent facet-related pain?
39. What is the current role of lumbar diskography in the management of lumbosacral
pain?
40. What is minimally invasive disk decompression? How does it work and what is a
limitation of this procedure?
41. How are sympathetic nerve blocks useful as a diagnostic tool in chronic pain
management? What is the current evidence of their role in managing chronic pain
syndromes?
42. What is the anatomical location of stellate ganglion? How is a stellate ganglion
block useful in the management of chronic pain?
43. How is a stellate ganglion block performed? Describe a safer alternative to the
conventionally performed stellate ganglion block.
44. List the common conditions for which stellate ganglion block is used in treatment.
45. What are the signs of a successful stellate ganglion block?
Chronic Pain Management
481
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
46. What are the complications of stellate ganglion block?
47. What is the anatomic location of the celiac plexus and what are the structures that
lie immediately adjacent to the celiac plexus?
48. What are the most common techniques by which a celiac plexus block can be
performed?
49. What is the clinical indication for a celiac plexus block?
50. How does a celiac plexus block differ from a splanchnic nerve block?
51. What are the complications associated with celiac plexus block?
52. Describe the applied anatomy of the lumbar sympathetic chain.
53. What are some of the clinical uses of a lumbar sympathetic block? List the
complications that may be encountered while performing a lumbar sympathetic
block.
54. What fundamental physiologic principle forms the basis of spinal cord stimulation?
55. What is the current role of spinal cord stimulation in managing chronic pain
syndromes?
56. What are the complications of spinal cord stimulation?
ANSWERS*
MULTIDISCIPLINARY
CHRONIC PAIN
MANAGEMENT
1. Chronic pain is a complex disorder and patients suffering from chronic pain usually
have biologic disease that coexists with cognitive, affective, behavioral, and social
factors. Hence, management of such a disease process requires the expertise of
health care providers from a range of medical specialties. The team at most centers
consists of a physician, often an anesthesiologist, a psychologist, and a physical
therapist working together. Patients are usually referred to a chronic pain clinic by
their primary care physicians for a problem with chronic pain that has not
responded to conventional medical therapy.
In the pain clinic, the physician coordinates the diagnosis and medical treatment,
the psychologist incorporates patient education and cognitive behavioral therapy,
and the physical therapist plans an appropriate exercise regimen for the patient
aimed at improving function. Thus the team members interact to manage the
chronic pain problem using a multimodal approach. (699)
2. On his or her arrival to a chronic pain clinic, the patient should be evaluated by a
physician with expertise in pain medicine. During the initial evaluation, the
potential psychological, medical, and social contributions to the patient’s pain
should be evaluated. While it would be ideal for a psychologist and a physical
therapist to also evaluate each new patient and then this multidisciplinary team
meet to discuss the various aspects of the patient’s history, as well as a probable
diagnosis, this is seldom possible in today’s constrained health care environment.
Nonetheless, the physician who conducts the initial evaluation must devise a
treatment plan for each patient that takes into consideration all aspects of the
patient’s care and arranges for appropriate referral to other members of the team
when needed. (699)
3. Treatment modalities available in most chronic pain clinics include oral
pharmacotherapy, diagnostic and therapeutic nerve blocks, the neuraxial
administration of opioids, neurostimulation techniques, biofeedback, and physical
therapy. (699)
*Numbers in parentheses: numbers refer to pages, figures, or tables in Miller RD, Pardo MC: Basics of Anesthesia,
6th ed. Philadelphia, Elsevier Saunders, 2011.
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
482
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
4. Chronic pain as a disease process may include psychiatric and psychological
manifestations, some of which include depression, insomnia, and avoidance of
social and vocational obligations. Dependence on analgesics and visits to
multiple physicians are common among patients with chronic pain. The Minnesota
Multiphasic Personality Inventory is a useful test for the detection of many of
these common comorbidities that often coexist in those suffering with chronic
pain. (699)
COMMON PAIN
SYNDROMES
5. Low back pain (LBP) is the most common reason why people seek medical attention
and is also known as lumbosacral pain. This refers to pain in either the lumbar or the
sacral spinal region. Anatomically, the region is defined as the area of the back
between the tip of the twelfth thoracic spinal process up till the sacrococcygeal joint.
Most people presenting with low back pain recover with no treatment. A majority
recover by 6 weeks (60% to 70%) or mostly by 12 weeks (90%). The recovery after
12 weeks, however, is slow and uncertain. (699, Figure 43-1)
6. Patients presenting with low back pain usually have pain either localized to the back
region (acute or chronic lumbosacral pain) or distributed in the area of nerve (acute
or chronic radicular pain). Acute radicular pain is typically caused by a herniated
nucleus pulposus in younger patients. Signs of radiculopathy include numbness,
weakness, or loss of deep tendon reflexes in the area of the affected nerve. In the
elderly, foraminal narrowing may affect the spinal nerve leading to acute radicular
pain. Patients presenting with chronic radicular pain require a detailed search for
a reversible cause of nerve root impingement. MRI or electrodiagnostic testing
could give some clues to the cause of pain in patients who have had prior surgery.
Acute lumbosacral pain with no radicular symptoms in most cases may be
myofascial in origin and require no further radiologic investigation. Chronic
lumbosacral pain may arise from many parts of the vertebral unit; most commonly
implicated are the sacroiliac joint, lumbar facets, and the intervertebral disks.
Diagnostic nerve blocks involving injection of local anesthetic at these anatomic
sites leading to temporary pain relief can aid in localizing the origin of pain.
Diagnosis and treatment of the patient with low back pain rely on the location
of pain (primarily radicular or lumbosacral) and the duration of symptoms
(acute or chronic). (700-701)
7. The following pathophysiologic mechanisms result from degenerative changes in
the spinal functional unit due to aging and injury, and can give rise to lumbosacral
and/or lumbar radicular pain:
▪Synovitis in the facet joints leading to capsular laxity and subluxation;
facet-related pain is predominantly localized over the lumbosacral junction.
▪Degeneration in the intervertebral disks leading to loss of hydration of the
nucleus pulposus. Further compromise with tears within the annulus fibrosis
is termed internal disk disruption; discogenic pain is predominantly localized
over the lumbosacral junction.
▪Internal disruption of the disk may also lead to herniated nucleated pulposus,
which is an extension of nuclear material beyond the disk margin. These disk
herniations often extend posterolaterally to involve the spinal nerve inciting
an intense inflammatory reaction and producing acute radicular pain
(“sciatica”). (700)
8. Pain arising from the lumbar facet joint is predominantly localized near the
lumbosacral junction, while lumbar radicular pain is localized within the leg.
The pain arising from facet joints is usually diagnosed by the injection of
a small volume of local anesthetic into the joint under fluoroscopic guidance.
Substantial pain relief suggests that pain originates from inflammation of that
particular joint. However, a substantial number of patients will report pain reduction
even when a nonactive agent such as normal saline is injected. This placebo
response can complicate certain diagnosis using diagnostic injections. (700)
Chronic Pain Management
483
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
9. When first evaluating a patient with back pain, the physician should be aware
of certain conditions that may indicate significant physical comorbidity,
prompting further investigation. In the patient’s history, these include new onset or
worsening pain after trauma, infection, or previous malignancy. Patients who
report worsening neurologic deficits, or bladder or bowel dysfunction, warrant
early radiologic imaging to rule out neural compression. (700)
10. Medical therapy for the most common presentations of low back pain is based on
how a patient presents to the pain physician and on the duration of pain symptoms.
Acute radicular pain: Therapy is usually started with a 7-day course of simple
analgesics alone or in combination with an opioid analgesic and a muscle relaxant
for associated muscle spasm. Chronic radicular pain: Therapy usually begins with a
trial of antidepressants or anticonvulsants since opioids are less effective for
neuropathic pain. Patients who are poor responders to combination medical therapy
are offered a trial of spinal cord stimulation. Acute lumbosacral pain is usually
managed with a short course of a simple analgesic alone or in combination with an
opioid and a muscle relaxant as needed. Pharmacotherapy is usually followed by
physical therapy for patients with persistent pain. First-line management for
patients with chronic lumbosacral pain involves diagnostic medial branch nerve
blocks to rule out facet joint pain. If positive, radiofrequency treatment may prove
beneficial. For patients with continued pain, a formal physical and behavioral
therapy program is usually recommended. (705, Table 43-4)
11. Low back pain and its treatment place a huge socioeconomic burden on society.
Only 40% to 45% of the patients who are disabled for 6 months will ever return
to work. The return to work rate for patients absent for 2 years is close to zero.
The risk factors for developing chronic low back pain include age, gender,
socioeconomic status, body mass index, tobacco use, general health status,
strenuous physical activities, job dissatisfaction, depression, and anatomic
variations. (699)
12. Neuropathic pain is persistent following injury to the nervous system. The three
most common types of neuropathic pain include postherpetic neuralgia, diabetic
peripheral neuropathy, and complex regional pain syndrome. Patients with
neuropathic pain often report:
▪Spontaneous pain—that is, it occurs without any stimulus.
▪Hyperalgesia—an exaggerated painful response to a mildly noxious stimulus.
▪Allodynia—a painful response to a normally nonnoxious stimulus. (702)
13. Postherpetic neuralgia refers to pain that persists for extended periods of time
(more than 3 to 6 months) after an acute infection of herpes zoster. Postherpetic
neuralgia usually occurs in elderly or immune compromised patients due to a
secondary infection of varicella zoster virus (called shingles) leading to damage
to small unmyelinated nerve fibers. The pain is characterized by episodic
lancinating pain accompanied by severe allodynia in the affected dermatome.
In recent years the availability of a vaccine has reduced the incidence of
postherpetic neuralgia. (702)
14. Postherpetic neuralgia has been treated with occasional success with sympathetic
nerve blocks in patients who have sought early treatment, but sympathetic blocks
are ineffective in those with established postherpetic neuralgia. Treatment of
established postherpetic neuralgia is challenging. Tricyclic antidepressants and
anticonvulsants remain the mainstay of treatment. Topical lidocaine is
useful to reduce the painful allodynia. (702)
15. Side effects of tricyclic antidepressants include orthostatic hypotension, sedation,
urinary retention, and an increase in appetite. Tricyclic antidepressants may
also cause worsening of preexisting heart block. These side effects may limit the
usefulness of tricyclic antidepressant medication therapy in elderly patients
suffering from postherpetic neuralgia. (704)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
484
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
16. Diabetic peripheral neuropathy, the most common cause of neuropathic pain,
occurs as a result of damage to small unmyelinated nerve fibers. The symptoms
are numbness associated with paresthesias, dysesthesias, and pain commonly
described as burning or deeply aching. Symptoms can progress slowly over many
years, and may affect the hands as well as the lower extremities. Diabetic
patients with poor glucose control are at the greatest risk for developing
diabetic peripheral neuropathy. (702)
17. Complex regional pain syndrome (CRPS) refers to signs and symptoms that emerge
in certain patients after injury to peripheral nerves, typically after trauma to an
extremity. After the initial trauma, and during healing, persistent neuropathic pain
associated with sympathetic nerve dysfunction develops and is characterized by
swelling, edema, erythema and temperature changes. The term CRPS type I, also
calledreflexsympatheticdystrophy,isusedwhenpainoccurswithoutanidentifiable
injury to a major nerve (e.g., ankle sprain). CRPS, type II, also called causalgia,
presents with the same signs and symptoms but following an identifiable nerve
injury (e.g., a pelvic fracture with a partial sciatic nerve transection). (702-703)
18. Clinical manifestations of complex regional pain syndrome include chronic, severe
burning pain, hyperalgesia, bone demineralization, joint stiffness, and atrophic
changes. Patients typically have localized sympathetic nervous system dysfunction,
which is manifest as warm, erythematous, dry, and swollen skin early in the disease
process, followed by vasoconstriction, with cool, pale, and edematous skin later in
the course. Patients usually characterize the pain in these syndromes as aching,
intense, and/or agonizing. The pain appears to be enhanced by mechanical
stimulation, movement, and the application of heat or cold. (702, Table 43-1)
19. The diagnosis of complex regional pain syndrome is based on the appearance of the
typical signs and symptoms after injury and the absence of any other underlying
condition. Some practitioners have suggested that the diagnosis can be made by
performing sympathetic nerve blocks in the affected extremity and evaluating
the patient for relief of the pain. For the upper extremity a stellate ganglion block
may be performed, while for the lower extremities lumbar sympathetic blocks
are usually performed. However, there is a significant placebo response to
diagnostic blocks, and the true role of sympathetic blocks in the diagnosis and
management of CRPS remains in question. (703)
20. The management of CRPS requires a multimodal approach. The primary goal of
managing patients diagnosed with CRPS is maintenance and restoration of function
through aggressive physical therapy, which is possible only with adequate pain
reduction. Sympathetic nerve blocks often aid in short-term pain reduction and
hence facilitation of physical therapy. Tricyclic antidepressants and anticonvulsants
usually form the first line of analgesic therapy. Spinal cord stimulation is now used
more commonly and may provide a more effective long-term means to produce pain
reduction, hence facilitating long-term physical therapy aimed toward functional
restoration of the affected extremity. A delay in the diagnosis and treatment of
complex regional pain syndrome may result in poorer outcome. (703)
21. Intravenous regional sympathetic nerve blockade has been used for the treatment of
complex regional pain syndromes. Pharmacologic agents that have been used for
intravenous regional sympathetic nerve blockade include guanethidine and
bretylium. Guanethidine is taken up by presynaptic sympathetic nerve terminals
where it is concentrated in norepinephrine neurotransmitter vesicles and replaces
norepinephrine, thereby blocking norepinephrine release. Bretylium blocks
norepinephrine release from nerve terminals. These agents are believed to exert
their analgesic effects in sympathetically maintained states by blocking
norepinephrine release from sympathetic nerve terminals. Neither agent is now
commonly used: guanethidine is not available for clinical use in the United States
and bretylium is associated with profound hypotension. More commonly,
Chronic Pain Management
485
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
intravenous regional blocks are conducted with local anesthetic alone, typically
0.5% lidocaine; careful attention must be paid to avoid toxic levels of local
anesthetic. The relative effectiveness of intravenous regional blockade versus
sympathetic ganglion blocks is unknown. (703)
CANCER-RELATED
PAIN
22. Pain is the most common presenting symptom of undiagnosed malignancy. Cancer
pain may be due to direct invasion of the malignancy or treatment. Local tumor
infiltration or metastases to bone or nerves are especially painful. Patients may
also experience pain as a side effect of chemotherapy, irradiation, or surgical
treatment. Examples include phantom limb pain, peripheral neuropathy, and
radiation fibrosis. Approximately 40% of patients with cancer experience chronic
pain. The primary focus of pain reduction in patients with cancer is direct
treatment of the malignancy, with successful treatment often leading to
complete pain resolution. (703)
23. The mainstay of treatment of chronic pain for cancer patients is opioid therapy.
Other analgesics which are commonly used are tricyclic antidepressants,
anticonvulsants, and corticosteroids. Tricyclic antidepressants may have
additional benefits of treating depression (common among cancer patients),
potentiating the effect of opioids, facilitating nocturnal sleep, and improving mood.
Anticonvulsant medications may be useful in neuropathic pain. Corticosteroids
play a role in decreasing the sensation of pain, improving mood, and increasing
appetite, all of which are ongoing problems in patients with chronic cancer pain.
The World Health Organization’s analgesic approach has been adopted
worldwide to promote the aggressive treatment of cancer-related pain by
tailoring analgesic use to the severity of pain. It comprises a simple three-step
analgesic ladder starting with nonopioids and moving toward more potent
opioid analgesics as necessary to control pain. (703, Table 43-2)
24. Intravenous, neuraxial, transdermal, and transmucosal routes of administration
are alternative routes of analgesic drug delivery for the cancer patient with chronic
pain in whom the oral administration of medicines is not possible. Implantable
intrathecal drug delivery systems using intrathecal opioids, local anesthetics,
clonidine, and other agents are now often used in managing intractable cancer
pain. (703)
25. Patients with chronic pain secondary to cancer who have not had success with pain
control with less invasive procedures may benefit from some neurosurgical
procedures for the treatment of the pain. Neurosurgical procedures that may be
useful in these cancer patients include a cordotomy or dorsal rhizotomy.
A cordotomy is the open or percutaneous interruption of the spinothalamic tract.
A dorsal rhizotomy is the interruption of the sensory nerve root.
26. One of the most common nerve blocks that successfully treats abdominal visceral
malignancy is the neurolytic celiac plexus block. The neurolytic celiac plexus block
(NCPB) may be useful to treat pain associated with cancer of the pancreas or upper
abdominal viscera. One limitation of this block is the inability to treat pain from
the left colon and pelvic viscera as the sensory and autonomic nervous system
fibers only from the abdominal viscera are carried by the celiac plexus. NCPB has
a long-lasting benefit for 70% to 90% of patients with abdominal visceral
malignancies. (710)
PHARMACOLOGIC
MANAGEMENT OF
CHRONIC PAIN
27. Pharmacologic agents used for pain management include nonsteroidal
antiinflammatory agents, antidepressants, anticonvulsants, muscle relaxants, and
opioids. Opioid analgesics are the most common agents used in the management of
cancer-related pain, but their long-term benefit in managing patients with
noncancer pain remains unclear. The antidepressants and anticonvulsants are the
most common agents used for the long-term treatment of chronic neuropathic pain.
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
486
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs and muscle relaxants are useful in the
management of acute pain, but the risk/benefit ratio of long-term use is less clear.
(704, Table 43-3)
28. The term simple analgesic has been traditionally reserved for acetaminophen and
the nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). They are the most common
agents used to treat mild to moderate pain. Even though poorly supported by
evidence for use in chronic illnesses such as low back pain, the use of NSAIDS
remains fairly common. They may be useful in conjunction with opioids for the
treatment of chronic pain in patients with pain that involves an inflammatory
process or in patients with bone pain such as arthritis. They also constitute the first
step of the WHO analgesic ladder and are used to treat mild to moderate cancer-
related pain. Enzyme selective NSAIDs (i.e., the COX-2-selective inhibitors) have a
lower risk of GI bleeding as compared to nonenzyme selective drugs, even though
they are comparable in their analgesic efficacy. (703)
29. Antidepressants are thought to exert their effect by normalizing sleep patterns,
decreasing anxiety, and decreasing the patient’s perception of the pain.
Antidepressants may enhance neurotransmitters acting on descending efferent
inhibitory pain pathways, thus producing analgesia that is independent of their
antidepressanteffects.Antidepressantscommonlyusedforthemanagementofchronic
pain include tricyclic antidepressants and newer selective norepinephrine reuptake
inhibitors (SNRIs). Examples of tricyclic antidepressants include the secondary amine
agents (nortriptyline and desimipramine) and tertiary amine agents (amitriptyline and
imipramine), which are more poorly tolerated. Side effects of tricyclic antidepressants
include dry mouth and urinary retention, and potentially worsening of preexisting
heart block. The newer SNRIs (venlafaxine, duloxetine) are effective in treatment of
neuropathicpain,suchaspainfuldiabeticperipheralneuropathy.ThoughSNRIshavea
similar analgesic efficacy as tricyclic antidepressants, they are better tolerated because
of a favorable side effect profile. (704)
30. The anticonvulsant drugs gabapentin and pregabalin are effective for pain
management. These drugs are commonly used as they are fairly well tolerated
with mild to moderate side effects like somnolence, drowsiness, and peripheral
edema. They are also commonly used to treat all types of neuropathic pain.
The choice of neuropathic agent should be guided by the severity of the pain and
the side effect tolerability by each patient. (704)
31. Use of long-term opioid therapy for the treatment of chronic noncancer pain remains
controversial. The most common problems encountered by physicians when
prescribing opioids are aberrant drug-related behavior (e.g., losing prescriptions,
unauthorized escalation of drug dose) and opioid tolerance (need for increasing drug
dose to produce the same effect). Overt addiction (i.e., preoccupation with use of the
opioid despite negative consequences like job loss) is uncommon. (704)
32. Opioid analgesic prescribing for nonmalignant chronic pain is adapted from
cancer pain management. This practice involves using a long-acting opioid for
continuous analgesia while a short-acting analgesic is used to cover intermittent
spikes in pain intensity, or breakthrough pain. However, the long-term use of
opioids has come under increasing scrutiny for managing noncancer pain, thus
adopting more stringent guidelines is wise. Most practitioners agree that opioids
should be used only when other, more conservative measures have failed. Patients
should receive these medications from a single prescriber and they should only be
continued when they lead to less pain and improvement in function. Many
practitioners have adopted routine use of random urine drug testing to help
ensure that patients remain compliant with chronic opioid therapy and that they
are not using other prescription or illicit drugs. (704)
33. Evidence-based guidelines for the pharmacologic management of neuropathic
pain recommend a stepwise pharmacologic approach. Following initial assessment
Chronic Pain Management
487
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
and diagnosis, realistic goals should be discussed with the patient. Therapy is
usually begun with a tricyclic antidepressant, SNRI, or anticonvulsant as the first-
line drug, followed by opioids or tramadol, alone or in combination (second-line
drugs). Serial follow-ups are conducted to evaluate response to therapy and
alternative first- or second-line drugs are commenced based on the response.
Certain antiepileptics, antidepressants, and NMDA receptor antagonists can be used
as a third line of drugs for a selective group of patients who respond poorly to
the previous therapy. (704, Table 43-3)
INTERVENTIONAL
PAIN THERAPIES
34. The term interventional pain therapy encompasses a variety of treatments
used for specific pain syndromes and these range from diagnostic nerve blocks
to therapeutic injections of steroids and sympathetic nerve blocks. Some of
the commonly performed procedures in the pain clinic include:
epidural steroid injections, facet joint nerve blocks, and radiofrequency
ablation. (705)
35. The injection of steroid into the epidural space is aimed at the inflammatory
response that is associated with acute disk herniation. Epidural steroids are most
useful for treating acute radicular pain, where a steroid injection if given within
6 weeks can accelerate the resolution of leg pain. Patients should be informed about
pain at the injection site and transient worsening of any radicular pain if present on
presentation. Infection, bleeding, and neural injury are all uncommon and
discussions about these rare complications should be based on individual patient
concerns. (705-706)
36. Epidural injection of steroids can be done using either the interlaminar or
transforaminal approach. The transforaminal approach may be more effective as
it allows the concentrated steroid solution to be injected directly adjacent to
the spinal nerve close to the site of the inflammation, yet there is little
scientific evidence to guide the choice between these two approaches. (706,
Figures 43-4, 43-5)
37. One of the many causes of low back pain is pain arising from the facet joints.
Facet-related pain should be suspected in patients who have persistent pain over in
the lumbosacral area, and have typical patterns of referred pain with maximal
tenderness directly over the facet joints. Facet joint blocks are commonly used as a
diagnostic tool and involve intraarticular injections of a mixture of local
anesthetic and corticosteroids. Intermediate pain relief lasting weeks to months
is common and supports the diagnosis of facet-related pain. (706)
38. Radiofrequency denervation of the lumbar facet joints can provide longer
duration of pain relief than intraarticular injections in some patients with facet-
related pain. About 50% of patients will respond with a 50% reduction of pain
lasting for up to 12 months. Radiofrequency denervation involves the delivery of
energy adjacent to the sensory nerve in the facet joint. The procedure can be
repeated with similar efficacy after repeat treatment. (706, Figure 43-6)
39. The use of lumbar diskography is based on the hypothesis that the intervertebral
disk is the source of ongoing pain in about 30% to 40% of the patients presenting
with lumbosacral pain. Provocative diskography is currently used to select patients
for surgical fusion but has largely remained a controversial test because of the
subjective nature of the test and the lack of convincing evidence that use of
diskography improves surgical outcome. Diskography has also been used to select
patients for intradiscal electrothermal therapy (IDET), a treatment that uses thermal
energy to treat discogenic pain. Evidence for use of IDET is mixed; in some reports,
30% to 50% of patients showed long-term pain reduction and improvement in
standing and sitting tolerance. The use of both diagnostic diskography and IDET has
declined in recent years. (706)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
488
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
40. Percutaneous plasma disk decompression (PDD) is a minimally invasive
procedure used to treat chronic radicular pain due to a focal disk bulge identified
on imaging studies, usually MRI. PDD reduces pain and improves long-term
functional status in highly selected patients—those with ongoing leg pain and
small disk protrusions. The procedure uses radiofrequency energy to remove a
portion of nucleus pulposus, which eases the pressure of the disk and hence
decompresses any pressure on the spinal nerve causing pain. A major limitation of
this technique is that it is only useful for patients with herniations smaller than
3 mm, and this comprises less than 5% of patients with low back pain. (707)
41. Certain pain syndromes such as CRPS and microvascular insufficiency causing
ischemic extremity pain are believed to be maintained by hyperactivity of the
sympathetic nervous system and are termed sympathetically maintained pain
syndromes. Blockade of the sympathetic nerve fibers produces pain relief in these
disease states and these nerve blocks are hence often used to diagnose CRPS and
related syndromes. There is a paucity of evidence supporting the use of repeated
sympathetic blocks to provide long-term pain relief or improvement in function;
however, these nerve blocks are still used to provide short-term pain relief and
facilitate physical therapy. (707-708)
42. The stellate ganglion is formed by the fusion of the inferior cervical and the
first thoracic sympathetic ganglia. There is significant anatomic variation in the
cervical and thoracic sympathetic chain and in many individuals the superior
thoracic and inferior cervical ganglia are separate structures. On the medial side
of the ganglion is the lateral border of the longus colli muscle. Posteriorly are the
neck of the first rib and the transverse process of the seventh cervical vertebra.
Anteriorly lay the first part of the subclavian artery and the origin of the
vertebral artery behind the dome of the lung. Anatomically, the sympathetic
supply of the head, neck, and the arms passes through the stellate ganglion on
each side. Hence a stellate ganglion block is performed to diagnose and treat
sympathetically maintained pain of the head, neck, and the upper extremity.
(708, Figure 43-7)
43. The most common approach to the stellate ganglion is the anterior paratracheal
approach guided by surface anatomy of the C6 vertebra. When performing the
block without radiographic assistance, the operator palpates the anterior tubercle of
the transverse process of the C6 vertebra then retracts the overlying carotid
artery and jugular vein laterally. A needle is advanced until seated on the anterior
tubercle of C6, where about 10 mL of local anesthetic is injected incrementally.
The local anesthetic spreads along the prevertebral fascia in the caudal direction
to bathe the stellate ganglion. Another approach that has been used is approaching
the ganglion at the level of C7; however, this carries a substantial risk of
pneumothorax because the dome of the lung lies in close approximation to the
needle injection site. When performed under radiographic assistance, the needle is
placed just inferior to the uncinate process of the C6 or C7 vertebra near the
junction of the transverse process and the vertebral body. (708)
44. A stellate ganglion block is used to diagnose and treat painful syndromes
involving the upper extremity, most commonly CRPS. There is some evidence that it
may also be useful for treating neuropathic pain arising from ischemia, herpes
zoster, early postoperative neuralgia, and postradiation neuritis. Stellate ganglion
block has also been used in the treatment of some disease states associated with
vascular compromise, including intractable angina pectoris, Raynaud disease,
frostbite, vasospasm, and occlusive or embolic phenomena. Stellate ganglion
block has shown usefulness in controlling hyperhidrosis of the upper
extremity. (709)
45. Successful stellate ganglion block is signaled by the appearance of Horner
syndrome, a constellation of signs and symptoms which includes miosis (pupillary
Chronic Pain Management
489
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
constriction), ptosis (drooping of the upper eyelid), and enophthalmos (sunken
eyeball). Other signs of a successful block include nasal congestion, anhidrosis (lack
of sweating), and venodilation in the involved extremity. There will also be an
increase in local temperature by at least a degree Celsius in the affected extremity.
Thus there are several signs the clinician should look for to confirm success of a
stellate ganglion block. (708)
46. Stellate ganglion block is associated with the following minor and major
complications. Minor complications include a recurrent laryngeal nerve block
causing hoarseness, phrenic nerve blockade leading to unilateral diaphragmatic
paresis, and somatic blockade of the upper extremity (brachial plexus block)
characterized by sensory and motor loss on the ipsilateral side. Major
complications include intravascular injection of local anesthetic causing immediate
seizures, and epidural or intrathecal injection of the local injection causing a
neuraxial block. The complication of a neuraxial block can be a high epidural or
spinal with loss of consciousness and apnea, for which immediate resuscitation
would be required. (709)
47. The celiac plexus is comprised of a diffuse network of nerve fibers that lie over the
anterior surface of the aorta at the T12-L1 vertebral level surrounding the origin of
the celiac artery from the aorta. Presynaptic nerve fibers travel from the sympathetic
chain toward the ganglion over the anterolateral aspect of the inferior thoracic
vertebra as the greater, lesser, and least splanchnic nerves. Postsynaptic fibers
innervate all the abdominal viscera, including the gastrointestinal tract between the
gastroesophageal junction and the splenic flexure of the colon. Sympathetic fibers
to the descending and sigmoid colon, the rectum, and the pelvis do not travel
through the celiac plexus. (710, Figure 43-8)
48. A neurolytic celiac plexus block (NCPB) can be performed using either a transcrural
or a retrocrural approach. The transcrural technique consists of placing the
neurolytic agent directly on the celiac ganglion anterolateral to the aorta. This
approach reduces the chance of nerve root involvement. The retrocrural approach
involves positioning the needles posterior to the diaphragmatic crura in close
apposition to the T12 vertebral body. The percutaneous posterior approach is
performed using surface anatomic landmarks to position needles in the vicinity of
the celiac plexus. NCPB is then achieved with the injection of 20 to 30 mL of either
alcohol (50% to 100%) or phenol (10% to 12%). The position of the needle can be
verified by computed tomography (CT), fluoroscopy, or ultrasound (using an
endoscopic ultrasound-guided transgastric approach). No single technique has
proven superior to the other. (710)
49. A neurolytic celiac plexus block is used to control pain arising from intraabdominal
structures, including the pancreas, liver, gallbladder, omentum, mesentery, and the
gastrointestinal tract from the stomach to the transverse colon. Most often the
source of the pain is malignancy, particularly pancreatic cancer. The pain relief for
these patients can be dramatic, and has long-lasting benefit for 70% to 90% of
patients. The use of the NCPB for nonmalignant pain, such as those with chronic
pancreatitis, is debatable. (711)
50. During NCPB, a transcrural approach places the neurolytic agent directly on the
celiac ganglion, anterolateral to the aorta, while a retrocrural approach places
the solution posterior to the diaphragmatic crura in close apposition to the T12
vertebral body. A splanchnic nerve block is a minor modification to the classic
retrocrural celiac plexus block; the only difference being that for a splanchnic nerve
block, the needles are placed in the midportion of T12 rather than in the
cephalad portion of L1 as is done for a celiac plexus block. (710)
51. The normal and expected physiologic effects of producing a sympathetic block
to the abdominal viscera are diarrhea from unopposed parasympathetic stimulation
of the bowel and orthostatic hypotension from splanchnic vasodilation.
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
490
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
There are other potential complications of a neurolytic celiac plexus block.
Intravascular injection of 30 mL of 100% ethanol results in a blood ethanol level
high enough to produce intoxication. Intravascular injection of 30 mL of 10%
phenol will cause clinical manifestations similar to local anesthetic toxicity,
including seizures, cardiac arrhythmias, and even cardiovascular collapse.
Perhaps the most feared complication of NCPB is paraplegia. Segmental spread at
the level of T12 or L1 may cause spasm or even necrosis of the artery of
Adamkiewicz, which compromises the blood supply of the anterior two thirds of
the spinal cord in the low thoracic region. Best available estimates of the
incidence of paraplegia place the risk at less than 1:1000. (711)
52. The lumbar sympathetic chain consists of four to five paired ganglia that lie over the
anterolateral surfaces of the L2-L4 vertebra. Their cell bodies lie in the anterolateral
region of the spinal cord from T11 to L2, where the preganglionic fibers exit the
spinal canal with the corresponding spinal root, join the sympathetic chain, and
then synapse with the appropriate ganglion. Postganglionic fibers exit the
ganglion to form a diffuse network of perivascular fibers surrounding the vessels in
the lower extremities; postganglionic fibers also travel within the nerves of the
lumbosacral plexus. (711, Figure 43-9)
53. Lumbar plexus block is used in the diagnosis and treatment of sympathetically
maintained pain of the lower extremities (e.g., CRPS types I and II). It is also used
clinically to treat ischemic pain from small vessel occlusion in the lower extremities.
There is some evidence supporting the usefulness of lumbar sympathetic block for
treating painful neuropathic states of the lower extremities, including early
postherpetic neuralgia and acute herpes zoster. Complications are uncommon with
proper use of a lumbar sympathetic block. Toxic levels of local anesthetic can result
from an inadvertent intravascular injection while performing a lumbar sympathetic
block, and if large volumes of concentrated local anesthetic are used, the local
anesthetic toxicity could be catastrophic. Some other complications which could be
encountered include hematuria caused by direct needle placement through the
adjacent kidney, spinal nerve injury, and epidural or intrathecal injection of local
anesthetic. All are uncommon complications when the procedure is performed
under radiographic guidance. Following neurolysis of the lumbar sympathetic
chain, postsympathectomy pain in the distribution of the L1 spinal nerve (anterior
thigh) occurs in about 10% of patients. (712)
54. Spinal cord stimulation is based on the hypothesis that a nonnoxious stimulus
interferes with the perception of pain. This input of a nonpainful stimulus directly
activates the ascending fibers within the dorsal columns of the spinal cord that
transmit nonpainful stimuli and this principle is used to treat chronic back pain.
A typical spinal cord stimulator system is comprised of a pacemaker-like
implanted pulse generator connected to an electrode positioned over the dorsal
columns of the spinal cord in the posterior epidural space. (712)
55. Current evidence supports the use of spinal cord stimulation (SCS) to treat pain,
in particular for patients presenting with chronic lumbosacral pain or radicular
pain after prior lumbar surgery. The evidence for the use of SCS for lumbosacral
pain has been inconclusive, but with the advent of new dual lead systems and
electrode arrays providing a broader area of stimulation, SCS may become more
useful for treating pain in these patients. Management of chronic radicular pain
using SCS is the best studied indication with the highest overall rate of
successful long-term pain reduction. SCS has proven to be less expensive and more
successful than repeat surgery in the management of persistent pain after prior
lumbar surgery. (712)
56. The most common complication associated with SCS is lead displacement with the
need for reoperation to reposition the lead(s). In modern case series, less than
5% of patients experienced wound infection or dehiscence. (712)
Chronic Pain Management
491
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
Chapter
41 CARDIOPULMONARY
RESUSCITATION
David Shimabukuro
1. What is cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR)? What is basic life support (BLS)?
What is advanced cardiac life support (ACLS)?
2. Who developed the Guidelines for Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation and Emergency
Cardiovascular Care?
BASIC LIFE
SUPPORT (BLS)
3. What are the four major components of BLS? What major change was recommended
in 2010 regarding the sequence of attention to airway, breathing, and circulation
during BLS?
Closed-Chest (External) Cardiac Compressions
4. Where should the rescuer’s hands be placed on the adult patient to maximize blood
flow when performing closed-chest cardiac compressions? What are some risks to
the patient when the rescuer‘s hands are placed incorrectly?
5. How should the rescuer be positioned relative to the patient when performing
closed-chest cardiac compressions? By how much is the sternum of an adult patient
depressed during each compression?
6. What is the minimum rate (number of compressions per minute) for adult BLS?
What is the ratio of cardiac compressions to ventilation during one-rescuer
CPR? What is the ratio of cardiac compressions to ventilation during two-
rescuer CPR?
7. What are the two proposed mechanisms for blood flow during closed-chest cardiac
compressions? Which of these is thought to be the most important?
8. How can the effectiveness of closed-chest cardiac compressions be verified?
What should the goal be for end-tidal CO2 if an end-tidal CO2 monitor is
available?
Provision of a Patent Upper Airway
9. What is the head-tilt/jaw thrust maneuver? What is its goal? How can it be modified
in a patient with a possible neck injury?
Specialized Equipment to Maintain the Airway
10. What are the advantages of a cuffed endotracheal tube for ventilation of the lungs in
a patient receiving CPR?
492
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
External Defibrillation
11. What is the definitive treatment for pulseless ventricular tachycardia (VT) and
ventricular fibrillation (VF)? What is the most important determinant of return of
spontaneous circulation in a patient with VT/VF when performing external
defibrillation?
12. How many joules of electricity should be delivered during an initial attempt at
external defibrillation? How many joules should be delivered in subsequent
defibrillation attempts, provided they are necessary?
13. Where on the chest is the appropriate placement of paddles/pads for external
defibrillation?
14. What is the risk of external defibrillation in the patient with a cardiac pacemaker?
ADVANCED
CARDIAC LIFE
SUPPORT
15. What are the three advanced cardiac life support (ACLS) algorithms most likely to be
used in the operating room?
Ventricular Fibrillation/Pulseless Ventricular Tachycardia
16. What are some causes of VF/pulseless VT?
17. What is the appropriate treatment for VF/ pulseless VT?
18. What is torsades de pointes? What are some causes of torsades de pointes?
19. What is the treatment for torsades de pointes?
Pulseless Electrical Activity
20. What are some causes of pulseless electrical activity (PEA)?
21. What is PEA? How should it be treated?
CARDIAC ASYSTOLE
22. What are some causes of cardiac asystole? How should it be treated?
Bradycardia
23. Bradycardia is defined as what heart rate?
24. What is the appropriate treatment for bradycardia?
Narrow-Complex Tachycardias
25. What is the appropriate treatment for narrow-complex tachycardias?
26. What are some side effects of the administration of adenosine?
27. What is the risk of cardioversion when it is performed without synchronization?
Wide-Complex Tachycardias
28. What is the appropriate treatment for wide-complex tachycardias?
29. When should adenosine be administered? How should b receptor blockers and
calcium channel blockers be administered?
30. What is the risk of cardioversion when it is performed without synchronization?
Precordial Thump
31. What is a precordial thump? When is a precordial thump recommended in adult
patients?
DRUG THERAPY
32. What is the goal of initial drug therapy during CPR? What are the mainstays of
treatment for the patient in cardiac arrest?
Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation
493
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
33. What actions of epinephrine are thought to be responsible for its beneficial effects
during cardiac arrest?
34. What actions of vasopressin are thought to be responsible for its beneficial effects
during cardiac arrest?
35. When is amiodarone administered during cardiac arrest?
36. What is the advantage of the delivery of drugs by a centrally placed intravenous
catheter during CPR? How long should the rescuers wait for drug administered via a
peripheral vein to reach the central circulation?
37. What are two alternatives for drug delivery when vascular access is not available?
RESUSCITATION OF
INFANTS AND
CHILDREN
38. Where should the pulse be palpated in infants up to 1 year of age? Where should it
be palpated in children?
39. How should closed-chest cardiac compressions be performed in infants?
40. How should closed-chest cardiac compressions be performed in children?
41. What energy setting, in joules, should be applied for optimal success for a return of
spontaneous circulation when using an external defibrillator? If the initial attempt
at defibrillation is unsuccessful, what energy setting should be used for the
subsequent attempts?
POSTRESUSCITATION
CARE
42. How should a cardiac arrest patient be managed after the return of spontaneous
circulation?
43. What glucose and arterial carbon dioxide levels should be maintained in a patient
after resuscitation from cardiac arrest?
SPECIAL
PERIOPERATIVE
CONSIDERATIONS
44. What are some of the more common drugs used in the operating room that can
precipitate an anaphylactic reaction? In addition to removing or stopping the
inciting agent, what is the primary treatment for anaphylaxis?
45. What is the treatment for an intraoperative venous gas embolism?
46. What is the primary treatment for local anesthetic toxicity? How long should the
resuscitation continue in the event of complete cardiovascular collapse?
47. How should one manage cardiovascular collapse in a patient who has received
neuraxial anesthesia?
ANSWERS*
1. CPR is the institution of artificial circulation and ventilation until spontaneous
cardiopulmonary function returns, extracorporeal life support is initiated, or
resuscitation efforts are discontinued. It consists of BLS and ACLS. BLS is the rapid
evaluation of an unresponsive individual with the activation of the emergency
medical system and the acquisition of an automated external defibrillator (AED) or a
regular defibrillator. Artificial circulation is achieved through closed-chest cardiac
compressions and ventilation is performed via mouth-to-mouth, mask-to-mouth,
or bag-valve mask. Any individual (including nonhealth care personnel) who has
had the appropriate training and certification can perform BLS. ACLS, based on BLS,
can only be performed by health care workers and adds advanced airway
management, cardiovascular drugs, cardiac rhythm analysis, and postresuscitation
management. ACLS also includes recognition, diagnosis, and initial treatment of
acute myocardial infarction and acute stroke. (715)
*Numbers in parentheses: numbers refer to pages, figures, or tables in Miller RD, Pardo MC: Basics of Anesthesia,
6th ed. Philadelphia, Elsevier Saunders, 2011.
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
494
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
2. The International Liaison Committee on Resuscitation publishes the guidelines
based on evidence from the medical and basic science literature. This multinational
committee, primarily represented by the American Heart Association and European
Resuscitation Council, meets every few years to evaluate and/or revise the
guidelines. (715)
BASIC LIFE
SUPPORT (BLS)
3. The four major components of BLS are the recognition of an unresponsive patient
that is not breathing, activation of the emergency medical system and acquisition of
an AED, closed-chest cardiac compressions with ventilations, and actual
defibrillation. In 2010 a major change occurred in the recommendation for the
sequence of attention by the rescuer in airway, breathing, and circulation. The old
mnemonic of ABCD (airway, breathing, circulation, and defibrillation) was changed
to CAB (compression, airway, breathing). In the hospital setting, ventilation is
expected in cardiopulmonary resuscitative efforts, although large out-of-hospital
studies have shown no difference in outcome between patients who had chest
compression alone CPR versus those who had chest compression and ventilation
CPR. (716, Figure 44-1)
Closed-Chest (External) Cardiac Compressions
4. For closed-chest cardiac compressions in the adult patient, the rescuer’s hands
should be placed in the middle of the patient’s sternum. This provides for maximum
compression to the underlying cardiac ventricles and optimizes blood flow
produced by the compressions. If the rescuer’s hands are placed incorrectly during
closed-chest cardiac compression, not only is blood flow not optimized, but the
patient may suffer from internal injury as well. For example, pressure over the
xiphoid process or rib cage can result in damage to abdominal organs, especially the
liver, or cause rib fractures. Rib fractures can result in damage to the heart and
lungs. (716, Figure 44-2)
5. During closed-chest cardiac compressions, the rescuer’s upper body should be
directly over the patient’s chest. The shoulders are positioned directly over the hands
and the elbows are kept straight. This position enables the rescuer to use the weight
of his or her upper body for compression and may prevent fatigue. The sternum of
an adult patient should be depressed at least 2 inches (5 cm) during closed-chest
cardiac compression. (716, Figure 44-2; 725, Table 44-3)
6. The rate for closed-chest compressions for an adult is at least 100 compressions
per minute. The rescuer needs to push hard and push fast, but allow for full
chest recoil. The ratio of cardiac compressions to ventilation during CPR is 30:2,
regardless of the number of rescuers. (716, Figure 44-1; 725, Table 44-3)
7. There are two proposed mechanisms for blood flow during closed-chest cardiac
compression: (1) the cardiac pump mechanism and (2) the thoracic pump
mechanism. The cardiac pump mechanism theorizes that the direct compression of
the cardiac ventricles between the sternum and the spine results in an increase in
intracardiac pressures, closure of the tricuspid and mitral valves, and the forward
flow of blood into the pulmonary arteries and aorta. During relaxation, the aortic
and pulmonary valves close to ensure unidirectional movement of blood. The
second proposed thoracic pump mechanism for forward blood flow revolves around
the alternating increase in intrathoracic pressure that accompanies closed-chest
compressions and decrease in intrathoracic pressure during relaxation. During
compressions, the increase in intrathoracic pressure ejects blood out of the chest;
during relaxation, the drop in intrathoracic pressure promotes venous return
back into the thoracic cavity. Evidence for the thoracic pump mechanism can be
seen with forceful coughing, which can sustain consciousness for as long as
1.5 minutes. The dominant mechanism for forward blood flow during closed-chest
Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation
495
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
compression is unclear, but most believe it to be the cardiac pump mechanism.
However, heart size, the anterior-to-posterior chest distance, and thoracic
compliance are believed to influence which of these mechanisms eventually
dominates.
8. Verification of the effectiveness of closed-chest cardiac compressions can be
estimated by the palpation of peripheral pulses and, if an arterial line is present,
a diastolic blood pressure of at least 20 mm Hg. If an endotracheal tube is in place,
a capnogram should be used to guide the effectiveness of closed-chest cardiac
compression. When ventilation and CO2 production are constant, alterations in the
end-tidal CO2 are reflective of alterations in pulmonary blood flow and cardiac
output. When end-tidal CO2 monitors are available during closed-chest cardiac
compression, an end-tidal CO2 of 20 mm Hg or more suggests effective CPR.
Conversely, an end-tidal CO2 of 10 mm Hg or less is suggestive of poor
CPR or a grave prognosis. (718-720, Figure 44-5)
Provision of a Patent Upper Airway
9. Upper airway obstruction in an unconscious patient is due to the tongue falling
against the posterior pharynx. The head-tilt/jaw thrust maneuver involves extension
of the head and displacement of the mandible to an anterior position thereby
moving the tongue forward away from the posterior pharynx. For many individuals,
this is adequate to provide a patent airway. For patients with suspected neck
trauma, the rescuer needs to modify the head-tilt/jaw thrust maneuver to avoid
exacerbating a potential spinal cord injury. The head-tilt should be excluded from
the maneuver and only the jaw thrust performed in these patients. (717, Figure 44-3)
Specialized Equipment to Maintain the Airway
10. There are several advantages of a cuffed endotracheal tube for ventilation of the
lungs in a patient receiving CPR. First, it allows for proper ventilation and end-tidal
carbon dioxide (ETCO2) monitoring. Second, compressions and ventilations are
no longer synchronous. Compressions are performed non-stop, while breaths are
given once every 6 to 8 seconds. This allows for more time with an adequate
perfusion pressure. Third, it also allows for the addition of supplemental oxygen in a
reliable manner. Finally, a cuffed endotracheal tube provides the lungs with some
protection against the aspiration of gastric contents. (718-720, Figure 44-5)
External Defibrillation
11. The definitive treatment for pulseless VT and VF is external defibrillation. The most
important determinant of the success of external defibrillation is the duration of
the time lapse between cardiopulmonary arrest and external defibrillation.
For this reason, the current recommendation is to apply external defibrillation
as soon as possible in these patients. (718-719, Figures 44-1 and 44-5)
12. The initial, and subsequent, attempts at external defibrillation require a shock of 120
to 200 J (biphasic) for adult patients. If the amount of energy needed to terminate VF
is not known for the specific device, then 200 J (biphasic) should be used. (718-719,
Figure 44-5)
13. The paddles/pads should be applied to the chest with firm pressure ensuring good
skin contact in a position that will reduce impedence or resistance and maximize the
flow of electrical current through the myocardium. The standard placement is
with one paddle/pad below the right clavicle and to the right of the sternum; the
second paddle/pad is applied at the level of the apex of the heart in the midaxillary
line. Poor skin contact can lead to an increase in the resistance or impedence to
current flow during shock delivery or arcing of the current. (718, Figure 44-4)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
496
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
14. The risk of external defibrillation in the patient with a cardiac pacemaker is the
malfunction of the pacemaker. It is recommended that the paddles/pads be
placed 1 to 2 cm away from the pacemaker generator. (718)
ADVANCED
CARDIAC LIFE
SUPPORT
15. Every anesthesiologist should be familiar with pulseless arrest, bradycardia, and
tachycardia algorithms.
Ventricular Fibrillation/Pulseless Ventricular Tachycardia
16. Possible causes of VF/pulseless VT include hypovolemia, hypoxia, hydrogen ion
(acidosis), hypokalemia/hyperkalemia, hypothermia, tension pneumothorax,
cardiac tamponade, toxins, thrombosis (pulmonary), and thrombosis (coronary).
(719, Figure 44-5, 723, Table 44-2)
17. PatientsinVF/pulselessVTshouldreceiveimmediatedefibrillationof120to200 Jwith
a biphasic defibrillator. Good quality CPR should also be instituted and maintained
throughout the resuscitation. Vasoactive medications, such as epinephrine and
vasopressin, are to be given at the appropriate times. Amiodarone, an antiarrhythmic,
should be considered as well. (718-722, Figure 44-5 and Table 44-1)
18. Torsades de pointes is an atypical form of VT with a characteristic twisting of
the QRS around the baseline such that it appears as a sine wave. Causes of
torsades de pointes include drugs that prolong the QT interval, such as quinidine,
procainamide, disopyramide, phenothiazines, and tricyclic antidepressants;
other causes include bradycardia, hypokalemia, hypomagnesemia, and acute
myocardial ischemia or infarction.
19. The treatment for torsades de pointes may include overdrive pacing of the cardiac
atria or ventricles and/or treatment with magnesium sulfate for stable patients.
Patients whose condition is unstable should undergo defibrillation.
Pulseless Electrical Activity
20. Causes of PEA are identical to those of VF or pulseless VT. (719, Figure 44-5 and
723, Table 44-2)
21. PEA is a term used to describe the presence of a normally perfusing cardiac rhythm
on the electrocardiogram with little or no cardiac output. In patients with PEA,
there is an absence of peripheral pulses or systemic blood pressure. Cardiac rhythms
that may be present include organized electrical activity, idioventricular rhythms,
and/or ventricular escape rhythms. PEA should be treated with closed-chest
compressions and the rapid administration of epinephrine and/or vasopressin.
There should also be a search for, and correction of, possible causes.
(719-723, Figure 44-5 and Table 44-1)
CARDIAC ASYSTOLE
22. Causes of cardiac asystole are identical to those of PEA, VF, or pulseless VT. It is
treated identically to PEA. (719, Figure 44-5 and 723, Table 44-2)
Bradycardia
23. Typically, bradycardia is defined as a heart rate of less than 60 beats/min.
(720, Figure 44-6)
24. Treatment for bradycardia depends on symptoms and underlying rhythm.
Asymptomatic patients can be monitored and observed. Symptomatic patients or
those with a high degree block need more definitive pharmacologic therapy
Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation
497
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
(atropine, dopamine infusion, epinephrine infusion) or cardiac pacing. (720,
Figure 44-6, 722, Table 44-1, 723)
Narrow-Complex Tachycardias
25. The factor that determines the appropriate method of treatment for narrow-complex
tachycardias is the amount of hemodynamic compromise that occurs as a result of
the cardiac dysrhythmia. Patients who are hemodynamically unstable should
undergo immediate synchronized cardioversion. The amount of energy used is
dependent upon the regularity of the QRS complex and likelihood of a type of
dysrhythmia. The treatment of patients with narrow-complex tachycardias whose
condition is stable includes vagal maneuvers, adenosine, b-blockers, calcium
channel blockers, and amiodarone. (721, Figure 44-7, 722, Table 44-1, 723)
26. Side effects of the administration of adenosine include flushing, dyspnea, chest
pain, and bronchospasm.
27. TheriskofcardioversionthatisnotsynchronizedisVF.VFresultsifthecardioversion
shock occurs on the relative refractory period of the cardiac cycle. (723)
Wide-Complex Tachycardias
28. The appropriate treatment for wide-complex tachycardias is determined by the
hemodynamic stability of the patient. Pulseless patients should receive immediate
defibrillation of 120 to 200 J with a biphasic defibrillator. Hemodynamically
unstable patients with evidence of acute myocardial ischemia or infarction, who
have acute pulmonary edema, or who have other evidence of end-organ
hypoperfusion should undergo immediate synchronized or unsynchronized
cardioversion with a shock of 100 to 200 J (biphasic) depending on the regularity of
the QRS complex and the likelihood of the type of dysrhythmia. Sedation will likely
be needed in awake patients. Hemodynamically stable patients can undergo drug
treatment. Drug therapy includes amiodarone, sotalol, or procainamide. A
cardiologist should be consulted before starting any of these drug therapies in a
stable patient. (721, Figure 44-7, 722, Table 44-1, 723)
29. Adenosine should only be administered in a wide-complex tachycardia when the
rate is regular and the QRS complex is monomorphic in nature. Adenosine has no
effect on monomorphic VT. b receptor blockers and calcium channel blockers should
be administered very cautiously and only if it is clear that the tachyarrhythmia is
supraventricular in origin. (721, Figure 44-7, 722, Table 44-1, 723)
30. In a wide-complex tachycardia, the main risk of unsynchronized cardioversion is a
change in rhythm to VF. However, with rapid ventricular rates, synchronization
may not be possible and the defibrillator will fail to discharge.
Precordial Thump
31. A precordial thump is the delivery of a single, forceful blow by the rescuer with a
closed fist to the middle portion of the patient’s sternum. A precordial thump is
recommended in adult patients for the initial treatment of VF or VT when a
defibrillator is not immediately available. Immediate external defibrillation
should not be delayed for a precordial thump. A precordial thump is not
recommended in pediatric patients.
DRUG THERAPY
32. The goal of initial drug therapy during CPR is the increasing of coronary and
cerebral perfusion pressures. The mainstay for treatment of the patient in
cardiopulmonary arrest is the administration of oxygen and epinephrine. (718-723,
Figure 44-5, Table 44-1)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
498
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
33. Epinephrine is a nonspecific a receptor and b receptor agonist. During a
resuscitation, its action on a1 receptors is probably the most important. As mediated
through the a receptor, there is an increase in cerebral and coronary perfusion
pressure, intense arterial vasoconstriction in other vascular beds, and a selective
redistribution of cardiac output. There is some evidence that epinephrine
administered early in the resuscitative effort in a patient with cardiac arrest can
possibly improve outcome. (723)
34. Vasopressin is a potent peripheral and mesenteric vasoconstrictor, yet a potent
pulmonary artery and cerebral artery vasodilator. Its effects are mediated via the
vasopressin receptor. Blood is redirected from the peripheral to the central
circulation, thus, increasing blood to the brain and heart. (723-724)
35. Amiodarone, a class III antiarrhythmic, is used in the treatment of VF and VT
(with and without a pulse). An initial dose of 300 mg IV push can be followed by a
subsequent single dose of 150 mg IV push, if there has been no return of
spontaneous circulation and resuscitation continues. In patients with stable VT
with a pulse, 150 mg IV over 10 minutes can be administered in an effort to
terminate the VT with conversion into sinus rhythm. (724)
36. The advantage of the administration of drugs by a centrally placed catheter
during CPR is the rapid delivery of drugs to the heart. When a peripheral
intravenous site is used for the administration of drugs during cardiopulmonary
arrest, a period of 1 to 2 minutes should be allowed for drugs to reach the central
circulation. In addition, drug administration should always be followed by at
least 20 mL of normal saline. CPR should not be interrupted for placement of
central venous access unless peripheral access and intraosseous access cannot be
obtained. (720)
37. Two alternatives for drug delivery when vascular access is not available include an
endotracheal tube or the placement of an intraosseous line. Drugs that can be
absorbed across the alveolar epithelium include epinephrine and vasopressin. The
intraosseous line should be treated as any other peripherally or centrally inserted
intravenous line. (720)
RESUSCITATION OF
INFANTS AND
CHILDREN
38. In infants up to 1 year of age, the best location to check for a pulse is the brachial
artery in the mid-upper arm. In children older than 1 year of age, the carotid artery
is the preferred location for pulse palpation. (725, Table 44-3)
39. The heart in infants and children is positioned below the lower sternum, as in adults.
Hand placement during closed-chest cardiac compressions in infants is with the
rescuer’s one hand to support the back while compressions are performed with
two fingers of the other hand. Closed-chest cardiac compression in the infant
should be performed at a rate of at least 100 per minute. The sternum of the infant
patient during closed-chest cardiac compressions should be depressed by at least
one third of the anterior-posterior diameter or 1.5 inches (4 cm). (724-725,
Table 44-3)
40. Closed-chest cardiac compressions in children can be accomplished with the heel of
one hand directly over the midsternum. The recommended rate of closed-chest
cardiac compressions in children is at least 100 per minute, identical to infants and
adults, and depression of the sternum should also be one third to one half the
anterior-posterior diameter or 1.5 to 2 inches (4 to 5 cm). (724-725, Table 44-3)
41. The energy setting that should be used for the optimal success of external
defibrillation of children is directly related to their body weight. The recommended
initial energy setting is 2 to 4 J/kg. If the initial attempt at defibrillation is
unsuccessful, the subsequent attempt should be made with at least 4 J/kg, but
no more than 10 J/kg. (724-725)
Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation
499
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
POSTRESUSCITATION
CARE
42. The management of the cardiac arrest patient after the return of spontaneous
circulation should follow the algorithm for postresuscitation life support.
Postresuscitation management should include close monitoring, supplemental
oxygen to maintain an adequate oxygen saturation, and vasopressor drug therapy
as needed to maintain an adequate perfusion pressure. Mild hypothermia should be
immediately started and continued for the first 12 to 48 hours in comatose patients
after resuscitation from cardiopulmonary arrest. (725-727, Figure 44-8)
43. In the postresuscitation phase, hypoglycemia and hyperglycemia have been shown
to be deleterious for optimal neurologic outcome. Both hypoglycemia and
hyperglycemia should be avoided. There is no evidence correlating specific values
of the arterial partial pressure of carbon dioxide (PaCO2) to neurologic outcome.
Hyperventilation is not recommended and may be harmful due to its effects on
cerebral blood flow. The goal is normocapnia. (727)
SPECIAL
PERIOPERATIVE
CONSIDERATIONS
44. Common medications used in the operating room and associated with
anaphylaxis are antibiotics and muscle relaxants. Intravenous contrast agents
and latex may also be associated with intraoperative anaphylactic reactions.
The main pharmacologic treatment for an anaphylactic reaction is epinephrine.
(727, Table 44-4)
45. The treatment for intraoperative gas embolism is to stop insufflation, if it is
being used, occlude open veins, and/or flood the field with saline. The patient
should also be placed in a Trendelenburg position with the left side down. In case
of cardiac arrest, CPR and ACLS need to be performed. (727)
46. The primary treatment for local anesthetic toxicity is the administration of
intralipid. In the event of complete cardiac collapse, resuscitation should be
continued for at least 60 minutes. (727-728, Table 44-5)
47. Cardiac arrest from neuraxial anesthesia is a rare event. Should it occur, it should be
managed with CPR and ACLS. (728)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
500
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
Chapter
42 AWARENESS UNDER
ANESTHESIA
Daniel Cole
INCIDENCE
1. What is the difference between explicit and implicit memory?
2. Can the incidence of intraoperative awareness be reliably determined in the
recovery room? By self-reporting?
3. What are the components of the “structured interview” as used to evaluate the
occurrence of intraoperative awareness?
4. When studied prospectively, and when using a structured interview, what is the
approximate incidence of intraoperative awareness?
ETIOLOGY AND RISK
FACTORS FOR
INTRAOPERATIVE
AWARENESS
5. What are the three major causes of intraoperative awareness?
6. What are some risk factors for intraoperative awareness?
7. What procedures are associated with an increased risk of intraoperative awareness?
PSYCHOLOGICAL
SEQUELAE
8. If a patient has an episode of intraoperative awareness, what is the approximate risk
of late psychological sequelae?
9. What are the potential psychological sequelae of intraoperative awareness?
PREVENTION OF
AWARENESS
10. What are some conventional monitors used to assess anesthetic depth?
11. What are some limitations of brain function monitors for assessing anesthetic depth
and the risk for intraoperative awareness?
12. What measures can be taken to help prevent intraoperative awareness?
13. What are the elements that the Joint Commission recommends to prevent and
manage intraoperative awareness?
BRAIN FUNCTION
MONITORING
14. What does the best available data on brain function monitors suggest regarding the
efficacy of these monitors to prevent intraoperative awareness?
THE ASA’S PRACTICE
ADVISORY ON
INTRAOPERATIVE
AWARENESS AND
BRAIN FUNCTION
MONITORS
15. According to the Practice Advisory from the American Society of Anesthesiologists
(ASA) on Intraoperative Awareness and Brain Function Monitoring, what should
the preoperative evaluation include to minimize the risk of intraoperative
awareness?
16. According to the Practice Advisory from the ASA on Intraoperative Awareness and
Brain Function Monitoring, what should the preinduction phase include to
minimize the risk of intraoperative awareness?
501
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
17. According to the Practice Advisory from the ASA on Intraoperative Awareness and
Brain Function Monitoring, what should intraoperative monitoring include to
minimize the risk of intraoperative awareness?
18. According to the Practice Advisory from the ASA on Intraoperative Awareness and
Brain Function Monitoring, what should intraoperative and postoperative
management include to minimize the risk of intraoperative awareness and
associated sequelae?
MEDICOLEGAL
SEQUELAE OF
AWARENESS
19. Why is there a large disparity between the incidence of intraoperative awareness
and associated malpractice claims?
20. What are the factors which influence a patient’s decision to initiate a malpractice
claim?
DATA FROM THE
ASA CLOSED
CLAIMS PROJECT
21. What is the percentage of claims for intraoperative awareness in the Closed Claims
database?
22. WhatarethefactorsassociatedwithamalpracticeclaimintheClosedClaimsdatabase?
23. What are the causes of intraoperative awareness in the Closed Claims database?
ANSWERS*
INCIDENCE
1. Explicit memory, or conscious memory, refers to the recollection of previous
experiences and is equivalent to remembering (intraoperative awareness).
Implicit memory, or unconscious memory, is the ability of a patient to respond
to commands, yet lack conscious recall of intraoperative events. (737)
2. The incidence of intraoperative awareness is best estimated by formally
interviewing patients postoperatively, well after discharge from the postanesthesia
recovery room. Patients will not reliably, or voluntarily, report awareness if they
were not disturbed by it, or if embarrassed to do so. A structured interview is
recommended to evaluate the incidence of awareness. (738)
3. The structured interview consists of the following components: (738)
▪What was the last thing you remember before you went to sleep?
▪What is the first thing you remember after your operation?
▪Can you remember anything in between?
▪Can you remember if you had any dreams during your procedure?
▪What was the worst thing about your procedure?
4. The best estimate for the incidence of intraoperative awareness is 1 to 2 occurences/
1000 patients undergoing a general anesthetic. (738)
EITOLOGY AND RISK
FACTORS FOR
INTRAOPERATIVE
AWARENESS
5. The three major causes of intraoperative awareness include light anesthesia, increased
patient requirements for anesthesia, and anesthetic delivery problems. (738)
6. Risk factors for intraoperative awareness include hemodynamic intolerance of
anesthetic drugs; patients that are hypovolemic; patients with limited
cardiovascular reserve; ASA Physical Statue 3–5; emergency surgery;
administration of small doses of volatile anesthetics; a nitrous oxide or intravenous-
based anesthetic; chronic use of alcohol, opioids, amphetamines, or cocaine; genetic
resistance to anesthetics; and equipment problems. (738)
*Numbers in parentheses: numbers refer to pages, figures, or tables in Miller RD, Pardo MC: Basics of Anesthesia,
6th ed. Philadelphia, Elsevier Saunders, 2011.
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
502
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
7. Cesarean delivery and open heart procedures are associated with an increased risk of
intraoperative awareness. (738)
PSYCHOLOGICAL
SEQUELAE
8. Approximately one third of patients who have an episode of intraoperative
awareness have late psychological sequelae. (739)
9. Potential psychological sequelae of intraoperative awareness include flashbacks,
anxiety/nervousness, loneliness, nightmares, and fear/panic attacks that vary from
bothersome to distressing. Some patients develop severe, persistent symptoms
(posttraumatic stress disorder) that profoundly interfere with interpersonal
relationships and daily activities. (739)
PREVENTION OF
AWARENESS
10. Conventional monitors of anesthetic depth include patient movement, tachycardia,
hypertension, tearing, perspiration, and clinical instinct. One could also include
anesthetic gas analyzers, which assess the dose of volatile anesthetic delivered to the
patient. (739)
11. Limitations of brain function monitors include: (1) there is not a unitary mechanism
of general anesthesia, and thus various anesthetics are likely to produce unique
electrical activity at a given anesthetic depth. Consequently, a unique algorithm to
each specific anesthetic regimen would likely be required for optimal correlation
between electrical signals in the brain and anesthetic depth; (2) general anesthesia
occurs on a continuum without a quantitative dimension, and there is
considerable interpatient pharmacodynamic variability to a specific anesthetic.
Attempting to translate a conscious or unconscious state into a quantitative number
can at best be limited to the art of probability with an expectation of false
positive and false negative data; and (3) there is less than an optimal likelihood of
cortical electric activity having reliable sensitivity and specificity to a biochemical
event which occurs at a distant subcortical structure. (739, 740, Figure 46-1,
Figure 46-2)
12. Suggestions for the prevention of intraoperative awareness include premedication
with an amnesic drug such as a benzodiazepine, giving adequate doses of drugs
to induce anesthesia, avoiding muscle paralysis unless necessary, and administering
a volatile anesthetic at a dose of 0.7 MAC or more with monitoring of end-tidal
levels to ensure delivery of adequate levels of a volatile anesthetic. (740)
13. The Joint Commission’s recommendations to prevent and manage intraoperative
awareness include development and implementation of an anesthesia awareness
policy, staff education, informed consent for high-risk patients, timely maintenance
of anesthesia equipment, postoperative follow-up of all patients who have
undergone general anesthesia, and postoperative counseling for patients with
awareness. (740)
BRAIN FUNCTION
MONITORING
14. The results of trials which evaluated the effect of brain function monitoring on the
incidence of intraoperative awareness are mixed. The best evidence is derived from
four sources: a randomized controlled trial in high-risk patients for which the
incidence of awareness was reduced by 82% in patients monitored with a brain
function monitor; a nonrandomized cohort comparison with historical control
subjects for which the incidence of awareness was reduced by 77% in patients
monitored with a brain function monitor; a prospective nonrandomized study for
which there was no reported effect of a brain function monitor on the incidence
of awareness; and a randomized trial that compared the bispectral index (BIS)
to end-tidal gas monitoring and reported no difference in the incidence of
definite awareness between the two groups. (740, 741)
Awareness Under Anesthesia
503
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
THE ASA’S PRACTICE
ADVISORY ON
INTRAOPERATIVE
AWARENESS AND
BRAIN FUNCTION
MONITORS
15. According to the ASA’s Practice Advisory on Intraoperative Awareness and Brain
Function Monitoring, the preoperative evaluation for preventing intraoperative
awareness should include the identification of potential risk factors for
intraoperative awareness, an interview of the patient and review of past medical
records, and obtaining informed consent for those patients at high risk for
intraoperative awareness. (741, Table 46-2)
16. According to the ASA’s Practice Advisory on Intraoperative Awareness and
Brain Function Monitoring, the preinduction phase of anesthesia should include the
use of a checklist for machine/equipment function, verification of function of
intravenous access and infusion equipment, and consideration of a
preoperative benzodiazepine for the patient. (741, Table 46-2)
17. According to the ASA’s Practice Advisory on Intraoperative Awareness and Brain
Function Monitoring, intraoperative monitoring should include multiple modalities
to monitor the depth of anesthesia (clinical, conventional monitors, and brain
function monitoring on a case-by-case basis). (741, Table 46-2)
18. According to the ASA’s Practice Advisory on Intraoperative Awareness and
Brain Function Monitoring, intraoperative and postoperative management should
include consideration of a benzodiazepine if the patient unexpectedly becomes
conscious, a postoperative visit, consideration of a structured interview to
determine the patient’s anesthetic experience, an occurrence report to
continuous quality improvement, and offering the patient psychological
counseling. (741, Table 46-2)
MEDICOLEGAL
SEQUELAE OF
AWARENESS
19. The large disparity between the incidence of awareness and actual malpractice
claims is multifactorial and includes the nature and severity of the injuries
associated with awareness, as well as the medicolegal and injury compensation
system. (742)
20. Factors influencing a patient’s decision to initiate a malpractice claim are poor
communication between the patient and physician, unmet expectations, and
financial pressure on the patient. One study reported that 50% of potential plaintiffs
had a poor relationship with their physician. (742)
DATA FROM THE
ASA CLOSED
CLAIMS PROJECT
21. Claims for intraoperative awareness represent a small fraction (2%) of all
malpractice claims in the Closed Claims database. (742)
22. Factors associated with a malpractice claim for intraoperative awareness in the
Closed Claim database include female gender, ASA physical class 1 and 2, less than
60 years of age, elective surgery, and obesity. (742)
23. The two main causes of intraoperative awareness in the Closed Claims database were
light anesthesia and anesthetic delivery problems. (743, Table 46-3)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
504
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
Chapter
43 QUALITY OF CARE AND
PATIENT SAFETY
Anuj Malhotra, Vinod Malhotra
BASIC PRINCIPLES
1. What is the principle of nonmaleficence in regard to patient safety?
2. What elements constitute The Joint Commission National Patient Safety Goals and
how often are these updated?
3. What is the triad of excellence in health care in the authors’ opinion?
4. What is included in assessing quality of care?
5. What resources are available to measure quality and efficiency in the operating
room (OR)?
ANESTHESIOLOGY
AND PATIENT
SAFETY
6. Why is anesthesiology often considered a leader in systematic improvement of
patient safety in the OR?
7. What are examples of common safety features on anesthesia machines that promote
the safe delivery of anesthesia?
8. What is the American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) Closed Claims Database?
9. What changes in practice have resulted, in part, from the findings of the ASA Closed
Claims Database?
10. What are the goals of the Anesthesia Patient Safety Foundation and who does it
include?
11. What are estimates of mortality from anesthesia in today’s surgical population?
Patient Safety, Medical Error, Adverse and Sentinel Events
12. What broad types of medical or health care errors exist?
13. What is an adverse event?
14. What is a sentinel event?
15. What are the most commonly reported sentinel events?
16. What is a root cause analysis (RCA)?
17. How many patients die annually as the result of medical errors?
18. What is the National Surgical Quality Improvement Program (NSQIP)?
19. What are the primary tenets of the NSQIP?
20. What is the central venous catheter checklist advocated for use in intensive care
units (ICUs)? What is the evidence for its efficacy?
The Joint Commission National Patient Safety Initiative
21. What is The Joint Commission?
22. How does The Joint Commission operate?
505
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
PREVENTING
WRONG-SITE
SURGERY
23. What is the definition of wrong-site surgery?
24. Is the incidence of wrong-site surgery increasing or decreasing?
25. What steps has The Joint Commission taken to prevent wrong-site surgery?
26. What are the essential elements of a preprocedural “time-out”?
Improved Patient Identification
27. How do the National Patient Safety Goals suggest that patient identification be
confirmed?
28. When should patient identifiers be checked?
Improved Communication
29. What constitutes a “handoff” of patient care?
30. What is SBAR communication?
MEDICATION
SAFETY
31. What is medication reconciliation in the context of anesthesia?
32. When should medication reconciliation be performed?
33. How should medication labeling be performed in the OR?
34. When should medication labeling be performed in the OR?
35. Whatelementsofpropermedicationnameanddoselabelinghelpensurepatientsafety?
36. How can look-alike and sound-alike drugs be differentiated?
FIRE SAFETY
37. What elements are requisite for a surgical fire and what are their sources in the OR?
38. What steps can be taken to prevent OR fires?
REDUCINGHOSPITAL-
ACQUIREDINFECTION
39. What practices can help limit hospital-acquired infections?
Surgical Care Improvement Project
40. What is the Surgical Care Improvement Project (SCIP)?
41. What are the current SCIP quality measures?
Never Events
42. What is a never event?
43. What are the current never events, per CMS?
44. What are the financial ramifications of a never event?
Culture of Safety
45. What are the components of a culture of safety?
High Reliability Organizations
46. What is a high reliability organization?
47. What are reporting guidelines for adverse events?
OPERATING ROOM
EFFICIENCY
48. How can OR efficiency be improved by anesthesiologists?
49. What are the financial considerations of OR time?
PATIENT AND STAFF
SATISFACTION
50. What is the link between staff satisfaction and patient satisfaction with health
care?
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
506
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
ANSWERS*
BASIC PRINCIPLES
1. Nonmaleficence is a basic tenet of medical ethics based on the Latin primum non
nocere, or “first, do no harm.” (746)
2. The Joint Commission National Patient Safety Goals are updated yearly, and for
2010 include the following:
a. Improve the accuracy of patient identification
b. Improve the effectiveness of communication among caregivers
c. Improve the safety of using medications
d. Reduce the risk of health care–associated infections
e. Accurately and completely reconcile medications across the continuum of care
f. Reduce the risk of patient harm resulting from falls
g. Reduce the risk of influenza and pneumococcal disease in older adults
h. Reduce the risk of surgical fires
i. Encourage patients’ active involvement in their own care as a safety strategy
j. Prevent health care–associated pressure ulcers
k. Identify safety risks inherent in the organization’s patient population
l. Improve recognition and response in a patient’s condition
m.Universal Protocol: Prevent wrong person, wrong site, wrong procedure surgery
(746-747, Table 47-1)
3. In the authors’ opinion, (1) patient safety, (2) improved outcomes, and (3) improved
patient satisfaction with their care constitutes the triad of excellence in clinical care.
(747, Figure 41-1)
4. Quality of care includes not only the clinical care indicators, but also the measures
of efficiency, such as timely starts, short turnaround times between cases,
appropriate access for emergencies, and effective utilization of the ORs, equipment,
and staff. (746-747)
5. The American Association of Clinical Directors has developed a Procedural Times
Glossary to measure and compare OR efficiency benchmarks. The ASA also
established the Anesthesia Quality Institute (AQI) in 2009 to establish standardized
quality measures, promote research, and obtain useful data to improve the
quality of patient care. (747)
ANESTHESIOLOGY
AND PATIENT
SAFETY
6. Anesthesiology has often been cited as an example of how a medical specialty has
systematically improved patient safety. In 1954, Beecher and Todd’s review of
mortality during anesthesia found a mortality rate of 1 in every 1561 operations,
and was one of the first studies to scientifically identify and quantify risks
associated with anesthesia. Patient safety efforts have included features on the
anesthesia delivery systems used in patient care (e.g., Pin Index Systems), founding
of the ASA Closed Claims Database in 1985, and establishment of the Anesthesia
Patient Safety Foundation (APSF) also in 1985. (747)
7. Many of the features of the anesthesia machine, such as Pin Index Safety Systems,
oxygen fail-safe controls, prevention of hypoxic mixtures, and elimination of
hanging bellows, were developed to enhance patient safety by avoiding critical
technical failures. (747)
8. In 1985 the ASA established the Closed Claims Database with the goal of reviewing
closed malpractice claims to identify sources of technical failure and human
*Numbers in parentheses: numbers refer to pages, figures, or tables in Miller RD, Pardo MC: Basics of Anesthesia,
6th ed. Philadelphia, Elsevier Saunders, 2011.
Quality of Care and Patient Safety
507
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
error that lead to patient injury, and to then share this information with the
anesthesia community. (747)
9. Initial findings from the Closed Claims Database found that most claims were due to
unrecognized esophageal intubation or other reasons for inadequate oxygenation.
This finding accelerated the requirement for pulse oximetry and capnography as
standard monitors for patients undergoing general anesthesia. Several additional
ASAtaskforces,suchasthePostoperativeVisualLossRegistry,havebeenestablished
to further address concerns identified by analysis of the Closed Claims Database.
FurtheranalysisofproblemsidentifiedbytheClosedClaimsDatabasehasledtheASA
to publish clinical practice recommendations such as the ASA Difficult Airway
Algorithm. The ASA currently has 23 practice advisories available. (747-748)
10. The Anesthesia Patients Safety Foundation is an independent, nonprofit corporation
with the goal that “no patient shall be harmed by anesthesia.” Board members
include anesthesiologists, nurse anesthetists, equipment manufacturers, lawyers,
and engineers. Its current mission statement identifies safety research and
education, patient safety programs and campaigns, and national and international
exchange of information and ideas as its continuing goals. Its quarterly newsletter is
the most widely circulated anesthesia publication in the world, providing a forum to
publicize advances in technology, as well as concerns regarding medications,
patient issues, and common anesthesiology practices. (748)
11. Through the implementation of technical advances and practitioner education,
mortality from anesthesia has improved to 1:250,000. However, as the
population has aged and patients with more severe medical problems are
undergoing surgery, mortality for the very ill is reported to be as frequent as
1:10,000 to 1:1500. (748)
Patient Safety, Medical Error, Adverse and Sentinel Events
12. Health care errors may be errors of commission (doing the wrong thing),
omission (not doing the right thing), or execution (doing the right thing incorrectly).
A defect in the delivery of care to a patient resulting in an unintended health
care outcome is deemed a health care or medical error. (748)
13. An adverse event refers to any injury caused by medical care. Identifying something
as an adverse event does not imply error, negligence, or poor quality of care.
It simply indicates that an undesirable clinical outcome resulted from some aspect of
diagnosis or therapy, not an underlying disease process. (748)
14. A sentinel event is an unexpected occurrence involving death or serious
physical or psychological injury, or the risk thereof. Serious injury specifically
includes loss of limb or function. The phrase “or the risk thereof” includes any
process variation for which a recurrence would carry a significant chance of
a serious adverse outcome. Such events are called “sentinel” because they signal
the need for immediate investigation and response. (748)
15. From January 1995 through December 2009, The Joint Commission reviewed
6600 sentinel events; 68% of sentinel events included patient mortality. Among the
10 most frequently reported sentinel events were wrong site surgery (most
common, 13.5%), operative/postoperative complication, medication error, and
unintended retention of a foreign body. (748-749)
16. A Root Cause Analysis (RCA) is a structured process for identifying the causal or
contributing factors underlying adverse events or critical incidents. (748-749)
17. The Institute of Medicine’s reports “To Err Is Human: Building a Better
Health System” (November 1, 1999) and “Crossing the Quality Chasm: A New Health
System for the 21st Century” (March 1, 2001) indicated that 98,000 patients in
the United States die annually as a result of medical errors. (748-749)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
508
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
18. NSQIP began at the Veterans Administration hospitals and has expanded
through the American College of Surgeons to many private institutions. The NSQIP
initiative endeavors to improve the delivery of medical care at a systems level
rather than at an individual level and is credited with improving postoperative
surgical mortality by up to 31% and morbidity by 45%. NSQIP has demonstrated that
while obvious errors can be detected on the local (hospital) level, subtle systems errors
or deficiencies cannot be appreciated without comparison to data from peer
institutions. (749)
19. NSQIP has identified three important patient safety observations:
a.
Safety is indistinguishable from overall quality of surgical care and should not
be addressed independently of surgical quality.
b.
During an episode of surgical care, adverse outcomes, and hence patient safety,
are primarily determined by the quality of systems of care.
c.
Reliable comparative outcome data are imperative for the identification of system
problems and the assurance of patient safety from adverse outcomes. (749)
20. The checklist requires that practitioners should:
a.
Wash their hands with soap.
b.
Clean the patient’s skin with chlorhexidine antiseptic.
c.
Put sterile drapes over the entire patient.
d.
Wear a sterile mask, hat, gown, and gloves.
e.
Put a sterile dressing over the catheter site.
f.
In a 2003 Michigan study, the median rate of ICU catheter-related
bloodstream infections decreased by 68%. In the first 18 months, the authors
estimated that 1500 lives and $100 million were saved. These results were
sustained for almost 4 years. (749)
The Joint Commission National Patient Safety Initiative
21. The Joint Commission is an independent, not-for-profit organization, which
accredits and certifies health care organizations and programs in the United States.
The organization’s mission statement is “to continuously improve health care for
the public, in collaboration with other stakeholders, by evaluating health care
organizations and inspiring them to excel in providing safe and effective care of the
highest quality and value.” (749)
22. The Joint Commission conducts unannounced surveys of hospitals on a regular
basis with the goal of assessing structural attributes, policies, and staff to
ensure patient safety and quality of care. The Department of Health and Human
Services and the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services recognizes The
Joint Commission’s accreditation as deeming hospitals, laboratories, and
other medical care providers able to participate in Medicare and Medicaid
programs. (749)
PREVENTING
WRONG-SITE
SURGERY
23. By definition, wrong-site surgery involves all surgical procedures performed on the
wrong patient, wrong body part, wrong side of the body, or the wrong level of a
correctly identified anatomic site. This includes anesthesia procedures such as
regional or neuraxial blocks. (749)
24. According to The Joint Commission, the reports of wrong-site surgery or
procedures are steadily increasing. The actual incidence of wrong-site surgery is
unknown but is estimated to be 1:15,000 to 1:112,000. (749)
25. To prevent the occurrence of wrong-site surgery, The Joint Commission has issued a
universal protocol which requires:
a.
Preoperative verification that uses two patient identifiers as well as the
procedure, the site/side or vertebral level, and involves at least two health
care providers (one of whom is the surgeon)
Quality of Care and Patient Safety
509
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
b.
Site marking of the operative site by the surgeon using his or her initials or “yes”
with patient involvement
c.
“Time-out” right before starting the procedure (749)
26. The process of “time-out” is when all the services involved in caring for the patient
(surgery, anesthesiology, and nursing) pause before beginning a procedure to
ensure that the correct patient is undergoing the correct procedure on the correct
location and all the necessary imaging studies and equipment necessary to safely
complete the procedure are available. The essential elements for a preprocedural
“time-out” are:
a.
Identification of the patient using two identifiers
b.
Correct side/site
c.
Correct procedure
d.
Correct position
e.
Verification that implants, devices, and special equipment are available
f.
Relevant images are properly labeled and displayed
g.
Allergies
h.
Antibiotics administered
i.
Safety precautions based on fire, hazards, patient history, or medication use
j.
Verbal agreement that all time-out elements have been met (749-750, Table 47-3)
Improved Patient Identification
27. National Patient Safety Goals have focused on improving patient identification
by checking two independent identifiers, such as name and date of birth or name
and medical record number. (750)
28. These patient identifiers must be checked every time a patient is to undergo
a diagnostic test or procedure, or is to receive medication or blood products. (750)
Improved Communication
29. When a patient is transferred from the care of one practitioner to another,
whether it is from floor nurse to the anesthesiologist in the operating room,
anesthesiologist to postanesthesia care unit nurse, or within services from daytime
team to an on-call team, structured systems to facilitate the transfer of vital
patient information are essential to avoid errors. The Joint Commission
has termed these transfers of patient care as “handoffs.” (750)
30. Originally developed for U.S. Navy communications, situation-background-
assessment-recommendation (SBAR) has been adapted by many health care
organizations and is internationally accepted as an effective communication
regarding a change in a patient’s condition either from nurse to physician or
among physicians. The elements of SBAR communication are:
Situation: The notifying health care practitioner identifies the patient and the
problem or the change in the patient’s condition.
Background: Relevant background information specific to the situation. For
example, this could include the patient’s diagnosis, his mental status, current vital
signs, complaints, pain level, and physical assessment findings.
Assessment: This step of the communication provides the practitioner with the
opportunity to offer an analysis of the problem or to convey more extensive data
about the patient, such as changes from prior assessments.
Recommendation: What the practitioner believes would help resolve the
situation or what is the desired response. (750)
MEDICATION
SAFETY
31. Medication reconciliation refers to the process by which the medications
the patient is on preoperatively are reviewed for any possible adverse
reactions with any medications he or she might receive intraoperatively or
postoperatively. (750)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
510
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
32. Medication reconciliation should occur whenever the patient is admitted,
transferred to another unit or service, or is discharged home. (750)
33. Medications should not be drawn into syringes until immediately prior to patient
use and the syringes must be labeled with the drug name, drug concentration,
and time medication is drawn up. Anesthesiologists have long adopted the use of
color-coded labels to distinguish among different classes of medications in an
effort to avoid medication administration errors. (750)
34. The Joint Commission recommends against the labeling of empty syringes in
anticipation of future medication preparation since this does not obviate drawing
the incorrect medication into a differently labeled syringe. A clarification on this
recommendation was sought by the ASA, in response to which The Joint
Commission will remove it from the FAQ section of their website. However, they
have stopped short of a clear statement of reversing it. (750)
35. Additional requirements in ensuring medication safety are avoiding the use of
abbreviations with regard to drug name and unit of dose. The use of decimal points
followed by a trailing zero is also to be avoided while a zero must be placed in
front of a decimal point to avoid dosing errors. Finally, the Do Not Use List prohibits
the use of “u” for units, “iu“ for international units, and Q.D. or Q.O.D. for
daily or every other day dosing. (751)
36. Care must be taken to avoid using vials of drugs from manufacturers that look alike.
If look-alike drugs cannot be avoided, such vials should not be placed near one
another in any pharmacy drawer. In addition, TALLman lettering, such as
EPInephrine may be used to distinguish it from EPHedrine. (751)
FIRE SAFETY
37. For a fire to start, each element of the fire triangle—heat, fuel, and oxygen—must be
present. Heat is the by-product of electrocautery units, lasers, and endoscopes.
Paper drapes, fabric towels, and gauze sponges provide ample fuel. Oxygen is often
present at high concentrations in localized areas such as during facial plastic
surgery or tracheostomy. Also, the newer, more effective skin preparation solutions
often contain alcohol that is highly flammable and must be allowed to dry
completely prior to placement of surgical drapes. (751)
38. Effective communication between all perioperative team members is essential
in preventing OR fires. Skin preparation solutions must be completely dried
prior to surgical draping, and lasers and endoscopes should be turned off or to
standby when not in use. When there is a possibility that oxygen may come
into direct contact with electrocautery, as in airway surgery or when
administering oxygen in a non-closed circuit, oxygen should be administered at
the lowest possible concentrations necessary for the patient to maintain
oxygenation. Use of special endotracheal tubes may also be warranted in some
cases. (751)
REDUCINGHOSPITAL-
ACQUIREDINFECTION
39. Prevention of hospital-acquired infections requires strict adherence to hand
hygiene protocols, prevention of central line, and surgical site infections, and
prevention against the spread of multidrug resistant organisms. Interventions by
anesthesia providers may include appropriate selection of antibiotics, timely
administration and dosing of antibiotics, proper hygiene and sterile technique
where indicated, appropriate contact and respiratory precautions, and maintenance
of normothermia. (751)
Surgical Care Improvement Project
40. The Surgical Care Improvement Project (SCIP) is a national partnership of
organizations interested in improving surgical care by significantly reducing
Quality of Care and Patient Safety
511
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
surgical complications. The steering committee is comprised of 10 national
organizations who have pledged their commitment and full support for SCIP:
a.
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality
b.
American College of Surgeons
c.
American Hospital Association
d.
American Society of Anesthesiologists
e.
Association of Perioperative Registered Nurses
f.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
g.
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services
h.
Institute for Healthcare Improvement
i.
The Joint Commission
j.
Veterans Health Administration (751)
41. Current SCIP quality measures include the following evidence-based outcome
improvement interventions:
a.
Prophylactic antibiotic received within one hour prior to surgical incision
(quinolones or vancomycin may be administered within 2 hours)
b.
Prophylactic antibiotic selection for surgical patients
c.
Prophylactic antibiotic discontinued 24 hours after surgery end time (48 hours
for cardiac surgery)
d.
Cardiac surgery patients with controlled 6 AM postoperative serum glucose
(<200 g/dL)
e.
Surgery patients with appropriate hair removal (depilatory creams or clippers
only, no razor)
f.
Urinary catheter removed on postoperative day 1 or postoperative day 2
g.
Surgery patients with perioperative temperature management (goal 36.0 C/
normothermia)
h.
Surgery patients on a b-blocker prior to admission received b-blockers during
the perioperative period
i.
Surgery patients with recommended venous thromboembolism (VTE)
prophylaxis ordered
j.
Surgery patients received appropriate VTE prophylaxis within 24 hours before
and after surgery (747, 752, Table 47-2)
Never Events
42. Never events are 28 occurrences on a list of inexcusable outcomes in a health
care setting compiled by the National Quality Forum (NQF). They are defined as
adverse events that are “serious, largely preventable, and of concern to both the
public and health care providers for the purpose of public accountability.”
The Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) also provides a list of never
events, some of which coincide with the NQF. (752)
43. Per CMS, the list of never events includes:
a.
Foreign object left in patient after surgery
b.
Surgery on wrong patient
c.
Surgery on wrong body part
d.
Wrong surgery on a patient
e.
Death/disability associated with intravascular air embolism
f.
Death/disability associated with incompatible blood
g.
Death/disability associated with hypoglycemia
h.
Death/disability associated with a fall within facility
i.
Death/disability associated with electric shock
j.
Death/disability associated with a burn incurred within facility (752, Table 47-4)
44. If a never event occurs, CMS will not pay the hospital for the added cost of the extra
care incurred as a result. (752)
MILLER’S ANESTHESIA REVIEW
512
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
Culture of Safety
45. A culture of safety enables any member of the health care team to contribute to
patient safety. It is a key component of many high reliability organizations.
Components of a culture of safety include:
a.
A blame-free environment where individuals are able to report errors or close
calls without fear of reprimand or punishment
b.
An expectation of collaboration across ranks to seek solutions to vulnerabilities
c.
A willingness on the part of the organization to direct resources for addressing
safety concerns (752-753)
High Reliability Organizations
46. High reliability organizations refers to organizations or systems that operate in
hazardous conditions and have done so with nearly failure-free performance
records, not simply better than average. Commonly discussed examples include air
traffic control systems, nuclear power plants, and naval aircraft carriers. (753)
47. Compliance with patient safety initiatives involves either voluntary or
mandatory reporting of adverse events. Reporting requirements are different in
each state and for federal government programs as well. In 2002 Pennsylvania
became the first state to establish a mandatory reporting system for not only
serious adverse events, but “incidents” (near misses) as well. (753)
OPERATING ROOM
EFFICIENCY
48. Anesthesiologists can be leaders in facilitating punctuality, on time starts,
keeping turnaround times between cases to a minimum, and promoting expeditious
surgery to improve the utilization of resources in the operating room. A systems
approach and standardization of equipment and processes will not only
streamline operations and improve efficiency but also improve patient safety,
staff satisfaction, and patient satisfaction. (753)
49. The operating rooms are the most expensive units to run in a hospital and, if run
inefficiently, can become a major financial drain. However, when run appropriately,
ORs are also the best source of revenue for most hospitals. (753)
PATIENT AND STAFF
SATISFACTION
50. Surveys have tracked a close link between staff satisfaction and patient satisfaction
at health care facilities. For example, according to the National Surveys (Press
Ganey), about one third of patients surveyed would not recommend the facility
where they received care. Interestingly, about one third of health care employees
at the hospitals surveyed were dissatisfied with their job. It should therefore be
a goal for every facility to promote staff satisfaction and be intolerant of
disruptive behavior so that the safest and best care is rendered to its
patients. (753)
Quality of Care and Patient Safety
513
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
INDEX
A
A-a gradient. See Alveolar-arterial gradient
ABA. See American Board of
Anesthesiologists
ABCDEs of trauma, 469, 472
ABG. See Arterial blood gas
Abruptio placentae, 366, 382
Absorption. See Drug absorption
Absorptive capacity, 126, 137
ACC/AHA. See American College of
Cardiology/American Heart
Association
Accident, actions to take after, 2, 5
ACEIs. See Angiotensin-converting enzyme
inhibitors
Acetylcholine (ACh)
metabolism of, 84, 88
opioids and, 64, 66
in PNS, 29, 32, 33
in SNS, 29, 32
Acetylcholinesterase, 84, 88
ACh. See Acetylcholine
Acid, 202, 203
Acid–base balance, 202–208
Acid–base status, 202, 203
disturbances in, 202–203, 205–207
Acidemia, 202, 203, 205
Acidosis, 202, 203
metabolic, 203, 206
respiratory, 202, 205
ACLS. See Advanced cardiac life support
ACT, 209, 215
Activated clotting time value, 276, 280
Acute epiglottis, 339, 346
Acute lung injury (ALI), 458, 462–463
Acute postoperative pain management, 1, 3
Acute radiation syndrome, 471, 478
Acute renal failure (ARF), 297, 300, 459, 466
Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS),
458, 462–463
Addison syndrome, 312, 321
Additive drug interactions, 9, 15
Adductor pollicis, nondepolarizing
neuromuscular blocking drug and,
86, 97
Adenoidectomy, 339, 346
Adenosine triphosphate (ATP), in SNS, 29, 32
Adenylate cyclase, 64, 66
Adjustable pressure-limiting (APL) valve, in
circle system, 125, 132
Adrenal insufficiency, 104, 115, 312,
321–322
a1-Adrenergic agonists, 30, 35
a2-Adrenergic agonists, 30, 36
dexmedetomidine, 53, 63
b2-Adrenergic agonists, 31, 36
a1-Adrenergic antagonists, 31, 36
a-Adrenergic antagonists, 31, 36–37
b-Adrenergic antagonists, 31, 37–38
surgery and, 104, 113
Adrenergic pharmacology, 29–30, 33–34
b1 Adrenergic receptors, dobutamine and,
30, 35
Adrenocortical insufficiency, 312, 321
Advanced cardiac life support (ACLS), 492,
493, 494, 497
bradycardia, 493, 497–498
cardiac asystole, 493, 497–498
narrow-complex tachycardias, 493, 498
precordial thump, 493, 498
in pregnancy, 365, 376
pulseless electrical activity, 493, 497
ventricular fibrillation/pulseless
ventricular tachycardia, 493, 497
wide-complex tachycardias, 493, 498
Advanced Trauma Life Support (ATLS),
469, 472
Adverse cardiac rhythms, with
succinylcholine, 85, 91, 92
Adverse effects
of anesthesia, 117, 118
of barbiturates, 52, 58
of local anesthetics, 74–75, 79–82
with neuromuscular blocking drugs, 87, 101
of opioids, 64–65, 68–69
Adverse event, 505, 508
AFE. See Amniotic fluid embolism
Affinity, 8, 14
Afterload, 16, 21
Age. See also Elderly patients
opioids and, 65, 70
surgery and, 103, 111
Agent-specific vaporizers, 124, 129
Agonist. See Receptor agonist
Aintree catheter, 142, 149
Air-filled spaces, nitrous oxide and, 41, 46
Air-Q intubating laryngeal airway, 143, 152
Airway assessment, 140–141, 145
Airway edema, 440, 443
Airway examination, 102, 105
Airway humidification, 125, 134
in anesthetic breathing systems, 125, 134
tracheal intubation and, 125, 134
Airway irritation, inhaled anesthetics and,
41, 49
Airway management, 2, 6, 140–154
airway assessment for, 140–141, 145
anatomy and physiology for, 140,
144–145
blind nasotracheal intubation, 142, 149
flexible fiberoptic laryngoscopy, 141–142,
148–149
Airway management (Continued)
in infants and children, 142–143, 151–154
in pediatrics, 388, 396
retrograde tracheal intubation, 142, 149
rigid fiberoptic laryngoscopy, 142, 149
supraglottic airway devices, 142, 149–150
techniques for, 141, 145–148
tracheal extubation, 142, 150–151
transtracheal techniques, 142, 150
Airway obstruction, in PACU, 440, 442–443
Airway resistance, 18, 25–26
Albumin, 226, 228
in elderly patients, 408, 412
Albuterol, 31, 36
Alfentanil, 64, 66
clinical use of, 65, 71
metabolism of, 64, 67
ALI. See Acute lung injury
Alkalemia, 202, 203, 205
Alkalosis, 202, 203
metabolic, 203, 206, 207
respiratory, 202, 203, 205, 206
Allergic reactions
to barbiturates, 52, 58
to benzodiazepines, 52, 60
to ketamine, 53, 62
to local anesthetics, 75, 82
to propofol, 51, 55
in remote locations, 431, 433–434
Allergic transfusion reactions, 232, 237
Altitude, inhaled anesthetics and, 40, 43
Alveolar gas equation, 17, 23, 203, 208
Alveolar partial pressure, 40, 45
Alveolar-arterial (A-a) gradient, 17, 23, 203,
208
American Board of Anesthesiologists (ABA),
1, 3
American Board of Medical Specialties, 1, 3
American College of Cardiology/American
Heart Association (ACC/AHA),
revascularization guidelines, 102, 106
American Medical Association, 1, 3
American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA),
1, 3
Closed Claims Project, 2, 5, 502, 504
Physical Status Classification, 102, 105
Practice Advisory on Intraoperative
Awareness and Brain Function
Monitoring, 501–502, 504
Amide local anesthetics, 73, 76
metabolism of, 74, 78
Amnesia
with benzodiazepines, 52, 59
MAC and, 40, 44
Amniotic fluid embolism (AFE), 366, 383
Amsorb Plus, 126, 136
515
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
Anaphylactic shock, 30, 34
Anemia, 103, 111
Anesthesia. See also Epidural anesthesia;
General anesthesia; Maintenance
anesthesia; Neuraxial anesthesia;
Outpatient anesthesia; Regional
anesthesia; Spinal anesthesia
a2-adrenergic agonists and, 30, 36
breathing control and, 19, 27–28
for cesarean delivery, 365–366, 377–379
comorbidities of, 102–103, 106–111
dissociative, 52, 60
for elderly patients, 408–409, 415–417
increased safety of, 2, 5
mortality rate from, 2, 5
with neuromuscular blocking drugs, 84, 88
for neurosurgery, 325–326, 330–333
for nonobstetric surgery during
pregnancy, 367, 383–384
in pediatrics, 389, 396–399
preparation for, 118, 121–122
quality of care and safety in, 2, 4–5
risks of, 2, 5–6
side effects of, 117, 118
Anesthesia machine ventilators, 125, 133–135
checking function of, 127, 138–139
Anesthesia Patient Safety Foundation
(APSF), 2, 5
Anesthesia Quality Institute (AQI), 2, 5
Anesthesia workstation, 123–124, 127–129
Anesthesiologist assistant, training of, 2, 4
Anesthesiology
additional providers of, 2, 4
changes in, 2, 6
definition of, 1, 3
evolution of, 1, 3
history of, 1, 2
patient safety and, 505, 507–509
scope of, 1–6
specialties of, 1, 4
subspecialties of, 1, 3
training and certification in, 1, 4
Anesthetic breathing systems, 124–125,
130–133
airway humidification in, 125, 134
carbon dioxide elimination in, 126,
136–138
checking function of, 127, 138–139
Anesthetic gas pollution, 125–126, 135–136
scavenging systems for, 125, 135
techniques leading to, 126, 136
Anesthetic monitoring, 193–201
capnography monitoring, 195, 199–200
central venous pressure monitoring,
193–194, 197
echocardiographic monitoring, 194, 198
electrocardiographic monitoring, 193–201
electroencephalographic monitoring,
195, 200
electrophysiologic monitoring, 194–195,
199
inhaled gas monitoring, 195, 201
pulmonary artery catheter monitoring,
194, 197–198
pulse oximetry monitoring, 194, 199
systemic blood pressure monitoring,
193–201
temperature monitoring, 195, 200
Anesthetic partial pressure, maintenance of,
41, 45
Anesthetic solubility, 41, 45
induction of anesthesia and, 41, 46
Anesthetic state, 40, 42
inhaled anesthetics for, 40, 42
nitrous oxide for, 40, 42
Anesthetic technique, 117–122
anesthetic gas pollution and, 126, 136
regional, 117, 120, 121
Aneurysms
aortic, 246, 266–268
dissecting, 246, 266
intracranial, 326, 334–335
Angina pectoris, 241, 249
Angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs), 104,
113
Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors
(ACEIs), 104, 113
Anion gap, 203, 206
Ankle block, 177, 182
Ankylosing spondylitis, 349, 354
ANS. See Autonomic nervous system
Antagonism
competitive, 8, 14
noncompetitive, 8, 14
of nondepolarizing neuromuscular
blocking drugs, 87, 99–101
Antagonist. See Receptor antagonist
Antibiotic prophylaxis, 103, 108
Anticholinesterase, 31, 38
in elderly patients, 408, 416
neuromuscular blocking drugs and, 283,
288
nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking
drugs and, 87, 99–101
Anticoagulants, 211–212, 219–222
approach to patients on, 212, 222–224
neuraxial interventions and, 213, 224
Anticonvulsants, 481, 487
Antidepressants, 481, 487
Antifibrinolytic drugs, 276, 280
Antiphospholipid syndrome, 210, 218
Antiplatelet drugs, 211–212, 219–222
approach to patients receiving, 212, 224
Anxiolytics, 104, 115, 408, 415
Aortic aneurysms, 246, 266–268
Aortic bodies, 18, 26
Aortic regurgitation, 243, 256
Aortic sclerosis, 102, 108
Aortic stenosis, 102, 108, 243, 255, 256
Apfel score, 427, 430
Apgar scoring system, 367, 385
APL valve. See Adjustable pressure-limiting
valve
Apnea, 18, 25. See also Obstructive sleep
apnea
with barbiturates, 52, 57
with benzodiazepines, 52, 59
with ketamine, 52, 61
with propofol, 51, 54
Apneic threshold, 18, 26
APSF. See Anesthesia Patient Safety
Foundation
AQI. See Anesthesia Quality Institute
ARBs. See Angiotensin receptor blockers
ARDS. See Acute respiratory distress
syndrome
ARF. See Acute renal failure
Arginine vasopressin, 297, 301
Arndt endobronchial blocker, 285, 295
Arrhythmias, 30, 34, 103, 108
Arterial blood gas (ABG)
analysis of, 202, 204–205, 276, 280
information from, 203, 207–208
Arterial blood pressure, 16, 19–20
barbiturates and, 52, 56
after cardiopulmonary bypass, 247, 270
with etomidate, 53, 62
inhaled anesthetics and, 41, 47
nitrous oxide and, 41, 47
Arterial hypoxemia, 203, 207, 283, 286
during thoracic surgery, 285, 295
Arterial oxygenation, 18, 24
Arteriovenous difference, 203, 208
Arteriovenous malformations, 326, 334–335
Artery of Adamkiewicz, 155, 161
Artificial cardiac pacemaker. See Pacemakers
ASA. See American Society of
Anesthesiologists
Ascites, 299, 306
Asepsis, with propofol, 51, 55
Aspirin, 102, 104, 106, 107, 113
Asthma, 103, 109, 283–284, 286–289
Asystole, 30, 34
with dexmedetomidine, 53, 63
with propofol, 51, 54
Atherosclerosis, aortic aneurysms and, 246,
266
ATLS. See Advanced Trauma Life Support
ATP. See Adenosine triphosphate
Atracurium, 86, 95, 96
Atropine, edrophonium with, 87, 100
Autologous blood transfusions, 232–233,
239–240
Autonomic nervous system (ANS), 29–39.
See also Parasympathetic nervous
system; Sympathetic nervous system
a1-adrenergic agonists, 30, 35
a2-adrenergic agonists, 30, 36
b2-adrenergic agonists, 31, 36
a-adrenergic antagonists, 31, 36–37
b-adrenergic antagonists, 31, 37–38
adrenergic pharmacology, 29–30, 33–34
cardiac reflexes and, 17, 21
cholinergic pharmacology, 31, 38–39
local anesthetics and, 73, 76
noncatecholamine sympathomimetic
amines, 30, 35
synthetic catecholamines, 30, 34–35
Autonomic neuropathy, 311, 316
Awareness under anesthesia, 501–504
ASA’s Practice Advisory on Intraoperative
Awareness and Brain Function
Monitoring, 501–502, 504
brain function monitoring for, 501, 503
data from ASA’s Closed Claims Project,
502, 504
etiology and risk factors for, 501,
502–503
incidence of, 501, 502
medicolegal sequelae of, 502, 504
prevention of, 501, 503
psychological sequelae, 501, 503
Axillary approach, to brachial plexus block,
176, 180
516
Index
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
B
Backache, with spinal anesthesia, 158, 169
Backward upward rightward pressure (BURP),
141, 146
Bacteremia, neuraxial technique and, 156,
162
Bain circuit, 124, 130, 131
Bainbridge reflex, 17, 22
Balanced salt solutions, 226, 228
Barbiturates, 51–52, 55–58
Baricity, spinal anesthetic and, 156, 164
Baroreceptors, 17, 22
Base, 202, 203
Base excess, 202, 203
Basic life support (BLS), 492–493, 494,
495–497
closed-chest cardiac compressions, 492,
495–496
external defibrillation, 493, 496–497
provision of patent upper airway,
492, 496
specialized equipment to maintain airway,
492, 496
Bellows, in anesthesia machine ventilators,
125, 134
Benzodiazepines, 52, 58–60
cerebral blood flow with, 324, 329
in labor, 364, 373
Bicarbonate buffering system, 202, 204
Bier block, 118, 121
Bilevel positive airway pressure (BiPAP),
458, 462
Biliary tract disease, 298–299, 303–309
Bilirubin, 298, 305
Binding, of receptors, 8, 14
Biologic terrorism, 471, 478–479
BiPAP. See Bilevel positive airway pressure
Bispectral index monitor, 195, 200
Bisulfite toxicity, 75, 82
Bleeding time, 209, 214
Blind nasotracheal intubation, 142, 149
b-Blockers. See b-Adrenergic antagonists
Blood components, 231–232, 235–236
Blood gas analysis, 202–208
arterial, 202, 204–205
umbilical, 367, 385
Blood oxygen, 17, 23
Blood pressure. See also Arterial blood
pressure; Systemic blood pressure;
Systolic blood pressure
after cardiopulmonary bypass,
247, 270
essential hypertension and, 245, 262
spinal anesthesia and, 157, 167
Blood therapy, 231–240
blood components, 231–232, 235–236
blood transfusions
autologous, 232–233, 239–240
decision to, 231, 234–235
complications of, 232, 236–239
procedures for, 231, 233–234
Blood transfusions. See also Transfusion
reactions
autologous, 232–233, 239–240
decision to, 231, 234–235
Blood typing, 231, 233
Blood urea nitrogen (BUN), 297, 301, 302
Blood–brain barrier, 324, 327
BLS. See Basic life support
BMI. See Body mass index
B-mode echocardiography, 194, 198
Board certification, 1, 4
Body mass index (BMI), 103, 111, 310, 312
Body temperature, shivering and, 441, 448
Bohr equation, 18, 25
Brachial plexus, injury to, 184, 190
Brachial plexus block, 176, 179–180
axillary approach to, 176, 180
interscalene approach to, 176, 179
supraclavicular approach to, 176, 180
Bradycardia, 493, 497–498
with dexmedetomidine, 53, 63
with propofol, 51, 54
Breathing control, 18–19, 26–28
anesthesia and, 19, 27–28
central chemoreceptors, 18, 26
disorders of, 19, 27–28
hypercapnic ventilatory response, 18,
26–27
hypoxic ventilatory response, 19, 27
inhaled anesthetics and, 41, 48
peripheral chemoreceptors, 18, 26
Bronchial blocker, 285, 295
Bronchial tone, inhaled anesthetics and, 41, 49
Bronchodilation, with ketamine, 52, 61
Bronchopulmonary dysplasia, 390, 400
Bronchospasm, 30, 34, 103, 109
intraoperative, 284, 289
Bubble oxygenator, 246, 269
Buffering systems, 202, 204
BUN. See Blood urea nitrogen
Bupivacaine, 75, 80
for spinal anesthesia, 157, 166
Buprenorphine, 450, 454
Burn injury, 470, 475
BURP. See Backward upward rightward
pressure
C
Cancer-related pain, 481, 486
Capacity limited drug metabolism, 8, 11, 12
Capnography monitoring, 195, 199–200
Carbon dioxide, 18, 24–25
circle system and, 124, 131
elimination of, 126, 136–138
obstructive pulmonary disease and, 283,
286
toxic compounds and
with desflurane, 40, 43, 44
with sevoflurane, 40, 43
Carbon monoxide, inhaled anesthetic
degradation to, 40, 43, 44, 126, 137
Carcinoid syndrome, 312, 321
Cardiac asystole, 493, 497–498
Cardiac catheterization, at remote locations,
432, 437
Cardiac conduction, disturbances in, 244,
257–260
Cardiac disorders
cardiac tamponade, 246, 265–266
neuraxial technique and, 156, 162
Cardiac index, 16, 20
with etomidate, 53, 62
Cardiac murmurs, 102, 107, 108
Cardiac output (CO), 16, 19, 20
congestive heart failure and, 245, 263
Cardiac output (CO) (Continued)
estimates of, 203, 208
inhaled anesthetics and, 41, 47
with ketamine, 52, 61
to kidneys, 297, 300
to liver, 298, 303
pulmonary artery catheter and, 194, 198
Cardiac reflexes, 17, 21
autonomic nervous system and, 17, 21
coronary blood flow, 17, 22
receptor systems, 17, 22
Cardiac rhythms
adverse, with succinylcholine, 85, 91, 92
disturbances in, 244, 257–260
Cardiac tamponade, 194, 198, 246, 265–266
Cardiogenic shock, 459, 464, 465
Cardiomyopathies, 103, 108.
See also Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
Cardiopulmonary bypass, 246–248, 268–274
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR),
492–500
advanced cardiac life support, 493, 497
basic life support, 492–493, 495–497
drug therapy during, 493–494, 498–499
of infants and children, 494, 499
postresuscitation care, 494, 500
special perioperative considerations, 494,
500
Cardiotomy suction, during cardiopulmonary
bypass, 247, 269
Cardiotoxicity, of local anesthetics, 75, 80
Cardiovascular collapse, 30, 34
Cardiovascular disease, 241–274
aortic aneurysms, 246, 266–268
artificial cardiac pacemakers, 244,
260–261
cardiac conduction and rhythm
disturbances, 244, 257–260
cardiopulmonary bypass, 246–248,
268–274
congestive heart failure, 245, 263
cor pulmonale, 245–246, 264–265
coronary artery disease, 241–242,
248–253
essential hypertension, 244–245,
261–262
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, 245,
263–264
valvular heart disease, 242–243,
253–257
Cardiovascular effects
of atracurium, 86, 96
of benzodiazepines, 52, 59
of dexmedetomidine, 53, 63
of etomidate, 53, 62
of ketamine, 52, 61
of local anesthetics, 74, 75, 79, 80
of mivacurium, 86, 97
of nondepolarizing neuromuscular
blocking drugs, 85, 94
of opioids, 64, 68
of pancuronium, 86, 95
of propofol, 51, 54
Cardiovascular evaluation, 102, 106
Cardioversion, at remote locations, 432,
437–438
Carotid bodies, 18, 26
Carotid disease, 326, 335–336
517
Index
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
Carotid endarterectomy, 326, 335–336
Catecholamines
infusion rate for, 30, 33
synthetic, 30, 34–35
Cauda equina, 155, 160
Cauda equina syndrome, with local
anesthetics, 75, 81
Caudal anesthesia, 117, 120
medicine deposition in, 155, 159
Caudal epidural space, 158, 171
Celiac plexus block, 482, 490
Central anticholinergic syndrome, 31, 38
Central chemoreceptors, 18, 26
Central nervous system disease, 324–336
anesthesia for neurosurgery, 325–326,
330–333
arteriovenous malformations, 326,
334–335
carotid disease, 326, 335–336
intracranial aneurysms, 326, 334–335
intracranial mass lesions, 326, 333–334
intracranial pressure, 325, 329–330
neuroanatomy for, 324, 327
neurophysiology of, 324, 327–329
neuroprotection, 325, 330
Central nervous system effects
of barbiturates, 52, 57
of benzodiazepines, 52, 59
of etomidate, 53, 62
with ketamine, 52, 61
of local anesthetics, 74, 75, 79, 80
of opioids, 64, 68
of propofol, 51, 54
Central neuraxial block, 155, 159
Central venous pressure (CVP), 16, 20
during cardiopulmonary bypass,
247, 271
cor pulmonale and, 246, 265
with etomidate, 53, 62
monitoring of, 193–194, 197
in pediatrics, 389, 399
in pregnancy, 363, 368
Central volume of distribution, 7, 10
Centrifugal pump, 246, 268
Cerebral blood flow, 324, 327
autoregulation of, 324, 328
with barbiturates, 52, 57
with benzodiazepines, 324, 329
with dexmedetomidine, 53, 63, 324, 329
with etomidate, 53, 62, 324, 329
with inhaled anesthetics, 41, 49, 324, 328
with ketamine, 52, 61, 324, 328
with neuromuscular blocking drugs, 324,
329
with nitrous oxide, 324, 328
with opioids, 324, 329
with propofol, 51, 54, 324, 329
with thiopental, 324, 329
Cerebral metabolic oxygen requirements
with barbiturates, 52, 57
with dexmedetomidine, 53, 63
with etomidate, 53, 62
with ketamine, 52, 61
with propofol, 51, 54
Cerebral metabolism, 324, 327
with ketamine, 52, 61
Cerebral perfusion pressure, 324, 327
Cerebrospinal fluid, 155, 161
Certification, in anesthesiology, 1, 4
Certified registered nurse anesthetist, training
of, 2, 4
Cervical plexus block, 175, 179
Cesarean delivery, anesthesia for, 365–366,
377–379
Channeling, in carbon dioxide absorber
canister, 126, 137
Chemical sympathectomy, 31, 36
Chemical terrorism, 471, 478–479
Chemoreceptors
central, 18, 26
peripheral, 18, 26
Cheyne-Stokes breathing, 19, 27
CHF. See Congestive heart failure
Children
airway management in, 142–143,
151–154
CPR of, 494, 499
succinylcholine in, 85, 91
Chiral, 75, 82
Chloroprocaine, 74, 75, 78, 81, 82
for spinal anesthesia, 157, 166
Cholinergic pharmacology, 31, 38–39
Cholinergic receptor, succinylcholine at, 84,
85, 90
Cholinesterase, 74, 78
Chronic back pain, neuraxial technique and,
156, 162
Chronic bronchitis, 284, 289, 290
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD), 103, 109, 284, 289–291
asthma and, 283, 288
Chronic pain management, 480–491
cancer-related pain, 481, 486
common pain syndromes, 480–481,
483–486
interventional therapies for, 481–482,
488–491
multidisciplinary, 480, 482–483
pharmacologic management of, 481,
486–488
Chronic pulmonary disease, 283–296
asthma, 283–284, 286–289
COPD, 284, 289–291
obstructive pulmonary disease, 283, 286
obstructive sleep apnea, 284, 292
pulmonary hypertension, 284, 291–292
Cigarette smoking. See Smoking
CIRCI. See Critical illness-related
corticosteroid insufficiency
Circle of Willis, 324, 327
Circle system, 124, 130, 131
classification of, 124, 131
closed, 124, 125, 131, 132, 133
components of, 124, 125, 132
dead space in, 124, 132
semiclosed, 124, 131
Circulatory effects, of inhaled anesthetics, 41,
47–48
Cisatracurium, 86, 95, 96
Clearance. See Drug clearance
Clinical anesthesia, subspecialties in, 1, 4
Clonidine, 30, 36, 364, 374, 451, 457
Clonidine withdrawal, 30, 36
Closed circle system, 124, 125, 131,
132, 133
carbon dioxide elimination in, 126, 136
Closed Claims Project, 2, 5, 502, 504
Closed-chest cardiac compressions, 492,
495–496
Clostridium botulinum toxin, 471, 479
CMV mode. See Continuous mandatory
ventilation mode
CO. See Cardiac output
Coagulation, 209, 213–214
liver role in, 298, 304
in pregnancy, 363, 367
Coagulation abnormalities
hereditary, 210, 216
neuraxial technique and, 156, 162
Cocaine, history of, 73, 75
Codeine, 64, 66
Cohen tip deflecting endobronchial blocker,
285, 295
Colloids, 226, 228
Combined spinal-epidural anesthesia, 159,
174
Comorbidities, of anesthesia, 102–103,
106–111
Compartment models of pharmacokinetics,
8, 13
Compensated heart failure, 102, 107
Compensatory disturbance, in acid–base
status, 202, 205
Competitive antagonism, 8, 14
Complex regional pain syndrome, 480, 481,
485
Compound A, 40, 43
inhaled anesthetic degradation to, 126, 137
Concentration. See Drug concentration
Conduction blockade, with local anesthetics,
73, 76
Congenital diaphragmatic hernia, 390, 403
Congenital heart disease, 275–282
pathophysiology in, 275, 277–278
perioperative management of, 275–277,
278–282
Congestive heart failure (CHF), 30, 35, 245,
263
in elderly patients, 407, 411
Context-sensitive effect site decrement time,
8, 14
Context-sensitive half-time (CSHT), 8, 13
of alfentanil, 65, 71
of barbiturates, 51, 56
of etomidate, 53, 62
of fentanyl, 65, 71
of opioids, 64, 67
of propofol, 51, 54
of remifentanil, 65, 71
of sufentanil, 65, 71
Continuous infusion, morphine for, 8, 14
Continuous mandatory ventilation (CMV)
mode, 458, 460
Continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP),
103, 110, 441, 445, 458, 461
Continuous quality improvement programs
(CQI), 2, 4
Continuous-wave Doppler, 194, 198
Contractility, 16, 21
COPD. See Chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease
Cor pulmonale, 245–246, 264–265
Cormack Lehane score, 140, 145
Corneal abrasion, 338, 343, 344
518
Index
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
Coronary artery blood flow, inhaled
anesthetics and, 41, 48
Coronary artery disease, 241–242, 248–253
aortic aneurysms and, 246, 267
Coronary artery steal syndrome, 41, 48, 242,
251
Coronary blood flow, 17, 22
Corticosteroids, 470, 474
Cortisol, 104, 115, 312, 321
Cotransmitters, of SNS, 29, 32
Cough reflex, barbiturates and, 52, 57
CPAP. See Continuous positive airway
pressure
CPR. See Cardiopulmonary resuscitation
CQI. See Continuous quality improvement
programs
Cranial nerves, 140, 144
Creatinine, 297, 302
in elderly patients, 407, 412
Creatinine clearance, 8, 12, 298, 302
Cricoarytenoid arthritis, 349, 352
Cricoid cartilage, 140, 141, 142, 145, 151
Cricoid pressure, 141, 146, 310, 315
Cricothyrotomy, 142, 150
Critical care medicine, 1, 3, 458–468
acute renal failure, 459, 466
ARDS, 458, 462–463
delirium, 459, 466–467
intensive insulin therapy, 459, 468
mechanical ventilation, 458, 460–461
noninvasive positive-pressure ventilation,
458, 461–462
nutritional support, 459, 467
rapid response teams, 459, 467
sedationand analgesia in ICU, 459, 463–464
shock, 459, 464–466
Critical care unit, open v. closed, 1, 3
Critical illness-related corticosteroid
insufficiency (CIRCI), 312, 322
Critical incidents, 2, 4
Crohn disease, 310, 315
Crossmatching of blood, 231, 233
Cross-sensitivity, with local anesthetics, 75, 82
Cryoprecipitate, 232, 236, 388, 395
Crystalloids, 226, 228, 229
CSHT. See Context-sensitive half-time
Culture of safety, 506, 513
Cushing syndrome, 312, 322–323
CVP. See Central venous pressure
CYP 2D6, 7, 11, 64, 66
CYP 3A4, 7, 10
D
DDAVP. See Desmopressin acetate tablets
Dead space, 18, 25
in circle system, 124, 132
tidal volume ratio with, 203, 207
Decompensated heart failure, 102, 107
Delayed awakening, in PACU, 441, 449
Delirium
in elderly patients, 409, 417, 418
in ICU, 459, 466–467
in PACU, 441, 447
Delirium tremens, 299, 308
Delivery systems, 123–139, 450–451, 453–456
anesthesia machine ventilators, 125,
133–135
checking function of, 127, 138–139
Delivery systems (Continued)
anesthesia workstation, 123–124, 127–129
anesthetic breathing systems, 124–125,
130–133
checking function of, 127, 138–139
anesthetic gas pollution, 125–126,
135–136
carbon dioxide elimination, 126, 136–138
vaporizers, 124, 129–130
Dental surgery, at remote locations, 433,
438–439
Depolarizing neuromuscular blocking drugs,
84–85, 90–93
Desflurane
circulatory effects of, 41, 47
degradation to carbon monoxide, 126, 137
MAC of, 40, 44
metabolism of, 41, 46
toxic compounds with carbon dioxide and,
40, 43, 44
vaporizers and, 40, 43, 124, 129
ventilation effects of, 41, 48–49
Desmopressin acetate tablets (DDAVP), 210,
217
Dexamethasone, 427, 429
Dexmedetomidine, 30, 36, 53, 63
cerebral blood flow with, 324, 329
in ICU, 459, 464
Dextran, 226, 228
Dextrorotatory, 82
Diabetes
with b-adrenergic antagonists, 31, 37
surgery and, 103, 104, 111, 114
Diabetes mellitus, 311, 316–317
Diabetic peripheral neuropathy, 480, 485
Diameter index safety system (DISS), 123, 127
Diastolic dysfunction, 102, 107
Diazepam, 52, 58–60
in labor, 364, 373
with local anesthetics, 74, 80
Dibucaine, 85, 91
DIC. See Disseminated intravascular
coagulation
Differential block, 73, 77
Difficult mask ventilation, 140, 141, 144, 146
Difficult tracheal intubation/laryngoscopy,
140, 144
Diffusion hypoxia, 41, 47
Diffusion limitation, 17, 18, 24
Dilutional thrombocytopenia, 232, 239
D-Dimer levels, 209, 210, 215
Diplopia, with nondepolarizing
neuromuscular blocking drugs, 87, 100
Direct laryngoscopy, 141, 142, 145, 151
DISS. See Diameter index safety system
Dissecting aneurysms, 246, 266
Disseminated intravascular coagulation
(DIC), 211, 218, 219
Dissociation constant, drug concentration
and, 8, 14
Dissociative anesthesia, 52, 60
Distal nerve blocks, of upper extremity, 176,
180–181
Distribution, 7, 10
fetal, 364, 372
Distribution clearance, 8, 12
Diuresis, during cardiopulmonary bypass,
247, 271
DNR. See Do not resuscitate
Do not resuscitate (DNR), 103, 111
Dobutamine
infusion rate for, 30, 33
receptors and, 30, 35
treatment with, 30, 35
Dopamine
effects of, 30, 34
fenoldopam compared with, 298, 302
infusion rate for, 30, 33
metabolism of, 30, 34
opioids and, 64, 66
receptor binding of, 30, 34, 459, 465
renal function and, 30, 34
in SNS, 29, 32
Doppler echocardiography, 242, 253
Dose–response curve, 9, 15
Double burst suppression, nondepolarizing
neuromuscular blocking drugs and, 86,
87, 98, 99, 100
Drug absorption, 7, 9
fetal, 364, 372
of local anesthetics, 74, 78, 79
plasma concentration and, 7, 9
Drug clearance, 7, 10. See also Distribution
clearance
of atracurium, 86, 96
of barbiturates, 51, 56
of cisatracurium, 86, 96
in elderly patients, 408, 414
of etomidate, 53, 62
by kidneys, 8, 12
of lidocaine, 74, 78
by liver, 7, 11
of local anesthetics, 74, 78
of mivacurium, 86, 96
of nondepolarizing neuromuscular
blocking drugs, 85, 94
of opioids, 64, 67
of propofol, 8, 12, 51, 53
of rocuronium, 86, 96
of vecuronium, 86, 95
Drug concentration
dissociation constant and, 8, 14
drug absorption and plasma, 7, 9
steady state, 8, 13
Drug interactions, 9, 15
with opioids, 65, 69
Drug metabolism
of barbiturates, 51, 56
capacity limited, 8, 11, 12
of dopamine, 30, 34
of etomidate, 53, 62
flow limited, 8, 11, 12
formula for rate of, 7, 11
in liver, 7, 10
with disease, 298, 305
of local anesthetics, 74, 78
of morphine, 64, 66
of opioids, 64, 66–67
of propofol, 51, 54
of propranolol, 31, 37
of volatile anesthetics, 41, 46
Drug potency, 9, 15
of inhaled anesthetics, 40, 44
of local anesthetics, 74, 78
of morphine, 65, 71, 72
of opioids, 64, 67
519
Index
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
Drug potency (Continued)
of remifentanil, 65, 72
of sufentanil, 65, 71
Dull pain impulses, 73, 77
Dyspnea, 103, 110
E
ECG. See Electrocardiogram
Echocardiographic monitoring, 194, 198
Echothiophate eye drops, 31, 39
ECT. See Electroconvulsive therapy
ECV. See External cephalic version
ED50, 9, 15
Edrophonium, nondepolarizing
neuromuscular blocking drugs and, 87,
100
Effect-site equilibration time
of alfentanil, 65, 71
of barbiturates, 51, 56
of etomidate, 53, 62
of opioids, 64, 65, 67, 70
of propofol, 51, 54
of remifentanil, 65, 71
of sufentanil, 65, 71
Efficacy, 8, 14
Eisenmenger syndrome, 275, 278
Ejection fraction, 16, 20
Elderly patients, 407–418
anesthesia choice for, 408–409, 415–417
medications to avoid in, 407, 410
morbidity and mortality rates with, 407,
410
perioperative care in, 408, 413–415
physiologic changes in, 407–408, 410–413
postoperative care for, 409, 417–418
Electrocardiogram (ECG), preoperative, 104,
110
Electrocardiographic monitoring, 193–201
Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT), at remote
locations, 432, 435–437
Electroencephalogram effects, of
barbiturates, 52, 57
Electroencephalographic monitoring, 195,
200
Electrolytes
in pediatrics, 388, 394–395
physiology for, 226, 227
Electromyelogram testing, 350, 357
Electrophysiologic monitoring, 194–195, 199
Emergence, from propofol, 51, 54
Emergence delirium, with ketamine, 52, 61
Emergency surgery, for trauma, 470,
476–477
EMLA. See Eutectic mixture of local
anesthetics
Enantiomer, 75, 82
Endocrine effects, of etomidate, 53, 63
End-of-life issues, 460, 468
Endorphins, opioid receptors and, 64, 66
Endotracheal cuffs, 141, 146, 147
Endotracheal intubation, 141, 146
fiberoptic, 141, 147, 148
retrograde, 142, 149
Endotracheal tube, 141, 146
for infants and children, 143, 151, 152
placement of, 117, 119
End-stage liver disease (ESLD), 299, 305, 306
End-stage renal disease (ESRD), 298, 302, 303
Enflurane, degradation to carbon monoxide,
126, 137
Enkephalins, opioid receptors and, 64, 66
Enoxaparin, 352, 362
Ephedrine, 30, 35
treatment with, 30, 35
Epidural anesthesia, 117, 120, 155–174
advantages of, 155, 159
anatomy for, 155, 159–161
for cesarean delivery, 365, 377
duration of, 158, 172
for elderly patients, 409, 417
equipment for, 158, 170
failure of, 158, 172, 173
general anesthesia and, 158, 169
local anesthetics for, 158, 171
medicine deposition in, 155, 159
preoperative preparation for, 156,
161–162
risks with, 158, 173
spinal anesthesia v., 117, 118, 121, 155,
159, 173
spread of, 158, 171, 172
Epidural space, 155, 161
Epiglottis, 142, 151
Epinephrine
effects of, 30, 34
endocrine and metabolic effects of, 30, 33
with halothane-based anesthetic, 30, 34
infusion rate for, 30, 33
with local anesthetics, 74, 78, 79
receptors and, 29, 33, 459, 465
in SNS, 29, 32
synthesis of, 29, 32
treatment with, 29, 30, 33, 34
Epistaxis, 339, 344
ESLD. See End-stage liver disease
Esmolol, 7, 11, 31, 38
Esophageal-tracheal Combitube (ETC), 142,
150
ESRD. See End-stage renal disease
Essential hypertension, 244–245, 261–262
Ester hydrolysis, 7, 11
Ester local anesthetics, 73, 76
clearance of, 74, 78
ESWL. See Extracorporeal shock wave
lithotripsy
ETC. See Esophageal-tracheal Combitube
Etidocaine, 73, 77
Etomidate, 53, 62–63, 312, 322
cerebral blood flow with, 324, 329
for cesarean delivery, 366, 379
Eutectic mixture of local anesthetics (EMLA),
75, 83
Evoked potentials, 194–195, 199
inhaled anesthetics and, 41, 49
External cephalic version (ECV), 366, 380
Extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy
(ESWL), at remote locations, 432–433,
438
Extraction ratio, 7, 11
Extrajunctional receptors, 84, 89
Eye injury, perioperative, 185, 191–192
F
Facial nerve, nondepolarizing neuromuscular
blocking drug and, 86, 97
Factor V Leiden, 210, 218
FAER. See Foundation for Anesthesia
Education and Research
Failed tracheal intubation, 140, 144
Fail-safe valve, 123, 127
Fasciculations, with succinylcholine, 85, 92
Fasting, 105, 116
Febrile transfusion reactions, 232, 236
Femoral nerve, 176, 181
injury to, 185, 191
Fenoldopam
dopamine compared with, 298, 302
effects of, 30, 35
receptors and, 30, 35
Fentanyl, 64, 66, 451, 456
administration of, 65, 70, 71
clinical use of, 65, 71
congenital heart disease and, 275, 279
effect-site equilibration time of, 65, 70
isoflurane with, 9, 15
in labor, 364, 373
metabolism of, 64, 67
Fetal distress, 367, 384–385
Fetal heart rate (FHR), 367, 384, 385
Fetal uptake and distribution of drugs, 364,
372
FFP. See Fresh frozen plasma
FHR. See Fetal heart rate
Fiberoptic endotracheal intubation, 141, 147,
148
Fiberoptic laryngoscopy
flexible, 141–142, 148–149
rigid, 142, 149
Fiberoptic tracheal intubation, 141, 148
Fibrin degradation products, 209, 210, 215
Fibrin monomer levels, 209, 210, 215
Fibrinogen levels, 209, 215
Fibrinolysis, 209, 214
tests of, 209, 215
Fibrinopeptide, 209, 210, 215
Fick equation, 19, 28, 203, 208
Fio2, 17, 18, 23, 24
Fire safety, 506, 511
First order pharmacokinetic process, 8, 13
First order transfer, 7, 9
Flexible fiberoptic laryngoscopy, 141–142,
148–149
Flow limited drug metabolism, 8, 11, 12
Flowmeters, 123, 128, 129
Flow-over vaporizers, 124, 129, 130
Fluid management, 226–230
in pediatrics, 388, 394–395
perioperative strategies for, 226–227,
229–230
physiology for, 226, 227
replacement, 226, 227–229
Flumazenil, 52, 60
Flush valve, 124, 129
Focal alopecia, 183, 186
Focused Professional Practice Evaluation,
1, 4
Fontan procedure, 276, 280
Foramen ovale, 387, 392
Fospropofol, 51, 55
Foundation for Anesthesia Education and
Research (FAER), 2, 5
4-2-1 rule, 226, 229
Frank-Starling mechanism, 16, 21
FRC. See Functional residual capacity
520
Index
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
Frequency-dependent blockade, 73, 76
Fresh frozen plasma (FFP), 232, 236,
388, 395
Full agonist, 8, 14
Functional residual capacity (FRC), 18, 25
Functional status, 102, 105
G
G proteins, 64, 66
GABA receptor. See Gamma-aminobutyric
acid receptor
Gallstones, 299, 308
Gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) receptor
barbiturates and, 51, 56
benzodiazepines and, 52, 58
etomidate and, 53, 62
propofol and, 51, 53
Ganglia
of PNS, 29, 33
of SNS, 29, 32
Gas cylinders, 123, 128
Gas pressure, volume and, 123, 128
Gas volume, gas pressure and, 123, 128
Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), 310,
315–316
Gastrointestinal system effects
of opioids, 65, 68
of spinal anesthesia, 157, 167
Gastroschisis, 391, 405
GCS. See Glasgow Coma Scale
Gender, opioids and, 65, 70
General anesthesia
agents for, 117, 120
for cesarean delivery, 365, 377
epidural anesthesia and, 158, 169
induction of, 117, 119
maintenance of, 117, 120
General Competences, 1, 4
Genitourinary system effects, of opioids,
65, 69
GERD. See Gastroesophageal reflux disease
Geriatrics. See Elderly patients
Gestational hypertension, 366, 380
GFR. See Glomerular filtration rate
Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS), 469, 473
Glaucoma, 338, 343
Glenn procedure, 276, 280
Glomerular filtration, 297, 301
Glomerular filtration rate (GFR), 103, 110,
297, 300, 301
in elderly patients, 407, 412
in pregnancy, 363, 371
Glossopharyngeal nerve, 140, 144
Glucocorticoids, 104, 115
Glycopyrrolate, 31, 38
neostigmine with, 87, 100
G-protein-coupled receptors, 8, 14
Graves disease, 311, 317
H
Halothane
circulatory effects of, 41, 47, 48
congenital heart disease and,
275, 279
degradation to compound A, 126, 137
metabolism of, 41, 46
ventilation effects of, 41, 48–49
Halothane hepatitis, 299, 307
Halothane-based anesthetic, epinephrine
with, 30, 34
Hanging-drop technique, 158, 170
Hazards. See Risks
b-hCG. See b-Human chorionic
gonadotropin
Head tilt/jaw thrust maneuver, 492, 496
Head-down position. See Trendelenburg
position
Heart
lung integration with, 19, 28
transplantation, 420, 424–425
Heart failure, 102, 103, 107, 108
Heart rate
with barbiturates, 52, 56
in elderly patients, 407, 411
with etomidate, 53, 62
with inhaled anesthetics, 41, 47
with ketamine, 52, 61
with propofol, 51, 54
spinal anesthesia and, 157, 168
Heat and moisture exchanger (HME)
humidifiers, 125, 134
Heat and moisture exchanging filters
(HMEFs), 125, 134
Heat of vaporization, 124, 129
Heated water vaporizers and humidifiers,
125, 135
HELLP syndrome, 366, 381
Hematocrit, during cardiopulmonary bypass,
247, 270
Hemodynamics, 16–17, 19–22
afterload, 16, 21
arterial blood pressure, 16, 19–20
cardiac output, 16, 20
contractility, 16, 21
instability in PACU, 441, 446–447
preload, 16, 20–21
systemic vascular resistance, 16, 20
Hemoglobin, buffering with, 202, 204
Hemolytic transfusion reactions, 232, 237
Hemorrhage, in pregnant women, 366,
381–383
Hemostasis, 209–225
anticoagulants, thrombolytics, and
antiplatelet drugs, 211–212,
219–222
approach to patients
anticoagulated, 212, 222–224
receiving antiplatelet therapy,
212, 224
coagulation, 209, 213–214
disorders with
favoring thrombosis, 210–211,
218–219
during surgery, 210, 215–218
laboratory tests of, 209–210, 214–215
Heparin, 211, 220
cardiopulmonary bypass and, 247, 270
Heparin resistance, 211, 221
Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT),
211, 212, 220, 221
Hepatic blood flow, 298, 304
in elderly patients, 407, 412
in pregnancy, 363, 371
Hepatic encephalopathy, 299, 306
Hepatic extraction ratios, 7, 11
Hepatic failure, opioids with, 65, 69
Hepatic metabolism, 7, 10
of barbiturates, 51, 56
of lidocaine, 74, 78
Hepatocytes, 298, 305
Hepatopulmonary syndrome (HPS), 420, 423
Herbal medications
neuraxial anesthesia and, 104, 115
surgery and, 104, 114
HES. See Hydroxyethyl starches
Hexafluoroisopropanol, 41, 46
High reliability organizations, 506, 513
Hip fracture, 351, 359–361
History, for preoperative evaluation, 102,
105–106
HIT. See Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia
HME. See Heat and moisture exchanger
HMEFs. See Heat and moisture exchanging
filters
Holter monitor, 244, 257
Hospice and palliative medicine, 1, 3
Hospital-acquired infection, 506, 511–513
HPS. See Hepatopulmonary syndrome
HPV. See Hypoxic pulmonary
vasoconstriction
b-Human chorionic gonadotropin (b-hCG)
assay, 104, 112
Humidifiers
for airway humidification, 125, 134
heated water vaporizers and, 125, 135
HME, 125, 134
nebulizer, 125, 135
in pediatrics, 389, 398
Hydrogen ion concentration, regulation of,
202, 204
Hydrolysis, of local anesthetics, 74, 78
Hydroxyethyl starches (HES), 226, 228
Hypercapnia, 17, 18, 23, 24
Hypercapnic ventilatory response, 18, 26–27
opioids and, 19, 27
Hypercoagulable state, 210, 218
Hyperkalemia
during cardiopulmonary bypass, 247, 272
with renal insufficiency, 103, 110
with succinylcholine, 85, 92
Hypertension, 103, 109, 241, 249.
See also Essential hypertension
during cardiopulmonary bypass, 247, 270
comorbidities, 103, 109
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and,245, 264
with opioids, 64, 68
portal, 299, 305
Hypertensive disorders, of pregnancy, 366,
380–381
Hyperthyroidism, 311, 317–318
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, 245, 263–264
Hyperventilation, 470, 474
Hypnotics, opioid interaction with, 9, 15
Hypobaric solution, 156, 165
Hypocalcemia, 390, 401
Hypoglycemia, 390, 401
Hypokalemia, nondepolarizing neuromuscular
blocking drugs and, 85, 94
Hypopharynx, 140, 144
Hypotension
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and, 245,
264
with local anesthetics, 75, 80
with neuraxial anesthesia, 365, 376
521
Index
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
Hypotension (Continued)
with opioids, 64, 68
in pediatrics, 389, 399
spinal anesthesia and, 157, 167
Hypothermia
after cardiopulmonary bypass, 248, 273
in elderly patients, 408, 413
induced, 325, 330
nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking
drugs and, 85, 94
Hypothyroidism, 311, 318–319
Hypoventilation, 17, 18, 23, 24
Hypovolemia, 16, 21, 194, 198
Hypovolemic shock, 459, 464
Hypoxemia, 18, 24
arterial, 203, 207
in PACU, 440, 443–444
Hypoxia, 19, 27
diffusion, 41, 47
Hypoxic gas mixtures, 17, 23
Hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction (HPV),
440, 444
inhaled anesthetics and, 41, 49
Hypoxic ventilatory response, 19, 27
with opioids, 64, 68
opioids and, 19, 27
I
IBD. See Inflammatory bowel disease
ICD. See Implantable cardioverter-
defibrillator
ICP. See Intracranial pressure
ICU. See Intensive care unit
Idiopathic hypertrophic subaortic stenosis.
See Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
ILMA. See Intubating LMA
Immune function, with opioids, 65, 69
Implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD),
103, 108
Induced hypothermia, 325, 330
Induction of anesthesia
anesthetic solubility and, 41, 46
with benzodiazepines, 52, 59
with inhaled anesthetic, 40, 44
with ketamine, 52, 60
recovery from anesthesia v., 41, 46
Infants
airway management in, 142–143, 151–154
CPR of, 494, 499
Infective endocarditis, 103, 108
Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), 310,
314–315
Informed consent, 105, 116, 117, 119
Infraadditive drug interactions, 9, 15
Infusion rate, for catecholamines, 30, 33
Inhalation induction, 117, 120
in pediatrics, 389, 396, 397
Inhaled anesthetics, 40–50
altitude and, 40, 43
cerebral blood flow with, 324, 328
circulatory effects of, 41, 47–48
congenital heart disease and, 275, 279
degradation to carbon monoxide, 126, 137
degradation to compound A, 126, 137
in elderly patients, 408, 414
for general anesthesia, 117, 120
induction of anesthesia with, 40, 44
IOP and, 337, 341
Inhaled anesthetics (Continued)
mechanism of action of, 40, 42
with nondepolarizing neuromuscular
blocking drugs, 85, 94
organ system effects of, 41, 49–50
pharmacokinetics of, 40–41, 44, 45, 46, 47
physical properties of, 40, 42, 43, 44
relative potency of, 40, 44
shunt and, 41, 45
toxic compounds with, 40, 43
valvular heart disease and, 243, 255, 256
vaporizers for, 40, 42, 124, 129
ventilation effects of, 41, 48–49
Inhaled gas monitoring, 195, 201
INR. See International normalized ratio
Insulin, 104, 114
Intensive care unit (ICU)
delirium in, 459, 466–467
end-of-life issues, 460, 468
nutritional support in, 459, 467
sedation and analgesia in, 459, 463–464
Intensive insulin therapy, 459, 468
Intercompartmental clearance, 7, 10
Intermediate-acting nondepolarizing
neuromuscular blocking drugs, 86,
95–96
International Anesthesia Research Society, 1, 3
International normalized ratio (INR), 104,
113, 114, 209, 215
Interscalene approach, to brachial plexus
block, 176, 179
Interscalene block, of brachial plexus, 176, 179
Interventional pain therapy, 481–482,
488–491
Intervertebral foramina, 155, 160
Intraarterial blood pressure monitoring, 193,
196
Intracranial aneurysms, 326, 334–335
Intracranial mass lesions, 326, 333–334
Intracranial pressure (ICP), 325, 329–330
with barbiturates, 52, 57
with benzodiazepines, 324, 329
with dexmedetomidine, 324, 329
with etomidate, 53, 62, 324, 329
with inhaled anesthetics, 41, 49, 324, 328
with ketamine, 52, 61, 324, 328
with neuromuscular blocking drugs, 324,
329
with nitrous oxide, 324, 328
with opioids, 324, 329
with propofol, 51, 54, 324, 329
with thiopental, 52, 57, 324, 329
Intragastric pressure, with succinylcholine,
85, 93
Intraocular pressure (IOP), 337, 340, 341
with succinylcholine, 85, 93
Intraoperative bleeding, 210, 215
intraoperative approach to, 213, 224–225
Intraoperative bronchospasm, 284, 289
Intraoperative care, 1, 3
Intraoperative patient monitoring, 193, 195
Intrapulmonary shunt, 17, 18, 24
Intravenous anesthetics, 51–63
barbiturates, 51–52, 55–58
benzodiazepines, 52, 58–60
during cardiopulmonary bypass, 247, 272
dexmedetomidine, 53, 63
etomidate, 53, 62–63
Intravenous anesthetics (Continued)
fospropofol, 51, 55
ketamine, 52–53, 60–62
for neuroprotection, 325, 330
propofol, 51, 53–55
Intravenous regional anesthesia, 118, 121,
177, 182. See also Bier block
Intubating LMA (ILMA), 142, 149
Invasive X-ray procedures, at remote
locations, 431–432, 435
Inverse agonist, 8, 14
IOP. See Intraocular pressure
Isobaric solution, 156, 165
Isoflurane
circulatory effects of, 41, 47, 48
degradation to carbon monoxide, 126, 137
fentanyl with, 9, 15
MAC of, 40, 44
metabolism of, 41, 46
ventilation effects of, 41, 48–49
Isoproterenol, 30, 34
J
Jackson-Rees system. See Mapleson F system
Jaundice, 299, 308
Joint Commission, 505, 509
Joint replacement, 351–352, 361–362
Junctional rhythms, with succinylcholine,
85, 91
K
Ketamine, 52–53, 60–62, 450, 454
asthma and, 283, 288
cerebral blood flow with, 324, 328
congenital heart disease and, 275, 279
in ICU, 459, 464
IOP and, 337, 340
in labor, 364, 374
valvular heart disease and, 243, 257
Kidneys
aortic aneurysms and, 246, 267
dopamine and, 30, 34
drug clearance by, 8, 12
failure of, opioids with, 65, 70
pediatric, 387, 393
physiologic function of, 297, 300
transplantation, 419, 421–422
Km, 8, 11
L
Labetalol, 30, 31, 36, 38, 325, 332
Labor
analgesia in, 364–365, 373–375
neuraxial analgesia and neuraxial
techniques, 364–365, 374–375
neuraxial anesthesia complications,
365, 375–376
nonpharmacologic techniques and
systemic medications, 364,
373–374
other techniques for, 365, 376–377
anatomy of pain, 364, 373
premature, 367, 384
stages of, 364, 372
Lactic acidosis, central chemoreceptors and,
18, 26
Large motor activity, nerve fiber impulses for,
73, 77
522
Index
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
Laryngeal mask airway (LMA)
airway humidification and, 125, 134
placement of, 142, 149
Laryngeal reflex, barbiturates and, 52, 57
Laryngoscope blades, 143, 153
Laryngoscopy
difficult, 140, 144
direct, 142, 151
Laryngospasm, 142, 150, 151, 338, 339, 344
Larynx, 142, 151
Laser surgery, 339, 340, 347
Latency time to peak effect, of opioids, 64, 67
Lateral decubitus position, 184, 187, 188,
285, 295
Laudanosine, 86, 96
LBP. See Low back pain
LD50, 9, 15
Leak tests, 440, 443
Left ventricular (LV) function, 102, 107
Left-to-right shunt, in congenital heart
disease, 275, 277
Levobupivacaine, 75, 82
Levorotatory, 82
Liability. See Professional liability
Lidocaine
for airway local anesthetic, 141, 148
clearance of, 74, 78
for spinal anesthesia, 75, 81, 82, 157, 165
Ligand-gated ion channels, 8, 14
Linear pharmacokinetics, 7, 8, 11
Lingual nerve, 140, 144
Lipid emulsion, for systemic anesthetic
toxicity, 75, 80
Lipid solubility, of nondepolarizing
neuromuscular blocking drugs, 85, 93
Lithotomy position, 184, 188, 189
Liver. See also Hepatic failure; Hepatic
metabolism
inhaled anesthetics and, 41, 50
lidocaine clearance and, 74, 78
local anesthetics and, 74, 78
physiologic functions of, 298, 303
propofol and, 51, 54
transplantation, 419–420, 422–424
Liver disease, 298–299, 303–309
increased bleeding with, 210, 217
pancuronium and, 86, 95
Liver function tests, 299, 307, 308
LMA. See Laryngeal mask airway
LMA CTrach, 142, 150
LMA Fastrach. See Intubating LMA
LMA Flexible, 143, 152
LMWH. See Low-molecular-weight heparin
Local anesthetics, 73–83, 451, 456
adverse effects of, 74–75, 79–82
allergic reaction to, 75, 82
amide, 73, 76
clinical uses of, 75, 82–83
cross-sensitivity with, 75, 82
EMLA, 75, 83
for epidural anesthesia, 158, 171
ester, 73, 76
history of, 73, 75
mechanism of action of, 73, 76
nerve classification for, 73, 77
in pediatrics, 389, 399
in peripheral nerve block, 74, 77
pharmacokinetics of, 74, 77–79
Local anesthetics (Continued)
potency of, 74, 78
seizures with, 74, 75, 79, 80
sensitivity to, 73, 77
structure-activity relationships of,
73, 76
Local tissue acidosis, local anesthetics and,
74, 78
Long-acting nondepolarizing neuromuscular
blocking drugs, 86, 95
Lorazepam, 52, 58, 59
Loss-of-resistance technique, 158, 170
Low back pain (LBP), 480, 483, 484
Low mixed venous oxygen levels, 18, 24
Lower extremity, blocks of, 176–177,
181–182
Low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH),
104, 113, 114, 211, 219, 221
Lumbar diskography, 481, 488
Lumbosacral (Taylor) approach, 156, 164
Lungs
during cardiopulmonary bypass,
247, 271
dynamic properties and airway resistance,
18, 25–26
heart integration with, 19, 28
local anesthetics and, 74, 78
resection of, 245, 264–265
anesthesia management for, 245–246,
266–268
conclusion of surgery, 246–248, 296
gas exchange during, 246, 295–296
isolation for, 246, 268–274
mediastinoscopy, 248–253, 296
postoperative pulmonary
complications, 248–274, 296
preoperative evaluation and
preparation for, 245, 265–266
static properties in, 18, 25
transplantation, 420, 425
zones of, 17, 22–23
Lupus anticoagulant, 211, 218
LV. See Left ventricular
M
MAC. See Minimum alveolar concentration
Maintenance anesthesia, with propofol,
51, 55
Maintenance of Certification in
Anesthesiology (MOCA), 1, 4
Malignant hyperthermia (MH), 18, 24
inhaled anesthetics and, 41, 50
in pediatrics, 390, 401, 402, 403
Mallampati classification system, 140, 145
Malnutrition, 310, 314
Mannitol, 325, 331, 469, 474
MAOIs. See Monoamine oxidase inhibitors
MAP. See Mean arterial pressure
Mapleson F system, 124, 130, 131
Mask ventilation
difficult, 140, 141, 144, 146
risks with, 183, 185
Mass casualty disasters, 470, 477–478
Mass spectrometry, 195, 201
Masseter muscle tension, with
succinylcholine, 85, 93
Maximum metabolic rate (Vm), 8, 11, 12
Mean arterial pressure (MAP), 16, 19
Mechanical ventilation, 458, 460–461
Meconium aspiration syndrome, 367, 386
Median nerve, 176, 180
injury to, 184, 190
Mediastinoscopy, 248–253, 296
Medication safety, 506, 510–511
Medications, surgery and, 104, 114
Medicolegal action, protection against, 2, 5
Membrane oxygenator, 247, 269
Meperidine, 64, 66
in labor, 364, 373
Mephentermine, 30, 35
Metabolic acidosis, 203, 206
Metabolic alkalosis, 203, 206, 207
Metabolic syndrome, 310, 312, 313
Metabolism. See also Drug metabolism
of acetylcholine, 84, 88
Metaproterenol, 31, 36
Metaraminol, 30, 35
Metformin, 104, 114
Methemoglobinemia, 75, 81
Methionine synthase, nitrous oxide and,
41, 46
Methohexital, 52, 56
Methylmethacrylate cement, 351, 361
Metoprolol, 31, 38
MH. See Malignant hyperthermia
Microcatheters, 157, 166, 167
Microcuff, 143, 153
Midazolam, 52, 58–60, 143, 152
in labor, 364, 373
Midline approach, 156, 163
Minimum alveolar concentration (MAC)
amnesia and, 40, 44
decrease in, 40, 44
increase in, 40, 44
of inhaled anesthetics, 40, 44
pediatric, 387, 393
Minute ventilation, inhaled anesthetics and,
41, 48
Mitral regurgitation, 243, 254, 255
Mitral stenosis, 242, 243, 253, 254
Mitral valve prolapse, 243, 257
Mivacurium, 86, 96
Mixed-venous oxygen saturation, 19, 28
Mixing lesions, 275, 277, 278
M-mode echocardiography, 194, 198
MOCA. See Maintenance of Certification in
Anesthesiology
Modulation of painful stimuli, 450, 452, 453
Monitored anesthesia care, 118, 121
Monitoring. See also Anesthetic monitoring
of CVP, 193–194, 197
electrocardiographic, 193–201
intraoperative patient, 193, 195
of systemic blood pressure, 193–201
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs), 104,
115
Morbid obesity, 310, 313
Morphine, 64, 66
for continuous infusion, 8, 14
effect-site equilibration time of, 65, 70
in labor, 364, 373
metabolism of, 64, 66
onset time of, 65, 70
potency of, 65, 71, 72
Morphine sleep, 364, 373
Morphine-3-glucuronide, 64, 67
523
Index
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
Morphine-6-glucuronide, 64, 67
Mortality rates
a2-adrenergic agonists and, 30, 36
from anesthesia, 2, 5
with elderly patients, 407, 410
Multiple endocrine neoplasia, 311–312,
320–321
Muscarinic antagonists, 31, 38
Muscarinic cholinergic receptors, 87, 99
Muscarinic effects, of anticholinesterase,
87, 99
Myalgias, with succinylcholine, 85, 92
Myelin, 73, 77
local anesthetics and, 73, 77
Myelomeningocele, 391, 405
Myocardial conduction, inhaled anesthetics
and, 41, 48
Myocardial depression, with ketamine, 52, 61
Myocardial ischemia, 241, 242, 249, 250, 251
Myocardial rhythm, inhaled anesthetics and,
41, 48
Myocardium, 17, 22
Myopathy, with nondepolarizing
neuromuscular blocking drugs, 85, 94
N
Naloxone, for neonatal resuscitation, 367, 386
Narcotics, 104, 115
Narrow-complex tachycardias, 493, 498
Nasal airway placement, 141, 146
Nasal mucosa, 140, 144
Nasopharynx, 140, 144
National Surgical Quality Improvement
Program (NSQIP), 505, 509
Nausea
with opioids, 65, 69
with propofol, 51, 55
with spinal anesthesia, 158, 169
Nebulizer humidifiers, 125, 135
Necrotizing enterocolitis, 391, 405
Neonate evaluation and resuscitation, 367,
385–386
Neostigmine, 364, 374
mivacurium and, 86, 97
nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking
drugs and, 87, 100
in pediatrics, 388, 394
Nerve agent, 471, 479
Nerve block, offset of effects following, 7, 9
Nerve classification, 73, 77
Nerve fibers
arrangement of, 74, 77
classification of, 73, 77
large and small motor activity, 73, 77
local anesthetics and, 73, 77
sharp and dull pain conductance, 73, 77
Neuraxial anesthesia, 450, 454, 455
anticoagulants and, 213, 224
herbal medications and, 104, 115
hypotension with, 365, 376
for labor, 364–365, 374–375
contraindications and complications of,
365, 375–376
Neuroendocrine tumors, 311–312, 320–321
Neuromuscular blocking drugs, 84–101
adverse outcomes with, 87, 101
analgesic effects of, 84, 88
anticholinesterase and, 283, 288
Neuromuscular blocking drugs (Continued)
asthma and, 283, 288
during cardiopulmonary bypass, 247, 272
cerebral blood flow with, 324, 329
clinical uses of, 84, 87–88
coronary artery disease and, 242, 252
depolarizing, 84–85, 90–93
for general anesthesia, 117, 120
IOP and, 337, 341
neuromuscular junction, 84, 88–89
nondepolarizing, 85, 93–95
antagonism of, 87, 99–101
intermediate-acting, 86, 95–96
long-acting, 86, 95
monitoring effects of, 86–87, 97–99
short-acting, 86, 96–97
physiologic effect of, 84, 87
residual, 440, 442
structure-activity relationships of, 84, 89
Neuromuscular function, inhaled anesthetics
and, 41, 50
Neuromuscular junction, 84, 88–89
neurotransmitters at, 84, 88
receptors at, 84, 88
Neuropathic pain, 480, 484
Neuropeptide Y, in SNS, 29, 32
Neuroprotection, 325, 330
Neurosurgery, anesthesia for, 325–326,
330–333
Neurotoxicity
with chloroprocaine, 75, 81
with lidocaine, 75, 81, 82
Neurotransmitters
at neuromuscular junction, 84, 88
of SNS, 29, 32
Never events, 506, 512
Nicotine replacement, 104, 115
Nicotinic cholinergic receptors, 84, 87, 88,
89, 99
acetylcholine at, 84, 88, 89
nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking
drugs at, 85, 93
opening of, 84, 90
succinylcholine at, 84, 90
NIPPV. See Noninvasive positive-pressure
ventilation
Nitrous oxide
air-filled spaces and, 41, 46
anesthetic state with, 40, 42
arterial blood pressure and, 41, 47
cerebral blood flow and, 41, 49, 324, 328
with COPD, 284, 290
delivery to anesthesia machine, 123, 127
essential hypertension and, 245, 262
for general anesthesia, 117, 120
during labor, 365, 377
leaks of, 126, 136
MAC of, 40, 44
maximum concentrations of, 125, 135
methionine synthase and, 41, 46
for thoracic surgery, 285, 294
valvular heart disease and, 243, 254, 255
ventilatory drive and, 41, 48
NMDA receptors, ketamine and, 52, 60
Nociception, 450, 452
Nodes of Ranvier, 73, 77
Noncardiac surgery, revascularization and,
102, 106
Noncatecholamine sympathomimetic
amines, 30, 35
Noncompetitive antagonism, 8, 14
Nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking
drugs, 85, 93–95
antagonism of, 87, 99–101
in elderly patients, 408, 414, 416
intermediate-acting, 86, 95–96
long-acting, 86, 95
monitoring effects of, 86–87, 97–99
short-acting, 86, 96–97
Noninvasive positive-pressure ventilation
(NIPPV), 441, 445, 458, 461–462
Noninvasive X-ray procedures, at remote
locations, 431, 434–435
Norepinephrine
administration of, 29, 33
infusion rate for, 30, 33
ketamine and, 52, 61
noncatecholamine sympathomimetic
amines and, 30, 35
opioids and, 64, 66
release of, 29, 32
in SNS, 29, 32
synthesis of, 29, 32
Norketamine, 52, 60
Normosol, 226, 228
Normothermia, 195, 200
Norwood procedure, 276, 279
NSQIP. See National Surgical Quality
Improvement Program
Nuclear exposure, 471, 478
O
Obesity, 103, 111, 310, 312–313
opioids and, 65, 70
OSA and, 292
Obstetrics, 363–386
abnormal presentations, 366,
379–380
amniotic fluid embolism, 366, 383
anatomy of labor pain, 364, 373
anesthesia
for cesarean delivery, 365–366,
377–379
for nonobstetric surgery during
pregnancy, 367, 383–384
fetal distress, 367, 384–385
fetal uptake and distribution of drugs, 364,
372
hemorrhage in pregnant women, 366,
381–383
hypertensive disorders of pregnancy, 366,
380–381
labor analgesia, 364–365, 373–375
neuraxial analgesia and neuraxial
techniques, 364–365, 374–375
neuraxial anesthesia complications,
365, 375–376
nonpharmacologic techniques and
systemic medications, 364,
373–374
other techniques for, 365, 376–377
multiple births, 366, 379–380
neonate evaluation and resuscitation, 367,
385–386
physiologic changes in pregnant women,
363, 367–371
524
Index
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
Obstetrics (Continued)
physiology of uteroplacental circulation,
364, 371–372
stages of labor, 364, 372
Obstructive pulmonary disease, 283, 286
Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA), 103, 109, 110,
143, 154, 284, 292, 339, 344, 345
Obturator nerve, injury to, 185, 191
Oculocardiac reflex, 337, 338, 341, 342
OELM. See Optimal external laryngeal
manipulation
Oliguria, 298, 303
Omphalocele, 391, 405
Ondine curse, 19, 27
Ongoing Professional Practice Evaluation, 1, 4
Onset time. See Time of onset
Open circle system, carbon dioxide
elimination in, 126, 136
Operating room, hazards of working in, 2, 6
Operating room efficiency, 506, 513
Ophthalmology, 337–338, 340–348
Opioids, 64–72, 450, 454, 481, 487
adverse effects of, 64–65, 68–69
cerebral blood flow with, 324, 329
clinical application of, 65, 72
common clinical indications for, 65, 72
rational drug selection and
administration, 65, 72
congenital heart disease and, 275, 279
drug interactions with, 65, 69
in elderly patients, 408, 414
essential hypertension and, 245, 262
for general anesthesia, 117, 120
hypnotic interaction with, 9, 15
hypoxic and hypercapnic ventilatory
response and, 19, 27
mechanism of action of, 64, 66
metabolism of, 64, 66–67
in pediatrics, 388, 393
pharmacodynamics of, 64–65, 68–72
pharmacokinetics of, 64, 67
in special populations, 65, 69–70
for spinal anesthesia, 157, 165
structure-activity relationships of, 64, 66
therapeutic effects of, 64, 68
unique features of individual, 65, 70–72
valvular heart disease and, 243, 254, 255
Opioid receptors, 64, 66
m-Opioid receptors, ketamine and, 52, 60
Optimal external laryngeal manipulation
(OELM), 141, 146
Orbicularis oculi muscle, nondepolarizing
neuromuscular blocking drug and,
86, 97
Organ transplantation, 419–425
heart, 420, 424–425
kidney, 419, 421–422
liver, 419–420, 422–424
lung, 420, 425
pancreas, 420, 425
Organizations, for safety, 2, 5
Oropharynx, 140, 144
Orthopedics, 349–362
hip fracture, 351, 359–361
rheumatologic disorders, 349, 352–354
spine surgery, 350–351, 354–359
in sitting position, 351, 359
total joint replacement, 351–352, 361–362
Orthostatic hypotension, 408, 415
OSA. See Obstructive sleep apnea
Oscillometric blood pressure measuring,
193, 196
Osteoarthritis, 408, 412
Osteoporosis, 408, 412
Otolaryngology, 338–348
Out-of-circuit vaporizers, 124, 129, 130
Outpatient anesthesia, 426–430
history of, 426, 427
keys to success, 426, 428
preoperative considerations for, 426, 428
techniques for, 426, 428–429
topics of importance in, 427, 429–430
Oxygen, 17–18, 23–24
for anesthesia machine ventilators, 125,
133
delivery of, 19, 28
to anesthesia machine, 123, 127
extraction of, 19, 28
Oxygen flush valve, 124, 129
Oxygen supplementation, in PACU, 441, 445
Oxygenators, for cardiopulmonary bypass,
246, 247, 269
Oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve, 17, 23
in pediatrics, 387, 392
propranolol and, 31, 38
P
P50, 17, 23
PA. See Pulmonary artery
Pacemakers, 103, 108, 244, 258, 260–261
Packed red blood cells (PRBC), 231, 235,
388, 395
PACU. See Postanesthesia care unit
Pain, neurophysiology of, 450, 452–453
Pain management, 1, 3. See also Chronic pain
management
Palatine nerves, 140, 144
Pancreas, transplantation, 420, 425
Pancuronium, 86, 95
valvular heart disease and, 243, 255
Papaverine, 64, 66
Paraganglioma, 311, 319–320
Paramedian approach, 156, 158, 163, 170
Paraplegia, aortic aneurysms and, 246, 268
Paresthesia
during epidural anesthesia, 159, 174
during peripheral nerve block, 175, 178
Parasympathetic nervous system (PNS),
29, 33
cardiovascular system and, 17, 21
organ response to, 30, 33
Paravertebral blockade technique, 451, 457
Partial agonist, 8, 14
Partial thromboplastin time, 209, 215
Partition coefficients, 41, 45
Patent ductus arteriosus (PDA), 391, 405
Patient identification, 506, 510
Patient injury, prevention of, 2, 5
Patient position, 183–192
lateral decubitus, 184, 187, 188
lithotomy, 184, 188, 189
prone, 183, 184, 187
sitting, 184, 188
for spinal anesthesia, 156, 162
supine, 183, 186
Trendelenburg position, 183, 186, 187
Patient safety, 505–513
anesthesiology and, 505, 507–509
basic principles of, 505, 507
culture of safety, 506, 513
fire safety, 506, 511
high reliability organizations, 506, 513
hospital-acquired infection, 506, 511–513
improved communication, 506, 510
medication safety, 506, 510–511
never events, 506, 512
operating room efficiency, 506, 513
patient and staff satisfaction, 506, 513
patient identification, 506, 510
preventing wrong-site surgery, 506,
509–510
Surgical Care Improvement Project, 506,
511–512
Patient Safety Practices, 2, 5
Patient-controlled analgesia (PCA), 450, 454
Patil-Syracuse mask, 142, 149
PCA. See Patient-controlled analgesia
PDA. See Patent ductus arteriosus
PDD. See Plasma disk decompression
PDPH. See Postdural puncture headache
PEA. See Pulseless electrical activity
Pediatrics, 387–406. See also Children;
Infants
airway, 388, 396
anesthesia induction and maintenance in,
389, 396–399
developmental physiology, 387, 391–393
fluids and electrolytes, 388, 394–395
medical and surgical diseases of, 390–391,
400–406
pharmacologic differences, 387–388,
393–394
postanesthesia care unit, 389, 399–400
preanesthetic evaluation and preparation,
388–389, 396
transfusion therapy, 388, 395
PEEP. See Positive end-expiratory pressure
Periodic breathing, 19, 27
Perioperative cardiac complications,
102, 107
Perioperative eye injury, 185, 191–192
Perioperative glucose control, 103, 111
Perioperative neuropathies, 185, 192
Perioperative pain management, 450–457
alternative approaches to, 451, 456–457
analgesia delivery systems, 450–451,
453–456
Perioperative pathway, 1, 4
Perioperative patient care, 1, 3–4
Peripheral chemoreceptors, 18, 26
Peripheral nerve block, 74, 77, 118, 121,
175–182, 451, 456
blocks of lower extremity, 176–177,
181–182
brachial plexus block, 176, 179–180
cervical plexus block, 175, 179
distal nerve blocks of upper extremity,
176, 180–181
intravenous regional neural anesthesia,
177, 182
preoperative evaluation for, 175, 177
types of, 175, 177
ultrasound guidance for, 175, 178
uses of, 175, 177
525
Index
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
Peripheral nerve catheters, 175, 178–179
Peripheral nerve injury, 184–185,
189–191
Peripheral nerve stimulator
for nondepolarizing neuromuscular
blocking drug, 86, 98
for nondepolarizing neuromuscular
blocking drug monitoring,
86, 97
Peripheral platelet destruction, 210, 217
Peripheral volume of distribution, 7, 10
Peroneal nerve, 177, 182
injury to, 184, 185, 191
Persistent airway obstruction, steroids with,
103, 109
Pharmacodynamics, 7, 8–9, 14–15
of opioids, 64–65, 68–72
Pharmacoeconomics, 118, 122
Pharmacokinetics, 7, 9
compartment models, 8, 13
first order process, 8, 13
of inhaled anesthetics, 40–41, 44, 45,
46, 47
linear, 7, 8, 11
of local anesthetics, 74, 77–79
of opioids, 64, 67
saturable, 8, 12
of succinylcholine, 7, 11
Pharynx, 140, 144
Phase I neuromuscular blockade, 84, 90
Phase II neuromuscular blockade, 84, 90
Phencyclidine, 52, 60
Phenoxybenzamine, 31, 36, 37
Phenylephrine, 30, 35, 337, 341
with local anesthetics, 74, 78, 79
Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase,
29, 32
Pheochromocytomas, 311, 319–320
with b-adrenergic antagonists, 31, 37
Physical examination, for preoperative
evaluation, 102, 105–106
Physical Status Classification, 102, 105
Physostigmine, 31, 38
Piggy-back technique, 420, 424
Pin index safety system (PISS), 123, 128
PISS. See Pin index safety system
Pituitary apoplexy, 312, 321
pKa, of local anesthetics, 74, 77
Placenta, blood circulation of, 364,
371, 372
Placenta previa, 366, 381, 383
Plasma cholinesterase, 85, 90, 91
dibucaine and, 85, 91
mivacurium and, 86, 96
Plasma concentration
drug absorption and, 7, 9
of local anesthetics, 74, 78, 79
Plasma disk decompression (PDD),
481, 489
Plasma proteins, 8, 12, 13
Plasma-lyte, 226, 228
Platelets, 209, 213
administration of, 231, 232, 235, 236
Platelet aggregation studies, 209, 214
Platelet count, 209, 214
Platelet disorders, hereditary, 210, 216
Platelet function, 212, 222
analysis of, 209, 214
Plica mediana dorsalis, 155, 161
Pneumonia, 407, 412
PNS. See Parasympathetic nervous system
Pollution, of anesthetic gas, 125–126,
135–136
PONV. See Postoperative nausea and
vomiting
Popliteal nerve, 176, 177, 181
Portal hypertension, 299, 305
Portopulmonary hypertension, 420, 423
Position. See Patient position
Positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP), 458,
461
Postanesthesia care unit (PACU), 1, 3,
440–449
airway obstruction in, 440, 442–443
body temperature and shivering in, 441,
448
delayed awakening in, 441, 449
delirium in, 441, 447
discharge criteria for, 441, 449
hemodynamic instability in, 441, 446–447
hypoxemia in, 440, 443–444
oxygen supplementation in, 441, 445
pediatrics in, 389, 399–400
postoperative nausea and vomiting in,
441, 449
pulmonary edema in, 440, 444–445
renal dysfunction in, 441, 447–448
Postdural puncture headache (PDPH), 157,
168, 169, 365, 376
Postextubation croup, 143, 154
Postganglionic fibers
of PNS, 29, 33
of SNS, 29, 32
Postherpetic neuralgia, 480, 484
Postoperative nausea and vomiting (PONV),
104, 115, 441, 449
Postoperative pulmonary complications
(PPC), 103, 109
Postoperative visual loss, 338, 344
with spinal surgery, 350, 351, 358, 359
Posttetanic stimulation, nondepolarizing
neuromuscular blocking drug and, 86,
87, 98, 99
Potency. See Drug potency
PPC. See Postoperative pulmonary
complications
Prazosin, 31, 37
PRBC. See Packed red blood cells
Preanesthetic visit, 102, 105
Precordial thump, 493, 498
Preeclampsia, 366, 380, 381
Preexcitation syndromes, 244, 259
Preganglionic fibers
of PNS, 29, 33
of SNS, 29, 32
Pregnancy. See also Obstetrics
ACLS in, 365, 376
anesthesia for nonobstetric surgery
during, 367, 383–384
blood pressure in, 363, 368
coagulation in, 363, 367
hemorrhage in, 366, 381–383
hepatic blood flow in, 363, 371
hypertensive disorders of, 366, 380–381
renal blood flow in, 363, 371
surgery and, 103, 111
Pregnant women, physiologic changes in,
363, 367–371
Prejunctional receptors, 84, 89
Preload, 16, 20–21
Premature labor, 367, 384
Preoperative clinics, 1, 4
Preoperative evaluation, 1, 3, 102–116, 117,
118
anesthetic plan formation, 105, 116
comorbidities, 102–103, 106–111
consultations, 104, 111
in elderly patients, 408, 413
for essential hypertension, 244, 261
fasting, 105, 116
history and physical examination for, 102,
105–106
informed consent, 105, 116
medications, 104, 113–115
in pediatrics, 388–389, 396
for peripheral nerve block, 175, 177
preparation for, 175, 177
risk assessment, 105, 116
techniques for, 175, 178
testing, 104, 112–113
Preoxygenation, 117, 119, 141, 145, 146
Prerenal oliguria, 298, 303
Pressure support ventilation (PSV) mode,
458, 460
Prilocaine, 75, 81, 82
Primary disturbance, in acid–base status, 202,
205
Professional liability, 2, 5
Professional performance concepts, 1, 4
Prolonged Q–T interval syndrome, 244, 259,
260
Prone position, 183, 184, 187
Propofol, 8, 11, 51, 53–55
asthma and, 283, 288
cerebral blood flow with, 324, 329
for cesarean delivery, 365, 378
clearance of, 8, 12, 51, 53
with local anesthetics, 74, 80
Propofol infusion syndrome, 459, 463
Propranolol, 31, 37, 38
Propylene glycol, with diazepam, 52, 60
ProSeal LMA, 142, 150
Prostaglandins, 297, 300
Protamine, 211, 220, 277, 281
after cardiopulmonary bypass,
248, 274
Proteinuria, 298, 302
Prothrombin time, 209, 215
Pseudocholinesterase enzyme, 31, 39
PSV mode. See Pressure support ventilation
mode
Psychiatric medications, 104, 113
Pulmonary artery catheter monitoring, 194,
197–198
Pulmonary artery (PA) pressure, 17, 22
cor pulmonale and, 246, 265
with ketamine, 52, 61
Pulmonary aspiration, 104, 115
Pulmonary blood flow, 276, 280
Pulmonary circulation, 17, 22–23
pulmonary artery pressure, 17, 22
pulmonary edema, 17, 23
pulmonary vascular resistance, 17, 22
zones of lung, 17, 22–23
526
Index
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
Pulmonary complications, postoperative,
103, 109
Pulmonary disease. See Chronic pulmonary
disease
Pulmonary edema, 17, 23
in PACU, 440, 444–445
Pulmonary embolism, 194, 198
Pulmonary emphysema, 284, 289
Pulmonary function tests, 284, 285, 293
Pulmonary gas exchange, 17–18, 23–26
carbon dioxide, 18, 24–25
oxygen, 17–18, 23–24
pulmonary mechanics, 18, 25–26
Pulmonary hypertension, 284, 291–292
Pulmonary mechanics, 18, 25–26
dynamic properties and airway resistance,
18, 25–26
static properties, 18, 25
Pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR), 17, 22,
275, 278
Pulse oximetry monitoring, 194, 199
Pulse pressure, 16, 19, 20
Pulseless electrical activity (PEA), 493, 497
Pulsus paradoxus, 246, 265
PVR. See Pulmonary vascular resistance
Pyloric stenosis, 390, 391, 404
Q
Quality of care
in anesthesia, 2, 4–5
evaluation of, 2, 4
R
RA. See Rheumatoid arthritis
Racemic mixture, 82
Radial nerve, 176, 180
injury to, 184, 190
Radiation safety, in remote locations,
431, 433
Radiation therapy, at remote locations,
432, 435
Radiofrequency ablation, 481, 488
Raman spectrometry, 195, 201
Ramsay sedation scoring system (RASS),
459, 463
Rapid response teams, 459, 467
Rapid sequence induction, 117, 119, 120,
310, 315
RASS. See Ramsay sedation scoring system
Rate constants, 8, 13
RCA. See Root cause analysis
Receptors. See also specific receptors
a2, 29, 32
for benzodiazepines, 52, 58
binding of, 8, 14
cardiac reflexes and, 17, 22
dobutamine and, 30, 35
dopamine binding by, 30, 34, 459, 465
epinephrine and, 29, 33, 459, 465
fenoldopam and, 30, 35
hypercapnic ventilatory response and,
18, 26
hypoxic ventilatory response and, 19, 27
at neuromuscular junction, 84, 88
noncatecholamine sympathomimetic
amines and, 30, 35
of SNS, 29, 32
types of, 8, 14
Receptor agonist, 8, 14. See also specific
receptor agonists
Receptor antagonist, 8, 14. See also specific
receptor antagonists
competitive v. noncompetitive, 8, 14
Recovery from anesthesia, induction of
anesthesia v., 41, 46
Refeeding syndrome, 310, 314
Regional anesthesia
asthma and, 283, 288
for cesarean delivery, 365, 377
with congestive heart failure, 245, 263
for elderly patients, 408, 409, 415, 416,
417
with essential hypertension, 245, 262
intravenous, 118, 121
in pediatrics, 389, 399
techniques for, 117, 120, 121
Regurgitant valvular lesions, 102, 108
Remifentanil, 7, 11, 64, 66
clinical uses of, 65, 72
in labor, 364, 373
potency of, 65, 72
Remote locations, 431–439
allergic reactions in, 431, 433–434
cardiac catheterization at, 432, 437
cardioversion at, 432, 437–438
characteristics of, 431, 433
dental surgery at, 433, 438–439
electroconvulsive therapy at, 432,
435–437
extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy at,
432–433, 438
invasive X-ray procedures, 431–432, 435
noninvasive X-ray procedures, 431,
434–435
radiation safety in, 431, 433
radiation therapy at, 432, 435
Renal blood flow, 297, 300
in elderly patients, 407, 412
in pregnancy, 363, 371
Renal disease, 297–298, 300–303
pancuronium and, 86, 95
Renal dysfunction, in PACU, 441,
447–448
Renal excretion, of local anesthetics,
74, 78
Renal failure. See also Acute renal failure
atracurium and, 86, 96
cisatracurium and, 86, 96
rocuronium and, 86, 96
with succinylcholine, 85, 92
Renal insufficiency, 103, 110
Renal response, 202, 204
Renin, 297, 300
Resection, of lungs, 245, 264–265
anesthesia management for, 245–246,
266–268
conclusion of surgery, 246–248, 296
gas exchange during, 246, 295–296
isolation for, 246, 268–274
mediastinoscopy, 248–253, 296
postoperative pulmonary complications,
248–274, 296
preoperative evaluation and preparation
for, 245, 265–266
Reservoir bag, in circle system, 125, 132
Respiratory acidosis, 202, 205
Respiratory alkalosis, 202, 203, 205, 206
Respiratory distress syndrome, 390, 400
Respiratory system effects. See also
Ventilation effects
of spinal anesthesia, 157, 167
Response surface, 9, 15
Resting membrane potential, local
anesthetics and, 73, 76
Retained placenta, 366, 382
Retinal detachment, 338, 342, 343
Retinopathy of prematurity, 390, 400, 401
Retrobulbar block, 338, 342
Retrograde tracheal intubation, 142, 149
Revascularization
guidelines for, 102, 106
noncardiac surgery and, 102, 106
Reversal
of benzodiazepines, 52, 60
of fentanyl, 65, 71
of local anesthetics, 73, 76
Rheumatic heart disease, 242, 243, 253, 254
Rheumatoid arthritis (RA), 349, 352, 353,
408, 412
Rheumatologic disorders, 349, 352–354
Right-to-left shunt, in congenital heart
disease, 275, 277
Rigid fiberoptic laryngoscopy, 142, 149
Ringer solution, 226, 228
Risk reduction, 242, 251
Risk stratification, 242, 251
Risks
of anesthesia, 2, 5–6
assessment of, 105, 116
with mask ventilation, 183, 185
of working in operating room, 2, 6
Ritodrine, 31, 36
Robertshaw endobronchial tube, 285, 294
Rocuronium, 86, 95
Roller pump, 246, 268
Root cause analysis (RCA), 505, 508
Ropivacaine, 75, 82
Rule of 1800, 427, 429
S
Sacral hiatus, 155, 160
Saddle block, 156, 165
Safety, 2, 4–5
greatest issue for, 2, 6
increase in, 2, 5
organizations for, 2, 5
Safety interlock mechanism, of vaporizers,
124, 130
Saphenous nerve, 176, 177, 181, 182
injury to, 185, 191
Sarin, 471, 479
Saturable pharmacokinetics, 8, 12
Scavenging systems, 125, 126, 135
Sciatic nerve, 176, 181
injury to, 184, 190
SCIP. See Surgical Care Improvement Project
Scopolamine, in elderly patients, 407, 410
Scopolamine patch, 31, 38
Second gas effect, 41, 46
Sedation
with benzodiazepines, 52, 59
in ICU, 459, 463–464
with propofol, 51, 55
Seizures, with local anesthetics, 74, 75, 79, 80
527
Index
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
Seizure threshold
etomidate and, 53, 63
propofol and, 51, 54
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
(SSRIs), CYP 2D6 and, 7, 11
Sellick maneuver. See Cricoid pressure
Semiclosed circle system, 124, 131
carbon dioxide elimination in, 126, 136
Semiopen circle system, carbon dioxide
elimination in, 126, 136
Sensory nervous system, local anesthetics
and, 73, 76
Sentinel events, 2, 4, 505, 508
Sevoflurane
circulatory effects of, 41, 47
congenital heart disease and, 275, 279
degradation to carbon monoxide,
126, 137
degradation to compound A, 126, 137
MAC of, 40, 44
metabolism of, 41, 46
toxic compounds with carbon dioxide and,
40, 43
ventilation effects of, 41, 48–49
Sharp pain impulses, 73, 77
Shivering, body temperature and, 441, 448
Shock, 459, 464–466
Short-acting nondepolarizing
neuromuscular blocking drugs, 86,
96–97
Shoulder dystocia, 366, 380
Shunt. See also Intrapulmonary shunt
inhaled anesthetic and, 41, 45
Shunt equation, 17, 24
Shunting
in congenital heart disease, 275, 277
pediatric, 388, 393
Sick sinus syndrome, 244, 258
SIMV mode. See Synchronized intermittent
mandatory ventilation mode
Single twitch response, nondepolarizing
neuromuscular blocking drug and,
86, 98
Sinus bradycardia, with succinylcholine,
85, 91
Sitting position, 184, 188
spine surgery in, 351, 359
Skeletal muscle tone
with ketamine, 52, 61
with neuromuscular blocking drugs, 84,
87, 88
Sleep medicine, 1, 3
Small motor activity, nerve fiber impulses
for, 73, 77
Smallpox, 471, 479
Smoke evacuator, 340, 347
Smoking, lungs and, 284, 293
Snoring, 143, 152
SNS. See Sympathetic nervous system
Soda lime, 126, 136
Sodium bicarbonate, with epidural
anesthesia, 158, 172
Sodium ion channel, local anesthetics and,
73, 76
Solubility. See also Anesthetic solubility
of nitrous oxide, 41, 46
Somatosensory evoked potentials (SSEPs),
350, 356
Speaking, with nondepolarizing
neuromuscular blocking drugs, 87, 100
Specialties, 1, 4
Spinal anesthesia, 117, 120, 155–174
anatomy for, 155, 159–161
approaches to, 156, 163
for cesarean delivery, 365, 377
duration of, 156, 164
for elderly patients, 409, 417
epidural anesthesia v., 117, 118, 121, 155,
159, 173
level of, 157, 166
lidocaine for, 75, 81, 82
medicine deposition in, 155, 159
position for, 156, 162, 163
preoperative preparation for, 156,
161–162
regression of, 157, 165
TNS with, 157, 165
vasoconstrictor for, 156, 165
Spinal cord ischemia, aortic aneurysms and,
246, 268
Spinal cord stimulation, 482, 491
Spinal interspaces, 155, 160
Spinal needles, 156, 163
Spine surgery, 350–351, 354–359
in sitting position, 351, 359
SPV. See Systolic pressure variation
SSEPs. See Somatosensory evoked potentials
SSRIs. See Selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitors
Stages of labor, 364, 372
Static compliance, 18, 25
Statins, 104, 113
Steady state drug concentration, 8, 13
of opioids, 64, 67
Stellate ganglion block, 481, 482, 489, 490
Steroid replacement, 312, 321–322
Steroidal muscle relaxants, 8, 12
Steroids, 104, 115
with persistent airway obstruction, 103,
109
surgery and, 104, 115
Stewart strong ion difference approach,
203, 206
Stiff-chest syndrome, 65, 68
STOP-Bang questionnaire, 103, 109
Strabismus surgery, 338, 343
Stroke volume, 16, 20
with etomidate, 53, 62
Stylets, 143, 153
for endotracheal intubation, 141, 147
Subendocardium, 17, 22
Submandibular compliance, 141, 145
Subspecialties
in anesthesiology, 1, 3
in clinical anesthesia, 1, 4
Substance P, opioids and, 64, 66
Succinylcholine, 7, 11, 31, 39, 84–85, 90–93
adverse cardiac rhythms with, 85, 91, 92
for cesarean delivery, 366, 379
in children, 85, 91
hyperkalemia with, 85, 92
intubating dose of, 84, 90
IOP and, 337, 340, 341
mechanism of action of, 84, 90
in pediatrics, 388, 389, 394, 398
pharmacokinetics of, 7, 11
Sufentanil, 64, 66
clinical effects of, 65, 71
metabolism of, 64, 67
potency of, 65, 71
Sugammedex, 87, 101
Supine hypotension syndrome, 363, 368
Supine position, 183, 186
Supportive services, 1, 3
Supraadditive drug interactions, 9, 15
Supraclavicular approach, to brachial plexus
block, 176, 180
Supraglottic airway devices, 142, 149–150
Sural nerve, 177, 182
Surgery
b-adrenergic antagonists and, 104, 113
age and, 103, 111
diabetes and, 103, 104, 111, 114
hemostasis disorders during, 210, 215–218
herbal medications and, 104, 114
medications and, 104, 114
noncardiac, revascularization and, 102,
106
pregnancy and, 103, 111
steroids and, 104, 115
Surgical Care Improvement Project (SCIP),
506, 511–512
SVR. See Systemic vascular resistance
Swallowing, with nondepolarizing
neuromuscular blocking drugs, 87, 100
Sympathetic nervous system (SNS), 29, 32
cardiovascular system and, 17, 21
organ response to, 30, 33
Sympathetic signals, 29, 32
Synchronized intermittent mandatory
ventilation (SIMV) mode, 458, 460
Synthetic catecholamines, 30, 34–35
Systemic blood pressure
with benzodiazepines, 52, 59
with dexmedetomidine, 53, 63
with ketamine, 52, 61
monitoring of, 193–201
Systemic clearance, 7, 10
Systemic emboli, during cardiopulmonary
bypass, 247, 269
Systemic toxicity
with chloroprocaine, 74, 78
lipid emulsion for, 75, 80
with local anesthetics, 74, 78, 79
Systemic vascular resistance (SVR), 16, 19,
20, 21, 275, 278
in pregnancy, 363, 368
Systolic blood pressure
age-related changes in, 407, 410
in pregnancy, 363, 368
with propofol, 51, 54
Systolic dysfunction, 102, 107
Systolic pressure variation (SPV), 16, 21
T
Tachycardia, 30, 34, 241, 249
narrow-complex, 493, 498
ventricular, 244, 259
wide-complex, 493, 498
Tachyphylaxis, 30, 35
Tachysystole, 367, 384
Taylor approach. See Lumbosacral approach
Tec-6 heated vaporizer, 40, 43
Temperature monitoring, 195, 200
528
Index
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
Temperature-compensated vaporizers, 124,
129, 130
Terrorism, chemical and biologic, 471, 478–479
Tetany, nondepolarizing neuromuscular
blocking drug and, 86, 87, 98, 99
Tetracaine, 75, 82
for spinal anesthesia, 157, 166
Therapeutic index, 9, 15
Thienopyridine, 212, 222
Thiopental, 51, 52, 55, 56
cerebral blood flow with, 324, 329
for cesarean delivery, 365, 378
intracranial pressure and, 52, 57
in pediatrics, 388, 393
Thoracoabdominal muscle effects, of opioids,
65, 68
Threshold potential, local anesthetics and,
73, 76
Thrombin time, 209, 215
Thrombocytopenia, 210, 217
dilutional, 232, 239
Thromboelastography, 209, 215
Thrombolytics, 211–212, 219–222
Thrombosis, 210, 216
hemostasis disorders favoring, 210–211,
218–219
Throughput, 1, 4
Thyroid storm, 311, 317–318
Thyromental distance, 141, 145
Thyrotoxicosis. See Thyroid storm
Tibial nerve, 177, 182
injury to, 185, 191
Tidal volume
dead space ratio with, 203, 207
with dexmedetomidine, 53, 63
inhaled anesthetics and, 41, 48
Time course of drug effect, 8, 13
Time of onset
of ketamine, 52, 60
of local anesthetics, 74, 79
of morphine, 65, 70
of nondepolarizing neuromuscular
blocking drug, 86, 97
of opioids, 64, 67
of rocuronium, 86, 95
Tissue factor, 209, 213
Tissue plasminogen activator, 209, 214
TNS. See Transient neurologic symptoms
Tongue, 142, 151
Tonsillectomy, 339, 346, 427, 430
Total body water, 226, 227
Total joint replacement, 351–352, 361–362
Total spinal, 157, 169
Toxic compounds. See also Cardiotoxicity;
Neurotoxicity; Systemic toxicity
with desflurane and carbon dioxide, 40,
43, 44
with inhaled anesthetics, 40, 43
with sevoflurane and carbon dioxide, 40, 43
Tracheal extubation, 142, 150–151
asthma and, 283, 288
Tracheal intubation
airway humidification and, 125, 134
difficult, 140, 144
failed, 140, 144
fiberoptic, 141, 148
retrograde, 142, 149
Tracheoesophageal fistula, 390, 404
Training
in anesthesiology, 1, 4
of certified registered nurse anesthetist v.
anesthesiologist assistant, 2, 4
Train-of-four ratio, nondepolarizing
neuromuscular blocking drugs and, 86,
87, 98, 100
TRALI. See Transfusion-related acute lung
injury
Transcranial evoked potentials, 350, 357
Transdermal drug delivery, 7, 9
Transfusion reactions, 232, 236
allergic, 232, 237
febrile, 232, 236
hemolytic, 232, 237
Transfusion therapy, for pediatrics, 388, 395
Transfusion-related acute lung injury
(TRALI), 232, 237, 440, 445
Transient neurologic symptoms (TNS), 75, 81
with spinal anesthesia, 157, 165
Transtracheal jet ventilation, 142, 150
Transtracheal techniques, 142, 150
Transverse abdominis plane block, 451, 457
Trauma
acute management of, 469–470, 471–476
emergency surgery for, 470, 476–477
Traumatic eye injury, 338, 343
Trendelenburg position, 183, 186, 187
Tricyclic antidepressants, 480, 484
Trifluoroacetate, 41, 46
Trigeminal nerve, 140, 144
U
UBF. See Uterine blood flow
ULBT. See Upper lip bite test
Ulcerative colitis, 310, 315
Ulnar nerve, 176, 180
injury to, 184, 189, 190
nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking
drug and, 86, 97
Ultrasound guidance, for peripheral nerve
block, 175, 178
Uncontrolled bleeding, intraoperative
approach to, 213, 224–225
Unfractionated heparin therapy, 211, 220
Unidirectional valves, in circle system, 124,
132
Univent tube, 285, 295
Upper airway
anatomy and physiology of, 140, 144–145
with dexmedetomidine, 53, 63
infant compared with adult, 142, 151
with ketamine, 52, 61
Upper extremity, distal nerve blocks of, 176,
180–181
Upper lip bite test (ULBT), 140, 145
Uterine atony, 366, 382
Uterine blood flow (UBF), 364, 371
Uterine rupture, 366, 382
V
Valerian, 104, 114
Valvular heart disease, 102, 103, 108,
242–243, 253–257
Vapor pressure, 124, 129
Vaporizers, 40, 42, 124, 129–130
classification of, 124, 129
desflurane and, 40, 43, 124, 129
Vaporizers (Continued)
for inhaled anesthetics, 40, 42, 124, 129
tipping of, 124, 130
Variable-bypass vaporizers, 124, 129, 130
Vasoconstrictor, for spinal anesthesia, 156,
165
Vasodilatory shock, 459, 465
Vecuronium, 86, 95
Venae cavae, during cardiopulmonary
bypass, 246, 268
Venous air embolism, 326, 333
Venous thrombosis, with thiopental, 52, 58
Ventilation effects
of barbiturates, 52, 57
of benzodiazepines, 52, 59
of dexmedetomidine, 53, 63
of etomidate, 53, 62
of inhaled anesthetics, 41, 48–49
of ketamine, 52, 61
of opioids, 64, 68
of propofol, 51, 54
Ventilatory drive, inhaled anesthetics and,
41, 48
Ventilatory response, 202, 204
Ventricular arrhythmias, with
succinylcholine, 85, 91
Ventricular fibrillation, 30, 34
Ventricular premature beats, 244, 258
Ventricular tachycardia, 244, 259
Vertebrae, 155, 159, 160
Videolaryngoscopes, 142, 149
Vigilance, 2, 6
Virchow triad, 211, 218
Visual loss, 185, 191–192
Vitamin K, 210, 217
Vm. See Maximum metabolic rate
Volatile anesthetics. See Inhaled anesthetics
Voltage-gated ion channels, 8, 14
Volume of distribution, 7, 10. See also Central
volume of distribution; Peripheral
volume of distribution
in elderly patients, 408, 415
Vomiting
with opioids, 65, 69
with propofol, 51, 55
von Willebrand’s disease, 210, 216
von Willebrand’s factor, 210, 216
W
Wake-up test, 350, 357, 358
Warfarin, 104, 113, 211, 219
Wide-complex tachycardias, 493, 498
Williams syndrome, 276, 280
Winter formula, 203, 207
Wolfe-Chaikoff effect, 311, 318
Wolff-Parkinson-White (WPW) syndrome,
244, 259
WPW syndrome. See Wolff-Parkinson-White
syndrome
Wrong-site surgery, 506, 509–510
X
X-ray procedures
invasive, 431–432, 435
noninvasive, 431, 434–435
Y
Y-piece connector, in circle system, 124, 132
529
Index
66485457-66485438                 www.ketabpezeshki.com
